==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MASTER THESIS 
 
Strengthening the market potential of sensory 
device used in epilepsy treatment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author: 
Sibien Youssouf Traore 
MSc Student (s182156) – Design and Innovation, DTU 
 
Supervisor: Karen Murdock 
Global Engagement Manager 
DTU Entrepreneurship - Centre for Technology 
Entrepreneurship 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
Page | 2  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 INTRODUCTION ............................................................................... 4 
 LITERATURE REVIEW ..................................................................... 7 
 
REQUIREMENTS IN PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT .................................................. 7 
 
FRAMEWORKS AND TOOLS ................................................................................ 11 
 
DOCUMENTATION OF REQUIREMENTS ............................................................ 16 
 
CONCLUSION – LITERATURE REVIEW .............................................................. 19 
 METHODOLOGY & FRAMEWORK ............................................... 20 
 OUTLINING A PRELIMINARY CONCEPT ..................................... 22 
 
TECHNICAL SUMMARY ........................................................................................ 22 
 
COMMERCIAL ENVIRONMENT ............................................................................ 25 
 
REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT ........................................................................... 28 
 
EPILEPSY PROBLEM AREAS .............................................................................. 30 
 
CONCLUSION - PRELIMINARY CONCEPT .......................................................... 32 
 USER INVOLVEMENT .................................................................... 38 
 
INTERVIEW PREPARATION ................................................................................. 38 
 
DATA ANALYSIS ................................................................................................... 39 
 
SUMMARIZING USER NEEDS .............................................................................. 45 
 
PRIORITIZING PRODUCT FEATURES ................................................................. 47 
 CONTRIBUTION OF THE THESIS AND RECOMMENDATIONS .. 50 
 
STRUCTURE THE USER REQUIREMENTS ......................................................... 50 
 
USE AND MAINTAIN THE QFD MATRIX .............................................................. 51 
 
ESTABLISH REGULATORY PLAN ........................................................................ 52 
 
ANSWERING RESEARCH QUESTION 1 .............................................................. 52 
 CONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS ................................................ 53 
REFERENCES ......................................................................................................... 56 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
Page | 3  
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Figure 1: RE, RQD and RQM as viewed in this report ............................................... 8 
Figure 2: Requirement Levels and their relations ..................................................... 11 
Figure 3: Framework for creating validated requirements  (Anitha & Prabhu, 2012) 12 
Figure 4: Integrating user input in the requirement structure .................................... 14 
Figure 5: QFD matrix – The House of Quality .......................................................... 15 
Figure 6: Requirement Levels and Requirement Documents ................................... 18 
Figure 7: Modified framework of Anitha & Prabhu (2012) ......................................... 20 
Figure 8: Traditional medical lab testing and POC testing (Lode, 2005) .................. 23 
Figure 9: The fundamental phases of the operation of biosensors ........................... 24 
Figure 10: Preliminary features and their correlation ................................................ 37 
Figure 11: Mind map of interview topics ................................................................... 39 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
Table 1: Properties for requirements classification (Papinniemi et al., 2011) ........... 12 
Table 2: Phase data collection and analysis techniques (Grocott et al., 2007) ........ 13 
Table 3: Requirement quality checklist (Ana et al., 2013) ........................................ 14 
Table 4: Structure and content of the MRD (“What is a MRD?”, n.d.) ...................... 17 
Table 5: Structure and content of the PRD (“What is a PRD?”, n.d.)........................ 18 
Table 6: Overview of interview participants .............................................................. 38 
Table 7: Seizure strength of the interviewees .......................................................... 40 
Table 8: AED history and therapy types ................................................................... 41 
Table 9: QFD Matrix – Customer need section ........................................................ 46 
Table 10: QFD matrix – Feature importance and relative importance ...................... 48 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
Page | 4  
 
 INTRODUCTION 
Biosensors are important analytic devices applied in numerous industries, to detect 
the presence of certain cells and molecules in target substances. They play a vital part 
in the medical field for example in pathogen identification or drug discovery and they 
are valuable tools for fighting various diseases such as diabetes. Biosensors are also 
utilized in food industry to monitor the authenticity, quality and safety of the products 
and in fermentation industry for process control. Further applications cover defence, 
marine and environmental applications (Mehrotra, 2016). The characteristics, which 
make these devices effective, are their unique sensitivity to physical and chemical 
signals and their selectivity. These traits allow them to make fast and reliable 
diagnostics and therefore make them suitable for Point of Care (POC) medical 
applications (Roe, 1992).  
DeTectUs, a team of students and academic researchers took the initiative to find an 
application for biosensors in a new field; they aim to develop a device that can be used 
to improve the medication treatment of epilepsy patients. Epilepsy is one of the most 
common neurological diseases, affecting more than 50 million people worldwide 
(WHO, 2019). People with epilepsy have a three times higher risk of premature death 
compared to the general population, and many of them experience difficulties in their 
social life. The different neuropsychological deficits caused by the disease such as 
memory loss or slower processing speed often interfere with the enjoyable reciprocity 
of social interactions (Steiger & Jokeit, 2017). The prevalent method to control the 
disease is the use of anti-epileptic drugs (AEDs) that reduce the chance of 
experiencing seizures. Although these medications successfully control the seizures 
in about 70% of the cases, they also cause adverse effects in many cases, impacting 
negatively the quality of life of the patients (Schachter et al., 2013). These effects can 
be especially strong for those 30-40% of the patients, that are on polytherapy (i.e. 
taking more than 1 type of AEDs over the same period) (Lee & Dworetzky, 2010). The 
exact impact of AEDs on the body and brain of the patients are still an uncharted 
territory, and therefore optimizing the dosage is an uncertain procedure. Nowadays 
approach to find the right doses is through generalized protocols that are not capable 
of fully considering the individual characteristics of the patients. By developing a 
biosensor, that is able to accurately measure AED levels in the blood of the patients it 
is expected, that doses can be optimized better and easier, resulting in reduced side 
effects and potentially improving seizure control. 
Entering the biosensor market however is not a trivial process and many of the new 
ventures in this space never achieve success. In general, a lot of research is revolving 
around improving the speed and accuracy of the sensors, but only a few solutions 
have the actual potential to reach the market (Luong et al., 2008). A possible reason 
for this is that even though many of the generated concepts function well and provide 
accurate measurements, they do not create enough value to the intended users 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
 
Page | 5  
 
(Luong et al., 2008), (Money et al., 2011).  According to Markiewicz et al. (2014) this 
issue should be addressed by applying models that facilitate the understanding of user 
needs and their incorporation in the development process. Implementing such 
methods in early stages of the project help to create value to the potential customers 
and considerably reduces the time and the cost of product development. Furthermore, 
it helps to filter unnecessary, yet costly functions and exclude them for further cost 
savings (Markiewicz et al., 2014). 
The device developed by DeTectUs was initially intended to be presented at the 
SensUs 2020 competition in Eindhoven in August 2020. As part of the competition a 
challenge was to develop a business case around the proposed biosensor concept 
and this thesis would have been written with this topic in focus. In the original schedule, 
the first prototypes were expected to be ready by the middle of April 2020, however 
due to the Covid-19 pandemic the team lost all access to laboratories, workshops and 
other resources. Furthermore, the competition was transformed to a theoretical 
project, meaning that the scope has been limited to desktop research related to the 
best technologies for AED detection. As a result, the conceptualization process has 
been stalled, making it redundant to develop a business case for the project. The 
report therefore shifted the focus on outlining the potential offering and directing the 
future development through capturing the needs of the users and translating them into 
explicit requirements. It is assumed, that this approach will contribute to the project of 
DeTectUs in case they continue the conceptualization of the biosensor. In the thesis, 
user needs are investigated through qualitative research methods and transformed 
into functional and non-functional requirements along Requirement Engineering (RE) 
principles. Two fundamental assumptions are accepted in the thesis; the first one is 
that capturing user needs, and transforming them into product specifications will result 
in a stronger value proposition. The second is that a stronger value proposition is equal 
to a stronger market potential. The report aims to answer the following questions 
related to user derived requirements: 
 Research Question 1: How should DeTectUs gather and structure user 
requirements in their development process? 
 Research Question 2: What are the most pressing needs or problems of 
epilepsy patients related to seizure control? 
 Research Question 3: What features in a biosensor would create the 
most value for epilepsy patients? 
To set the context of the research, an analysis of the technology, market and related 
regulations is necessary. Despite the difficulties for new entrants to penetrate the 
biosensor market, there are some highly successful solutions in the space such as the 
blood glucose monitor, which is the most widely commercialized biosensor of our days 
(Newman et al., 2002). The global market for such category of devices was estimated 
at 15.3 billion USD in 2015 (“Glucose Biosensors Market Size, Share, Industry Trends 
Report”, 2016) and it is forecasted to reach 30.5 billion USD by 2024 (“Biosensor 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
 
Page | 6  
 
Market”, 2018). Other well-known and successfully commercialized biosensors are 
cholesterol meters, blood lactate analysers and pregnancy tests. Glucose biosensors 
are further discussed in the thesis to discover what characterizes these devices from 
technical and usability point of views. The information retained from analysing the 
solution serves as a foundation to a preliminary list of functionalities that is further 
expanded with the requirements gathered from the users. Therefore, the following 
question is explored: 
 Research Question 4: What characterizes a successfully commercialized 
biosensor and how are these characteristics applicable to a device for 
epilepsy treatment? 
The thesis incorporates theories from new product development, user interaction, 
requirement engineering, and entrepreneurship. It outlines the development of a 
biosensor product for a specific market reflecting on decisions relating to technology 
features, markets and customers to achieve wide market adaptability. 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
 
Page | 7  
 
 LITERATURE REVIEW 
In this chapter relevant literature on requirement modelling and management, with a 
special focus to user derived requirements and requirement models for the 
development of medical devices is reviewed. The chapter summarizes the role of 
requirements in the development process, potential ways to categorize them as well 
as their relevance to product commercialization. It also outlines of methods that 
combine user insights in the otherwise very technical procedure of requirement 
modelling. The aim of the review is to develop a deeper understanding of requirements 
as a way to develop a framework for capturing and recording requirements in user-
centred projects.  
2.1 REQUIREMENTS IN PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 
2.1.1 REQUIREMENTS ENGINEERING 
Requirements Engineering (RE) consists of discovering and capturing stakeholder 
needs, understanding the context of these needs, and translating them into explicit 
requirements through different modelling techniques. According to Stechert & Franke 
(2014) the requirements specification or requirements model serves as a link between 
customer needs, the strategic aims of the business and other constraints deriving from 
e.g. laws and regulations. They claim that the product development process should be 
guided by the requirements model to ensure compliance with all these elements. The 
concept of RE was first used in software engineering and it is a sub-division of systems 
engineering (Papinniemi et al., 2011). Nilsson & Lindahl (2016) mention the 
importance of establishing requirements specifications in any type of innovative design 
process as they provide a clear overview on the potential offering that the project aims 
to create. Similarly, Iaksch et al. (2019) claim, that introducing RE is essential in the 
New Product Development Process, as the performance and acceptability of the 
product depend on the quality of the drafted requirements. Besides the creation of 
requirements, RE also has a focus on verifying them through testing. The data 
collected in the verification process is recorded, and the requirements are modified 
according to newly exposed information. As stakeholder needs are flexible, it is crucial 
to continuously monitor them, and maintain the requirements to always correspond to 
the current state of the market. Based on the aforementioned objectives Iaksch et al. 
(2019) separates Requirement Engineering into two major phases – Requirements 
Development (RQD) and Requirements Management (RQM), where RQD deals with 
capturing, modelling and validating the requirements, while RQM focuses mainly on 
requirement maintenance. Compared to this Schuh et al. (2008) do not separate RQD 
and RQM into separate phases and refers to RQM as a recollection of all processes 
related to Requirements Engineering. In this report RQD is defined as the phase of 
capturing, modelling and validating requirements and will be handled separately from 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
 
 
Page | 8  
 
RQM. The way the system of RE, RQD and RQM is viewed in this report is shown in 
Figure 1 below. 
 
Figure 1: RE, RQD and RQM as viewed in this report 
2.1.2 RELEVANCE OF USER REQUIREMENTS 
To justify the approach of this report it is important to bring some evidence from 
literature, which confirm that requirements specifications are relevant to the market 
adaptability of a technology.  
Requirements for a long time were regarded as the list of technical specifications 
describing what the product is capable of. Up to recent years this approach was 
sufficient, as even a few decades ago it was possible to successfully market technical 
products solely based on their specifications (Anitha & Prabhu, 2012). However, as 
the technology advanced so did the expectations, and nowadays it is a major 
requirement for products and services to respond to spoken and unspoken needs of 
the customer. According to the findings of Anderson & Mittal (2000) on average, a 1% 
increase of customer satisfaction can be associated with 2,37% increase in the return 
of investment (ROI) while a 1% decrease in customer satisfaction results in 5.08% 
decrease in ROI. It is not surprising therefore that many articles claim, that in order to 
create a commercially successful Product Service System (PSS) it is crucial to interact 
and collaborate with stakeholders and actors of the system (Vasantha et al., 2012) 
(Mont, 2002). They argue, that without involving stakeholders the result is a sub-
optimized PSS, unable to properly fulfil needs, which would be a fundamental element 
of market success. User interaction in itself however is not enough to create a 
satisfactory PSS; it is essential to analyse the findings and translate the user needs 
into requirements that can be incorporated in the development process. Stechert & 
Franke (2014) highlights the importance of modelling requirements, referring to it an 
essential step in developing a commercially successful product, and Anitha & Prabhu 
(2012) claim that having a list of unambiguous requirements derived from customer 
needs is already ’half of the success’ of a development project. He et al. (2006) claim 
that modelling requirements has a major role in building competitive advantage and 
achieve product differentiation.  
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
 
Page | 9  
 
Transforming needs to requirements however is not a trivial process due to the lack of 
integration between development tools, customer needs and engineering 
requirements (Simpson et al., 2012), (Anitha & Prabhu, 2012). According to Tseng & 
Jiao (1998) requirements derived from customer and user needs are often difficult to 
manage as they are often vague and ‘fuzzy’, whereas requirements used for product 
development ought to be unambiguous. 
While the information in the above summarized literature is applicable to any kind of 
product development project, there is no specific reference to user-derived 
requirements in the development of medical devices. This issue is addressed by 
analysing literature about user involvement in medical device development projects. 
These articles do not focus on requirement modelling in particular, but the topic of user 
involvement is closely related, and provides further support to the approach of the 
project. 
According to Shah & Robinson (2006), understanding user needs is a major 
determinant of the success or failure of the development process, and the quality of 
the medical device delivered. Grocott et al. (2007) identifies the alignment with clinical 
needs as one of the mandatory requirements for medical devices and claim that this 
alignment can only be achieved by involving all the key stakeholders such as patients, 
clinicians and academics in the development process. They also suggest the 
involvement of end-users in projects targeting the self-management of chronic 
conditions as a tool to achieve improved health outcomes. Markiewitz et al. (2014) 
confirms the same idea, and mention some specific benefits of user involvement in 
med-tech projects, such as improved patient safety, improved compliance to user 
needs, and higher levels of user and patient satisfaction. 
User involvement in the development of medical devices also has several advantages 
from a project and business point of view; according to Markiewicz et al. (2014), 
applying methods focusing on interaction with stakeholders can considerably reduce 
the time of product development, as issues with usability are discovered early in the 
process. At earlier stages the project is still flexible and therefore design changes are 
less costly. By identifying all usability related problem prior to commercialization 
product recall can also be avoided. Besides these benefits, user and stakeholder 
involvement is also crucial to comply with regulations and policies within the industry. 
Medical devices are heavily regulated as their malfunction expose the patient to high 
risks. Grocott et al. (2007) and Shah & Robinson (2007) confirm, that user participation 
is an integral part of medical device related policies i.e. at some phases of the 
development (e.g. clinical testing) it is obligatory to involve patients and clinicians. 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
 
 
Page | 10  
 
2.1.3 REQUIREMENT LEVELS 
Most of the sources dealing with requirement classification define three levels of 
requirements: business requirements, user requirements and system requirements 
(Brown, 2008), (Kauppinen, 2005), (Wiegers, 2003). The three levels have a hierarchic 
relationship as system requirements are created for the purpose of fulfilling user 
requirements, and ultimately to achieve business goals. The abovementioned sources 
claim that these three main levels can be further divided, but essentially all 
requirements can be traced back to them. Sparx Systems (n.d.) on the other hand 
expands the approach with two further abstract level: non-functional and transition 
requirements. 
Business requirements are described as the highest level of requirements that 
formulate the main economic objectives of the organization that is developing the 
product (Wiegers, 2003). These requirements do not mention directly any system 
specific information (Brown, 2008). They articulate the reasons for spending money 
and other resources on a specific project, and the expected gains for the organization 
(Sparx Systems, n.d.). Without clear business requirements, there is no reason to 
develop any product or system (Brown, 2008). 
User requirements describe the needs and expectations of the users as well as the 
features of the system that are necessary in order to fulfil the business requirements. 
Requirements of this level are more detailed with some reference to system specific 
information (Brown, 2008), (Sparx Systems, n.d.). 
In their requirements overview Sparx Systems (n.d.) describes system requirements 
as the bridge to communicate customer expectations unambiguously to the technical 
teams. These requirements are the most detailed and define how the system should 
behave under different conditions in order to fulfil user requirements (Wiegers, 2003). 
Example sub-categories within system requirements are hardware, software and 
interface requirements. 
Non-functional requirements are the ones that are related to system quality, i.e. how 
well the system performs during operation (Sparx Systems, n.d.). These requirements 
answer questions such as how secure the system is, how many times it develops a 
fault or how easily it can be extended (Herzfeldt et al., 2011). In the industry of medical 
devices many of the non-functional requirements related to quality, security and 
performance are highly regulated. Transition requirements describe the resources and 
actions needed in order to take the business from a certain state to another, improved 
state (Sparx Systems, n.d.), therefore they are closely related to business 
requirements. Potential sub-categories within transition requirements are project 
requirements and life-cycle requirements. Project requirements are describing how the 
project shall be set up and implemented. Requirements in this category relate to 
schedule, budget, labour and other project resources. Life-cycle requirements are 
defined and include requirements related to the design & development, operation, 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
 
 
Page | 11  
 
evolution and retirement of the product (Herzfeldt et al., 2011). Most of the regulatory 
requirements related to medical devices can be classified either as non-functional or 
transitional. 
Henchion (2014) formulates two further sub-levels of requirements related specifically 
to the market adaptation of products: trade facilitation and product differentiation. 
Requirements belonging to trade facilitation are the ones parallel to functional 
requirements i.e.: the ones that describe the technical value that is given for a certain 
price. Product-differentiation requirements are those customers derived and non-
functional requirements that raise the interest of the customer. Figure 2 shows the 
different requirement levels as well as the relations between them, to support the 
understanding of the section.  
 
Figure 2: Requirement Levels and their relations 
2.2 FRAMEWORKS AND TOOLS 
In the literature, we can find various methods and frameworks proposed for working 
with requirements. Papinniemi et al., (2011) defines three main categories of tools that 
can be used for RQD and RQM: tools for requirement classification, tools for 
requirement identification and capture and tools for requirement traceability. They also 
provide a list of properties that can serve as a basis for classification of requirements. 
The list is shown in Table 1. The content of the Dimension, Level and Type columns 
is already covered in Section 2.1.3, but the Source, Priority and Status columns 
provide further opportunities to categorise and manage requirements. 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
 
 
Page | 12  
 
Table 1: Properties for requirements classification (Papinniemi et al., 2011) 
Categorisation 
Attributes 
Dimension Level 
Type 
Source 
Priority 
Status 
Features 
Costs 
Scheduling 
Reliability 
Project 
Product 
System 
Component 
Product 
Functional 
Non-functional 
Process 
Organizational 
End-user 
Strategic/Marketing 
Customer support/Sales  
Legal/Standard 
Engineering/ Production 
Competitor 
Environmental 
Social 
Must have 
Important 
Not critical 
Created 
Active 
Change 
Obsolete 
 
Anitha & Prabhu (2012) propose a basic step-by-step framework for creating validated 
requirements along with some tools to support the different phases of the framework. 
The phases and related tools are presented below. 
 
Figure 3: Framework for creating validated requirements  
(Anitha & Prabhu, 2012) 
Similar to Anitha & Prabhu (2012), several articles such as Iaksch et al. (2019) and 
Lee & Huang (2009) also suggest Kano’s model as a possible tool to use for 
requirements modelling and translation. Lee & Huang (2009) however claim that the 
traditional model needs further refining when implemented in user-focused projects, 
as it is not able to take into account the uncertain nature of customer requirements. 
They propose an improved ‘fuzzy’ Kano model that considers the uncertainty and 
supports decision making in product development. Other articles such as Nilsson & 
Lindahl (2016) and Yang et al. (2010) propose Quality Function Deployment as a tool 
==PAGE:13==
 
 
 
 
Page | 13  
 
for translating customer needs into quantitative engineering characteristics. Several 
researchers merged these two tools to achieve more precise frameworks; Lai et al. 
(2004) transformed the Kano model by combining it with QFD to better meet customer 
requirements in product design (Papinniemi et al., 2011). Their proposed method 
consists of two parts: an analysis phase that is carried out along the framework of the 
Kano model and a translation phase, where QFD is used to convert customer 
requirements into product design. Lee et al. (2008) further combine the previously 
mentioned approaches by incorporated the ‘fuzzy’ aspect of the Kano model into the 
matrix of QFD and adjusted customer requirements weights. 
Steinhardt (2010) suggests a thorough model for RQD and RQM in user-centred 
projects, called Blackblot Procedural Requirements Management Model (Blackblot 
PRM Model). The model provides a detailed methodological framework that 
incorporates creation and verification of explicit market requirements. 
Specific frameworks to involve users in the development of medical devices are also 
suggested in literature. Grocott et al. (2007) divide the mapping of user needs into 
three different phases, and propose a list of data collection and analysis techniques 
for each phase. The first phase focuses on capturing the diversity of user views, the 
second phase is an iterative testing of concepts and prototypes, and the third phase 
is about testing the final solution with an emphasis on user-experience. In the context 
of this thesis, only the first phase is relevant therefore, the table below shows the list 
of the proposed techniques limited to this phase. 
Table 2: Phase data collection and analysis techniques (Grocott et al., 2007) 
Phase 
Type of Data Collection techniques 
Analysis techniques 
Phase 1 
Qualitative 
Audio-taped in depth 
workshops 
Participant observation 
Photographs and videos 
Framework Analysis 
Data Mapping 
Development of typologies 
Establishing Associations with the data 
Explanation building and discussion of 
findings in relation to the theoretical 
framework 
 
Ana et al. (2013) discuss the different stakeholder ‘voices’ and also identify specific 
stakeholders in each voice group. The three voices identified are Voice of Business 
(VoB), Voice of Customer (VoC) and Voice of Technology (VoT). The executive, 
marketing, sales and reimbursement teams of the business belong to VoB, physicians, 
patients and insurance companies to VoC and engineers from the R&D team to VoT. 
They suggest, that all these voices need to be heard at each phase (Discovery, 
Envision & create, Refine) of the development process. They also provide matrix of 
tools for customer involvement from each voice group at each phase. Similar to Table 
2, Table 3 is also reduced to the first phase of the development. 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
 
 
 
 
Page | 14  
 
Table 3: Requirement quality checklist (Ana et al., 2013) 
Phase 
Voice of Customer 
Voice of Business 
Voice of Technology 
Discovery 
Patients interview 
Physician interview 
Payers panel 
Executive interview 
Rep Ride-Along 
Reimbursement Shadowing 
Technology Research 
The figure below demonstrates how input from users and other stakeholders is 
integrated in the requirement structure. Some of the tools and frameworks listed in this 
section are used to gather user needs/insights and some to translate them into a 
format that allows adding them to the different requirement levels. Information 
gathered from the users mainly feeds in the UR, SR, and NFR levels. 
 
Figure 4: Integrating user input in the requirement structure 
In order to understand the most significant tools proposed in literature, QFD, the 
Kano model and the Blackblot PMR Model were further examined. In the context of 
this thesis QFD is the most relevant (as later explained in Hiba! A hivatkozási 
forrás nem található. Methodology & framework), and therefore this is the only tool 
further discussed in the review. Summaries of the Kano model and the Blackblot 
PMR model are included in Appendix A.  
2.2.1 QUALITY FUNCTION DEPLOYMENT 
 
Quality Function Deployment (QFD) is a tool to determine what a product or service 
needs to be accomplish to satisfy the needs of the customer (Learn & Apply, 2018). 
QFD comprises of four levels that are product definition, product development, 
process development and process quality control. In the context of the thesis the first 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
 
 
Page | 15  
 
level - Product Definition - is the most relevant, as it covers the collection of 
stakeholder needs and their translation into product specifications. 
QFD utilizes a relationship matrix called “The House of Quality”. On the Product 
Definition level, the matrix demonstrates the relationship between stakeholder needs 
and product features. The House of Quality is visualized in Figure 5 below. 
 
Figure 5: QFD matrix – The House of Quality 
The Stakeholder Needs section is completed by interacting with the users through 
data collection methods such as qualitative interviews. The pieces of information in 
this section are not formalized requirements, but functions that the stakeholders 
expect from the solution. An Importance Factor is assigned to each of the needs, 
based on their perceived importance. A scale of 1-5 is used with “5” being the highest 
level of importance. The Product Features section contains the product specifications 
that need to be aligned with the stakeholder needs. In the “Body” of the model, the 
Product Features are ranked according to their correlation of fulfilling each of the 
Stakeholder Needs. The correlation can be strong, moderate or weak, and some 
needs and features do not correlate. The model assigns symbols or points to the 
strength of correlation as presented in Figure 5. The “Roof” indicate how each product 
feature interact with each other. The relationship ranges from strong positive (++) to 
strong negative (- -) depending on whether the features enhance or inhibit each other. 
In case there is no correlation, the fields are marked with “0”. The competitor analysis 
==PAGE:16==
 
 
 
 
Page | 16  
 
section is not relevant in the context of this thesis, as no research for competitors is 
carried out. After filling out the matrix with values, the importance and relative 
importance of the product features are calculated. By getting this information, it 
becomes clear which features must be prioritized and therefore the future focus of the 
development is determined. 
2.3 DOCUMENTATION OF REQUIREMENTS 
Documenting requirements in a structured way helps to communicate the aims of the 
development project to all the relevant stakeholders (Rubright, 2019). They define the 
desired state of a business or product, as well as the related problems that must be 
solved (Pragmatic Institute, n.d.). In this section, several types of requirements 
documents are discussed and the content of the most relevant ones is further 
explained. Most of the sources refer to similar documents with different naming; 
Rubright (2019), Gabb (2012) and Anitha & Prabhu (2012) all agree on the relevance 
of five distinct documents. The five dimensions these documents cover are business, 
market, functionalities, user interface, and technology. Rubright (2019) and Gabb 
(2012) adds quality as another domain and Rubright (2019) and Anitha & Prabhu 
(2012) both discuss the relevance of recording the requirements of specific customers 
or customer groups separately. Furthermore, Rubright (2019) expand the list with two 
more dimensions - product and software, making a list of nine documents in total. 
The Quality Requirements Document (QRD), Software Requirements Document 
(SRD), Customer Requirements Document (CRD), User Interface Requirements 
Document (UIRD) and Technical Requirements Document (TRD) are not relevant for 
this report for specific reasons; TRD contains very specific requirements focusing on 
the specifications of the final product, such as programming language used, memory 
size, or processor speed. Similarly, UIRD draws on highly specific information, such 
as color codes or the ergonomic presentation of the content (Gabb, 2012). More high-
level implications of these dimensions are incorporated in the functional and product 
requirements. QRD comes much later in the development process as it is meant to 
control the performance of the different technical requirements. SRD is specific to IT 
projects and CRD contains customized information, specific to customers (Rubright, 
2019), while this report is a general investigation of the needs of all the relevant 
stakeholders. The BRD summarize the vision and the business values or incentives 
that drive the project (Anitha & Prabhu, 2012). It includes information related to the 
objectives of the project, financial statements, personnel need, and a timeline with 
specific milestones and explains why the project is needed from an organizational 
point of view and how it will meet those needs (Rubright, 2019).  The BRD is usually 
the first official document to be created in a venture (Rubright, 2019), (Gabb, 2012). 
As the focus of the report is shifted towards creating a strong value proposition to the 
users and customers, a cohesive BRD will not be created. 
==PAGE:17==
 
 
 
 
Page | 17  
 
In a development project, the creation of BRD is followed by the creation of a Market 
Requirements Document (MRD). The MRD identifies the target market as well as the 
expectations of the stakeholders towards product characteristics. Meeting these 
expectations is imperative to increase the market potential of the product (Actuation 
Consulting, 2018); therefore, the MRD should not leave any ambiguities related to the 
wants and needs of the stakeholders. The MRD can contain both functional and non-
functional requirements, such as documentation requirements, legal, regulatory and 
compliance requirements, compatibility requirements etc. The MRD is a high-level 
document, it does not break down the desired functionality into specific features and 
attributes. “What is a MRD” (n.d.) summarizes the different sections to be incorporated 
in a MRD. These sections and their descriptions are represented in Table 4 below. 
Table 4: Structure and content of the MRD (“What is a MRD?”, n.d.) 
Section 
Description 
Executive 
summary 
The executive summary is a concise version of the whole document, outlining the 
problem to be solved, the key findings, assumptions, and suggestions. 
Vision 
The vision communicates the core value of the offering. It highlights the unique 
attributes of the product or service, and defines the essence of what needs to be 
delivered. 
Target Market 
The size and other different characteristics of the potential market are outlined in 
this section.  
Personas 
The target customers and stakeholders using the product are described in the 
form of personas. 
Competitor 
analysis 
Alternative solutions and major competitors are collected and analysed in this 
section. The distinctive features of the offering i.e. the characteristics that 
differentiate the solution from the competition are highlighted. 
High-level 
capabilities 
The high-level capabilities are requirements towards the operational 
characteristics and they outline the solution from the perspective of the 
customers, users and other stakeholders. It is important to only consider high-
level functionalities, detailed design and development specifications should not 
be included in this document. 
Metrics 
strategy 
The metrics strategy reflects how the business intends to generate income from 
the offering, therefore the information in the section is connected to the business 
model. The key metrics show what will be measured to determine the success of 
the product from a market point of view. 
 
The author of “What is a PRD?” (n.d.) approaches product functions as part of the 
requirements related to the product, and thus propose to record both dimensions in 
the same Product Requirements Document (PRD). They define the PRD as a 
document that describes the value and purpose of the product and each of its feature. 
A strong PRD is concise and defines the capabilities of the product in a manner, that 
clarifies to the development team the features that need to be built, while leaving 
enough room for discussion on how to build it (Geracie, 2014). “What is a PRD?” (n.d.) 
summarizes the key topics that form the content of a PRD, as shown in Table 5. Both 
the authors of “What is a MRD?” (n.d.) and Steinhardt (2010) highlight, that preparing 
the PRD should only be started once the MRD is finalized, as it uses market 
requirements as an input. 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
 
 
Page | 18  
 
Table 5: Structure and content of the PRD (“What is a PRD?”, n.d.) 
Section 
Description 
Objective 
The PRD contains an objective that explains the stakeholder needs and problems 
that the project is addressing, and discusses the relation between these problems 
and the goals of the project. 
Release 
The release section focuses on outlining the delivery; it explain what is expected 
to be delivered and when. 
Features 
Clearly defined product features support the development team in determining 
the exact specifications that are expected to be built in the product. Based on the 
information in this section the team will be able to find the best way to implement 
the required features. 
User flow and 
design 
The PRD explains how the use of the different features will look like from the 
perspective of the user. Visual techniques such as wireframes and mockups help 
to communicate user flow and design. 
Analytics 
It is important to measure the impact of the different features, to determine 
whether they are successful or not. It is beneficial therefore to incorporate the key 
performance indicators (KPI) in the PRD that will be used as a reference for 
future measurements. 
Future work 
The section regarding future work discusses how the product is expected to 
evolve throughout the different steps of the development process. It includes 
high-level information about plans for future roadmaps for the product in question. 
 
Figure 6 clarifies the relation between Requirement Levels and Requirement 
Documents. The figure also demonstrates the reason for putting a bigger emphasis 
on MRD and PRD, as these are the main documents to store user and stakeholder 
level requirements. 
 
Figure 6: Requirement Levels and Requirement Documents 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
 
 
Page | 19  
 
2.4 CONCLUSION – LITERATURE REVIEW 
Requirements Engineering (RE) is divided into two phases Requirements 
Development (RQD) and Requirements Management (RQM). This thesis focuses on 
RQD, specifically on capturing requirements from the users as an input to outline the 
features of a biosensor. It is assumed that incorporating these features in the design 
of the sensor will generate higher customer satisfaction and thereby strengthen the 
market potential of the sensor. 
Many authors highlight the criticality of user and stakeholder interaction to achieve 
customer satisfaction, and many refer to requirement modelling as a potential way to 
incorporate the discovered user needs to the technical development process. The 
literature also implies that the quality of these user derived requirements is a major 
determinant in later market success, which supports the two fundamental assumptions 
formulated in the introduction. 
The level of requirements and their hierarchic, top-down nature is also discussed. The 
report focuses on the middle level (stakeholder requirements), but as the three levels 
are interrelated, some implications to business and system levels are also included. 
The use of two abstract levels, the transition and non-functional levels is also 
suggested in the literature. These abstract levels are taken into consideration, due to 
their connection to regulatory requirements, which are prominent in the industry of 
medical devices. 
Examples of different frameworks to work with stakeholders and stakeholder driven 
requirements are brought. Two potential tools to capture and translate stakeholder 
requirements are discussed: the Kano Model and QFD. The Blackblot PRM Model as 
a tool to work with requirements in user-centred projects is summarized. In the 
following chapter some of these frameworks and tools are selected, and it is explained 
why they are chosen. 
The literature distinguishes between nine documents to record requirements. The 
contents of these documents are briefly summarized, and their relationship to the 
requirement levels is visualized. As the MRD and PRD are the most relevant for User 
level requirements, these documents are further discussed. The MRD describes the 
offering of the business and the expectations of the intended users. It also discusses 
high-level capabilities of the product that are supposed to meet the expectations of the 
users. The PRD most importantly discusses specific product features, without going 
into low-level technical details. As DeTectUs currently does not record user 
requirements, these two documents can be proposed as valuable tools to structure 
this aspect of their work. 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
 
 
Page | 20  
 
 METHODOLOGY & FRAMEWORK 
This thesis gathers input for requirements from the users with the aim of transferring 
the knowledge to the developers of DeTectUs. The goal is to ensure that a solution is 
made, which responds to the current needs of the market. To structure the work, the 
step-by-step framework proposed by Anitha & Prabhu (2012) is chosen, with several 
changes to better fit the context of the project. The modified framework is presented 
below.  
 
Figure 7: Modified framework of Anitha & Prabhu (2012) 
As it is shown, a preceding step is introduced before capturing stakeholder needs. 
This is necessary, as at the time of the thesis there is no tangible concept available, 
and therefore there is no context for capturing requirements. In [Step 0] a preliminary 
concept is created, that communicates the baseline of the biosensor that is to be 
developed. The input for the concept is drawn from: 
 Literature on biosensor technology and commercialization 
 Regulations for medical devices, specifically for “companion diagnostics” 
 Sources defining problem areas within the medical treatment of epilepsy 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
 
 
Page | 21  
 
The information collected from these sources also provides a set of features through 
which the needs of the stakeholders can be fulfilled. [Step 0] is documented in Chapter 
4: Outlining a preliminary concept. 
In [Step 1], stakeholder needs are captured through qualitative research. All together 
two epilepsy patients and three mothers of children with epilepsy were interviewed. 
These interviews were unstructured, to enhance two-way communication and to 
explore needs and problems beyond the ones identified in Step 0. Although the 
literature also suggest the use of other data collection techniques, many limitations 
were imposed by the COVID-19 lockdowns, and therefore no focus group meetings or 
workshops were organized. 
In [Step 2], the input from the stakeholder research is translated into requirements. 
Two main tools are suggested in the literature to guide this process step: The Kano 
model and QFD. Both models take a similar approach of involving stakeholders: they 
are asked to prioritize certain capabilities based on their importance. A major 
difference however is that according to the Kano model the stakeholders have to 
evaluate specific functions defined by the developers, while in QFD they prioritize their 
own needs, which is then traced to technical features. This implies that in order to 
successfully implement the Kano model a set of specific product functions need to be 
defined first, and stakeholder input should be gathered afterwards. In this project, 
product functions are expected to change a lot and quickly, given that the development 
is still in a very early phase. Stakeholder input gathered through the model would 
therefore quickly get outdated as the product features are updated. In this sense, QFD 
is more stable as stakeholder needs change slower compared to product features. 
Furthermore, the QFD matrix is expandable in both directions i.e. more stakeholder 
needs and more product features can be added or removed. This means that the 
information is easy to update at any stage of the project, making the tool more flexible. 
For these reasons, QFD is selected as a main tool for this step.  
[Step 1] as well as [Step 2] are documented in Chapter 5: User Involvement. 
Anitha & Prabhu (2012) propose to delimit the system as the following step, but as the 
research is already limited to the user/stakeholder level of requirements, there is no 
specific need to define further boundaries. 
As a conclusion of the thesis, suggestions for [Step 4], [Step 5] and [Step 6] are made 
in relation to the development process of DeTectUs. These suggestions are 
documented in Chapter 6: Contribution of the thesis and recommendations. 
 
 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
 
Page | 22  
 
 OUTLINING A PRELIMINARY 
CONCEPT 
The purpose of the chapter is to establish a preliminary biosensor concept that can be 
used to monitor the medication treatment of epilepsy patients. The chapter draws on 
the literature of biosensor technology and commercialization, medical device 
regulations and the problem areas of epilepsy treatment. The Technical Summary 
section briefly explains the technology behind biosensors. The purpose of the section 
is to give an overview on how biosensors in general work and what basic solution 
principles are available at the current stage of technology. The Commercial 
Environment section discusses the general characteristics of the biosensor and 
medical device market. In the section, the characteristics of glucose biosensors are 
analysed in order to get a better understanding what functionalities of these sensors 
helped them to achieve such a significant market. The Regulatory Environment section 
explains the relevance of regulations in the industry and shows examples of 
regulations for medical diagnostics devices. At the end of the chapter, a preliminary 
concept is described based on the knowledge gained from the collected information. 
The chapter intends to answer Question 4 formulated in Chapter 1: Introduction. 
4.1 TECHNICAL SUMMARY 
Biosensors are important analytic devices applied in numerous industries, to detect 
the presence of certain chemicals in various substances. By definition a biosensor is 
a tool that combines a biological recognition element, that is responsible for 
recognizing and binding the target analyte and a transducer that transforms signals 
into information that can be processed, recorded and displayed Scheller et al. (1985) 
and Moina & Ybarra (2012). The concept of biosensors and the first device utilizing 
these principles were created by L.C Clark and C.L. Lyons in the 1960s, and 
immediately attracted the attention of the biotechnological industry (Lin & Wang, 
2005). The characteristics which make these devices so valuable are their unique 
sensitivity to physical and chemical signals and their selectivity. These traits are in fact 
so significant, that they make biosensors the highest performing solutions among the 
currently available diagnostic devices (Scognamiglio et al., 2010).  Besides sensitivity 
and selectivity the other two foundational characteristics of biosensors are stability and 
versatility (Scognamiglio et al., 2010), (Luong et al., 2008). Sensitivity describes the 
ability of the biosensor, to sense a target analyte i.e. the minimum amount of analyte 
that can be detected. Selectivity describes how specific the biosensor is to the target 
analyte. Bounding and transducing physiochemical changes triggered by non-target 
molecules shall not happen in a selective biosensor. Stability is defined as the degree 
to which the biosensor and the bounding procedure is resistant to external and internal 
disturbances. Unprepared blood samples are quite diverse it is very important for the 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
 
 
Page | 23  
 
biosensor to be versatile and therefore be able to operate with any user’s blood sample 
as input. Sensitivity and selectivity together define accuracy. 
Besides their analytical advantages biosensors also have implications for patient care; 
they facilitate point-of-care (POC) testing, and thereby allow medical professionals to 
make fast therapeutic decisions (Roe, 1992). Near-patient testing or point-of-care 
testing is defined as an investigation taken at the time of the consultation with instant 
availability of results to make immediate and informed decisions about patient care 
(Khunti, 2010). The processes and traditional medical lab testing and POC testing are 
shown in Figure 8. By comparing the two processes the advantages of the latter are 
apparent – it is more effective, faster and leaves less room for errors. 
 
Figure 8: Traditional medical lab testing and POC testing (Lode, 2005) 
4.1.1 BIOSENSING PROCEDURE 
There are three fundamental phases in the operation of biosensors; binding, signal 
transduction and signal reporting (Denmark et al., 2019). The phases are explained 
below and visualized in Figure 9.  
In the binding phase the sample (e.g.: blood, urine, water drop etc.) containing the 
target analyte is passed along the surface of the transducer, where the biological 
recognition elements immobilize the target molecules or cells. In order for the binding 
to successfully happen, the biological component has to be highly specific to the 
target. This is analogous to a lock and key - only the desired particles should be able 
to attach to the recognition elements (Denmark et al., 2019) (Venk’s Bio, 2018). 
The binding of the target to the recognition element generates either a physical or a 
chemical change. This change is captured by the transducer element and converted 
into electrical signal, which can be processed, recorded and displayed. This signal is 
then transferred and amplified if needed (Venk’s Bio, 2018). 
The main goal of signal reporting phase is to inform the user about the measurement 
results. Possible ways to do this are for example displaying values on a screen or 
giving an audio feedback (Denmark et al., 2019) (Venk’s Bio, 2018). 
==PAGE:24==
 
 
 
 
Page | 24  
 
If the biosensor is single-use, the biosensing procedure end with the signal reporting 
as a final step, and is categorized as disposable. Where this is not the case and the 
surface of the transducer can be “cleaned” by detaching the analyte molecules or cells 
from the recognition elements the solution is categorized as reversible (TAUVOD, 
2012). 
 
Figure 9: The fundamental phases of the operation of biosensors 
4.1.2 CATEGORIZATION OF BIOSENSORS 
Both the biological component and the transducer have multiple possible working-
principles. Biological recognition elements can be for example antigens/antibodies 
(immunocomponents), enzymes, and chemoreceptors, while different transducer 
mechanisms can rely on optical, electrochemical, mechanical and magnetic or thermal 
signal creation. It is not uncommon to use label particles in the procedure; they are 
required whenever the target analytes do not have any distinctive physical properties 
based on which it would be possible to measure them. By binding fluorescent, 
radioactive, ferromagnetic etc. particles to the target molecules before binding them 
to the biorecognition elements it is possible to gain new physical properties that can 
serve as the basis for the transduction (Schöning & Poghossian, 2018). Following this 
thought biosensing technologies can be categorized as label-based or label-free. 
Medical sensors for POC medical use can come in two major forms, implantable and 
non-implantable sensors, however the former is still not very widespread due to the 
complexity of bio-compatible materials, the huge development costs and difficulties of 
==PAGE:25==
 
 
 
 
Page | 25  
 
achieving certifications as medical devices. Mazzocchi (2016) defines five categories 
of medical sensors – identification, monitoring, safety, diagnostic and triggering 
devices. Identification, monitoring and safety sensors are irrelevant in the context of 
this report, as they have no direct therapeutic value. These sensors are only used to 
identify and monitor the performance of medical implants in the patients’ body. 
Diagnostic sensors on the contrary provide physiological data to patients and medical 
professionals, in order to adjust the therapy of the patient accordingly. These sensors 
can be both implantable and non-implantable. Triggering sensors only function as 
implantable – similarly to diagnostic devices, they provide physiological data, but 
based on the received signals it actuates a response, discharging chemical, 
mechanical, or electrical change in the body (Mazzocchi, 2016). 
4.2 COMMERCIAL ENVIRONMENT 
4.2.1 MARKET CHARACTERISTICS 
Since the creation of the first biosensors in the 60s thousands of new patents and 
publications followed. Up to 1984 devices to detect more than 100 different types of 
substances were available, however biosensors were only commercialized for 11 
types of analytes (Scheller et al., 1985). More recent data has not been found to 
confirm how these numbers changed exactly, but many of the papers highlight that 
even up to recent years only glucose analysers show a true market potential (Newman 
& Turner, 2005)., (Lin & Wang, 2005). The initial stages of biosensor development 
were inhibited by limited functional and mechanical stability, low diffusional resistance 
of the immobilization technique and difficulty of achieving interference-free signals 
(Scheller et al., 1985). In order to mitigate these problems, developers had to create 
either very expensive or rather big devices. Although some of these challenges are 
still present, two major breakthroughs – mediators and miniaturisation – have 
contributed to bring these devices into the market. 
The biosensor market consists of four major segments: environmental, food and 
agriculture, military and medical. Although the application of biosensors is significant 
in the three former segments, the medical application is the dominant. Applications of 
biosensors for biomedical and life sciences accounts for 99% of the total market. 
Among these four segments, the latter is also considered the easiest to enter (Lin & 
Wang, 2005). Biosensors in medical application are used as instrumentation for 
patient monitoring as well as to make rapid therapeutic decisions resulting in improved 
patient care (Roe, 1992). 
According to Lin & Wang (2005) there are six major factors that shape the market of 
medical biosensors. The aging population and governmental policies to contain 
healthcare costs increase the need for biosensor development, as biosensors could 
provide help to people with chronic diseases, and they facilitate POC use, that helps 
containing healthcare costs (Roe, 1992). Furthermore, Europe and other developed 
==PAGE:26==
 
 
 
 
Page | 26  
 
countries are shifting towards outcomes-based medicine, which breaks with the 
traditional view that the value of a healthcare system comes from the amount of 
doctors per person, the amount of hospitals and the amount procedures and 
screenings performed (Grigorovsky, 2018). Outcomes-based medicine instead puts 
the focus on the quality of treatment, and measures the value of the healthcare system 
based on the improved condition of the patients. Biosensors are valuable tools both in 
providing better treatment, and also in monitoring treatment results, therefore they are 
well fit in the approach of outcomes-based medicine (Roe, 1992). The factors that are 
inhibiting the extensive spread of biosensors are the shortfall of skilled personnel and 
laboratory technicians, the strict regulatory environment of global biomaterials and 
diagnostics industries and reimbursement issues. 
The biggest challenge of biosensors (and complex technologies in general) from a 
business point-of-view is that they require massive upfront investment, with 
unpredictable results (Luong et al., 2008). A significant amount of expenses should be 
expected when building and testing biosensor prototypes, as both the different parts 
and the consumables for experiments are quite costly. The development of such 
devices is also rather slow meaning that the positive or negative results only show 
after a long time from the start of the project. All together the progress of biosensor 
development is incremental, with frequent failures, and therefore market entry is quite 
difficult (Luong et al., 2008). Most of the designs never exceed the prototype phase 
due to the need for excessive laboratory tests and validation, while new ventures often 
have too few resources for such procedures (Scognamiglio et al., 2010). Furthermore, 
governmental support in this area is lacking, which makes it even harder for small 
start-ups to prevail; it is the larger companies with their massive resources in research 
and development that shape and control the industry (Scognamiglio et al., 2010). 
A typical approach to enter the market of medical biosensors is to focus on a specific 
niche market, where biosensors can provide a cheaper, more accessible and yet 
equally accurate option compared to other diagnostic procedures and devices (Lin & 
Wang, 2005). A good example for such market is the market of pregnancy tests. 
Besides targeting niche markets, the typical way for biosensor start-ups is doing a 
spin-off and getting acquired by major players. Many start-up companies originate 
from an academic project with a contribution of an expert professor and some master 
or PhD level students. These projects often result in a patent or a patent portfolio that 
can potentially be presented to key players. It is a general practice in the industry that 
well-established companies such as Abbott, LifeScan (Johnson & Johnson) or Bayer 
acquire these small businesses and integrate them into their own research and 
development processes (Newman & Turner, 2005), (Lin & Wang, 2005). When 
following either of the abovementioned paths to commercialization, protection of 
intellectual property is essential. 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
 
 
Page | 27  
 
4.2.2 A COMMERCIALLY SUCCESSFUL SOLUTION – THE GLUCOSE 
BIOSENSOR 
Many of the articles on biosensors refer to glucose sensors as the only concept that 
has truly reached its maturity (Lin & Wang, 2005), (Newman & Turner, 2005). Glucose 
biosensors are the most widely commercialized of all the devices and account for 
approximately 85% of the world market for biosensors that is valued at 19.6 billion 
USD in 2019 (Newman & Turner, 2005), (“Glucose Biosensors Market Size, Share, 
Industry Trends Report”, 2016). There are several factors behind the success of 
glucose biosensors, but the two most important ones are the prevalence of diabetes 
in developed countries and the absence of a cure for the disease (Newman & Turner, 
2005). However, in order to develop a deeper understanding of the popularity and 
successful spread of biosensors, it is important to look at the different characteristics 
of diabetes and the features of glucose biosensors that fulfil the needs of people with 
this condition. 
Diabetes is a disease, where the pancreas cannot produce insulin in sufficient amount 
or produces defective hormones. The disease requires frequent monitoring of blood 
glucose levels in order to find out when the patients need additional insulin and the 
dosage. Blood glucose monitoring helps to identify trends in glucose control, to identify 
factors that may cause high or low glucose levels and it makes it possible to evaluate 
the impact of activity, diet and medication. Furthermore, the data recorded from the 
measurements allows the optimization or change of treatment plans and helps to 
decide what to do when the patient is ill (Newman & Turner, 2005). In order to capture 
data many solutions were developed – different biosensors can record and store 10-
125 results locally and devices that can communicate with cloud services or external 
software can provide an overview of the 4000 latest measurement results of the 
patient. Some solutions allow users to enter food intake, exercise and other medication 
taken. This information can be compared to the measurement data to evaluate how 
different lifestyle changes affect the condition of the patient. Due to the frequency of 
measurements a fast, accurate and simple to use solution is required. The device 
should allow self-monitoring and be easy to transport. As the measurements take 
blood sample it is also rather important, that the sampling procedure is as painless as 
possible. For similar consideration, the blood sample needed for the measurements 
need to be minimalized. 
In order to reach better user experience and establish a competitive advantage, many 
companies developed further functions, which can be distributed into three main 
categories; features that prevent strip-waste and thereby save money, features that 
reduce the pain inherent to the blood sampling and features that reduce hassle with 
operating the device. Preventing the waste of test strips can be achieved by building 
some kind of feedback that clearly communicates to the user whether there is enough 
blood provided for the test or not. This feedback can be a simple visual or audio signal, 
or it can be automatized i.e. only triggering the test to start if sufficient blood sample 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
 
 
Page | 28  
 
is provided (Newman & Turner, 2005). Another solution for the same issue is the use 
of a lancing device, which automatically pulls the blood sample on a test strip. To 
reduce the inherent pain of sampling, moving away from finger pricking is the main 
approach; many parts of the body such as the forearm or the calf are less sensitive 
compared to the fingers. Modern lancing devices therefore allow to take the samples 
from these areas. Hassle with the machine is often associated with carrying around all 
the necessary equipment and the insulin supply. For this reason there are some efforts 
to combine the different components into one device. Good examples for this are 
integrating strips in form of a strip drum, or incorporating an insulin dosing system in 
the biosensor. 
Despite of the many features targeting the usability and user-experience of glucose 
monitors, diabetes patients are often reluctant to perform the required 2-4 
measurements per day. For a long time, it was believed that the main reason behind 
this phenomenon is the pain associated with frequent self-testing, however several 
other problems have been discovered through user research. Among these reasons, 
we can find the ambiguous measurement results that can only be interpreted by 
physicians, while the time of these medical professionals is rather expensive, meaning 
that they are not able to constantly check the data of the patients (Newman & Turner, 
2005). This could be solved by more automatic systems that can also plan the 
treatment of diabetes patients, but users are unwilling to let a computer program 
decide their treatment instead of a well-trained doctor (Newman & Turner, 2005). 
These challenges reveal the relevance of better exploring user needs in the 
development of medical devices. 
4.3 REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT 
In case of highly complex technologies such as biosensors, technology selection, and 
technical details highly influence the market adaptability of the solution. The most 
important connection between these two aspects is the set of strict regulations and 
requirements that determine whether the biosensor can enter the market as a 
legitimate medical device or not. Getting approvals as a certified medical device is 
usually a cumbersome procedure and many ventures never get through this phase, 
however this also correlates with the level of technological complexity. Mazzocchi 
(2016) reports of a company that took 30 months to get an approval from major 
regulatory bodies from the point of sending preliminary clinical test data. The uncertain 
length of approvals make it hard to predict revenues and ROI in case of biosensors. It 
is therefore imperative to seek for compliance with the regulatory guidelines from the 
very beginning of the development. 
Two of the most important regulatory bodies that administer the certification of medical 
devices are the European Commission (EC) and the United States Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA). All the medical devices commercialized in Europe or the US 
must fulfil the regulations specified by these organisations;  
==PAGE:29==
 
 
 
 
Page | 29  
 
”A device may be placed on the market or put into service only if it complies with this 
Regulation when duly supplied and properly installed, maintained and used in 
accordance with its intended purpose.” (European Comission, 2017). 
Some of these requirements will influence the specifications of the product and 
indirectly pose some limitations; most of the features have to be tested and validated, 
and therefore in some cases businesses choose to keep only the minimum features 
in order to faster achieve certification. Although seeking professional help to achieve 
compliance and approval carries some expenses, experience has proven that in most 
cases it helps to get approvals faster (Mazzocchi, 2016). It is highly recommended, to 
consider compliance with the regulatory guidelines from the very beginning of the 
development, as transforming the design, tests or documentation retrospectively is 
costly and opens up the possibility for mistakes. 
To explore how the regulations influence the market adaptation Directive of the 
European Commission (Directive 98/79/EC) was analysed. The document covers 
many aspects of the development, such as technical documentation, performance 
tests or quality control. Information regarding auditing, CE approval, classification 
rules, clinical testing and post market surveillance are also discussed. 
The biosensor developed by DeTectUs is intended for Point-of-Care and specifically 
for self-testing. Directive 98/79/EC defines such devices as follows: 
“‘device for self-testing’ means any device intended by the manufacturer to be used 
by lay persons, including devices used for testing services offered to lay persons by 
means of information society services;” 
When it comes to medical devices, safety of use is a top priority requirement, 
especially if the device is intended to be used by lay persons. For this reason, most of 
the usability related regulations focus on risk reduction, ease of use, and effective 
delivery of information. As a general approach the directive defines three paths to 
mitigate risks; Elimination, Protection and Information. The first option is prioritized, 
meaning that all risks must be eliminated if possible. If there is no possibility to 
eliminate a risk, integrated warning systems shall be implemented in the device, to 
protect the user. If the second option is not available either, then the user shall be 
informed and trained to use the device as intended. Directive 98/79/EC formulates the 
following regulations for self-testing and near-patient testing devices: 
 Devices intended for self-testing or near-patient testing shall be designed and 
manufactured in such a way as to: 
o ensure that the device can be used safely and accurately by the intended 
user at all stages of the procedure if necessary after appropriate training 
and/or information; and 
o reduce as far as possible the risk of error by the intended user in the 
handling of the device and, if applicable, the specimen, and also in the 
interpretation of the results. 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
 
 
Page | 30  
 
 Devices intended for self-testing and near-patient testing shall, where feasible, 
include a procedure by which the intended user: 
o can verify that, at the time of use, the device will perform as intended by 
the manufacturer; and 
o be warned if the device has failed to provide a valid result. 
Directive 98/79/EC distinguishes four classes of devices: A, B, C and D, where A 
covers the most simple devices and D the most complex ones. Many rules determine 
the class of the device, but self-testing diagnostic devices automatically qualify as 
class C or D. As the use of the DeTectUs biosensor cannot result in direct life-
threatening situations, it is very likely that the device would fall under Class C. The 
applicable regulations to Class C devices besides safety and performance are related 
to quality management and technical documentation. 
The directive requires the manufacturer to specify high-level functions of the sensor, 
and the device features unambiguously, as well as the intended purpose and target 
users. The documentation shall also contain the description of the disorder, condition 
or risk factor that the device focuses and the rationale for how the device provides 
value in the specified area. When looking at these aspects of the documentation it is 
visible that they overlaps with the contents of MRD and PRD described previously in 
Table 4 and Table 5. Creating these documents therefore will not only contribute to 
strengthening the value proposed by the device, but also facilitate compliance with 
some of the regulations formulated by the European Commission. 
4.4 EPILEPSY PROBLEM AREAS 
When looking at the different sources discussing the issues related to epilepsy, three 
main problem areas are apparent; patients with epilepsy may experience a decreased 
quality of life due to a.) Uncontrollable seizures, b.) Impaired social interactions or c.) 
Adverse effects and difficulties related to their medical treatment. A biosensor that is 
able to monitor the level of AEDs in the blood of the patients has the strongest 
implications for the medical treatment of patient with epilepsy and therefore this is the 
area that is further investigated in the report. It is possible to claim that the solution 
also has useful implications for seizure control through providing massive amounts of 
data on how the effects of the medications varies for each individual, which is 
otherwise not available at current stage of epilepsy research. This however requires 
the solution to be used for a long period of time by a great amount of users with a wide 
range of etiologies, symptoms and medication treatments to collect adequate data. A 
team of experts that can process and interpret the data would also be required in order 
to discover currently unidentified correlations between different characteristics of the 
patients and the AEDs used. As these resources are not available in the current 
project, the implications of the solution on seizure control is not discussed in the thesis, 
only suggested for further research. Impaired social interactions are results of complex 
behavioural issues deriving from the neuropsychological effects of the disease 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
 
 
Page | 31  
 
combined with the side effects of AEDs. The solution of DeTectUs in itself does not 
bring meaningful value in the endeavours of improving the social life of epilepsy 
patients. 
4.4.1 POINTS OF INTERVENTION 
Anti-epileptic drugs are the most commonly recommended means of seizure control 
and AED treatment is the primary therapy proposed by medical experts (Schachter et 
al., 2013). There are many types of AEDs available and some of these work better on 
certain kinds of seizures. It is also quite general, that a combination of these medicines 
are prescribed for the patient to fully control their disease. In 70% of all the cases, 
epilepsy can be controlled with a single or a combination of AEDs. A common trait of 
these drugs however is that they do not cure the root problem of the disease, they only 
serve to eliminate the seizures themselves, meaning that a great deal of the patients 
are bound to take these medications for life. A bit less than 50% of the patients can 
never leave their medication behind without experiencing breakthrough seizures 
(Holland, 2019). Although most of these patients are seizure free thanks to AEDs, 
many of them experience adverse effects of the medications decreasing their quality 
of life. Other groups at a high risk of experiencing side effects are patients who freshly 
started the treatment and people on polytherapy that account for 30-40% of the total 
cases. All together around 50% of people with epilepsy report bothersome effects of 
seizure medications. In some of the cases, patients claim that these side effects are 
in fact as troublesome as seizures themselves. In a set of interviews published on 
Healthtalk.org (Healthtalk, 2016), young epilepsy patients (between the age of 18-26) 
report about experiencing severe side effects such as memory loss, frequent nausea, 
chronic tiredness, aggression etc., negatively impacting their work, studies, social life 
and their mood in general. Some of the interviewees also reported physical side effects 
such as acne, boils and rashes on the skin and losing some hair. Besides the 
aforementioned side effects, AEDs can also cause health issues on the long term; 
they increase the chance for liver and pancreas malfunctions, and they can cause a 
drop in the number of white blood cells or platelets in the patients’ body. Reducing 
side effects through better dose adjustment is therefore a potential point of intervention 
and should be further examined through user research to evaluate whether it can 
serve as part of the value proposition of the biosensor developed by DeTectUs. 
Besides reducing the side effects, the solution would provide a useful tool against 
unexpected effects of drug-to-drug interactions and comorbidities. Many of the AEDs 
are sensitive to different substances such as other medications, drugs, alcohol and 
high-energy food etc. These substances can either increase or decrease the efficiency 
of the AEDs, meaning that it is possible to experience breakthrough seizures or more 
severe side effects while taking the medication as prescribed. Some of these 
interactions are well known, but many of them vary with each individual, and they can 
also come unexpectedly. By frequent monitoring of AED levels, it is possible to detect 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
 
 
Page | 32  
 
these changes and use the data to adjust the doses accordingly, in order to avoid 
breakthrough seizures or unexpectedly strong side effects. 
Another potential point of intervention lies within the dose adjustment and monitoring 
process itself; it is assumed, that optimizing the doses and keeping track of their effects 
is a cumbersome, time consuming activity, due to the amount and length of visits at 
the doctor’s office. This problem might be especially relevant for young children, who 
account for about 15% of the total cases, based on US statistics (CDC, 2017). In these 
cases, the parents are also involved in the issue as they are responsible for taking 
their child to the visits, update the doctor about their condition, and track whether they 
take the medication as prescribed. This means that both the parents and the children 
will need to assign time for the treatment, which might interfere with their normal 
schedules at school and at the workplace. This assumption however is not specifically 
supported by any of the analysed data and therefore need to be thoroughly validated 
with the potential users and customers. 
A further assumption is related to the psychological aspects of the treatment; it is 
assumed that the solution would help to empower the patients to take charge of their 
treatment. Many studies such as Rees & Williams (2009) suggest, that letting the 
patients to take a bigger part in their therapy actually improves the health outcomes of 
the treatment. It is important to examine therefore how people with epilepsy feel about 
their current therapy, and whether or not they perceive the solution as a mean of 
empowerment, that would help to deal with their condition. 
4.5 CONCLUSION - PRELIMINARY CONCEPT 
In this section, a preliminary concept is described based on the knowledge gained 
from the analysis of biosensor technology, market, regulations and epilepsy treatment 
problem areas. The preliminary concept is used, to fill out the Product Features section 
of the QFD matrix. The matrix is later updated or adjusted based on the findings from 
the qualitative user interviews. It is assumed that the features, capabilities and 
characteristics summarized in this section are outlining a biosensor that is considered 
useful by patients on AED treatment. 
This section also serves as a conclusion that collects all the relevant findings of the 
chapter and implements them in one main idea. 
4.5.1 TECHNOLOGY BACKEND 
The biosensor to be developed for the treatment of epilepsy is characterized as 
follows; a self-testing diagnostics device with test strips, that uses immunocomponents 
as biorecognition elements and a magnetic principle for signal transduction. Due to 
the magnetic nature, the technology is categorized as label-based, with ferromagnetic 
particles as labels. The decision of using a Giant Magnetoresistance (GMR) as a 
transduction mechanism is the decision of the lead engineers of DeTectUs. According 
==PAGE:33==
 
 
 
 
Page | 33  
 
to their preliminary assessment, GMR has a big potential in terms of providing the four 
foundational biosensor characteristics (sensitivity, selectivity, stability, versatility), 
while the production of the parts is cheap, compared to other technologies. The device 
is non-implantable and uses whole blood sample for its operation and the biosensing 
components are disposable. Further specifics about the technology backend i.e.: 
features that are not directly perceived by the stakeholders are not be discussed in 
this report. Note: The concept uses test strips, which means that the binding and the 
physical (magnetic) change happen on the surface of the strip. The device captures 
this change in magnetoresistance, converts it to electrical signal, that is processed 
and displayed. 
4.5.2 CAPABILITIES 
The capabilities listed below are high-level functionalities that the biosensor should 
adhere to unless it is proven otherwise by the data from the user research. These are 
the capabilities that could characterize a commercially successful biosensor, that 
responds to the needs of the users, and thereby the section answers Research 
Question 4: What characterizes a successfully commercialized biosensor and 
how are these characteristics applicable to a device for epilepsy treatment? 
The device for epilepsy treatment should be capable of... 
…facilitating self-testing: The DeTectUs biosensor should allow epilepsy patients to 
monitor AED levels in their blood more frequently without adding much complexity to 
their lives. The related capabilities making the device eligible for self-testing are the 
portable construction, fast and understandable measurement results and on-line 
communication with medical professionals. The main purpose of self-testing is that it 
saves time compared to frequent visits at the physician’s office and empowers the 
user, by allowing them to manage a bigger part of the treatment. 
… being transported in a relatively small place: The components of the biosensor 
should be minimal in number, size and weight. The components are discussed later in 
this part. 
… communicating clear measurement results: Directive 98/79/EC emphasizes the 
importance of communicating understandable measurement results to the user. The 
average person is not capable of interpreting complex medical measurement data 
such as the level of the active ingredient of AEDs in the blood. Therefore showing such 
values does not necessarily inform epilepsy patients about their condition. A 
suggestion is to forward core values to the physician or to a laboratory for analysis, 
and only show simple values to the patients that help to determine whether AEDs in 
their blood are at a normal or at a peak level. This way the medical professional can 
optimize the treatment more accurately, while the patient might observe connections 
between peak values and lifestyle events. 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
 
 
Page | 34  
 
… making fast measurements: The goal of DeTectUs is to carry out measurements 
in less than 5 minutes. If the technology allows this threshold will be further reduced. 
… facilitating accurate therapeutic decisions: Making measurements frequently 
results in more data, including both average and peak values. By having more data it 
is easier to set trends and point out specific connections between AED doses, AED 
levels and adverse effects. Furthermore, in some cases connections between AED 
levels and lifestyle elements of the patient (e.g. food intake, sleeping hours etc.) can 
be pointed out. By analysing the data in such way, therapeutic decisions can be made 
with more accuracy. Another capability making the device eligible to facilitate 
therapeutic decisions is the communication with medical professionals. 
… facilitating communication with medical professionals: The value deriving from 
self-testing can only be delivered if the physicians are well informed about the patient’s 
condition. On-line communication should be therefore established, to ensure that 
medical professionals receive frequent updates of the measurement data.  
… multi-AED detection: Different patients take different medication and many of 
them take two or more as part of their treatment. It is also very common, that people 
with epilepsy try multiple types of AEDs before selecting a specific one for extended 
use. Although technically it is challenging to implement a system that is calibrated for 
multiple different analytes, measuring only one type of target might not provide enough 
value to the average epilepsy patient. The suggested way to carry out detection of 
multiple analytes is to create different test strips for the most common AEDs. 
… painless sampling: Taking blood shall be as painless as possible. Alternative site 
sampling (i.e. sampling at different parts of the body), and adjustable piercing depth 
should be considered. 
… providing unambiguous feedbacks: “The intended user shall be able to verify 
that, at the time of use, the device will perform as intended by the manufacturer; and 
be warned if the device has failed to provide a valid result.” (European Comission, 
1998)  
… operating with minimal sample preparation: Due to the magnetic labels required 
for the GMR technology, sample preparation i.e. adding additives to the sample is 
necessary. This however should not take long, and the risk of damaging the sample 
in the procedure should be eliminated. Automation should be considered. 
… operating with disposable test strips: As blood is handled throughout the 
detection procedure, and test strips are usually hard to clean, it is best if these parts 
are disposable. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
 
 
Page | 35  
 
4.5.3 COMPONENTS 
The main components of the biosensor for monitoring AEDs are: 
1. a transducer device:  
2. test strips with bio-recognition elements 
3. lancing device for finger-pricking 
4. an additive containing magnetic nanoparticles and disposable cartridges 
5. a firmware responsible for controlling the detection event 
6. a software responsible for storing and displaying the date to the physician 
4.5.3.1 Transducer Device 
The transducer is a handheld device that has a size of approximately 10 x 5 x 2.5 cm. 
It has an input area, where the test strips are inserted before a measurement is carried 
out. The measurement data is presented on a seven-segment display. There are two 
buttons on the transducer: one to switch the device on and off, and one to start the 
measurement. A small light on the device indicates whether enough sample was 
provided to the machine to start the test or not. The electricity required to operate the 
transducer is supplied from button batteries. 
4.5.3.2 Test Strip 
Test strips are approximately 5 x 1.5 x 0.7 cm in size. They have a designated area 
with a GMR chip where blood sample should be placed, before inserting the strip in 
the transducer.  
4.5.3.3 Lancing device 
It is required to supply a lancing device with the biosensor of DeTectUs, but it is not 
necessary to develop one in case a simple lancing solution is chosen. There are many 
lancing solutions available on the market, therefore it is possible to contract with 
suppliers and buy these devices instead of producing them. Developing a unique 
lancing device is only relevant, if it is decided to incorporate the sample preparation 
feature in the lancing device itself; In that case, three main functions shall be realized 
– the device must be able to take the required amount of sample, mix it with the 
required amount of additive, and release the mixture on the test strip. 
4.5.3.4 Additive and Cartridge 
The additive containing magnetic nanoparticles comes in the form of a liquid that 
needs to be mixed with the blood sample before placing it on the test strip. The mixing 
happens in a cartridge that is disposed after the blood is released on the test strip. 
4.5.3.5 Firmware and Software 
The detection event is controlled by a firmware, as there is no need to implement a 
complex software within the device. The device however should be able to forward 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
 
 
Page | 36  
 
measurement data to a software used by the medical professionals. This system 
allows the medical professionals to store and display the data of any patient that has 
a device registered at their office. 
4.5.4 OPERATION OF THE MACHINE 
The operation of the device might change a lot with the actual development, but a 
preliminary idea is summarized below to give the readers, as well as the interviewees 
an idea how the biosensor of DeTectUs could work. 
1. The device is switched on. 
a. The display is showing a value to indicate that it is switched on. 
b. The light is glowing in red as there is not enough sample provided yet. 
2. A blood sample is taken from a site on the body – finger, forearm, calf. 
3. The blood sample is mixed with the additive in a disposable cartridge 
a. Automation possibility – Additive is mixed to the blood sample within the 
lancing device 
4.  The mixture is placed on the test strip. 
a. Automation possibility – As mentioned in the chapter, there are lancing 
devices available that automatically pull samples on test strips. Such 
integrated solutions can reduce time spent on a measurement and 
eliminates the risk of strip waste. 
5. The test strip is inserted in the transducer device. 
6. If the light turns to green, the “Start” button is pressed. If the light remains red, 
more sample needs to be added to the strip. 
a. Automation possibility – The red/green light and the “Start” button can 
be eliminated in case the device only starts operation if enough sample 
is inserted. 
7. The test is carried out in 1-5 minutes. The transducer device must be left turned 
on throughout the course of the measurement. 
8. The user is notified when the measurement is complete, by an audio feedback. 
9. The test strip is removed from the transducer and disposed. 
10. The measurement results are visible on the screen of the transducer. If the 
measurement was unsuccessful, an error message is presented. 
11. The measurement results are forwarded online to the computer of the physician 
and stored and displayed in a dedicated software.  
12. A message stating whether sending the results to the medical professional was 
successful or not is displayed on the transducer. 
13. The transducer is switched off. 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
 
 
 
Page | 37  
 
4.5.5 PRODUCT FEATURES AND CORRELATIONS 
The product features fulfilling the capabilities defined earlier in the section are listed in 
the respective part of the QFD matrix as presented below in Figure 10. The 
correlations between the different features are also indicated in the “Roof” section of 
the matrix. For greater visibility please refer to Appendix C “Roof Matrix” tab. 
 
Figure 10: Preliminary features and their correlation 
 
 
Working principle (GMR)
Accurate measurement results
+
Representation of measurement 
data on the device
0
+
Alternating sample sites
0
0
0
Sample preparation
+
++
0
+
Adjustable piercing depth
0
0
0
+
0
Sterilized components
0
0
0
0
0
+
Warning if not enough sample is 
used (Visual)
0
++
0
0
++
0
0
Measurement speed
++
0
0
0
++
0
0
++
Feedback when measurement is 
complete (Audio/tactile)
0
0
+
0
0
0
0
0
0
Warning if measurement is 
unsuccessful (Visual)
0
++
++
0
0
0
0
0
0
+
Online communication with external 
software
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
+
Storing and representing data in 
external software
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
++
Detecting multiple analytes - Analyte 
specific test strips
++
++
+
0
++
0
0
+
0
0
+
0
++
Disposable test strips
+
0
0
0
+
0
+
+
-
0
0
0
0
++
Number of components
+
0
0
0
+
0
+
0
-
0
0
0
+
0
++
Total size of components
+
0
-
0
+
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
+
++
Total weight of components
+
0
0
0
+
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
+
++
++
Automation
+
+
+
0
-
0
0
+
++
+
+
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Analysing liver function
+
+
+
+
0
+
0
+
0
0
0
0
0
0
+
0
0
0
0
Notification to take medication 
(Audio/tactile)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
+
0
Battery power supply
+
0
+
0
0
0
0
0
+
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
+
+
+
0
++
Total weight of components
Automation
Analysing liver function
Notification to take medication (Audio/tactile)
Online communication with external software
Storing and representing data in external software
Detecting multiple analytes - Analyte specific test strips
Disposable test strips
Number of components
Total size of components
Adjustable piercing depth
Sterilized components
Warning if not enough sample is used (Visual)
Measurement speed
Feedback when measurement is complete (Audio/tactile)
Warning if measurement is unsuccessful (Visual)
Accurate measurement results
Representation of measurement data 
on the device
Alternating sample sites
Sample preparation
==PAGE:38==
 
 
 
 
Page | 38  
 
 USER INVOLVEMENT 
The chapter outlines how the users were involved in the project, and how their insights 
were used to prioritize the importance of the preliminary features.  The chapter intends 
to answer Research Question 2 and Research Question 3 formulated in Chapter 1: 
Introduction. 
5.1 INTERVIEW PREPARATION 
Qualitative interviews were carried out with five people: two epilepsy patients and three 
mothers of children with epilepsy. An overview of the participants is shown in Table 6.  
Table 6: Overview of interview participants 
Reference n° 
Participant(s) 
Patient Age 
Diagnosis 
Main Systems of the disease 
experienced 
Interviewee 1 
Patient 
18 years old 
16 years old 
Not having seizures 
Taking medication 
Interviewee 2 
Mother & 
Patient 
14 years old 
8 years old 
Not having seizures 
Not taking medication anymore 
Interviewee 3 
Patient 
38 years old 
24 years old 
Having minor seizures 
sometimes 
Taking medication 
Interviewee 4 
Mother 
7 years old 
8 months old 
Not having seizures 
Taking medication 
Congenital heart & lung 
dysfunction 
Interviewee 5 
Mother 
22 years old 
6 months old 
Having minor to strong seizures 
Taking medication 
Having Tuberous Sclerosis 
 
The interviews were not structured by specific questions, instead, based on the 
findings of the previous chapter, five main themes were established and used to guide 
the interviews. The main themes touched upon the everyday life with epilepsy, the life 
with an epileptic child, experiencing and controlling seizures, the initial period after 
diagnosis and the biosensor of DeTectUs. These themes were broken down into sub-
themes to ensure, that similar problem areas are discussed with each of the 
participants. Many of the sub-themes are interrelated, which gave the interviews a 
natural flow, as it made it easy to navigate between the different topics without 
breaking the consistency of the conversation. The themes and sub themes are 
presented in Figure 11.  
==PAGE:39==
 
 
 
 
Page | 39  
 
 
Figure 11: Mind map of interview topics 
Four topics were not anticipated before the interviews, but they came up on multiple 
occasions, and are therefore also discussed in the analysis of the interviews. These 
topics are marked with a dark colour and arrows pointing at them. 
The interviews were carried out in the form of phone calls and ranged from 30 to 60 
minutes. 
5.2 DATA ANALYSIS 
5.2.1 LIFE WITH EPILEPSY 
To set the context of the interviews, the interviewees were asked to talk about how 
epilepsy affects their everyday life. In general, the participants talked about their 
personal feelings about living with a chronic disease, the restrictions posed by the 
condition and some discussed stigmatization as a problem inherent to having epilepsy. 
Asking about these topics was necessary to get into the interviewees’ point of view 
and understand their relationship to epilepsy. However, as the DeTectUs biosensor is 
not capable of solving issues related to stigmatization or restrictions, specific cases 
are not detailed in the report. 
5.2.2 POST-DIAGNOSIS PERIOD 
The post-diagnosis period was originally not anticipated as a separate topic, however 
many of the interviewees had useful insights related to this phase. Four out of five 
participants reported that the period right after the diagnosis (first 6-12 months) was a 
great challenge, as they had to adapt both physically and mentally to the new 
circumstances coming with epilepsy. Major challenges mentioned in relation to this 
period were the strong adverse effects of AEDs, the constant fear of seizures, many 
new restrictions and the inconvenience of going to the hospital so often. The 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
 
 
Page | 40  
 
interviewees also reported that these challenges became less significant over time. 
Various reasons helped to overcome the various challenges, but in all of the cases, 
the optimization of the AED doses or change of AED types was a contributing factor. 
When introduced to the concept of the DeTectUs biosensor, one of the interviewees 
(Interviewee 2) immediately connected the solution to the initial phase. 
“This device would be very useful in the first year of diagnosis. It could help regulate 
the medicine dosage accurately, which in turn might prevent seizures.” – Interviewee 
2 
The remaining participant (Interviewee 5) did not highlight the difficulty of the initial 
phase. A possible explanation for this is that the condition of this patient have not 
improved with the AED treatment, and therefore they experience the same challenges 
as at the beginning. 
Conclusion: Based on the data it is possible to state, that generally the first months 
or years after the diagnosis are perceived to be hard, due to the difficulty of getting 
acclimatized to the medication treatment, the new restrictions, the hospital visits and 
the seizures. Patients in this period might be more susceptible to any solutions that 
help them to adapt faster to the new lifestyle inherent to epilepsy. 
5.2.3 SEIZURES AND THERAPY 
5.2.3.1 Seizure strength 
Table 7 below shows how the different interviewees experienced the seizures in the 
early stages of the diagnosis and how they experience it now. 
Table 7: Seizure strength of the interviewees 
Reference n° 
Initially 
Currently 
Interviewee 1 
Strong Seizures 
Seizure free since the first three seizures, due to the 
medication 
Interviewee 2 
Strong Seizures 
Seizure free for more than two years. They outgrew the 
condition. 
Interviewee 3 
Minor Seizures 
Experiencing minor seizures occasionally even though they 
take the medication 
Interviewee 4 
Minor Seizures 
Seizure free since they started the medication treatment 
Interviewee 5 
Strong Seizures 
Experiencing strong seizures, even though they take the 
medication 
5.2.3.2 Medication and adverse effects 
The interviewees were asked to list all the medication they had to take over time, and 
their experiences with them. The overview of the AEDs taken by the patients as well 
as the therapy they had to follow are presented in Table 8. 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
 
 
Page | 41  
 
Table 8: AED history and therapy types 
Reference 
n° 
1st AED type 
2nd AED type 
3rd AED type 
Type of therapy 
Interviewee 1 
Lamotrigine 
- 
- 
Monotherapy 
Interviewee 2 
Carbamazepine 
Sodium Valproate 
- 
Monotherapy 
Interviewee 3 
Lamotrigine 
Topiramate 
Lamotrigine 
Monotherapy 
Interviewee 4 
Carbamazepine 
Lamotrigine 
- 
Monotherapy 
Interviewee 5 
Vigabatrin 
Clonazepam 
Oxcarbazepine 
Polytherapy – 3 
types together 
 
Lamotrigine is the most frequently used AED in the case of these patients, which aligns 
with the claims in DeNoon (2007), who recommends Lamotrigine as a best first choice 
for partial epilepsy. The same source recommends Sodium Valproate as a best first 
choice for generalized epilepsy. These two medications are among the most widely 
used AEDs globally, and they are both on the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines 
(WHO, 2019) 
Interviewees 2, Interviewee 3 and Interviewee 4 tried at least one other AED before 
finding the optimal type, but they never went for polytherapy (except for the period 
where they were changing from one medication to the other). None of them mentioned 
specific challenges related to switching from one medicine to the other. In all three 
cases, the main reason for change were the adverse effects experienced by the 
patients. The dominant adverse effects mentioned by these participants were chronic 
tiredness, frequent nausea and eczema. These effects did not decrease over time with 
the dose adjustments hence there was a need to change the type of AED completely. 
Interviewee 1 also experienced some adverse effects, but these disappeared over 
time. 
Interviewee 5 experienced a wide spectrum of very strong side effects, including 
aggression, chronic tiredness, severe panic attacks and menstrual problems. These 
side effects become especially strong whenever there is a change in the therapy, 
however there is a need for adjusting the doses and adding new AEDs to the 
treatment, as the patient have otherwise uncontrollable seizures. Interviewee 5 refer 
to these adverse effects as one of the most challenging part of the condition. 
“Overdosing the medication made her dull. Sabril (Vigabatrin) on the other hand made 
her aggressive… After we shift to a new treatment plan she feels a bit better for a short 
time, and then everything just turns upside down and the side effects become very 
strong, almost unbearable.” – Interviewee 5 
Besides the side effects, another major challenge related to AEDs is that it is hard to 
keep in mind to take them in the proper time. Three out of five participants mentioned 
it as a hardship of the medication treatment. 
Conclusion: The interview data confirms the assumption, that adverse effects of the 
medication can indeed affect the life of a patient as hard as the seizures themselves 
in some cases. The data also suggests that screening only one type of AED is not 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
 
 
Page | 42  
 
enough to build a strong value proposition, as a large variety of medications are used 
by the patients. The prevalent method is to reduce adverse effects of AEDs is dose 
adjustment, and doctors only decide to change medication types if the adverse effects 
are experienced over a sustained period, or if the medication does not control the 
seizures. The period of waiting for adverse effects to disappear can take from several 
months to years, without knowing for sure whether the problem lies within the doses 
or in the type AED used. The solution of DeTectUs should provide value by making 
this period shorter or more certain by providing data that helps physicians to decide if 
the doses can be optimized or a new treatment plan should be chosen. Note: To 
understand the nature of the data that is needed to optimize doses and treatment 
plans, further research needs to be carried out together with medical experts. 
5.2.3.3 Hospital visits and relationship to the doctor 
Interviewee 1 and Interviewee 3 do not visit the hospital frequently only for EEG twice 
a year. Dose adjustments happen via phone. These patients do not feel the need to 
do checkups more frequently, as their condition is rather stable and they do not 
experience strong adverse effects of the AED they take. Interviewee 5 used to visit the 
hospital frequently, but not anymore and they try to handle all communication via 
phone or e-mail.  
Interviewee 2 mentioned the inconvenience of missing school due to frequent hospital 
visits. In the first year of the diagnosis, they reported to miss more than 30 days at 
school for this reason. As the patient was still young, their mother accompanied them 
to the doctor, meaning that she also had to take many days off at work. A session in 
the hospital took about 30 minutes but waiting often took longer.  Interviewee 4 
reported similar issues; she has to take her child at least 5-10 times a year to the 
hospital, which takes a lot of time, and she is required to take days off at work. 
Furthermore, they do not consider the hospital a safe place as the patient has a 
congenital heart and lung dysfunctions, which make them susceptible to contagious 
diseases such as flu or the corona virus. 
Two interviewees brought up another unanticipated topic related to physicians - their 
personal feelings about the doctor that handles their treatment. Interviewee 2 
mentioned that they trust their doctor a lot, and respect their therapeutic decisions. 
They communicate with them as much as possible, and they never decide to change 
any doses, or make any decisions without consulting with them at first. On the contrary, 
Interviewee 5 described their doctors as being helpless and unwilling to spend enough 
time on their individual case. As a result, they do not trust them entirely, and do not 
follow all their decisions. This mainly shows in adjusting the doses without consulting 
to the doctor first and deliberately skipping to take the medication when the patient 
suffers from the strong adverse effects. 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
 
 
Page | 43  
 
“I don’t really feel that they can help us there anymore. It just feels like they don’t care 
[…] From time to time after she has a severe panic attack, I just don’t give her the 
medication for a while. It seems that she calms down a bit in those periods. It 
happened that we reduced the doses for a longer period without the consent of the 
doctor. I sometimes feel that I can better decide the doses than the doctor can as I live 
together with ___ and see better, how her conditions are changing.” - Interviewee 5 
Conclusion: Hospital visits are perceived to be a bigger challenge for those 
participants where the patient is young, and their parents are bound to take part in 
these visits. These user groups would benefit greatly from a solution that can reduce 
the frequency or the length of the visits. Trust and good relationship with the doctor 
can be an important factor in the success of the treatment. It is highly recommended 
not to deviate from the decision of the professionals however when trust is not strong, 
the patients might not take the advice of the doctor seriously as shown in the case of 
Interviewee 5. It should be further examined if the solution of DeTectUs can facilitate 
better relationships between the physician and the patient. 
5.2.3.4 Lifestyle, seizures and side effects 
The interviewees were asked to talk about how the lifestyle of the patients affects their 
condition in terms of seizures and adverse effects of the medication. Some of the 
interviewees observed that food intake, and exercise affect their condition in both 
terms. Interviewee 2 mentioned that doing exercise had a good effect on the mood of 
the patient when they were experiencing side effects of the treatment. Interviewee 5 
reported that consuming sugar could trigger breakthrough seizures in the patient, while 
drinking herbal teas can help to calm them down in case they have severe panic 
attacks caused by the medication. They also mentioned that consuming herbal teas 
too close to the time when the medication is taken might cancels its effect and results 
in a breakthrough seizure. 
Conclusion: There might be some relation between the lifestyle of the patient and the 
effects of medication as suggested both by the data and literature. Frequent 
monitoring of AED doses in the blood might provide valuable input to this research 
are, and the biosensor of DeTectUs is a useful tool for that. 
5.2.4 RESPONSIBILITY AS A PARENT 
Interviewee 2, Interviewee 4 and Interviewee 5 were asked about the hardships of 
being responsible for a person with epilepsy. According to them, the role of the 
responsible person is psychologically challenging, as they want to be sure about the 
well-being of the patient while they do not have many opportunities to help them. The 
feeling of helplessness and frustration is especially strong in the case of Interviewee 
5, as they have been fighting with the disease and the adverse effect of the medication 
for more than 20 years, without any breakthrough success. 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
 
 
Page | 44  
 
Interviewee 4 and Interviewee 5 also mentioned, that they read a lot about epilepsy in 
order to understand what their children go through and to be able to help them as 
much as possible. 
Conclusion: Originally, it was assumed, that this topic concerns children and their 
parents, however the case of Interviewee 5 shows that the problem is not necessarily 
limited to children of young age. The patient is 22 years old, but due to their mental 
state, they have to rely on a person that takes care of them. This is not a unique case 
- according to literature neurological disorders such as Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 
and Autism Spectrum Disorders are often coupled with epilepsy (Perry & Hernandez, 
2016), (Khan, 2017). These disorders affect the mental state of the causing severe 
neurodevelopmental, behavioural, psychiatric and psychosocial difficulties. Based on 
this information it is suggested to regard the families of epilepsy patients with mental 
disorders as potential beneficiaries of the DeTectUs biosensor. The data also implies 
that the parents responsible for an epilepsy patient are missing to have more 
opportunities that would allow them to improve the quality of life of the patient they are 
looking after. Enabling these people to take a more active part in the treatment of the 
patient should be an integral part of the value proposition of DeTectUs. 
5.2.5 DETECTUS BIOSENSOR 
The capabilities, components and operational characteristics of the preliminary 
concept were introduced to the participants. They were asked to assess the overall 
usefulness of the device and to brainstorm about additional functions that they would 
want to see in such a sensor. The interviewees were not asked to evaluate specific 
features, as the importance and relative importance of these features are calculated 
through the QFD matrix. 
Interviewee 1 found the sensor useful, but they also added that they would not use it, 
as they are not in need of such a solution. Interviewee 2, Interviewee 4 and Interviewee 
5 found the biosensor useful and they all claimed that they would use such a solution. 
Interviewee 2 and Interviewee 5 mainly saw the potential of the device in better dose 
adjustments and therefore reduced adverse effects, while Interviewee 4 was excited 
about the idea of visiting the hospital less frequently. The answer of Interviewee 3 was 
in contradiction with their previous answers; earlier they claimed that they do not suffer 
from adverse effects of the medication, and only visit the doctor once or twice a year 
for the mandatory control. Furthermore, they were positive about the condition and 
reported that it does not affect their life in any bad way. In spite of these claims, they 
stated that they would use the biosensor of DeTectUs. The reason for that was that it 
sounded interesting. 
The main expectations the interviewees formulated were related to safety, reliability 
and usability. Three of the participants mentioned that it would be a major deterrent if 
the device showed data that they could not understand. 
==PAGE:45==
 
 
 
 
Page | 45  
 
When asked about additional capabilities they would see, the interviewees expressed 
two needs; they wanted to be reminded to take the medication, and they wanted their 
liver functions to be monitored. Monitoring liver functions is an integral part of the 
routine blood tests these patients have as taking medications put a pressure on the 
liver. By integrating such a function in the device, the DeTectUs biosensor can further 
reduce the amount of hospital visits needed as well as provide information about the 
health of the patient. 
Conclusion: The interviewees generally liked the idea of the DeTectUs biosensor, but 
the amount of data is not enough to validate potential customer segments. It is possible 
to assume, that the early adopters of the solution would be parents of children with 
epilepsy, or parents of epilepsy patients who does not have the capabilities to take 
care of themselves. This assumption has to be validated through further, quantitative 
research. The two needs expressed by the interviewees were added to the QFD 
matrix, and the list of functionalities were expanded to also respond to these needs as 
presented in the next section. 
5.3 SUMMARIZING USER NEEDS 
After carrying out and analysing the qualitative interviews, the needs expressed by the 
users were collected and added to the QFD matrix, which is presented in Table 9. 
Besides listing the customer needs, two proto-personas were developed based on the 
interview data. The purpose of the proto-personas is to communicate the needs 
expressed by the participants in a relatable way that helps the development team to 
better picture patients with epilepsy. The proto-personas are described in Appendix B. 
It was mentioned earlier that some of the needs and problems expressed might not be 
solvable with the sensor of DeTectUs, but it was decided to keep these on the list too. 
The reason behind is that this way the list shows a clear overview of what epilepsy 
patients in general want, and helps to communicate their needs to the development 
team. The list was sent out to the interviewees several days after the interviews and 
they were asked to assign an importance factor to each need on a scale from 1 to 5. 
Two types of needs were formulated. The first type of needs were related to epilepsy 
and the medication treatment, and the second type were related to the sensor that 
was described as part of the interview. The average of the importance factors assigned 
to each need are also presented in the table below. 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
 
 
 
Page | 46  
 
Table 9: QFD Matrix – Customer need section 
 
Customer needs 
Importance 
Factor 
The patient with epilepsy wants… 
to be seizure free 
5 
better seizure control 
3,2 
to live a life without many restrictions 
5 
to live a life without stigmatization 
4,8 
to understand more about the nature of their epilepsy 
3,4 
to understand how their diet and activities affect their 
seizures 
2,6 
the adverse effects of the medication to disappear 
4,4 
to understand more why they experience side effects of the 
medication 
3,6 
to understand how their diet and activities affect the side 
effect of the medication 
2,6 
to be sure, that the medications will not cause health issues 
on the long-term 
3,6 
to be reminded to take their medication at the proper time 
2,6 
their medication to be optimized faster 
4,2 
to change medication without experiencing severe side 
effects or breakthrough seizures 
4,4 
to have a bigger influence on their condition 
3 
their doctor to know every detail of their condition 
3,8 
to reduce the amount of doctor visits 
3,6 
their doctor to make the best therapeutic decisions 
5 
to trust their doctor more 
2,6 
When using the solution 
proposed by DeTectUs, the 
user wants… 
the device to be easy to use 
4,4 
to make measurement without spending more than a couple 
of minutes per day on it 
4,4 
to avoid repeating the measurements 
5 
the device to be safe 
5 
to see reliable data 
5 
to see detailed measurement data 
2,8 
the to see understandable data 
4,2 
to be able to take the device with them 
1,6 
the device to always fit their most recent medication 
5 
the use to be painless 
3,2 
the device to be affordable 
5 
 
Although all of the needs in the list were mentioned throughout the interviews, it is 
clear, that they are not equally important to the users. The lowest average importance 
was assigned to the portability of the device i.e. the patients in general did not find any 
extra value in a device that they could take with them wherever they go. This means 
that either they prefer to use it at home, or they do not care when and where the 
measurements are carried out. Either way, fulfilling this need will presumably not 
increase customer satisfaction a lot. Relatively low importance values were assigned 
to the needs related to better understanding details of the disease and the treatment 
from the patient side. On the other hand the participants found it important to let their 
doctor know about every detail of their condition. This implies that the potential users 
believe that the usefulness of the device lies within communicating more and better 
data to their doctor in order to achieve better therapeutic decisions. In general, they 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
 
 
Page | 47  
 
do not want to – or believe that they cannot – understand their condition better than 
they do currently, and therefore they are not very interested to see detailed 
measurement data on their device. 
Safety-of-use, reliability of the measurement data and ease of use are perceived to be 
very important by the potential users as well as the time needed for the measurements. 
Furthermore, they expect that the device will fit any of the AEDs they take.  
Based on the answers it is assumed, that the need related to trusting the doctor was 
formulated ambiguously. It is not possible to assess whether the participants assigned 
low value to this need because they trust their doctor currently and they do not feel 
the need to trust them “more” or because they do not consider it important to have a 
trustful relation with their doctor. 
From the information in the table it is possible to answer Research Question 2: What 
are the most pressing needs or problems of epilepsy patients related to seizure 
control? 
The patients generally expect to be seizure free if they take the medication, however 
they do not want to experience any severe adverse effects of AEDs. In the periods 
after the diagnosis, the patients want their doses to be optimized faster, as these are 
the periods when they are most susceptible to medication adverse effects and 
breakthrough seizures. They want to be sure, that AEDs will not cause long term health 
issues and they want to understand more why the medication affects them negatively. 
Epilepsy patients expect their doctor to provide the best therapeutic decision, while 
they would be happy if they could reduce the time spent in the hospital. 
The patients would want to live a life without stigmatization and many restrictions, 
however these are less related to the seizure control procedure itself. 
5.4 PRIORITIZING PRODUCT FEATURES 
As a final step of processing the data from the user research, the correlations between 
the needs formulated by the users and the features outlined as part of the preliminary 
concept were examined. The strength of correlation between each need and feature 
was assessed and values were given, based on the “body ranking system”, described 
in section 2.2.1. The “body” of the matrix that contains these correlation values is not 
presented here due to the limited space on the page. Filling up the correlation matrix 
with values made it possible, to calculate the importance, and relative importance of 
each feature. To calculate the importance of the features, the following equation was 
used: 
𝐈𝐣= ∑𝐈𝐅𝐢
𝐧
𝐢=𝟏
 𝐱 𝐒𝐨𝐂𝐢𝐣 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
 
 
Page | 48  
 
Where: 
Ij is the Importance of Feature j; 
IFi is the Importance Factor assigned to Customer need i; 
SoCij is the Strength of correlation between Feature j and Customer need i. 
To calculate the relative importance of the features, the following equation was used: 
𝐑𝐈𝐣= 
𝐈𝐣
∑
𝐈𝐣
𝐦
𝐣=𝟏 𝐱 𝟏𝟎𝟎 
Where: 
RIj is the Relative Importance of Feature j; 
Ij is the Importance of Feature j; 
The results of the calculations are presented in Table 10 below. 
The complete matrix can be found in Appendix C. 
Table 10: QFD matrix – Feature importance and relative importance 
Product Features 
Importance 
Relative 
Importance 
Accuracy of sensing procedure 
379,8 
18,51 
Representation of measurement data on the device 
233,0 
11,35 
Detecting multiple analytes - Analyte specific test strips 
206,0 
10,04 
Storing and representing data in external software 
178,4 
8,69 
Warning if not enough sample is used (Visual) 
144,6 
7,05 
Working principle (GMR) 
121,2 
5,91 
Automation 
109,2 
5,32 
Sample preparation 
99,0 
4,82 
Warning if measurement is unsuccessful (Visual) 
84,6 
4,12 
Sterilized components 
73,8 
3,60 
Analysing liver function 
64,8 
3,16 
Notification to take medication (Audio/tactile) 
54,6 
2,66 
Measurement speed 
52,8 
2,57 
Alternating sample sites 
42,0 
2,05 
Feedback when measurement is complete (Audio/tactile) 
39,6 
1,93 
Disposable test strips 
33,0 
1,61 
Number of components 
32,6 
1,59 
Adjustable piercing depth for the lancer 
28,8 
1,40 
Online communication with external software 
22,2 
1,08 
Total size of components 
18,8 
0,92 
Total weight of components 
18,8 
0,92 
Battery power supply 
14,4 
0,70 
 
The matrix answers Research Question 3: What features in a biosensor would 
create the most value for epilepsy patients? 
These results provide a clear overview on how important it is to incorporate the specific 
features in the biosensor for epilepsy patients. The higher the relative importance of a 
feature is the more it will increase or decrease the satisfaction of the customers, 
depending on the quality of that feature. Most of the resources should be assigned to 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
 
 
Page | 49  
 
perfecting the top 5-10 features, as these will be the ones that define the core values 
of the product.  
The relative importance factors help to distinguish between right and wrong decisions 
related to the design of the product. This means for example that a decision to use 
cheaper parts to save costs would have a great negative impact of the design in case 
it also lowers the accuracy of the measurement results, as this feature is top priority 
and should not be compromised. An opposing example is to increase the sizes and 
weights of components – without taking it to the extremes – in order to create a 
cheaper of a more accurate solution. This decision would be a valid approach, as 
based on the assessment of the matrix these features do not contribute much to the 
satisfaction of the customer. 
Another benefit of mapping out these importance values is that they help to distinguish 
between more and less important features of the same functions. A great example is 
the external software of the doctors; it provides a lot of value to the customer, that the 
measurement data is visualized to the doctor in an external software, however it does 
not matter too much for them how the data is transferred there. This provides some 
flexibility for the engineers when designing the connection between the device and the 
external software. They could potentially chose for example the option of storing the 
data on an internal hard drive, transferring it to the computer of the patient via USB 
and send it to the doctor in e-mail. 
Ultimately, the QFD matrix and this list of prioritized features summarizing the findings 
of the user research in a concise, comprehensible way that can be communicated to 
the developers of DeTectUs. In the following chapters recommendations are made 
how to incorporate the matrix and the findings of the thesis in their future work. 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
 
 
Page | 50  
 
 CONTRIBUTION OF THE THESIS 
AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
In this chapter, the findings of the thesis are discussed along with their relevance to 
the DeTectUs team. Recommendations are made for the future work of the 
development team. The chapter intends to answer Research Question 1 formulated 
in Chapter 1: Introduction. 
6.1 STRUCTURE THE USER REQUIREMENTS 
Technical teams usually consider the creation of documentation related to technical 
requirements, but the literature suggests that recording and managing higher-level 
user requirements is just as important. Many ventures in the biosensor market do not 
achieve success due to missing this aspect of the development. A potential way to 
overcome this issue is to map the user needs through user research and communicate 
them clearly throughout the whole organization. This way it is ensured that the design 
of the product will meet the expectations of the user, resulting in higher customer 
satisfaction. One of the key components of spreading the knowledge between the 
teams is the documentation of the needs. Based on the literature it is recommended 
for DeTectUs to establish two key documents the Market Requirement Document and 
the Product Requirement Document, even before they start developing and testing 
prototypes. 
Contribution: The thesis outlines the capabilities of a biosensor for epilepsy patients 
as well as some proto-personas of the potential users of the device. It is recommended 
for DeTectUs to transfer these inputs to the respective sections (“High-level 
capabilities”, “Personas”) of their own MRD. 
The thesis outlines the need of the potential user, a set of product features to address 
these and operational characteristics, based on the findings from user research and 
the research of biosensor commercialization, medical device regulations, and epilepsy 
problem areas. It is recommended for DeTectUs to transfer these inputs to the 
respective sections (“Objectives”, “Features”, “User flow and design”) of their own 
PRD. 
Recommendation: The thesis does not contribute three areas of the MRD therefore 
DeTectUs has to carry out a market analysis, with these areas in mind. The first is to 
map out the size of the potential market, and estimate the share that they can achieve. 
To document the findings, use the “Target market” section of the MRD. When the 
target market is established, as a second step the metric strategy of DeTectUs has to 
be outlined in terms of what costs and revenues they expect and compare the two 
numbers. To document the findings, use the “Metrics strategy” section of the MRD. 
Note: According to the estimation of the United States Food and Drug Administration, 
certifying and placing a class C level device to the market costs up to 31.000.000 USD 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
 
 
Page | 51  
 
in total (Silvestrini, 2020). The third step is to identify potential competitors and 
establish product differentiation. The “Competitor analysis” section of the QFD matrix 
is a suitable interface to register how well the concurrent solutions fulfil each of the 
needs listed in the “User needs” section. The section provides an easy-to-understand, 
but detailed overview of the strengths and weaknesses of the solution DeTectUs 
compared to the competition. It is highly recommended therefore, to create and 
maintain this section of the matrix, and use it as a main tool to document findings of 
the competitor research. 
The thesis does not contribute to the “Analytics” section of the PRD. It is recommended 
to outline the content of this section in accordance to Annex II – Section 6 of Directive 
98/79/EC. This section pre-defines Key Performance Indicators toward diagnostic 
medical devices, therefore DeTectUs only has to assess, which KPIs are applicable 
to their project. 
6.2 USE AND MAINTAIN THE QFD MATRIX 
The QFD matrix is a tool to monitor the importance of each device feature in relation 
to the needs formulated by the users. QFD has a set of benefits, which make it a good 
choice to organize knowledge gathered from the potential users of the product to be 
developed. QFD facilitates the translation of ‘fuzzy’ user requirements such as “easy-
to-use” or “safe-to-use” into clear product features, and helps to prioritize them based 
on the correlation matrix. Due to these characteristics, QFD is a great tool to support 
decision-making. Based on the relative importance of the features it is easier to decide 
which product specifications should be kept or excluded opening up possibilities for 
cost reductions. Furthermore, it the matrix shows whether the most important user 
needs are fulfilled well, or additional product features shall be developed to satisfy the 
customers. The tool is flexible and does not require much training to use. 
Contribution: The thesis explains the first level – Product Definition – of QFD, and 
outlines the preliminary concept in this matrix. 
Recommendation: It is recommended, to develop the prototype based on the 
preliminary concept summarized in the matrix. As mentioned in previous sections, 
most of the budget, development time and other resources should be assigned to the 
top 5-10 features.  
Once the prototype is developed, it is recommended, to carry out further research with 
the users. Through testing of the prototype, the user can give feedback and formulate 
further, more detailed needs that should be added to the matrix. It is also highly 
recommended, to start gathering quantitative data, i.e. to validate the importance of 
the needs with a much higher amount of potential users. A potential tool to use to 
gather quantitative input is the Kano model. The model is described in Appendix A. 
In the thesis, the terms “user” and “customer” are used interchangeably, and both refer 
to the patient or the person responsible for them. In reality, medical professionals 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
 
 
Page | 52  
 
would also be very important users of the concept and therefore it is crucial to also 
map their needs and expectations. It is recommended for DeTectUs to carry out 
qualitative interviews with doctors and nurses. These interviews should clarify how the 
software can be implemented and what kind of information has to be shown not to 
overload the medical professionals with data. Either the current QFD matrix can be 
expanded to have all the requirements posed by all the users in one place, or a new 
QFD can be created addressed solely to this second topic. 
6.3 ESTABLISH REGULATORY PLAN 
It is mandatory to comply with Directive 98/79/EC in order to receive EU declaration 
of conformity and CE mark. Without these certifications it is not possible to legally 
place the device on the market in the EU. In case the findings from the market analysis 
imply that the US market is preferable, the applicable FDA directive must be examined. 
Based on Directive 98/79/EC regulations towards performance, technical 
documentation and quality management should be planned early in the process. 
Contribution: The thesis highlights the importance of seeking compliance with 
regulations from the very beginning of the development process. As a form of early 
compliance with the regulations related to technical documentation, the creation of a 
detailed MRD and PRD were proposed. 
Part of the regulations related to self-testing devices were considered when outlining 
the preliminary concept. Features taken from the regulations are for example the 
different warning systems, sterilization of components and automation. 
Recommendation: In the literature, it is suggested to seek the help of compliance 
expert companies to avoid potential mistakes and to speed up the process. 
6.4 ANSWERING RESEARCH QUESTION 1 
Research Question 1: How should developers gather and structure user 
requirements in the development of a biomedical system? 
It is recommended for the team, to gather input from the users qualitatively and 
validate them through quantitative methods such as the Kano model and Kano 
questionnaire. To structure, translate and maintain the requirements gathered from 
the users, use the QFD matrix. 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
 
 
 
 
Page | 53  
 
 CONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS 
Epilepsy is a chronic neurological disorder, affecting over 50 million people worldwide. 
Many of the patients with this condition, among many other difficulties has to face the 
problem of adverse effects caused by their medication. This is the problem area that 
DeTectUs would target, with a biosensor concept, that allows the patients to monitor 
drug levels in their blood, and as a result facilitates better dose optimization. This 
thesis examines the needs of the patients and the perceived value of the concept 
through user research and translate the findings to product features along requirement 
engineering principles. The goal of strengthening the value proposition and thereby 
the market potential of the device, is addressed by proposing a set of functionalities 
for the product as well as a list of prioritized features. 
The literature review summarizes theories behind requirement engineering such as 
requirement levels, ways to capture and document requirements, as well as tools to 
help these procedures. User requirements were further examined and their relevance 
to product development was discussed. Based on the frameworks and methodologies 
proposed in the literature for incorporating user needs into product features, the 
structure of the thesis was outlined in six steps. 
At the time of the thesis the development the project of DeTectUs was not yet in a 
phase where a clear concept was defined, which made it necessary to gather input to 
outline a preliminary solution. The research drew on the relevant literature of epilepsy 
problem areas, the technology and commercialization of biosensors for medical 
purpose, and on the regulations of the diagnostic medical device industry. The 
research on the problems of epilepsy patients helped to identify points of intervention 
i.e. those problem areas where the idea of DeTectUs could bring a meaningful change. 
These areas related to medication dose optimization, reduced hospital visits and to 
some psychological aspects of the condition. The brief technical section served as an 
overview on the basics of the biosensor. Insights of from the literature of the 
commercially successful glucose biosensor helped to discover specific features such 
as warning for the absence of enough sample for carrying out a test, alternating 
sampling sites, or adjustable piercing depth for the lancing device. Regulations were 
mostly examined with the intention of discovering additional features for the concept. 
Insights from this part of the research were generally related to safety and clarity of 
the measurement results. Specific features taken from the research were the warning 
for unsuccessful measurements, use of sterilized components, use of disposable 
components, and data representation on the device intended for laypersons.  
The knowledge gained from the research of these made it possible to draft a set of 
capabilities that were assumed to be valuable for the potential user of the device. It 
was assumed, that the device should allow self-testing and be capable of measuring 
multiple AED levels in several minutes and communicate with an external interface 
that displays measurement results for the medical professionals, who could increase 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
 
 
Page | 54  
 
the accuracy therapeutic decisions based on the data. Further capabilities that were 
assumed to be valuable to the user related to portability, clarity of measurement 
results, clarity of feedbacks, painless sampling, the use of disposable parts and 
minimal sample preparation. The features of the device were outlined in a way so that 
they could potentially deliver the capabilities formulated, and they were inserted in the 
“Product Features” section of the QFD matrix. 
The user research served to validate the needs of the potential users, to discover 
further needs and to verify whether the preliminary concept offered valuable 
capabilities or not. Many of the users confirmed that the adverse effects of the 
medication has or used to have a significant negative impact on their life, and some 
also identified frequent visits at the hospital as a major problem. When it came to the 
capabilities of the device, safety-of-use, reliability of the measurement data and ease 
of use were perceived to be very important by the potential users as well as the time 
needed for the measurements. Furthermore, they expected that the device would fit 
any of the AEDs they take. Ultimately, all the user inputs were entered in the respective 
section of the QFD matrix, and the users evaluated the importance of the needs and 
expected capabilities of the concept. 
Correlations between the user needs and the proposed features of the preliminary 
concept were examined and outlined in the “Body” of the QFD matrix. Based on the 
importance factors defined by the potential users, and the correlation values, the 
importance and relative importance of each product features were calculated. The 
results provide a clear overview on how relevant the different features are, for a 
biosensor used for tracking AED levels. The higher the relative importance of a feature 
is the more of it will increase or decrease the satisfaction of the customers, depending 
on the quality of that feature. Most of the resources should be assigned to perfecting 
the top 5-10 features, as these will be the ones that define the core values of the 
product. In case of the DeTectUs biosensor, the top features are; 
 the accuracy of the sensing procedure, 
 the representation of data on the device, 
 the multiple analyte detection, 
 the storage and representation of data in the external software used by the 
medical professional, 
 and the warnings targeting the absence of enough sample for the test 
At the end of the thesis, the contribution of the report and some recommendations are 
discussed. It is proposed to the DeTectUs team, to use the preliminary concept as a 
basis for a prototype, and maintain the QFD matrix, by updating it with new features 
or needs, discovered from prototype testing. As means of structuring the user 
requirements, the MRD and PRD documents are recommended. 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
 
 
Page | 55  
 
The situation caused by the Covid-19 pandemic posed numerous limitations to the 
project. A major change took place both in the scope of the thesis and in the scope of 
the DeTectUs research, which resulted in the two projects drifting apart from each 
other and deprived the thesis from the technical support that would have been 
provided by the team. As an initiative to reduce the gap caused by the lack of technical 
information, a brief research about biosensor technologies was incorporated in the 
scope of the thesis, but there was no in-depth research carried out about the topic. 
Having more detailed technical insights would have contributed to creating a more 
realistic preliminary concept, which otherwise might have some unanticipated 
discrepancies in this case. Furthermore, working with more technical information could 
have opened up further potential features to consider when creating the preliminary 
concept. The change of scope also imposed time limitations, due to which the analysis 
of the competitors and the target market were excluded from the thesis. 
Many of the initiatives to contact potential users have not succeeded, and therefore all 
the interviewees were gathered from the author’s personal network. This limited the 
number and diversity of interview subjects. As an implication, no quantitative data 
collection was carried out, and the analysis in the thesis is not representative to the 
global population of people with epilepsy. 
Medical professionals were not interviewed as part of the project, however it is 
recognized that their input is crucial to arrive at an all-around solution. Further research 
is necessary to validate whether the healthcare employees have the capacity to work 
with the system proposed in this theses. 
Many factors besides user satisfaction such as the costs of the development, the 
marketing strategy, the execution and quality of the product among other unexpected 
factors will determine the market success of the biosensor. Involving users in the 
development process in itself will not necessarily result in commercial success, but 
following this approach contributes to the market potential of the solution. 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
 
 
Page | 56  
 
REFERENCES 
Actuation Consulting (2018). Market Requirements Document (MRD). Retrieved 
from the website of Actuation Consulting: https://actuationconsulting.com/market-
requirements-document-mrd/ 
Ana, F.J., Umstead, K., Phillips, G.J., & Conner, C.P. (2013). Value Driven 
Innovation in Medical Device Design: A Process for Balancing Stakeholder Voices. 
Annuals of Biomedical Engineering, 41, 1811-1821.  
Anderson, E. W. & Mittal, V. (2000) Strengthening the satisfaction-profit chain. J. 
Service Res, 2000, 3(2), 107–120 
Anitha P.C. & Prabhu B., (2012) Integrating requirements engineering and user 
experience design in Product life cycle Management. 1st International Workshop on 
Usability and Accessibility Focused Requirements Engineering, UsARE 2012, 
Zurich, IEEE, pp. 12-17. 
Biosensor Market (2018). Retrieved from: 
https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/biosensors-market-
798.html?gclid=CjwKCAjwwMn1BRAUEiwAZ_jnEgKWv8Im 
OaKkQ7uZXEwdbAf_vrAsAL13AzJNqKReQJ80CEn6sOlOpBoCV6cQAvD_BwE 
Brown, C. (2008). 3 levels of requirements. Better projects blog.  Retrieved from: 
http://www.betterprojects.net/2008/02/3-levels-of-requirements.html 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  - CDC (2017). National and State 
Estimates of the Numers of Adults and Childer with Active Epilepsy. Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR). Retrieved from: 
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/wr/mm6631a1.htm 
Denmark, J.D., Bustos-Perez, X., Swain, A., Phan, M-H., Mohapatra, S. & 
Mohapatra S.S. (2019). Readiness of Magnetic Nanobiosensors for Point-of-Care 
Commercialization. Journal of Electronic Materials volume 48, pages 4749–4761 
DeNoon, D. J. (2007). Best First-Choice Drugs for Epilepsy ID'd. Retrieved from: 
https://www.webmd.com/epilepsy/news/20070322/best-first-choice-drugs-epilepsy-
idd#1 
European Comission (1998). Directive 98/79/EC of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 27 October 1998 on in vitro diagnostic medical devices. Official 
Journal L 331, 1998 pp: 0001-0037 
Gabb, N. (2012). 6 Different Types of Requirements Documentation. Ezine Articles. 
Retrieved from: https://ezinearticles.com/?6-Different-Types-of-Requirements-
Documentation&id=721643 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
 
 
Page | 57  
 
Geracie G. (2014). What is the Difference between an MRD and a PRD? Retrieved 
from the website of Actuation consulting: https://actuationconsulting.com/what-is-the-
difference-between-an-mrd-and-a-prd/ 
Glucose Biosensors Market Size, Share, Industry Trends Report. (2016). Retrieved 
from https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/glucose-biosensors-
market 
Grigorovsky, C. (2018). Towards outcomes-based healthcare: the EFPIA vision. 
Retrieved from the website of Health Europa:  
https://www.healtheuropa.eu/outcomes-based-healthcare-efpia-vision/87389/ 
Grocott, P., Weir, H. & Ram, M. (2007). A model of user engagement in medical 
device development. International journal of health care quality assurance 
Hansen, S., Berente, N., & Lyytinen. K. (2008). Emerging Principles for 
Requirements Processes in Organizational Context. Ingenierie des Systemes d 
Information 13 (1): 9–36. 
He, W., Ming, X. G., Ni, Q. F., Lu, W. F. & Lee B. H. (2006). A Unified Product 
Structure Management for Enterprise Business Process Integration throughout the 
Product Lifecycle. International Journal of Production Research 44: 1757–1776. 
Healthtalk (2016). Epilepsy in Young People - Side effects of epilepsy medication. 
Retrieved from the website of Healthtalk: https://healthtalk.org/epilepsy-in-young-
people/side-effects-of-epilepsy-medication 
Henchion, M. (2014). Market Requirements and Specifications. Encyclopedia of 
Meat Sciences, pp. 231-235. 
Herzfeldt, A., Kristekova, Z., Schermann, M., & Krcmar, H. (2011). A conceptual 
framework of requirements for the development of e-learning offerings from a 
product service system perspective. in 17th Americas Conference on Information 
Systems 2011, AMCIS 2011. 
Holland, K. (2019). Epilepsy: Facts, Statistics, and You. Retrieved from the website 
of healthline: https://www.healthline.com/health/epilepsy/facts-statistics-
infographic#1 
Iaksch, J., Borsato, M., Schimdt, J. & Vaine, A. (2019). Requirements Engineering in 
the New Product Development Process: A Structured Literature Review. Journal of 
Industrial Integration and Management. 
Jiao, J.R., & Chen. C.H. (2006). Customer Requirements Management in Product 
Development: A Review of Research Issues. Concurrent Engineering: Research and 
Applications 14 (3): 173–185. 
==PAGE:58==
 
 
 
 
Page | 58  
 
Kauppinen, M. (2005). Introducing Requirements Engineering into Product 
Development: Towards Systematic User Requirements Definition. TKK Dissertations 
15, Helsinki University of Technology, Software Business and Engineering Institute. 
Khan, T. (2017). Epilepsy and Autism: Is There a Relationship? Retrieved from: 
https://www.epilepsy.com/article/2017/3/epilepsy-and-autism-there-relationship 
Khunti, K. (2010). Near-patient testing in primary care. The British journal of general 
practice : the journal of the Royal College of General Practitioners, 60(572), 157–158 
Lai, X., Xie M., & Tan, K.C. (2004). Optimizing Product Design Using the Kano 
Model and QFD. International Engineering Management Conference, 21–24 
October, 2004. Vol 3, 1085–1089. 
Learn & Apply: Lean and Six Sigma. (Jun 24, 2018). QFD (Quality Function 
Deployment): Illustration with practical example (PART-1). [Video file]. Retrieved 
from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X1KONQw02H8 
Lee, J. W. & Dworetzky, B. (2010). Rational Polytherapy with Antiepileptic Drugs. 
Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2010 Aug; 3(8), pp.2362-2379 
Lee, Y., & Huang, S. (2009). A new fuzzy concept approach for Kano's model. 
Expert Syst. Appl., 36, 4479-4484. 
Lee, Y.C., Sheu, L.C., & Tsou, Y.G. (2008). Quality Function Deployment 
Implementation Based on Fuzzy Kano Model: An Application in PLM System. 
Computers & Industrial Engineering 55: 48–63. 
Lin, C-T. & Wang, S-M. (2005). Biosensor commercialization strategy - A theoretical 
approach. Frontiers in bioscience: a journal and virtual library. 10(1-3):99-106  
Lode, P.V. (2005). Point-of-care immunotesting: Approaching the analytical 
performance of central laboratory methods. 
Luong, J.H.T., Male, K.B. & Glennon, J.D. (2008). Biosensor technology: Technology 
push versus market pull. Biotechnology Advances 26(5):492-500 
Luong, J.H.T., Male, K.B. & Glennon, J.D. (2008). Biosensor technology: Technology 
push versus market pull. Biotechnology Advances 26(5):492-500 
Markiewicz, K., Van Til, J., & Ijzerman, M. (2014). Medical Devices Early 
Assessment Methods: Systematic Literature Review. International Journal of 
Technology Assessment in Health Care, 30(2), 137-146. 
Markiewicz, K., Van Til, J., & Ijzerman, M. (2014). Medical Devices Early 
Assessment Methods: Systematic Literature Review. International Journal of 
Technology Assessment in Health Care, 30(2), 137-146. 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
 
 
Page | 59  
 
Maussang, N., Zwolinski, P., & Brissaud, D. (2009) Product-service system design 
methodology: from the PSS architecture design to the products specifications. 
Journal of Engineering Design, 2009. 20(4): p. 349-366. 
Mazzocchi, R.A. (2016). Medical Sensors – Defining a Pathway to 
Commercialization. ACS Sensors, 1, 1167-1170. 
Mehrotra P. (2016). Biosensors and their applications - A review. Journal of oral 
biology and craniofacial research, 6(2), 153–159. 
Moina, C. & Ybarra, G. (2012). Fundamentals and Applications of Immunosensors. 
Advances in Immunoassay 
Money, A.G., Barnett, J., Kuljis, J., Craven, M.P., Martin, J.L., & Young, T. (2011). 
The role of the user within the medical device design and development process: 
medical device manufacturers' perspectives. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision 
Making, 11, 15 - 15. 
Money, A.G., Barnett, J., Kuljis, J., Craven, M.P., Martin, J.L., & Young, T. (2011). 
The role of the user within the medical device design and development process: 
medical device manufacturers' perspectives. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision 
Making, 11, 15 - 15. 
Mont, O.K. (2002). Clarifying the concept of product–service system. Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 2002 10(3): p. 237-245. 
Newman JD., Tigwell L.J., Warner P.J. & Turner A.P.F. (2002). Biosensors: an inside 
view. The Seventh World Congress on Biosensors. Kyoto, Japan; 2002. 
Newman, J.D. & Turner, A.P.F. (2005). Home blood glucose biosensors: A 
commercial perspective. Biosensors & bioelectronics. 20. 2435-53. 
Newman, J.D. & Turner, A.P.F. (2005). Home blood glucose biosensors: A 
commercial perspective. Biosensors & bioelectronics. 20. 2435-53.  
Nilsson, S., & Lindahl, M. (2016). A Literature Review to Understand the 
Requirements Specification's Role when Developing Integrated Product Service 
Offerings. Procedia CIRP, 47, 150-155.  
Papinniemi, J., Hannola, L., & Maletz, M. (2011). Challenges in integrating 
requirements management with PLM. 21st International Conference on Production 
Research: Innovation in Product and Production, ICPR 2011, Stuttgart, 2011, pp. 1-
6. 
Perry, M. S. & Hernandez A. (2016). Tuberous sclerosis complex. Retrieved from: 
https://www.epilepsy.com/learn/epilepsy-due-specific-causes/neurocutaneous-
syndromes/tuberous-sclerosis-complex-tsc 
Pragmatic Institute (n.d.), Writing the Market Requirements Document. Retrieved 
from the website of Pragmatic Institute: 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
 
 
Page | 60  
 
https://www.pragmaticinstitute.com/resources/articles/writing-the-market-
requirements-document 
Rees, S. & Williams, A. (2009). Promoting and Supporting Self-Management for 
Adults Living in the Community With Physical Chronic Illness: A Systematic Review 
of the Effectiveness and Meaningfulness of the Patient-Practitioner Encounter. JBI 
Libr Syst Rev. 2009, 7(13), pp: 492-582 
Roe, J.N. (1992). Biosensor Development. Pharm Res 9, 835–844 
Rubright, N. (2019). 9 Types Of Requirements Documents: What They Mean And 
Who Writes Them. Modern Analyst. Retrieved from: 
https://www.modernanalyst.com/Resources/Articles/tabid/115/ID/5464/9-Types-Of-
Requirements-Documents-What-They-Mean-And-Who-Writes-Them.aspx 
Schachter, S. C., Shafer, P. O. & Sirven, I. J. (2013). Seizure and Epilepsy 
Medicines. Retrieved from: https://www.epilepsy.com/learn/treating-seizures-and-
epilepsy/seizure-and-epilepsy-medicines 
Scheller, F. W., Schubert, F., Renneberg, R., Muller, H.G., Janchen, M. & Weise H. 
(1985). Biosensors: Trends and commercialization. Biosensors 1(2) pp. 135-160 
Schuh, G., Rozenfeld, H., Assmus, D. & Zancul, E. (2008). Process Oriented 
Framework to Support PLM Implementation. Computers in Industry 59: 210–218.  
Schöning, M. & Poghossian, A. (2018). Label-Free Biosensing: Advanced Materials, 
Devices and Applications. Elsevier, 2018. 
Scognamiglio, V., Pezzotti, G., Pezzotti, I., Cano, J., Buonasera, ., Giannini, D. & 
Giardi, M. (2010). Biosensors for effective environmental and agrifood protection and 
commercialization: From research to market. Microchimica Acta. 170. 215-225.  
Shah, S. & Robinson, I. (2006). User Involvement in medical device development 
and assessment. International Journal of Health Care Quality Assurance. 9(6), 500 - 
515 
Shah, S. & Robinson, I. (2007). Benefits of and barriers to involving users in medical 
device technology development and evaluation. International journal of technology 
assessment in health care.  
Silvestrini, E. (updated 2020). Premarket Approal (PMA). Retrieved from: 
https://www.drugwatch.com/fda/premarket-approval/ 
Simpson, T., Bobuk, A., Slingerland, L., Brennan, S., Logan, D., & Reichard, K. 
(2012). From user requirements to commonality specifications: an integrated 
approach to product family design. Research in Engineering Design, Vol. 23, 2012, 
pp. 141-153. 
Sparx Systems, Enterprise Architect. (n.d.). Requirements overview. Retrieved from 
the website of Sparx Systems: 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
 
 
Page | 61  
 
https://sparxsystems.com/enterprise_architect_user_guide/14.0/model_domains/wha
t_are_requirements.html 
Stechert, C. & Franke H.J. (2014). Requirements models for collaborative product 
development. Competitive Design - Proceedings of the 19th CIRP Design 
Conference, 2014, pp. 24-31. 
Steiger, B. K. & Jokeit, H. (2017). Why epilepsy challenges social life. Seizure, 2017 
Volume 44, pp.194-198 
Steinhardt, G. (2010). Crafting Market Requirements: Methodology to Identify and 
Articulate Market Requirements. IN Product Manager's Toolkit® — 2017, pp. 39-50 
BY Steinhardt, Gabriel 
TAUVOD. (Mar 13, 2012). Electrochemical Biosensors for Food Safety. [Video file] 
Retrieved from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v7mF6h49ygM 
Tseng, M. & Jiao. J. (1998). Computer-aided Requirements Management for Product 
Definition: A Methodology and Implementation. Concurrent Engineering: Research 
and Applications 6 (3): 145–160. 
Vasantha, G.V.A., Roy, R., Lelah, A., & Brissaud, D. (2012). A review of product–
service systems design methodologies. Journal of Engineering Design, 2012 23(9): 
p. 635-659. 
Venk’s Bio. (Apr 6, 2018). What are biosensors? [Video file]. Retrieved from: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k5ZBUNqx2yI 
What is a market requirements document (MRD)? (n.d.) Retrieved from: 
https://www.aha.io/roadmapping/guide/requirements-management/what-is-a-market-
requirements-document 
What is a PRD (Product Requirements Document)? (n.d.). Retrieved from: 
https://www.aha.io/roadmapping/guide/requirements-management/what-is-a-prd-
(product-requirements-document) 
Wiegers, K. E. (2003). Software Requirements: Practical Techniques for Gathering 
and Managing Requirements throughout the Product Development Cycle. Redmond, 
WA: Microsoft Press. 
World Health Organization - WHO (Jun 20, 2019). Epilepsy. Retrieved from: 
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/epilepsy 
World Health Organization – WHO (2019). World Health Organization Model List of 
Essential Medicines – 21st List 2019.  
Yang, L., Xing, K., & Lee, S.H. (2010) A new conceptual life cycle model for Result-
Oriented Product-Service System development. in Proceedings of 2010 IEEE 
International Conference on Service Operations and Logistics, and Informatics, SOLI 
2010. 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
 
 
Page | 62  
 
Zacarias, D. (n.d.). The Complete Guide to the Kano Model. Retrieved from the 
website of Folding Burritos. https://foldingburritos.com/kano-model/#end-jump 
Zahn, D., Szeponik, J. & Gandhi, A. (2009). Multi-Way Biosensors. SENSOR+TEST 
Conference 2009 - SENSOR 2009 Proceedings 
 
 
