==PAGE:1==
The Contribution of Circular 
Economy Strategies to the 
NDCs’ Mitigation Ambitions in
Developing Countries
Author
Teddy Aurélien Delphin Serrano (s182250)
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby
June 26th, 2020
Supervisors
Alexis Laurent, Quantitative Sustainability Assessment, DTU Management
Sandra Roxana Aparcana Robles, UNEP DTU Partnership, DTU Management 
Fatemeh Bakhtiari, UNEP DTU Partnership, DTU Management
==PAGE:2==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Abstract
As part of the Paris Agreement, countries are asked to put forward their Nationally Deter-
mined Contributions (NDCs) which embody their proposed pathways to face and mitigate
climate change. In the meantime, the concept of Circular Economy (CE) is being increasingly
acknowledged to have a signiﬁcant role to play in reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions,
especially in developing countries. However, the contribution of CE to climate goals at the
scale of entire nations remains unknown in the current scientiﬁc literature. The objective
of this study is to propose a methodology to assess the potential of CE strategies to reach
the mitigation targets of developing countries, as described in their NDCs. Following an in-
ductive approach with the example of Chile, a CE package (CEP) is developed. This CEP
includes a set of CE strategies that aim to reduce Chilean GHG emissions by 2030, targeting
speciﬁc emissions categories. It is found that the application of this CEP enables a reduction
of 38% of the GHG emissions in 2030 in Chile compared to business-as-usual levels, which
would put the country on track to fulﬁll its NDC commitments. This reduction mainly occurs
in the energy sector, through strategies linked to smarter product manufacturing and use.
The methodology as it stands can be applied to other developing countries; moreover, it is
found that the CEP developed for a given country could be used as a benchmark for other
countries with similar emission patterns. Finally, it is recommended to conduct further re-
search on the socioeconomic implications of implementing CE strategies in order to support
decision-makers with a more multidisciplinary perspective.
i of 53
==PAGE:3==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Foreword
This project has been carried out in collaboration with the Quantitative Sustainability As-
sessment (QSA) research group and the UNEP-DTU Partnership (UDP), both part of DTU
Management. It stands for the MSc thesis of my degree in Industrial Engineering and Man-
agement at the Technical University of Denmark, for which 30 ECTS have been assigned.
As agreed with my supervisors, the structure of the present report follows the structure of
a scientiﬁc article, by way of some modiﬁcations to properly meet the requirements of a
Master’s thesis. For the attention of the reader, this document contains a main report, as well
as 6 out of 7 appendices of the supplementary information. The last appendix, attached to
the present document, stands for an Excel ﬁle (Appendix G).
Teddy Serrano
ii of 53
==PAGE:4==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Acknowledgments
I would like to express my gratitude towards my main supervisor, Alexis Laurent, for his ex-
pertise, his patience, and for dedicating a lot of his time to provide me with useful guidance
and precious advice throughout the project. I also want to thank the Quantitative Sustainabil-
ity Assessment (QSA) research group for their warm welcome, and for making this Master’s
thesis a enriching experience on an academical, professional, but also personal viewpoint.
I would also like to thank my co-supervisors from the UNEP-DTU Partnership (UDP), Sandra
Aparcana and Fatemeh Bakhtiari, for their support and their input in this thesis, the former
being at the origin of the subject of this project. Thank you to the entire team of the UDP as
well for letting me work at the core of the UN City in great conditions.
I will conclude by signifying my recognition to all the people that surrounded and supported
me in this particular period, strongly marked by the corona crisis.
iii of 53
==PAGE:5==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Acronyms and abbreviations
AFOLU
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use
BAU
Business-as-usual
BUR
Biennial Updated Report
CAP
Capability approach
CE
Circular Economy
CEP
Circular Economy package
CH4
Methane
CO2
Carbon dioxide
CO2e
CO2-equivalent
COP
Conference of Parties
CPC
Equal cumulative per capita approach
CURN
Scenario under the application of the current NDC
EPC
Equality approach
EU
European Union
GDF
Grandfathering approach
GDR
Responsibility-capability-need approach
GHG
Greenhouse gases
IEA
International Energy Agency
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IPCC-AR
IPCC Assessment Report
LDCs
Least Developed Countries
LULUCF
Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry
MIT
Mitigation scenario
MRV
Measurement, Reporting and Veriﬁcation
N2O
Nitrous oxide
NDC
Nationally Determined Contribution
PLAN
Scenario under the application of the NDC update proposed
SIDS
Small Island Developing States
SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
UN
United Nations
UNEP
United Nations Environment Program
UN DESA
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
UNFCCC
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
WTO
World Trade Organization
iv of 53
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Foreword
ii
Acknowledgments
iii
Acronyms and abbreviations
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Methodology
2
2.1
Deﬁnitions and scoping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1
Deﬁnition of ‘developing countries’ and classiﬁcation of Chile
. . . . .
2
2.1.2
Deﬁnition of Circular Economy and a Circular Economy strategy . . . .
2
2.2
Scenarios compared for CE contribution assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Business-as-usual scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Mitigation scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.3
Current NDC scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.4
Planned NDC scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.5
Fair benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Construction of the CE package . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3.1
Emissions categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Exclusion of the emissions and removals from the LULUCF category . .
10
2.3.3
Selection process for relevant emissions categorization . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.4
Choice of CE strategies and calculation of mitigation potentials
. . . .
11
3
Results and discussion
13
3.1
The case of Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
Proposed CE package . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.2
Comparison of the emissions scenarios for 2030 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.3
Hotspot analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.4
Uncertainty and sensitivity analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Generalization of the methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Construction of emissions scenarios for other countries . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Cross-country similarities to assist CEP construction . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Operability and challenges of the proposed CEP methodology
. . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.1
Improving data availability and relevance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.2
Overcoming the limits of the production-based approach . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.3
Assessing all socio-economic and environmental implications . . . . . .
25
3.3.4
Exploring the interdependence of CE strategies and their side-effects
.
26
4
Conclusion and recommendations
27
v
==PAGE:7==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
References
28
Supplementary information
33
vi of 53
==PAGE:8==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
1
Introduction
The Kyoto Protocol, adopted in 1997 by the Parties of the UNFCCC, marks the beginning of
global climate cooperation (Gerden, 2018). A clear differentiation is however made between
the contribution of developed and developing countries for mitigation ambitions, since only
the former, included in the so-called Annex I list (Gerden, 2018) are entitled to greenhouse
gas (hereafter GHG) emissions reduction targets (Savaresi, 2016; Pauw et al., 2019). The
Paris Agreement (UNFCCC, 2015) puts an end to the comparative advantage of non-Annex I
countries. Starting from the principle that they have an increasing contribution to global GHG
emissions (Ari and Sari, 2017), those countries are invited to take actively part of the global
cooperation by also proposing their pathways to mitigate climate change in their Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDCs) (UNFCCC, 2015).
More developing countries are acknowledging the role of Circular Economy (CE) in achieving
their mitigation pledges. More generally, over the last few years, the concept of CE has been
gaining a lot of momentum in the scientiﬁc literature and the industry (Geissdoerfer et al.,
2017). This concept is often described as a closure of material and energy loops for a better
resource use (Kirchherr et al., 2017; Korhonen et al., 2018; Christis et al., 2019; Prieto-
Sandoval et al., 2018). An increasing number of scientiﬁc studies are investigating the link
between CE and the reduction of GHG emissions. Some are assessing the contribution of CE
strategies to climate change mitigation targets at the level of a city (Christis et al., 2019),
or at bigger scales, e.g. the EU or the world (Material Economics, 2019; Ellen MacArthur
Foundation, 2019). Their approaches are however often partial, the potential of CE being
only studied for a small set of materials/industrial sectors only. They usually do not offer a
systemic viewpoint of the contribution of CE to climate goals at the scale of a country, what
is more in a developing country. None of them are addressing the potential of CE in regard
to the NDCs in particular, which are the core of the climate action agenda today (UNFCCC,
2015). Also, CE is often found to be reduced to material recycling and waste management
only (Kirchherr et al., 2017).
In order to try to address those knowledge gaps, the objective of this study is to develop a
methodology to assess the contribution of CE strategies to reach the mitigation targets of
developing countries, as described in their NDCs.
Following an inductive approach with
the example of Chile, a CE package (CEP) is developed.
This CEP includes a set of CE
strategies that aims to reduce the GHG emissions of the country for the year 2030, targeting
speciﬁc emissions categories. The GHG emissions of Chile under the application of the CEP
is then compared to other 2030 scenarios, including a scenario where the mitigation targets
of the NDC are reached. A hotspot analysis is then carried out to pinpoint the emissions
categories having the biggest reduction potential, as well as the CE strategies that bring
most beneﬁts (Section 3.1). The uncertainties and limitations of this study, as well as the
generalization of this methodology to develop CEPs in other countries are ﬁnally thoroughly
discussed (Sections 3.2 and 3.3).
1 of 53
==PAGE:9==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
2
Methodology
2.1
Deﬁnitions and scoping
2.1.1
Deﬁnition of ‘developing countries’ and classiﬁcation of Chile
There is no convention or commonly accepted deﬁnition of a developing country among the
institutions (Nielsen, 2011). On this matter, the Statistics Division of UN DESA states that
“The designations ‘developed’ and ‘developing’ are intended for statistical convenience and
do not necessarily express a judgment about the stage reached by a particular country or area
in the development process” (United Nations, 2018). They propose their own classiﬁcation,
known as the M49 Standard, based on geographical and economic criteria. In the context
of the United Nations, given the fact that the Paris Agreement is an agreement within the
UNFCCC, the classiﬁcation of developing countries established by the UN DESA is the one
used in this study.
In the aforementioned classiﬁcation, Chile is a country included in the “Developing Regions”
grouping. As this project is conducted in collaboration with the UNEP DTU Partership, that
maintains close relations with Chile, it has been deemed relevant to build the present method-
ology based on this country. The World Bank Group (2019) also classiﬁes the country into the
“High income” category, which offers an interesting indication as to the positioning of Chile
among the developing countries, and therefore its capacity to act.
2.1.2
Deﬁnition of Circular Economy and a Circular Economy strategy
The multiplication of scientiﬁc articles on CE has gone hand in hand with differing approaches
of the concept and a broadening of the suggested deﬁnitions (Geissdoerfer et al., 2017). In
this section, we propose our own deﬁnition of CE, based on a review of the available scientiﬁc
literature.
There are many possibilities to deﬁne CE, and no consensus has been reached in the scientiﬁc
community (Prieto-Sandoval et al., 2018). In general, CE is depicted as an alternative to a
linear production model which is not compatible with a ﬁnite planet with limited capacity
to renew its resources and absorb waste.
We indeed found a general agreement on the
literature around the idea that “the scale of humanity’s metabolism is unsustainable and must
be reduced” (Haas et al., 2015). Most studies mention the necessity of a systemic shift or a
change of paradigm (e.g. Howard et al. (2018); Material Economics (2019); Kirchherr et al.
(2017)) breaking with the current economic system by slowing material loops (i.e. opting for
long-lasting products and extending their lifespan) or closing them (making materials stay
inside the technosphere1).
1The technosphere is here considered as the part of the environment consisting of products and goods of
anthropogenic origin that are currently in use or that can be potentially used
2 of 53
==PAGE:10==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Kirchherr et al. (2017), after analyzing 114 deﬁnitions of CE, state that the main goal of CE
is often found to be economic prosperity, followed by environmental quality, whereas social
aspects are usually barely mentioned. More generally, the concept of CE is often studied
with regard to the three dimensions of sustainable development (economy, society and en-
vironment), even though the links between the two notions are often described unclearly
and ambiguously (Suárez-Eiroa et al., 2019; Geissdoerfer et al., 2017). In the context of
this study, we choose to align the aim of CE with the new paradigm of Griggs et al. (2013),
who argue that the stability of Earth’s systems (inside which the climate is one component)
is a pre-requisite for socioeconomic prosperity in a safe-operating space. Ensuring stability
of Earth’s systems will be included in our deﬁnition as the main target of CE, in the light of
the respect of planetary boundaries, a notion introduced by J. Rockström et al. (2009) and
Steffen et al. (2015). In the context of the SDGs (see Appendix A), our approach could be
represented by the wedding cake classiﬁcation of the goals (see Figure 1), as described by
Folke et al. (2016). We argue that social and economic aspects of CE (not tackled in this
study) can only be considered once the environmental contribution of the concept is proven.
In line with that perspective, we therefore did not consider economic growth as a primary
objective of CE, contrary to many authors and CE practitioners (Kirchherr et al., 2017).
Figure 1: The wedding cake of the 17 SDGs, adapted from Folke et al. (2016). They introduce a hierarchy of the
different SDGs, here grouped under 3 levels: biosphere, society and economy. The biosphere is the foundation
upon which society, and ultimately economy, can prosper.
When it comes to the application framework of CE, studies also differ. Various “R frameworks”
try to classify and prioritize different strategies to recirculate as many products, product parts
and materials as possible to minimize waste and resource demand. Kirchherr et al. (2017)
identiﬁed one of them, the “9R” framework introduced by Potting et al. (2016), as the most
nuanced and detailed one (see Table 1). With a view of including as many CE strategy types
as possible in our methodology, it has been deemed relevant to use this framework in our
study. As the limit between some of those strategy types is sometimes hard to establish, we
3 of 53
==PAGE:11==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
however often refer to those 10 strategy types according to the 3 category groups in which
they have been categorized, as Group 1: Smarter product manufacturing and use, Group 2:
Extend lifespan of product and its parts and Group 3: Useful application of materials (see
Table 1).
Table 1: Representation of the 9R framework of Circular Economy, based on Kirchherr et al. (2017) and Potting
et al. (2016).
Finally, previous literature reviews on CE found a general agreement on the importance of
having a systemic approach of the concept at all levels, that we will also integrate in our
deﬁnition: micro (consumers and companies), meso (industrial sectors and cities) macro
(regions, nations and beyond) (Kirchherr et al., 2017; Prieto-Sandoval et al., 2018).
The aforementioned comments boil down to our deﬁnition of CE:
CE is a concept that aims to align the environmental impacts of a socioeconomic system to
the planetary boundaries at all levels (micro, meso and macro). On a practical viewpoint,
CE is carried out through the implementation of CE strategies.
A CE strategy is a strategy that intends to reduce the throughput of natural resources in the
technosphere by either slowing and closing material loops, or by reducing the primary need
of natural resources. Those strategies can be classiﬁed under the 9R framework (refuse,
rethink, reduce, reuse, repair, refurbish, remanufacture, repurpose, recycle, recover energy)
introduced by Potting et al. (2016) (see Table 1).
2.2
Scenarios compared for CE contribution assessment
In the present methodology, the assessment of the contribution of CE to the NDCs mitigation
ambitions is made through the comparison of several scenarios for 2030. In one of them,
4 of 53
==PAGE:12==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
referred as the mitigation scenario, CE strategies are implemented. The year 2030 is found
to be the most relevant here, since it stands for the year chosen as a reference for the NDC
targets of most countries. In this section, those scenarios, as well as the sources of the data
and the main assumptions on which they rely, are described and speciﬁed for the case of
Chile. For each of them, a low and a high estimation of Chilean GHG emissions have been
determined. Unless otherwise indicated, they are always expressed excluding emissions and
removals from the LULUCF sector (see Section 2.3.2).
2.2.1
Business-as-usual scenario
This scenario is a reference scenario based on the projections of GHG emissions under the
implementation of current policies. Several papers have tried to estimate the estimations of
the countries under BAU circumstances (e.g. Den Elzen and Höhne (2008); Kemp-Benedict
et al. (2019)). The data of the Climate Action Tracker (CAT) (Climate Analytics and NewCli-
mate Institute, 2019) has here been chosen for its better data transparency, and due to the
fact that its estimations were calculated recently and detailed for the year 2030. This tool,
developed by two non-proﬁt institutes, Climate Analytics and the NewClimate Institute, aims
to track the current climate policies at a national level with regard to the international climate
objectives such as the so-called 2◦C target of the Paris Agreement (UNFCCC, 2015). To esti-
mate the emissions under current policies, the CAT bases its analysis upon “country-speciﬁc
scenarios from literature, coming from governments themselves, national independent re-
search, or from international source (e.g. the IEA’s World Energy Outlook)” (Climate Action
Tracker, 2019a). For the case of Chile, the pathway includes policies like the Unconventional
Renewable Energy Law (Law 20.257/2008), the carbon tax (Law 20.780/2014), the results
of electricity supply tenders as of December 2017, emissions reductions from the retirement
of the ﬁrst eight coal-ﬁred power plants announced in 2019 and the Electromobility Strategy,
which sets out an action plan to achieve electriﬁcation of a 40% share of the private vehicle
ﬂeet –and 100% of public urban transport– by 2050 (see Appendix B.1 for more details). In
our estimations, all the aforementioned assumptions are taken into account, except for the
retirement of the ﬁrst eight coal-ﬁred power plants and the Electromobility Strategy, that are
for now only at the stage of announcement. Under this scenario, the estimations of GHG
emissions for Chile are between 129 MtCO2e and 136 MtCO2e. It is worth mentioning that
those ﬁgures are consistent with the estimation of 133 MtCO2e in 2030 for Chile, calculated
by the Climate Equity Reference Calculator (Kemp-Benedict et al., 2019), another tool widely
used for national emissions projections.
2.2.2
Mitigation scenario
The mitigation scenario is a scenario where CE strategies are implemented in the considered
country. The contribution of each CE strategy is deﬁned by its mitigation potential, i.e. the
amount of GHG emissions that are saved thanks to their implementation, compared to BAU
5 of 53
==PAGE:13==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
levels. Taken together, those CE strategies deﬁne what we have called a CE package (whose
construction for Chile is the object of Section 2.3).
2.2.3
Current NDC scenario
Under this scenario, the mitigation targets that the considered country pledged in its current
NDC (The Committee of Ministers for Sustainability and Climate Change, 2015) are assumed
to be fulﬁlled. Chile’s current target is an intensity target, that aims at reducing the GHG
intensity of GDP. In order to convert this intensity target into a absolute reduction target, an
estimation of the GDP growth of 3% per year on average until 2030 has been used (Minis-
terio de Energía de Chile, 2017). The NDC contains an unconditional target2 (30% below
2007 GHG intensity of GDP by 2030) that we have estimated at 131 MtCO2e, as well as a
conditional target3 (up to 45% below 2007 GHG intensity of GDP by 2030), that we have
estimated at 103 MtCO2e. It is worth mentioning that this range includes the estimation of
123 MtCO2e for the year 2030 that has been stated by the government of Chile itself (The
Committee of Ministers for Sustainability and Climate Change, 2015).
2.2.4
Planned NDC scenario
As the Paris Agreement requests countries to update or submit a new version of their NDC
in 2020 (United Nations, 2016) (Decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 23 and 24), Chile proposed
an updated version of their NDC that was released for public consultation in October 2019
(Ministerio del Medio Ambiente de Chile, 2019). This new version, that has not been sub-
mitted to the UNFCCC yet, may replace their current NDC. This would mark a strengthening
of the ambitions of Chile: it is estimated that emissions would unconditionally peak in 2027
and that the total GHG emissions budget would be between 1110 and 1175 MtCO2e between
2020 and 2030, resulting in emissions of 97 MtCO2eq in 2030. A conditional target would
also been set, which embodies a reduction of up to 45% net GHG emissions from 2016 levels,
by 2030. In the end, the range proposed for this new NDC would be between 61.4 and 97
MtCO2eq.
2.2.5
Fair benchmark
In the Paris Agreement, the parties are supposed to self-justify to what extent their NDCs are
relevant and fair. Yet, according to the 2019 report of the UNEP on the emissions gap, if the
current NDCs were fully achieved, the 2◦C target of the Paris Agreement would most likely be
missed (UNEP, 2019). We therefore propose to compare the aforementioned scenarios to a
fair benchmark where the emissions of the countries for 2030 would be aligned with the Paris
2Target that has been considered to be implementable without international support
3Target conditional on ﬁnancial subsidies or on supportive climate-related policies pursued by other coun-
tries
6 of 53
==PAGE:14==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Agreement. A lot of scientiﬁc studies have investigated what the contributions of each party
could look like in a world on track with the 2◦C target (Höhne et al., 2014). To do so, the
remaining global carbon budget is estimated and distributed among the different countries.
There is no commonly agreed method to allocate “fairly” those emissions, as the fairness
depends on the interests and the viewpoint of the stakeholders considered. Here, we have
used the estimations of Robiou Du Pont et al. (2017), that are country-speciﬁc and detailed
for 2030 in particular. They use ﬁve IPCC-AR5 equity categories to deﬁne 5 different fair-
allocation approaches, based on (1) Capability (higher mitigation for wealthier countries)
(2) Equality (equal annual emissions per person) (3) Responsibility-capability-need (higher
mitigation for wealthier countries and countries with higher historical per capita emissions)
(4) Equal cumulative per capita (higher mitigation for countries with higher historical per
capita emissions) and (5) Grandfathering (maintaining current emissions ratios). For Chile
in 2030, they have been estimated at 47, 83, 77, 92 and 88 MtCO2e, respectively. It is worth
mentioning that those carbon budgets correspond to the total net GHG emissions of Chile
here, therefore including the emissions and removals that could occur in the LULUCF sector.
A summary of the description of the scenarios, as well as the fair benchmark, is provided in
Table 2.
Table 2: The 4 scenarios for 2030 considered in this study, as well as the fair benchmark
2.3
Construction of the CE package
In this section, we deﬁne how we have constructed the Chilean CEP used to estimate the
emissions of the country under the mitigation scenario (see Section 2.2.2). The CEP is made
up of several CE strategies that could be implemented to mitigate the GHG emissions of
the country by 2030, compared to BAU levels. As they often target a particular industrial or
economic sector, the emissions of Chile under the 2030 BAU scenario had to be ﬁrstly detailed
among relevant emissions categories that would represent all the activities performed in the
country. When possible, it has been ensured that the methodology to construct this CEP could
7 of 53
==PAGE:15==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
be applied to other developing countries.
2.3.1
Emissions categories
All developing countries, as part of non-Annex I parties of the UNFCCC (2019), were re-
quired to report their GHG emissions by December 2014 through their ﬁrst Biennial Update
Report (BUR), and every two years thereafter (with more ﬂexibility given to LDCs and SIDS)
(UNFCCC, 2014). The inventories must follow the “UNFCCC biennial update reporting guide-
lines for Parties not included in Annex I to the Convention”, contained in annex III of decision
2/CP.17, established during the COP 17 in Durban, in 2011 (UNFCCC, 2012). Among those
guidelines, countries are asked to refer to the different categories and subcategories of GHG
emissions and removals deﬁned by the IPCC in 1996 (IPCC, 1996). Those guidelines have
further been updated and reﬁned in 2006 (IPCC, 2006a) and 2019 (IPCC, 2019). We will
however exclusively refer to the 2006 guidelines, used by the submitted BURs that will be
considered in this study.
The IPCC reporting method is representative of all the activities performed in the country,
whether they are domestic, industrial or commercial. Four main sector categories are pro-
vided by the IPCC in their 2006 report: (1) Energy, that “includes all GHG emissions arising
from combustion and fugitive releases of fuels” (2) Industrial processes and product use, “ex-
cluding [emissions] related to energy combustion, extraction, processing and transport of
fuels and CO2 transport, injection and storage” (3) Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use
(AFOLU), including “emissions and removals from forest land, cropland, grassland, wetlands,
settlements, and other land, [as well as] emissions from livestock and manure management,
emissions from managed soils, and emissions from liming and urea application” and (4)
Waste (IPCC, 2006a). Those four main categories are then divided in subcategories, them-
selves subdivided in other subcategories and so on, providing different degrees of detail (see
Appendix C).
In order to allocate the GHG emissions under the BAU scenario among the different IPCC
categories, the emissions in the last BUR of Chile has been taken as a reference (the results of
this allocation are shown in Appendix G). In this BUR, the emissions data dates back to 2016
(Ministry of Environment of Chile, 2018). The distribution of GHG emissions may change
by 2030. Between 2010 and 2016 however, the share of each main IPCC category has been
stable. As for 2030, the estimations of the consulting group Poch Ambiental (2017) also show
a similar share (see Figure 2), which goes along with our assumption.
8 of 53
==PAGE:16==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1990
2000
2010
2011
2012
2013
2016
2030
Share of total GHG emissions of Chile
Waste
AFOLU (excl. LULUCF)
Industry
Energy
Figure 2: Evolution of the share of the GHG emissions in Chile among the 4 main IPCC categories. Between
1990 and 2016, the data of the last BUR of Chile (Ministry of Environment of Chile, 2018) has been used. For
2030, the estimations of the consulting group Poch Ambiental (2017) are shown.
It is worth noting that those subcategories do not necessarily reﬂect the economic sectors of
a country per say. To give but one example, the IPCC category 2C1 Iron & steel and metal-
lurgical cokeproduction (under the subcategory 2C Metal industry from the main category 2
Industry) does not embody all the emissions coming from the iron and steel economic sector.
The emissions due to fuel combustion during the extraction of the metal ores are for instance
reported under 1A2i Mining, the electricity used in the metallurgical furnaces in 1A1ai Elec-
tricity, and the energy used for transport of those materials in 1A3 Road transportation, all
in the main category 1 Energy. From this point, the calculation of the mitigation potentials
of certain CE strategies can therefore be delicate: if a CE strategy enables steel production
to be cut by 40% versus business-as-usual levels, transmitting this cut to all the aforemen-
tioned IPCC categories is complex. For example, the IPCC guidelines do not provide any
subcategories for the category 1A1ai Electricity. It is therefore insufﬁcient to determine how
much GHG emissions can be saved in this category with this CE strategy, as the amount of
electricity used in the steel industry is unknown. To overcome this issue and increase data
completeness, additional data from governmental institutions have been used.
9 of 53
==PAGE:17==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
2.3.2
Exclusion of the emissions and removals from the LULUCF category
In 2003, the IPCC published a report named Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land-Use
Change and Forestry (GPG-LULUCF). It provides supplementary methods and good practice
guidance for “estimating, measuring, monitoring and reporting on carbon stock changes and
greenhouse gas emissions from LULUCF activities” (IPCC, 2003). The reﬁned 2006 IPCC
guidelines abides by those recommendations and include a category named 3B Land that
reﬂects the six land-use categories (i.e., Forest Land, Cropland, Grassland, Wetlands, Set-
tlements, and Other Land) used in GPG-LULUCF (IPCC, 2006b). In this study, it has been
deemed relevant to exclude all emissions and removals from LULUCF, for the following rea-
sons: (1) Accounting for those emissions and removals may hide trends in dependency to
fossil fuels and decarbonization in general, especially in countries where the forest coverage
potential is large. Excluding LULUCF therefore makes it easier to compare the real contribu-
tions of different countries (2) Uncertainties in land-use related emissions are larger than in
most of the other emissions categories (Monni et al., 2007), mainly because of the uncertain-
ties linked to the estimation of deforestation and forestation rates, as well as that of carbon
density in different lands, ampliﬁed in a context changing climate (Galik and Jackson, 2009;
Houghton et al., 2012) (3) On a methodological point of view, most of the scientiﬁc literature
is predominantly based on GHG emissions excluding LULUCF. On the same line, most NDCs
targets deal with emissions and removals from LULUCF separately, as it is the case in Chile
(The Committee of Ministers for Sustainability and Climate Change, 2015).
2.3.3
Selection process for relevant emissions categorization
The IPCC categories and subcategories being plentiful (the emissions can be split into around
300 different categories, see Appendix C), ﬁnding potential CE strategies to mitigate GHG
emissions for each of them would have been quite a long and laborious work. As a conse-
quence, it has been deemed relevant to only consider and select the IPCC categories where
the GHG emissions were signiﬁcant under the 2030 BAU scenario. The selection process fol-
lows the algorithm presented in Figure 3. It introduces a threshold, which is the minimum
emission share of the total emissions under which an IPCC category is not considered for the
rest of the analysis (i.e. the associated emissions are found to be not signiﬁcant enough). The
value of this threshold is the result of a dichotomic search that ensures that the sum of all
the selected categories embody at least 90% of the total emissions of the country (excluding
LULUCF). This choice of 90% was an arbitrary compromise to overcome the difﬁculty to look
for data relative to really speciﬁc sectors, while maximizing the accuracy of our work by con-
sidering as many detailed categories as possible. For Chile, the threshold has been found to
be 1% (rounding down to the nearest half point). This algorithm could be adapted to select a
more substantial amount of categories, providing more accuracy (e.g. by taking 95% or 99%
instead of 90%). The selected categories are those entitled to an emission reduction with one
or several CE strategies.
10 of 53
==PAGE:18==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Is the CC
≥ x%?
Has the CC 
subcategories
?
Is there a next 
category at the same 
level as the CC?
The first 
subcategory of the 
CC is the new CC
The next category 
of the CC is the new 
CC
Add the CC 
to the list
Are all the 
categories at 
the same level 
as the CC < x%?
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
Add the parent 
category of CC 
to the list
YES
YES
NO
The new CC is the 
parent category of 
the CC
YES
End of the 
algorithm
Has the CC a 
parent 
category?
NO
Start of the 
algorithm
Figure 3: Algorithm applied to build the list of the selected categories of the CEP, entitled to emissions reduction.
In this ﬂowchart, “CC” stands for the variable “considered category”. The algorithm starts with the red box on
the left, and initially the CC is the IPCC category 1 Energy. Two categories are said to be on the “same level” if
they have the same parent category. For instance, 3A1 Enteric fermentation and 3A2 Manure management are on
the same level because they have the same parent category: 3A Cattle. To get at least 90% of the total emissions
of Chile, x had to be set to 1% (rounding down to the nearest half point)
2.3.4
Choice of CE strategies and calculation of mitigation potentials
Once the relevant IPCC categories selected, CE strategies that could have the potential of mit-
igating emissions in those different categories have been searched. In order to do so, a review
of the available scientiﬁc literature has been conducted. For each selected IPCC category, the
objective was to target studies that had calculated mitigation potentials of CE strategies in
this category for 2030 and compared to business-as-usual levels. When possible, we opted
for peer-reviewed studies that made estimations for Chile and for the year 2030. Otherwise,
estimations calculated for other developing countries were selected, as well as studies that
made estimations for the years 2035 or 2050. An order of priority between several categories
of studies was therefore established. This priority hierarchy is summarized in Table 3, where
the different papers that have been considered to build the CEP are classiﬁed. It is worth
mentioning that the results of some studies have been used for several IPCC categories.
11 of 53
==PAGE:19==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Table 3: Priority table used for the data collection of CE strategies. The 14 sources used for the construction
of our CEP are here classiﬁed among different priority categories. The studies marked with * are non peer-
reviewed papers/reports. Although they are not necessarily less reliable, better carefulness has been given as to
the assumptions made for mitigation potentials calculations.
In order to avoid double counting, it has been ensured, when possible, that the CE strategies
were not already implemented in the BAU scenario of Chile for 2030. To do so, we closely
looked at those strategies against the assumptions that had been made to build the BAU
scenario of Chile in 2030 (see Section 2.2.1). This was particularly relevant for papers and
reports that did not make estimations for Chile but for other countries which are considering
implementing CE strategies that have already been implemented in Chile.
Whilst this prioritization has been found relevant to increase the accuracy of this methodol-
ogy, it is facing several limits. The main one lies in the distinction between production and
consumption-based approaches for GHG inventory reporting. In short: what is produced in
a country is not what is consumed in this country. Indeed, the NDCs mitigation ambitions,
as well as the inventories published in the BURs, are for the most part production-based (i.e.
they consider the emissions occurring inside the frontiers of the country territory). However,
some CE strategies, that would mitigate the emissions in a given country, rely on the change
of consumption behaviors that can occur in other countries. To give but one example, Chile
exports most of the copper they produce (WTO, 2016). Consequently, in order to reduce
copper production levels in Chile, CE strategies that involve changing copper consumption
patterns in Chile are less relevant than those applying to the rest of the world (in this case,
particularly in China). When possible, this aspect has also been taken into account before
selecting the data sources used here.
After the CE strategies relevant for the case of Chile have been selected in the literature,
mitigation potentials have been calculated for each of them (see Appendix G). Those mitiga-
tion potentials are based on the data found directly in the scientiﬁc papers, and have been
adapted to the IPCC classiﬁcation used in our methodology, following calculation rules that
avoid double counting (see Appendix D.1). Finally, each CE strategy has been assigned to
one of the CE strategy groups of the 9R framework (see Table 1).
12 of 53
==PAGE:20==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
3
Results and discussion
3.1
The case of Chile
3.1.1
Proposed CE package
18 IPCC categories have been selected for the case of Chile (see Table 4). In 2030, those
emissions categories are estimated to embody 91.3% of all GHG emissions of the country
(excluding LULUCF), 92% of the emissions of the Energy category, 82% for the Industry cate-
gory, 95% for the AFOLU category (excluding LULUCF) and 80% for the Waste category.
Table 4: The CEP of Chile for 2030, gathering the mitigation potentials calculated for the 18 selected IPCC
categories.
In those selected categories (for which we recall that the GHG emission distribution is the
same as that of 2016), 72% of the emissions lie in the Energy category (whereas 4.4% for
Industry, 10% for AFOLU, 4.2% for Waste). 31% are attributed to the Electricity generation
category only. This makes physical sense, since most of today’s anthropogenic emissions
are the result of fossil fuel combustion (IPCC, 2014a), that are here all listed in the Energy
category. In addition, most of the electricity in Chile is currently generated by thermal pow-
erplants, especially coal powerplants, that made up 41% of the electricity generation in 2014
(Deloitte, 2016). As for the other main categories, the emissions of Industry are mainly due
to the CO2 emissions that occur during mineral and chemical transformations in industrial
processes, as well as hydroﬂuorocarbons emissions, reported under the category 2F1 Refrig-
eration and air conditioning. The emissions of AFOLU and the Waste category mainly come
from CH4 and N2O emissions.
13 of 53
==PAGE:21==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
The CEP of Chile contains 22 CE strategies (see Appendix D.2) applying to the aforemen-
tioned categories. It is worth mentioning that for two of them, 1A2m ad 1A4a, no mitigation
potentials have been identiﬁed. Indeed, for the former, no details are provided by Chile about
the industrial activities that are counted in this category. For the latter, no CE strategy has
been found in the scientiﬁc literature to calculate any meaningful mitigation potential.
3.1.2
Comparison of the emissions scenarios for 2030
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
BAU
MIT
PLAN
NEWN
GHG emissions (MtCO2e)
FAIR ZONE
Robiou du Pont et al. (2016)
EPC
GDF
CPC
GDR
CAP
AVERAGE
Figure 4: Projection of Chilean emissions in 2030 under 4 different scenarios (see Section 2.2). For each
scenario, a range between high and low estimations is represented. The average is symbolized by a darker
dash. BAU = Business-as-usual scenario. MIT = Mitigation scenario. PLAN = Planned NDC scenario. NEWN =
New NDC scenario. The light green area corresponds to a fair benchmark calculated by Robiou Du Pont et al.
(2017) according to different approaches. CPC = Equal cumulative per capita, GDF = Grandfathering, EPC =
Equality, GDR = Responsibility-capability-need, CAP = Capability. NB: there is the same mitigation potential
between the high, average and low estimations of BAU and the high, average and low estimations of MIT,
respectively. In other words, the yellow range does not represent the uncertainties of the CEP. It is just a report
of the uncertainties of the BAU scenario itself.
The different results for the 4 scenarios, as well as the fair benchmark, are given in Figure
4. Under the mitigation scenario (MIT in Figure 4), the emissions are reduced by 38% com-
pared to the BAU scenario. With such a reduction of its GHG emissions, Chile would be
largely on track to achieve its current NDC, and on track to achieve the unconditional target
of its proposed NDC update in 2019. Moreover, the associated emissions of Chile under this
14 of 53
==PAGE:22==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
scenario would enable the country to be +2◦C compliant according to several allocation ap-
proaches4 (compliant with regard to Equal cumulative per capita, Grandfathering and Equality
approaches, not compliant for Responsibility-capacity-need and Capability approaches).
Those results have to be taken with caution. This ﬁgure of 38% is simply an addition of
all the mitigation potentials of the CE strategies of the Chilean CEP (see Table 4). For each
CE strategy, the assumptions that have been made to calculate their mitigation potentials
are subject to high uncertainty. This could have a substantial impact on the ﬁnal potential
reduction of the CEP, that we have tried to quantify for the main emissions categories through
a sensitivity analysis (see Section 3.1.4).
3.1.3
Hotspot analysis
It can be interesting to have a look at how this mitigation potential of 38% is reached, i.e.
what are the strategies that bring most beneﬁts. Indeed, the present methodology allows to
discriminate GHG emissions savings on two criteria: the IPCC categories where they apply,
and the types of CE strategies that lead to such decreases (see details on the “9R framework”
in Section 2.1.2 for the classiﬁcation of strategy types).
Focus on the IPCC emissions categories. Most of GHG emissions savings (around 84% of them)
are found to lie in the energy sector, as shown in Figure 5.
This comes as no surprise,
since the share of GHG emissions for the Energy category was already substantial in the BAU
scenario (78% of the total). As for the Industry, AFOLU and Waste categories, their mitigation
potentials are found to be limited (7%, 5% and 4% of total emissions savings of the CEP,
respectively).
4It should be however noted that the comparison with the fair benchmark is made without considering the
potential removals of the LULUCF category, that is today a net carbon sink in Chile (Ministry of Environment of
Chile, 2018)
15 of 53
==PAGE:23==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
BAU
Energy
Industry
AFOLU
Waste
MIT
GHG emissions (MtCO2e)
Group 3
Group 2
Group 1
-38%
Figure 5: Emission reduction potentials of the Chilean CEP for each IPCC category. Details per CE strategy
group. Group 1: Smarter product manufacturing and use. Group 2: Extend lifespan of product and its part.
Group 3: Useful application of materials (see Table 1).
As the energy sector holds an important role in this context, it is worth having a closer
look at the Energy category to provide more details.
In Figure 6, a pie chart shows the
contribution of each IPCC category of the CEP to emissions savings, with a focus on the
selected subcategories of the Energy category. By far, electricity generation is the main lever
of this CEP to reduce the GHG emissions of Chile (embodying 45% of the total emissions
savings). This is made by closing down most of the coal powerplants in Chile, that are today
its main source of electricity production (see Appendix D.2). The next levers concern the
transportation sector (20% of the GHG savings here) and the mining sector (13%), the latter
being a pillar of the Chilean economy. It is no surprise that the aforementioned sectors are
seen as having the best potential for GHG emissions, as they currently embody more than 60%
of the country’s emissions. Nevertheless, those results have been found to be very sensitive
to the CE strategies that are selected for the CEP (see Section 3.1.4).
16 of 53
==PAGE:24==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Residential
6%
Heavy-duty 
trucks and 
buses
7%
Light-duty trucks
4%
Cars
6%
Domestic aviation
3%
Mining
13%
Pulp and paper
0%
Electricity 
generation
45%
WASTE (4%)
AFOLU (excl. LULUCF) (5%)
INDUSTRY (7%)
ENERGY (84%)
Figure 6: Contribution of each IPCC category of the Chilean CEP to emissions savings, detailed for the Energy
category
Focus on CE strategy types. The distribution of the mitigation potentials is not even among
the different CE strategy types (see Figure 7). 77% of them have been identiﬁed as belonging
to Group 1, gathering the CE strategy types Refuse, Rethink and Reduce, standing for smarter
product manufacturing and use (see Table 1). On this matter, two important elements can
be highlighted. First of all, a reduced consumption of goods and services, associated with
more frugal ways of life (here associated with the strategy type R0 Refuse), seems like playing
a fundamental role in GHG emissions savings. This makes environmental sense, as Refuse-
strategies are often depicted as the most effective ones (Potting et al., 2016), since they purely
and solely prevent new natural resources to enter the technosphere. Nonetheless, according
to Kirchherr et al. (2017), this aspect of Circular Economy tends to be often neglected or
kept quiet by fear it could hinder economic growth. Second of all, the available literature
related to energy efﬁciency potentials (associated with the strategy type R2 Reduce) has been
found to be more abundant and detailed, in comparison to other strategy types. For Group 2
strategies (extend lifespan of product and its parts), scientiﬁc papers and reports calculating
mitigation potentials are found to be really scarce, or not adapted to calculate mitigation
potentials at the scale of a country. Since the construction of the CEP has been made with the
existing literature, this can bring about bias as to which strategy types are the most crucial to
focus on.
17 of 53
==PAGE:25==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
BAU
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
MIT
GHG emissions (MtCO2e)
Waste
AFOLU
Industry
Energy
-38%
Figure 7: Emission reduction potentials of the Chilean CEP for each CE strategy group. Group 1: Smarter
product manufacturing and use. Group 2: Extend lifespan of product and its part. Group 3: Useful application
of materials (see Table 1. Details per main IPCC category.
3.1.4
Uncertainty and sensitivity analyses
As mentioned before, most of the emissions savings rely on a couple of CE strategies only,
through estimations found in or calculated from the available literature. As those estimations
sometimes rely on strong assumptions, it has been deemed relevant to carry out a sensitivity
analysis to assess the inﬂuence of the selection of some of those CE strategies to the mitigation
potential of the entire CEP.
The two IPCC categories representing most emissions savings are 1A1ai Electricity genera-
tion and 1A2i Mining and quarrying; the two of them embody more than 58% of the total
emissions savings of the CEP (see Figure 6). Thus, the emphasis has been put on two main
parameters whose variations strongly affect the mitigation potential of those two categories:
(1) the evolution of the Chilean electricity mix (2) the copper production levels of Chile –
copper production embodying around 32% of the total Chilean electricity consumption (Min-
isterio de Energía, 2018). Besides the original mitigation scenario (see Section 2.2), here
renamed as MIT0, 4 additional scenarios, described in Table 5, have been added to the list.
18 of 53
==PAGE:26==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Table 5: The 5 mitigation scenarios considered for the sensitivity analysis
The emissions of Chile for 2030 under those scenarios are shown in Figure 8. The mitigation
potential of the CEP have been estimated to drop down to 36%, 31%, 26% and 24% for the
scenarios MIT1, MIT2, MIT3 and MIT4, respectively. As a reminder, it was 38% for MIT0.
Those results show a high sensibility of the reduction of copper production in the mitigation
potential of the entire CEP. In our initial CEP (MIT0), CE strategies had been estimated to cut
up to 25% of new copper production (see Appendix G). The increase of GHG emissions be-
tween MIT0 and MIT1 is 3%; and it is 4% between MIT3 and MIT4, which appears to be high
with regard to the importance of this sector in Chile, that represents around 10% of its GDP
(Copper Alliance, 2017). Unsurprisingly, the evolution of the Chilean electricity mix seems
to be also of utmost importance for the country to mitigate its GHG emissions. In the original
CEP (MIT0), the assumption of a “no-coal” scenario had been made, where electricity gener-
ation with coal would be reduced to a 5th of its current capacity (and replaced by renewable
electricity), representing a mitigation potential of around 50% of the 1A1ai Electricity genera-
tion IPCC category (see Appendix G). Reaching less than a half of this objective would mean
for Chile to leave the fair zone identiﬁed by Robiou Du Pont et al. (2017), regardless of the
fair-share approach chosen5. Regarding the NDCs, the country would not be on track to meet
the unconditional target of its proposed NDC update under MIT3 and MIT4.
5It should be however noted that the comparison with the fair benchmark is made without considering the
potential removals of the LULUCF category, that is today a net carbon sink in Chile (Ministry of Environment of
Chile, 2018)
19 of 53
==PAGE:27==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
140
BAU
MIT0
MIT1
MIT2
MIT3
MIT4
PLAN
NEWN
GHG emissions (MtCO2e)
EPC
GDF
CPC
GDR
CAP
AVERAGE
Figure 8: Projection of Chilean emissions in 2030 under 8 different scenarios. For each scenario, a range
between high and low estimations is represented. The average is symbolized by a darker dash. BAU = Business-
as-usual scenario. MIT = Mitigation scenario. PLAN = Planned NDC scenario. NEWN = New NDC scenario.
The light green area corresponds to a fair benchmark calculated by Robiou Du Pont et al. (2017) according
to different approaches. CPC = Equal cumulative per capita, GDF = Grandfathering, EPC = Equality, GDR =
Responsibility-capability-need, CAP = Capability. NB: there is the same mitigation potential between the high,
average and low estimations of BAU and the high, average and low estimations of MIT, respectively. In other
words, the yellow range does not represent the uncertainties of the CEP. It is just a report of the uncertainties
of the BAU scenario itself.
Here, the inﬂuence of only two parameters have been studied. It is however sufﬁcient enough
to show that the Chilean CEP can be very sensitive and dependent on the selection of the
CE strategies chosen, as well as their degree of implementation by 2030. More thorough
sensitivity and uncertainty analyses, taking into account more parameters, would however
be necessary to have a more detailed assessment of the uncertainty of this CEP.
3.2
Generalization of the methodology
In this section, we discuss the transposability of the present methodology built from the case
of Chile, reﬂecting on the possibility to assess the contribution of CE strategies to the NDCs
of other developing countries similarly.
20 of 53
==PAGE:28==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
3.2.1
Construction of emissions scenarios for other countries
The construction of different scenarios has been made based on data that is speciﬁc to Chile
(see Section 2.2). Here, we ﬁrstly discuss the possibility of building the same scenarios for
other developing countries.
BAU scenario. In order to estimate the emissions under the BAU scenario in 2030, the data
of the Climate Action Tracker had been used (Climate Analytics and NewClimate Institute,
2019). This tool provides estimations for many countries, but not all of them: in total, 32
countries are tracked, covering around 80% of global emissions (see Appendix B.2). The least
emitting regions have often been disregarded in their analysis. It is for example the case in
Africa, where only 5 countries are considered (Morocco, South Africa, Ethiopia, Kenya and
Gabon). This might convey an apparent lack of data for the least emitting countries, and
other data sources would be required to estimate their BAU emissions (e.g. Den Elzen and
Höhne (2008); Kemp-Benedict et al. (2019)).
NDC scenarios. In the context of the Paris Agreement, limited guidelines have been given on
NDC formulation (Pauw et al., 2018). Countries have consequently submitted really different
NDCs that are sometimes difﬁcult to analyse and compare. Mitigation targets submitted in
the NDCs can be grouped into 5 different types: (1) Absolute targets, aiming at an absolute
reduction of GHG emissions, (2) Intensity target, aiming at a reduction of GHG emissions
per unit of GDP created, (3) Business-as-usual target, aiming at a reducing GHG emissions
compared business-as-usual levels, (4) Peak target, setting up a goal year after which abso-
lute GHG emissions will decrease and (5) Unquantiﬁed target, that involves no mention of a
clear mitigation target. Those targets have different implementation periods, as well as vari-
ous baselines (year of reference for reduction calculations). When developing countries have
picked 2030 as the implementation period –which is the case of around 85% of them (Carbon
Brief, 2015)–, it is however possible to estimate the GHG emissions under the achievement of
the ﬁrst 4 types of mitigation targets highlighted here, that around 70% of developing coun-
tries have chosen (Carbon Brief, 2015). Those estimations, that depend on considerations
chosen by the countries themselves, can be subject to uncertainties. They however often give
an idea of the objective of net GHG emissions that has been pledged by the countries for
2030. When the last type of target is preferred however, no real estimation can be made, as
no quantiﬁed objective is actually stated in the NDC.
Mitigation scenario. The Chilean emissions under the 2030 BAU scenario have been allocated
among the different IPCC emissions categories, following the allocation shares provided in
their last BUR (as explained in Section 2.3.1). This can be done for other countries as well,
since all of them are required to report their GHG emissions through their own BUR, follow-
ing the same reporting guidelines provided by the IPCC. However, it has to be noted that
the IPCC has classiﬁed several degrees of accuracy for GHG reporting (called Tiers), cor-
responding to different quantities of information required and different degrees of analytic
complexity (UNFCCC, 2014). Tier 1 is considered as the less accurate or default approach,
while Tier 3 is considered as the most accurate one, by notably using more elaborated meth-
21 of 53
==PAGE:29==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
ods (providing more detailed data or better measurements for example). When accounting
for their GHG emissions, countries can provide different tiers of methods, depending on their
capacity. This boils down to a level of details and accuracy that can vary a lot from a country
to another, or from an emissions category to another. As to the selection of CE strategies to
mitigate the GHG emissions among the most signiﬁcant IPCC categories, its relevance mostly
depends on data availability in the scientiﬁc literature (see Section 2.3.4): for countries that
are the object of more studies about their production patterns and their raw materials con-
sumption, the contribution of CE strategies could be determined more accurately. For the
others, assumptions as to the transposability of the implementation of CE strategies from
other countries would have to be made.
Fair benchmark. In this study, several fair-allocation approaches have been used, calculated
by Robiou Du Pont et al. (2017). 174 countries are covered by their analysis, which enables
to construct a fair zone, similar to Chile, for most developing countries.
3.2.2
Cross-country similarities to assist CEP construction
Searching for CE strategies that can be implemented in a given developing country is found to
be the most laborious step of this methodology, since a literature review has to be conducted.
In this paragraph, we reﬂect on the possibility to mimic the construction of CE packages by
highlighting similarities between the emission patterns of different countries. To illustrate this
reﬂection, we consider, besides Chile, additional developing countries located on different
continents: Peru, Nigeria and Vietnam.
The share of the GHG emissions of the three other developing countries among the emissions
categories selected for Chile seems to highly differ (see Table 6): whilst those categories
embody 91.3% of Chile’s emissions, they only represent 72.8%, 64.4% and 61.8% of the Pe-
ruvian, Nigerien and Vietnamese emissions, respectively. When going into details, taking a
closer look at the different IPCC categories one by one, the difference appears even more evi-
dent. Electricity generation, that embodies almost a third of Chilean emissions, only represent
from around 10% to 17% of the GHG emissions in the other countries. It is the lowest for
Peru, whose electricity mix is highly constituted of hydroelectricity and natural gaz power
plants (IEA, 2018). Conversely, the share of some other IPCC categories are much higher in
Peru, Nigeria and Vietnam (for AFOLU categories for example), depending on the prevailing
economic sectors in those countries.
22 of 53
==PAGE:30==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Table 6: Estimated share of the GHG emissions of Chile in 2030 for the selected IPCC categories in the CEP.
Comparison of the share of the GHG emissions for Peru, Nigeria and Vietnam for the same categories
However, similarities can also be observed in the previous table, as some emissions categories
selected for Chile appear to be signiﬁcant for Peru, Nigeria and Vietnam as well. To highlight
those similarities, the selection process (described in Section 2.3.3) has been applied to the
three other countries (see Tables 9, 10 and 11 in Appendix E). In Table 7 is shown the
percentage of commonly selected IPCC categories for those countries.
When two out of
four countries are randomly picked, at least half of the categories are shared. It can also
be noticed than for a given country, most of its selected categories are shared with at least
another country (78% for Chile, and up to 94% for Peru). Finally, 8 categories (representing
44% of Chile’s categories) are present in all the CEPs.
Table 7: Percentage of commonly selected IPCC categories for Chile, Peru, Nigeria and Vietnam (see Section
2.3.3 for details about the selection process). The table can be read as follows: for the ﬁrst line, 61% of the
categories selected for Chile have also been selected for Peru, 50% of them have been selected in Nigeria, 72%
in Vietnam, 78% by at least one of them, 44% by all of them.
This could glimpse the possibility of having similar emission patterns for a large amount of
countries, where signiﬁcant emissions categories would be shared. For instance, in the most
rural countries, it is really likely that a similar emissions pattern would be observed for the
AFOLU category, that would hold an important emissions share; for oil producing countries,
23 of 53
==PAGE:31==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
the category 1B2a Petroleum would probably have signiﬁcant emissions. Those countries are
likely to be able to implement similar CE strategies. The construction of new CEPs (for other
countries) would therefore most certainly get easier as the methodology is applied multiple
times: once CEPs are developed for some given countries, similar CE strategies could be
adapted for the construction of the CEP of a new country.
3.3
Operability and challenges of the proposed CEP methodology
3.3.1
Improving data availability and relevance
A perfect inventory of GHG emissions through the IPCC reporting method would presume to
perfectly keep track of the emissions occurring everywhere in the country, which is technically
impossible. For some emissions categories, the lack of data can even result in the report of
no emission. It is for example the case in the last Chilean BUR for some categories such as
1A2k and 1A2l (energy consumed in construction and textile industries, respectively), or 4C2
(open burning of waste) (Ministry of Environment of Chile, 2018). As to the emissions due
to international transportation, they are not even included in the scope of the BURs.
Also, as seen in Section 2.3.1, the IPCC categories usually do not match with the economic
activities and the industrial sectors, which emissions are often split into a lot of different IPCC
categories. Consequently, this methodology does not allow to have a lot of information on
the economic sectors that will play a key role to reduce GHG emissions: the discrimination is
only being made according to the IPCC categories and the CE strategy types.
Finally, once relevant IPCC categories are selected, the search for CE strategies to mitigate
the emissions of those categories can only be incomplete. Indeed, the strategies selected
strongly depend on the available scientiﬁc literature, which can be really scarce when it comes
to speciﬁc sectors. Sometimes, the calculated mitigation potentials found in the literature
also apply to speciﬁc geographical areas, sectors or time frames that do not match with the
requirements of the study. Assumptions for the transposability of the data have to be therefore
made, which lowers down the accuracy of the results.
3.3.2
Overcoming the limits of the production-based approach
The mitigation targets formulated in most NDCs of the UNFCCC parties are production-based.
They aim to reduce GHG emissions taking a territorial system boundary, and do not take into
account the exported or imported emissions from abroad. In the handbook on “Measure-
ment, Reporting and Veriﬁcation (MRV) for Developing Country parties” (UNFCCC, 2014),
whilst ‘emissions and removals of GHGs through the national inventory is presented as a core
element of the countries’ BURs, no guidelines on production-based or consuption-based ap-
proaches seem to be given. As a result, most countries choose a production-based approach,
potentially hiding consumption trends of imported/exported goods of the country. Burden
24 of 53
==PAGE:32==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
shifting can be observed, if the production of polluting goods are for example relocated in
neighboring countries. Since one of the main levers of CE identiﬁed to mitigate GHG emis-
sions is based on a smarter consumption of products, it could be more meaningful to adopt
a consumption-based approach to assess better the potential of CE. This approach, often rec-
ommended in the scientiﬁc literature, is however seen to be harder to implement (Peters,
2008). It would indeed require to determine nations footprinting with precision, keeping
track of all the input-output ﬂows occurring worldwide. Some models of nation footprinting
for GHG emissions have been developed (e.g. (Exiobase, 2015; Eora, 2019)), but they do not
provide a level of details as high as the IPCC classiﬁcation.
3.3.3
Assessing all socioeconomic and environmental implications
In the context of the SDGs (see Appendix A), this study mainly focuses on SDG 13 Climate
Action. However, the implementations of CE strategies are really likely to have impacts on
the achievement of other SDGs, that are crucial to consider.
In our study, no economic considerations have been taken into account. The capacity of
the Chilean society to support the implementation of the CEP is for example not assessed.
More precisely, no calculation on the potential of CE strategies to create jobs and stimulate
economic growth is provided in this study (linked to SDG 8 Decent work and economic growth).
However, a review of the limits of CE (see Appendix F) allowed us to raise many doubts as
to this possibility. Indeed, in the recent scientiﬁc literature, the decoupling of environmental
impacts from economic growth is often seen as limited and unlikely to happen in the future,
economic prosperity being mainly driven by an increasing consumption of raw materials
and fossil fuels (Parrique et al., 2019). Some of our results go along the same line. The
elimination of copper losses (which is a strategy included in the Chilean CEP, see Appendix
D.2) would inevitably decrease the need of mining new ore. As the copper mining industry
plays a big role in the Chilean economy (Copper Alliance, 2017), this could have an impact
on the economic performance of the entire country. The calculation of abatement costs of
CE strategies (that could for instance be deﬁned as the investment required to prevent the
emission of 1 kgCO2e) could provide better decision support for decision makers, potentially
helping them to prioritize some CE strategies over others.
Finally, the question of the responsibility of the implementation of this CEP is not addressed
either. Different stakeholders can indeed act at different levels of production and consump-
tion chains, whether they are part of public institutions or private companies. Thus, some
questions remain open: should the countries massively invest in a transition for more circu-
larity, supporting the public and the private sector to work hand in hand? Should state actors
oblige the private sector to invest in CE? Who has the capacity to trigger the “systemic shift”
(Kirchherr et al., 2017) that a circular transition requires? Who is going to ﬁnance a more
environmentally-friendly transformation of the economy?
On an environmental perspective, the consideration of more environmental impacts is needed
25 of 53
==PAGE:33==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
to deal with the sustainability of the CEP more in depth and to conclude as to its respect to
all planetary boundaries. It could be interesting to adapt the present methodology to other
impact categories, such as raw material depletion (addressing SDG 12 Responsible consump-
tion and production) or biodiversity loss (SDGs 14 Life below water and 15 Life on land). This
would however require a similar system of national reporting beforehand, adapted to those
new impact categories.
3.3.4
Exploring the interdependence of CE strategies and their side-effects
In this methodology, the mitigation potential of the CEP is purely and solely an addition
of the mitigation potentials of all CE strategy, as if their implementation was independent.
This does not happen to be correct in practice. For instance, developing electromobility for
public transportation at a large scale would most likely result in the increase of the electricity
demand, whose carbon intensity is today still unknown (would it result in the construction of
a new coal power plant?). A more systemic approach of the implementation of CE strategies,
studying the side-effects resulting from the application of each CE strategy, would therefore
be required. On the same wavelength, the calculation of potential rebound effects, that can
be tremendous when it comes CE economy but that remain widely unknown in the scientiﬁc
literature (see the literature review on the limits of CE in Appendix F for more details) could
also be relevant.
26 of 53
==PAGE:34==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
4
Conclusion and recommendations
The objective of this thesis was to develop a methodology to assess the contribution of CE
strategies to the NDCs mitigation ambitions in developing countries. In order to do this,
we opted for an inductive approach based on the country of Chile. This gave rise to a CE
package, containing a series of CE strategies that have the potential to mitigate Chilean GHG
emissions: following this methodology, it has been found that a reduction of 38% of the
GHG emissions can be reached in 2030 in Chile, compared to BAU levels. This reduction
mainly occurs in the Energy sector, primarily thanks to strategies linked to smarter product
manufacturing and use. Such a reduction would enable Chile to achieve their current NDC,
as well as their recently proposed NDC update, that may be submitted to the UNFCCC by the
end of 2020.
Based on the results obtained for Chile, several lessons can be learned as to the exactness of
the methodology. The uncertainties of the assumptions that have been made throughout this
study to evaluate the contribution of CE strategies are hard to estimate. Also, the construction
of the CEP strongly depends on the choice of CE strategies taken from the literature, that
incidentally have their own uncertainties. A more accurate and less uncertain estimation
of the contribution of CE to climate targets would require a better data availability on the
potential of CE strategies to reduce GHG emissions. We also found that more transparency
about the production and consumption patterns of developing countries would be required
in order to keep better track of their GHG emissions, and therefore ﬁnd the most relevant CE
strategies for them.
The present methodology can be generalized to other countries to a different degree, depend-
ing on data availability of each region. It appears that several developing countries may have
similar emission patterns. This could help build other CE packages around the world and
bring the cooperation around CE to an international level. The implementation of the same
CE strategies could indeed beneﬁt to various nations that have similar prevailing economic
sectors.
Finally, some challenges have been identiﬁed as to the operability of the methodology, that
could be the object of further research.
One is to incorporate the side-effects caused by
the implementation of CE strategies itself. Some of those side-effects, that could result in
rebound effects or the burden shifting of environmental impacts, could indeed hinder the
initial beneﬁts brought by the introduction of the mitigation strategies. Another one is to
consider the socioeconomic viability of CE strategies, that could provide decision-makers
with a more multidisciplinary perspective.
27 of 53
==PAGE:35==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
References
Ari, I. and Sari, R. (2017). Differentiation of developed and developing countries for the Paris Agree-
ment. Energy Strategy Reviews, 18:175–182.
Carbon Brief (2015).
Paris 2015: Tracking country climate pledges | Carbon Brief. Available at:
https://www.carbonbrief.org/paris-2015-tracking-country-climate-pledges.
Christis, M., Athanassiadis, A., and Vercalsteren, A. (2019). Implementation at a city level of circu-
lar economy strategies and climate change mitigation – the case of Brussels. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 218:511–520.
Circle Economy (2019).
The Circularity Gap Report 2019. Available at: https://www.legacy.
circularity-gap.world/.
Climate Action Tracker (2019a). Current Policy Projections | Climate Action Tracker. Available at:
https://climateactiontracker.org/methodology/current-policy-projections/.
Climate Action Tracker (2019b). Current Policy Projections (Chile) | Climate Action Tracker. Available
at: https://climateactiontracker.org/countries/chile/current-policy-projections/.
Climate Analytics and NewClimate Institute (2019). Home | Climate Action Tracker. Available at:
https://climateactiontracker.org/.
Copper Alliance (2017). The Impacts of Copper Mining in Chile: Economic and Social Implications for
the Country.
De Decker, K. (2019). How Circular is the Circular Economy?
Low-Tech Magazine. Available at:
https://www.lowtechmagazine.com/2018/11/how-circular-is-the-circular-economy.html
Deloitte (2016). Estudio: Sector Energético Chile 2016. Available at: https://www2.deloitte.com/
cl/es/pages/energy-and-resources/articles/estudio--sector-energetico-chile-2016.
html
Den Elzen, M. and Höhne, N. (2008). Reductions of greenhouse gas emissions in Annex I and non-
Annex I countries for meeting concentration stabilisation targets: An editorial comment. Climatic
Change, 91(3-4):249–274.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2019).
How The Circular Economy Tackles Climate Change.
Ellen
MacArthur Foundation, 1:1–62.
Eora (2019). Eora Global MRIO. Available at: https://worldmrio.com/.
Exiobase (2015). Exiobase - Home. Available at: https://exiobase.eu/.
Federal Republic of Nigeria (2018). First Biennial Update Report (BUR1) of the Federal Republic of
Nigeria.
Folke, C., Biggs, R., Norström, A. V., Reyers, B., and Rockström, J. (2016). Social-ecological resilience
and biosphere-based sustainability science. Ecology and Society, 21(3).
Galik, C. S. and Jackson, R. B. (2009). Risks to forest carbon offset projects in a changing climate.
Forest Ecology and Management, 257(11):2209–2216.
28 of 53
==PAGE:36==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Bocken, N. M., and Hultink, E. J. (2017). The Circular Economy – A new
sustainability paradigm? Journal of Cleaner Production, 143:757–768.
Gerden, T. (2018). The adoption of the kyoto protocol of t he united nations framework convention
on climate change. Prispevki za Novejso Zgodovino, 58(2).
Griggs, D., Stafford-Smith, M., Gaffney, O., Rockström, J., C. Öhman, M., Shyamsundar, P., Steffen, W.,
Glaser, G., Kanie, N., and Noble, I. (2013). Sustainable development goals for people and planet.
Nature, 495:305–307.
Haas, W., Krausmann, F., Wiedenhofer, D., and Heinz, M. (2015). How circular is the global economy?:
An assessment of material ﬂows, waste production, and recycling in the European union and the
world in 2005. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 19(5):765–777.
Höhne, N., den Elzen, M., and Escalante, D. (2014). Regional GHG reduction targets based on effort
sharing: a comparison of studies. Climate Policy, 14(1):122–147.
Houghton, R. A., House, J. I., Pongratz, J., Van Der Werf, G. R., Defries, R. S., Hansen, M. C., Le
Quéré, C., and Ramankutty, N. (2012). Carbon emissions from land use and land-cover change.
Biogeosciences, 9(12):5125–5142.
Howard, M., Hopkinson, P., and Miemczyk, J. (2018). The regenerative supply chain: a framework
for developing circular economy indicators. International Journal of Production Research, 7543.
IEA (2018). Key energy statistics | Peru. Available at: https://www.iea.org/countries/peru.
IPCC (1997). Revised 1996 IPCC guidelines for national greenhouse gas inventories workbook, vol. 2.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
IPCC (2003). Good practice guidelines for greenhouse gas inventories for land-use, land-use change and
forestry. Kanagawa, Japan: Institute of Global Environmental Strategies (IGES).
IPCC (2006a). 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. IPCC National Greenhouse
Gas Inventories Program, Hayama, Japan, 2006.
IPCC (2006b). 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Volume 4: Agriculture, Forestry
and Other Land Use, Introduction. IPCC National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Program, Hayama,
Japan, 2006.
IPCC (2006c). 2006 Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Chapter 8: Reporting Guid-
ance and Tables. IPCC National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Program, Hayama, Japan, 2006.
Available at: https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2006gl/pdf/1_Volume1/V1_8_Ch8_
Reporting_Guidance.pdf
IPCC (2014a). Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group
III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Edenhofer, O.,
R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum, S. Brunner,
P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlömer, C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel and J.C. Minx
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA..
IPCC (2014b). Annex II: Glossary [Mach, K.J., S. Planton and C. von Stechow (eds.)]. In: Climate
Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment
29 of 53
==PAGE:37==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri and L.A.
Meyer (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 117-130..
IPCC
(2019).
2019
Reﬁnement
to
the
2006
Ipcc
Guidelines
for
National
Greenhouse
Gas
Inventories.
Available
at:
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/
2019-refinement-to-the-2006-ipcc-guidelines-for-national-greenhouse-gas-inventories/
J. Rockström, W. Steffen, K. Noone, Å. Persson, F. S. Chapin, E. F. Lambin, T. M. Lenton, M. Scheffer,
C. Folke, H. J. Schellnhuber, B. Nykvist, C. A. de Wit, T. Hughes, S. van der Leeuw, H. Rodhe, S.
Sörlin, P. K. Snyder, R. Costanza, U. Svedin, M. Falkenmark, L. Karlberg, R. W. Corell, V. J. Fabry, J.
Hansen, B. Walker, D. Liverman, K. Richardson, P. Crutzen, and J. A. Foley (2009). A safe operation
space for humanity. Nature, 461(September):472–475.
Kemp-Benedict, E., Holz, C., Baer, P., Athanaisou, T., and Kartha, S. (2019). Berkeley and Somerville:
Climate Equity Reference Project (EcoEquity and Stockholm Environment Institute). The Climate
Equity Reference Calculator.
Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., and Hekkert, M. (2017). Conceptualizing the circular economy: An analysis
of 114 deﬁnitions. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 127(September):221–232.
Korhonen, J., Honkasalo, A., and Seppälä, J. (2018). Circular Economy: The Concept and its Limita-
tions. Ecological Economics, 143:37–46.
Material Economics (2019). The Circular Economy - A powerful force for Climate Mitigation. Building
Engineer, 94(11):24–26.
Mayer, A. L., Kauppi, P. E., Angelstam, P. K., Zhang, Y., and Tikka, P. M. (2005). Importing timber,
exporting ecological impact. Science, 308(5720):359–360.
McKinsey
&
Company
(2014).
Moving
toward
a
circular
economy
|
McKinsey
&
Com-
pany. Available at:
http://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/Manufacturing/Moving_toward_a_
circular_economy?cid=manufacturing-eml-alt-mkq-mck-oth-1402
Millar, N., McLaughlin, E., and Börger, T. (2019). The Circular Economy: Swings and Roundabouts?
Ecological Economics, 158(April 2018):11–19.
Ministerio de Energía (2018). Informe Balance Nacional de Energía 2017. (1a. Ed.), Santiago de Chile.
Ministerio de Energía de Chile (2017).
Propuesta de Plan de Mitigación del Sector Energía en
Chile.
Available at:
http://www.minenergia.cl/archivos_bajar/2017/03/propuesta_plan_
mitigacion_gases_efecto_invernadero.pdf
Ministerio del Medio Ambiente de Chile (2019). Chile’s Nationally Determined Contribution | Update
2020.
Ministero del Ambiente de Peru (2019).
Segundo Informe Bienal de Actualizacion.
Avail-
able at: https://www.minsalud.gov.co/sites/rid/Lists/BibliotecaDigital/RIDE/IA/INS/
SegundoinformeONS.pdf
Ministry
of
Environment
of
Chile
(2018).
Chile’s
Third
Biennial
Update
Report.
Avail-
able at: https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/SubmissionsStaging/NationalReports/Documents/
5769410_Chile-BUR3-1-Chile_3BUR_English.pdf
30 of 53
==PAGE:38==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment of Vietnam (2017). The Second Biennial Updated Re-
port of Vietnam. Available at: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/97620135_
Viet%20Nam-BUR2-1-Viet%20Nam%20-%20BUR2.pdf
Monni, S., Peltoniemi, M., Palosuo, T., Lehtonen, A., Mäkipää, R., and Savolainen, I. (2007). Uncer-
tainty of forest carbon stock changes - Implications to the total uncertainty of GHG inventory of
Finland. Climatic Change, 81(3-4):391–413.
Nielsen, L. (2011). Classiﬁcations of Countries Based on their Level of Development: How it is Done
and How it Could Be Done. IMF Working Papers, 11(31):1.
Parrique, T., Barth, J., Briens, F., Kerschner, C., Kraus-Polk, A., Kuokkanen, A., and Spangenberg, J.
(2019). Decoupling debunked: Evidence and arguments against green growth as a sole strategy for
sustainability. page 80.
Pauw, W. P., Castro, P., Pickering, J., and Bhasin, S. (2019). Conditional nationally determined con-
tributions in the Paris Agreement: foothold for equity or Achilles heel? Climate Policy, 0(0):1–17.
Pauw, W. P., Klein, R. J., Mbeva, K., Dzebo, A., Cassanmagnago, D., and Rudloff, A. (2018). Beyond
headline mitigation numbers: we need more transparent and comparable NDCs to achieve the Paris
Agreement on climate change. Climatic Change, 147(1-2):23–29.
Peters, G. P. (2008). From production-based to consumption-based national emission inventories.
Ecological Economics, 65(1):13–23.
Poch Ambiental (2017).
Actualización de la proyección de emisiones 2017-2030 y análisis medidas
de mitigación de CO2 equivalente. Available at: http://generadoras.cl/media/170613_Informe_
final_estudio_proyeccion_emisiones_GEI_y_medidas_-_POCH_Generadoras_de_Chile.pdf
Potting, J., Hekkert, M., Worrell, E., and Hanemaaijer, A. (2016).
Circular Economy: Measuring
innovation in the product chain - Policy report. PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency,
(2544):42.
Prieto-Sandoval, V., Jaca, C., and Ormazabal, M. (2018). Towards a consensus on the circular econ-
omy. Journal of Cleaner Production, 179:605–615.
Robiou Du Pont, Y., Jeffery, M. L., Gütschow, J., Rogelj, J., Christoff, P., and Meinshausen, M. (2017).
Equitable mitigation to achieve the Paris Agreement goals. Nature Climate Change, 7(1):38–43.
Savaresi, A. (2016). The Paris agreement: A new beginning? Journal of Energy and Natural Resources
Law, 34(1):16–26.
Steffen, W., Richardson, K., Rockström, J., Cornell, S. E., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E. M., Biggs, R., Car-
penter, S. R., De Vries, W., De Wit, C. A., Folke, C., Gerten, D., Heinke, J., Mace, G. M., Persson,
L. M., Ramanathan, V., Reyers, B., and Sörlin, S. (2015). Planetary boundaries: Guiding human
development on a changing planet. Science, 347(6223).
Suárez-Eiroa, B., Fernández, E., Méndez-Martínez, G., and Soto-Oñate, D. (2019). Operational prin-
ciples of circular economy for sustainable development: Linking theory and practice. Journal of
Cleaner Production, 214:952–961.
31 of 53
==PAGE:39==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
The Committee of Ministers for Sustainability and Climate Change (2015). Intended Nationally Deter-
mined Contribution of Chile Towards the Climate Agreement of Paris 2015. Gobierno de Chile.
UN (2015). Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development | Sustainable Devel-
opment Knowledge Platform. Available at: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/
transformingourworld
UNEP (2019).
Emissions Gap Report 2019. Available at:
https://www.unenvironment.org/
resources/emissions-gap-report-2019
UNFCCC (2012).
Report of the Conference of the Parties on its seventeenth session, held in Durban
from 28 November to 11 December 2011. Available at: https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2011/
cop17/eng/09a01.pdf
UNFCCC (2014).
Measurement, Reporting And Veriﬁcation For Developing Country Parties. Avail-
able at: https://unfccc.int/files/national_reports/annex_i_natcom_/application/pdf/
non-annex_i_mrv_handbook.pdf
UNFCCC (2015). Paris Agreement | 21st Conference of the Parties.
Available at: https://unfccc.
int/files/meetings/paris_nov_2015/application/pdf/paris_agreement_english_.pdf
UNFCCC (2016). Report of the Conference of the Parties on its twentieth session, held in Lima from 1
to 14 December 2014. Available at: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/docs/
2014/cop20/eng/10.pdf
UNFCCC
(2019).
List
of
Parties.
Available
at:
https://unfccc.int/process/
parties-non-party-stakeholders/parties-convention-and-observer-states
United Nations (2018). UNSD – Methodology | Standard country or area codes for statistical use
(M49). Available at: https://unstats.un.org/unsd/methodology/m49/
Wiedmann, T. O., Schandl, H., Lenzen, M., Moran, D., Suh, S., West, J., and Kanemoto, K. (2015). The
material footprint of nations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 112(20):6271–6276.
World
Bank
Group
(2019).
World
Bank
Country
and
Lending
Groups.
Avail-
able
at:
https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/
906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups
WTO (2016). Trade proﬁle | Chile. Pages 44–47. Available at: https://www.wto.org/english/res_
e/statis_e/daily_update_e/trade_profiles/CL_e.pdf
Zink, T. and Geyer, R. (2017). Circular Economy Rebound. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 21(3):593–
602.
32 of 53
==PAGE:40==
The contribution of Circular Economy strategies to the
NDCs mitigation ambitions in Developing Countries
Supplementary information
Teddy Aurélien Delphin Serrano
Part I
.
Contents
A
The Sustainable Development Goals
34
B
Speciﬁcations on the Climate Action Tracker
35
C
IPCC classiﬁcation of GHG emissions categories
44
D Details on the construction of the CEP
45
E
Selected emissions categories for Peru, Nigeria and Vietnam
48
F
Literature review on the limits of Circular Economy
50
G Calculation tables for the mitigation scenario of Chile
53
33
==PAGE:41==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
A
The Sustainable Development Goals
The expression Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is commonly used to designate the
seventeen goals established by the member states of the UN (see Figure 9), considered as the
core of the 2030 Agenda. This agenda was adopted by the UN in September 2015 after two
years of negotiations including governments and the civil society. The 17 goals are subdivided
into 169 targets that are meant to be reached by 2030 (UN, 2015).
Figure 9: The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), adopted by all the United Nations Member States, “[pro-
viding] a shared blueprint for peace and prosperity for people and the planet, now and into the future.” (UN,
2015)
34 of 53
==PAGE:42==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
B
Speciﬁcations on the Climate Action Tracker
B.1
Description of Chile’s BAU scenario for 2030
This appendix reports the assumptions made by the Climate Action Tracker (CAT) (Climate
Analytics and NewClimate Institute, 2019) to calculate their “Current policy projections” in
Chile for 2030. It directly quotes what can be found in their methodology section (Climate
Action Tracker, 2019b). Our BAU scenario rely on those projections, taking the same as-
sumptions than the CAT, except for the retirement of the ﬁrst coal-ﬁred power plants and the
Electromobility Strategy, described below.
“ECONOMY-WIDE
Between 1990 and 2016, Chile’s emissions increased by 115% from 52 MtCO2e to 112 MtCO2e,
excluding LULUCF. Taking into account Chile’s current policies, we estimate that emissions will
slightly decrease and level out to reach 107-108 MtCO2e per year in 2020 excluding LULUCF,
which represents a 106-108% increase above 1990 levels, and 18-19% increase above 2010
levels.
Thereafter, we project that emissions will ramp up, climbing to 122-126 MtCO2e in
2030 (134-143% above 1990 levels and 32-38% above 2010 levels) excluding LULUCF. Our
current policy emissions pathway includes the Unconventional Renewable Energy Law (Law
20.257/2008), the carbon tax (Law 20.780/2014), the results of electricity supply tenders as
of December 2017, emissions reductions from the retirement of the ﬁrst eight coal-ﬁred power
plants announced in 2019 and the Electromobility Strategy, which sets out an action plan to
achieve electriﬁcation of a 40% share of the private vehicle ﬂeet –and 100% of public urban
transport– by 2050.
Under currently implemented policies, Chile will overachieve its 2020 pledge. Our analysis also
suggests that with current policies Chile will meet its unconditional and conditional NDC targets
in 2030. With planned policies, Chile would almost achieve its newly-proposed NDC target in
2030.
Chile’s overarching Climate Action Plan 2017–2022 is the instrument articulating climate change
policy for all sectors (Ministerio de Medio Ambiente, 2017). It guides climate mitigation actions
and intends to advance mitigation measures by maintaining the national GHG inventory, de-
veloping policy, implementing MRV systems, and fulﬁlling Chile’s international commitments
(Government of Chile, 2016a).
Chile is currently formulating a Climate Change Framework Law. The objective of this new law is
to strengthen legal and institutional bases for implementing climate change mitigation and adap-
tation targets. Public debates (“Diálogos Ciudadanos”) have been held in several cities between
December and mid-January 2019. The preliminary draft bill, released for public consultation
between June and July 2019 (Gobierno de Chile, 2019a), includes:
1. Governance: specifying the role and tasks of the different ministries, authorities, regions
and municipalities.
35 of 53
==PAGE:43==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
2. Management instruments: setting a goal of GHG emissions neutrality in 2050, which could
be increased if necessary, based on best available scientiﬁc information to achieve the Paris
Agreement’s 1.5◦C goal or comply with international commitments. For this the following
instruments are proposed: (1) Long-Term Climate Change Strategy: outlining the guide-
lines, intermediate targets, and integration of sectoral and regional policies in a 30-year
horizon and including an emissions pathway towards GHG emissions neutrality in 2050
and means of implementation (i.e. capacity building, technology transfer and ﬁnance) (2)
Nationally Determined Contribution: establishing Chile’s international commitments un-
der the Paris Agreement (3) Sectoral mitigation and adaptation plans: establishing actions
and measures to achieve emissions reductions under the Long-Term Climate Strategy (4)
National Report on Climate Change (RANCC, in Spanish): including all policies, planes,
programs, actions and measures included in all climate change instruments or proposed by
public organisms to monitor its correct implementation
3. Public information systems on climate change: including (1) the National Inventory Sys-
tem for GHGs and other climate gases (2) the creation of the National System of GHG
Projections (3) the GHG Certiﬁcation System, and (4) a Climate Change Scientiﬁc Reposi-
tory.
4. Financing measures and economic instruments: including the creation of a National Fi-
nance Strategy Against Climate Change. It assigns to the Environmental Protection Fund,
the task of ﬁnancing climate change projects and concrete actions in the RANCC and the
Long-Term Climate Strategy.
If approved, this bill will enshrine Chile’s 2050 GHG emissions neutrality target into legislation.
ENERGY SUPPLY
Chile’s 2050 Energy Strategy from 2017 sets long-term targets for renewable energy generation.
These targets include 60% electricity production from renewable energy by 2035 and 70% by
2050 (Ministerio de Energía, 2015). To achieve the Paris Agreement’s long-term temperature
goal, the global power sector needs to rapidly transition to being carbon-free by around 2050
(Climate Action Tracker, 2017).
A newly-published roadmap, the Energy Route 2018–2022 (Ministerio de Energía, 2018b), sup-
ports the 2050 Energy Strategy’s targets and establishes commitments for further emissions re-
ductions. These commitments include quadrupling small distributed renewable energy capacity
by 2022, establishing a legal framework for energy efﬁciency in the industry, mining, transport,
and buildings sector, implementing a ten-fold increase of current EVs share, regulating solid bio-
fuels (i.e. wood), starting the process of decarbonising the energy matrix and establishing a
concrete phase-out plan for coal-ﬁred power plants.
Chile has already started implementing some of these commitments, but it is giving mixed signals.
After more than a year of planning, in June 2019, Chile announced its plant to completely
phase-out coal by 2040 and aim towards carbon-neutrality by 2050 (Ministerio de Energía,
36 of 53
==PAGE:44==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
2019). Around the same time, a new 375 MW coal-ﬁred power plant in Mejillones (equivalent
to about 1.8 TWh per year) started operations and two of its eight oldest ones (equivalent to
170 MW or 0.6 TWh per year) were closed (Electricidad, 2016; Engie, 2019; Tomás Gonzalez,
2019). These developments are already considered in our current and planned policy projections.
The phase-out plan is divided into two stages.
First, by 2024, Chile will close eight of the oldest coal-ﬁred power plants—equivalent to a ﬁfth of
its current coal electricity capacity and to nearly 5 MtCO2e/yr of yearly emissions by 2024 if the
demand is replaced by renewable energy sources. If electricity demand is replaced by gas-ﬁred
generation, emissions reductions by 2024 will only be 2 MtCO2e/yr. This is a remarkable step
for a country with 40% coal share in their electricity matrix in 2016 (IEA, 2017b).
Second, Chile will phase out the remaining 20 plants, but has not yet speciﬁed a detailed schedule.
Phasing out all coal-ﬁred power plants at the latest by 2032 is an action compatible with the
global sectoral benchmark for electricity sector under a scenario in line with the Paris Agreement
for the Latin America region (Yanguas Parra et al., 2019), this is eight years ahead of Chile’s
coal phase-out plan.
We have estimated that closing all 29 coal-ﬁred power plants in Chile by 2040 – assuming lineal
retirement between 2024 and 2040 – could lead to a cumulative emissions reduction potential
between 30 MtCO2e/yr to 36 MtCO2e/yr by 2030 depending on which technologies substitute
electricity generation (for more details see Assumption section). In comparison, a study from the
Chilean consultancy Valgesta Energia, estimated a cumulative emissions reduction potential of up
to 20 MtCO2e by 2030, equivalent to about 1.8 MtCO2e/yr between 2019 and 2030 (Valgesta
Energía, 2018).
Chile’s most recent energy planning documents, the Mitigation Plan for the Energy Sector (re-
ferred to as Mitigation Plan) and the Energy Sector’s Long Term Strategy, already assume a
decreasing share of coal electricity generation towards 2050 (Ministerio de Energía, 2017b,
2017c). Chile’s Mitigation Plan includes three different scenarios for the energy sector: current
policies, 2050 Energy Strategy and additional effort.
We have assessed the ﬁrst two in our analysis as current and planned policies respectively, de-
ducting estimations from policies coming after its publication. The main difference between these
two scenarios lies in the assumptions of the long-term share of renewable energy and the coal
phase-out.
In the current policy scenario, the renewable electricity share increases towards 2020 to reach
around 59% and then stalls and we consider only the ﬁrst stage of the coal phase-out plan:
closing of the ﬁrst eight plants by 2024. The planned policy scenario considers a growing renew-
able energy generation share towards 2050, where it reaches 70% and the assumption of linear
retirement of coal power plants by 2040. This difference is translated to higher GHG emissions
in the current policy scenario, as electricity generation from gas is ramped up to satisfy growing
demand. In a Paris Agreement-compatible pathway, however, (unabated) gas should play only a
minor role in electricity generation and phase out completely by 2050 (Climate Action Tracker,
37 of 53
==PAGE:45==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
2017).
Both the current policy and 2050 Energy Strategy scenarios from the Mitigation Plan include
substantial generation from hydro — which accounted for 25% of generation in 2016 (IEA,
2017a), and is assumed to increase to 32% and 39% respectively in 2030. According to the
2050 Energy Strategy scenario from the Mitigation Plan, renewable energy generation goals in
2035 and 2050 are only to be met with a substantial contribution of hydro power generation.
It is not clear how much of this share is large hydro. The construction of large hydro projects
in Chile is highly controversial, largely because of signiﬁcant adverse environmental and so-
cial impacts. In 2014, Chile’s government overturned environmental permits for HidroAysén, a
massive hydroelectric project in Patagonia, after a seven year campaign against it - the largest
environmental campaign in Chile’s history (NRDC, 2016).
Making progress towards the non-conventional renewables goal, in 2018, 17.4% of electricity
generation was from non-conventional renewable sources, and 57% of the generation capacity
under construction was non-conventional renewable energy1 (NCRE) (Comisión Nacional de
Energía and Ministerio de Energía Chile, 2019).
As a measure to foster decentralised renewable energy deployment, in early 2018, Chile reformed
its Distributed Generation Law (also referred to as the “Net Billing” Law) (Law 20.571). The
reform included a tripling of installed capacity threshold from 100 kW to 300 kW, which aims
to support and promote larger projects of self-consumption of electricity (Ministerio de Energía,
2018a).
As in the original law, electricity surplus can be fed into the grid to obtain discounts in the owner’s
electricity bill. The reform establishes, that if an owner has more than one establishment, these
discounts are also applicable for those electricity bills, otherwise, discounts from surplus can be
accumulated. This policy is neither quantiﬁed in the current policy scenario nor the plan policy
scenario due to lack of available data.
Additionally, Chile has implemented a carbon tax of 5 USD/tCO2 for stationary sources (turbines
or boilers above 50 MWth), which came into effect in 2017. Payments for 2017 began in April
2018 and accounted for more than 190 million USD (El Mercurio, 2018).
According to IRENA (2015, 2018, 2019), renewable energy costs in Chile have continuously
declined over recent years.
Cost reductions have recently led to a higher implementation of
renewable energy. The cost of renewable energy technologies in Chile is expected to keep declining
(Ministerio de Energía, 2017c).
Energy efﬁciency is also part of the government’s Energy Agenda. A new Energy Efﬁciency bill was
approved by the Senate in April 2019 (Ministerio de Energía de Chile, 2019a). It aims to foster
energy efﬁciency and thereby reduce ﬁnal energy consumption by 7% by 2035. This bill provides
for the development of National Energy Efﬁciency Plans by the Ministry of Energy every ﬁve years
and encompasses several sectors such as buildings, transportation and industry. The bill has not
yet been published as law in the Ofﬁcial Journal. If this new law were to be implemented as
proposed in the current draft bill, it could lead to an estimated CO2 emissions reduction of 4.6
38 of 53
==PAGE:46==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
MtCO2 by 2030 and of 6.8 MtCO2 by 2035 (Ministerio de Energía de Chile, 2019a).
From 2010 to 2013, the government implemented several policies on appliance labelling, energy
efﬁciency, fuel efﬁciency standards and electricity infrastructure. Policies that stands out are
the Energy Efﬁciency Seal (2013) and Energy Efﬁciency Action Plan 2012–2020 (Ministerio de
Energía, 2013). The ﬁrst one provides recognition form the Chilean Ministry of Energy to com-
panies demonstrating a high commitment in terms of energy efﬁciency. In 2017, 22 companies
received this recognition for more than 590 GWh per year saved through energy efﬁciency projects
(Revista Electricidad, 2018). The second one aims to set a suitable legal framework for energy
efﬁciency implementation across different sectors towards a 15% energy efﬁciency improvement
by 2025.
INDUSTRY
Chile is the world’s leading copper exporter, and the mining and industry sector is Chile’s largest
consumer of both total ﬁnal energy (39% in 2017) and electricity (Comisión Nacional de Energía
and Ministerio de Energía Chile, 2019).
The main agreement between the government and the mining industry regarding energy efﬁciency
is the “Cooperation Agreement”, under which mining companies should look for ways to use
energy more efﬁciently, and the Ministry of Energy should support them (Government of Chile,
2016b).
The new energy efﬁciency bill approved by the Senate in April 2019 will foster emissions re-
ductions in “energy intensive” industries (i.e. with energy consumption higher than 418 TJ per
year) that could be legally binding (El Mostrador, 2019). Policies within this sector would be
important for Chile to reduce its emissions (Ministerio de Energía, 2017b).
Under current policies, energy emissions from the mining and industry sector are projected to
reach 21.4 MtCO2e per year in 2030, 24% increase compared to emissions from 2015, while
under planned policies (2050 Energy Strategy), the projected emissions are 18.9 MtCO2e per
year in 2030 (Ministerio de Energía, 2017b).
TRANSPORT
In 2017, the transport sector accounted for 36% of total ﬁnal energy consumption in Chile, sec-
ond to industry (Comisión Nacional de Energía and Ministerio de Energía Chile, 2019). In 2015,
the government introduced the “Green Tax” on motorised vehicles, which applies to new vehicles,
and is intended to incentivise more efﬁcient vehicles. Payments of this tax for 2017 accounted for
107 million USD (El Mercurio, 2018). Chile also has a vehicle labelling programme (Govern-
ment of Chile, 2016a) and has set CO2 ﬂeet performance standards – that are in line with those
of the US, EU and Japan – for new imported vehicles (Ministerio de Energía, 2017b).
In December 2017, Chile published its electromobility strategy, which sets out a goal and action
plan towards achieving a 40% share of electric passenger vehicles as well as a 100% electriﬁed
public transport by 2050 (Ministerio de Energía, 2017a). We estimate that the implementation
of this strategy could lead to an emissions reduction between 2.1 to 4.6 MtCO2e/yr by 2030.
39 of 53
==PAGE:47==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
This is included in our planned policies scenario. The action plan is divided into strategic axes,
which include development of policy and regulation, prioritising pubic transport, and supporting
the initial uptake of electric mobility.
Chile has already begun implementing actions towards achieving these targets. By the end of
April 2018, the Chilean government had funded 60 electric taxis, which arrived in Santiago in
October 2018 (Ministerio de Transportes y Telecomunicaciones, 2018). The Valparaíso Region
will have a second ﬂeet of 120 “electrotaxis” operating by the end of 2019 (Ministry of Energy
Chile, 2019).
Two ﬂeets of 100 electric buses each –equivalent to 3% of Santiago’s bus ﬂeet– were also incorpo-
rated to the Transantiago public transport system between December 2018 and January 2019,
making Chile the country with the largest electric bus ﬂeet in the Latin America region and the
second largest in the world (Nuñez, 2017; Labarca, 2019). These buses are incorporated in a 10
km long electric corridor in Chile’s capital city (La Tercera, 2018). In January 2019, the Chilean
government also launched its ﬁrst interurban electric bus, which operates between Santiago and
Rancagua (Ministerio de Energía Chile, 2019).
Chile’s electromobility target is a step in the right direction, but additional policies, especially
targeting private car ownership, are needed to meet global decarbonisation benchmarks, which
foresee having only zero emission cars on the road by 2050 to be compatible with limiting temper-
ature to 1.5◦C (Climate Action Tracker, 2016). For the development of an integral policy making
framework for transport, it is of great importance to consider social and economic consequences
of the different policy options. The total emissions reduction potential of transport electriﬁcation
depends signiﬁcantly upon the decarbonisation of the electricity supply used to charge vehicles.
BUILDINGS
The buildings sector was the third largest consumer of ﬁnal energy in 2017, accounting for 22%
of consumption (Comisión Nacional de Energía and Ministerio de Energía Chile, 2019). Chile
pursues a National Strategy for Sustainable Buildings, which includes energy, water, waste and
health goals. The government also incentivises energy efﬁciency in public buildings (Government
of Chile, 2016a). Under the law no. 20.571/2016, Chile aims to incentivise the use of solar
heating through tax cuts for developers who implement this technology (Ministerio de Energía,
2017b). A draft law currently debated in the Senate aims to promote an energy efﬁciency rating
system for buildings – “Caliﬁcación Energética de Viviendas (CEV, in Spanish)”. This rating
issued by the Ministry of Housing and Urbanism will be required for new residential buildings to
be commercialised.
Energy emissions from the buildings sector are projected to reach 9.5 MtCO2e per year in 2030
under current policies, a 61% increase compared to emissions in 2015, which will be mainly
driven by increased energy demand for residential heating (Ministerio de Energía, 2017b). Under
planned policies scenario emissions are projected to be 8.4 MtCO2e.
ASSUMPTIONS FOR CURRENT POLICIES PROJECTION
40 of 53
==PAGE:48==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Current policy projections have been harmonized to historical emissions up to 2016.
We estimate total emissions as the sum of the agriculture, waste, energy and Industrial Pro-
cesses and Product Use (IPPU) sectors. The ﬁrst two sectors are taken from MAPS Chile (Línea
Base 2013, PIB bajo) (Government of Chile, 2014). The base year of the MAPS Chile scenario
is 2013, and it is based on macroeconomic projections from 2013 (low case GDP growth, an
average annual GDP growth of 3% through 2030) and includes implemented policies up until
2013. The Industrial Processes and Product Use sector is quantiﬁed by assuming a continuation
of historical emissions trends from the inventory due to lack of available national projections.
The energy sector projections are taken from the Mitigation Plan’s current implemented policies
scenario (Ministerio de Energía, 2017b). The policies included in this scenario include the Un-
conventional Renewable Energy Law (Law 20.257/2008), the carbon tax (Law 20.780/2014),
and the results of electricity supply tenders as of December 2017 (Ministerio de Energía, 2017b).
We have additionally quantiﬁed and subtracted the potential emissions reduction from Chile’s
Electromobility Strategy as well as the recently announced ﬁrst-phase of Chile’s coal phase-out
plan from the Mitigation Plan current policy scenario.
Potential emission reductions from the Electromobility Strategy are quantiﬁed by estimating a
range of private electric vehicle market penetration and urban electric bus ﬂeet renewal.
• For Light Duty Vehicles, we estimated a range for Chile’s future ﬂeet based on different
projections for LDV development and EV market penetration. Emissions reductions were
then estimated from the total amount of conventional vehicles that could be replaced by
electric ones. For the lower end, we assumed historical private vehicle ﬂeet from the In-
stituto Nacional de Estadísticas (Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas de Chile), total vehicle
ﬂeet projections from the Agencia Chilena de Eﬁciencia Energética (EBP Chile, 2018), and
LDV projections from New Climate’s EV policy impact assessment tool (NewClimate Insti-
tute, 2018). For the higher end, we linearly projected the LDV ﬂeet by using the amount
of electric vehicles expected by the government in 2050 (Ministerio de Energía, 2017a)
and historical LDV ﬂeet numbers from the IEA Global Outlook on EVs (IEA, 2018b) and
from the Electromobility Platform launched by the government in April 2019 (Ministerio
de Energía de Chile, 2019b).
• For the urban electric bus ﬂeet, we ﬁrst estimated a range of electric vehicle ﬂeet projections
based on different assumptions outlined below. We then assumed the emissions reductions
by using different factors such as the vehicle use and the consumption factor from various
sources (Directorio de Transporte Público Metropolitano; Ecoscore; Ministerio de Trans-
portes y Telecomunicaciones Chile; E2BIZ Consultores, 2017; EBP Chile, 2018). For the
lower end, we used the projections for urban electric buses in Santiago from the Chilean
Association of Electricity Suppliers (in Spanish: Asociación de Generadoras de Chile; re-
ferred to as “Suppliers”) (E2BIZ Consultores, 2017). We extrapolated the evolution of the
national urban electric bus ﬂeet from those local projections and used the conservative
scenario’s growth rate of the Suppliers’ report, which corresponds to a Business-As-Usual
scenario. We also assumed that the total national urban bus ﬂeet would remain stable as
41 of 53
==PAGE:49==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
of 2019 onward, as the Suppliers did for the TranSantiago bus ﬂeet. For the higher end of
the range, we linearly interpolated the historical electric urban bus ﬂeet numbers from the
Electromobility Platform (Ministerio de Energía de Chile, 2019b) and the expected amount
of electric urban buses expected by the government in 2050 (i.e 100% of the urban bus
ﬂeet). The projection of the urban bus ﬂeet in 2030 was obtained by using the histori-
cal urban bus ﬂeet from the Subsecretary of Transport (Subsecretaría de Transportes) and
extrapolated it to 2030 applying the population growth as a proxy.
The maximum emission reduction potential assumes that the electricity demand from electric
LDVs and electric buses will be met by renewable sources. The minimum emission reduction
potential assumes that the electricity demand will be met by increasing electricity generation
from the grid using the same mix as in CAT current policy scenario.
Emissions reductions from the ﬁrst stage of Chile’s coal phase-out plan were estimated using
the chronogram published the Ministry of Energy (Ministerio de Energía, 2019). We ﬁrst es-
timated electricity generation from those plants using capacity factors from an Inodú (2018)
study prepared for the Ministry of Energy. We then estimated an average emission factor from
coal-ﬁred power plants in Chile between 2010 and 2016 from IEA data (IEA, 2018c, 2018a).
Finally, we estimated emission reductions by multiplying the replaced electricity generation per
year by the average emission factor assuming that these electricity generation would be replaced
by non-conventional renewable energy sources as speciﬁed by Chile’s Ministry of Energy. The up-
per end of the range assumes that electricity generation from retiring coal-ﬁred power plants will
be replaced by gas-ﬁred power plants. For this we estimated an average emissions factor from
plans in Chile between 2010 and 2016 using data from the IEA (2018c, 2018a). Some newer
policy developments such as the update on the Distributed Generation Law (also referred to as
the “Net Billing” Law) (Law 20.571), which triples the capacity threshold for installed capacity
for projects of self-consumption, are not quantiﬁed due to lack of available data.”
B.2
List of countries considered
The CAT does not provide analyses for every single country. They consider 34 countries (or
regions), covering around 80% of worldwide greenhouse gas emissions (Climate Analytics
and NewClimate Institute, 2019). In Figure 10, the list of those countries is provided.
42 of 53
==PAGE:50==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Figure 10: Countries considered in the Climate Action Tracker (Climate Analytics and NewClimate Institute,
2019). The countries highlighted in blue correspond to developing countries, as deﬁned by the M49 Standard
(United Nations, 2018).
43 of 53
==PAGE:51==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
C
IPCC classiﬁcation of GHG emissions categories
A list of the GHG emissions categories identiﬁed by the IPCC in 2006 (IPCC, 2006a) is pro-
vided in Figure 11. The level of details given here is not the highest possible, as only the
4 main categories (Energy, Industry, AFOLU and Waste), their subcategories and the subcat-
egories of their subcategories are listed here. As a result, 97 categories/subcategories are
shown, out of around 300 (for more details, see IPCC (2006c)).
1
2F
Product uses as substitutes for ozone depleting substances
1A
Fuel combustion activities
2F1
Refrigeration and air conditioning
1A1
Energy industries
2F2
Foam blowing agents
1A2
Manufacturing industries and construction
2F3
Fire protection
1A3
Transport
2F4
Aerosols (propellants and solvents)
1A4
Other sectors
2F5
Solvents (non-aerosol)
1B
Fugitive emissions from fuels
2F6
Other applications
1B1
Solid fuels
2G
Other product manufacture and use
1B2
Oil and natural gas
2G1
Emissions of SF6 and PFCs from electrical equipment
1B3
Other emissions from energy production
2G2
Emissions of SF6 and PFCs in other products
1C
Carbon dioxide transport and storage
2G3
N2O from product uses
1C1
Transport of CO2
2G4
Others
1C2
Injection and storage
2H
Other
1C3
Other
2H1
Pulp and paper
2
2H2
Food and drinks
2A
Mineral industry
2H3
Others
2A1
Cement
3
2A2
Lime
3A
Cattle
2A3
Glass
3A1
Enteric fermentation
2A4
Other process uses of carbonates
3A2
Manure management
2B
Chemical industry
3B
Land (not considered in this study)
2B1
Ammonia production
3C
Aggregate sources and non-CO2 emissions sources on land
2B2
Nitric acid production
3C1
GHG emissions from biomass burning
2B3
Adipic acid production
3C2
Liming
2B4
Caprolactam, glyoxal and glyoxylicacid
3C3
Urea fertilization
2B5
Carbide production
3C4
Direct N2O emissions from managed soils
2B6
Titanium dioxide production
3C5
Indirect N2O emissions from Manure soils
2B7
Soda ash production
3C6
Indirect N2O emissions from Manure Management
2B8
Petrochemical and carbon blackproduction
3C7
Rice cultivation
2B9
Fluorochemical production
3C8
Others
2B10
Others
3D
Others
2C
Metal industry
3D1
Wood products
2C1
Iron & steel and metallurgical cokeproduction
3D2
Others
2C2
Ferroalloy production
4
2C3
Primary aluminium production
4A
Municipal Solid Waste
2C4
Magnesium production
4A1
Managed waste disposal sites
2C5
Lead production
4A2
Unmanaged waste disposal sites
2C6
Zinc production
4A3
Uncategorised waste disposal sites
2C7
Others
4B
Biological tratment of Solid Waste
2D
Non-energy products from fuels and solvent use
4C
Incineration and Open Burning of Waste
2D1
Lubricant use
4C1
Waste incineration
2D2
Paraffin wax use
4C2
Open burning of waste
2D3
Asphalt production and use
4D
Wastewater treatment and discharge
2D4
Solvent use
4D1
Domestic wastewater treatment and discharge
2D5
Others
4D2
Inustrial wastewater treatment and discharge
2E
Electronics industry
4E
Other
2E1
Integrated circuits and semiconductors
2E2
Flat screen tipe TFT
2E3
PV cells
2E4
Thermal transfers fluids
2E5
Others
Industrial processes and product use
Energy
Agriculture, forestry and other land use
Waste
Figure 11: Classiﬁcation of the IPCC for GHG emissions reporting inventory, with 3 degrees of detail (IPCC,
2006a)
44 of 53
==PAGE:52==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
D
Details on the construction of the CEP
D.1
Formulas for the combination of several mitigation potentials
For the same IPCC category, several CE strategies are sometimes applied. The calculation of
the mitigation potential of the combination of those strategies can sometimes be harder to
calculate than a simple addition. To give but one example, we can take the category 1A1ai
Electricity generation. If a CE strategy results in the use of 50% less electricity (mitigation
potential of 50%), while another one results in using the same amount of electricity but with
a carbon intensity that is twice as low (mitigation potential of 50%), the combination of
the two mitigation potentials will not be simply additive (i.e. with a combined potential of
50+50 = 100%), as both strategies are targeting the “same GHG emissions”. Instead, the
potential would rather be 75% (we use twice as less electricity that emits twice as less GHG).
Then, among those 75%, the contribution of each strategy could be deﬁned as the half of
75% (i.e. 37.5% for each).
To generalize what has been said, let’s consider an IPCC category whose emissions are x,
and two CE strategies A and B, taking a and b their respective mitigation potentials for this
category. The emissions savings due to the application of the CE strategy A alone is therefore
x × a. For B alone, it is x × b.
Let c be the mitigation potential resulting from the implementation of the CE strategies A and
B, and cont(A) and cont(B) the contribution of A and B to this mitigation potential, deﬁned
as:
cont(A)
=
a
a + bc
cont(B)
=
b
a + bc
and therefore satisfying c = cont(A) + cont(B).
Two cases can occur:
1. A and B are additive. This happens when the strategies are not mitigating the same GHG
emissions. Emissions savings due to the implementation of A and B are therefore the sum
of the emissions savings due to the implementation of each strategy taken separately. For
instance, the strategies “Electricity savings due to the elimination of copper losses during and
after use” and ”Electricity savings during production in pulp and paper industry” are additive
for the IPCC category 1A1ai Electricity generation. In this case:
x × c
| {z }
emissions saved by A+B
=
x × a
| {z }
emissions saved by A
+
x × b
| {z }
emissions saved by B
=
x(a + b)
45 of 53
==PAGE:53==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
And therefore:
c
=
a + b
cont(A)
=
a
cont(B)
=
b
2. A and B are not additive. Both strategies are mitigating the same GHG emissions. The
emissions savings due to the implementation of A and B are not the sum of the emissions
savings due to the implementation of each strategy taken one by one.
For instance, the
strategies “Electricity savings due to the elimination of copper losses during and after use”
and ”Electricity generation by coal replaced by renewable energy generation” are not additive
for 1A1ai Electricity generation. In this case, if A is applied before B:
x × c
| {z }
emissions saved by A+B
=
x × a
| {z }
emissions saved by A
+
emissions in the IPCC category after A is applied
z
}|
{
(x −x × a)
×b
|
{z
}
emissions saved by B
=
x × (a + (1 −a)b)
=
x(a + b −ab)
Unsurprisingly, it can be noticed that a and b play a symmetrical role in the previous equality:
the GHG savings do not depend on the order of the implementation of the CE strategies.
And therefore:
c
=
a + b −ab
cont(A)
=
a
a + b(a + b −ab)
cont(B)
=
b
a + b(a + b −ab)
The contributions of each strategy, cont(A) and cont(B), can be seen as “apparent mitigation
potentials” that can be added. In the table presented in Appendix D.2, they are calculated
in the column Apparent mitigation for addition (details about calculations can be found in
Appendix G). As to the column Mitigation of IPCC categories, it stands for a simple addition
of the apparent mitigation potentials applying to this IPCC category.
It is worth mentioning that those formulas could be extended to the case where more than
two CE strategies are applying to the same IPCC categories (not occurring in this study), with
a reasoning by induction.
D.2
CE package of Chile, detailed
The Chilean CE package contains 22 CE strategies that target 18 selected IPCC categories
(see Section 2.3.3). Those strategies are described in Table 8 (for more details about the
46 of 53
==PAGE:54==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
calculation of the mitigation potentials, see Appendix G).
Table 8: CE package of Chile. The classiﬁcation of those strategies (see column CE strategy type and CE strategy
group) follow the framework of Potting et al. (2016), presented in Section 2.1.2. As to the column Apparent
mitigation for addition, more details about the calculations are provided in Appendix D.1.
Reference
CE strategy
CE
strategy 
type
CE
strategy 
group
Mitigation 
alone
Apparent 
mitigation for 
addition
Mitigation of 
IPCC 
category
Mitigation of 
total
Share of total 
mitigation 
Carvallo et al. (2014)
"No-coal" scenario (1/5th of the capacity), 
electricity generation by coal replaced by 
renewable energy generation
R0
1
50%
46.1%
14.3%
38.1%
Ciacci et al. (2016)
Ministerio de Energia (2018)
Elimination of copper losses during and 
after use
R8
3
8.0%
7.3%
2.3%
6.1%
Fleiter et al. (2012)
Ministerio de Energia (2018)
Electricity savings during production in 
pulp and paper industry
R2
1
1.2%
1.1%
0.4%
0.9%
1A2d
Pulp, paper and print
Szabo et al. (2009)
Paper demand decrease
R8
3
12.7%
12.7%
12.7%
0.2%
0.5%
Norgate and Haque (2009)
Energy efficiency for mining operations
R2
1
61.0%
51.1%
3.6%
9.7%
Ciacci et al. (2016)
Comision Chilena del cobre (2019)
Elimination of copper losses during and 
after use
R8
3
22.3%
18.6%
1.3%
3.5%
McCollum et al. (2010)
Advanced technological systems for 
efficiency imporvements
R1
1
5.0%
5.0%
0.1%
0.2%
McCollum et al. (2010)
Improved airframe design and propulsion
R1-R2
1
35%
35.0%
0.5%
1.4%
McCollum et al. (2010)
Use of alternative fuels
R0
1
24%
24.0%
0.4%
1.0%
1A3bi
Cars
29.0%
29.0%
29.0%
2.2%
5.7%
1A3bii Light-duty trucks
29.0%
29.0%
29.0%
1.4%
3.8%
1A3biii Heavy-duty trucks and 
buses
29.0%
29.0%
29.0%
2.5%
6.8%
1A4b
Residential
Schueftan and Gonzales (2013)
Reduction potential due to thermal 
improvement after building refurbishment
R1-R2
1
62.0%
62.0%
62.0%
2.4%
6.3%
Xu et al. (2014)
Thermal efficiency
R2
1
2.3%
2.3%
0.0%
0.0%
Xu et al. (2014)
Clinker production
R0
1
8.0%
8.0%
0.1%
0.3%
ETC (2018)
Materials circulation
R8
3
16.1%
16.1%
0.2%
0.5%
ETC (2018)
Product circulation
R6-R7
2
16.1%
16.1%
0.2%
0.5%
2F1
Refrigeration and air 
conditioning
Höglund-Isaksson et al. (2010)
Process modifications including alternative 
refrigerants
R0
1
80.8%
80.8%
80.8%
2.0%
5.3%
3A1
Enteric fermentation
Höglund-Isaksson et al. (2012)
Diet changes indoor fed cattle
R0
1
1.9%
1.9%
1.9%
0.1%
0.2%
3A2
Manure management
Höglund-Isaksson et al. (2012)
Maximum implementation of anaerobic 
digestion
R9
3
27.8%
27.8%
27.8%
0.5%
1.3%
3C4
Direct N2O emissions 
from managed soils
Höglund-Isaksson et al. (2012)
Mix of feed changes
R2
1
36.1%
36.1%
36.1%
1.4%
3.9%
4A1
Managed waste 
disposal sites
Höglund-Isaksson et al. (2010)
Optimized process parameters towards low 
N2O yield
R9
3
23.7%
23.7%
23.7%
0.7%
1.8%
Höglund-Isaksson et al. (2010)
Optimized process parameters towards low 
N2O yield
R2
1
40.2%
40.2%
0.5%
1.4%
Höglund-Isaksson et al. (2010)
Anaerobic treatment with gaz recovery or 
flaring
R9
3
22.6%
22.6%
0.3%
0.8%
TOTAL
37.5%
100%
R0-R9
4D1
Domestic wastewater 
treatment and 
discharge
62.8%
1A2i
Mining (excluding 
fuels) and quarrying
69.7%
1,2,3
Various low-carbon measures on the 
transportation system
Gota et al. (2015)
2A
Mineral industry
10.3%
Iron & steel and 
metallurgical 
cokeproduction
2C1
32.2%
IPCC category
1A1ai
Electricity generation
54.6%
1A3aii Domestic aviation
64.0%
47 of 53
==PAGE:55==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
E
Selected emissions categories for Peru, Nigeria and Viet-
nam
The selection process (described in Section 2.3.3) enables to select the most signiﬁcant IPCC
emissions categories given in a GHG inventory, representing at least 90% of the total GHG
emissions of a country. Here, we applied this process to Peru, Nigeria and Vietnam, based on
the data available in their last BURs.
Table 9: Relevant GHG emissions categories selected for Peru, after the application of the algorithm described
in Figure 3. The last column indicates whether each category had been selected for Chile. * For the category
2A1 Cement, it has been considered as being selected for Chile, since it stands for a subcategory of 2A Mineral
industry. Source: Ministero del Ambiente de Peru (2019)
Table 10: Relevant GHG emissions categories selected for Nigeria, after the application of the algorithm de-
scribed in Figure 3. The last column indicates whether each category had been selected for Chile. * For the
category 2A1 Cement, it has been considered as being selected for Chile, since it stands for a subcategory of 2A
Mineral industry. Source: Federal Republic of Nigeria (2018).
48 of 53
==PAGE:56==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Table 11: Relevant GHG emissions categories selected for Vietnam, after the application of the algorithm de-
scribed in Figure 3. The last column indicates whether each category had been selected for Chile. * For the
category 2A1 Cement, it has been considered as being selected for Chile, since it stands for a subcategory of 2A
Mineral industry. Source: Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment of Vietnam (2017).
49 of 53
==PAGE:57==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
F
Literature review on the limits of Circular Economy
The scientiﬁc literature is not abundant when it comes to assessing the potential negative
impacts of CE on the environment and the economy. However, some authors address this
subject, revealing that the beneﬁts of CE are often assumed rather than proven and inte-
grated in a systemic viewpoint. To give but one example, Millar et al. (2019) argues that
“Whilst there have been longstanding and widespread suggestions that other routes of win-
win sustainable growth have not been fulﬁlled, for example those regarding improvements
in efﬁciency and technology, it is curious that these debates have not been common within
CE literature”. As a consequence, it has been deemed relevant to conduct a literature review
on the limits of Circular Economy, in order to have a better approach on the limits of our own
methodology.
Thermodynamic limits. A lot of authors report that closing material loops can only be done
partly. Haas et al. (2015) explains that we can only achieve a low degree of circularity since
“44% of processed materials are used to provide energy and are thus not available for recy-
cling”. Even when it does not come to energy, circularity is limited: De Decker (2019) states
that “71% of all resources cannot be recycled or reused”, mainly for thermodynamic reasons.
Finally, even when loops are closed, keeping the materials in the value chain requires energy
and the consumption of new resources and raw materials is unavoidable: “Due to the laws
of thermodynamics, all economic activities, also CE consume energy, increase entropy and
decrease exergy. This means that all CE-type initiatives, projects and activities generate en-
vironmental impacts and consume resources.” (Korhonen et al., 2018). Not to mention that
materials inevitably degrade through time and “sooner or later, any recycling is necessarily
downcycling” (Parrique et al., 2019). In some cases, it also turns out to be really hard to
identify which circular strategy prevails for some processes. In the original 9R framework of
Potting et al. (2016), the 10 strategy types are ranked from the least circular (R9 recover) to
the most circular (R0 refuse), cf. Table 1. Some authors however point out that this hierarchy
is not always that simple. For some products, it can even be more environmentally friendly
to dispose them than to recycle them(Haas et al., 2015).
Rebound effects. Increasing circularity is not necessarily associated with absolute raw material
consumption decrease: this is the so-called rebound effect, a notion that is gaining momen-
tum in the scientiﬁc literature. To come to this conclusion, Zink and Geyer (2017) try to
assess how the markets compete with one another, introducing two types of production, the
“primary production” (coming from raw materials) and the “secondary production” (coming
from CE strategies). They argue that in most cases, it is assumed that increasing the latter
will decrease the former on a 1:1 displacement basis. From this strong assumption, it is then
easy to conclude as to the beneﬁts of CE strategies, if the secondary production is indeed
more environmentally friendly. However, they highlight that in fact, “the impact of secondary
production activities on primary material production is largely unknown”, and later than
“there is not inherent reason to believe that market forces would conspire to create full dis-
placement” between the two production types. The contrary is actually often observed, and
50 of 53
==PAGE:58==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
the secondary production is added to the primary one, instead of substituting it. Worse still,
they report that according to McKinsey & Company (2014), those situations are those which
create the largest proﬁts: “This means that simply introducing the CE economy concept to
free markets and proﬁt-maximizing ﬁrms (as the European Commission has actively done) is
very likely to result in rebound”. Millar et al. (2019), while reviewing the existing literature
on CE strategies, comes to a similar conclusion: “Whilst there are compromised suggestions
that environmental damage caused by the CE would be less than that produced by the lin-
ear economy, there are no assurances of this due to the possibility of rebound effects”. On
this matter, the reports that try to quantify the contributions of CE strategies to GHG emis-
sions reduction generally remain either silent (no occurrence of the word “rebound” in the
reports of the Circle Economy (2019) and the Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2019)), or un-
clear. For instance, Material Economics (2019) assumes a 20% rebound effect when it comes
to shared-mobility systems, before mentioning that “[it] could very well grow larger still if
left unmanaged, but policy-makers have a number of options to contain it, whether through
charges or regulation”.
Decoupling limits. Economic prosperity is often stated as a primary objective of CE (Kirch-
herr et al., 2017). The European Environmental Bureau, in a report reviewing the empirical
and theoretical literature on the decoupling of economic growth and environmental pres-
sures (Parrique et al., 2019), express reservations as to this possibility: “not only is there no
empirical evidence supporting the existence of a decoupling of economic growth from envi-
ronmental pressures on anywhere near the scale needed to deal with environmental break-
down, but also, and perhaps more importantly, such decoupling appears unlikely to happen
in the future”. Considering material decoupling, they add that “There has been no absolute
decoupling of resource use from economic growth”, underlining that “Global use of resources
is on the raise and global GDP is still tightly coupled with total resource extraction”. This
is consistent with the results of Wiedmann et al. (2015), who point out that generally, “the
GDP curve is closely reﬂecting the shape of the MF curve”, and that no absolute (only rela-
tive) decoupling can be observed. Concerning developing countries in particular, Millar et al.
(2019) mention that “a vast proportion of materials accrues in use stocks and this trend is
increasing”, and later that “it is reduced production and altered consumption that is required
to reduce impacts, two processes which the CE does not directly encourage”.
Burden shifting. When environmental impacts are reduced in a certain region of the world, it
is often at the expense of another one when they increase. Since climate change is a global
issue caused by the increase of anthropogenic GHG emissions regardless of where they come
from IPCC (2014b), shifting the emissions are of no relevance in terms of impacts. However,
Mayer et al. (2005) underline that “in the global economic system, when a rich country
increases its nature protection areas and its eco-efﬁciency through national environmental
policy and natural resource demand simultaneously increases due to economic growth, the
harmful production can be transferred to poor bordering countries”. Along the same lines,
the European Environmental Bureau explains that “it seems that rich countries achieve a
faster relative decoupling than others. Yet, this performance wafts away when accounting for
51 of 53
==PAGE:59==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
cost shifting (consumption-based)”, which results in a “stagnating material intensity at the
global level” (Parrique et al., 2019).
At the end of the day, CE strategies are thus facing a lot of barriers than can potentially
limit, or even offset its beneﬁts. On the limited potential of CE, some authors conclude that
“simply closing material loops is not enough to guarantee environmental improvement” (Zink
and Geyer, 2017), that “if the current consumption culture will not change, CE will remain
as a technical tool that does not change the course of the current unsustainable economic
paradigm” (Korhonen et al., 2018), or even that “there is no assurances to suggest that [CE]
is a better alternative to the current model” (Millar et al., 2019).
52 of 53
==PAGE:60==
MSc Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
G
Calculation tables for the mitigation scenario of Chile
See attached Excel ﬁle AppendixG_CalculationTablesMitigationScenarioChile.xlsx.
53 of 53
