==PAGE:1==
Evaluation of Emerging
Serverless Platforms
Sataponn Phutrakul
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Software architectures have continuously evolved since the advent of cloud com-
puting, resulting in several paradigm shifts from virtualization towards microser-
vices. Serverless computing, or Function as a Service (FaaS), has lately emerged
as a new model that allows developers to focus on the development of event-
driven functions, while leaving operational tasks to the serverless platforms.
These functions can elastically scale to meet demand, and users are only charged
for the actual execution time and consumed computing resources. Therefore,
its popularity has been rising, and there are currently several serverless plat-
forms users can choose. Such platforms include hosted platforms that are fully
managed by cloud providers and open-source platforms that can be installed,
for instance, on a private infrastructure. The performance of hosted platforms
has been evaluated in several research works, whereas the number of studies tar-
geting open-source platforms is still limited. Moreover, the benchmarking tools
developed so far are either not actively maintained or do not target open-source
platforms.
Thus, the goal of the thesis is to develop a benchmarking tool to evaluate hosted
and open-source serverless platforms. To this end, we leveraged FaaSTest, an
open-source tool that provides a set of tests for benchmarking AWS Lambda
and Azure Functions, and extended it to support several open-source serverless
platforms: Knative, OpenFaaS, Kubeless, and Fission. We then benchmarked
the platforms under diﬀerent scenarios, including diﬀerent rates of incoming
traﬃc and computational load of the deployed functions. For the hosted plat-
forms, the results show that AWS Lambda outperformed Azure Functions. For
the open-source platforms, the evaluation results were not fully conclusive due
to the challenges in conﬁguring a large number of platform-speciﬁc features.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Despite that, we observed that Knative outperformed the other solutions with
a higher ratio of successful responses and lower response time in most scenarios.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at Aalto University, School of Science, Finland in
partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring the M.Sc. double degree
in Security and Cloud Computing (SECCLO) at Aalto University, School of
Science, Finland and Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Denmark.
The thesis deals with the development of an extension for an existing open-
source serverless benchmarking tool and the evaluation of serverless platforms,
both in terms of feature comparison and performance analysis.
Lyngby, 27-June-2020
Sataponn Phutrakul
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my primary supervisor, Professor Mario
Di Francesco, for the opportunity to work on this thesis and all the support
throughout the project, as well as my secondary supervisor, Professor Nicola
Dragoni. Additionally, I would like to thank my advisor, Gopika Premsankar,
who was working closely with me, gave me countless advice, and calmed me
down with I got stressed out.
Lastly, I am grateful to all my friends, ex-colleagues, neighbors, and, most
importantly, my family for all the encouragement and emotional support in
the past ﬁve months, or even the whole period of my master’s study.
This
achievement would not have been possible without them.
Thank you.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Structure of the Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Kubernetes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Serverless Computing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Performance of Serverless Platforms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Benchmarking Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Serverless Platforms
17
3.1
Hosted Serverless Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
AWS Lambda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.2
Azure Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Open-Source Serverless Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.1
Knative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
OpenFaaS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.3
Apache OpenWhisk
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.4
Kubeless . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.5
Fission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Implementation
31
4.1
FaaSTest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Extensions to FaaSTest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
FaaSTest Usability and Ease of Development
. . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Evaluation
41
5.1
Experimental Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.1
Amazon EKS Clusters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.2
Serverless Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.3
FaaSTest
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Conclusion
57
A Function Invocation
61
A.1 Knative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2 OpenFaaS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.3 OpenWhisk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.4 Kubeless . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.5 Fission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
B Stacks
65
B.1
Knative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
B.2
OpenFaaS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
B.3
Kubeless . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
B.4
Fission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
C Test Stacks
73
C.1 Knative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
C.2 OpenFaaS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
C.3 OpenWhisk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
C.4 Kubeless . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
C.5 Fission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
D Functions
77
D.1 Function cpustress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Bibliography
79
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Online applications and web services have been around for decades. The very
ﬁrst solution for hosting software and web services is called on-premise, which
is still in use until today.
With this traditional approach, software runs on
physical servers, or even regular computers [The15]. Companies that possess
on-premise infrastructure need to ensure that the servers are physically secure
in addition to software security.
These servers are costly, and they are not
easily scaled and cannot adapt to non-functional requirement changes (e.g.,
performance and availability) [Qai12]. Additionally, there are other incurred
costs such as electricity, maintenance, and hardware upgrades.
However, an
advantage of this is that the privacy of the company’s data is protected. An
alternative to self-hosted solutions is hosting services, which are usually used
for websites.
Such hosting services oﬀer storage and domain names for cus-
tomers’ websites. The performance and capabilities of the web services depend
on the hosting plans, thereby giving limited control to the customers. Then,
followed the concept of cloud computing, which includes online applications and
data centers comprising of underlying hardware and software components that
serve such applications [AFG+]. There are three main service models: Infras-
tructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a
Service (SaaS). These models diﬀer in the level of abstraction. Customers can
instantly get as many computing resources as desired and only pay for what
they have consumed. Initially, applications were deployed on virtual machines
in the cloud [Kra18]. Subsequently, containerization was introduced to improve
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
resource utilization of the virtual machines by allowing multiple containers to
run on a single virtual machine [Kra18]. Containers maintain the isolation of
the applications running inside them.
They are lightweight, so they require
short startup time and can scale rapidly. This concept boosted the trend of
microservice architectures wherein the software backend is composed of several
small loosely-coupled services, each of which is responsible for a single entity or
domain of the system. A microservice could become even smaller and perform
only a single task, which is suitable for the next concept of serverless computing.
Serverless computing, or Function as a Service (FaaS), eliminates operational
concerns by delegating the operational tasks to cloud providers or serverless plat-
forms [CIMS19]. Customers are still charged based on a pay-as-you-go billing
model, but at a ﬁner granularity. In other words, function instances are elasti-
cally scaled based on demand; therefore, they only pay for the amount of time
that the functions execute, and not for idle resources. Serverless computing helps
enhance resource utilization and reduce operational costs. Furthermore, devel-
opers do not need low-level knowledge about infrastructure to develop serverless
applications. Hence, serverless computing has received greater attention, and
there has been an increasing amount of research that seeks to expand the capa-
bilities of serverless functions for diverse applications.
Owing to its growing popularity and rate of adoption, there are many FaaS plat-
forms in the market. Hosted platforms fully managed by cloud providers, such
as AWS Lambda, Google Cloud Functions, and Azure Functions, suit those
who need to start their projects immediately with a minimal learning curve.
Open-source platforms1 serve as alternatives that eliminate some drawbacks of
the hosted platforms at the cost of convenience. However, the vast number of
options for FaaS platforms raises questions about how to choose a platform. Al-
though features can be identiﬁed through the documentation, a critical step in
choosing a platform is to analyze the performance. This is why platform bench-
marking becomes crucial. However, it is a time-consuming task, and it may
require complicated setup. Some companies or developers might not have ade-
quate budgets (e.g., time budget and human resources) for such benchmarks. To
this end, several recent works have presented benchmark results that compare
diﬀerent FaaS platforms [BA18, MFGZ18, KWB+20, MPdF18, LKRL19]. In
spite of that, they are not necessarily up-to-date, and the focus has mainly been
on hosted platforms, e.g., AWS Lambda and Azure Functions. Moreover, there
are websites [Str19, Cyb19, MFGZ18] that provided continuous benchmarking
results, but they are not actively maintained. Furthermore, the open-source
FaaS platforms are under active development, and thus it is necessary to have
up-to-date benchmark results when new features are added to the platforms. To
1Open-source serverless platforms maintained by the open-source community, which can
be installed anywhere, e.g., public cloud, private cloud, and on-premise servers.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Contributions
3
this end, the goal of this thesis is to develop a benchmarking tool that is exten-
sible for any FaaS platform. We choose an open-source FaaSTest benchmarking
tool [Cyb19] and extend it to support additional open-source FaaS platforms.
We then demonstrate the feasibility of using such a tool by evaluating the per-
formance of the chosen platforms.
1.1
Contributions
In this thesis, our contributions are listed as follows:
• Comparing the key features oﬀered by hosted and open-source serverless
platforms
• Reviewing benchmarking tools and results for FaaS platforms
• Implementing an extension for an open-source benchmarking tool to sup-
port other (currently unsupported) FaaS platforms and publishing it to a
public repository
• Demonstrating a setup for evaluating FaaS platforms
• Evaluating the usability of the benchmarking tool
• Evaluating the performance of the selected hosted and open-source server-
less platforms
1.2
Structure of the Thesis
The rest of the thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 2 introduces the funda-
mental concepts of Kubernetes and serverless computing, reviews related work,
and surveys existing benchmarking tools. Chapter 3 describes the key features
of two hosted and ﬁve open-source serverless platforms. Chapter 4 describes the
implementation of the benchmarking tool for open-source platforms. Chapter
5 presents the evaluation of the benchmarking tool and the selected serverless
platforms. Finally, Chapter 6 summarizes the work and provides directions for
future work.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter describes the core concepts and enabling technologies for server-
less computing. First, we describe the key components of Kubernetes, a popular
container orchestration framework, commonly used in deploying serverless plat-
forms. Next, we describe the main features of serverless computing including
their features, potential application scenarios, advantages, and disadvantages.
We, then, discuss some related work on benchmarking serverless platforms and
the tools used therein.
2.1
Kubernetes
After the concepts of bare-metal servers and virtual machines, containers were
introduced as building blocks of software development [Kha17]. The most pop-
ular container platform is Docker1. An operating system, a piece of software,
and its dependencies can be packaged into a container, and an image built from
this container is portable and runnable in any operating systems that allow run-
ning containers. Thus, this simpliﬁes the setup steps for software developers.
The container acts as an isolated environment for the software running inside.
However, ﬁles can be shared with the host machine by using volumes [Doc],
1https://www.docker.com
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
and the container can be exposed via speciﬁc ports. Containers are suitable for
distributed applications consisting of several components that need to dynam-
ically scale in and out since they are more lightweight than virtual machines.
They can also be used in other applications such as batch processing, machine
learning, and Internet of Things (IoT).
An application typically comprises of multiple containers. Container orchestra-
tion is needed to eﬃciently manage these containers and perform other tasks
such as scaling, networking, and monitoring. Kubernetes is known as the most
popular container orchestration tool, and the rate of adoption is still growing
[VN19]. Kubernetes2 is an open-source project developed by Google that facil-
itates deployment, scaling, and other management tasks of containerized appli-
cations [Ell18a]. With Kubernetes, a system is organized as a cluster comprising
of at least one worker node, and this cluster is where containerized applications
run [Kub20]. The cluster’s desired state is deﬁned with Kubernetes API ob-
jects in YAML conﬁguration ﬁles. These ﬁles are supplied to Kubernetes API
through a command-line interface (CLI), kubectl. Then, the Kubernetes Con-
trol Plane maintains the desired state. The basic Kubernetes objects are listed
as follows:
• Namespaces can be used when there is more than one environment or
project running in the same cluster so that there is a clear separation.
• A Pod is the smallest unit of deployment, which can be seen as an instance
of an application. There can be one or more containers that are tightly-
coupled inside a single Pod.
• A ReplicaSet deﬁnes the number of Pod replicas running at any point in
time.
• a Deployment describes the desired state of Pods and ReplicaSets, and
auto-scaling rules can be set for the Deployment.
• a Service deﬁnes how a set of target Pods can be accessed and exposed
externally. There are four types of Services: ClusterIP, NodePort, Load-
Balancer, and ExternalName. ClusterIP is the default type, which means
the Service is only accessible within the cluster.
2https://kubernetes.io
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Serverless Computing
7
2.2
Serverless Computing
Serverless computing, also known as Function-as-a-Service (FaaS), was intro-
duced as a new paradigm that hides the operational concerns from developers.
It enables the development of event-driven services that elastically scale with
demand and charges users based on ﬁne-grained usage metrics. Prior to the
adoption of serverless computing, the cost of running online services and applica-
tions include infrastructure costs and wages for operations teams. For example,
a company has to hire operations engineers for taking care of the infrastructure
and ensuring that the servers can handle loads with minimum downtime. As a
consequence, resources are usually over-provisioned, exceeding the capacity that
is actually utilized, which results in a waste of idle resources and money. Ama-
zon was the ﬁrst to launch a FaaS service named Lambda3 in 2014 [SKM19].
As FaaS gained in popularity, other major cloud providers also released similar
services [CIMS19]. The well-known ones other than AWS Lambda are Azure
Functions4, Google Cloud Functions5, and IBM Cloud Functions6. At the same
time, several open-source serverless platforms, such as Apache OpenWhisk7,
Knative8, and OpenFaaS9, were also released. These platforms allow executing
stateless functions with limited execution time in response to events in a fully
managed manner.
With serverless computing, developers only need to focus on the function code
and leave any operational concerns, including provisioning, auto-scaling, net-
work routing, event sourcing, and other maintenance tasks, to the platforms.
This bridges the gap between operations and development teams because a de-
veloper no longer requires expertise in infrastructure operations to manage the
whole development life cycle. Operations engineers are still needed, but their
workload is reduced, which means the team can be downsized. However, one
downside of abstracting away operational concerns is that engineers have no
access to the servers running functions and thus have less control of the system.
Other than personnel cost savings, FaaS oﬀers several other advantages. With
a traditional approach, operations engineers have to spin up a lot of computing
instances to serve ﬂuctuating request volumes, and the company will be charged
for these running instances that are not fully utilized. Instead, FaaS platforms
automatically scale function instances based on demand, i.e., scale out when
requests come and scale in when the load decreases.
Therefore, ideally, the
3https://aws.amazon.com/lambda
4https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/functions
5https://cloud.google.com/functions
6https://cloud.ibm.com/functions
7https://openwhisk.apache.org
8https://knative.dev
9https://www.openfaas.com
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
services will be able to handle sudden bursts of requests. However, this auto-
scaling may cause a problem of cold starts in which initiating new instances takes
some time, thus increasing the latency. To mitigate the problem, the serverless
platforms implement techniques such as keeping some warm containers that can
be reused for a ﬁxed period of time. Finally, FaaS platforms use a pay-as-you-
go pricing model. To put it another way, a customer is only charged for the
exact amount of time that the functions run at a ﬁne-grained granularity, e.g.,
in milliseconds.
On the other hand, from the cloud providers’ perspective, they beneﬁt from
utilizing their resources more eﬃciently since resources on a single server can
be shared and used for running many user functions [KPL19]. Additionally,
customers tend to use other services that they oﬀer in integration with serverless
functions.
FaaS platforms fully managed by cloud providers, or hosted platforms, could be
appropriate options for developers who prioritize convenience in development
owing to the beneﬁts that we have described. Open-source serverless platforms
serve as an alternative that avoids vendor lock-in [MPdF18]. Another disad-
vantage of hosted platforms is some limitations such as concurrency limits and
execution time limits. With a self-managed solution, serverless applications can
be conﬁgured more ﬂexibly (e.g., auto-scaling rules) and conveniently ported to
another set of infrastructure. For instance, Kubernetes-based serverless plat-
forms can be deployed anywhere with operational Kubernetes clusters.
The
speciﬁc details of popular open-source serverless platforms will be discussed in
Chapter 3.
Serverless computing can be employed in a variety of use cases. It is especially
suitable for event-driven applications and services that receive requests at a
varying or bursty rate. Some examples of the use cases are listed as follows:
1. The simplest use case is using FaaS to build a mobile backend or APIs
with HTTP requests as triggers [LMM18]. Although serverless functions
are supposed to be stateless, it is feasible to connect to external database
services for maintaining states. However, some performance issues might
occur. For example, a state has to be transferred over network between
the function instance and an external cloud storage service, thus increasing
latency [ZXLS19].
2. A data analytics system usually includes an extensive use of service of-
ferings, e.g., AWS Glue10, AWS Athena11, and Amazon Kinesis12, from a
10https://aws.amazon.com/glue
11https://aws.amazon.com/athena
12https://aws.amazon.com/kinesis
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Performance of Serverless Platforms
9
cloud provider, and the system architecture could be complicated and hard
to maintain [RH19]. Using serverless computing could be cost-eﬀective,
and it can be conveniently integrated with other cloud services. Thus,
serverless functions can be used for coordinating these services and imple-
menting workﬂows for processing data streams.
3. Scientiﬁc computing, machine learning, and compute-intensive
applications generally run for a limited period of time, so serverless com-
puting’s pay-as-you-go model is favorable. As these applications some-
times require high computing power, some research [ZKW20, NRdA+20]
combined the concepts of serverless computing and GPU virtualization to
enhance the performance.
4. The event-driven nature of serverless computing also makes it suitable for
Internet of Things applications. For example, data from several sensors
in a sensor network are collected by a sensor manager [GIL19]. When the
data need to be pushed to the central server, the manager calls a serverless
function that formats the data and stores them in the remote database.
These formatted data can be, then, displayed on a dashboard.
Although serverless computing has been around since 2014, some challenges are
still being discussed in both academic and industrial worlds. A serverless appli-
cation runs with functions as the smallest unit. During the normal operation, a
lot of instances of diﬀerent functions are running concurrently, thereby posing
diﬃculties in tracing and debugging [CIMS19]. Another problem is the lack of
standards for serverless deployments, which leads to the vendor lock-in prob-
lem. There are many more challenges that have not been mentioned, such as
the inability to communicate between function instances [SKM19]. Since server-
less computing is a broad topic and it has attracted considerable attention,
there are research areas and opportunities that are worth exploring including
system-level research about the cold start problem, automatic transformation
from legacy applications to serverless, stateful serverless, multi-cloud server-
less and standardization, heterogeneous serverless, serverless at the edge, and
platform benchmarking [CIMS19].
2.3
Performance of Serverless Platforms
There is growing interest in adopting serverless computing both in the indus-
try and academia. At the same time, more FaaS platforms have been devel-
oped and released as well, leading to a total of 31 alternative platforms [CNC].
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
These platforms oﬀer diﬀerent features, supported runtimes, and pricing mod-
els. Therefore, benchmarking the performance of serverless platforms is crucial
in determining which platform to use.
To this end, several research articles
and blogs evaluate the performance of FaaS platforms. However, most of the
work compared only hosted platforms. The reason could be that these platforms
are dominant over the open-source ones [Fou19]. Even the popular Serverless
Framework13, a tool that provides a template to facilitate function deployments,
supports all major clouds’ platforms while supporting only four open-source
platforms: Knative, Kubeless14, OpenWhisk, and Fn15.
To understand the current state of serverless benchmarking, Scheuner et al.
[SL20] surveyed existing FaaS benchmark studies appearing in both academic
and gray literature. They studied the characteristics of the evaluation settings,
including benchmark types, performance metrics, used runtimes, function trig-
gers, and connected external services. According to their report, AWS Lambda
was included in more than 89 percent of all the surveyed work, whereas open-
source platforms are considerably less popular. The open-source platform that
was most evaluated was OpenWhisk. The serverless benchmarks are catego-
rized into two types: microbenchmarks and application-based benchmarks. A
microbenchmark focuses on speciﬁc performance aspects while an application-
based benchmark evaluates platform performance under realistic scenarios. Mi-
crobenchmarks were observed to be more common because of the complicated se-
tups required for application-based benchmarks. For instance, external services,
such as storage and queues, are needed to implement a function, and diﬀerent
platforms oﬀer diﬀerent sets of services. Additionally, in most application-based
benchmarks, only one platform was evaluated and presented as a prototype. In
terms of performance, the aspects that were tested the most were CPU per-
formance, platform overhead, and concurrency. Regarding platform conﬁgura-
tions, Python, Node.js, and Java were the most commonly used programming
languages, and HTTP triggers were prevalent over other types of triggers. As
a consequence, API gateways are the most frequently used external service,
followed by storage. Finally, they also emphasized the importance of the repro-
ducibility of benchmarks, which was still insuﬃciently fulﬁlled.
Back et al.
[BA18] evaluated AWS Lambda, Google Cloud Functions, IBM
Cloud Functions, and Azure Functions with regard to performance and cost by
using a microbenchmark that they implemented and published on GitHub16.
The benchmark contains three functions performing tasks that require diﬀerent
amounts of CPU and memory resources. These functions were deployed with
diﬀerent memory allocations on the hosted platforms and Apache OpenWhisk
13https://www.serverless.com
14https://kubeless.io
15https://fnproject.io
16https://github.com/timonback/faas-mubenchmark
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Performance of Serverless Platforms
11
set up on a local machine. This local platform was used as a baseline for the
comparison. The functions were sequentially invoked from a local machine using
curl with ranges of input parameters. Then, they collected execution time,
execution results, billed duration, and costs of execution. The results indicated
that IBM Functions was the cheapest option but produced the most errors. On
the other hand, Azure Functions responded with a 100% success rate, although
with a long duration resulting in high costs. The performance of Google Cloud
Functions was found to be variable. Lastly, AWS Lambda showed a reasonable
trade-oﬀbetween performance and cost. In contrast to our work, Back et al.
focused on the platforms’ performance on diﬀerent tasks, not how the platforms
behave under heavy load.
Malawski et al. [MFGZ18] evaluated the performance of AWS Lambda, Azure
Functions, Google Cloud Functions, and IBM OpenWhisk by exploiting their
heterogeneous aspects such as runtimes and resource management. They devel-
oped two benchmarking frameworks, one using Serverless Framework for auto-
matic deployments and another one based on HyperFlow, an event-based con-
trol plane for the OpenFlow communication protocol [Bal16]. Both used CPU-
intensive functions for the benchmarks. The source code for the former one is
available on GitHub17. The results are kept on a database and continuously
reported on a Grafana18 dashboard. Kuhlenkamp et al. [KWB+20] presented
an assessment on AWS Lambda, Google Cloud Functions, Azure Functions, and
IBM Cloud Functions with the focus on their elasticity or ability to handle traﬃc
by using their own benchmarking tool. They believed that elasticity quantiﬁ-
cation was beneﬁcial for making system design decisions. Then, they deduced
from the results the possibility of using these platforms in diﬀerent scenarios
including web serving, data analysis, and batch processing.
Mohanty et al. [MPdF18] were the ﬁrst to evaluate popular open-source server-
less platforms: Kubeless, OpenFaaS, and Fission19. In addition to evaluation,
they provided a feature comparison and some insights about platform archi-
tecture that could aﬀect the performance. The platforms were installed with
default conﬁgurations on a Kubernetes cluster on Google Kubernetes Engine20
(GKE) with three worker nodes residing in the same zone. Then, they used an-
other virtual machine created in the same zone for running benchmarks. Firstly,
they evaluated the performance when receiving diﬀerent levels of concurrent re-
quests. In this experiment, a simple function that returns a static string was
deployed on the platforms without auto-scaling, and the experimental variables
were concurrency levels and numbers of function replicas. Apache Benchmark21
17https://github.com/kfigiela/cloud-functions
18https://grafana.com
19https://fission.io
20https://cloud.google.com/kubernetes-engine
21https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/programs/ab.html
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
was used for generating HTTP requests. Then, response time and success rates
were collected. Secondly, they investigated the impact of auto-scaling on the
performance. A CPU-intensive function was deployed with CPU-based auto-
scaling. After that, 10,000 requests with a concurrency of 10 were sent to each
platform repeatedly ﬁve times, and the same metrics were assessed. According
to both experiments, it was concluded that Kubeless performed the best out of
the three platforms.
Subsequently, Li et al. [LKRL19] evaluated the performance of the following
open-source serverless platforms–Knative, Kubeless, Nuclio22, and OpenFaaS.
They proved the beneﬁt of having multiple workers in Nuclio and Knative. To
evaluate the platforms, they set up one master node and two worker nodes on
CloudLab23 as a Kubernetes cluster and used wrk24 to generate HTTP requests.
The experiments were divided into two parts. First, they evaluated the perfor-
mance under diﬀerent concurrency levels by disabling auto-scaling and running
three functions: a simple function that returns a static string, a function that
serves a static HTTP payload, and a function that serves variable sizes of HTTP
payloads. Then, throughput and latency were analyzed. Second, they evaluated
the auto-scaling capabilities of the platforms by observing the throughput, re-
source consumption, and number of pods over time in the following experiments.
For Knative and OpenFaaS, which could scale based on the request concurrency
and request rate respectively, experiments were performed with constant and
bursty workloads. Then, CPU-based auto-scaling was set for all the platforms
to handle steady workloads. lastly, some design issues were identiﬁed, and the
results showed that Nuclio seemed to have to best performance.
Yussupov et al. [YSB+20] presented a framework to classify platforms platforms
based on the platforms’ characteristics and features.
They used the frame-
work to systematically review both hosted and open-source platforms. Then,
they proposed an open-source application, named FaaStener25, which assists re-
searchers and developers in choosing the right platforms based on the analysis
and requirements. To develop the framework, they reviewed academic litera-
ture to ﬁnalize a list of top FaaS platforms and analyzed their documentation
to extract the platforms’ characteristics. The framework took into account the
perspective of project managers and developers who consider diﬀerent criteria
for platform selection. As a result, the review incorporated a wide variety of
aspects, ranging from high-level information to low-level technical details.
22https://nuclio.io
23https://www.cloudlab.us
24https://github.com/wg/wrk
25https://faastener.github.io
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Benchmarking Tools
13
2.4
Benchmarking Tools
Since all platforms are being developed and constantly updated, benchmark
results could change over time. It would be beneﬁcial if one can run a benchmark
on their own without waiting for an up-to-date evaluation. However, a serverless
platform benchmark, especially for open-source platforms, requires some work
for designing and setting up the environment, platforms, functions, and the
benchmark itself. Therefore, a benchmark suite or tool that is ready to use
will deﬁnitely be a timesaver. We have surveyed existing benchmark tools and
found a number of tools from both industry and academia. Some provide only
online dashboards that present historical results instead, but some also share the
source code to public as well as the dashboards. Although several projects are
available publicly, many of them are either incomplete or no longer up-to-date.
Moreover, most of them support only the hosted platforms.
Pellegrini et al. [PIT19] proposed a FaaS benchmarking framework that allows
users to evaluate the performance of the platforms.
It is composed of three
components. The ﬁrst component is a Java application that runs on the local
machine, which is responsible for sending requests to the second component,
collecting performance metrics, and reporting results. The second one is a cloud
function named proxy cloud function (PCF). PCF invokes the third component,
a target cloud function (TCF), and records platform-related metrics. TCF could
be either a microbenchmark or application-based function. The source code of
the framework is not available in public yet, and the provided test functions are
limited.
The most impressive benchmarking tool was developed by an engineer from
Elbstack, a software company [Str18, Str19]. The blog posts explain how the tool
works and the detailed analysis of the benchmark results. The benchmark was
running continuously, and the results were reported on an online dashboard26.
However, the project has been temporarily put on hold, and the dashboard
does not show results anymore. This tool executes a CPU-intensive function,
bcrypt, on AWS Lambda, Google Cloud Functions, Azure Functions, IBM Cloud
Functions, and Cloudﬂare Workers with 50 concurrent requests and collects
the function duration, roundtrip time, and overhead calculated by subtracting
the duration from the roundtrip time. Unfortunately, the source code is not
available.
Next, a bencharmking tool called FaaSTest was developed by Nuweba to com-
pare their platform to existing serverless platforms [Cyb19].
The source is
available on a public repository27, and is actively maintained and open to the
26https://serverless-benchmark.com
27https://github.com/nuweba/faasbenchmark
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
community for contributions. In addition, they provide an online feature-rich
dashboard28 where users can choose to see the latest result or the previous
ones.
FaaSTest can be run with either a text-based user interface (TUI) or
CLI. Currently, it supports AWS Lambda, Google Cloud Functions, and Azure
Functions. It oﬀers a large number of tests including both microbenchmark and
application-based functions. However, only one application-based benchmark is
available. The main reason that makes FaaSTest diﬀerent from other tools is
that it automates all required steps including function deployments, function ex-
ecutions, and function removals. However, this may cause a benchmark to run
slower than other tools, and it will behave diﬀerently when running multiple
iterations since functions are removed after each iteration.
Kim et al. [KL19] implemented a benchmark suite, FunctionBench29, to eval-
uate serverless platforms. The suite contains function code written for AWS
Lambda, Google Cloud Functions, and Azure Functions. They claimed that mi-
crobenchmarks are not as useful as benchmarks with realistic workloads, so they
included several application-based functions as well. These functions return ex-
ecution time that is calculated inside the functions. Since only the functions are
provided, function deployments and HTTP workload generation are left to users.
It would be diﬃcult to extend this benchmark tool for open-source platforms
since the application-based functions requires several cloud-based services.
Similarly to FaaSTest, FaaS Mark30 was developed by Binaris to compare their
platform to other hosted ones [Boy17]. FaaS Mark consists of three components:
client, initiator function, and empty function. The client can be run either lo-
cally or in the cloud. It invokes the initiator function, which will invoke the
empty function and calculate the latency. The empty function might return
immediately or after a period of time depending on the benchmark type. There
are three types of benchmarks: simple benchmark for AWS Lambda, Google
Cloud Functions, Azure, Functions, and IBM Cloud Functions; aspect bench-
mark; and concurrency benchmark. The last two benchmarks only support AWS
Lambda. The aspect benchmark is similar to the simple benchmark, but it takes
into account the invocation methods, programming languages, and memory al-
locations. The concurrency benchmark aims at evaluating the platforms under
traﬃc with diﬀerent levels of concurrency.
Other than the three open-source projects, there are a few more that seem
interesting, but they have not been updated for a long time. These include
the project implemented by Back et al. [BA18] for microbenchmarking hosted
platforms, which we mentioned in the previous section; a cloud function bench-
28https://www.faastest.com
29https://github.com/kmu-bigdata/serverless-faas-workbench
30http://faasmark.com
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Benchmarking Tools
15
marking project31 that provides a Grafana dashboard32; and Serverless Mark,
which extends FaaS Mark for open-source platforms including OpenWhisk, Fn,
Kubeless, OpenFaaS, and Snafu33.
31https://github.com/kfigiela/cloud-functions
32http://cloud-functions.icsr.agh.edu.pl
33https://github.com/serviceprototypinglab/snafu
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Serverless Platforms
In this chapter, we describe the key features of the serverless platforms evaluated
in this thesis. We aim to prove the usability of the benchmark tool and evaluate
the performance of popular serverless platforms. To this end, we selected two
hosted platforms and ﬁve open-source platforms.
Lastly, we summarize the
comparison of the platforms.
3.1
Hosted Serverless Platforms
Major cloud providers have been oﬀering their FaaS services for several years, led
by Amazon that ﬁrst launched AWS Lambda in 2014 [SKM19]. These services
could be referred to as hosted FaaS platforms. Adopting a hosted serverless
platform, one need not worry about resource management and platform con-
ﬁguration since the provider handles such concerns for them. Moreover, these
platforms provide eﬀortless integrations with their products such as message
queues and cloud storage. However, it is important to consider costs and vendor
lock-in. We selected two hosted platforms, AWS Lambda and Azure Functions,
based on their popularity reﬂected in the poll conducted by the Cloud Native
Computing Foundation (CNCF) in 2019 [Fou19].
==PAGE:28==
18
Serverless Platforms
3.1.1
AWS Lambda
AWS Lambda is an event-driven serverless platform from Amazon. It abstracts
away the infrastructure operations: auto-scaling, server maintenance, and other
administrative tasks are taken care of by Amazon [Lama]. Thus, developers can
build Lambda functions by simply uploading the code and choosing the amount
of memory to allocate to the functions via the AWS CLI, the AWS Management
Console, or the Serverless Framework CLI. Other resources, such as CPU, are
managed proportionally to the memory size [Lamc]. However, in exchange for
the convenience oﬀered by AWS Lambda, developers do not have access to the
instances running the functions, which may make troubleshooting diﬃcult. This
can be solved with built-in monitoring and adequate logging. Lambda supports
several types of events for invoking functions, e.g., API calls from SDKs, HTTP
requests, and changes on Amazon S31. Customers are charged based on the
number of incoming requests and execution time in addition to the amount of
allocated memory.
AWS Lambda is based on the following concepts.
1. A function contains the code to be executed when an event occurs.
2. A qualiﬁer is an identiﬁer of a function version or alias.
A function
version is an immutable snapshot of a function, whereas an alias is an
alterable pointer to a version. When invoking a function, a qualiﬁer could
be speciﬁed along with the function name.
3. A runtime bridges the Lambda service and functions. A number of run-
times are provided to support functions in diﬀerent languages. It is also
possible to implement a new runtime if those provided are not suitable for
certain use cases.
4. An event is an object passed as input to the invoked function. It includes
information about the event that will be used or processed by the function,
e.g., messages from Amazon Simple Queue Service2 (SQS) queues and
events detected by IoT sensors and triggered through AWS IoT Events3.
Diﬀerent event sources generate diﬀerent structures of event objects.
5. Concurrency is the number of concurrent requests served by Lambda in
an AWS region. Concurrency limits can be set per function as well.
6. A trigger is responsible for invoking functions in response to certain
events.
1https://aws.amazon.com/s3
2https://aws.amazon.com/sqs
3https://aws.amazon.com/iot-events
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Open-Source Serverless Platforms
19
3.1.2
Azure Functions
Similar to AWS Lambda, Azure Functions is a serverless service that lets de-
velopers run event-driven functions without infrastructure concerns [AzF]. Al-
though it is a service fully-managed by a cloud provider, the source code is
partially available on GitHub4. The service charges are based on three alter-
native plans. In the consumption plan, all resources are fully managed by
Azure, and customers only pay for function executions based on both duration
and memory consumption. It is important to note that memory is allocated
automatically, and it can vary over time. With a premium plan, a customer
can specify the number of pre-warmed instances, and he is charged for these
instances regardless of idle time in addition to other resources consumed for
serving requests. Lastly, the app service plan is for customers using Azure
App Service5, which is a hosting service for web applications and mobile back-
ends, and they can run functions without additional cost.
In Azure Functions, a function app is created in a speciﬁc runtime ﬁrst. This
function app will act as an environment for the execution of its functions writ-
ten in the same language selected during app creation. Azure has two terms
regarding function invocations. A trigger–such as HTTP, timer, and queue–
deﬁnes how a function can be invoked, and one function has only one trigger.
Bindings are used for associating functions with other resources, e.g., queues
and blob storage. A function is allowed to have multiple input bindings and
output bindings. These inputs are accessed through parameters inside the func-
tions. Even though Azure Functions run in the cloud, Azure also provides local
development environments, allowing developers to debug functions locally while
still connecting to other Azure services in the cloud.
3.2
Open-Source Serverless Platforms
In spite of convenience oﬀered by hosted platforms, some people might inevitably
encounter problems such as vendor lock-in and strict limitations. Thus, open-
source serverless platforms, also known as installable platforms, are promising
alternatives with ﬂexibility and portability. Similar to the hosted platforms, the
open-source platforms were selected based on the poll of the most used open-
source serverless platforms conducted by CNCF in 2019 [Fou19]. Additionally,
other selection criteria include the number of stars on GitHub, community en-
gagement inferred from the latest commit on GitHub, and the level of maturity.
4https://github.com/Azure/azure-functions-host
5https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/app-service
==PAGE:30==
20
Serverless Platforms
Note that only the platforms with Kubernetes support are considered. In to-
tal, ﬁve platforms were chosen: Knative, OpenFaaS, OpenWhisk, Kubeless, and
Fission.
3.2.1
Knative
Knative is an open-source project initiated by Google in collaboration with
many other companies including IBM and Red Hat [Goo]. Knative serves as an
extension of Kubernetes to provide the capability to deploy serverless applica-
tions and automatically manage their workloads [Kn]. Although Knative also
provides a CLI, users can interact with the functions through the Kubernetes
CLI (kubectl) since Knative registers its APIs into Kubernetes APIs.
This platform enables software developers to run serverless applications or func-
tions on any Kubernetes clusters hosted in the cloud, on on-premise servers, or
in third-party data centers. Furthermore, the developers can freely use any pro-
gramming languages of their choice because Knative takes a container image as
one of the inputs for a deployment. Lastly, owing to the huge Knative commu-
nity, some commercial Knative products have been released with richer features.
For example, Google Cloud Run6 allows users to use Knative without having
to manage Kubernetes clusters, which is suitable for those who have limited
experience with Kubernetes.
Auto-scaling in Knative can take place in two ways. First, Knative uses the
Knative Pod Autoscaler (KPA) by default, which scales function pods based
on request concurrency. Inside a function pod, there are the function container
itself and queue-proxy sidecar container, which is responsible for concurrency
control [Th9]. When a request reaches the pod, queue-proxy proxies the request
to the function container and collects metrics that will be used by KPA. Another
scaling option is provided by Kubernetes Horizontal Pod Autoscaler (HPA) for
scaling pods based on CPU utilization. In this case, a metrics server7 has to be
set up ﬁrst to collect resource metrics, e.g., CPU and memory usage, from all
pods on the cluster.
Knative consists of two components: Serving and Eventing [KnD]. Users can
decide to install only Serving or both depending on the scenarios. For instance,
the Eventing component is required if functions need to publish or consume
events.
6https://cloud.google.com/run
7https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Open-Source Serverless Platforms
21
Figure 3.1: Kubernetes resources deﬁned by Knative Serving [Knac]
Serving
As the name implies, Knative Serving is responsible for hosting serverless func-
tions, auto-scaling the functions, and networking. Knative supports diﬀerent
options for the networking layer, but an Istio ingress gateway8 is used by default.
To achieve the aforementioned responsibilities, Serving component includes four
Kubernetes Custom Resource Deﬁnitions (CRDs) as illustrated in Figure 3.1.
A service controls the whole lifecycle of a function. A revision is an immutable
snapshot of the service.
A route maps a network endpoint to the speciﬁc
revisions that have been conﬁgured, thus facilitating rolling updates. By default,
it directs traﬃc to the latest revision.
Finally, a conﬁguration maintains
the desired state of the function according to the latest revision. When the
conﬁguration is updated, a new revision will be created. The service ensures
the creation of relevant route, conﬁguration, and revision objects.
Eventing
Eventing manages event sources and subscriptions. Knative allows services to
receive events from various sources, not limited to the platform or cluster in
which the subscriber resides. Users can also deﬁne their own event sources if
they are not available on the list provided by Knative.
8https://istio.io/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/ingress-control
==PAGE:32==
22
Serverless Platforms
Figure 3.2: Knative Eventing components for consumers [Knab]
Two interfaces are deﬁned for routing events to their consumers, which can be
implemented by any components that interact with events. First, Addressable
receives events over HTTP and acknowledges them.
Second, Callable is a
subset of Addressable. However, instead of returning a status code indicating
the event processing result, it can return a modiﬁed event or none.
Figure 3.2 shows how events are ﬁltered and routed to the consumers. Broker
collects all events that it has received. For a subscribing service, multiple Trig-
ger objects can be created to set rules for ﬁltering based on event attributes.
Events in the broker that match the triggers will be routed to the corresponding
subscribers.
3.2.2
OpenFaaS
OpenFaaS is a platform that simpliﬁes the development of serverless functions
and microservices [Opec].
Although it can be deployed on several container
platforms, Kubernetes is still recommended for production [Opeb]. With Open-
FaaS, users can manage functions by using either a UI portal or CLI. Functions
are deployed in the form of container images. OpenFaaS has its own template
store containing various options of templates written in diﬀerent programming
languages [Ell18b]. A template contains ﬁles required for building a function
image such as a Dockerﬁle, so the users only need to write function handlers.
Once the users add functions and conﬁgurations in YAML ﬁles, these templates
are ready to be packaged into container images, pushed to image registries, and
deployed. Apart from the template store, there is also a function store where
users can choose functions that have been written and tested by the community.
Figure 3.3 illustrates the conceptual workﬂow of OpenFaaS on a Kubernetes
cluster. faas-netes9 is an oﬃcial OpenFaaS provider for Kubernetes, which
9https://github.com/openfaas/faas-netes
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Open-Source Serverless Platforms
23
Figure 3.3: OpenFaaS Conceptual Workﬂow [Oped]
acts as an interface for the management and invocations of functions deployed
based on immutable images from Docker registries. OpenFaaS provides access
to the Gateway via CLI, UI, and REST API. Other services included in the
OpenFaaS stack are Prometheus10 for collecting metrics; an AlertManager11,
which works with the Prometheus service to enable request-based auto-scaling;
and the Cloud Native Messaging System12 (NATS) for handling asynchronous
function invocations.
Once a function is deployed, a number of pods are created depending on the
auto-scaling rule. By default, an OpenFaaS function has a minimum of one
replica. It can also be conﬁgured to scale down to zero when there is no load
by using faas-idler13.
As OpenFaaS includes a binary called watchdog in
the function Dockerﬁle, it runs as an initial process inside the container of the
pod. It is basically an HTTP server that takes responsibility for executing and
monitoring the function. There are two types of watchdogs. The ﬁrst one is
the classic watchdog.
Once the watchdog receives a request, it forks a new
function process, i.e., one forked process per request, and passes the request
to this process through stdin. Then, the response is read back via stdout.
When this type of watchdogs is used, the function does not have control over
the HTTP communication. Consequently, the second type, of-watchdog14, was
introduced with new features such as keeping the functions warm, persistent
database connection pools, and caching of data. The of-watchdog oﬀers ﬁve
modes including one that behaves identically to the classic watchdog as detailed
next.
10https://prometheus.io
11https://prometheus.io/docs/alerting/latest/alertmanager
12https://nats.io
13https://github.com/openfaas-incubator/faas-idler
14https://github.com/openfaas-incubator/of-watchdog
==PAGE:34==
24
Serverless Platforms
1 HTTP
HTTP serves as the default mode. In this mode, a process is forked when
the watchdog starts. All received requests are, then, forwarded to this
process, thereby making it more eﬃcient than the classic watchdog, which
forks a new process for every request. OpenFaaS templates that use this
mode are available in various programming languages, each of which comes
with an HTTP framework known to be popular for such language. Hence,
a function receives richer information about the context and event and has
more control over the HTTP response.
2 Serializing Fork
This mode behaves the same way as the classic watchdog. A request is read
into memory and serialized before being piped to a newly forked function
process through stdin. Similarly, the output from stdout is read and
serialized before being sent to the client as an HTTP response.
3 Streaming Fork
Similarly to Serializing Fork, a process is forked per request. However, it
is capable of processing larger data because it does not read inputs and
outputs into memory.
4 Afterburn
In Afterburn, a process is reused for all requests to the container. The
container will terminate if the process dies. Moreover, inputs and outputs
are sent through stdin and stdout respectively. This mode has become
deprecated and will be replaced by HTTP mode.
5 Static
Static mode is for serving static content, so the watchdog acts as an HTTP
ﬁle server.
OpenFaaS supports two ways of auto-scaling. Firstly, an auto-scaling rule based
on the number of requests per second is activated by default. As shown in Fig-
ure 3.3, AlertManager reads the request rate from Prometheus. Then, Alert-
Manager sends an alert to the API Gateway when there is a need to scale up or
down. Secondly, if a function needs to be scaled based on other custom metrics,
the previous auto-scaling rule provided by OpenFaaS can be disabled, and Ku-
bernetes HPA can be used instead. When using HPA for auto-scaling, functions
can be scaled based on both CPU and memory usage.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Open-Source Serverless Platforms
25
Figure 3.4: OpenWhisk Programming Model [Opee]
3.2.3
Apache OpenWhisk
Apache OpenWhisk is an open-source serverless platform that was initially de-
veloped by IBM and later donated to the Apache foundation [San19]. It handles
infrastructure management and auto-scaling, thereby letting developers focus
mainly on function development [Opea]. The platform can be deployed in di-
verse environments with a number of supported tools, e.g., Docker Compose15
and Ansible16, but Kubernetes is recommended. OpenWhisk was built on top of
three fundamental concepts. Figure 3.4 depicts the relationship between these
concepts.
1. An action is a stateless function that is executed when an event occurs.
It can also be invoked manually, i.e., via OpenWhisk CLI or REST API.
An authentication key is always required when invoking actions through
HTTPS requests. Actions can be programmed in a variety of supported
languages. For languages that are not supported, developers can use cus-
tomized Docker-based actions.
Multiple heterogeneous actions can be
combined together, making up a sequence, which is treated as a single
action. Web actions are a special type of actions introduced to ease the
development of web-based applications. In fact, diﬀerently from standard
actions, web actions can be triggered anonymously without OpenWhisk
authentication.
2. A trigger is a channel for events generated from diﬀerent sources, such
as message queues and database modiﬁcations. A trigger is ﬁred with an
input of a dictionary containing key-value pairs from the event source.
3. A rule connects a trigger to an action so that the action is invoked when
the trigger is activated. A trigger can be associated with multiple actions.
Similarly, diﬀerent triggers can invoke the same action.
15https://docs.docker.com/compose
16https://www.ansible.com
==PAGE:36==
26
Serverless Platforms
Figure 3.5 represents the overall architecture of OpenWhisk and its underly-
ing components. Communications with the OpenWhisk system must be done
securely over HTTPS, and self-signed server certiﬁcates can be used for devel-
opment purposes. All requests are handled by the NGINX17 component, which
is a reverse proxy server that handles SSL termination. Once a request reaches
NGINX, it is decrypted and forwarded to the controller over HTTP. The con-
troller is an API server that serves both requests for resource management and
action invocations. It is responsible for authenticating and authorizing the user
through credentials and information stored in the CouchDB18 NoSQL database,
loading the action to be invoked from the database, and choosing an available in-
voker. A message with the action details and selected invoker is, then, published
to the Kafka19 streaming platform. When Kafka has processed the message, the
controller generates an activation ID for this invocation, which will be returned
to the client in case of an asynchronous invocation. To invoke an action, the in-
voker creates a Docker container, runs the code inside the container to preserve
isolation, retrieves the result, and destroys the container. Not all invocations
are carried out in fresh and cold containers. In other words, OpenWhisk adopts
a concept of container pre-warming and container reuse [Th7]. It creates some
pre-warmed containers to speed up the ﬁrst action invocations and maintains
warm containers for the successive calls to enhance the throughput.
Conse-
quently, the action result and logs are stored into the database, which can be
later obtained with an activation ID.
The default OpenWhisk conﬁguration is only suﬃcient for development and
testing.
For example, the limit for concurrent requests per minute is quite
low, and there are only one controller and one invoker, which could result in
a bottleneck or even failures under heavy load. Nevertheless, the number of
replicas and allocated memory for these components can be increased at the
cost of requiring more computing resources. In addition, OpenWhisk has some
system limitations20, not all of which can be adjusted.
3.2.4
Kubeless
Kubeless is a serverless platform that was designed speciﬁcally to run on Ku-
bernetes [Kub]. It supports a variety of runtimes and provides both CLI and
UI, even though the latter is no longer under development. Kubeless is based
on the following concepts.
17https://www.nginx.com
18https://couchdb.apache.org
19https://kafka.apache.org
20https://github.com/apache/openwhisk/blob/master/docs/reference.md#system-limi
ts
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Open-Source Serverless Platforms
27
Figure 3.5: OpenWhisk Architecture [Opee]
1. Functions include the code to be executed and the metadata that describe
the functions, such as runtimes and dependencies.
2. Triggers are deﬁned as event sources of the functions, and one trigger can
be associated with multiple functions. As a result, the function is invoked
with at-most-once semantics when an event occurs. The available types
of triggers include, but are not limited to, HTTP, Cron jobs, Kafka, and
Kinesis. To enable HTTP triggers, an ingress controller has to be installed
for exposing functions outside the cluster.
3. A runtime is a language-speciﬁc environment in which functions are ex-
ecuted.
When a function is created with the source code and metadata, the function is
built and deployed as a pod by function-controller. The pod contains an init
container, which is responsible for loading the source code and dependencies, and
a function container, which runs after the init container completes its job [Wu19].
The ability to serve concurrent requests depends on the function runtime and
the available resources in the pod.
Kubeless uses Kubernetes HPA for auto-scaling. Auto-scaling is not enabled by
default; therefore, an auto-scaling rule has to be created for the function man-
ually. The default metric for auto-scaling is CPU usage. In case other metrics
are needed for auto-scaling, custom metrics can also be conﬁgured. Hence, in
==PAGE:38==
28
Serverless Platforms
addition to CPU-based auto-scaling, it is feasible to scale functions based on
the number of requests per second if, for example, Prometheus has been set up.
3.2.5
Fission
Fission is a serverless platform for Kubernetes [Fis20]. Fission was developed
based on three basic concepts.
First, functions are to be executed by Fis-
sion, which can be written in many supported languages. Second, environ-
ments are where functions reside. An environment is responsible for building
and running functions written in a given language. Lastly, triggers associate
events to functions so that the functions are invoked when relevant events oc-
cur.
There are two alternatives when installing Fission: fission-core and
fission-all. fission-core includes only the core components described be-
low while fission-all includes optional services such as the NATS message
queue and a logger supported by InﬂuxDB21.
1. A controller acts as an API server that receives requests from Fission
CLI, and then creates, reads, updates, and deletes (CRUD) Fission re-
sources according to the requests. If a request targets another service, not
CRUD operations, the controller proxies the request to the right destina-
tion.
2. A router receives HTTP requests from triggers and checks if the function
address is found in the cache. If not, it asks for a new address from the
executor. Then, it forwards the requests to the function pod.
3. A function pod executes the function.
A pod contains a fetcher for
loading a deployment archive containing the executable function and an
environment container which runs an HTTP server.
4. An executor is responsible for function pod creation. When it gets a
request from the router for a function’s address, it retrieves the function
details, spins up a function pod, and returns the address of the pod back
to the router. There are two types of executors.
• PoolManager maintains a ﬁxed-sized pool of warm generic pods or
containers for each environment. A pod contains a fetcher container
and an environment container. When the pod is chosen for execu-
tion, the fetcher loads the required function into the pod, and the
pod is marked as specialized for this particular function. Any further
requests to this function will be directed to this pod. The pod is
21https://www.influxdata.com
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Summary
29
cleaned up if it has not received loads for a period of time. PoolMan-
ager guarantees short cold starts, but one drawback is that it cannot
scale pods to serve a burst of requests.
• NewDeploy allows pod auto-scaling and request load-balancing. Fis-
sion uses HPA for auto-scaling based on CPU utilization. The min-
imum number of pods can be set to zero or more depending on the
requirement on cold starts and idle cost.
5. A builder manager and a builder pod build deployment archives from
source archives which contain source code.
6. A storage service stores source archives and deployment archives and
serves them to function fetchers and the builder.
3.3
Summary
We have introduced two hosted and ﬁve open-source FaaS platforms. Hosted
platforms are suitable for those who need an out-of-the-box serverless service,
which does not need much further conﬁguration, or those who are already us-
ing services oﬀered by these cloud providers. On the other hand, open-source
platforms are for those who need more control on the platform, but not beyond
the concept of serverless computing. If a company does not want to stick to one
cloud provider, or there is a possibility that they will shift to other providers,
adopting open-source platforms is a recommended option.
These are many alternative open-source platforms. All platforms that we have
reviewed commonly support deployment on Kubernetes. One may make a de-
cision based on the popularity, number of known issues, supported runtimes,
auto-scaling mechanisms, and provided tools. Table 3.1 shows the overview of
features provided by the selected open-source platforms [YSB+20].
Knative,
Kubeless and Fission were developed to be used speciﬁcally on top of Kuber-
netes, so they do not support other container orchestrators. In contract, Open-
FaaS and OpenWhisk support several more options. All of the platforms provide
CLIs for platform resource management. Moreover, Knative, OpenWhisk, and
Kubeless functions can be deployed and removed by using Serverless Framework
as well. However, we experienced some diﬃculties or unexpected behavior when
using it with Knative and Kubeless. In terms of supported runtimes, Knative is
particularly diﬀerent from other platforms because functions are developed as
Docker images. For other platforms, developers only need to implement function
handlers, and most mainstream programming languages are supported. Never-
theless, all the platforms allow users to implement their own custom runtimes
==PAGE:40==
30
Serverless Platforms
Features
Knative
OpenFaaS
OpenWhisk
Kubeless
Fission
License
Apache 2.0
MIT
Apache 2.0
Apache 2.0
Apache 2.0
Hosts
Kubernetes
Docker
Docker
Kubernetes
Kubernetes
Swarm,
Compose,
faasd,
Kubernetes,
Kubernetes,
OpenShift,
OpenShift
Mesos
Serverless
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Framework
Support
Interfaces
CLI, API
CLI, API,
CLI, API
CLI, GUI
CLI
GUI
Supported
Docker
Docker
Docker
Ballerina,
Go, Java,
Runtimes
Images,
Images, Go,
Images,
Docker
.NET, Node,
Custom
Java, .NET,
Ballerina,
Images,
Perl, PHP,
Runtimes
Node, PHP,
Go, Java,
Go, Java,
Python,
Python,
.NET, Node,
.NET, Node,
Ruby,
Ruby,
PHP,
PHP,
Custom
Custom
Python,
Python,
Runtimes
Runtimes
Ruby, Rust,
Ruby,
Scala, Swift,
Custom
Custom
Runtimes
Runtimes
Auto-scaling
Request
Requests
N/A
Request
CPU
Metrics
Concurrency,
Per Second,
Per Second,
CPU,
CPU,
CPU,
Custom
Memory,
Custom
Metrics
Custom
Metrics
Metrics
GitHub
2,983
17,720
4,741
5,754
5,141
Stars
GitHub
254
64
272
162
207
Issues
Table 3.1: Overview of Serverless Platforms
if the provided ones are not suitable. Most platforms provide multiple metrics
for auto-scaling, except for Fission, which can only scale based on CPU usage,
and OpenWhisk, whose auto-scaling cannot be conﬁgured. The details of how
OpenWhisk works were discussed in Section 3.2.3. Lastly, GitHub stars and
issues could imply the popularity and existing issues although the issues may
include inquiries. Since Knative consists of multiple repositories, these numbers
were obtained from Knative Serving22. Among these platforms, OpenFaaS has
attracted the most attention from the community, and it has the least amount
of reported issues.
22https://github.com/knative/serving
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Implementation
We extended an existing benchmarking tool, FaaSTest, to evaluate open-source
serverless platforms. We chose this tool1 because it is well-structured, has a
permissive software licence, and is actively maintained. This chapter explains
in detail about FaaSTest and our contribution to the project to evaluate open-
source platforms.
4.1
FaaSTest
FaaSTest is a benchmarking tool, developed in Golang, that is capable of running
performance tests on three hosted serverless platforms: AWS Lambda, Google
Cloud Functions, and Azure Functions. The tool provides a wide range of tests
that aim to evaluate diﬀerent computing resources. The tests can be run with
diﬀerent load levels and computation intensities. These tests are identiﬁed with
test IDs, which are strings consisting of test names and levels, and they diﬀer
in function handlers, request patterns, and some conﬁgurations. The function
conﬁgurations do not override the default settings of the platforms, except for
timeouts and memory allocations. The tool also comes with a component to
1Other benchmarking tools are discussed in Section 2.4.
==PAGE:42==
32
Implementation
generate workloads. Also, the workload generator has hooks to measure the
platform-dependent latencies. The components of FaaSTest are as follows:
1 Providers
All supported serverless providers are deﬁned in this component.
The
component is responsible for initializing provider objects when FaaSTest
starts running and controlling how serverless functions are invoked with
HTTP requests.
2 Stacks
Stacks deﬁne how functions are deployed and removed on the serverless
platforms. They also deﬁne how functions’ properties, including names,
descriptions, handler names, allocated memory, and runtimes, are re-
trieved from function conﬁguration ﬁles. A provider is deﬁned with one
stack that it will use for function deployment, but a stack can be used
by several providers.
Cloud functions can be deployed with Serverless
Framework, so there is a stack called sls2. This stack is used to deploy
functions to AWS Lambda and Google Cloud Functions. FaaSTest uses
another stack, azurestack3, for managing Azure Functions by using the
Azure CLI. The executable binaries and dependencies used by these stacks
are included in the project Dockerﬁle.
3 Test Stacks
Each test stack contains a list of functions with handlers and conﬁgurations
tailored for diﬀerent serverless platforms. Functions in these test stacks
are deployed by the stacks mentioned above.
4 Tests
Tests are the actual tests that are run to evaluate the serverless platforms.
Each test is conﬁgured with some settings including a required test stack,
request pattern, query parameters, concurrency limit, and request delay.
5 Conﬁgurations
This component contains data structures of diﬀerent conﬁguration objects
used in FaaSTest. For example, an Http object includes the conﬁgurations
for HTTP requests (e.g., query parameters, headers, and body) and the
request pattern that the workload generator has to generate.
6 Reports
This component collects, veriﬁes, and formats the responses from serverless
functions. It also retrieves and calculates metrics for reporting benchmark
results in JSON ﬁles.
2https://github.com/nuweba/sls
3https://github.com/nuweba/azure-stack
==PAGE:43==
4.1 FaaSTest
33
Figure 4.1: FaaSTest TUI
7 CLI/TUI
FaasTest provides a CLI and a TUI depicted in Figure 4.1. The CLI has
two commands, one for showing the list of all providers and another one
for running a test on a speciﬁc platform.
As mentioned before that FaaSTest has a workload generator, FaaSTest uses a
library called httpbench4, which was also implemented by Nuweba, for generat-
ing HTTP requests. This library keeps a trace summary of a processed request,
which describes the details about each stage of the HTTP request depicted in
Figure 4.3. Such information includes the timestamp and duration from the
previous stage. These will be used for metric calculation as they give insights
on how a request passes through the whole process. In addition, httpbench
can generate requests in several patterns, called presets, including both sequen-
tial and concurrent requests. It accepts parameters such as the currency level,
request delay, and the duration for generating requests. These presets allow
FaaSTest to have several test scenarios. The followings are some examples. The
details of tests selected for the evaluation are discussed in Section 5.
• Burst tests how the platform handles a burst of concurrent requests com-
ing to a single function.
4https://github.com/nuweba/httpbench
==PAGE:44==
34
Implementation
• ConcurrentIncreasingLoad evaluates the platform when handling con-
current requests coming to multiple functions.
• IncreasingLoad includes several tests. Each test evaluates the platform
when there are requests with increasing concurrency coming to a function
that heavily consumes a speciﬁc type of computing resource. For example,
in the IncreasingCPULoad and IncreasingMemoryLoad, the functions are
CPU-intensive and memory-intensive respectively.
To run a test, ﬁrst, a user has to clone the GitHub repository5 and build the
tool as a Docker image. It is recommended to run this image on the same cloud
for which the user is running the test to minimize the network latency. For
example, the user should run FaaSTest on an Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud6
(EC2) instance for benchmarking AWS Lambda. Inside the container, he or she
completes authentication needed for deploying serverless functions and runs a
command specifying the provider name and the test ID. Then, FaaSTest deploys
functions deﬁned in the test’s deﬁnition, invokes the functions with a speciﬁc
request pattern, removes the functions, and saves the results in a JSON ﬁle.
A report generated by FaaSTest contains a description and conﬁguration of the
test and benchmark results. The results for each individual request include the
following metrics.
1 Invocation Overhead
An invocation overhead is the amount of time that the serverless plat-
form spends processing the request excluding the actual function execu-
tion time. To illustrate this, Figure 4.2 shows the request ﬂow starting
from the client through the entire process. It could imply the eﬀect of a
cold or warm start, but the accuracy is not completely guaranteed. Ac-
cording to the hooks provided by httpbench in Figure 4.3, the invocation
overhead is captured from the duration between WroteRequest and Got-
FirstResponseByte. However, this period includes network latency, which
is undesired.
2 Function Duration
Function duration is the function execution time that is measured inside
the function handler. It is calculated by taking the diﬀerence between two
timestamps, start captured when the function starts and end captured
before it returns.
5https://github.com/nuweba/faasbenchmark
6https://aws.amazon.com/ec2
==PAGE:45==
4.1 FaaSTest
35
Figure 4.2: Request ﬂow in a serverless system [Faa20]
Figure 4.3: Trace Hooks [Htt19]
3 Response Time
Reponse time means the time it takes to read the whole response back
from the server.
Referring to Figure 4.3, it is the time span between
GotFirstResponseByte and Done.
4 Cold or Warm Start
This indicates whether the function has been executed with a cold or warm
start. In the function handler, an environment variable named reused is
checked for existence. If it has been set, this means the function pod was
reused, resulting in a warm start. Otherwise, it is a cold start, and the
variable is, then, initialized.
==PAGE:46==
36
Implementation
4.2
Extensions to FaaSTest
In this work, we extended FaaSTest to support ﬁve open-source serverless plat-
forms: Knative, OpenFaaS, OpenWhisk, Kubeless, and Fission. Even though
this tool provides both TUI and CLI, we only made changes to the CLI. This
was achieved by following the instructions on how to add new providers avail-
able on the tool’s GitHub page. To this end, we modiﬁed some components as
described below, and the changes are available on a GitHub repository7.
1 Providers
The open-source platforms can be deployed anywhere, so the patterns of
the URLs for invoking their functions are not known in advance.
For
example, if a platform is installed on a Kubernetes cluster, a URL of
the cluster’s ingress gateway or load balancer is needed. Thus, a JSON
ﬁle was added for setting the base URLs for the open-source platforms.
Furthermore, HTTP requests sent to diﬀerent platforms are constructed
diﬀerently, i.e., diﬀerent in request paths and headers. As FaaSTest sepa-
rates platforms into diﬀerent Go packages, ﬁve packages were added, one
for each platform, to instruct how functions are invoked (Appendix A).
When these providers are initialized, their URLs are read from the JSON
ﬁle.
2 Stacks
The existing stack, sls, only works properly with OpenWhisk. Therefore,
we created the stacks (Appendix B) to support the other platforms and
released this on GitHub8. It contains four packages that are later imported
into Stacks component.
• knativestack deploys and removes functions deﬁned in a Kubernetes
YAML ﬁle using kubectl. After that, it periodically checks if the
statuses of functions are all True; otherwise, it waits for ﬁve seconds,
and the loop continues.
• openfaasstack uses the OpenFaaS CLI (faas-cli) for deploying
functions. If the functions need to be scaled based on CPU usage, it
will create Kubernetes HPA objects according to the conﬁgurations.
Then, it also uses faas-cli to periodically check the functions’ readi-
ness.
• kubelessstack ﬁrst installs all npm dependencies required by the
function handlers. Then, it deploys functions with the Kubeless CLI
7https://github.com/nropatas/faasbenchmark
8https://github.com/nropatas/faastest-stacks
==PAGE:47==
4.3 FaaSTest Usability and Ease of Development
37
and checks their statuses by inspecting their Kubernetes Deployment
objects with kubectl. Once all of them are ready, it creates HTTP
triggers and sets auto-scaling based on CPU usage.
• fissionstack installs npm dependencies and uses the Fission CLI
to create one environment per runtime, deploy functions, and create
HTTP triggers. Then, it keeps checking their Kubernetes Deploy-
ment objects for the statuses until all functions become ready.
Lastly, We updated the project Dockerﬁle by adding commands for in-
stalling the CLIs required in these stacks.
3 Test Stacks
We added and customized all test stacks for the ﬁve open-source platforms.
Initially, we attempted to set all platforms to use the same auto-scaling
metric, but we failed to enable CPU-based auto-scaling for Knative and
auto-scaling based on the request rate for Kubeless. Thus, we kept the
default auto-scaling mechanisms with the minimum of one function in-
stance for all platforms, and the functions were conﬁgured to be able to
scale as much as possible. In other words, we set the limitations with high
values, so they could scale out until the available resources got exceeded.
Table 4.1 shows the conﬁgurations related to auto-scaling. OpenWhisk
does not scale based on metrics, so no conﬁgurations are available. The
sample test stack conﬁguration ﬁles are presented in Appendix C.
4 CLI
We updated to CLI to accept one more parameter for the command for
running a test. The parameter is for a path to a JSON ﬁle containing
custom test conﬁgurations that will override the default test settings. For
instance, a user can change the request pattern or concurrency limit when
running a test. This will be useful when the given tests do not satisfy the
user’s test cases.
5 Tests
As we allow custom test conﬁgurations, we updated all tests to check if the
custom conﬁgurations exist. If they exist, they will override the default
settings. Otherwise, the original ones are used.
4.3
FaaSTest Usability and Ease of Development
This section describes our experience with extending the FaaSTest tool to sup-
port the open-source platforms evaluated in this thesis.
The project struc-
ture is relatively complex compared to other open-source benchmarking tools.
==PAGE:48==
38
Implementation
Platforms
Metrics
Conﬁgurations
Knative
Request Concurrency
Min Scale: 1
OpenFaaS
Requests Per Second
Min Scale: 1
Max Scale: 50
(Default: 20)
OpenWhisk
N/A
N/A
Kubeless
CPU
Min Scale: 1
Max Scale: 50
(Default: 1)
CPU Limit: 200m
Target CPU: 50%
Fission
CPU
Min Scale: 1
Max Scale: 50
CPU Limit: 200m
Target CPU: 50%
(Default: 80%)
Table 4.1: Common conﬁgurations for all functions
Additionally, some parts of the code are included in other Go modules, e.g.,
httpbench, sls, and azurestack. However, its documentation is helpful as it
clearly instructs developers on how to add new teststacks, tests, stacks, and
providers. The implementations of the existing stacks were separated into their
own modules, not in the FaaSTest project. Thus, we followed the same struc-
ture by creating a separate module containing new stacks for the open-source
platforms. Due to limited experience with Golang and the way it deals with
dependencies, we encountered some diﬃculties in handling Go modules locally.
Instead, we pushed code to GitHub and downloaded it to the FaaSTest project
every time we made some changes, which was quite inconvenient. We also faced
another problem that made testing and debugging the tool diﬃcult. Since the
tool requires many dependencies, such as CLIs for diﬀerent platforms, it is pack-
aged as a Docker image so that we do not have to install these dependencies
on our machines. However, we had to build the images for testing frequently
during the development, and it took almost ten minutes for each build. Despite
all the mentioned issues, working on this tool was not too complicated.
The documentation of FaaSTest has an instruction on how to run the bench-
mark, but we found it slightly inaccurate. FaaSTest is distributed as a Docker
image, and it runs inside Docker containers. However, the documentation does
not provide the details of platform authentication in the Docker containers. To
this end, we started a FaaSTest container, accessed the container via a bash
session, and everything, e.g., authentication and running the FaaSTest tool,
took place in the bash session. To benchmark the open-source platforms, we
==PAGE:49==
4.3 FaaSTest Usability and Ease of Development
39
needed to install them on Kubernetes clusters. As FaaSTest relies on the clus-
ters’ ingress URLs and kubeconfig ﬁles, we had to either build a new Docker
image or manually copy them to the running containers every time the URLs
and kubeconfig ﬁles change. In addition, this tool is recommended to be run
in the cloud, resulting in an extra step of transferring benchmark results back
to the local machine. All in all, these only negatively aﬀect the user experience
when using FaaSTest for benchmarking open-source platforms. The tool itself
provides a simple CLI, which is easy to use.
==PAGE:50==
40
Implementation
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Evaluation
This chapter describes the steps that were carried out to benchmark the server-
less platforms.
Then, we present the results from benchmarking two hosted
platforms (AWS Lambda and Azure Functions) and four open-source platforms
(Fission, Knative, Kubeless, and OpenFaaS).
Initially, we aimed to benchmark ﬁve open-source platforms. However, after
a number of attempts, we found that OpenWhisk was struggling to handle
the load, even in the ﬁrst level of the tests. As a result, we could not collect
informative data for OpenWhisk. Thus, we do not consider OpenWhisk in the
evaluation.
5.1
Experimental Setup
We ran the experiments to evaluate the serverless platforms on Amazon Elas-
tic Kubernetes Service1 (EKS). To this end, we ﬁrst installed the open-source
serverless platforms on EKS clusters. The benchmarking tool, FaaSTest, was
also run on an Amazon EC2 instance and an Azure Virtual Machine2 (VM).
1https://aws.amazon.com/eks
2https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/virtual-machines
==PAGE:52==
42
Evaluation
Next, we describe the experimental setup in detail. The setup is divided into two
main parts: Kubernetes clusters for hosting the open-source serverless platforms
and serverless platform installation. Finally, we conclude how we conducted the
experiments.
5.1.1
Amazon EKS Clusters
Since all of the selected open-source serverless platforms can be installed and
easily managed on Kubernetes clusters, we decided to create four clusters, each
for one serverless platform. Amazon EKS was used for running these clusters in
the cloud. To simplify the management of cloud resources on AWS and avoid
mistakes that could cause unexpected charges, the concept of infrastructure as
code (IaC) was adopted by using a tool called Terraform3. This was chosen over
AWS CloudFormation4 mainly because Terraform supports various providers
and is not only limited to AWS. With Terraform, we deﬁned required resources
in conﬁguration ﬁles and ran a simple command to provision them. All the
resources in use can be terminated and removed conveniently with a single
command.
We provisioned the AWS resources in region Europe (Frankfurt)
with code eu-central-1.
To create EKS clusters, a virtual private cloud (VPC) was created ﬁrst. Ac-
cording to the VPC requirements for EKS [Ama], our VPC consisted of two
private subnets and two public subnets in two Availability Zones. Public load
balancers ran in the public subnets and worker nodes ran inside the private
subnets. Each cluster ran Kubernetes version 1.16 and had three worker nodes,
which were EC2 instances of type m4.large with 2 virtual CPUs, 8 GiB of
memory, and moderate network performance. After the EKS clusters had been
created and become ready, Terraform generated kubeconfig ﬁles for the corre-
sponding clusters. These ﬁles were used with kubectl to communicate with the
remote clusters.
5.1.2
Serverless Platforms
Once the EKS clusters were in place, the open-source serverless platforms were
installed on their clusters. The ﬁle path to a kubeconfig ﬁle retrieved in the
previous section was exported as an environment variable named KUBECONFIG
before the installation. We also installed a metrics server5 on all clusters through
3https://www.terraform.io
4https://aws.amazon.com/cloudformation
5https://hub.helm.sh/charts/stable/metrics-server
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Experimental Setup
43
Helm6 (a package manager for Kubernetes). Such a server allowed to check the
available CPU and memory resources through kubectl. The metrics server also
enabled auto-scaling based on CPU usage.
Next, we describe the installation settings for each open-source platform.
1 Knative
We installed only Knative Serving as our experiments involved invoking
functions through HTTP requests. We followed the instructions for in-
stalling the Serving component7 (v0.13.0). Additionally, we had to set up
a networking layer using Istio. However, we faced issues8 with installing
the Istio ingress gateway on Knative through the oﬃcial instructions. In-
stead, we installed Istio (v1.4.4) using Kubernetes YAML ﬁles that were
generated from a script found in Knative GitHub repository9. System-
wide conﬁgurations were left as default.
2 OpenFaaS
We installed OpenFaaS by following the instructions on its GitHub repos-
itory10. A Kubernetes YAML ﬁle containing OpenFaaS components was
generated from an OpenFaaS Helm chart (v5.5.6) by using helm template.
These components include faas-netes (v0.10.1), OpenFaaS Gateway (v0.18.11),
Prometheus (v2.11.0), AlertManager (v0.18.0), NATS Streaming (v0.17.0),
queue-worker (v0.9.0), and faas-idler (v0.2.1). The installed Open-
FaaS was RBAC-enabled and initialized with basic authentication, which
is password-based authentication for admin when using the CLI. The ser-
vice type was set to be LoadBalancer so that Helm created a LoadBalancer
object as it was needed on an EKS cluster.
3 Kubeless
Following the installation guide11, we installed Kubeless (v1.0.6) with
RBAC enabled. However, Kubeless does not expose functions by default.
Hence, we had to set up an ingress controller so that we could create HTTP
triggers for functions. There are a few options for an ingress controller,
e.g., NGINX, Kong, and Traeﬁk. We installed NGINX ingress12 (v0.32.0)
with RBAC enabled using Helm.
6https://helm.sh
7https://knative.dev/docs/install/any-kubernetes-cluster
8https://github.com/knative/serving/issues/7005
9https://github.com/knative/serving/tree/master/third_party
10https://github.com/openfaas/faas-netes/blob/master/chart/openfaas/README.md
11https://kubeless.io/docs/quick-start
12https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx
==PAGE:54==
44
Evaluation
4 Fission
According to the guide13, there are two versions of Fission: fission-all
and fission-core. It is recommended to install the ﬁrst one. However,
we installed fission-core (v1.8.0) by using Helm as we needed to only
serve and invoke functions.
Then, the serverless platforms were all set up with ingresses. Finally, we ob-
tained the ingress URLs of these platforms by running a kubectl command.
These URLs are required for function invocations as detailed next.
5.1.3
FaaSTest
As explained in Section 4.1, it is recommended to run FaaSTest in the cloud in
which the serverless platform is running so as to minimize the network latency.
We used Terraform once again to create an AWS EC2 instance of type t2.micro
with 1 virtual CPU and 1 GiB of memory in Frankfurt (eu-central-1). This
EC2 instance was used for benchmarking AWS Lambda and open-source plat-
forms on EKS clusters.
For the experiments with Azure Functions, we ran
FaaSTest on an Azure VM of size Standard_F1 with 1 virtual CPU and 2 GB
of memory in West Europe. Both instances had Docker installed. We did not
need machines with high capability because we would only run the benchmark-
ing tool and computations took place in the serverless platforms.
A Docker
image of FaaSTest, including our implementation explained in Chapter 4 and
kubeconfig ﬁles and ingress URLs from the setup, was built locally, pushed to
Docker Hub, and pulled on these instances.
There are many types of tests provided by FaaSTest. We picked three represen-
tative test cases, each of which supports diﬀerent traﬃc levels (through diﬀerent
levels of concurrent requests). We describe the test cases next, and Table 5.1
summarizes the main parameters.
• Burst
Given a level of concurrency and a sleep duration, a set of concurrent
requests are sent to a sleep function at once. The invoked function sleeps
for the speciﬁed duration and returns the metrics.
• ConcurrentIncreasingLoad
In this test, ten identical sleep functions are deployed with exactly the
same settings. These functions are concurrently invoked with the same
13https://docs.fission.io/docs/installation
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Results
45
request pattern. For each function, given a maximum concurrency level of
n, the request pattern consists of n rounds with a delay between rounds.
These rounds are set with diﬀerent levels of concurrency ranging from 1
to n. In each round, a corresponding number of requests are sent to the
function concurrently. For example, in the ﬁrst round, only one request
is sent to the function, and ten concurrent requests are sent in the tenth
round.
• IncreasingCPULoad
In this test, ﬁve cpustress14 functions, which perform trigonometric
calculations iteratively, are deployed with diﬀerent memory allocations:
128MB, 256MB, 512MB, 1048MB, and 2048MB. These functions are tested
sequentially. The pattern of requests sent to each function is the same as
in ConcurrentIncreasingLoad, i.e., the requests are sent in multiple rounds
with increasing concurrency levels up to n.
Before running benchmarks, we examined the impact of network latency in the
overhead.
We used ping utility to send ICMP echo requests from the local
machine and the cloud instance to an EKS ingress and measure the round-trip
time (RTT) delays. The results demonstrated that running FaaSTest on a cloud
instance caused a signiﬁcant decrease in network latency by over 97 percent to
approximately 1 millisecond, which is considered negligible.
FaaSTest oﬀers a command for running a speciﬁc test on a single platform. A
script was written to automate running the selected tests on all platforms. We
ran ten iterations of the Burst and ConcurrentIncreasingLoad tests and ﬁve
iterations of the IncreasingCPULoad tests on each platform. The script waited
for ﬁve minutes between iterations as some platforms needed time to completely
remove function pods.
5.2
Results
As mentioned previously, we ran three tests to evaluate the serverless platforms.
The followings discuss the evaluation results of each test.
14See Appendix D.1 for the sample function code.
==PAGE:56==
46
Evaluation
Test Types
Request
Test Stacks
Conﬁgurations
Patterns
Burst
A burst of
singlefunction
Level 1:
concurrent
(1 sleep function)
Concurrency: 100 req
requests
Sleep duration: 500 ms
Level 2:
Concurrency: 500 req
Sleep duration: 500 ms
Level 3:
Concurrency: 1,000 req
Sleep duration: 500 ms
Concurrent
Gradually
identical
Level 1:
Increasing
increasing
functions
Max concurrency: 40 req
Load
request
(10 sleep
Sleep duration: 50 ms
concurrency
functions)
Delay: 1,000 ms
starting from
Level 2:
1 req/sec
Max concurrency: 34 req
Sleep duration: 500 ms
Delay: 100 ms
Level 3:
Max concurrency: 18 req
Sleep duration: 5,000 ms
Delay: 10 ms
Increasing
Gradually
cpustress
Level 1:
CPULoad
increasing
(CPU-intensive
Max concurrency: 40 req
request
functions with
Delay: 1,000 ms
concurrency
diﬀerent memory
Intensity Level: 1
starting from
limits)
Level 2:
1 req/sec
Max concurrency: 40 req
Delay: 100 ms
Intensity Level: 2
Table 5.1: Selected test types
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Results
47
Burst
The ﬁrst test, Burst, aims to examine the ability of the platforms to handle a
sudden burst of concurrent requests. The three levels diﬀer in the number of
concurrent requests: 100, 500, and 1,000. Table 5.2 shows the average success
rates and their standard deviations in all three levels. In BurstLvl1, all platforms
managed to handle 50 concurrent requests, except for Azure Functions that
resulted in less than one percent of errors. Then, in BurstLvl2, Azure’s overall
performance was still similar to the previous level, but there were variations
across iterations. There were unsuccessful requests in one iteration of OpenFaaS,
whereas all the other iterations achieved a 100% success rate.
In contrast,
Kubeless started to show instability in handling a large amount of concurrent
requests. For instance, some iterations had only approximately 25% success rate,
whereas there were a few iterations with 100% success as well. This is reﬂected
in both the lower average success rate and high standard deviation. Lastly, in
BurstLvl3, only AWS Lambda and Knative could keep the success rate of 100
percent. This is corresponding to Lambda’s documentation stating that it allows
a maximum of 1,000 concurrent requests per region [Lamb]. Those who need
higher concurrency can submit a request for a limit increase. Fission was the
second-best among the open-source platforms, and OpenFaaS’s results are still
acceptable. The results from Azure and Kubeless are considerably worse than
the others even though Azure Functions was set to allow unlimited concurrent
requests. Furthermore, we did not observe HTTP 429 response codes which are
expected if the concurrency limit is exceeded. Regarding Kubeless, the results
are unexpected because it has a simple architecture. The cause might have been
the ingress controller becoming a bottleneck.
Another interesting metric is invocation overhead, which indicates the time it
takes to route a request to the available function pod to be executed. Figure 5.1
shows the box plots of invocation overhead (in milliseconds) of successful re-
quests in all platforms. AWS Lambda and Knative performed the best among
the hosted platforms and open-source platforms respectively with minimal over-
head. The overhead in OpenFaaS and Fission was slightly higher, but there were
a lot of outliers in OpenFaaS, especially in BrustLvl3, which is undesired. Lastly,
a wide range of overhead was observed in Kubeless as the level of concurrency
increased, reaching the highest overhead of over 18 seconds.
Next, we checked the number of function replicas or pods used for handling
requests per iteration as shown in Table 5.3. This was obtained by checking
the occurrence of the reuse parameter set to False (see Section 4.1). AWS
handled all requests with new functions instances, whereas Azure reused one
or two function instances on average. This could explain why AWS Lambda
had very low invocation overhead. We observed that none of the open-source
==PAGE:58==
48
Evaluation
Platforms
Iterations
Lvl1
Lvl2
Lvl3
AWS
100.0±0.0
100.0±00.0
100.0±00.0
Azure
99.3±1.0
98.0±06.0
54.6±31.2
Knative
100.0±0.0
100.0±00.0
100.0±00.0
OpenFaaS
100.0±0.0
99.3±02.1
86.7±07.8
Kubeless
100.0±0.0
84.1±23.3
63.4±23.0
Fission
100.0±0.0
100.0±00.0
99.6±00.8
Table 5.2: Average success rates along with their standard deviations over 10
iterations of the Burst tests (in %)
Platforms
BurstLvl1
BurstLvl2
BurstLvl3
AWS
100.0
500.0
1000.0
Azure
1.2
1.1
1.4
Knative
1
1
1
OpenFaaS
1
1
1
Kubeless
1
1
1
Fission
1
1
1
Table 5.3: Numbers of function replicas created on average in each iteration
of the Burst test
platforms scaled out; i.e., all requests were handled by one function instance.
This is either because the platforms did not trigger the scale out of the functions
or the pod initialization took too long.
For Knative and OpenFaaS, it was
likely that they did not scale because of the default system-wide auto-scaling
conﬁgurations. Speciﬁcally, Knative is set to scale after two seconds [Knaa],
and OpenFaaS scales every 40 seconds15. All requests in these two platforms
were ﬁnished before the respective time window. On the other hand, Kubeless
and Fission did not scale because the auto-scaling rules were based on CPU
usage. To summarize, Knative gave the best performance in handling bursts
of requests with a single function instance, which could have been because of
the queue-proxy container that handled request queuing inside the pod. It is
unclear how the other platforms handled concurrent requests on one function
instance, but all of them used Express.js16 in the function runtimes that we used,
which is a web framework for Node.js that is capable of handling concurrent
requests.
15https://github.com/openfaas/faas/issues/1271
16https://expressjs.com
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Results
49
13000
15000
17000
AWS
Azure
Platforms
0
2000
4000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(a) BurstLvl1
AWS
Azure
Platforms
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(b) BurstLvl2
AWS
Azure
Platforms
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(c) BurstLvl3
12000
14000
16000
18000
Knative
OpenFaaS Kubeless
Fission
Platforms
0
2000
4000
6000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(d) BurstLvl1
Knative
OpenFaaS
Kubeless
Fission
Platforms
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(e) BurstLvl2
Knative
OpenFaaS
Kubeless
Fission
Platforms
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(f) BurstLvl3
Figure 5.1: Invocation overhead in the Burst tests. (a), (b), and (c) repre-
sent the overhead on the hosted platforms, whereas (d), (e), and
(f) show those of the open-source platforms per level of incoming
traﬃc.
ConcurrentIncreasingLoad
The ConcurrentIncreasingLoad tests aim at evaluating the platforms in the sce-
nario where a serverless application contains multiple functions that simultane-
ously receive a gradually increasing number of concurrent requests. Additionally,
it evaluates how well the platforms handle concurrency in long-running functions
as the sleep duration in ConcurrentIncreasingLoadLvl3 is ﬁve seconds. Table 5.4
shows the average success rate and its standard deviation for each platform and
each test level. The highest possible concurrency is 40 requests per function and
400 requests per platform, so most of the platforms could handle all or almost
all requests in these tests, except for Azure and OpenFaaS. We also detected one
or two cold starts per iteration in Level 1 for OpenFaaS and Kubeless, meaning
that they scaled. We found that Azure responded with diﬀerent status codes,
including 404, 502, and 503, and timeout errors. The 404 errors are unusual.
Nevertheless, the results are similar to that observed on faastest.com for ex-
periments around the same time. During the tests, we found that faas-cli
became unresponsive at the end of each test, which may be because the CLI
could not get responses from OpenFaaS Gateway. Therefore, the Gateway might
have been a bottleneck when the platform received a large amount of requests.
For instance, there were a total of 8,200 requests going through the Gateway in
Level 1. Moreover, although it received a lower number of requests (1,710 re-
==PAGE:60==
50
Evaluation
Platforms
ConcurrentIncreasingLoad
Lvl1
Lvl2
Lvl3
AWS
100.0±00.0
100.0±0.0
100.0±00.0
Azure
30.4±20.9
2.5±5.1
11.4±18.1
Knative
100.0±00.0
100.0±0.0
100.0±00.0
OpenFaaS
49.0±02.0
88.7±1.2
19.1±03.0
Kubeless
94.0±03.0
93.2±4.2
100.0±00.0
Fission
100.0±00.0
100.0±0.0
100.0±00.0
Table 5.4: Average success rates and standard deviations in the ConcurrentIn-
creasingLoad tests (in %)
quests) in Level 3, each request took at least ﬁve seconds, and the delay between
sets of concurrent requests was low.
Figure 5.2 presents the box plots of invocation overhead for hosted and open-
source platforms. AWS Lambda outperformed Azure Functions, which showed a
wide span of overhead in Level 1 with the highest value reaching over 20 seconds.
The overall overhead in Azure Functions remained high in all levels. Most open-
source platforms spent a relatively small amount of time to schedule and execute
the requests, except for Kubeless. However, many requests experienced a long
invocation overhead (up to 20s) with OpenFaaS; this may be due to issues
observed with the Gateway as explained previously. Kubeless had the highest
median of invocation overhead, and its overhead went up to approximately 17
seconds in Level 2. To summarize, AWS, Knative, and Fission had no problems
in handling concurrent requests to multiple functions.
IncreasingCPULoad
The last test that we conducted in this thesis is IncreasingCPULoad which fo-
cuses on how platforms handle CPU-intensive tasks with moderate loads. It
is important to note that auto-scaling is handled diﬀerently in Knative and
OpenFaaS as compared to Kubeless and Fission. Knative and OpenFaaS scaled
based on request concurrency and the request rate respectively; accordingly, the
CPU was not limited for each function pod. On the other hand, Kubeless and
Fission scaled based on CPU metrics; therefore, CPU limits were required. We
ran this test in three settings for open-source platforms: two worker nodes with
a CPU limit of 200m per function pod, three worker nodes with a CPU limit
of 200m, and three worker nodes with a CPU limit of 500m. The CPU limits
were only set for Kubeless and Fission. We increased the number of worker
nodes because Knative was the only platform that consumed all available CPU.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Results
51
AWS
Azure
Platforms
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(a) ConcurrentIncreasing
LoadLvl1
AWS
Azure
Platforms
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(b) ConcurrentIncreasing
LoadLvl2
AWS
Azure
Platforms
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(c) ConcurrentIncreasing
LoadLvl3
18000
20000
22000
Knative
OpenFaaS Kubeless
Fission
Platforms
0
2000
4000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(d) ConcurrentIncreasing
LoadLvl1
Knative
OpenFaaS
Kubeless
Fission
Platforms
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(e) ConcurrentIncreasing
LoadLvl2
12000
14000
16000
18000
Knative
OpenFaaS Kubeless
Fission
Platforms
0
2000
4000
6000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(f) ConcurrentIncreasing
LoadLvl3
Figure 5.2: Invocation overhead in the ConcurrentIncreasingLoad tests
Hence, we would like to observe how the amount of resources would aﬀect the
performance. Table 5.5 shows the average success rates and standard devia-
tions in all settings, and Table 5.6 shows the average success rates for diﬀerent
memory allocations in the open-source platforms. We do not include the hosted
platforms in Table 5.6 because Azure Functions dynamically allocates memories
to functions. Additionally, we do not present the results of IncreasingCPULoad-
Lvl3 as the success rates in all platforms fell below 20 percent, except for AWS
Lambda which achieved 100% success rate.
All platforms managed to fully complete IncreasingCPULoadLvl1, except for
Kubeless whose less than 1% of the requests were unsuccessful. AWS Lambda
also maintained a high success rate in Level 2 while the success rate for Azure
decreased by more than half. The performance of the open-source platforms
became signiﬁcantly worse in Level 2 as well. Knative’s success rate substantially
increased while the increases were small in other platforms when we increased
the number of worker nodes from two to three. We monitored CPU usage on
the nodes and found that Knative consumed a lot of CPU and hit 100% CPU
utilization on all nodes when it tried to scale out. The results on Table 5.6
indicate that the allocated memory did not aﬀect the performance. However,
Knative gave the best results for the function with 128MB of memory, and the
success rate decreased after that. In this test, a function is tested one by one,
starting from the one with 128MB of memory until the last one with 2048MB
of memory. We suspect that Knative was not able to scale out for the functions
==PAGE:62==
52
Evaluation
with higher memory allocation due to limited CPU availability. Therefore, we
assume that Knative’s performance can improve signiﬁcantly if the allocated
computing power is increased. We expected Kubeless and Fission to scale out
since it is a CPU-intensive test. We discovered that they tried to scale out, but
the new pods were not ready before each test ended. This could be because the
metrics server reported CPU metrics with some delay or the pod initialization
took a long time. As a result, they handled requests with a single pod each, and
the success rates rose as the allocated CPU was increased from 200m to 500m.
Figure 5.3 shows the box plots of invocation overhead. In Level 1, all platforms
maintained the overhead below two seconds, except for Azure, OpenFaaS, and
Kubeless that had many outliers. AWS Lambda was the only platform in which
the overhead remained the same even at higher loads in Level 2. In contrast, the
other platforms resulted in considerably higher invocation overhead reaching as
high as 20 seconds, except for OpenFaaS whose overhead was lower than the
others by half. We also observed the function duration or execution time since
the function used in this test performed some calculation, unlike sleep in the
previous tests. Figure 5.4 presents the box plots of function duration. We report
the results for AWS Lambda per memory allocated, as we could control such
settings. On the other hand, Azure Functions dynamically allocates memory
and thus, we report the results over all runs. We report the results for AWS
Lambda per memory allocated as we could control such settings. On the other
hand, Azure Functions dynamically allocates memory, and thus we report the
results over all runs.
For the open-source platforms, we observed the same
trend in all memory settings; therefore, we show only the results from allocating
512MB of memory. Outliers are found in all platforms in either level. In spite
of that, most platforms completed the executions instantly in Level 1. In level
2, OpenFaaS maintained the same function duration, while the others became
slightly slower.
Knative responded most requests within 100 milliseconds or
less with outliers reaching over 300 milliseconds. Kubeless and Fission behaved
similarly with the function duration of approximately 100 milliseconds. In short,
most of the response time was spent on the overhead rather than the function
execution itself, and OpenFaaS gave the best performance in this test given the
current settings.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Results
53
Platforms
IncreasingCPULoad
Lvl1
Lvl2
AWS
100.0
100.0±00.0
Azure
100.0
43.4±10.9
2 Nodes
3 Nodes
2 Nodes
3 Nodes
Knative
100.0
100.0
58.4±2.6
73.2±2.0
OpenFaaS
100.0
100.0
75.7±4.2
76.0±2.6
200m
200m
500m
200m
200m
500m
Kubeless
99.2±1.3
96.7±2.5
99.9
19.2±1.5
22.2±1.2
59.7±1.2
Fission
100.0±0.0
100.0±0.0
100.0
21.5±0.8
23.9±1.5
69.8±1.1
Table 5.5: Average success rates and standard deviations in the Increas-
ingCPULoad tests (in %). For the open-source platforms, the rates
are shown for diﬀerent settings, i.e., number of worker nodes on the
EKS clusters and allocated CPU (in millicores). The CPU alloca-
tions only apply to Kubeless and Fission.
Platforms
IncreasingCPULoadLvl2
128MB
256MB
512MB
1024MB
2048MB
All
Knative
99.7±0.5
80.0±7.0
58.9±8.7
57.9±8.8
69.7±3.8
73.2±2.0
OpenFaaS
76.1±3.5
81.3±1.9
70.6±9.7
76.3±4.5
75.9±3.5
76.0±2.6
Kubeless
23.4±1.6
23.1±1.2
18.9±3.7
22.1±2.1
23.5±1.2
22.2±1.2
Fission
22.5±5.0
25.7±4.5
23.2±4.7
25.8±4.1
22.5±4.8
23.9±1.5
Table 5.6: Average success rates and standard deviations (in %) for the open-
source platforms in IncreasingCPULoadLvl2 organized based on
memory allocations
==PAGE:64==
54
Evaluation
6000
8000
10000
12000
AWS
Azure
Platforms
0
1000
2000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(a) IncreasingCPULoad
LoadLvl1
AWS
Azure
Platforms
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(b) IncreasingCPULoad
LoadLvl2
4000
5000
6000
Knative
OpenFaaS
Kubeless
Fission
Platforms
0
1000
2000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(c) IncreasingCPULoad
LoadLvl1
Knative
OpenFaaS
Kubeless
Fission
Platforms
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
12500
15000
17500
20000
Invocation Overhead (ms)
(d) IncreasingCPULoad
LoadLvl2
Figure 5.3: Invocation overhead in the IncreasingCPULoad tests
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Results
55
AWS
128MB
AWS
256MB
AWS
512MB
AWS
1024MB
AWS
2048MB
Azure
Platforms
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Function Duration (ms)
(a) IncreasingCPULoad
LoadLvl1
AWS
128MB
AWS
256MB
AWS
512MB
AWS
1024MB
AWS
2048MB
Azure
Platforms
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Function Duration (ms)
(b) IncreasingCPULoad
LoadLvl2
Knative
OpenFaaS
Kubeless
Fission
Platforms
0
20
40
60
80
100
Function Duration (ms)
(c) IncreasingCPULoad
LoadLvl1
Knative
OpenFaaS
Kubeless
Fission
Platforms
50
100
150
200
250
300
Function Duration (ms)
(d) IncreasingCPULoad
LoadLvl2
Figure 5.4: (a) and (b) show function duration in the hosted platforms. Mem-
ory is allocated dynamically in Azure Functions. (c) and (d) show
the function duration in the open-source platforms when the allo-
cated memory was 512MB.
==PAGE:66==
56
Evaluation
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This thesis presented a benchmarking tool to evaluate both hosted and open-
source serverless platforms. The tool provides a set of standard functions and
platform-speciﬁc conﬁgurations for a few serverless platforms to support their
evaluation through minimal setup. This is important to quickly evaluate emerg-
ing serverless platforms as the popularity of serverless computing and the num-
ber of serverless platforms have been continuously rising.
To this end, we ﬁrst introduced the fundamental concepts of containerization
and container orchestration as well as the main components of Kubernetes.
Then, we introduced serverless computing along with their beneﬁts, drawbacks,
and sample use cases.
We also reviewed other work related to feature com-
parisons and performance evaluation of serverless platforms and surveyed ex-
isting benchmarking tools. To fully understand how serverless platforms work,
we summarized the key features and components of popular platforms: AWS
Lambda, Azure Functions, Knative, OpenFaaS, OpenWhisk, Kubeless, and Fis-
sion.
Next, to achieve the goal of this thesis, we extended an open-source bench-
marking tool, FaaSTest, to support ﬁve open-source serverless platforms. We
also published the modiﬁed version of FaaSTest to a public GitHub repository
so that others can beneﬁt from this work. We used it to evaluate the popular
==PAGE:68==
58
Conclusion
platforms1 that have been discussed. To this end, we installed the open-source
platforms on separate Amazon EKS clusters and ran three tests, Burst, Con-
currentIncreasingLoad, and IncreasingCPULoad, provided by FaaSTest on an
Amazon EC2 instance and an Azure VM. We, then, analyzed the collected
metrics.
Our results show that AWS Lambda performed better than Azure Functions
and produced no failures in all tests. However, it is impossible to determine the
best open-source platform due to the diﬀerences in their settings and resource
consumption under limited resources. For instance, we could not compare Kna-
tive and OpenFaaS with Kubeless and Fission because they oﬀer diﬀerent auto-
scaling mechanisms. Nonetheless, if we consider the scenarios where scaling did
not occur, Knative outperformed the other open-source platforms with higher
success rates and lower invocation overhead. The only drawback of Knative
is that it consumed signiﬁcantly higher CPU than the others, especially in the
CPU-intensive tests. On the other hand, among platforms that used CPU-based
auto-scaling, Fission achieved better results than Kubeless.
Although FaaSTest is an eﬀective tool to evaluate serverless platforms, bench-
marking open-source platforms still remains challenging. This is because the
platform’s performance signiﬁcantly depends on the platform setup and conﬁg-
uration of functions (e.g., allocated CPU and memory). Thus, we identify the
following directions for further improving FaaSTest.
• The reports generated by FaaSTest should be enhanced to include times-
tamps for all requests so that we can analyze the platform behavior over
time.
• FaasTest occasionally generates reports in an invalid JSON form. As a
consequence, we had to correct them manually. We did not encounter this
issue often; in the future, it would be good to debug this issue.
• During a test, function deployment takes a long time, thus slowing down
the test. The stacks that we implemented can be refactored to run faster
and more eﬃciently. Moreover, azurestack still uses the Azure CLI for
function deployment. It could be updated to use the Serverless Framework
similar to the other platforms.
• We had to manually monitor CPU and memory consumption and auto-
scaling behavior, which is not eﬀective because a test usually ﬁnishes
shortly. It would be better if the tool can periodically retrieve this in-
formation and include it in the reports. For instance, FaaSTest may exe-
1Except for OpenWhisk, which failed the tests.
==PAGE:69==
59
cute kubectl commands to collect nodes’ resource consumption and HPA
objects in parallel to the tests.
==PAGE:70==
60
Conclusion
==PAGE:71==
Appendix A
Function Invocation
The followings are some parts of the packages that are responsible for construct-
ing request objects.
A.1
Knative
func
( knative
∗Knative )
buildFuncInvokeReq ( funcName string ,
qParams
∗u r l . Values ,
headers
∗http . Header ,
body
∗[ ] byte )
(∗http .
Request ,
error )
{
funcUrl
:=
u r l .URL{
Scheme :
" http " ,
Host :
knative . ingressUrl ,
}
req ,
e r r
:= http . NewRequest ( "POST" ,
funcUrl . String ( ) ,
i o u t i l .
NopCloser ( bytes . NewReader (∗body ) ) )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
nil ,
e r r
}
req .URL. RawQuery = qParams . Encode ( )
req . Host = fmt . S p r i n t f ( "%s . d e f a u l t . example . com" , funcName )
for k ,
multiH := range ∗headers
{
==PAGE:72==
62
Function Invocation
for _,
h := range multiH {
req . Header . Set (k ,
h)
}
}
return req ,
nil
}
A.2
OpenFaaS
func
( openfaas
∗OpenFaaS)
buildFuncInvokeReq ( funcName string ,
qParams ∗u r l . Values ,
headers
∗http . Header ,
body
∗[ ] byte )
(∗http
. Request ,
error )
{
funcUrl
:=
u r l .URL{}
funcUrl . Scheme = " http "
funcUrl . Host = openfaas . i n g r e s s U r l
funcUrl . Path = path . Join ( funcUrl . Path ,
" function " , funcName )
req ,
e r r
:= http . NewRequest ( "POST" ,
funcUrl . String ( ) ,
i o u t i l .
NopCloser ( bytes . NewReader (∗body ) ) )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
nil ,
e r r
}
req .URL. RawQuery = qParams . Encode ()
for k ,
multiH := range ∗headers
{
for _,
h := range multiH {
req . Header . Set (k ,
h)
}
}
return req ,
nil
}
A.3
OpenWhisk
func
( openwhisk ∗OpenWhisk)
buildFuncInvokeReq ( funcName string ,
qParams ∗u r l . Values ,
headers
∗http . Header ,
body
∗[ ] byte )
(∗http
. Request ,
error )
{
funcUrl
:=
u r l .URL{}
funcUrl . Scheme = " https "
funcUrl . Host = openwhisk . i n g r e s s U r l
funcUrl . Path = path . Join ( funcUrl . Path ,
" api " ,
"v1" ,
"web" ,
" guest
" ,
" d e f a u l t " ,
funcName )
==PAGE:73==
A.4 Kubeless
63
req ,
e r r
:= http . NewRequest ( "POST" ,
funcUrl . String ( ) ,
i o u t i l .
NopCloser ( bytes . NewReader (∗body ) ) )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
nil ,
e r r
}
req .URL. RawQuery = qParams . Encode ( )
for k ,
multiH := range ∗headers
{
for _,
h := range multiH {
req . Header . Set (k ,
h)
}
}
return req ,
nil
}
A.4
Kubeless
func
( kubeless
∗Kubeless )
buildFuncInvokeReq ( funcName string ,
qParams ∗u r l . Values ,
headers
∗http . Header ,
body
∗[ ] byte )
(∗http
. Request ,
error )
{
funcUrl
:=
u r l .URL{}
funcUrl . Scheme = " http "
funcUrl . Host = kubeless . i n g r e s s U r l
funcUrl . Path = path . Join ( funcUrl . Path ,
funcName )
req ,
e r r
:= http . NewRequest ( "POST" ,
funcUrl . String ( ) ,
i o u t i l .
NopCloser ( bytes . NewReader (∗body ) ) )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
nil ,
e r r
}
req .URL. RawQuery = qParams . Encode ( )
req . Host = "example . com"
for k ,
multiH := range ∗headers
{
for _,
h := range multiH {
req . Header . Set (k ,
h)
}
}
return req ,
nil
}
==PAGE:74==
64
Function Invocation
A.5
Fission
func
( f i s s i o n
∗F i s s i o n )
buildFuncInvokeReq ( funcName string ,
qParams
∗u r l . Values ,
headers
∗http . Header ,
body
∗[ ] byte )
(∗http .
Request ,
error )
{
funcUrl
:=
u r l .URL{}
funcUrl . Scheme = " http "
funcUrl . Host = f i s s i o n . i n g r e s s U r l
funcUrl . Path = path . Join ( funcUrl . Path ,
funcName )
req ,
e r r
:= http . NewRequest ( "POST" ,
funcUrl . String ( ) ,
i o u t i l .
NopCloser ( bytes . NewReader (∗body ) ) )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
nil ,
e r r
}
req .URL. RawQuery = qParams . Encode ()
for k ,
multiH := range ∗headers
{
for _,
h := range multiH {
req . Header . Set (k ,
h)
}
}
return req ,
nil
}
==PAGE:75==
Appendix B
Stacks
B.1
Knative
Stack Deployment
func
( s
∗KnativeStack )
DeployStack ()
error {
_, _,
e r r
:=
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
"/ bin /sh" ,
"−c" ,
fmt . S p r i n t f ( " kubectl
apply −f %s −−kubeconfig
/app/ kubeconfigs / kubeconfig_knative " ,
k s e r v i c e F i l e ) )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
// Check
i f
a l l
functions
are
ready
funcStatuses
:= make ( [ ] bool ,
len ( s . Functions ) )
for
! u t i l s . IsAllTrue ( funcStatuses )
{
time . Sleep (5
∗time . Second )
for
i ,
f
:= range s . Functions
{
stdout , _,
e r r
:=
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
"/ bin /sh" ,
"−c" ,
fmt . S p r i n t f ( " kubectl
get
ksvc %s −o
jsonpath = ’{. status . condit i on s [ 1 ] . status } ’ −−kubeconfig
/app/ kubeconfigs / kubeconfig_knative " ,
f .Name) )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
==PAGE:76==
66
Stacks
isReady :=
s t r i n g s . Compare( stdout ,
"True" ) == 0
funcStatuses [ i ] = isReady
// Don ’ t
check more
functions .
Continue
waiting
r i g h t
away .
i f
! isReady {
break
}
}
}
return
nil
}
Stack Removal
func
( s
∗KnativeStack )
RemoveStack ()
error {
_, _,
e r r
:=
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
"/ bin /sh" ,
"−c" ,
fmt . S p r i n t f ( " kubectl
d e l e t e −f %s −−kubeconfig
/app/ kubeconfigs / kubeconfig_knative " ,
k s e r v i c e F i l e ) )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
return
nil
}
B.2
OpenFaaS
Stack Deployment
func
( s
∗OpenFaaSStack )
DeployStack ()
error {
_, _,
e r r
:=
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" faas −c l i " ,
" deploy " ,
"−g" ,
s . gatewayUrl ,
"−f " ,
s e r v i c e F i l e )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
for _,
f
:= range s . s e r v i c e . Functions
{
i f
f . Autoscaling
!=
nil
{
_, _,
e r r = u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
"/ bin /sh" ,
"−c" ,
fmt . S p r i n t f ( " kubectl
autoscale
deployment
−n openfaas−fn %s −−cpu−percent %s −−min %s −−max %s −−
kubeconfig
/app/ kubeconfigs / kubeconfig_openfaas " ,
f .
Name,
f . TargetCPU ,
f . Min ,
f .Max) )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
==PAGE:77==
B.2 OpenFaaS
67
return
e r r
}
}
}
// Check
i f
a l l
functions
are
ready
funcStatuses
:= make ( [ ] bool ,
len ( s . Functions ) )
for
! u t i l s . IsAllTrue ( funcStatuses )
{
time . Sleep (5
∗time . Second )
for
i ,
f
:= range s . Functions
{
stdout , _,
e r r
:=
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" faas −c l i " ,
" d e s c r i b e " ,
"−g" ,
s . gatewayUrl ,
f .Name)
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
isReady :=
! s t r i n g s . Contains ( stdout ,
"Not Ready" )
funcStatuses [ i ] = isReady
// Don ’ t
check more
functions .
Continue
waiting
r i g h t
away .
i f
! isReady {
break
}
}
}
return
nil
}
Stack Removal
func
( s
∗OpenFaaSStack )
RemoveStack ( )
error {
time . Sleep (5
∗time . Minute )
_, _,
e r r
:=
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" faas −c l i " ,
"remove" ,
"−g" ,
s . gatewayUrl ,
"−f " ,
s e r v i c e F i l e )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
for _,
f
:= range s . s e r v i c e . Functions
{
i f
f . Autoscaling
!=
nil
{
_, _,
e r r = u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
"/ bin /sh" ,
"−c" ,
fmt . S p r i n t f ( " kubectl
d e l e t e
hpa −n
openfaas−fn %s −−kubeconfig
/app/ kubeconfigs /
kubeconfig_openfaas " ,
f .Name) )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
}
}
==PAGE:78==
68
Stacks
return
nil
}
B.3
Kubeless
Stack Deployment
func
( s
∗KubelessStack )
DeployStack ()
error {
_, _,
e r r
:=
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
"npm" ,
" i " )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
for _,
f
:= range s . spec . Functions
{
handlerFile
:= s . spec . F i l e
i f
f . F i l e
!= "" {
handlerFile = f . F i l e
}
deployArgs :=
[ ] string {" function " ,
" deploy " ,
f .Name,
"−r " ,
f .
Runtime ,
"−f " ,
handlerFile ,
"−−handler " ,
f . Handler ,
"−−cpu" ,
f .CPU,
"−−memory" ,
f .
MemorySize}
dependencies
:= s . spec . Dependencies
i f
f . Dependencties
!= "" {
dependencies = f . Dependencties
}
i f
dependencies
!= "" {
deployArgs = append( deployArgs ,
"−−dependencies " ,
dependencies )
}
i f
f . Env != "" {
deployArgs = append( deployArgs ,
"−−env" ,
f . Env)
}
_, _,
e r r = u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" kubeless " ,
deployArgs . . . )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
// Check
i f
the
function
i s
ready
stdout
:= ""
for
s t r i n g s . Compare( stdout ,
"True" ) != 0 {
time . Sleep (5
∗time . Second )
==PAGE:79==
B.4 Fission
69
stdout , _,
e r r = u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
"/ bin /sh" ,
"−c" ,
fmt . S p r i n t f ( " kubectl
get
deploy %s −o
jsonpath = ’{. status . condit i on s [ 0 ] . status } ’ −−kubeconfig
/app/ kubeconfigs / kubeconfig_kubeless " ,
f .Name) )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
}
_, _,
e r r = u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" kubeless " ,
" t r i g g e r " ,
" http " ,
" c r e a t e " ,
f .Name,
"−−function −
name" ,
f .Name,
"−−hostname" ,
s . spec . Hostname ,
"−−path" ,
f . Path )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
_, _,
e r r = u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" kubeless " ,
" autoscale " ,
" crea t e " ,
f .Name,
"−−metric " ,
"cpu" ,
"−−min" ,
f . MinScale ,
"−−max" ,
f . MaxScale ,
"−−value " ,
f .
TargetCPU)
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
}
time . Sleep (5
∗time . Second )
return
nil
}
Stack Removal
func
( s
∗KubelessStack )
RemoveStack ()
error {
for _,
f
:= range s . spec . Functions
{
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" kubeless " ,
" function " ,
"
d e l e t e " ,
f .Name)
}
return
nil
}
B.4
Fission
Stack Deployment
==PAGE:80==
70
Stacks
func
( s
∗FissionStack )
DeployStack ()
error {
_, _,
e r r
:=
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
"npm" ,
" i " )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
for _,
env := range s . spec . Envs {
envArgs :=
[ ] string {"env" ,
" create " ,
"−−name" ,
env . Env .Name,
"
−−image" ,
env . Env . Image}
i f
env . Env . Builder
!= "" {
envArgs = append( envArgs ,
"−−b u i l d e r " ,
env . Env . Builder )
}
_, _,
e r r = u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" f i s s i o n " ,
envArgs . . . )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
for _,
f
:= range env . Functions
{
fnArgs :=
[ ] string {" fn " ,
" create " ,
"−−name" ,
f .Name,
"−−env" ,
env . Env .Name}
i f
f . Entrypoint == "" {
fnArgs = append( fnArgs ,
"−−code" ,
f . Handler )
}
else
{
fnArgs = append( fnArgs ,
"−−s r c " ,
f . Handler ,
"−−entrypoint " ,
f . Entrypoint )
}
fnArgs = append( fnArgs ,
"−−executortype " ,
"newdeploy" ,
"−−mincpu" ,
f . Mincpu ,
"−−maxcpu" ,
f . Maxcpu ,
"−−minmemory" ,
f . Minmemory ,
"−−maxmemory" ,
f . MemorySize ,
"−−minscale " ,
f . Minscale ,
"−−maxscale " ,
f . Maxscale ,
"−−
targetcpu " ,
f . Targetcpu )
_, _,
e r r = u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" f i s s i o n " ,
fnArgs . . . )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
_, _,
e r r = u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" f i s s i o n " ,
" route " ,
" create " ,
"−−method" ,
"POST" ,
"−−u r l " ,
fmt . S p r i n t f ( "/%s " ,
f .Name) ,
"−−function " ,
f .Name,
"−−
name" ,
f .Name)
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
// Check
for
readiness
stdout
:= ""
for
s t r i n g s . Compare( stdout ,
"True" ) != 0 {
==PAGE:81==
B.4 Fission
71
time . Sleep (5
∗time . Second )
stdout , _,
e r r = u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
"/ bin /sh" ,
"−c" ,
fmt . S p r i n t f ( " kubectl
get
deploy −n
f i s s i o n −function −l
’ functionName=%s ’ −o
jsonpath = ’{.
items [ 0 ] . status . condit i on s [ 0 ] . status } ’ −−kubeconfig
/
app/ kubeconfigs / kubeconfig_fission " ,
f .Name) )
i f
e r r
!=
nil
{
return
e r r
}
}
}
}
time . Sleep (10
∗time . Second )
return
nil
}
Stack Removal
func
( s
∗FissionStack )
RemoveStack ()
error {
for _,
f
:= range s . Functions
{
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" f i s s i o n " ,
" h t t p t r i g g e r " ,
"
d e l e t e " ,
"−−name" ,
f .Name)
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" f i s s i o n " ,
" fn " ,
" d e l e t e " ,
"
−−name" ,
f .Name)
}
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" f i s s i o n " ,
"pkg" ,
" d e l e t e " ,
"−−
orphan" )
for _,
env := range s . spec . Envs {
u t i l s . ExecCmd ( [ ] string {} ,
s . path ,
" f i s s i o n " ,
"env" ,
" d e l e t e " ,
"
−−name" ,
env . Env .Name)
}
return
nil
}
==PAGE:82==
72
Stacks
==PAGE:83==
Appendix C
Test Stacks
The followings are the YAML conﬁguration ﬁles for the test stack singlefunction
used in Burst tests.
C.1
Knative
apiVersion :
serving . knative . dev/v1
kind :
Service
metadata :
name :
sleep −node13 −128mb
namespace :
d e f a u l t
spec :
template :
metadata :
annotations :
a u t o s c a l i n g . knative . dev/ minScale :
"1"
spec :
c on tainers :
−image :
docker . io / nropatas / f a a s t e s t −sleep −node13
r e s o u r c e s :
l i m i t s :
memory :
"128Mi"
==PAGE:84==
74
Test Stacks
C.2
OpenFaaS
version :
1.0
provider :
name :
openfaas
f u n c t i o n s :
sleep −node12 −128mb:
lang :
node12
handler :
./ s l e e p
image :
nropatas / f a a s t e s t −sleep −openfaas−node12
l i m i t s :
memory :
128Mi
l a b e l s :
com . openfaas . s c a l e . max :
50
C.3
OpenWhisk
s e r v i c e :
s i n g l e f u n c t i o n
provider :
name :
openwhisk
p r o j e c t :
f a a s t e s t
stage :
dev
ignore_certs :
true
f u n c t i o n s :
sleep −node12 −128mb:
name :
sleep −node12 −128mb
d e s c r i p t i o n :
s l e e p
function
128mb
runtime :
nodejs :12
handler :
handler . s l e e p
memory :
128
annotations :
web−export :
true
plugins :
−s e r v e r l e s s −openwhisk
C.4
Kubeless
hostname :
example . com
f i l e :
handler . j s
dependencies :
package . json
f u n c t i o n s :
sleep −node12 −128mb:
==PAGE:85==
C.5 Fission
75
name :
sleep −node12 −128mb
d e s c r i p t i o n :
s l e e p
function
128mb
runtime :
nodejs12
handler :
handler . s l e e p
path :
sleep −node12 −128mb
cpu :
200m
memory :
128Mi
min−s c a l e :
1
max−s c a l e :
50
target −cpu :
50
C.5
Fission
envs :
node :
env :
name :
f a a s t e s t −s i n g l e f u n c t i o n
image :
f i s s i o n /node−env
f u n c t i o n s :
sleep −node−128mb:
name :
sleep −node−128mb
handler :
s l e e p . j s
mincpu :
200
maxcpu :
200
minmemory :
128
maxmemory :
128
minscale :
1
maxscale :
50
targetcpu :
50
==PAGE:86==
76
Test Stacks
==PAGE:87==
Appendix D
Functions
D.1
Function cpustress
This is the handler code for cpustress in OpenFaaS.
function
cpuIntensiveCalculation ( baseNumber )
{
const
iterationCount = 50000 ∗Math . pow( baseNumber ,
3) ;
l e t
r e s u l t = 0;
f o r
( l e t
i = iterationCount ;
i >= 0 ;
i −−) {
r e s u l t += Math . atan ( i )
∗Math . tan ( i ) ;
}
}
function
getDuration ( startTime )
{
const
end = process . hrtime ( startTime ) ;
return end [ 1 ] + ( end [ 0 ]
∗1e9 ) ;
}
function
getLevel ( event )
{
const
i n t e n s i t y L e v e l = event . query . l e v e l
?
parseInt ( event . query .
l e v e l )
:
null ;
i f
( ! i n t e n s i t y L e v e l
| |
i n t e n s i t y L e v e l < 1) {
return {"error" :
"invalid
level
parameter" } ;
}
return
i n t e n s i t y L e v e l ;
}
==PAGE:88==
78
Functions
function
getParameters ( event )
{
return
getLevel ( event ) ;
}
function
runTest ( i n t e n s i t y L e v e l ) {
cpuIntensiveCalculation ( i n t e n s i t y L e v e l ) ;
}
function isWarm ()
{
const
is_warm = process . env . warm ? true
:
false ;
process . env . warm = true ;
return is_warm ;
}
module . exports = async
( event ,
context ) => {
const
startTime = process . hrtime () ;
const
params = getParameters ( event ) ;
i f
( params . e r r o r )
{
return
context . status (200) . succeed ({
e r r o r :
params . error ,
}) ;
}
runTest ( params ) ;
const
reused = isWarm () ;
const
duration = getDuration ( startTime ) ;
return
context . status (200) . succeed ({
reused :
reused ,
duration :
duration ,
}) ;
}
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[AFG+]
M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Griﬃth, A. D. Joseph, R. H. Katz, A. Kon-
winski, G. Lee, D. A. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, and M. Za-
haria. Above the Clouds: A Berkeley View of Cloud Computing,
February.
[Ama]
Amazon. Cluster VPC considerations. Accessed: 25 May 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest
/userguide/network_reqs.html.
[AzF]
Azure Functions documentation. Accessed: 2 June 2020. [Online].
Available: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-f
unctions.
[BA18]
T. Back and V. Andrikopoulos. Using a Microbenchmark to Com-
pare Function as a Service Solutions. In K. Kritikos, P. Plebani, and
F. de Paoli, editors, Service-Oriented and Cloud Computing, vol-
ume 11116 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 146–160.
Springer, Cham, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-99819-0_11.
[Bal16]
B. Balis. HyperFlow: A model of computation, programming ap-
proach and enactment engine for complex distributed workﬂows. In
Future Generation Computer Systems, volume 55, pages 147–162.
February 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.future.2015.08.015.
[Boy17]
M. Boyd. Binaris Wants to Reduce Latency in Serverless Produc-
tions, December 2017. Accessed: 10 June 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://thenewstack.io/binaris-wants-reduce-latency-se
rverless-productions.
==PAGE:90==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[CIMS19]
P. Castro, V. Ishakian, V. Muthusamy, and A. Slominski.
The
server is dead, long live the server: Rise of Serverless Computing,
Overview of Current State and Future Trends in Research and In-
dustry. June 2019. Accessed: 24 February 2020. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02888.
[CNC]
CNCF Cloud Native Interactive Landscape.
Accessed: 23 June
2020. [Online]. Available: https://landscape.cncf.io/format
=serverless.
[Cyb19]
Y. Cybulski.
FaaS Benchmarking Made Easy:
Introducing
FaaStest.com and Faasbenchmark, October 2019.
Accessed: 10
June 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.nuweba.com/blog/
Introducing-faastest-and-faasbenchmark.
[Doc]
Use volumes. Accessed: 24 June 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//docs.docker.com/storage/volumes.
[Ell18a]
J. Ellingwood.
An Introduction to Kubernetes, May 2018.
Ac-
cessed: 11 June 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.digitalo
cean.com/community/tutorials/an-introduction-to-kubern
etes.
[Ell18b]
A. Ellis. Introducing the Template Store for OpenFaaS, November
2018. Accessed: 12 June 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.
openfaas.com/blog/template-store.
[Faa20]
FaaSTest, 2020. Accessed: 27 May 2020. [Online]. Available: http
s://github.com/nuweba/faasbenchmark.
[Fis20]
Fission, May 2020.
Accessed: 1 June 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.fission.io/docs.
[Fou19]
Cloud Native Computing Foundation. CNCF Survey 2019: Deploy-
ments are getting larger as cloud native adoption becomes main-
stream, 2019.
[GIL19]
M. Großmann, C. Ioannidis, and D. T. Le. Applicability of Server-
less Computing in Fog Computing Environments for IoT Scenarios.
In Proceedings of the 12th IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Utility and Cloud Computing Companion - UCC ’19 Companion,
pages 29–34, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3368235.3368834.
[Goo]
Google. Knative. Accessed: 23 March 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://cloud.google.com/knative.
[Htt19]
httpbench, 2019. Accessed: 27 May 2020. [Online]. Available: ht
tps://github.com/nuweba/httpbench.
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[Kha17]
A. Khan. Key Characteristics of a Container Orchestration Plat-
form to Enable a Modern Application. IEEE Cloud Computing,
4(5):42–48, September 2017. doi: 10.1109/MCC.2017.4250933.
[KL19]
J. Kim and K. Lee.
FunctionBench: A Suite of Workloads for
Serverless Cloud Function Service. In 2019 IEEE 12th International
Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), pages 502–504, July
2019. doi: 10.1109/CLOUD.2019.00091.
[Kn]
Knative. Accessed: 23 March 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//knative.dev.
[Knaa]
Conﬁguring autoscaling. Accessed: 20 June 2020. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://knative.dev/v0.13-docs/serving/configuring
-autoscaling.
[Knab]
Knative Eventing. Accessed: 24 March 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://knative.dev/docs/eventing.
[Knac]
Knative Serving.
Accessed: 24 March 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://knative.dev/docs/serving.
[KnD]
Welcome to Knative. Accessed: 14 June 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://knative.dev/docs.
[KPL19]
J. Kim, J. Park, and K. Lee. Network Resource Isolation in Server-
less Cloud Function Service. In 2019 IEEE 4th International Work-
shops on Foundations and Applications of Self* Systems (FAS*W),
pages 182–187, June 2019. doi: 10.1109/FAS-W.2019.00051.
[Kra18]
N. Kratzke. A Brief History of Cloud Application Architectures.
Applied Sciences, 8(8):1368, August 2018. doi: 10.3390/app80813
68.
[Kub]
Kubeless. Accessed: 1 June 2020. [Online]. Available: https://ku
beless.io.
[Kub20]
Kubernetes Documentation, May 2020. Accessed: 11 June 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://kubernetes.io/docs/home.
[KWB+20] J. Kuhlenkamp, S. Werner, M. C. Borges, D. Ernst, and D. Wen-
zel. Benchmarking elasticity of FaaS platforms as a foundation for
objective-driven design of serverless applications. In Proceedings
of the 35th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, pages
1576–1585, March 2020. doi: 10.1145/3341105.3373948.
[Lama]
AWS Lambda. Accessed: 2 June 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//aws.amazon.com/lambda.
==PAGE:92==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Lamb]
AWS Lambda limits. Accessed: 19 June 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/gettingst
arted-limits.html.
[Lamc]
What is AWS Lambda? Accessed: 14 June 2020. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/welco
me.html.
[LKRL19]
J. Li, S. G. Kulkarni, K. K. Ramakrishnan, and D. Li.
Under-
standing Open Source Serverless Platforms: Design Considerations
and Performance. In Proceedings of the 5th International Work-
shop on Serverless Computing, pages 37–42, December 2019. doi:
10.1145/3366623.3368139.
[LMM18]
J. Lehvä, N. Mäkitalo, and T. Mikkonen. Case Study: Building
a Serverless Messenger Chatbot. In Current Trends in Web Engi-
neering, volume 10544, pages 75–86, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
319-74433-9_6.
[MFGZ18]
M. Malawski, K. Figiela, A. Gajek, and A. Zima.
Benchmark-
ing Heterogeneous Cloud Functions.
In D. B. Heras, L. Bougé,
G. Mencagli, E. Jeannot, R. Sakellariou, R. M. Badia, J. G. Bar-
bosa, L. Ricci, S. L. Scott, S. Lankes, and J. Weidendorfer, edi-
tors, Euro-Par 2017: Parallel Processing Workshops, volume 10659
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 415–426. Springer,
Cham, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-75178-8_34.
[MPdF18]
S. K. Mohanty, G. Premsankar, and M. di Francesco. An Evalu-
ation of Open Source Serverless Computing Frameworks. In 2018
IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology
and Science (CloudCom), pages 115–120, December 2018.
doi:
10.1109/CloudCom2018.2018.00033.
[NRdA+20] D. M. Naranjo, S. Risco, C. de Alfonso, A. Pérez, I. Blanquer, and
G. Moltó. Accelerated serverless computing based on GPU virtual-
ization. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 139:32–42,
May 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.jpdc.2020.01.004.
[Opea]
Apache OpenWhisk. Accessed: 21 May 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://openwhisk.apache.org.
[Opeb]
Deployment. Accessed: 14 June 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//docs.openfaas.com/deployment.
[Opec]
OpenFaaS. Accessed: 26 March 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//docs.openfaas.com.
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[Oped]
OpenFaaS stack.
Accessed: 27 March 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.openfaas.com/architecture/stack.
[Opee]
OpenWhisk Documentation.
Accessed:
21 May 2020. [Online].
Available: https://openwhisk.apache.org/documentation
.html.
[PIT19]
R. Pellegrini, I. Ivkic, and M. Tauber. Function-as-a-Service Bench-
marking Framework. In Proceedings of the 9th International Con-
ference on Cloud Computing and Services Science, pages 479–487,
2019. doi: 10.5220/0007757304790487.
[Qai12]
E. J. Qaisar. Introduction to cloud computing for developers: Key
concepts, the players and their oﬀerings. In 2012 IEEE TCF In-
formation Technology Professional Conference, pages 1–6, March
2012. doi: 10.1109/TCFProIT.2012.6221131.
[RH19]
M. M. Rahman and M. H. Hasan. Serverless Architecture for Big
Data Analytics.
In 2019 Global Conference for Advancement in
Technology (GCAT), pages 1–5, October 2019. doi: 10.1109/GCAT
47503.2019.8978443.
[San19]
C. Santana. Apache OpenWhisk, January 2019. Accessed: 21 May
2020. [Online]. Available: https://developer.ibm.com/open/p
rojects/openwhisk.
[SKM19]
H. Shaﬁei, A. Khonsari, and P. Mousavi. Serverless Computing: A
Survey of Opportunities, Challenges and Applications. December
2019. Accessed: 14 February 2020. [Online]. Available: http://ar
xiv.org/abs/1911.01296.
[SL20]
J. Scheuner and P. Leitner. The State of Research on Function-as-a-
Service Performance Evaluation: A Multivocal Literature Review.
April 2020. Accessed: 28 April 2020. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2004.03276.
[Str18]
B. Strehl. The largest benchmark of Serverless providers, Septem-
ber 2018.
Accessed: 10 June 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//medium.com/elbstack/the-largest-benchmark-of-serverl
ess-providers-ac19b55750f4.
[Str19]
B. Strehl. Serverless Benchmark 2.0, March 2019. Accessed: 10
June 2020. [Online]. Available: https://medium.com/elbstack/
serverless-benchmark-2-0-part-i-f23acb8e8a29.
[The15]
MS Themes. The interesting history of web hosting and web hosting
services, January 2015. Accessed: 16 June 2020. [Online]. Available:
==PAGE:94==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
https://mhthemes.com/blog/history-of-web-hosting-servi
ces.
[Th7]
M. Thömmes. Squeezing the milliseconds: How to make serverless
platforms blazing fast!, April 2017. Accessed: 12 June 2020. [On-
line]. Available: https://medium.com/openwhisk/squeezing-t
he-milliseconds-how-to-make-serverless-platforms-blazi
ng-fast-aea0e9951bd0.
[Th9]
M. Thömmes. Serverless Workloads on Kubernetes with Knative,
April 2019. Accessed: 25 March 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//serverless-architecture.io/blog/serverless-workloads
-on-kubernetes-with-knative.
[VN19]
S. J. Vaughan-Nichols. Just how popular is Kubernetes?, November
2019. Accessed: 11 June 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.
zdnet.com/article/just-how-popular-is-kubernetes.
[Wu19]
B. Wu. Kubeless: A Deep Dive into Serverless Kubernetes Frame-
works, June 2019.
Accessed:
1 June 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/kubeless-a-deep-di
ve-into-serverless-kubernetes-frameworks-1_594901.
[YSB+20]
V. Yussupov, J. Soldani, U. Breitenbücher, A. Brogi, and F. Ley-
mann.
FaaSten Your Decisions:
Classiﬁcation Framework and
Technology Review of Function-as-a-Service Platforms. April 2020.
Accessed: 8 April 2020. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/
abs/2004.00969.
[ZKW20]
M. Zhang, C. Krintz, and R. Wolski. STOIC: Serverless Teleop-
erable Hybrid Cloud for Machine Learning Applications on Edge
Device. 2020.
[ZXLS19]
T. Zhang, D. Xie, F. Li, and R. Stutsman. Narrowing the Gap
Between Serverless and its State with Storage Functions. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing - SoCC ’19,
pages 1–12, 2019. doi: 10.1145/3357223.3362723.
