==PAGE:1==
Sólveig Helga Gudjónsdóttir
Stability assessment of the impact of
wind integration in a weak isolated
system with a large share of
renewable energy sources
Master’s Thesis, June 2020
==PAGE:2==
Sólveig Helga Gudjónsdóttir
Stability assessment of the impact of
wind integration in a weak isolated
system with a large share of
renewable energy sources
Master’s thesis, June 2020
==PAGE:3==
Stability assessment of the impact of wind integration in a weak isolated system
with a large share of renewable energy sources
Author:
Sólveig Helga Gudjónsdóttir
Supervisor:
Hjörtur Jóhannsson, Senior Scientiﬁc Consultant, Department of Electrical Engineering,
DTU
External advisor from Landsnet:
Samuel Perkin, Specialist at Landsnet
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
27.06.2020
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve MSc degree at
Technical University of Denmark. The report represents 30 ECTS
points.
Rights:
Sólveig Helga Gudjónsdóttir, 2020
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
PREFACE
This thesis was completed in partial fulﬁllment for acquiring an M.Sc (Eng.) degree in
Electrical Engineering with a specialization in Electric Energy Systems study from the
Electrical Engineering Department at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
Acknowledgments
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisor Hjörtur Jóhannson, Senior Scientiﬁc Consultant
at DTU for his guidance on this thesis and interesting discussions on the topic. I would
also like to thank him for giving me the opportunity to work on a topic that I am really
interest in. I would like to thank Samuel Perkin Specialist at Landsnet, the Icelandic
TSO, for his advice, and discussions as well as giving comments on the thesis. Also for
helping me understand the Icelandic power system as well as its PSS/E model. His help
has been greatly appreciated and he was always willing to help through emails and online
meeting. Landsnet supplied the models and resources required for the project and to them,
I am grateful for the generosity. I also want to thank numerous employees at Landsnet
for oﬀering conversation, ideas and discussion about a Master’s thesis, which I really
appreciate. I also want to thank Brynjar Sævarsson for helping me with technical problems
regarding DTU’s system and PSS/E.
And I would like to thank my family and friends for their support during my studies.
Especially my boyfriend Arnar Sigurðsson who have been a enormous support through my
studies.
i
==PAGE:6==
ABSTRACT
This thesis investigates the impact of wind power integration into the Icelandic energy
system, with an emphasis on stability analysis. Due to the ever-increasing emissions
of greenhouse gases, the need to transition to more sustainable energy sources is more
apparent than ever. The electrical power system is transitioning to more renewable energy
sources, but to use them eﬀectively, it must compensate for their ﬂuctuating nature. The
integration of such sources can be challenging for weak isolated power systems such as in
Iceland. The country uses predominantly hydroelectric power but with climate change,
rapidly melting their glaciers, it may need to supplement the power system with other
sources. There is growing interest in wind power in Iceland, but due to the ﬂuctuating
winds it is necessary to investigate the potential impact on the already unstable system. In
the north-west, the electrical power system is quite unreliable and in need of more power.
The system is modeled using PSS/E model from Landsnet. A wind turbine is modeled in
Glerárskógar in the north-west in Iceland. Results shows that the ﬂuctuating nature of
wind power production could aﬀects the stability of the system as well as increasing the
power transfer between areas, which is a bottleneck in the system. An upgraded system
showed that it improved both the stability and the amount on feasible wind generation.
ii
==PAGE:7==
NOMENCLATURE
API
Application Program Interface
AVR
Automatic Voltage Regulators
CIGRE
International Council on Large Electric Systems
GUI
Graphical User Interface.
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IMO
The Icelandic Meteorological Oﬃce
KKS
Kraftwerk Kennzeichnen System (Identiﬁcation System for Power Plant)
RES
Renewable Energy Sources
TSO
Transmission System Operator
PSS
Power System Stabilizer
PSS/E
Power System Simulator for Engineering
WECC
Western Electricity Coordinating Council
WGMG
Wind Generator Modeling Group
WPP
Wind Power Plan
WTG
Wind Turbine Generator
iii
==PAGE:8==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
i
Abstract
ii
Nomenclature
iii
Table of Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Formulation of the Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Methodology, Scope and Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Readability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
The Icelandic Power System
4
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
System Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
System Identiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Stability Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
System Protection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
System Upgrading
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Wind Power Production in Iceland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
Grid Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Theoretical Background
12
3.1
Power System Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Electrical Power System Simulation Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Power System Simulations in PSS/E
25
4.1
Introduction to PSS/E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
PSS/E Model of the Icelandic Power System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Modelling
29
5.1
Generic Wind Turbine Generator Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Power Flow Setup for Generic WT4 (Type 4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Dynamic Setup for Generic WT4 (Type 4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4
Aggregation of Wind Turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.5
Redispatch
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.6
Shunt compensator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Impact of wind variability
34
6.1
Relationship between wind speed and power output
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Wind behaviour in Iceland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
iv
==PAGE:9==
Table of Contents
6.3
Proposed Methods for Simulating Wind Alternations . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.4
Modelling Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Simulations
39
7.1
Introduction to Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2
Overview of Cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.3
Original System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.4
Upgraded System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8
Conclusion
57
8.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.2
Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
References
59
A Landsnet Assets
64
A.1 Substations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.2 Transmssion lines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
B Wind Data Statistics
70
C Power Reference
72
C.1
Example of Power Reference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
v
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
1
INTRODUCTION
1.1
Background
Power production has been mostly based on fossil fuels since the era in industrialization.
As a consequence, climate change is threatening the ecosystem. Renewable energy sources
(RES), such as wind and solar, will be key in a low carbon future. In 2015, an agreement
was drafted to combat climate change. The aims listed were to keep the increase in global
average temperature below 2◦C compared to pre-industrial [1]. Current estimates claim
that up to 65% of the world’s energy would be needed to be from RES to meet the goals
of the Paris Agreement [2].
Therefore, countries must adapt to renewable energy production to combat climate change.
Currently hydroelectric, geothermal, solar- and wind energy technology are available but
not feasible everywhere around the world. One other factor to consider is that their eﬃcacy
can change due to climate change. One such example is Iceland, a small island in the
northern hemisphere which produces almost 100% of its energy from RES, mostly from
hydroelectric power (69,7%) and geothermal power (30,3%). Only 0.01% and 0.02% are
being produced by fuel and wind respectively [3].
Climate change can threaten the generation of hydroelectric power in Iceland in the future.
The glaciers are melting faster causing more runoﬀ. The rapid increase in melting has
already caused one glacier named Ok to shrink to the point where it is no longer classiﬁed
as a glacier [4], [5]. If the reservoir of the hydroelectric dam is not capable of containing all
the runoﬀ, it may result in the loss of potential energy. Case studies estimate that runoﬀ
will increase up until the year 2080, then the glaciers in Iceland could have shrunk to the
point that runoﬀwill decrease. By the year 2200, the glaciers could disappear altogether[6].
This will pose challenges for the future energy production of Iceland. In order to adapt to
the changing climate, new means for production other than hydro is needed. One viable
option would be wind energy. The geographic location and topology of Iceland makes it
rich in wind energy potential and could be one of the largest producers of wind energy in
Europe [7]. The TSO of Iceland (Landsnet hf.), is contemplating the possibility of adding
wind integration of 400MW in the coming years.
In the past years, the interest in installation of wind farms has increased and the demand
for energy increases steadily, while the production of energy has not increased enough [8],
which makes a good motivation of wind power production installation.
1.2
Formulation of the Problem
The Icelandic electrical power system is an isolated network. It has no interconnection to
import or export energy from other networks. Therefore, the load of the system has to be
1
==PAGE:12==
1. Introduction
met with the electrical generation of the system. Iceland’s transmission grid consists of two
main mesh grids; a 220kV grid in the south west and in the east, which is interconnected
with a fairly weak 132kV ring connection. The ring connection was ﬁnished around 30 years
ago and since then, no major upgrades have been carried out. It is the main bottleneck in
the system because of its limited capacity and limits the power transfer between areas.
Because of the ﬂuctuating power production, it’s estimated that the need for transfer
power between areas will increase signiﬁcantly. This calls for improvement of the system
where the ring connection is a bottleneck for the power transfer between areas.
The areas under consideration for the installation of wind farms in Iceland are diﬀerently
suited for the system, with regards to the strength of the grid and the transfer capacity
between areas, among other factors.
The installation of wind farms will pose challenges to the operation of the transmission
system due to the ﬂuctuating nature of wind power production as it is dependent on
weather.
In the west fjords, the system is quite unreliable and in need of more power [9]. Frequent
disruptions in the delivery of electricity causes problems for both domestic users and makes
it unfavorable for modern industry which is heavily reliant on stable delivery of electricity
[9]. For the future livability and economic development of the area, more robust and stable
delivery is essential for the area. This thesis investigates the possibility of using wind
energy for such purposes.
1.3
Methodology, Scope and Conditions
The goal of this project is to model a wind farm and analyse its impact, located at
Glerárskógar in the west fjords, shown in Figure 1.1. After installing a wind turbine,
grid strengthening is generated to evaluate how it improves the feasibility of wind power
integration. The main project objectives are listed as follows:
• Model a wind power plant in PSS/E (Power System Simulator for Engineering) to
investigate the impact of wind integration.
• Conﬁgure Python scripts that use API to run a power ﬂow and dynamic simulation
in PSS/E.
• Find an estimation on much wind integration is feasible in the area.
• Strengthen the grid to help with the wind integration.
• Compare the stability assessment of original case and the grid strengthening scenario.
• Address the bottlenecks and weakness of the system before and after grid
strengthening results.
• Address the impact the wind integration has on the power transfer in the grid.
• Simulate an ﬂuctuation in wind to analyse the impact of ﬂuctuating nature of wind
production.
2
==PAGE:13==
1. Introduction
Figure 1.1. The Icelandic transmission grid and the location of Glerárskógar marked in red [10].
1.4
Readability
1. Chapter 1: The chapter outlines the Project background and problem statement
2. Chapter 2: The chapter outlines the state of the art of wind energy in Iceland and
describes the Icelandic power system.
3. Chapter 3: The chapter provides an introduction to the theoretical background to
stability analysis and simulations.
4. Chapter 4: The chapter describes power system simulations using PSS/E
5. Chapter 5: The chapter describes the elements to be modeled and how they are
treated.
6. Chapter 6: The chapter describes the modeling of wind variation and modeling
constraints of the procedure.
7. Chapter 7:
This chapter contains the results from the modeling diﬀerent of
conditions on how a wind farm may impact the electrical grid in the west of Iceland.
8. Chapter 8: This chapter discusses the results from modeling and what the impact
is from the wind farm modeling along with perspectives and potential future work.
3
==PAGE:14==
2
THE ICELANDIC POWER SYSTEM
This chapter introduces the Icelandic electrical power system. The characteristics, stability,
and limitations are described.
2.1
Introduction
The TSO in Iceland is responsible for the Icelandic electrical power transmission system. It
includes all bulk transmission lines and all main substations. The TSO connects electrical
power production to distributors and power-intensive users [11].
The Icelandic population accounted for roughly 350 thousand inhabitants in 2019. 62% of
the population lives in the capital region (Reykjavík), other sparsely along the coastline
[12]. This requires long transmission lines, where the total length is 3.343 km, equivalent
distance from Reykjavik to Rome [11].
The total installed power capacity in 2018 was 2927MW. The percent share of total
electricity generation is shown in Figure 2.1. It is made up of 69,7% hydroelectric power,
30,3% geothermal power and only 0,02% wind power and 0,01% fuel [3]. The usage of fuel
Hydro 
 (69,7 %) 
Geothermal 
(30,3%)  
Fuel (0,01%) 
Wind (0,02%) 
Figure 2.1. Percent share of total electricity generation in Iceland 2018 [3].
is only used consistently is two islands; Grímsey and Flatey [13]. Alternatively, fossil fuel
is used for backup generators in case of transmission malfunction due to storms or other
outages [11].
Hydroelectric power depends on the water reservoir level. If the reservoirs are low it is
often needed to transfer power between east and west. In such a case, it causes a heavy
power transfer through the weak 132kV ring connection, which is a major bottleneck for
power transfer between areas.
4
==PAGE:15==
2. The Icelandic Power System
The main drawback of geothermal power production is that is does not participate in the
frequency control. It is power regulated where the output power is kept constant according
to a set-point. Only in severe disturbance, geothermal power plants contribute in frequency
regulation by switching to governor control, but they are slow in switching. Therefore,
hydro power plants are the prime frequency regulators and they have very good frequency
regulation system [14], [15].
The main consumption is by heavy industry, making up 77% of the energy consumption.
Around 18% of the energy is used by households and general use, and 2% are used by the
power plants themselves as shown in Figure 2.2. The other 3% are lost to transmission
and distribution throughout the network.
2,0 1,1 2,0 77,0 
Indrustry 
77% 
General use 
18% 
Transmisson 
losses 
2% 
Power plant 
own use 
2% 
Distibution 
losses 
1% 
Figure 2.2. Percent share of energy consumption in Iceland 2018 [3].
The energy demand in the past years has grown substantially and current estimates predict
that the demand will only increase in the future. Currently, the greatest demand is from
heavy industry as seen in Figure 2.3, but it is expected that the demand will increase in
the coming years. Mostly from service sectors and industry. This is a cause for concern, as
previously stated in the thesis, the main part of the grid, the ring connection has largely
remained unchanged since built. Therefore, it is important to meet the changes in demand
with variable power sources and upgrades to the Icelandic system [11], [16], [8].
One of the operational challenges in the Icelandic power system in low inertia, which
has a major inﬂuence on frequency stability [14]. Frequency stability is introduced in
subsection 3.1.2.
5
==PAGE:16==
2. The Icelandic Power System
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
kWh 
Year 
General use
Industry:total
Total Electricity used
Total production
Figure 2.3. Energy evolution in the Icelandic power system [17].
2.2
System Description
The transmission system is operated on 66 kV or higher, as well as few 33kv transmission
lines for the regional system. The highest operation voltage is 220kV, a few of them
are build for 400 kV. That gives the option to increase the operation voltage when more
transmission capacity is needed [11].
There are two strong 220 kv systems, one located in the south-west and one in the east on
Iceland. They are interconnected with a weaker 132 kV ring connection.
The main bottleneck in the Icelandic network is the ring connection, because it is heavily
loaded and therefore it limits the power transfer between the west and east.
The transmission system is shown in Figure 2.4.
6
==PAGE:17==
2. The Icelandic Power System
Figure 2.4. The Icelandic transmission system [10].
2.3
System Identiﬁcation
In this thesis, the KKS codes (g: Kraftwerk Kennzeichnen System, e: Identiﬁcation
Systems for Power Plant) will be used to simplify the identiﬁcation of TSO assets, i.e the
transmission system. [18]
The Icelandic names of assets will be shown with the corresponding KKS code and
afterwards only the KKS code will be used for said asset. For further information, the
TSO list of assets can be found in the Appendix under the identiﬁcation of assets.
2.4
Stability Problems
The Icelandic transmission grid is heavily loaded, especially the 132 kV ring connection
which was built in 1987. The demand for energy is steadily increasing and the grid is in
need of improvements as stability is becoming an increasing concern [19].
In 2019, the grid experienced 63 disturbances and 80 malfunctions, 32 of those caused a
need for 2071 MWh to be produced with backup generators. Whereas in 2018 the grid
experienced 56 disturbances and 65 malfunctions, causing 18 disturbances requiring 404
MWh to be produced with backup power [20].
The system also experiences disturbances related to weather. For example, a major reason
for the increase in stability issues in 2019 was due to a heavy storm in December, where
the grid experienced 27 disturbances where the average for the last 10 years was 11,2.
Weather-related disturbances account for approximately 50% of total disturbances since
2010. Therefore, the stability of the system often depends on the weather and in combination
to its age, only exacerbates the problem [21].
7
==PAGE:18==
2. The Icelandic Power System
2.4.1
Cuts
The main system is divided into cuts shown in Figure 2.5. The cuts are used to deﬁne and
monitor the system are based on the thermal transfer rates, load capacity and stability
limits. The cuts are monitored for power ﬂow to prevent overload, power ﬂuctuation and
low frequency [22], which can lead to instability and even blackout.
Figure 2.5. Cuts in the Icelandic Transmission System [10].
Due to the location of the wind farm proposed in this thesis, it is out of interest to examine
CutIIIb and CutIV, which will be explained further.
Cut IIIb
Cut IIIb is the active power sum of Fljótsdalslína 2 (FL2) and Blöndulína 1 (BL1). The
active power ﬂow through CutIIIb is a measurement of the active power transfer from
the east to west of Iceland. The amount of ﬂow in this cut is dependent on the water
reservoirs in Kárahnjúkar (KAR). If the water reservoirs at KAR are good, the power ﬂow
through CutIIIb is above 100MW. In that case, the generators are used to produce as
much as possible and export power to the west for saving water in reservoirs. This happens
in the beginning of summer when the show is melting from the highlands into the KAR
reservoirs. FL2 lies over a mountain and failures on the line can be due to icing conditions
on the mountain. BL1 is relativity short and there are not often faults there [14]. It limits
the power ﬂow from stations at Fljótdsdalur (FLJ), Kraﬂla (KRA), Þeistareykir (THR)
and Blanda (BLA) through the ring connection to the west. The deﬁned stability limit of
CutIIIb is 130MW [11].
8
==PAGE:19==
2. The Icelandic Power System
Cut IV
Cut IV is the active power sum of Sigöldulína 4 (SI4) and Blöndulína 2 (BL2). The active
power ﬂow through CutVI is a measurement on the active power transfer from west to
east of Iceland. The ﬂow is dependent mainly on three factors: reservoirs at KAR, the
load demand from ﬁsh smelter and maintenance of generators in KAR. If the active power
ﬂow is above 100MW, then one ore more of these factors could be the reason for such high
ﬂow to the east [14]. The deﬁned stability limit of Cut IV is 100MW [11].
If one of the two lines which deﬁne each cut fails, or is out of service due to maintenance,
then at an instance, all the power ﬂow on that cut will move onto the other line that
deﬁnes the cut. Hence, there must always be suﬃcient capacity on that line to receive that
power. If not, then the line becomes overloaded which may trigger a protection scheme or
instability of the system [11].
There are few things that need to be fulﬁlled to ensure secure operation, system stability
and security of supply. These are [23], [14]:
1. Power ﬂow through individual units in the system is not exceeding the transmission
capacity of the unit.
2. The voltage at supply points in the system has to be within limits.
3. Power ﬂow through deﬁned cuts must not exceed deﬁned limits to ensure system
stability.
2.5
System Protection
System protection has the aim to isolate a fault to prevent damage or even blackout of
the system. Protection units are spread around the country to monitor power ﬂow, power
oscillations, under frequency among other values and if they detect an abnormality, they
send a signal to protection equipment to isolate the fault. If the cuts exceed their stability
limits, the protection units can cause the system to split into two operating island (east
and west) to prevent power oscillations on the ring connection.
The splitting of the system can help the system to re-balance after a signiﬁcant disturbance.
However, splitting of the system reduced the inertia of the system which has a negative
eﬀect on the frequency stability of the system. A common split of the system is illustrated
in Figure 2.6.
9
==PAGE:20==
2. The Icelandic Power System
Figure 2.6. Splitting of the system into two island [10].
2.6
System Upgrading
Landsnet approaches a possible future options to upgrading the ring connection in their
Annual System Plan. The options proposed is shown in Figure 2.7. These options will be
under considerations when the system is upgraded in this thesis.
B option – Ring connection 
New 220kV lines 
220kV reconstructions 
on the 132kV ring 
Figure 2.7. Landsnet proposal: B options - Ring connections [24].
10
==PAGE:21==
2. The Icelandic Power System
2.7
Wind Power Production in Iceland
As previously stated, there is interest in the installation of wind turbines for electricity
generation widely across Iceland and has grown in the past years. The total interest of about
a few hundreds of megawatts power production. The areas that are under consideration
are diﬀerently suited for the electrical grid, with regards to the size of the wind production,
transfer capacity from the area, voltage quality and other factors.
Integration of wind production of such capacity comes with new challenges to the operation
of the electrical system due to the ﬂuctuating nature of wind power. The operation of
geothermal- and hydroelectric plants will have to change to account for the ﬂuctuating
changes in production of wind power.
Due to the ﬂuctuation of the wind power production, it can be estimated that the need
for energy transfer between regions will increase. The increase in energy transfer calls
for improvements of the energy grid, primarily elimination of existing bottlenecks (cuts)
that constrain the power transfer between areas. Therefore, the connection possibilities of
wind power production to the grid are diﬀerent between areas. The grid can not, without
changes, receive this new wind power production anywhere. A comprehensive assessment
needs to be made for how much wind power is feasible for the transmission grid.
The integration of wind power is directly a part of the Green plan of the TSO [11]. There
are three scenarios that the TSO is currently assessing, that involves a total of 400MW
power generation:
1. One 400 MW wind farm in the Western part of the island.
2. Two 200 MW wind farms, one in the West and one in the south of the island.
3. Four 100 MW wind farm, one in each section, West, North, East and South of the
Island.
2.8
Grid Code
The transmission system is required to fulﬁll the requirements of regulation 1048/2004
about electricity quality and security of supply. The aim of the regulation is to ensure as
far as possible, suﬃcient quality and security of supply in the Icelandic electricity system
[25] .
Under this regulation the delivery voltage must be within ±10% but for heavy industry the
criteria is more stringent. The TSO has deﬁned the limits as −9% and +5% for assessing
voltage quality of the 220kV system. Frequency tolerance decided by the TSO for each
month should be 99.5% of frequency measurements and be within 50Hz ± 0.2Hz for 10
second average. Measurements by the TSO have shown that in some cases the values
exceed the limits designated by the regulation but they are caused by lack of voltage,
caused by malfunctions or maintenance [26].
11
==PAGE:22==
3
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
This chapter provides on overview of basic concepts and deﬁnition related to power system
stability and electrical power system theory.
3.1
Power System Stability
Stability refers to a condition where there is an equilibrium between opposing forces. Power
system stability is essential for operation of power system and satisfactory design of power
system. In a report developed jointly by the CIGRE and IEEE [27], power system stability
is deﬁned as:
Power system stability is the ability of an electric power system, for a given
initial operating condition, to regain a state of operating equilibrium after being
subjected to a physical disturbance, with most system variables bounded so that
practically the entire system remains intact.
Overall picture of classiﬁcation of power system stability is given in Figure 3.1. The
classiﬁcation is divided into three main categories:
• Rotor Angle Stability, described in subsection 3.1.1.
• Frequency Stability, described in subsection 3.1.2.
• Voltage Stability, described in subsection 3.1.3.
Power System Stability
Rotor Angle
Stability
Frequency
Stability
Voltage
Stability
Small-
Disturbance
Angle Stability
Transient
Stability
Large-
Disturbance
Voltage Stability
Small-
Disturbance
Voltage Stability
Short Term
Short Term
Long Term
Short Term
Long Term
Figure 3.1. Classiﬁcation of power system stability [27].
12
==PAGE:23==
3. Theoretical Background
3.1.1
Rotor Angle stability
Rotor angle stability is the ability of synchronous machines of an interconnected power
system to maintain synchronism and remain in synchronism after being subjected to a
disturbance. This refers to one or more synchronous machines. A disturbance could be for
example loss of generation or load unit or loss of transmission line. Rotor angle stability
also depends on the ability to maintain/restore equilibrium between electromagnetic torque
and mechanical torque of each synchronous machine.
If instability occurs, it is in the form of increasing the angular swing of one or more
generators leading to their loss of synchronism with other generators. This could cause a
blackout in the system.
For illustration, a simple system is considered shown in Figure 3.2, where a synchronous
generator is operated to feed a synchronous motor.
Eg
Em
XG
XL
XM
I
Figure 3.2. Simple system [28].
The power transferred from the generator to the motor is expressed as
P = EGEM
XT
sinδ
(3.1)
where
XT = XG + XL + XM
(3.2)
and δ is the angular separation between the generator and motor. The size of δ depends
on both the internal angle of the generator δG and of motor δM. It depends also on the
angular diﬀerence between the generator and motor terminals δL.
Equation 3.1 describes the power P versus angle δ relationship and deﬁnes the maximum
ﬂow of transmitted power as shown in Figure 3.3
13
==PAGE:24==
3. Theoretical Background
Figure 3.3. Power transfer characteristic between a generator and a motor connected by reactance
XT [28].
System stability depends on whether or not the angular deviations of the rotors result
in suﬃcient restoring torques. The change in electrical torque of a synchronous machine
following a perturbation can be expressed as
∆Te = TS∆δ + TD∆ω
(3.3)
where TS∆δ is the synchronizing torque component, which refers to the component of
torque change in phase with the rotor angle perturbation ∆δ. TD∆ω is the damping torque
component, which refers to the component of torque in phase with the speed deviation ∆ω.
System stability depends on suﬃcient existence of both of the torque components [28].
For convenience in analysis, it is usual to characterize the rotor angle stability phenomena
in the terms of two categories; Rotor Angle Stability and Transient Stability, which will be
described hereafter.
Small Signal Stability
Small signal stability is the ability of the power system to maintain synchronism under small
disturbances, which occurs continually due to small variations in loads and generations.
Linearization of system equations are permissible for the purpose of analysis for suﬃciently
small disturbances. Instability that may result of small disturbances can be of the following
two forms:
1. Steady increase in rotor angle due to lack of suﬃcient synchronizing torque
2. Rotor oscillations of increasing amplitude due to lacking of suﬃcient damping torque
The system response to small disturbances is dependent on various factors such as
transmission system strength and type of generator excitation controls used.
In modern power systems, small signal stability problems are usually associated with
insuﬃcient damping of oscillations, i.e. lack of suﬃcient damping torque. The instability
problem has been largely eliminated in power system by using Automatic Voltage Regulators
14
==PAGE:25==
3. Theoretical Background
(AVR). However, this problem can still occur when generators operate with constant
excitation when subjected to the actions of excitation limiters. To meet this, Power System
Stabilizer (PSS) can be provided in the system [27].
The basic function of PSS is to add damping to the generator rotor oscillations by controlling
the generators excitation. It must produce a component of electrical torque in phase with
the rotor speed deviations in order to provide an additional damping. PSS are the most
cost eﬀective means of solving small signal stability problems [29].
Small signal stability problems may be of local or global nature. Local problems are usually
local plant oscillations, where a single generators oscillates against the rest of the power
system. They may also be interplant oscillations, where the oscillations are associated with
oscillations between few generators, that are located close to each other. Control modes
are other type of local problems, where it is associated with controls of equipment such as
generator excitation system and static var compensators. Damping of all these oscillations
depends on the transmission system strength, generator excitation control systems and
plant output
Global problems are caused by the interaction among large group of generators and have,
as the name global indicates, a widespread aﬀect. They involve oscillations of a group of
generators in one area against a group of generators in another area and are referred as
inter-area mode oscillations [27] [29].
Transient Stability
Transient Stability is the ability of the power system to maintain synchronism after severe
transient disturbance. Such disturbance could be faults on transmission lines, busses,
transformers or loss of generations or loads. The system response involves large excursions
generator rotor angles. Transient stability is inﬂuenced by the non-linear power-angle
relationship and it depends on both the initial operating state of the system and the
severity of the disturbance.
Transient instability is usually manifested as ﬁrst swing instability, in the form of aperiodic
angular separation due to insuﬃcient synchronizing torque. However, in large power
system, transient instability may not always occur as ﬁrst swing stability. For instant, it
could be a result of superposition of a slow inter-area swing mode and local-plant swing
mode causing a large excursion of rotor angle beyond the ﬁrst swing [27].
3.1.2
Frequency Stability
A description of frequency stability is:
Frequency stability refers to the ability of a power system to maintain steady
frequency following a severe system upset resulting in a signiﬁcant imbalance
between generation and load. It depends on the ability to maintain/restore
equilibrium between system generation and load, with minimum unintentional
loss of load. Instability that may result occurs in the form of sustained frequency
swings leading to tripping of generating units and/or loads [27].
15
==PAGE:26==
3. Theoretical Background
The frequency should remain nearly constant for satisfactory operation of power system
The frequency of the system is closely related to the balance of load and generation. A
change in active power demand or generation is reﬂected throughout the system by a
change in frequency.
Generators are highly dependent on a steady frequency to operate. A considerable frequency
disturbance could lead to cascading disconnection of generators.
Frequency stability is also depended on the size of the system. In a isolated system, such
as the Icelandic power system, frequency could be of concern for any disturbance. For large
interconnected system, frequency could be of concern for a severer system disturbance,
which may result in splitting of the system into one or more islands. In general, frequency
stability problems are related to inadequacies in equipment responses, poor coordination
of control and protection systems [30].
Percent speed regulation, or droop (R%) is the measure of steady-state speed against the
load characteristic of generating unit, as shown in Figure 3.4. It is an essential parameter in
terms of frequency adjustment to given load conditions in a multimachine system. Droop
represents how the frequency changes with a power output change. It can be expressed in
percent as:
R% = percent speed or frequency change
percent power output change
· 100
(3.4)
=
 
fNL −fFL
f0
!
· 100
[%]
(3.5)
where:
• fNL = steady state frequency at no load
• fFL = steady state frequency at full load
• f0 = nominal or rated speed
The ratio of frequency deviation (∆f) to power output (∆P) or change in valve/gate
position (∆Y ) is equal to R, as shown in the following equation:
R = ∆f
∆P
(3.6)
16
==PAGE:27==
3. Theoretical Background
Figure 3.4. Ideal steady-state characteristics of a governor with speed droop [30].
If a power system has two or more generators with drooping governor characteristics, there
will be a unique frequency at which they share a load change, as shown in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5. Load sharing by parallel units with drooping governor characteristics [30].
Following a load increase, the units will slow down. Then the governors increase output
until they reach a new common operating frequency. The output picked up by each unit
depends on the droop characteristic:
∆P1 = P ′
1 −P1 = ∆f
R1
(3.7)
∆P2 = P ′
2 −P2 = ∆f
R2
(3.8)
Hence,
∆P1
∆P2
= R2
R1
(3.9)
17
==PAGE:28==
3. Theoretical Background
To ﬁnd the regulation constant K, it is inverted the droop Equation 3.6 and then the
regulation constant K is:
K = 1
R = ∆P
∆f =
P0
R% · f0
(3.10)
where P0 is the nominal power and f0 the nominal frequency.
The output from each machine (Pout,n) participating in the frequency control can be
expressed as:
Pout,n = Pdisp,n + (fref −fmeas) · Kn
(3.11)
and solving for the dispatched power:
Pdisp,n = Pout,n −(fref −fmeas) · Kn
(3.12)
the dispatched power Pdisp is the reference setting at a set-point frequency fref = 50Hz.
Pout is the power output at a measured frequency. If Pdisp is ﬁxed then Pout is proportional
to the changes in frequency. To give an example, when an change in an electrical load
happens, the rotor of a machine accelerates or decelerates causing the frequency to drop
or rise. An increased electrical load causes the frequency to drop and decreased electrical
load cause the frequency to rise. The rotor acceleration or deceleration will eventually
become zero and frequency reaches a new steady state under normal conditions.
The following describes the calculation of frequency gradient and steady state frequency.
The inertia constant H is the stored kinetic energy in MJ at synchronous speed divided
by the machine rating in MV A, or:
H =
1
2Jω2
0m
Smach
(3.13)
and the total rotational energy in a power system with N generator units:
Erot =
N
X
t=1
HiSmach,i
[MJ].
(3.14)
The equation of motion in terms of angular velocities ωm is expressed as:
2H
ω0m
d2δ
dt2 = 2H dωm
dt
= Pm −Pe = Pa
[pu]
(3.15)
where Pm is the mechanic input torque into the generator and Pm the electrical output
from the generator. By rearranging, the frequency gradient can be determined:
df
dt = f0
dωm
dt
=
Paf0
2HSmach
= Paf0
2Erot
"
Hz
s
#
(3.16)
The size of a disturbance ∆P, in respect to the total rotational energy in the system
determines the frequency gradient at t = 0:
 
df
dt
!
t=0
= ∆P · f0
2Erot
"
Hz
s
#
(3.17)
18
==PAGE:29==
3. Theoretical Background
The steady state frequency deviation during disturbance in a system with N generating
units is calculated by:
∆fss = −∆PL
Ki + Di
(3.18)
where ∆PL is non-frequency sensitive load change and D is the load damping constant.
Finally, this gives the steady state frequency:
f = f0 −∆fss
(3.19)
In contrast, frequency characteristic of a system depends on generators speed governors
and frequency characteristics of the loads in a system [28], [30].
For Iceland, which has a low inertia, has a major impact on frequency stability. From the
observation from the above equations, the frequency will drop faster and deeper at the
ﬁrst swing compared to system with higher inertia. After the ﬁrst swing of frequency drop,
the frequency regulation system take over.
3.1.3
Voltage Stability
Voltage stability refers to the ability to maintain steady voltages at all buses in the power
system under normal conditions and after being subjected to a disturbance.
Power system enters a state of voltage instability when a disturbance, changes in load
demand or changes in system conditions, which causes a progressive rise or drop in voltage.
The progressive voltage drop could also be associated with rotor angle instability. For an
instant, the gradual loss of synchronism of machines as rotor angles between two groups of
machines approach or exceed 180◦would result in rapid drop in voltages at intermediate
points in the power system. The outcome of voltage instability may lead to loss of loads or
tripping of transmission lines, possible causing a blackout.
The main causes of voltage instability are listed are following [28]:
1. The load on the transmission lines is too high.
2. The voltage sources are too far from the load centers.
3. The source voltages are too low.
4. There is insuﬃcient load reactive compensation.
The principal factor contribution to voltage instability is the inability of the power system to
meet the reactive power demand. If the voltage drop occurs it is usually when active power
and reactive power ﬂow through inductive reactances associated with the transmission
network.
PV -curves can be used to illustrate a basic phenomenon associated with voltage instability.
They can be used to estimate the maximum power transfer capability of a transmission
line. PV -curves illustrate the relationship between the receiving end voltage and the active
power P delivered through a transmission line for a given load angle φ.
An expression for the relationship between the sending end voltage E, receiving end voltage
V , the active and reactive power P and Q, and the line reactance X is described in the
19
==PAGE:30==
3. Theoretical Background
following equation:
V =
v
u
u
t−XQ + E2
2 ±
s
E4
4 + X2P 2 −E2 −E2XQ.
(3.20)
The maximum delivered power is obtained when the second square root is zero:
s
E4
4 + X2P 2 −E2 −E2XQ = 0.
(3.21)
By utilizing Q = P · tan(φ), tan(φ) = sin(φ)
cos(φ) and by isolating P the following is obtained:
P = E
X
s
E2
4 −XPtan(φ)
= E
X
s
E2cos(φ) −4XPsin(φ)
4cos(φ)
=
E2
X2cos(φ)
s
cos2(φ) −4XPsin(φ)cos(φ)
E2
.
(3.22)
By utilizing that cos2(φ) = 1−sin(φ) and sin(φ)cos(φ) →0, the solution for the maximum
power becomes:
Pmax =
E2
2Xcos(φ)(1 −sin(φ)).
(3.23)
These equations is used to calculate P −V characteristics like shown in Figure 3.6.
Figure 3.6. Example of PV -curves for a lossless transmission line with locus of critical points
[31].
For the PV -curves, there is a inherent maximum limit of power that can be transmitted
at any load factor. The only way to transfer more power is by lowering the load angle.
But that will result in increased current and decreased V and increased line losses. Up to
20
==PAGE:31==
3. Theoretical Background
a certain point, the increase in current dominates the decrease in V , resulting in increased
power. Finally, the decrease in V will end with the reversed trend.
The part above the locus of critical points illustrates a stable operation and the part below
a unstable operation. The part below is unstable and avoided because of the increased
load demand. The increase in load demand leads to higher current in order to maintain
the same active power P. However, the decrease in the receiving end voltage V has more
eﬀect than the increased currents which can leads to voltage instability. In addition, the
increased current may exceed the line thermal limits. In part above the locus of critical
points is a stable operation. When current increases with increased loading, the eﬀect of
the receiving end voltage is more and therefore no voltage instability [31].
3.2
Electrical Power System Simulation Theory
This section provides a introduction to two main concept of electrical simulation theory;
power ﬂow and dynamic theory.
3.2.1
Power ﬂow
Power ﬂow (also referred to as load ﬂow) analysis involves the calculation of power ﬂows
and voltages of a power system for speciﬁed terminal and bus conditions. Such calculations
are required for analysis of steady state and dynamic performance of a power system.
The following four quantities are associated with each bus in the power system:
• Active power P
• Reactive power Q
• Voltage magnitude V
• Voltage angle θ
All the buses in the power system are divided into three categories, depending on which
two of the four quantities listed above are known. They are deﬁned as follows:
1. Voltage controlled (PV) bus: Active power and voltage magnitude are speciﬁed.
Examples are buses with generators, synchronous condensers and static var
compensators.
2. Load (PQ) bus: Active and reactive power are speciﬁed.
3. Slack (Swing) bus: Voltage magnitude and angle are speciﬁed. Also referred as
reference bus. Only one bus in the power system can be deﬁned as a slack bus.
It is desirable to keep the reactive power associated with the slack bus within reasonable
limits, otherwise the solution to the power ﬂow could be unrealistic [28].
Network equations
Node equations or loop equations can represent the relationship between node voltages and
currents. Node equations are usually preferred because the number of independent node
equations is smaller than the number of independent loop equations. The node admittance
21
==PAGE:32==
3. Theoretical Background
matrix is written as:


˜I1
˜I2
...
˜In


=


Y11
Y12
. . .
Y1n
Y21
Y22
. . .
Y2n
...
...
...
...
Yn1
Yn2
. . .
Ynn




˜V1
˜V2
...
˜Vn


(3.24)
where
• n is the total number of nodes.
• Yii is the self admittance of node i = sum of all the admittances terminating at node
i.
• Yij is mutual admittance between nodes i and j = negative of the sum of all
admittances between nodes i and j.
• ˜Vi is the phasor voltage to ground at node i.
• ˜Ii is the phasor current ﬂowing into the network at node i.
Eﬀects of generators, nonlinear loads and other devices connected to the network nodes
are reﬂected in the node current. Linear loads (constant impedance) are includes in the
node admittance matrix. Note that a node is also referred as a bus.
If the current injections ˜Ii were known, Equation 3.24 would be linear. However, in practice
most current injections are unknown for most nodes. The current at any node k is related
to P, Q and ˜Vi as:
˜Ik = Pk −jQk
˜V ∗
i
(3.25)
For PQ nodes, P and Q are known. For PV nodes, P and magnitude of ˜V are known.
For other types of nodes, the relationship between P, Q, ˜V and ˜I are deﬁned by the
characteristics of the devices connected to the nodes. The power ﬂow equations are solved
iteratively using techniques such as the Gauss-Seidel or Newton-Raphson method. The
Gauss-Seidel and Newton-Raphson method is described in a broad manners here after [28].
3.2.2
Gauss-Seidel Method
Gauss-Seidel Methos is an iterative method used to solve a linear system of equations. For
application to the power ﬂow analysis, from Equation 3.24 and Equation 3.25, it can be
written:
Pk −jQk
˜V ∗
k
= Ykk ˜Vk +
n
X
i=1
i̸=k
Yki ˜Vi
(3.26)
for the kth node. The voltage ˜Vk may be expressed as:
˜Vk = Pk −jQk
Ykk ˜V ∗
k
−
1
Ykk
n
X
i=1
i̸=k
Yki ˜Vi
(3.27)
The iterations begin with an informed guess of the voltage magnitude V and voltage angle
θ at all load buses (PQ) buses and for the voltage angle at all generator buses (PV ) buses.
22
==PAGE:33==
3. Theoretical Background
For a load (PQ) bus, as previously stated, P and Q are known. Equation 3.27 is used to
computes the voltage ˜Vk for all buses, using the best voltages available for all buses.
For a generator (PV ) bus, then it is rearranged Equation 3.26 as the following:
Qk = −Im
"
˜V ∗
k
n
X
i=1
Yki ˜Vi
#
(3.28)
where Qk is calculated using the best values of bus voltages available. If the calculated
value of Qk is within the limits Qkmax and Qkmin, then Qk is used in Equation 3.27 to
compute the updated value of ˜Vk. If the calculated value of Qk does exceeds its limits of
Qkmax and Qkmin, then the bus type is changed to load (PQ) bus. With Qk set to its
limit value, ˜Vk is computed as a load (PQ) bus [28].
For the slack bus, no iterations are required due to its input data is voltage magnitude
and angle as previously stated [32].
3.2.3
Newton-Raphson Method
The Newton-Raphson method is an iterative technique for solving a set of n nonlinear
equations with n unknowns:
f1(x1, x2, . . . , xn) = b1
f2(x1, x2, . . . , xn) = b2
. . . = . . .
f3(x1, x2, . . . , xn) = bn
(3.29)
If the iterations start with an initial estimate of x0
1, x0
2, . . . , x0
n and if ∆x1, ∆x2, . . . , ∆xn
are the corrections necessary the initial estimate so that the equations are fulﬁlled, then
the following may be written:
f1(x0
1 + ∆x1, x0
2 + ∆x2, . . . , x0
n + ∆xn) = b1
f2(x0
1 + ∆x1, x0
2 + ∆x2, . . . , x0
n + ∆xn) = b2
. . . = . . .
f3(x0
1 + ∆x1, x0
2 + ∆x2, . . . , x0
n + ∆xn) = b3.
(3.30)
With the utilization of Taylor’s theorem, Equation 3.30 can be expanded as follows:
f1(x0
1 + ∆x1, x0
2 + ∆x2, . . . , x0
n + ∆xn)
= fi(x0
1, x0
2, . . . , x0
n) +
 
∂fi
∂x1
!
0
∆x1 + · · · +
 
∂fi
∂xn
!
0
∆xn
+ terms with higher power of ∆x1, ∆x2, . . . , ∆xn
= bi
(3.31)
The terms of higher powers can be neglected, if the initial estimate is close to the true
solution. By rearranging the above, the following set of equations can be obtained:
23
==PAGE:34==
3. Theoretical Background


b1 −f1(x0
1, x0
2, . . . , x0
n)
b2 −f2(x0
1, x0
2, . . . , x0
n)
...
bn −fn(x0
1, x0
2, . . . , x0
n)


=



∂f1
∂x1

0

∂f1
∂x2

0
. . .

∂f1
∂xn

0

∂f2
∂x2

0

∂f2
∂x2

0
. . .

∂f2
∂xn

0
...
...
...
...

∂fn
∂x1

0

∂fn
∂x2

0
. . .

∂fn
∂xn

0




∆x1
∆x2
...
∆xn


(3.32)
it can also be written in more simple form:
∆f = J∆x
(3.33)
where J is referred to as the Jacobian.
Equation 3.32 is a provision of a linearized
relationship between the errors ∆f and the corrections ∆x through the Jacobian of the
simultaneous equations. If the initial estimates x0
1, . . . , x0
n were exact, then ∆f and ∆x
would be zero. However, if the the initial estimates x0
1, . . . , x0
n were not exact, then errors
∆f are ﬁnite. By applying suitable method for solution of linear systems, ∆x can be
obtained and used for updating the values of the x’s, where they are calculated from:
x1
i = x0
i + ∆xi
(3.34)
The process is repeated until errors ∆fi are lower than speciﬁed tolerance [28], [33].
3.2.4
Dynamic Simulations
Electrical power system can be represented by algebraic and diﬀerential equations. Dynamic
simulations are a practical method of stability analysis, which is time domain simulations.
It computes the solution of nonlinear diﬀerential equations by numerical integration
techniques [34].
The diﬀerential equations to be solved are nonlinear ordinary diﬀerential equations with
known initial values:
dx
dt = f(x, t)
(3.35)
where x is the state vector of n dependent variables and t is the independent variable
(time). The objective is to solve x as a function of t with the initial values of x and t equal
to x0 and t0 [28].
In order to solve the equations of the above form in Equation 3.35, there are several
diﬀerent numerical integration methods. First method to mention is the Euler Method,
which severs a good introduction to numerical integration by virtue of its simplicity. More
advanced methods is for example the Runge-Kutta Method. For further reading about
diﬀerential numerical methods, the author recommends p.838-848 in [28], chapter 4 provides
an description of how dynamic simulation carried in PSS/E.
24
==PAGE:35==
4
POWER SYSTEM SIMULATIONS IN PSS/E
This chapter is an overview of how power system simulations are carried out in PSS/E.
4.1
Introduction to PSS/E
The power system simulation PSS/E is a trusted tool, used around the world by engineers,
universities, consultants and research labs for operations and planning of electrical power
system [35].
The power system simulator PSS/E performs complex modeling for engineering purposes
using networked linear and non-linear ordinary diﬀerential equations for time dependent
simulation. The simulator takes the networked diﬀerential equations and reduces them
to algebraic equations while preserving the time varying elements needed for modeling of
ﬂuxes and frequencies in voltages. The design of modern electrical systems requires the
integration of large sets of calculations able to describe the machines, generator controls,
turbines and the governing systems, transmission networks and the loads at substations
[36].
Modern electrical systems are quite complex and require the loads and generator output
to be calculated iteratively, termed Power Flow Calculations, which returns a solution in
the form of magnitude and phase angle of the power frequency voltage phasor for each
node. The simulator also produces a second type of simulation where transient quantities
are calculated as a factor of time by integrating ordinary diﬀerential equations. Those are
referenced as Dynamic Simulations, which can be used for stability studies on the power
system within a deﬁned criteria [36].
4.1.1
Power Flow Simulations in PSS/E
There are two power ﬂow methods available in PSS/E: Gauss-Seidel and Newton-Raphson
method, then PSS/E makes is able to choose from the following ﬁve diﬀerent power ﬂow
iterations [36]:
1. Gauss-Seidel iteration.
2. Modiﬁed Gauss-Seidel iteration suitable for series capacitors.
3. Fully coupled Newton-Raphson iteration.
4. Decoupled Newton-Raphson iteration.
5. Fixed slope Decoupled Newton-Raphson iteration.
Of the ﬁve power ﬂow iteration procedures listed above:
• The Gauss-Seidel and Modiﬁed Gauss-Seidel methods solve both network and
boundary conditions by iteration.
25
==PAGE:36==
4. Power System Simulations in PSS/E
• The full Newton-Raphson and both Decoupled Newton-Raphson methods solve the
network conditions by closed-form calculation, while using iteration to solve the
boundary conditions.
4.1.2
Dynamic Simulations in PSS/E
The dynamic simulation process of a physical system has the following three steps:
1. Construction of a set of diﬀerential equations describing the behavior of the physical
system in general.
2. Determination of a set of values of constant and variable parameters describing, in
detail, the condition of the physical system at some instant.
3. Integration of the diﬀerential equations with the values determined in Step 2 as
initial conditions.
An overview of the dynamic simulation sequence is described in [36] as:
The overall ﬂow of the dynamic simulation in PSS®E is shown in Figure 4.1.
The dynamic simulation functions are handled by activities DYRE, RSTR,
STRT, RUN, and ALTR. These subroutines include logic to accept constant
and parameter values, solve the electric network for its bus voltages, implement
the numerical integration calculation, and display results. They do not, however,
include logic relating to the algebraic and diﬀerential equations of any item of
power system equipment. The logic required to inform PSS®E of the diﬀerential
equations and other characteristics of the power system is provided by two
libraries of subroutines:
• A library of subroutines handling models that involve state variables and
diﬀerential equations.
• A library of subroutines handling models that involve only algebraic
relationships between input and output signals, without reference to
diﬀerential equations.
The linkage of the library subroutines into PSS®E is accomplished by four
subroutines called TBLCNC, TBLCNT, CONEC, and CONET, which have the
responsibilities outlined below. TBLCNC and TBLCNT are supplied by PSS®E
and are never seen by the user.
26
==PAGE:37==
4. Power System Simulations in PSS/E
Data Assimilation
Initialization
Output of Instantaneous
System Conditions
Calculation of Rate
of Change of
All State Variables
Solution of Network for
Machine Currents,
Bus Voltages
Data Changes and
Input Signals
DYRE
RSTR
Power Flow Activities
RUN-CONET
RUN
RUN-CONEC
RUN
STRT-CONET-CONEC
ALTR
Numerical Integration
Figure 4.1. Dynamic simulation basic ﬂow [36].
4.2
PSS/E Model of the Icelandic Power System
A complete model of the Icelandic power system was provided by Landsnet. The main
items in the model are listed in Table 4.1. All further modelling are constructed on this
original system model. The load and generation in this model represents the peak load
case from 2019.
Table 4.1. Main model items.
Item
Count
Buses
370
Branches
208
Two winding transformers
143
Three winding transformers
39
Power plants
75
Dynamic var compensator
1
Static var compensator
1
The machines are represented with three main dynamic models:
• Generator model
• Exciter model
• Turbine governor model
In the Icelandic power system, the most common generator PSS/E models are:
27
==PAGE:38==
4. Power System Simulations in PSS/E
• GENSAL - Hydro Generation
• GENSAE - Hydro Generation
• GENROU - Geothermal Generation
• GENROE - Geothermal Generation
The parameters stored in the generator models contains parameters such as machine inertia
and transient and subtransient parameters of the generator.
The exciter models includes AVR and the excitation system. In included parameters such
as time constant and gain parameters for the AVR. The output of exciter models is the
generator ﬁeld voltage Efd.
The turbine governor model controls the speed of the generator and therefore the power
output. If the generator is frequency regulated, then the governor used the system frequency
as an input and changes the power output of the generator as frequency changes. If the
generator is power regulated, the active power is constant.
28
==PAGE:39==
5
MODELLING
This Chapter describe modeling conﬁguration on the original system and how an wind
power plant is modeled in the system.
5.1
Generic Wind Turbine Generator Models
For the purpose of this thesis, a generic wind turbine generator (WTG) model is used.
The term generic refers to a standard, public model which has a similar topology as wind
turbine generators regardless of the manufacturer [37].
These models were developed at the behest of the Western Electricity Coordinating Council
(WECC) by the Wind Generator Modeling Group (WGMG). These models were developed
to resolve issues surrounding quality assurance, model behavior and increase reliability
by complying with multiple versions of diﬀerent software. The WTGs have four main
classiﬁcation [38]:
• Type 1: Induction generator (WT1).
• Type 2: Induction generator with variable rotor resistance (WT2).
• Type 3: Doubly-fed asynchronous generator (WT3).
• Type 4: Asynchronous or synchronous generator with full converter interface (WT4).
The following design guidelines and modeling assumptions were outlined for the generic
model, a few of them include [39]:
• It is assumed that the wind speed remains constant during the simulation time frame.
• The models are not designed for use in simulations that involve severe frequency
excursions.
• The models are suitable for representing individual WTGs or an equivalent wind
power plant (WPP).
• The main model components do not include protective functions.
Furthermore, the models were not designed to reproduce the behavior of advanced power
management features, such as programmed inertia [40].
For this thesis, the main constrains of the design assumptions listed above is the assumed
constant speed. In order to emulate a wind speed variations, a proposed methodology for
emulating variations in wind speeds is provided in chapter 6.
Type 4 is chosen for this thesis for two reasons, currently type 3 and 4 are the most
commonly sold and installed units for wind power production in the US and Europe [37].
Also it interfaces with the grid as a full-scale converter and contains no mechanical variables
to be modeled unlike other generic models [41].
29
==PAGE:40==
5. Modelling
5.2
Power Flow Setup for Generic WT4 (Type 4)
The wind turbine generator is decoupled from the grid by a power converter, where the
power converter is connected to the grid. More speciﬁcally, the power converter is connected
to an PV bus, which is connected to the grid through an step-up transformer. This is
illustrated in Figure 5.1. The voltage level at the bus where the wind turbine generator is
connected to was chosen as 33kV , this voltage level was chosen by observing the voltage
levels and sizes of the existing generators in the PSS/E model of the Icelandic power
system.
Wind
turbine
Step up
transformer
33 kV
132 kV
To grid
Figure 5.1. Illustration of power ﬂow setup for wind turbine.
Note that in the PSS/E power ﬂow setup, the power converter is treated as a generator
related to a wind machine category of the existing generator record of the Power Flow Raw
Data File. In other words, the values speciﬁed for the model for power ﬂow in the Power
Flow Raw Data File are in the same manner as for non-wind generators in the system, but
with a related wind machine category, which is a wind control mode.
The wind control mode is in such a way that the wind machine controls the voltage at the
bus that the wind turbine is connected to, within a range [Qmin; Qmax] of reactive power.
The range of reactive power is determined as ±10% of the nominal active power output
of the wind turbine generator. The Danish technical regulations for the properties and
the control of wind turbines [42], requires that the reactive power that a wind turbine
exchanges with a grid must lie within a control band. The control band has its maximum
and minimum value of reactive power as ±10% of the nominal power. In addition, the
book Wind Farm: Technical Regulations, Potential Estimation and Siting Assessment [43],
says that the typical reactive power limiting curve for wind generators has its maximum
and minimum reactive power of ±10% of the nominal power. Hence, the range for reactive
power as ±10% of the nominal active power output was determined.
5.3
Dynamic Setup for Generic WT4 (Type 4)
The WT4 Generic Wind Model used comprises two modules as follows in PSS/E:
• WT4G1: power converter/generator module.
• WT4E1: electrical control module.
30
==PAGE:41==
5. Modelling
The dynamic data input ﬁle for WT4G1 and WT4E1 models, are the dynamic data input
with reference to GE 2.5 MW wind turbine, provided in [40].
5.3.1
Power converter/generator module (WT4G1)
A block diagram of the converter/generator module is shown in Figure 5.2. It is algebraically
computed current source and it calculates the current injection to the grid based on ﬁltered
active and reactive power commands from the electrical control module.
Figure 5.2. Block diagram of WT4G1 wind generator/converter model [40].
5.3.2
Electrical control module (WT4E1)
The control model WT4E1 controls the active and reactive current which are the inputs
for the WT4G1, which uses them to calculate the current injection to the grid. A block
diagram of the electrical control module is shown in Figure 5.3. The Converter Current
Limiter is an essential part of the model. Depending on whether active or reactive priority
was selected, it uses diﬀerent algorithms to update limits of active and reactive components
of the converter current.
5.4
Aggregation of Wind Turbines
As stated in section 5.3, the generic model WT4 is suitable for representing an equivalent
power plant (WPP). Therefore, it is possible for PSS/E to model it as a single turbine,
The WPP is modeled as a single aggregated wind turbine instead of a WPP consisting
of multiple turbines. This methodology has shown to be equivalent to complete models
with individual wind turbines for studies on grid disturbance and power production when
using equivalent wind speeds. One weakness of this modeling strategy is if the wind speeds
diﬀer more than 2 m/s from each wind turbine or if the turbines receive above nominal
winds. However a WPP is spread through a wide area and there is non-uniform wind
distribution for that area. One cause is wind shadowing, that happens when wind turbines
are placed in rows, the ﬁrst row of turbines that is hit by the wind, disturbs the airﬂow
31
==PAGE:42==
5. Modelling
Figure 5.3. Block diagram of WT4E1 wind electrical control model [40]
causing diﬀerent wind speeds on later rows. Another factor is diﬀerence in wind speeds
due to topology, the roughness or smoothness of land can aﬀect the wind speeds at each
individual turbine [44], [45].
5.5
Redispatch
Redispatch means that the transmission system operator adjust the real power input of
power plants by lowering the real power output of one or more power plants and at the
same time increasing the real power output of one or more other power plants. Redispatch
is used in this study to lower an power amount on machines the same amount as for the
wind generation so the total power remains the same in the system with the wind power
plant.
It was determined to specify 10 large machines to participate in the redispatch. Three
hydro machines at Blanda (BLA) were chosen due to how close they are to the wind farm.
Six hydro machines at KAR also participates and one hydro machines located at Búrfell
(BUR). Only hydro electrical machines were chosen because they have a good frequency
regulation, while geothermal are kept at constant power output and only participate in
frequency regulation in severe disturbance, as mentioned in section 2.1.
The total amount of active power of the machines that participate in redispatch are lowered
by the same amount as the nominal power of the wind turbine. The machines lowers their
amount in proportion to their individually size.
The following is a description of how it is calculated the new power output of the machines
that participate in redispatch: Pafter refer to the new active power output after the
redispatch for each machine, Pbefore refer to the active power output before redispatch for
each machine. R is the ratio between the nominal active power output of the wind turbine,
or
32
==PAGE:43==
5. Modelling
R =
Nominal active power of wind turbine
Total active power of all the machines that participates in redispatch
(5.1)
then the new power output after redispatch are calculated for each machine as:
Pafter = Pbefore −(R · Pbefore)
(5.2)
5.6
Shunt compensator
Reactive power compensation for wind generators are important as they are used to enhance
wind power output and for regulation of voltage deviations [46]. A switched capacitive
shunt of 30Mvar was added at bus Hrútatunga (HRU) for that purpose.
33
==PAGE:44==
6
IMPACT OF WIND VARIABILITY
6.1
Relationship between wind speed and power output
The power production of a wind turbine varies with wind speed. A power curve describes
the electrical output from the turbine as a factor of wind speed [47], [48].
Wind turbine manufacturers measure the power performance of electricity producing wind
turbines according to International Standard such as IEC 61400-12-1[49]. The standard
speciﬁes a procedure for measuring the power performance characteristics of a single wind
turbine, where the power performance characteristics are determined by measured power
curve. A collection of simultaneous measurements of wind speed and power output to
establish a statistically signiﬁcant database over a range of wind speeds and various wind
and atmospheric conditions.
A real power curve of wind turbine of type GE 2.5 MW is used to determine the relationship
between wind speed and power output of the wind turbine in this thesis. This type of
turbine is used because the dynamic input ﬁle for WT4 Generic Wind Model used in this
thesis are with reference to wind turbine of type GE 2.5 MW. Figure 6.1 shows the power
curve:
Figure 6.1. The power curve of wind turbine GE 2.5 [48].
The cut-in speed of the wind turbine is 3.0 m/s and the cut-out speed 25.0 m/s. That
means that the wind turbine is not able to generate power for wind speed below 3 m/s
and shuts down for wind speed above 25.0 m/s to avoid damage. The survival wind speed
is 59.5 m/s for this type of wind turbine.
34
==PAGE:45==
6. Impact of wind variability
The power curve in Figure 6.1 is used to ﬁnd a corresponding power output for a certain
wind speed. The power curve is normalized to a scale of 0 to 1 in order for it to work for
other sizes of wind turbines. 1 being maximum power output and 0 is no power output
from the turbine. This is normalization is feasible as power curves for diﬀerent wind
turbines follow a similar trend.
In order to determine power output for a given wind speed, linear interpolation is used.
Linear interpolation is a method using linear polynomials to construct new data points
within the range of a discrete set of known data point, which is in this case the power
curve shown in Figure 6.1. The two known points are given by the coordinate [50]
y = y1 + (x −x1) y2 −y1
x2 −x1
(6.1)
This interpolation method is implemented in Excel [51].
6.1.1
Wind Variation Simulation
To simulate a power response from wind variations, the power reference variable named
VAR(L+3) in the electrical control module is used. The active power control compares
the active power injected to the grid against the power reference and changes the active
component of the injected current accordingly. In other words, the power reference changes
the active power of the wind turbine.
The power reference range from 0 to 1 and it calculated according to the machine base
of the wind turbine, which is the maximum power of the wind turbine. This has to be
considered while changing the power reference.
The initial value of the power reference is purely based on the machine base and the
generated power speciﬁed in the Power Flow Raw Data File. The following describes the
initial power reference of the wind turbine, where Pref−initial is the initial power reference,
Pgen is the generated power speciﬁed in the Power Flow Raw Data File and Mbase is the
machine base, also speciﬁed in the Power Flow Raw Data:
Pref−initial = Mbase
Pgen
(6.2)
This needs to be considered to have the desired initial power reference. For example, if the
aim is to begin with power reference of 0.5, Pgen needs to be 50% of the Mbase value.
After the initial value, the power reference can be changed by using Python API during
dynamic simulation. Also note that in order to get smooth changes in the power output,
the power reference need to be changes for every simulation step.
6.2
Wind behaviour in Iceland
To have an estimation on the wind behaviour in Iceland, a wind data from the Icelandic
Meteorological Oﬃce (IMO) is reviewed [52]. The wind data is collected from four weather
35
==PAGE:46==
6. Impact of wind variability
stations spread throughout the country as shown in Figure 6.2. The stations were selected
because they collect data every 10 minutes, while other stations collected data every hour.
Note that this data can contain errors due to icing for example and some are non existence
for some period. The data was collected by the IMO from the 1st September 2019 to the
Figure 6.2. Map of Iceland with weather stations highlighted in diﬀerent colors [53].
1st of April 2020. The data provides measurements of average speed every 10 minutes and
a 3 second gust within each of this 10 minutes measurements.
To give an brief overview of the wind measurements, the data is aggregated into weeks
and summarised for average wind speed and average gusts for every station. This is shown
in Figure 6.3, there it can be been seen that for some weeks, the average wind goes above
the cut-oﬀspeed (25m/s).
Table 6.1 counts percentages of how often as a portion of the total measurement time the
average wind speed and gusts exceed the cut-out speed. The highest wind speeds are at
Kerlingarfjoll-Asgardsfjall as that is in the central highlands of Iceland.
Table 6.2 summarizes the behavior of the power curve relative to gusts. The data shown,
displays the distribution of changes in the power output of a theoretical wind turbine, at
each of the weather stations. The data is summarized by intervals, when the gusts do not
have enough wind speed to change the power output they are categorized as "No change".
Then the data is summarized as changes in power output by percentages. Gusts mostly
increase the power output by either 10-20%, but in some cases the gusts are so severe that
they exceed the cut-out speeds. The change is calculated by subtracting the power output
from gusts from the power output from the average wind speeds and then categorized by
percentage change. As such some of the "No change" category counts no changes, even
when the turbine is idle, as in not producing any power. The data is summarized in this
fashion in order to show that there are frequent gusts with the potential to aﬀect the power
output of wind turbines in various locations in Iceland.
36
==PAGE:47==
6. Impact of wind variability
Figure 6.3. Weekly averages of wind speeds.
Table 6.1. Proportion of wind speed or gusts exceed 25 m/s.
Station
Average wind speed
over 25 m/s
Gusts above 25 m/s
Thverfjall
1,3%
10,6%
Gagnheidi
4,6%
12,4%
Skalafell
5,1%
10,7%
Kerlingarfjoll-Asgardsfjall
12,2 %
20,8%
Table 6.2. Eﬀect of gusts on the average speed calculated in power.
Station
No change
1-10%
10-20%
20-30%
30-60%
60-100%
>cut-out
Thverfjall
24,3
17,5
21,1
14,1
12,1
0,3
9,6
Gagnheidi
32,2
18,5
26,9
9,4
4,4
0,2
7,9
Skalafell
40,0
14,3
23,3
10,6
4,8
0,4
5,7
Kerlingarfjoll-
Asgardsfjall
37,7
13,1
21,2
11,9
6,3
0,3
8,6
The observations from the wind data show a clear trend for high wind speeds and gusts
37
==PAGE:48==
6. Impact of wind variability
which could potentially aﬀect the power production and therefor a possible challenge for
system stability. The average ranged from 9,8-12,9 m/s from the total dataset and gusts
average from 13,6-16,3 m/s depending on the weather station. With the highest values
belonging to Kerlingarfjöll-Ásgardsfjall, which is located in the mid-highlands. Therefore,
modeling the eﬀects of variable wind speeds would be of interest. Also note that the
Appendix B contains statistics about the data.
6.3
Proposed Methods for Simulating Wind Alternations
Observing the wind data described in section 6.2, it is proposed two conditions for simulating
a wind ﬂuctuations:
1. When the wind speed exceeds the cut-out speed.
2. Wind gust.
The motivation behind for simulating the ﬁrst condition is from the observation in
section 6.2. There, it was shown that the average weekly wind speed exceeded a few
times the cut-out speed (shown in Figure 6.3). Furthermore, the average wind speed over
cut-out speed ranges from approximately 1-10% depending on stations and gust from
approximately 10%-20% (shown in Table 6.1).
The motivation for the second condition; wind gust is also from observation in section 6.2.
Figure 6.3 shows that the gusts have more speed than the average wind speed. The aﬀect
gust had on the average wind, calculated according to the power curve, showed that only
approximately 20-40% depending on station showed no change from gusts. Therefore, gust
can have an impact on wind power generation.
6.4
Modelling Constraints
The power curve is only a representation the theoretical output of the wind turbine, but in
reality a power curve must be calibrated to the WPP as the environment and climate of
the WPP will play a large role in wind power. Oﬀ-shore WPP will experience more wake
loss and WPP in the highlands will experience more wind variation due to topography.
Other elements such as heat, precipitation, gusts, frost, wind shear and blade fouling will
cause uncertainty in the power output for the turbine [54]. There are also numerous issues
when it comes to modeling a wind turbine in a realistic manner. The issues that can
present themselves is the cut-in/cut-out behaviour. The power curve can give negative
values in the cut-in/cut-out region, diﬀerences in models, extrapolation of wind speed and
general modeling practices such as curve ﬁtting [55].
38
==PAGE:49==
7
SIMULATIONS
In this Chapter, the simulations is presented. The goal of the simulations is to assess the
impact of wind integration in the system, an upgraded system is provided based on results
from the original system. Then it is analysed and how the upgraded system changes the
dynamic in the system.
7.1
Introduction to Simulations
The simulation process was planned as follows: First, the PSS/E model was conﬁgured
in GUI. Then Python scripts were made using API to interference with PSS/E that runs
load ﬂow and dynamic simulations and stores the dynamic simulations in .out ﬁle. After
that, a Python script is used to plot the simulation. Last, if results are validated, they are
analysed and published in thesis. This process is illustrated by a ﬂow chart in Figure 7.1.
Stage 1
Conﬁgure
PSS/E
Stage 2
Conﬁgure
Python scipts
Stage 3
PSS/E runs
simulation
Stage 4
Simulations
evaluated
Stage 5
Simulation
published in
thesis
Figure 7.1. Simulation process.
7.2
Overview of Cases
An overview of all cases analysed are listed in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1. Simulation cases and their description.
Case
System Model
Description
Case 1
Original system
Find an estimation on amount of feasible wind power
Case 2
Original system
Wind speed exceed cut-out speed
Case 3
Original system
Gust eﬀect
Case 4
Original system
Fault at bus at BLA
Case 5
Original system
Islanding
Case 6
Upgraded system
Wind speed exceed cut-out
Case 7
Upgraded system
Gust eﬀect
Case 8
Upgraded system
Find an estimation on amount of feasible wind power
39
==PAGE:50==
7. Simulations
Case 1 is for ﬁnd an estimation of feasible amount of wind generation that the original
system can handle without being unstable under normal conditions. The result from Case
1 are used as a benchmark on the amount on wind generation used in the following cases.
Case 2 and 3 simulates a two types of wind alternation; gust and when wind speed exceeds
the operation limit of the wind turbine (also referred as cut-out) respectively. These cases
are motivated by the analyses in chapter 6. The simulations will give an insight on the
behaviour in the system due to the ﬂuctuating nature of wind generation.
Case 4 and 5 simulate a fault condition and islanding scenario respectively. For the Case 4,
the fault is applied with wind turbine is generation and when there is no generation. That
is out of interest to see if the wind generation has aﬀect on the system stability under
fault condition. Case 5 simulates a common islanding scenario as discussed in section 2.5.
There, it is also out of interest to simulate wind and without wind generation to compare
if the wind generation is aﬀecting the system dynamic under islanding condition, where
the country is split to east and west islands.
Cases 6-8 are for an upgraded system. There, it will be out of interest how the upgraded
system will improve the stability of the system compared to the original system.
The simulations for cases listed in Table 7.1 are divided into two main sections:
• Simulations for the original system, cases 1-5, provided in section 7.3
• Simulations for the upgraded system, cases 6-8, provided in section 7.4
In the beginning of each of the two sections mentioned above, an more thorough description
of conditions for each system is provided. Similarly, in the beginning of a section for each
case, a more thorough detail in provided.
7.3
Original System
As mentioned in subsection 2.4.1, CutIIb and CutIV are out of interest and are simulated.
They are used in order to determine how the wind integration aﬀect the transmission
of power between areas of west and east. That is out of interested because weakness
of the system is the ring connection which is a bottleneck for the power ﬂow between
areas. Also, there are two transmission lines out of interest: Hrútutungalína 1 (HT1) and
Laxárvatnslína (LV1).
Figure 7.2 illustrates the Cuts along with the location of the wind farm, among with the
lines that deﬁnes the cuts. LV1 and HT1 are also shown and are marked in blue along
with their power ﬂow direction simulated.
40
==PAGE:51==
7. Simulations
Figure 7.2. Cuts and transmission lines simulated, location of wind farm is marked in red [10].
7.3.1
Case 1
As previously mentioned, this case is for to ﬁnd an estimation on how much wind generation
is feasible for this area.
The amount of active power wind generation is increased steadily from 0MW to 100MW
over a time of 30 second, shown in Figure 7.3.
CutIIIb and CutIV are shown in Figure 7.4 and Figure 7.5.
A plot of frequency and voltage at GLE bus, which the wind turbine is connected to are
shown Figure 7.6 and Figure 7.7 respectively.
For this case, it is out of interest to look for at which amount of active power (MW), the
system shows a sign of instability. The instability can be shown as a power oscillations
and deviations in voltage or frequency.
41
==PAGE:52==
7. Simulations
Figure 7.3. Wind generation increased from 0MW to 100MW.
Figure 7.4. Original system, CutIIIb.
Figure 7.5. Original system, CutIV.
Figure 7.6. Original system, voltage at GLE.
Figure 7.7. Original system, frequency at
GLE.
Analysis on repetitive spikes
The simulation show a large repetitive spikes in all simulation plots. The spikes shows a
trend where the spikes are smaller for location further away from the wind turbine. This
indicates that the wind turbine is causing this abnormally. It was noted that the spikes
were also dependent on a software used to run the Python scripts, when it was switched to
the software Spyder by Anaconda, the spikes reduced. It was also noted that the spikes
42
==PAGE:53==
7. Simulations
reduced when the time step of the simulation was reduced. This indicated that this is a
computational issue caused by the wind turbine model.
It was also noted that other Master’s thesis also experienced this abnormal large repetitive
spike phenomenon [56]. There, it was investigated the wind turbine electrical control model
and the wind turbine converter/generator model. The electrical control model showed no
unusual behavior. However, there was one variable in the converter/generator model that
showed a relationship to the spikes. That was internal variable named "previous Vterm
angle". This variable jumped from value near −π to value near π and vice verse, which
occurred at times when the spikes appeared. It was concluded that the generator/converter
model is ﬂawed.
Based on the above, it is also concluded that the generator/converter model is ﬂawed and
needs to be corrected. Therefore, the spikes are not addressed speciﬁcally in this thesis
here after.
Analyses of the simulations
The simulations show that at t = 10sec where the wind generation is 30MW, it starts
to show a sign of instability. The active power starts to oscillates and voltage starts to
decrease in addition to the increase in frequency.
Based on above, the benchmark on the amount of feasible wind generation before it shows
a sign of instability is set as 30MW.
However, the system could be under stable conditions even though it starts to show a sign
of instability at 30MW. It is noted that the oscillations are dependent on the spikes as
the oscillations shows a clear increase at the time when the spikes appears. The second
spike at approximately t = 16 where wind generation is approximately 53MW. To ﬁnd if
the this second spike is an inherent point of instability, it is plotted for a constant value of
wind generation before and after the second spike. For a constant value of 50MW wind
generation, which is before the second spike, is shown in Figure 7.8. For a constant value
of 65MW wind generation, which is after the second spike, is shown in Figure 7.9. CutIV
is only plotted as the other variables showed a similar trend.
Figure 7.8. Original system, CutIV where
wind
generation
is
constant
50MW.
Figure 7.9. Original system, CutIV where wind
generation is constant 65MW.
43
==PAGE:54==
7. Simulations
Summary of Case 1
The system starts to show a sign of instability at wind generation of 30MW. The system
showed a clear sign of instability for a constant wind generation of 65MW. It is possible
that the spike aﬀect the results as the oscillations increases at the time when spike occurs.
The benchmark for next cases are set as little below of the point where it started to show
sign of instability, at 25MW generation. This is because it is excepted that ﬂuctuations in
wind will aﬀect the system stability.
7.3.2
Case 2
This case simulates when the wind speed exceeds the cut-out speed, As previously mentioned,
the wind generation is set as 25MW, then at 3 seconds the power is decreased into 0MW
in 2 seconds. This is done as it is expected that the wind generation will not immediately
shut-down, as described in chapter 6.
Figure 7.10 shows the active power wind generation, Figure 7.11 shows the active power of
the transmission lines LV1 and HT1. Figure 7.12 and Figure 7.13 shows the Cuts.
Figure 7.10. Wind generated.
Figure 7.11. Active power ﬂow in HT1 and
LV1.
Figure 7.12. Case 2 - CutIIIb.
Figure 7.13. Case 2 - CutIV.
From simulations, it shows CutIIIb becomes more loaded when the wind turbine shuts oﬀ
while CutIV becomes less loaded.
44
==PAGE:55==
7. Simulations
This means that power transfer from east to west increases then the wind turbine shuts
down, as CutIIIb deﬁnes the power ﬂow from east to west and CutIV the vice versa.
Figure 7.11, it shows that LV1 becomes more loaded because the power transfer increases
from the east, to compensate for the shut-oﬀin wind generation. Similarly, HT1 becomes
less loaded as the wind generation is not transferring power south when the wind generation
is shut-down because of the wind exceeding its operation limits.
Little oscillations appears, however they reach a steady sate. The oscillations indicated
that the wind alternations aﬀects the power oscillations as for Case 1, no oscillations
appeared at 25MW.
7.3.3
Case 3
Case 3 simulates a potential change in wind generation due to gust. Motivated by the
analysis in chapter 6 and discussed in section 6.3. Here a wind gust increases the power
output by 50% over a time period of 3 seconds. The initial power generation is 12.5MW
and it is increased to 25MW. Similar for Case 2, it is assumed that it takes 2 seconds to
increase and 2 seconds to decrease.
Figure 7.14. Wind generated.
Figure 7.15. Active power ﬂow in HT1 and
LV1.
Figure 7.16. Case 3 - CutIIIb.
Figure 7.17. Case 3 - CutIV.
The simulation shows a vice-versa trend as for Case 2. Here, the CutIV becomes more
loaded when the gust appears. This means that the power transfer from west to east is
more when wind generation is high, For CutIIIb, it becomes less loaded when gust appears.
45
==PAGE:56==
7. Simulations
That means that there is less power transfer from the east to west when wind generation
is high.
The active power ﬂow shown in Figure 7.15 show that the ﬂow increases in HT1 and
decreases in LV1. This means that the ﬂow is less from the east when wind generation is
high and then it transfers more power south through HT1.
7.3.4
Case 4
The aim of this case is to see if wind generation aﬀects the stability during fault condition.
The fault applied is at a generator bus at Blanda (BLA), where one machine is connected
to. The fault is applied at t = 3sec. An illustration on location is shown Figure 7.18.
On the left hand, a simulation with no wind generation is shown. On the right hand, a
simulation with wind generation is shown, where the wind generation is 25MW.
Figure 7.18. Bus fault at BLA showed geographically [10].
Figure 7.19. Case 4, CutIIIb with no wind
generation.
Figure 7.20. Case 4, CutIIIb with wind genera-
tion.
46
==PAGE:57==
7. Simulations
Figure 7.21. Case 4, CutIV with no wind
generation.
Figure 7.22. Case 4, CutIV with wind genera-
tion.
Figure 7.23. Case 4, Voltage with no wind
generation.
Figure 7.24. Case 4, Voltage with wind genera-
tion.
Figure 7.25. Case 4, frequency with no wind
generation.
Figure 7.26. Case 4, frequency with wind gen-
eration.
The simulations above show nearly identical results for with and without wind generation.
The wind generation have negligible eﬀects on this fault conditions. It is also a possibility
that with more detailed simulation model of the wind turbine, other results would occur.
47
==PAGE:58==
7. Simulations
7.3.5
Case 5
This case simulates the system behavior for an islanding behavior. As introduced in
section 2.5. This will be simulated with and without wind generation to see if the wind
generation will aﬀect the islanding. In this case, the buses at GLE, GEH (220kV) and FLJ
(220kV) will be out of interest to compare simulation for the west side of the islanding split
and of the east side of the islanding. In additon, the cuts CutIIb and CutIV is simulated.
Simulation for no wind generation is shown on the left side and with wind generation on
the right side.
Figure 7.27. Islanding shown graphically and buses analysed [10].
Figure 7.28. Case 5, CutIIIb with no wind
generation.
Figure 7.29. Case 5, CutIIIb with wind genera-
tion.
48
==PAGE:59==
7. Simulations
Figure 7.30. Case 5, CutIV with no wind
generation.
Figure 7.31. Case 5, CutIV with wind genera-
tion.
Figure 7.32. Case 5, frequency with no wind
generation.
Figure 7.33. Case 5, frequency with wind gen-
eration.
Figure 7.34. Case 5, voltage with no wind
generation.
Figure 7.35. Case 5, frequency with wind gen-
eration.
Simulation show near identical oscillation behaviour for the cuts. However, the frequency
and voltage have less deviation with wind generation.
This indicates that the wind
generation might have positive aﬀect on the system stability during this islanding condition.
7.4
Upgraded System
An upgraded system is proposed based on results from the original system. The results for
wind variations (Case 2 and Case 3) showed that the ﬂuctuating nature of wind generation
49
==PAGE:60==
7. Simulations
do aﬀect the power oscillations because for Case 1 which had no wind variations, there
were no oscillations for the same wind generation of 25MW. The Cuts are aﬀected by
the ﬂuctuating nature of wind generation and the simulation for the Cuts shows that the
system transfer power between east and west to compensate for the ﬂuctuation in power
production. For low wind generation, the transfer comes from KAR in the east, but for
high wind generation, there is less need for power transfer from east to west.
As previously stated, the proposed options by Landsnet, is considered, shown in Figure 2.7.
It is determent that B.2 option is preferred because it will increase the capacity of the
transfer between the east and west, the other options range further east-south, but it is
not estimated to be required as the location of the wind turbine in the north-west. The
B.2 option is shown below:
Figure 7.36. B.2 option proposed by Landsnet [24].
In addition, the future transmission lines that are in Landsnet’s System Plan [11] are
included in the upgraded system in this thesis. An block diagram shown the connections
points of the upgraded system:
FLJ
KRA
HLS
THR
RAN
BLA
HRU
BRE
Figure 7.37. Block diagram of addition 220kv lines to the original system, using the KKS
identiﬁcation.
Note that these new 220kV transmission lines shown in Figure 7.37 are an addition to the
original system.
50
==PAGE:61==
7. Simulations
7.4.1
Case 6
This case simulates the cut-out behaviour for the upgraded system. The wind generation
is also 25MW to have accordance between the original system and the upgraded. Also,
for an accordance between the original and the upgraded system, the same variables are
simulated. However, the Cuts are not calculated as they are only relevant for the original
because they are calculated according to the original system.
For an comparison to the original system, it will be displayed on the left side the simulation
for the upgraded system and on the right side simulations for the original system. The
active power generated is the same as for the original system, shown in Figure 7.10. The
simulations are shown below.
Figure 7.38. Upgraded system, active power
ﬂow in HT1 and LV1.
Figure 7.39. Original system, active power
ﬂow in HT1 and LV1.
Figure 7.40. Upgraded system - transmission
lines that deﬁne CutIV.
Figure 7.41. Original system - CutIV.
51
==PAGE:62==
7. Simulations
Figure 7.42. Upgraded system, lines that
deﬁne CutIIIb.
Figure 7.43. Original system - CutIIIb.
Observing the above simulations, is it seen that the active power ﬂow in HT1 reduced
by approximately 15MW and by approximately 30MW in LV1 when the system is
upgraded, this is because the upgraded system distributes the power ﬂow on the new 220kV
transmission lines. Similarly for CutIIIb, the transmission lines becomes less loaded after
upgrading because the power is distributed into the new 220kV lines.
For CutIV, the upgraded system reduces the power ﬂow in BL2 by distribute the power
into the new 220kV transmission lines. However, SI4 is more loaded for the upgraded
system. This is because the upgrading does not go all the way to the area where SI4 is.
This can also indicates that there is more total power ﬂow in the upgraded system. This
can be because the original system constricted the power ﬂow in the system by its limited
capacity.
7.4.2
Case 7
This case simulates a gust behavior and follows the same procedure as described in Case 6,
the simulations for the upgraded system are shown on the left side and for the original
system on the right. The wind power generation is the same as for case 3, shown in
Figure 7.14.
Figure 7.44. Upgraded system, active power
ﬂow in HT1 and LV1.
Figure 7.45. Original system, active power
ﬂow in HT1 and LV1.
52
==PAGE:63==
7. Simulations
Figure 7.46. Upgraded system - transmission
lines that deﬁne CutIV.
Figure 7.47. Original system - CutIV.
Figure 7.48. Upgraded system, lines that
deﬁne CutIIIb.
Figure 7.49. Original system - CutIIIb.
Analyses of these simulations for case 7 are in the same manner as for case 6. However, in
this case, it can be seen more clearly than for case 6 that the upgraded system shows less
oscillations than the original system.
7.4.3
Case 8
This case simulates an estimation for feasible wind generation for the upgraded system.
Also for accordance between the original and the upgraded system, the simulations for the
original system is displayed on the right side and the upgraded system on left.
53
==PAGE:64==
7. Simulations
Figure 7.50. Upgraded system, increase in wind
generation.
Figure 7.51. Original system, increase in
wind generation.
Figure 7.52. Upgraded system, lines that
deﬁne CutIV.
Figure 7.53. Original system, CutIV.
Figure 7.54. Upgraded system, lines that
deﬁne CutIIIb.
Figure 7.55. Original system, CutIIIb.
54
==PAGE:65==
7. Simulations
Figure 7.56. Upgraded system, voltage.
Figure 7.57. Original system, voltage.
Figure 7.58. Upgraded system, frequency.
Figure 7.59. Original system, frequency.
The comparison between the original and the upgraded show that the upgraded system
show a clear sign of improved stability as the oscillations are more noticeable for the
original system, especially for the Cuts.
The upgraded system start to show a sign of voltage instability at t = 17 and wind
generation of approximately 55MW, while it was at t = 10 and 30MW for the original
system.
It was estimated the inherent point where the upgraded system shows a clear sign of
instability while the wind generation is constant, similar that was done for the original
system in case 1. However, it was more diﬃcult to ﬁnd that point for the upgraded system
because the oscillations were really small large range of constant wind generation and then
it shows large amount of instability.
For illustration, Figure 7.60 shows the system response to a constant wind generation of
60MW, and for constant wind generation up to 80MW, it showed similar behavior. It was
not until the wind generation was increased to 90MW that the system showed clear sign
of instability as shown in Figure 7.61. It is therefor diﬃcult to ﬁnd an inherent point of
instability that is comparable to the original system.
55
==PAGE:66==
7. Simulations
Figure 7.60. Constant wind generation of
60MW, little oscillation ap-
pears.
Figure 7.61. Constant wind generation of
90MW, large oscillations ap-
pears.
56
==PAGE:67==
8
CONCLUSION
8.1
Results
Results showed that the wind ﬂuctuation has an eﬀect on the stability of the system. The
system showed increased oscillations during wind ﬂuctuation and the wind ﬂuctuation
increased the power transfer between areas, which is a bottleneck of the system.
The simulations showed negligible aﬀect that wind generation has on the system stability
during fault conditions. However, the wind generation showed a slight better frequency
response in the islanding case. The two wind ﬂuctuating aﬀects; gust and when wind speed
exceeded the operation limits showed that wind ﬂuctuation aﬀects both the stability of
the system and also the power transfer between areas. The gust scenario increased the
loading of CutIV while decrease the loading of CutIIIb, this is because there is less transfer
from east to west when wind generation is high, which indicated that KAR is transmitting
less power to west when wind generation is high. A reversed trend was obtained for the
scenario when the wind speed exceeded the cut-out speed, but has the same explanation
as for the gust scenario.
Neither CutIV and CutIIIb exceeded its deﬁned stability limit. However, CutIIIb was
closer to its stability limits (130MW), but the wind ﬂuctuation scenarios showed that for
high wind generation, CutIIIb will be less loaded, which is good for CutIIIb.
The upgraded system improved the stability of the system, it decreased the power transfer
in the transmission lines that the Cuts are deﬁned as because it distributes the power ﬂow
with the new transmission lines. This indicates that the power transfer between areas are
less of a bottleneck in the upgraded system than for the original system as the Cuts deﬁne
a bottleneck for the system which is the transmission ﬂow between areas. However, one
transmission line in the deﬁnition of Cuts; SI4, became more loaded with the upgraded
system because the upgrading was not in the area of SI4. This shows the importance of
upgrading the system. It was also showed that the amount of wind generation right before
it starts to show instability is 30MW for the original system and 55MW for the upgraded
system. That shows the importance of upgrading the system for future wind integration in
the system. It is estimated that in reality these numbers of amount of feasible power will
be less, because there are various factors that can aﬀect the assessment in this thesis and
further assessment is needed to ﬁnd more realistic value of feasible power.
8.2
Perspectives
The ﬁndings from the thesis suggest that with the current strengthening schemes that the
TSO is assessing might well be able to support future wind power production. Wind power
production could prove very useful in supplementing the power system to assist rural areas
57
==PAGE:68==
8. Conclusion
in Iceland. The only precondition is that, the grid needs to be strengthened for this to be
a more viable option.
The wind data does give an interesting insight into what might happen to the power
production as gusts could become a frequent problem.
8.3
Future work
While working on this thesis the usefulness of wind power generation does make itself clear.
However, the weakness of the electrical system of Iceland in many regions does make their
integration diﬃcult. Integration of wind power production to the Icelandic power system
would be of great utility. But before that can be done eﬀectively, the power system needs
to be upgraded to increase the stability and capacity of the grid due to ﬂuctuation nature
of wind production.
It would be of interest for further study to investigate the power output of WPP in multiple
rural areas and compare if some areas are more suitable than others. As the nation is
sparsely populated with long transfer distances, it would prove useful to diversify the power
production on the island and increase the number of locations where power is made. To
do this eﬀectively, strengthening scenarios, power production and stability assessments
need to be done for multiple rural areas.
To assess the impact of wind integration further, is could be useful to simulate a more
detailed model of wind turbine and simulate for diﬀerent load and generation cases in the
system. In addition to other factors that could be useful when assessing wind integration.
58
==PAGE:69==
REFERENCES
[1]
FCCC UN. Paris agreement. UNFCCC secretariat, 2015. URL
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2015/cop21/eng/l09r01.pdf.
[2]
IRENA. Renewable energy. 2017. URL https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/
IRENA/Agency/Publication/2017/Nov/IRENA_A_key_climate_solution_2017.
pdf?la=en&hash=A9561C1518629886361D12EFA11A051E004C5C98.
[3]
Orkustofnun. Energy statistics in iceland 2018. 2019. URL
https://orkustofnun.is/orkustofnun/utgafa/orkutolur/.
[4]
Sciencealert. Iceland just held a funeral for the ﬁrst glacier killed by climate change,
2019. URL https://www.sciencealert.com/
iceland-just-held-a-funeral-for-the-first-glacier-killed-by-climate-change.
[5]
T. Johannesson G. Adalgeirsdottir F. Palsson O. Sigurdsson S. Gudmundsson,
H. Björnsson. Similarities and diﬀerences in the response to climate warming of two
ice caps in iceland. Hydrology Research, 40, 12 2009. doi: 10.2166/nh.2009.210.
[6]
R.S Williams Jr. R.Z, Poore and Christopher Tracey. Sea level and climate: U.s.
geological survey fact sheet 002–00, 2000. URL
https://pubs.usgs.gov/fs/fs2-00/.
[7]
H. Bjornsson A. N. Hahmann K. Jonasson C. B. Hasager Niels-Erik Clausen
N. Nawri, G. N. Petersen. The wind energy potential of iceland. Renewable Energy,
69,290-299, 2014. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.03.040.
[8]
Landsnet Eﬂa. Aﬂ- og orkujöfnuður 2019-2023. 2019. URL https://www.landsnet.
is/library/Skrar/utgefnar-skyrslur/Orku--og-afljofnudur/Afl%20%20og%
20orkuj%C3%B6fnu%C3%B0ur%202019-2023.pdf.
[9]
EFLA. FlutningskerﬁÐ Á vestfjÖrÐum: Greining á afhendingaröryggi. URL
https://www.landsnet.is/library/Skrar/utgefnar-skyrslur/%C3%81rei%C3%
B0anleiki%20%C3%A1%20Vestfj%C3%B6r%C3%B0um%20-%20LN%2019020_Loka.pdf.
[10] Landsnet. Annual report 2017. . URL
https://2017.landsnet.is/annual-report-2017/operations/transmission/.
[11] Landsnet. Landsnet system plan 2019-2028. . URL https://framtidin.landsnet.
is/library/Skrar/KerfisaAetlun-2019-2028/Kerfis%C3%A1%C3%A6tlun%
202019-2028%20-%20Langt%C3%ADma%C3%A1%C3%A6tlun%20-%20Loka.pdf.
[12] Hagstofan. Population development 2018. 2019. URL
http://hagstofan.s3.amazonaws.com/media/public/2019/
e33d2cb3-2b74-4835-b326-0d5ea3926918.pdf.
59
==PAGE:70==
References
[13] Orkustofnun. Orkumál. 2011. URL https:
//orkustofnun.is/gogn/Orkumal-arsrit/Orkumal-Raforka-2011-7-1.pdf.
[14] Gunnar Ingi Valdimarsson. Real-time security assessment for the icelandic electrical
power system using phasor measurements. Master’s thesis, HR, 2016.
[15] Birkir Heimisson. Improved frequency control strategies for geothermal power plants.
Master’s thesis, Chalmers, 2014.
[16] Orkuspárnefnd. Raforkuspá 2019 – 2050 :endurreikningur á spá frá 2015 út frá nýjum
gögnum og breyttum forsendum. URL
https://orkustofnun.is/gogn/Skyrslur/OS-2019/OS-2019-13.pdf.
[17] Hagstofa Islands. Stóriðja og almenn notkun raforku 1990-2018. URL
https://px.hagstofa.is/pxis/pxweb/is/Umhverfi/Umhverfi__4_orkumal__2_
framleidslaognotkun/IDN02103.px/table/tableViewLayout1/?rxid=
ab280b3e-5309-4e7d-99da-55c1ae6a52a3.
[18] Aﬂog Orka Landsnet. Kks handbook. EDITION 09, 2014. URL
https://www.landsnet.is/library/Skrar/Landsnet/Upplysingatorg/
Skyrslur/Annad/KKS_HANDBOOK_09.pdf.
[19] Landsnet. Flutningsgeta og afhendingar Öryggi ﬂutningskerﬁsins, . URL
https://framtidin.landsnet.is/langtimaaaetlun/
flutningsgeta-og-afhendingaroryggi-flutningskerfisins/.
[20] Landsnet. Truﬂanir og bilanir, . URL https://www.landsnet.is/arsskyrslur/
arsskyrsla-2019/islenska/frammistoduskyrsla/rekstrartruflanir-/.
[21] Landsnet. Töluleg gögn, . URL https://www.landsnet.is/arsskyrslur/
arsskyrsla-2019/islenska/frammistoduskyrsla/toluleg-gogn.
[22] Landsnet. Kerﬁsaetlun 2016-2025, . URL https://landsnet.is/library/Skjol/
Um-okkur-/utgafa-og-samskipti/Skyrslur/KerfisaAetlun/2016-2025/
Kerfis%C3%A1%C3%A6tlun%202016-2025%20-%20Copy%20(1).pdf.
[23] Erla Eiríksdóttir. Wide-area power oscillation damping (wa-pod) in the icelandic
transmission system. Master’s thesis, KIT, 2016.
[24] Landsnet. Landsnet system plan 2014-2023. . URL
https://www.landsnet.is/library/Skrar/Landsnet/Upplysingatorg/
Skyrslur/KerfisaAetlanir/2014/Kerfisaaetlun%202014-2023%20skyrsla.pdf.
[25] K. Skarphedinsson V. Sverrisdottir. Reglugerð um gæði raforku og afhendingaröryggi.
URL https://www.reglugerd.is/reglugerdir/allar/nr/1048-2004.
[26] Landsnet. Reliability of supply and quality of delivered electricity: Performance
report 2016, . URL https://www.landsnet.is/library/Skrar/Landsnet/
Skyrslur/Frammistoduskyrsla/Performance_Report%202016.pdf.
60
==PAGE:71==
References
[27] P. Kundur, J. Paserba, V. Ajjarapu, G. Andersson, A. Bose, C. Canizares,
N. Hatziargyriou, D. Hill, A. Stankovic, C. Taylor, T. Van Cutsem, and V. Vittal.
Deﬁnition and classiﬁcation of power system stability ieee/cigre joint task force on
stability terms and deﬁnitions. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 19(3):
1387–1401, 2004.
[28] Prabha Kundur. Power System Stability and Control. 1994.
[29] Hjörtur Jóhannsson. Small signal stability. Center for Electric Power and Energy
Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[30] Jakob Glarbo Møller. Frequency stability: Active power and frequency control.
Center for Electric Power and Energy Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[31] Hjörtur Jóhannsson. Ac transmission - transmission lines and transmission capability.
Center for Electric Power and Energy Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[32] Thomas J. Overbye J. Duncan Glover, Mulukutla S. SARMA. Power System
Analysis and Design. 2012.
[33] Hjörtur Jóhannsson. Ac transmission (iii/iii) power ﬂow analysis and introduction to
assignment 1. Center for Electric Power and Energy Technical University of
Denmark, 2019.
[34] Hjörtur Jóhannsson. Transient stability (i-ii). Center for Electric Power and Energy
Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[35] Siemens. Pss®e – high-performance transmission planning and analysis software.
URL https://new.siemens.com/global/en/products/energy/services/
transmission-distribution-smart-grid/consulting-and-planning/
pss-software/pss-e.html.
[36] Siemens Industry. PSS®E 33.5 PROGRAM APPLICATION GUIDE VOLUME 1.
Siemens, 2013.
[37] P. Pourbeik. Proposed changes to the wecc wt4 generic model for type 4 wind turbine
generators. URL https://www.wecc.org/Reliability/Report_on_WT4_Model_
Description_PP012313.pdf.
[38] Y. Lin. Introduction to generic wind turbine generator models. URL
https://static.dc.siemens.com/datapool/us/SmartGrid/docs/pti/2011May/
PDFs/Introduction%20to%20Generic%20Wind%20Models.pdf.
[39] E. Muljadi P. Pourbeik J.J. Sanche-Gasca A. Ellis, Y. Kazachkow. Description and
technical speciﬁcations for generic wtg models – a status report. In: European Wind
Energy Conference and Exhibition 2012, Ewec 2012 1 (2012), pp. 585 –591, 2011.
URL https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5772473.
[40] Siemens Industry. PSS®E 33.5 PROGRAM APPLICATION GUIDE VOLUME 2.
Siemens, 2013.
61
==PAGE:72==
References
[41] S. Niskanen S. Uski-Joutsenvuo. Wind turbine models - model development and
veriﬁcation measurements, 2013. URL
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Mohamed_Mourad_Lafifi/post/
Please_I_need_a_complete_data_of_2_MW_50_Hz_DFIG_generator/attachment/
59d650d379197b80779a9899/AS%3A504996944936960%401497412062073/
download/D5.1.28+Wind+turbine+models+-+Model+development+and+
verification+measurements_final-update.pdf.
[42] Transmission Department of Denmark. Technical Regulations TF 3.2.6. 2004.
[43] InTechOpen. Wind Farm: Technical Regulations, Potential Estimation and Siting
Assessment. 2013.
[44] J. R. Saenz L. M. Fernández, F. Jurado. Aggregated dynamic model for wind farms
with doubly fed induction generator wind turbines. Renene, 33, 129-140, 2007. URL
doi:10.1016/j.renene.2007.01.010.
[45] J. R. Saenz F. Jurado L. M. Fernández, C. A. García. Aggregated dynamic model for
wind farms with doubly fed induction generator wind turbines. Econman, 50,
691-704, 2008. URL doi:10.1016/j.enconman.2008.10.005.
[46] Zongxiang Lu and Shuangxi Zhou. Integration of Large Scale Wind Energy with
Electrical Power Systems in China. 2017.
[47] Danish Wind Industry Association. The power curve of a wind turbine. 2003. URL
http://www.windpower.org/en/tour/wres/pwr.htm.
[48] Lucas Bauer Silvio Matysik. Ge general electric ge 2.5 - 100. 2011 - 2020. URL
https://en.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/
641-ge-general-electric-ge-2.5-100.
[49] International Electrotechnical Commission. International standard iec 61400-12-1.
2005.
[50] E. Meijering. A chronology of interpolation: From ancient astronomy to modern
signal and image processing. Proceedings of the IEEE, 90(3):319–342, 2002. doi:
10.1109/5.993400. URL http://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/63085.
[51] Blue Leaf Software. Linear interpolation with excel. 2018.
[52] Icelandic Meteorological Oﬃce. Database of icelandic meteorological oﬃce, delivery
no. 2020-06-03/hi05 (veðurstofa Íslands 2020: Gagnabanki veðurstofu Íslands,
afgreiðsla nr. 2020-06-03/hi05). 2020.
[53] LMI. Map of iceland. URL
https://www.lmi.is/landupplysingar/einfold-kort/.
[54] A. I. Selvakumar G. E. P. Kumar M. Lydia, S. S. Kumar. A comprehensive review on
wind turbine power curve modeling techniques. rser, 30, 452-460, 2014. URL
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2013.10.030.
62
==PAGE:73==
References
[55] R. K. Nema V. Sohoni, S. C. Gupta. A critical review on wind turbine power curve
modelling techniques and their applications in wind based energy systems. Journal of
Energy, Volume 2016, 2016. URL https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/8519785.
[56] Martin Kostadinov Bakardjiev. Small-signal stability of power systems with wind
energy penetration. Master’s thesis, DTU, 2016.
[57] Landsnet. Annual report 2019. . URL
https://www.landsnet.is/arsskyrslur/arsskyrsla-2019/islenska/
frammistoduskyrsla/vidauki/#TengivirkiLandsnets.
63
==PAGE:74==
A
LANDSNET ASSETS
The following sections show Landsnet assets in the end of 2019 [57]
A.1
Substations
Table A.1. Substations
Substation ID
KKS ID
Voltage [kV]
Starting year
Aðveitustöð 12
A12
132
2006
Akranes
AKR
66
2016
Ásbrú
ASB
33
2011
Bakki
BAK
220/33/11
2017
Blanda
BLA
132
1991
Bolungarvík/varaaﬂ
BOL
66/11
2014
Breiðidalur
BRD
66
1979
Brennimelur
BRE
220/132/66/11
1978
Brennimelur
BRE
66
2007
Búðarháls
BUD
220
2013
Búrfell
BUR
220
1999
Búrfell
BUR
66
1999
Dalvík
DAL
66
1981
Eskifjörður
ESK
66
1993
Eyvindará
EYV
132/66
1975
Fáskrúðsfjörður
FAS
66
1998
Fitjar
FIT
132
1990/2018
Fljótsdalur
FLJ
220/132/11
2007
Flúðir
FLU
66
1995
Geiradalur
GED
132
1983
Geitháls
GEH
220/132/11
1969
Glerárskógar
GLE
132
1980
Grundarfjörður
GRU
66
2017
Grundarfjörður
GRU
66
1987
Hamranes
HAM
220/132/11
1989
Hella
HLA
66
1995
Hnjúkar
HNJ
132/33 2018
Hnoðraholt
HNO
132
1990
Hólar
HOL
132
1984/2013
Hrauneyjafoss
HRA
220
1981
Hrútatunga
HRU
132
1980
Hryggstekkur
HRY
132
1978
Húsavík
HUS
33
1978
Hveragerði
HVE
66
1983
Hvolsvöllur
HVO
66
2019
Hvolsvöllur
HVO
66
1953
64
==PAGE:75==
A. Landsnet Assets
A.2
Transmssion lines
* A part is construved for 400 kV
** A part overhead line and part cable
*** Cable
**** Sea cable
65
==PAGE:76==
A. Landsnet Assets
Table A.2. Substations
Substation ID
KKS ID
Voltage [kV]
Starting year
Írafoss
IRA
220/132
1953
Ísafjörður
ISA
66
2014
Keldeyri
KEL
66
1979
Klafastaðir
KLA
220/16
2013
Kolviðarhóll
KOL
220
2006
Korpa
KOR
132
1976
Kópasker
KOP
66
1980
Kraﬂa
KRA
220/132/11
2017
Kraﬂa
KRA
132
1977
Lagarfoss
LAG
66
2007
Laxá
LAX
66/33
2003
Laxárvatn
LAV
132
1977/2018
Lindarbrekka
LIN
66
1985
Ljósafoss
LJO
66
1937
Mjólká
MJO
132/66
1980
Nesjavellir
NES
132
1998
Neskaupstaður
NKS
66
1994
Ólafsvík
OLA
66
1980
Ólafsvík
OLA
66
2019
Prestbakki
PRB
132
1984
Rangárvellir
RAN
132/66/6,6
1974
Rangárvellir
RAN
66/6,6
2001
Rauðimelur
RAU
132
2006
Reykjanes
REY
132
2006
Rimakot
RIM
66/33
1990
Sauðárkrókur
SAU
66
1977
Selfoss
SEL
66
2005
Seyðisfjörður
SEY
66
1957
Sigalda
SIG
220/132
1977
Silfurstjarnan
SIL
66
1992
Stakkur
STA
132
2016
Steingrímsstöð
STE
66
1959
Stuðlar
STU
132/66
1980/2014
Sultartangi
SUL
220
1999
Svartsengi
SVA
132
1997
Teigarhorn
TEH
132
2005
Varmahlíð
VAR
132/66
1977
Vatnsfell
VAF
220
2001
Vatnshamrar
VAT
132/66
1976/2014
Vegamót
VEG
66
1975
Vestmannaeyjar
VEM
66/33
2017
Vogaskeið
VOG
66
1975
Vopnafjörður
VOP
66
1982
Þeistareykir
THR
220/66/11
2017
Þorlákshöfn
TOR
66
1991/2016
Öldugata
OLD
132
1989
66
==PAGE:77==
A. Landsnet Assets
Table A.3. 220kV lines
Line ID
KKS ID
Starting year]
Substation ID
Length[km]
Brennimelslína 1
BR1
1977 / 2006
Geitháls - Brennimelur
58,6
Búðarhálslína 1
BH1
2014
Búðarháls - HR1 (Langalda)
5,6
Búrfellslína 1
BU1
1969
Búrfell - Írafoss
60,8
Búrfellslína 2
BU2
1973
Búrfell - Kolviðarhóll
86
Búrfellslína 3
BU3
1992/1998
Búrfell - Hamranes
119
Fljótsdalslína 3*
FL3
2007
Fljótsdalur - Reyðarfjörður
49
Fljótsdalslína 4*
FL4
2007
Fljótsdalur - Reyðarfjörður
53
Hamraneslína 1
HN1
1969
Geitháls - Hamranes
15,8
Hamraneslína 2
HN2
1969
Geitháls - Hamranes
15,8
Hrauneyjafosslína 1
HR1
1982
Hrauneyjafoss - Sultartangi
19,5
Ísallína 1
IS1
1969
Hamranes - Ísal
2,4
Ísallína 2
IS2
1969
Hamranes - Ísal
2,4
Járnblendilína 1
JA1
1978
Brennimelur - Járnblendiv.
4,5
Kolviðarhólslína 1
KH1
1973
Kolviðarhóll - Geitháls
17,3
Kröﬂulína 4
KR4
2017
Kraﬂa - Þeistareykir
33
Norðurálslína 1
NA1
1998
Brennimelur - Norðurál
4,2
Norðurálslína 2
NA2
1998
Brennimelur - Norðurál
4
Sigöldulína 2
SI2
1982
Sigalda - Hrauneyjafoss
8,6
Sigöldulína 3
SI3
1975/2015
Sigalda - Búrfell
36,8
Sogslína 3
SO3
1969
Írafoss - Geitháls
35,8
Sultartangalína 1
SU1
1982
Sultartangi - Brennimelur
121,6
Sultartangalína 2
SU2
1999
Sultartangi - Búrfell
12,5
Sultartangalína 3*
SU3
2006
Sultartangi - Brennimelur
119
Vatnsfellslína 1
VF1
2001
Vatnsfell - Sigalda
5,8
Þeistareykjalína 1
TR1
2017
Þeistareykir - Bakki
28,3
67
==PAGE:78==
A. Landsnet Assets
Table A.4. 132kV lines
Line ID
KKS ID
Starting year
Substation ID
Length[km]
Blöndulína 1
BL1
1977/1991
Blanda - Laxárvatn
32,7
Blöndulína 2
BL2
1977/1991
Blanda - Varmahlíð
32,4
Eyvindarárlína 1
EY1
1977
Hryggstekkur - Eyvindará
27,5
Fitjalína 1
MF1
1991
Rauðimelur - Fitjar
6,8
Fitjalína 2
FI2
2015
Fitjar - Stakkur
8,5
Fljótsdalslína 2**
L2
1978
Fljótsdalur - Hryggstekkur
25
Geiradalslína 1
GE1
1980
Glerárskógar - Geiradalur
46,7
Glerárskógalína 1
GL1
1983
Hrútatunga - Glerárskógar
33,5
Hafnarfjörður 1 ***
HF1
1989 / 2007 / 2019
Hamranes - Öldugata
4,26
Hafnarlína 1 **
HA1
1987/2014
Hólar - Höfn
7
Hnoðraholtslína 1**
AD7
1990 / 2007
Hamranes - Hnoðraholt
9,7
Hólalína 1
HO1
1981
Teigarhorn - Hólar
75,1
Hrútatungulína 1
HT1
1976
Vatnshamrar - Hrútatunga
77,1
Korpulína 1
KO1
1974 / 2004
Geitháls - Korpa
6
Kröﬂulína 1
KR1
1977
Kraﬂa-Rangárvellir
82,1
Kröﬂulína 2
KR2
1978 / 2006
Kraﬂa - Fljótsdalur
123,2
Laxárvatnslína 1
LV1
1976
Hrútatunga - Laxárvatn
72,7
Laxárvatnslína 2 ***
LV2
2018
Laxárvatn - Hnjúkar
2,85
Mjólkárlína 1
MJ1
1981
Geiradalur - Mjólká
80,8
Nesjavallalína 1 **
NE1
1998
Nesjavellir - Korpa
32
Nesjavallalína 2 ***
NE2
2010
Nesjavellir - Geitháls
25
Prestbakkalína 1
PB1
1984
Hólar- Prestbakki
171,4
Rangárvallalína 1
RA1
1974
Rangárvellir - Varmahlíð
87,5
Rangárvallalína 2 ***
RA2
2009
Rangárvellir – Krossanes
4,5
Rauðamelslína 1
RM1
2006
Reykjanes - Rauðimelur
15
Rauðavatnslína 1 **
RV1
1953
Geitháls - A12
3
Sigöldulína 4
SI4
1984
Sigalda - Prestbakki
78,1
Sogslína 2
SO2
1953
Írafoss - Geitháls
44,4
Stuðlalína 1 ***
SR1
2005
Hryggstekkur - Stuðlar
16
Suðurnesjalína 1
SN1
1991
Hamranes - Fitjar
30,7
Svartsengislína 1
SM1
1991
Svartsengi - Rauðimelur
4,9
Teigarhornslína 1
TE1
1981
Hryggstekkur - Teigarhorn
49,7
Vatnshamralína 1
VA1
1977
Vatnshamrar - Brennimelur
20,2
68
==PAGE:79==
A. Landsnet Assets
Table A.5. 66kV lines
Line ID
KKS ID
Starting year
Substation ID
Length[km]
kraneslína 1 ***
AK1
1996
Brennimelur - Akranes
18,5
Bolungarvíkurlína 1**
BV1
1979/2014
Breiðidalur - Bolungarvík
17,1
Bolungarvíkurlína 2***
BV2
2010/2014
Ísafjörður - Bolungarvík
15,3
Breiðadalslína 1
BD1
1975
Mjólká - Breiðidalur
36,4
Dalvíkurlína 1
DA1
1982
Rangárvellir - Dalvík
39
Eskifjarðarlína 1
ES1
2001
Eyvindará - Eskifjörður
29,1
Fáskrúðsfjarðarlína 1
FA1
1989
Stuðlar - Fáskrúðsfjörður
16,7
Flúðalína 1
FU1
1978
Búrfell - Flúðir
27,68
Grundarfjarðarlína 1
GF1
1985
Vogaskeið - Grundarfjörður
34,65
Grundarfjarðarlína 2
GF2
2019
Grundarfjörður - Ólafsvík
26,16
Hellulína 1**
HE1
1995
Flúðir - Hella
34,4
Hellulína 2***
HE2
2015
Hella - Hvolsvöllur
12,997
Hveragerðislína 1
HG1
1982
Ljósafoss - Hveragerði
15,4
Hvolsvallarlína 1
HV1
1972
Búrfell - Hvolsvöllur
45,1
Ísafjarðarlína 1 **
IF1
1959/2014
Breiðidalur - Ísafjörður
13
Kópaskerslína 1
KS1
1983
Laxá - Kópasker
83,3
Lagarfosslína 1 **
LF1
1971 / 2011
Lagarfoss - Eyvindará
28
Laxárlína 1
LA1
1953
Laxá - Rangárvellir
58,4
Ljósafosslína 1 ***
LJ1
2002
Ljósafoss - Írafoss
0,6
Neskaupstaðarlína 1 **
NK1
1985
Eskifjörður - Neskaupstaður
20,
Ólafsvíkurlína 1
OL1
1978
Vegamót - Ólafsvík
48,8
Rimakotslína 1
RI1
1988 / 2018
Hvolsvöllur - Rimakot
22,2
Sauðárkrókslína 1
SA1
1974
Varmahlíð - Sauðárkrókur
21,8
Selfosslína 1 **
SE1
1981
Ljósafoss - Selfoss
20,3
Selfosslína 2
SE2
1947
Selfoss - Hella
32
Selfosslína 3***
SE3
2015
Selfoss Þorlákshöfn.
28
Seyðisfjarðarlína 1
SF1
1996
Eyvindará - Seyðisfjörður
19,6
Steingrímsstöðvarlína 1**
ST1
1959 / 2002
Steingrímsstöð - Ljósafoss
3,4
Stuðlalína 2 **
SR2
1983
Stuðlar - Eskifjörður
18,2
Tálknafjarðarlína 1
TA1
1985
Mjólká - Keldeyri
45,1
Vatnshamralína 2
VA2
1974
Andakílsvirkjun - Vatnshamrar
38,2
Vegamótalína 1
VE1
1974
Vatnshamrar - Vegamót
63,8
Vogaskeiðslína 1
VS1
1974
Vegamót - Vogaskeið
24,8
Vopnafjarðarlína 1
VP1
1980
Lagarfoss - Vopnafjörður
58
Þeistareykjalína 2 ***
TR2
2013
Þeistareykir - KS1 (Höfuðreiðarmúli)
11
Þorlákshafnarlína 1
TO1
1991
Hveragerði - Þorlákhöfn
19,5
Table A.6. 33kV lines
Line ID
KKS ID
Starting year
Substation ID
Length[km]
Húsavíkurlína 1
HU1
1948
Laxá - Húsavík
26
Vestmannaeyjalína 1 ****
VM1
1962
Vestmannaeyjar - Rimakot
16
Vestmannaeyjalína 3 ****
VM3
2013
Vestmannaeyjar - Rimakot
16
69
==PAGE:80==
B WIND DATA STATISTICS
B.0.1
Wind data statistics
Analysis of wind data can be found in this chapter. The dataset uses uses single letter
abbreviations for these variables:
• F - Wind speed
• FG - Gust speed
Table B.1. Statistics on average wind speeds.
Station
Mean(F)
St.dev(F)
Var(F)
Thverfjall
9.85
5.96
35.52
Gagnheidi
12.30
7.30
53.29
Skalafell
11.28
7.44
55.3
Kerlingarfjoll-
Asgardsfjal
12.87
9.58
91.85
Table B.2. Statistics on average gust speeds.
Station
Mean(FG)
St.dev(FG)
Var(FG)
Thverfjall
13.56
8.41
70.8
Gagnheidi
15.28
8.88
78.93
Skalafell
14.14
8.85
78.31
Kerlingarfjoll-
Asgardsfjal
16.27
11.48
131.7
70
==PAGE:81==
B. Wind Data Statistics
Figure B.1. Dot plot of gusts exceeding the operational limits of the wind turbine. Each station
is represented in the plot and on the right the total number of gusts is summarized.
71
==PAGE:82==
C POWER REFERENCE
C.1
Example of Power Reference
An example of power reference change and its corresponding wind power output.
Figure C.1. Wind power.
Figure C.2. Power reference change.
72
==PAGE:83==
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Write ISBN XX-XXXXX-XX-X (or delete)
