==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data 
and Machine Learning 
 
 
 
David Sanchez Vicente 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0385 
June 2020 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: David Sanchez Vicente 
Title: Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and 
Machine Learning 
DTU Wind Energy-M-03855 
June 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students.  
Project period:  
January 2020 – June 2020 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Tuhfe Göcmen 
Matti Juhani Koivisto 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Iben Holfort Voxen 
ConWx 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
Master Thesis
June, 2020
By
David Sánchez Vicente
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Wind
Energy,
Frederiksborvej
399,
4000
Roskilde Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The objective of this thesis is to explore the possibilities of wind power forecast im-
provements through the application of advanced analysis and machine learning method-
ologies. The project will be developed in collaboration with ConWx, weather and energy
forecasting provider, situated in Copenhagen.
While the method in ConWx combines Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) fore-
casts without taking weather scenarios into account, this project aims to design and con-
figure a machine learning toolbox for forecasting, building a prediction model, tuning its
parameters, combining several NWP forecasts dependent on the weather scenario and/or
different look-ahead periods and proposing a tool with the purpose of improving the cur-
rent method used in ConWx.
Thanks to the collaboration with ConWx, the suggested methodologies will be bench-
marked against existing applications in the industry with the potential of challenging the
industrial state-of-the-art. Regarding this, it is not expected to necessarily improve the
method applied in ConWx, but to explore the possibilities of using big data with machine
learning as a forecasting system. These machine learning tools will be specially useful in
short-time predictions, such as minutes or a few hours ahead, while longer time horizons
ahead can reduce their impact. It is important to notice that NWP forecasts will just be
applied as an input from ConWx, and not deep study about them will be performed during
the project.
ii
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:5==
Motivation
The main motivation of this project is the possibility of collaborating with ConWx and
its team of engineers and programmers. The input from these professionals, together with
the orientation and feedback of the DTU supervisors, will be highly helpful for developing
the proposed forecasting method.
Further development of the Special Course carried out during January 2020, Method-
ology Benchmark for Power Forecasting, is also a motivation for this project. That course
was an approach to some forecasting models, such as ARIMA, Random Forest and Neu-
ral Network, implementing the corresponding libraries and functions in a Python script.
The predictions were made with synthetic data in a fully controlled environment. This
project keeps developing those models, building a more complex toolbox and working
now with real data, provided by ConWx.
Due to the potential of renewable sources in the energy industry, the project tries to
contribute to wind power forecasting methods, proposing a tool for obtaining more accu-
rate predictions of the generated power in a wind plant.
Wind generation forecasts are typically based on the input from several NWP models,
each one of them providing variability from the differences in physical assumptions. By
combining each model’s individual advantages, the resulting accuracy of the wind power
forecast is improved. Therefore, better results on these predictions would mean more
competitive bids in the energy market and higher revenues for the wind power companies.
According to the Danish Energy Agency [“Power markets and power sector planning
in Europe - Lessons learnt for China” 2015], most of the imbalances handled by the energy
market come from errors in the forecasts. A forecast error of 1 m/s in the wind speed can
cause an imbalance of 550 MW in the entire country, corresponding to the 10% of the total
installed capacity. Therefore, accurate forecast in wind power production are essential for
a steady market.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Tuhfe Göçmen and Matti Juhani Koivisto form
DTU, and Iben Holfort Voxen from ConWx, for all the help and good advice during the
development of the project. Also to my girlfriend, friends, and family, for all the support
and patience on these stressful months.
iv
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
3
2.1
Introduction to time series analysis and forecasting . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The ARIMAX model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
The Neural Network model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
The Random Forest model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
ConWx forecasting method
13
3.1
Numerical Weather Prediction models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Combination of NWP models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Input data for the forecast models
17
4.1
Observations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
Weather parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5
Forecasting process
35
5.1
Preliminary data handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.2
Defining and fitting the forecast model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.3
Post-processing of the output data from the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
6
Building the ARIMAX model
45
6.1
Training the ARIMAX model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7
Building the Random Forest model
49
7.1
Training the Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
8
Building the Neural Network model
57
8.1
Training the Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
9
Results of the Random Forest
63
9.1
Test case 1: Impact of differencing in the Random Forest
. . . . . . . . . . 63
9.2
Test case 2: Forecasting without access to previous observations
. . . . . 66
9.3
Test case 3: Weighting of the NWP power forecasts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
9.4
Compilation of results of Random Forest test cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
9.5
Random Forest and NWP weighted forecast for same time horizon . . . . . 71
10 Additional results using ARIMAX and Neural Network
79
10.1 Results of the ARIMAX model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
10.2 Results of the Neural Network model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
11 Comparison between forecast models
87
12 Conclusion
89
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
v
==PAGE:8==
Bibliography
91
vi
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The following project will explore different forecasting models, comparing their accu-
racy to the tools used at ConWx nowadays. These models will be the ARIMAX model,
the Random Forest model and the Neural Network model. The three of them are based
on machine learning fundamentals, training the models with time series of power obser-
vations and exogenous data, such as forecasts of weather parameters, and will predict
power observations. ConWx has provided a portfolio of wind farms with approximately 3
years of observations. In order to protect client’s privacy, the portfolio of wind farms will
be anonymous, so they will be renamed and the power time series of observations will be
normalized by the capacity.
This report will start with a literature review about the fundamentals of forecasting, in
chapter 2, going through the theory behind each one of the models considered. Then, in
chapter 3, the method applied at ConWx will be explained, which is based on Numerical
Weather Prediction. From these NWP models, ConWx obtains several weather parame-
ters, used for producing power curves of the wind farms and, finally, the power forecast.
The time series of weather parameters and the optimum power forecast produced by
ConWx is also provided, in order to benchmark these predictions to the forecasts models
proposed here and assess their accuracy. These time series of data will be evaluated in
chapter 4, checking their availability and combining them as the first step for preparing
the input for the forecast models.
Afterwards, the data handling and the forecasting process will be detailed in chapter
5. Two forecast methods are considered, both for producing several steps-ahead pre-
dictions for short and long-term time horizons. Then, chapters 6 to 8 explain the details
about each forecast model, tuning the their parameter through some test to improve the
performance of the predictions. Finally, the results will be shown in chapters 9 and 10,
also comparing the forecasting models between them in chapter 11, and the conclusion
is presented in chapter 12.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature review
The literature review carried out in this chapter establishes the fundamentals of time
series forecasting through different models. The review will cover the tools implemented
on the January 2020 Special Course: Methodology Benchmark for Power Forecasting,
such as ARIMAX, Random Forest and Neural Network.
2.1
Introduction to time series analysis and forecasting
Time series analysis aims for modeling a stochastic process that defines the ordered
sequence of observations, which are usually in terms of time intervals equally spaced.
Madsen 2007 explains the fundamentals and the first approach to time series forecasting
through the following process.
Considering Yt as and observation of a time series at the timestamp t, a naive pre-
diction would be to guess that the value at the next timestamp t + 1 will be the same as
at the current timestamp:
ˆYt+1|t = Yt
(2.1)
This naive approach is the persistent predictor. As the actual value at the timestamp
t + 1 will be Yt+1, there will be a prediction error defined as:
εt = Yt+1 −ˆYt+1|t
(2.2)
The stochastic model can then be define by the combination of the equations above:
Yt = Yt−1 + εt
(2.3)
Where, if the prediction errors form a sequence of uncorrelated values with zero
mean, also known as white noise, the process is called a random walk, for which the
optimal forecasting method is the persistent predictor.
This random walk can be written as an integration of the white noise, which shows
that it is a non-stationary process:
Yt = εt + εt−1 + εt−2 · · ·
(2.4)
On the other hand, a more general model can also be considered:
Yt = ϕYt−1 + εt
(2.5)
This is the first order auto regressive model, or AR(1) model. In this expression, the
random walk can be obtained for ϕ = 1, and a stationary distribution for |ϕ| < 1. The auto
regressive feature of this process is due to the fact that Yt can be defined by a regression
of past values, or lags, of the variable.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
3
==PAGE:12==
2.1.1
The AR process
In a more generic form, the auto regressive model of order p, or AR(p), can be written
as:
Yt + ϕ1Yt−1 + · · · + ϕpYt−p = εt
(2.6)
where the values of εt for each timestamp form the white noise. Another expression
for this process is:
ϕ(B)Yt = εt
(2.7)
where ϕ(B) is the polynomial of order p in B.
2.1.2
The MA process
The value Yt can also be obtained by a moving average process of order q, or MA(q)
model. This is defined as:
Yt = εt + θ1εt−1 + · · · + θqεt−q
(2.8)
On a similar way as for the AR process, this can be simplified as:
Yt = θ(B)εt
(2.9)
where θ(B) is the polynomial of order q in B.
2.1.3
The ARMA process
By the combination of the AR process and the MA process, it is possible to obtain Yt
as:
Yt + ϕ1Yt−1 + · · · + ϕpYt−p = εt + θ1εt−1 + · · · + θqεt−q
(2.10)
Having ϵt as values of white noise, this will be an ARMA(p,q) process.
2.2
The ARIMAX model
When the time series has long-term trends, it can be differentiated in order to achieve
stationarity.
Here is where an ARIMAX(p,d,q) process can be applied, which names
stands for auto regressive integrated moving average model, including exogenous pa-
rameters.
The ARIMAX model includes the term d, which defines the grade of difference applied
to the time series. This can be defined in terms of Yt:
Yt = µ + xt + ϕ1Yt−1 + · · · + ϕpYt−p −εt −θ1εt−1 −· · · −θqεt−q
(2.11)
where x is the exogenous input and µ is a constant term dependent on the mean. If
the mean of Y is zero, this term will not be included in the expression. Then, the ARIMAX
model has three main parameters to look at:
• p: the number of autorregressive (AR) terms, or lags of the prediction variable Y .
4
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:13==
• d: the order of differences needed for achieving stationarity in the time series.
• q: the number of moving average (MA) terms, or lagged forecast errors ϵ.
Through the general expression of the ARIMAX model, it is possible to define the first
order auto regressive model seen before as the ARIMAX (1,0,0) or the random walk as
the ARIMAX (0,1,0).
As wind power time series will not be stationary, the input variable needs to be dif-
ferentiated. A first approach to this is to define the ARIMAX (1,1,0) model:
Yt = µ + Yt−1 + ϕ1(Yt−1 −Yt−2)
(2.12)
This case is adding the first difference of Y on itself lagged by one period. Again, the
constant term µ will not appear if the mean of Y is zero.
2.2.1
Identifying the order of difference
The first step when applying and fitting an ARIMAX model is to determine the order
of differencing needed to approach stationarity in the time series. This can be done by
iterating, increasing the d term until the series fluctuates around a well defined mean
value and the autocorrelation function decays rapidly to zero, as if the time series contains
non-stationarities, the autocorrelation will decrease very slowly to zero, as explained in
Madsen 2007. However, if the lag-1 in the autocorrelation function drops to a negative
value, the series might be overdifferenced.
This overdifferencing can also be noticed by looking at the standard deviation, as the
optimal order of difference is that which minimizes the standard deviation. Therefore, and
increase in the standard deviation of the series might indicate a possible overdifferencing.
Finally, as a ”rule of thumb” for selecting the order of difference, an order of one is
usually applied when the time series has a constant trend, while an order of two is used
when trend varies with time.
2.2.2
Identifying the number of AR and MA terms
The AR and MA terms can be used for correcting mild underdifferencings and overdif-
ferencings, respectively. Once the degree of differencing d is defined, it is time to deter-
mine the order of the p and q terms of the ARIMAX model.
These AR and MA terms will be determined by looking at the autocorrelation function
(ACF) and partial autocorrelation function (PACF). If the PACF drops sharply, the model
might need an extra AR term. This is due to the fact that the AR term acts as a partial
difference in the forecasting equation, so adding an AR term by increasing the parameter
p can correct an underdifferencing in the time series.
The ACF shows the same effect regarding the MA terms. If the function drops to a
negative value at lag 1, the series might be overdifferentiated, and adding an MA term
by increasing the parameter q can correct it. This happens because the MA terms can
partially cancel and order of differencing of the time series in the forecasting equation.
2.2.3
Applications of the ARIMAX model
By tuning the (p,d,q) order of the ARIMAX model, the forecasting equation can be
adjusted for giving more accurate predictions of a time series. An example of the applica-
tion of ARIMAX is Hodge et al. 2011, which utilizes several configurations of the model on
simulated wind power data from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in the Unite
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
5
==PAGE:14==
States and real wind power data from the Ontario Power Authority in Canada. This anal-
ysis concludes that the ARIMA models applied are approximately a 20% more accurate
in the predictions than the persistence method for the simulated data, and a 5% more
accurate for the real data.
Another application is presented in Radziukynas and Klementavicius 2014 for pre-
dicting wind speed in the Laukžemė wind farm in Lithuania using historical data of the site.
Here, several configurations of the ARIMAX (p,d,q) order are tested on real data, using
the root mean square error as the accuracy evaluation value. This paper compares the
result of the ARIMA predictions applied to different look-ahead periods, between 6 and
48 hours, to the results from Numerical Weather Prediction models. It concludes that,
for 6 to 12 hours ahead predictions, ARIMA performs similarly than the NWP, but it gives
too rough estimations for 24 and 48 hours ahead, so the model is not a good solution for
long-term predictions.
However, ARIMA models can be applied to these larger time horizons by adding some
improvements. One is the proposed by Kavasseri and Seetharaman 2009, which defines
a fractional-ARIMA or f-ARIMA model. The merit of this variation of the ARIMAX model
is to let the d parameter to take fractionally continuous values in the interval (-0.5,0.5).
This paper explores the possibilities of the f-ARIMA on wind speed forecasting for 24 and
48 hours ahead predictions, using real data from four potential wind generation sites in
North Dakota, Unite States.
The results are compared to a persistence model and to a standard ARIMAX model,
applying several configurations of the p and q parameters, which take values between 0
and 5. The results show how the f-ARIMA predictions have a significantly higher accuracy.
However, the reliability of the f-ARIMA model is questioned by other studies. Drisya
et al. 2014 finds more accurate results in deterministic methods such as the local first-
order (LFO) approximation, and Kiplangat, Asokan, and K. S. Kumar 2016 concludes that
f-ARIMA is not better than a simple AR model when it is combined with time series decom-
position. This, together with the fact that it does not have a straightforward implementation
in Python, makes f-ARIMA a questionable option for time series forecasting.
All these applications show the potential of the ARIMAX model for wind power fore-
casting. Later on, examples of the optimization of this model by its combination with
Neural Networks will be explored.
2.3
The Neural Network model
Neural Networks are a usually more complex forecasting methods, built by intercon-
nected neurons, each one of them acts as an independent computational unit applying
the following expression [More and Deo 2003]:
y = f
[ ∑
(x1w1 + x2w2 + x3w3 + · · · ) + β
]
(2.13)
Where y is the output value of the neuron, x is a specific input value, w is a connection
weight, β is the bias and f is the activation function.
A Neural Network can be defined as a feed-forward network when the computational
process only goes in one direction, and as a recurrent network when it has backwards
connections.
6
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:15==
In its simplest structure, a feed-forward Neural Network is built by an input layer,
an output layer and a certain amount of hidden layers in between [Kalogirou 2000]. In
this architecture, every neuron is connected to all the neurons of the previous layer by
synaptic weights. This weights are fixed at the beginning and then adjusted during the
train algorithm, as it will be explained in Section 2.3.1.
Figure 2.1: Diagram of a typical feed-forward neural network
Each neuron in the network performs following the algorithm shown below, where the
information coming from the previous layer is weighted before getting into the new node.
This information is summed and passed through the activation function. The output of this
function is the output of the neuron, which is multiplied by another weight before going
into the next layer [Kalogirou 2000].
Figure 2.2: Diagram of the working algorithm of a neuron
Although a feed-forward is easier to define and train, it is a simple architecture than
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
7
==PAGE:16==
can still be optimized. For going further in the design of the network, Long-Short-Term
Memory networks can be built. These are recurrent models with backwards connections
and they are trained by back propagation, method that will be explained below. The main
advantage of the LSTM is its memory feature, which can be helpful in the forecasting
process [Gangwar, Bali, and A. Kumar 2018].
2.3.1
Training process of the Neural Network
The train algorithm of the network aims to reduce the mean squared error [More and
Deo 2003]. This process can be defined by different methods, been Back Propagation
and Cascade Correlation two of the most popular strategies.
The structure of Back Propagation is detailed in L.pinjare and M 2012. It consists on
a supervised algorithm for feed-forward networks with two passes through the layers, one
forward and one backward. The forward pass applies the input vector to the input layer of
the network, being propagated until the output. During this pass, all the weights between
the nodes are fixed and random, thus they have no meaning.
As this is a supervised method, the target output is known and used for calculating
an error signal by comparison with the output of the forward pass. This error signal is
then propagated backwards during the second pass, which adjusts the synaptic weights
in order to obtain a more accurate final output when the network is used on test data.
On the other hand, the Cascade Correlation method trains the network by starting
just with the input and output layers, and one node at a time in an iterative process, such
as the one described in More and Deo 2003:
• 1. The network is trained considering only the input and output layers.
• 2. A node is added and connected to the input and output layers, and to all the other
existing hidden nodes.
• 3. Once the new node is trained, it is installed as a new hidden node.
• 4. The process goes back to step 2 until the error of the output of the network
decreases below a certain threshold or a defined number of iterations is reached.
The following picture shows the training process of a Neural Network by cascade
correlation:
8
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: Algorithm of the cascade correlation training method for neural networks [Har-
rington 1998]
2.3.2
Application of the Neural Network model
The first example explained here of the application of a Neural Network is in Premku-
mar and Sowmya 2018, which proposes an algorithm for predicting the wind power pro-
duced in a site using wind speed data as input. The estimations are compared to the
actual wind power produced, using the difference for training the model again until the
errors falls below a threshold. The final output of the neural network in this study is quite
accurate compared to the actual power curve, specially below rated power.
Olaofe and K. A. Folly 2012 uses a recurrent Neural Network for generating accurate
wind power predictions up to 12 days ahead, which proves the reliability of this tool for
long-term predictions due to its memory of the values it was trained on.
More and Deo 2003 extends the application of the Neural Network, performing wind
speed forecasts with two feed-forward networks, one trained by back propagation and an-
other by cascade correlation, one Jordan recurrent network and an ARIMA(2,12,0) model
for comparison. In this case of study, all the neural networks perform similarly, but giving
always better results than the ARIMA.
Chen and K. Folly 2018 also compares a Neural Network with an ARIMA (2,1,0)
model for very-short-term (10 minutes ahead) and short-term (1 hour ahead) time hori-
zons. In this case, both models perform accurately for very-short-term predictions, but
when going to longer horizons, the Neural Network results degrade faster. However, they
conclude that the forecasting errors are still within common values, so more data and
simulations should be necessary for a valid comparison.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
9
==PAGE:18==
Another interesting example is the variation of the conventional Neural Networks is
used in Lotfi et al. 2014. Here, an emotional Neural Network is built and implemented for
wind power forecasting. This type of network has an architecture highly inspired in the
human brain, with nodes such as the thalamus, the cortex and the amygdala.
Figure 2.4: Architecture of an Emotional Neural Network [Lotfi et al. 2014]
The input vector is defined as P = [p1, p2 · · · pn, pn+a] and it enters the network
through the thalamus. Here, this input is divided in the values p1 to pn, which go to the
sensory cortex, and pn+1, which goes to the amygdala. Both the amygdala and the or-
bitofrontal cortex receive p1 to pn as an output from the sensory cortex. The final output of
the network is obtained as the output of the amygdala, once the data has passed through
all the nodes and their specific weights have been applied.
In their results, the study shows how the emotional Neural Network gives just a slightly
reduced root mean square error in the predictions, compared to a more conventional
artificial Neural Network. However, the standard deviation of the results is significantly
lower, meaning that this architecture is more stable.
Similarly as for the ARIMAX model, Neural Networks have been proved as useful
tools for wind power forecasting. Although they are more complex and have more param-
eters to tune and control, this model has the potential of giving more accurate results than
other more traditional methods.
2.4
The Random Forest model
Random Forests are based on the combination of decision trees. A decision tree
is a largely used tool for classification and regression, which finds solutions based on a
hierarchical structure without loops that makes decisions applied to predictor data. The
tree contains nodes or leafs, each one of them stores the final result of the test. Thanks to
this structure, a tree is not affected by irrelevant inputs and it is easy to interpret [Lahouar
and Slama 2017].
However, a single decision tree is very sensitive to the data it is trained on, so any
change in the train data will produce significantly different predictions. They are also weak
in terms of impurity, as they have a high risk of error propagation in case of incorrect input
10
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:19==
data. Here is where Random Forests can handle the weakness of individual decision
trees.
As it is defined by its developer in Breiman 2001: ”Random Forests are a combination
of tree predictors such that each tree depends on the values of a random vector sampled
independently and with the same distribution for all trees in the forest”. Random Forest
are then built by several trees trained independently, forming an ensemble method whose
predictions are combined through averaging.
It is an extension of the bootstrap aggregating (or bagging) process [Breiman 1996],
which constructs the trees using different bootstraps of the sample data. As this bagging
process is made with replacement, the same value can be taken more than once when
sampling and thus there is a risk of overfitting.
While bagging extracts samples from the entire data set, Random Forest limits this
sample extraction to a reduced random set inside the raw data set. This reduces the
correlation between the trees and thus the risk of overfitting by adding an extra layer of
randomness to the algorithm [Liaw and Wiener 2002].
The fundamentals of the Random Forest are defined in several studies, such as
Drisja et al. 2017 or Zhou, Li, and Wu 2016, as an algorithm that generates a certain
number of trees: T1(X), T2(X) ... TN(X), where X is an input vector of dimension m:
X = (x1, x2 ... xm).
Each one of these trees gives an output: ˆS1 = T1(X), ˆS2 = T2(X) ... ˆSN = TN(X).
Finally, the output of the entire forest will be an average of all the individual responses of
the trees. The steps of this algorithm are detailed in Shi et al. 2018:
• 1. As mentioned before, the model extracts subsets Di from the raw data set, ran-
domly and with replacement.
• 2. From each one of these subsets, a random amount of variables are used for
building each tree. With a number m of variables, the node splitting process of each
tree will be 2m.
• 3. All these trees form the random forest, and for ensuring an ensemble method,
the prediction error of each tree should not be less than 50%.
• 4. The performance of each individual tree will be weak, so the generalization of the
random forest will reduce the error.
• 5. The random forest is applied to the test data set, combining the results of the
trees by average and finally obtaining the output of the model.
2.4.1
Applications of the Random Forest
Several studies prove the efficiency of the Random Forest as a wind power forecast-
ing method. A first approach to the applications of the model is made in Zhou, Li, and Wu
2016, which shows how the accuracy of the results increase for higher number of trees
between 50 and 200.
Another example is Drisja et al. 2017, where the model is used for forecasting in a
time series of wind speed data. This method is applied to a data set of 10 minutes interval
measurements recorded at the same location during several years in order to obtain 10
minutes ahead and one hour ahead predictions. Their results show a low root mean
square error, which does not significantly increase even when the model is predicting for
data three years in the future.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
11
==PAGE:20==
Lahouar and Slama 2017 performs one hour ahead power forecasting of a wind farm
in Tunisia. This study uses wind speed and wind direction together with past records of
wind power as inputs for the model, proving that these exogenous variables can improve
the performance of the Random Forest, without affecting the results when these inputs
are not relevant.
A comparison between Random Forest and Neural Network is made in Ahmad, Mour-
shed, and Rezgui 2017. This paper studies the energy consumption in a building but it has
an interesting conclusion affirming that both models can be effective for predictions, al-
though the Neural Network performs better in their cases according to their error analysis
and gives more stable results than decision trees. Random forest, however, is consid-
erably faster during the training process and has less parameters to tune, which also
makes it a feasible tool. Random forest is then another interesting model for wind power
forecasting.
12
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:21==
3
ConWx forecasting method
The objective of this project is to propose a model that could improve the forecasting
method employed at ConWx. This method will be explained in this chapter, highlighting
those features that could be improved.
3.1
Numerical Weather Prediction models
ConWx bases its forecasts in Numerical Weather Predictions (NWP) models. These
models use observations of the weather, processing the information through mathematical
tools for predicting the future state of many meteorological parameters such as pressure,
temperature, wind speed, humidity, precipitations and others.
During this project, the output of three NWP models will be available as inputs for
the forecasting toolbox. These models will be the European Centre for Medium-Range
Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), the State-of-the-art atmospheric model (ETA) and the Global
Forecast System (GFS).
The ECMWF model, operating since 1975, is supported by many countries in west-
ern, southern and northern Europe. It is build by and ensemble of 51 separate forecasts
developed from the same computer model. All these forecasts are activated at the same
time, with slightly different starting conditions and physical parameters. This configuration
makes the forecasts be very similar at the beginning of the simulation, tending to higher
differences as the forecasting horizons grow [ECMWF 2020].
On the other hand, ETA (which name comes from the Greek letter η) is widely used in
Europe and America. This model is derived from the HIBU (Hidrometeorological Institute
and Belgrade University) model, which was created in the 1970’s and updated in the
1980’s [ETA model 2020].
Finally, the GFS model covers the entire globe with a horizontal resolution of 28 km
between grid points. This resolution can drop until 70 km depending on the time horizons
considered for the forecasts [Global Forecast System (GFS) n.d.].
3.2
Combination of NWP models
The process for obtaining the power forecast time series in ConWx starts by extract-
ing all the necessary weather parameters from the desired NWP servers. This extraction
is made for the location of each power plant, defining the location together with other in-
puts such as the time resolution (usually 15 minutes), the starting and ending dates of
the time series and the desired weather parameters to extract. All these inputs define the
configuration of the data extraction.
Once the weather data is downloaded, ConWx uses the weather parameters together
with the power curve of the plant to obtain a power time series for each NWP model. This
transformation into power will not be considered in this project, and the time series of
predicted power will be directly obtain from ConWx.
Finally, the power time series are combined, applying different weights, to obtain a
weighted forecast time series as the final prediction. The applied weights are chosen
in order to minimize the error, but they are not updated during time. Here is where this
project aims to introduce an improvement, designing a less arbitrary combination of the
weather parameters obtained from the NWP models.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
13
==PAGE:22==
For having a first look at this weighted forecast, the figures below show three different
periods of a certain wind farm. The root mean square error is shown in percentage and
the observations and the forecast are normalized by the capacity:
Figure 3.1: Power observations and weighted forecast in Park2. RMSE = 7.65%
Figure 3.2: Power observations and weighted forecast in Park2. RMSE = 19.18%
14
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Power observations and weighted forecast in Park2. RMSE = 25.17%
Considering the entire time series of Park 2, between 2016-03-28 and 2019-04-02,
the root mean square error is 17.56%. The RMSE for the entire available period of some
other parks are compiled below:
Table 3.1: RMSE of the NWP weighted forecast along the entire time series
Park
RMSE [%]
Park 1
20.82
Park 2
17.56
Park 4
20.26
Park 9
15.72
Park 13
15.97
Park 14
10.93
The RMSE between the weighted forecast and the power observations will be used
as a main parameter for assessing the performance of the forecast models proposed in
this project.
After testing and the different plants in the portfolio and start including the weather
parameters together with the power observations in the forecast models build later, some
time series result non-valid as the time resolution of the observations does not match
the time resolution of the weather parameters. As there are other useful plants, these
non-valid time series are dropped from the analysis.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:25==
4
Input data for the forecast models
This chapter will describe the data used as the input for the designed forecast models,
analysing the availability of all the different inputs.
4.1
Observations
The first parameter to consider is the series of power observations. Several wind
farms are available for the study and, as it was mentioned, they will be named as Park 1,
Park 2, etc, for confidentiality.
For all the plants, a time series of the power observations is provided, with 10 and 15
minutes of time resolution. These time series go from 2016 to 2019, with different gaps on
the data depending on the plant. Most of the plants have continuous time series, except
from some minor gaps of 10 or less timestamps.
However, other plants have larger gaps, of several months. Park 1 and Park 5 are
two examples:
Figure 4.1: Power observations time series of Park 1 plant
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.2: Power observations time series of Park 5 plant
These gaps can cause a bias in the predictions. For example, in the case of Park1
(Figure 4.1), the time series has a large gap in the summer of 2017, so the input for the
forecast model will lack information about the behaviour of the data during summer and
therefore the predictions for this period of the year might be less accurate for this plant.
Apart from this, it can be seen how Park 5 has some outliers along all the time series.
These are filtered, setting those values above capacity equals to capacity, so the forecast
models will not be trained with values over the limits that they should not exceed in the
predictions.
4.2
Weather parameters
The extracted data from the NWP models cover the range between 11/03/2016 and
10/03/2020 for the three models considered, all with a time resolution of 15 minutes. As
it was mention, some plants do not match this time resolution, and thus will be dropped
from the analysis. However, these time range will be shortened in order to match the time
range of the power observations.
The parameters listed below are the ones available in the ECMWF model:
• Surface pressure [Pa]
• Medium cloud cover [(0 - 1)]
• Stratiform precipitation (Large-scale precipitation) [m]
• Convective precipitation [m]
• Low cloud cover [(0 - 1)]
• High cloud cover [(0 - 1)]
• Total cloud cover [(0 - 1)]
18
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:27==
• Surface solar radiation downwards [W m−2 s]
• 2 metre dewpoint temperature [K]
• Snowfall [m of water equivalent]
• 2 metre temperature [K]
• 10 metre height V wind component [m/s]
• 10 metre height U wind component [m/s]
• Mean sea level pressure [Pa]
• Visibility [m]
• Sea-ice cover [(0 - 1)]
• Boundary layer height [m]
• Snow density [kg m−3]
• Forecast surface roughness [m]
• Forecast albedo [(0 - 1)]
• 100 metres height U wind component [m/s]
• 100 metres height V wind component [m/s]
On the other hand, ETAEC and GFS ETA 015 have a different set of weather param-
eters, listed below:
• Visibility [m]
• Geopotential height [gpm]
• Temperature at 2 metres height [K]
• Temperature at Level 1 (hub height) [K]
• Pressure [Pa]
• Specific humidity [kg/kg]
• Relative humidity [%] 2m above ground
• Potential temp. [K] 10m above ground
• Specific humidity [kg/kg] 10m above ground
• Total precipitation [kg/m2]
• Categorical ice pellets [yes=1; no=0]
• Categorical snow [yes=1;no=0]
• Categorical freezing rain [yes=1; no=0]
• Categorical rain [yes=1;no=0]
• Friction velocity [m/s]
• Convective available potential energy [J/kg]
• Low level cloud cover [%]
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
19
==PAGE:28==
• Mid level cloud cover [%]
• High level cloud cover [%]
• Total cloud cover [%]
• Non-convective cloud [%]
• Convective cloud cover [%]
• Downward short wave flux [W/m2]
• U wind component at 10 metres height [m/s]
• V wind component at 10 metres height [m/s]
• U wind component at Level 1 (hub height) [m/s]
• V wind component at Level 1 (hub height) [m/s]
• Best (4-layer) lifted index [K]
This is an extensive list of weather parameters and not all of them will be useful inputs
for the forecast models. In order to perform a better analysis of the available parameters,
some Python functions are created for enabling and disabling the parameters in the in-
put dataframe of the forecast models, and also to generate statistics about the selected
parameters.
4.2.1
Availability of the NWP parameters
The approach to include the weather parameters as inputs for the forecast models is
to select a set of the variables more related to the power equation in a wind turbine:
P = 1
2ρAV 3CP
(4.1)
Therefore, the selected parameters are wind speed, wind direction, pressure, tem-
perature and relative humidity.
The parameters of all the NWP models are merged and combined by averaging.
Whenever one parameter is not available for a certain period of time, only the others (if
exist) are considered.
These parameters do not have the same availability. For example, in the case of
the ECMWF weather model, the parameter Surface pressure is not available until 2018,
so the input pressure for the models up to 2018 is the combination by averaging of the
Pressure parameter of ETAEC and GFS ETA 015. From 2018, also the Surface pressure
parameter of ECMWF is included. The same procedure will be made for each weather
parameter depending on the availability of each NWP model.
20
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.3: Atmospheric pressure in Park 2
The Figure 4.3 shows the time series of the pressure in the Park1 plant. The legend
shows the availability of each NWP model.
The wind speed and the atmospheric temperature are available for the entire time
range since 2016 for the three NWP models, while the relative humidity is a parameter
only available for ETAEC and GFS models.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.4: Wind speed in Park 2
Figure 4.5: Atmospheric temperature in Park 2
22
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.6: Relative humidity in Park 2
The wind direction is shown in a wind rose for each one of the three NWP models:
Figure 4.7: Wind rose of ECMWF model in
Park 2
Figure 4.8: Wind rose of ETAEC model in
Park 2
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.9: Wind rose of GFS ETA 015 model in Park 2
The time series of the each weather parameter for the different NWP models are
quite similar. This can be seen in the following tables for some of the wind farms:
RMSE [%] between weather models
NWP parameter
ECMWF vs ETAEC
ECMWF vs GFS ETA 016
ETAEC vs GFS ETA 015
Wind speed
0.10
0.15
0.12
Pressure
0.001
0.001
0.001
Temperature
-
-
0.001
Relative humidity
-
-
0.04
Table 4.1: NWP parameters compared by root mean square error (Park 2)
RMSE [%] between weather models
NWP parameter
ECMWF vs ETAEC
ECMWF vs GFS ETA 016
ETAEC vs GFS ETA 015
Wind speed
0.20
0.22
0.13
Pressure
0.001
0.001
0.001
Temperature
-
-
0.001
Relative humidity
-
-
0.07
Table 4.2: NWP parameters compared by root mean square error (Park 13)
These errors are between the weather parameters are quite low, so the similarity
between the NWP models will make their combination easier.
4.2.2
Combination of the weather parameters
The weather parameters are combined so each one acts as a single input. Due to
its similarities, the approach for combining the weather parameters will be by averaging.
For Park 2, the combined weather parameters of wind speed, pressure, temperature and
relative humidity time series are shown below:
24
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.10: Combined wind speed in Park 2
Figure 4.11: Combined atmospheric pressure in Park 2
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.12: Combined temperature in Park 2
Figure 4.13: Combined relative humidity in Park 2
The wind direction, however, is more complex to combine. Due to the angular context,
1◦and 359◦are very close directions although they are in opposite sides of the range.
26
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:35==
This could confuse the forecast models, so the wind direction as angles is not a valid
input.
Each value could be converted to sinus or cosinus, but if only the sinus is taken,
there would be no difference between, for example, 90◦and 270◦. If only the cosinus is
taken, there would be no difference between 0◦and 180◦. Then, a combination of both
components is considered, so wind direction is converted to the sum of its sinus plus its
cosinus, making each value unique in the range from 0◦to 360◦.
4.2.3
Statistics of NWP parameters
The characteristics of these NWP parameters can be explored by generating some
statistics directly from Python:
Figure 4.14: Main statistics of the NWP power forecasts in Park 2
Figure 4.15: Main statistics of the weather parameters in Park 2
Also by some plots, it is possible to see the histograms of each parameter and their
correlation to the power observations.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.16: Histograms of the NWP power forecasts
Figure 4.17: Histogram of the combined atmospheric pressure (Park 2)
28
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.18: Histogram of the combined atmospheric temperature (Park 2)
Figure 4.19: Histogram of the combined relative humidity (Park 2)
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.20: Histogram of the combined wind speed (Park 2)
The auto-correlation of each weather parameters and its cross-correlation with the
power observations is shown below, for 50 lags ahead and backwards:
Figure 4.21: Correlation of the power fore-
cast by ECMWF model (Park 2)
Figure 4.22: Scatter plot of power obser-
vations and the power forecast by ECMWF
model (Park 2)
30
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.23: Correlation of the power fore-
cast by ETAEC model (Park 2)
Figure 4.24: Scatter plot of power obser-
vations and the power forecast by ETAEC
model (Park 2)
Figure 4.25: Correlation of the power fore-
cast by GFA ETA 015 model (Park 2)
Figure 4.26: Scatter plot of power observa-
tions and the power forecast by GFA ETA
015 model (Park 2)
Figure 4.27:
Correlation of the pressure
(Park 2)
Figure 4.28: Scatter plot of power and pres-
sure (Park 2)
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.29: Correlation of the temperature
(Park 2)
Figure 4.30: Scatter plot of power and tem-
perature (Park 2)
Figure 4.31: Correlation of the relative hu-
midity (Park 2)
Figure 4.32: Scatter plot of power and rela-
tive humidity (Park 2)
Figure 4.33: Correlation of the wind speed
(Park 2)
Figure 4.34: Scatter plot of power and wind
speed (Park 2)
32
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:41==
For generating these correlation plots, the data requires to be normalized with zero
mean and unit variance, in order to avoid the bias in the signals. The Pearson’s auto-
correlation and cross-correlation can also be computed from the Python dataframes, pro-
ducing the same values that can be observed in the plots at lag 0:
Weather parameter
Auto-correlation
Cross-correlation with power observations
ECMWF power [kW]
1
0.914478
ETAEC power [kW]
1
0.908255
GFS ETA 015 power [kW]
1
0.88398
Pressure [kPa]
1
-0.21765
Temperature [K]
1
-0.224731
Relative humidity
1
0.122482
Wind speed [m/s]
1
0.865667
The NWP power forecast are the most highly correlated exogenous parameters.
However, as these time series form the weighted forecast used for reference during the
assessment of the performance of the forecast models built in the project, they will not be
used as inputs except for a particular test case. Also, as it could be expected from the
power production in a wind farm, the wind speed has the highest correlation among the
weather parameters.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:43==
5
Forecasting process
This chapter will explain the data handling and the forecast process. The main steps
for building the models are a preliminary data handling where the inputs are adjusted
depending on the availability of the different parameters considered, a process of building
the box of the forecast model where the predictions are generated, and finally a post-
processing of the output data from the model.
5.1
Preliminary data handling
Several functions have been created during the development of the project in order to
simplify the code, creating a toolbox that is imported at the beginning of the main Python
script.
The power observations and the weather data are loaded in two different dataframes.
Both dataframes are filtered by removing the gaps in the time series. Here it is important
to compare the available dates in the dataframes for ensuring that both data sets match
and have the same length.
5.1.1
Stationarizing the time series
After loading the data sets, the time series are differenced in order to achieve sta-
tionarity. This is made by a function that is built and applied during the preliminary stages.
The function takes the time series and subtracts a shifted version of itself. The number of
shifting periods considered is 1 for a standard approach, so the differencing process can
be defined as:
dt = yt −yt−1
(5.1)
Where dt is the differenced data point at the current timestamp, and yt and yt−1 are
the original data points at the current and previous timestamps.
Due to this process, the first period in the time serie is differenced by a non-existing
value. This gives a Nan in the differenced time series, which is removed.
Examples of the differenced time series are shown below, compared to the original
series of power observations:
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.1: Original and differenced time series of power observations (Park 2)
Figure 5.2: Original and differenced time series of power observations (Park 4)
36
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:45==
5.1.2
Scaling the time series
Once the data is differenced, it also has to be scaled. This scaling is necessary
because each parameter will be represented in a different range. For example, wind
speeds will change between 0 and 25 m/s, approximately, while wind directions will cover
the range between 0º and 360º, and pressure will change between 98 and 104 kPa, ap-
proximately.
As the forecast models only consider numbers, it is necessary to convert all the inputs
to a common scale. The StandardScaler function of the Scikit-learn Python library is
applied, which takes the dataset as input, removes the mean, scales the data set to unit
variance and gives the standarized data set as output.
5.1.3
Splitting the time series
The last step before going into the forecasting model is splitting the data into train
and validation sets. The train set will be used for training the model, allowing it to learn
about the features of the data. Then, the model will perform predictions on data that it has
never seen before, based on what it has learnt from this train set.
On the other hand, the validation set will provide information about how to tune the
parameters in the model. This is a set of data with different samples than in the train
set, and will be used for testing the accuracy of the predictions once the model has been
trained. This split into train and validation is applied equally to the power observations,
with will be the endogenous variable of the models, and to the weather data, which will
be the exogenous variables.
The first approach to the train-validation split of the entire time series is made by
applying the model selection function of the Scikit-learn library. This function takes the
time series as the input, allows the user to define the fraction of data that will build the
validation set, and gives two data sets as output. Common values for this split are 80% of
the data for the train set and 20% for validation, or 70% for train and 30% for validation.
A more accurate approach to the train-validation split is made in ConWx data pro-
cessing tools, which are suggested for this project. They apply three different methods to
split the data, as follows:
• ConWx method 1: days 1-20 for train, days 21-31 for validation.
• ConWx method 2: days 11-31 for train, days 1-10 for validation.
• ConWx method 3: days 1-10 and 21-31 for train, days 11-20 for validation.
It is also important to mention that the ConWx methods define the split between the
train set and the validation set at 00:00 hours. This is, for the ConWx splitting method 1,
e.g., the train set will be built by data between the 1st day of the month at 00:00 until the
20th day of the month at 23:45, so the validation set starts on the 21st at 00:00. However,
after some testing with these splitting methods, the train set is extended 12 hours, until
the 21st of the month at 11:45, so the validation set will actually start on the 21st at 12:00,
being this the time stamp of the first prediction.
This also applied to the other ConWx splitting methods, so the time ranges become:
• ConWx method 1: days 1 at 00:00 to 21 at 11:45 for train, days 21 at 12:00 to 31 at
23:45 for validation.
• ConWx method 2: days 11 at 00:00 to 1 at 11:45 for train, days 1 at 12:00 to 10 at
23:45 for validation .
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
37
==PAGE:46==
• ConWx method 3: days 1 at 00:00 to 11 at 11:45 and 21 at 00:00 to 31 at 23:45 for
train, days 11 at 12:00 to 20 at 23:45 for validation
This is due to how the NWP data provided by ConWx is obtained. The weather
parameters are extracted by skipping the first 6 hours of data each day, as it has been
seen that the data have lower quality during this period, and data up to the next day.
This means that there is a discontinuity at 06:00, where the modelrun for extracting the
data changes. As it will be explained later, the forecast process refreshes the input for
generating the predictions when new data is available. By setting these refreshing points
at 12:00 and providing the model enough lags of the data (so it looks far back in the
time series, as it will be beneficial for long time horizons in the predictions), the input will
contain data from two modelruns, from the current day and the previous day, avoiding this
discontinuities that might confuse the model.
All these splitting methods are shown in the figure below for one of the parks:
Figure 5.3: Train and validation sets by different splitting methods
The advantage of these ConWx splitting methods is that both sets will include data of
all the months of the year, allowing the forecast model to learn about the seasonality of the
time series. The problem with the 80% - 20% split is that this seasonality is not considered,
so the train set might lack data from one season, giving less accurate predictions for that
part of the year.
The following table show the range covered for each input parameter in the train and
in the validation sets, for each splitting method:
38
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:47==
Table 5.1: Range of the input parameters in train and validation sets for each data splitting
method (Park 2)
Range of parameter for each splitting method
Parameter
Set
80% - 20%
ConWx 1
ConWx 2
ConWx 3
Power [-]
Train
0.0 - 0.99
0.0 - 0.99
0.0 - 0.99
0.0 - 0.99
Valid
0.0 - 0.99
0.0 - 0.99
0.0 - 0.99
0.0 - 0.99
Wind
speed [m/s]
Train
0.48 - 27.02
0.48 - 25.92
0.56 - 27.02
0.48 - 27.02
Valid
0.82 - 23.83
0.82 - 27.02
0.48 - 23.83
0.56 - 25.92
Pressure[kPa]
Train
97.94 - 104.06
97.94 - 104.07
97.95 - 104.45
97.95 - 104.45
Valid
98.05 - 104.45
98.10 - 104.45
98.02 - 104.07
98.05 - 104.05
Temp. [K]
Train
264.96 - 302.67
264.96 - 302.67
265.75 - 298.57
264.96 - 302.67
Valid
268.34 - 297.67
265.75 - 298.57
264.96 - 302.67
268.88 - 297.67
Relative
humidity [-]
Train
50.28 - 99.11
50.28 - 99.11
54.26 - 99.11
50.28 - 98.57
Valid
54.26 - 98.32
54.26 - 98.32
50.28 - 98.57
58.94 - 99.11
It can be seen that, e.g. ConWx splitting method 1 covers the wind speed values
until a maximum of 25.92 m/s. However, the validation set in this case has values up to
27.02 m/s. This means that the forecast models can perform worse at high wind speeds,
as there will be input values that have not been seen during the train.
Looking at the different options, it is difficult to find one train-validation splitting that
covers the entire range for all the parameters in the train set. However, as the wind speed
is the most relevant feature, ConWx splitting method 3 allows the train set to cover all
the possible values of the wind speed in the validation set, and also for most of the other
inputs.
For this splitting method, the following plots show the density of values in the train
and the validation sets:
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.4: Histograms of train and validation sets of the power observations. ConWx
splitting method 3 applied (Park 2)
The power observations are normalized by the capacity. A proper train set should
cover widely the values in the validation set. However, the density of the train and the
validation in the plots is calculated inside each data set, which makes it more difficult to
see this coverage. Looking at the counts, ConWx splitting method 3 divides the data into
72823 data points to the train set and 32832 to the validation set, which means a 68.93%
- 31.07% split.
The same splitting method is applied to the rest of the input parameters:
40
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:49==
(a) Wind speed [m/s]
(b) Pressure [kPa]
(c) Temperature [K]
(d) Relative humidity [-]
Figure 5.5: Histograms of train and validation sets of weather parameters.
ConWx splitting
method 3 applied (Park 2)
This splitting method, however, does not always give the best results for all the parks
in the portfolio. For Park 9, the train set will contain a range of wind speed between 0.543
m/s and 18.339 m/s, while the validation set will contain a range between 0.288 m/s and
17.208 m/s. This means that the ConWx splitting method 3 will include lower values in
the validation set than the minimum of the train set, which could decrease the accuracy of
the predictions of the forecast model for low wind speeds. For this case, ConWx splitting
method 2 gives a better coverage in the train set, which means that the optimum splitting
method to select will depend on the park.
5.2
Defining and fitting the forecast model
Before applying the model for obtaining the predictions, two history sets are defined
with the data in the train set, and they will be updated after each forecasting period. This
means that, for example, for one hour ahead predictions (4 steps with 15 minutes reso-
lution), the model will predict values from t to t+3 after been trained with the history data
until time t. Later, when the real values up to time t+3 are available, the history will be ex-
tended, so the next predictions can be based on these updated sets, which can improve
the performance of the model significantly.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
41
==PAGE:50==
Once these history dataframes are built, the model is fitted with the history of the
power observations as endogenous variables and the history of the weather parameters
as exogenous variables, both up to the same timestamp t −1, been t the point where the
predictions will begin.
The desired output of the model will be a multi-step forecast for 1 hour ahead and
24 hours ahead predictions. These results are obtained by two different strategies: a
recursive multi-step forecast of a multiple output forecast.
5.2.1
Recursive forecast
The recursive strategy works in a loop of one step ahead forecasts that predicts the
power for a certain number of target dates. For the example of 1 hour ahead predictions,
the target dates will consists of the timestamps that will be predicted, t, t+1, t+2 and t+3.
The model will predict the power for t, and then use that predicted value as an input for
predicting t+1.
In the case of a 4 steps recursive strategy, and considering, e.g. 3 lags in the power
observations and 1 exogenous variable, x, the recursive process will be defined as fol-
lows:
Yt = model
(
yt−1, yt−2, yt−3, xt
)
(5.2)
Yt+1 = model
(
Yt, yt−1, yt−2, xt+1
)
(5.3)
Yt+2 = model
(
Yt+1, Yt, yt−1, xt+2
)
(5.4)
Yt+3 = model
(
Yt+2, Yt+1, Yt, xt+3
)
(5.5)
Where y defines the real observations and Y defines the predicted values.
At some point, depending on the amount of lags used for the model, the predictions
could be based only in predicted values and not in real observations. This means that
the performance of the model is expected to decrease as the timestamps in the target
dates increases. After all the target dates have been predicted and the predicting period
is finished, the real observations of the power will be available and the model can be
refreshed.
On the other hand, the exogenous variables x are forecast values from the NWP mod-
els, so each prediction can use the exogenous variables corresponding to its particular
timestamp.
5.2.2
Multi-output forecast
The multi-output (or multiple) strategy predicts all the values corresponding to the tar-
get dates in just one iteration. For the same example as above, the input for this strategy
will consist of the real observations for the 3 lags and the exogenous variables for all the
timestamps between time t and time t+3:
Yt+3, Yt+2, Yt+1, Yt = model
(
yt−1, yt−2, yt−3, xt, xt+1, xt+2, xt+3
)
(5.6)
42
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:51==
This method requires a higher amount of inputs during the training, as it includes all
the timestamps between t and t+3. Thus, the training time for this method is significantly
higher than for the recursive method.
5.3
Post-processing of the output data from the model
Once the predictions are obtained from the model, they require some post-processing
in order to convert the differenced and scaled values to real values of power in kW.
In the pre-processing, the differencing was made before the scaling, so in the post-
processing, this scaling must be inverted before the differencing. For inverting the scaling,
the Scikit-learn library contains the inverse transform method, which can be applied to the
scaler previously generated by the StandardScaler function. This method scales the data
set back to the original representation.
Afterwards, the differences are inverted by a recursive reconstruction of the predicted
values. Continuing with the example of a 4 steps ahead forecast, this method starts
reconstructing the first prediction at time t using the last available observation at time
t −1, and the differenced prediction at time t. Afterwards, the prediction at time t + 1 is
reconstructed using the prediction at time t and the differenced prediction at time t + 1.
Continuing this recursive process, all the predictions are reconstructed until the last value
obtained, at time t + 3. The loop process can be represented by the following equations:
Yt = yt−1 + dt
(5.7)
Yt+1 = Yt + dt+1
(5.8)
Yt+2 = Yt+1 + dt+2
(5.9)
Yt+3 = Yt+2 + dt+3
(5.10)
Where Yt to Yt+3 are the reconstructed values in kW for all the predictions, yt−1 is the
last available observation, also in kW, and dt to dt+3 are the differenced predicted values.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:53==
6
Building the ARIMAX model
Once the data set have been differenced and scaled during the pre-processing stages,
the ARIMAX model can be defined in Python through the ARIMA function from the statsmodel
library. This function will take three inputs:
• endog: power observations as endogenous variable.
• exog: weather parameters as exogenous variables.
• order: order (p, d, q) of the ARIMAX model.
These endog and exog inputs will be dataframes built with the train set. The model
is fitted by the fit method of this Python function, and the predictions are generated by
the forecast method. This last method takes a steps parameter as input that defines the
number of steps ahead that the model will predict. It will be defined always as 1 for the
recursive forecast and as many numbers of steps ahead as wanted for the multi-output
forecast.
6.1
Training the ARIMAX model
The ARIMAX model can be optimized by adjusting the (p, d, q) order. The d terms
is fixed as 1 degree of differencing as it was explained in the section 5.1.1. However, the
AR and MA terms of the ARIMAX model (p and q parameters) can be tuned by assessing
the performance of the model for different orders. The p parameter is defined between 0
and 10 in steps of 5, and the q parameter is defined between 0 and 5 in steps of 1.
Figures 6.1 to 6.4 show the performance of the ARIMAX model for these different
orders, for short and long-term predictions, respectively, and for two different parks.
Figure 6.1: RMSE in the validation set for different ARIMAX orders. 4 steps ahead pre-
dictions (1 hour ahead), Park 2
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 6.2: RMSE in the validation set for different ARIMAX orders. 4 steps ahead pre-
dictions (1 hour ahead), Park 9
Figure 6.3: RMSE in the validation set for different ARIMAX orders. 96 steps ahead
predictions (24 hours ahead), Park 2
46
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:55==
Figure 6.4: RMSE in the validation set for different ARIMAX orders. 96 steps ahead
predictions (24 hours ahead), Park 9
As it can be seen, the performance of the model tends to increase when increasing
the amount of lags with the p parameter and also when adding q parameters. The results
change from one plant to another, although the recursive forecast method performs better
on average. Thus, the order of the ARIMAX model must be tuned for each plant.
For these particular plants, the best ARIMAX orders are compiled in the following
table:
Table 6.1: Optimum ARIMAX orders for short and long-term forecasting
Forecast horizon
Optimum ARIMAX order and forecast method
Park 2
4 steps
(5,0,1) recursive
96 steps
(10,0,1) recursive
Park 9
4 steps
(10,0,1) recursive
96 steps
(5,0,4) recrusive
6.1.1
Selection of the exogenous parameters
The next approach for training the model will be to get the selection of parameters that
are inserted as exogenous parameters. First, the model is fitted only with the endogenous
variable, i.e. the power observations. Then, the NWP parameters explained in the chapter
4 (wind speed, wind direction, pressure, temperature and relative humidity) are included.
ConWx weighted forecast is added to the right of the table for comparison. For all these
cases, the accuracy of the predictions in the validation set is shown in the following tables
for some of the plants, in short and long-term forecasting horizons:
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
47
==PAGE:56==
Table 6.2: Performance of the ARIMAX model fitted with endogenous and exogenous
parameters, Park 2, 4 steps ahead predictions (1 hour ahead)
Plant
RMSE [%]
recursive
(endog)
RMSE [%]
recursive
(endog + exog)
RMSE
multi-output [%]
(endog)
RMSE [%]
multi-output
(endog + exog)
RMSE [%]
ConWx
weighted
forecast
Park 1
11.80
11.50
11.77
11.35
27.45
Park 2
10.61
9.64
9.66
9.53
26.15
Park 4
11.16
10.93
10.25
10.12
24.30
Park 9
15.08
14.57
15.81
17.02
23.80
The same test is made for long forecast time horizons, such as 24 hours ahead:
Table 6.3: Performance of the ARIMAX model fitted with endogenous and exogenous
parameters, Park 2, 96 steps ahead predictions (24 hours ahead)
Plant
RMSE [%]
recursive
(endog)
RMSE [%]
recursive
(endog + exog)
RMSE [%]
multi-output
(endog)
RMSE [%]
multi-output
(endog + exog)
RMSE [%]
ConWx
weighted
forecast
Park 1
43.33
67.55
39.53
30.25
27.45
Park 2
39.66
29.85
36.83
25.96
26.15
Park 4
131.32
124.69
22.58
22.84
24.30
Park 9
40.82
36.14
40.82
35.63
23.80
The endog tests mean that the model has been trained only with the power obser-
vations, and the predictions are based only in this parameter. The endog + exog tests
include the entire set of exogenous parameters. As it can be seen, adding the more ex-
ogenous parameters, on average, improves the performance of the model, as more data
about the time series is available for training the model and generating the predictions.
From these tests it is also possible to see that the ARIMAX model in long horizons
has a high error for some of the parks compared to the ConWx weighted forecast. For
trying to improve this performance, the Random Forest and the Neural Network models
will be defined and tuned in the next chapters.
48
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:57==
7
Building the Random Forest model
While ARIMAX model generates the defined amount of lags by itself, Random Forest
needs these lags to be added among its inputs. For this purpose, a Python function is
built in order to generate the desired amount of lags, which are concatenated to the power
observations.
The creation of these lags allows the model to be fitted with a dataframe of features
with an adequate structure. Following the example of 4 steps ahead predictions, 3 lags
and 1 exogenous variable, and for the recursive forecast method, this dataframe would
contain the parameters yt−1, yt−2, yt−3, xt, being t the timestamp of the first prediction.
For the multi-output forecast method, the input would contain the following parameters:
yt−1, yt−2, yt−3, xt, xt+1, xt+2, xt+3
The dataframe of targets also requires a certain structure for fitting the Random For-
est. For the recursive forecast method, it will contain only the column of observations yt,
while for the multi-output forecast, it requires additional columns built by shifted versions
of these observations, with the structure: yt, yt+1, yt+2, yt+3. As the lags are produced
by shifting the time series, some Nans are generated at the beginning of the data set,
which are dropped.
Once these dataframes are built, the Random Forest can be defined using the Ran-
domForestRegressor Python function from the Scikit-learn library. Among its several in-
puts, the parameter n-estimators defines the number of trees that the model will contain.
This parameter can be tuned for increasing the performance of the model. Also, a certain
fixed value is given to the random-state input so the randomness is controlled and the
Random Forest generates the trees using always the same seed.
The model is fitted by the fit method, providing the features and targets dataframes as
inputs, and the predictions are generated by the predict method. While the ARIMAX model
produced a certain number of predictions depending on its parameter steps, the Random
Forest requires an input to its predict method that follows the structure of the features
dataframe, and it will generate as many predictions as columns are in the dataframe of
targets.
7.1
Training the Random Forest
As it has been mentioned, the Random Forest model requires to input the number
of lags of the target variable manually. These are created in the pre-processing stages,
but its number can be tuned for achieving a higher performance. In order to do this, the
model is run for a range of lags, assessing the performance of the predictions.
The following plots show the RMSE in a certain period of the validation set of two
parks, compared for different lags, between 0 and 100, in steps of 5. Figure 7.1 show
test for recursive forecast and figure 7.2 for multi-output forecast, both for 4 steps ahead
predictions. Figures 7.3 and 7.4 show the same tests for 96 steps predictions.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
49
==PAGE:58==
(a) Park 2
(b) Park 4
(c) Park 9
(d) Park 14
Figure 7.1: RMSE in the validation set for different number of lags, applying recursive forecast
for 4 steps ahead predictions (1 hour ahead)
(a) Park 2
(b) Park 4
(c) Park 9
(d) Park 14
Figure 7.2: RMSE in the validation set for different number of lags, applying multi-output forecast
for 4 steps ahead predictions (1 hour ahead)
50
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:59==
(a) Park 2
(b) Park 4
(c) Park 9
(d) Park 14
Figure 7.3: RMSE in the validation set for different number of lags, applying recursive forecast
for 96 steps ahead predictions (24 hours ahead)
(a) Park 2
(b) Park 4
(c) Park 9
(d) Park 14
Figure 7.4: RMSE in the validation set for different number of lags, applying multi-output forecast
for 96 steps ahead predictions (24 hours ahead)
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
51
==PAGE:60==
From these test is difficult to choose an optimum number of lags of power observa-
tions. The test cases developed during the project show that having at least as many
lags in the input as steps ahead are going to be predicted gives better accuracy, specially
when the time series experiments sudden ramps up or down. Due to this, for short time
horizons, such as 4 steps ahead (1 hour ahead), 10 lags will be chosen as a standard
value. For longer horizons, such as 96 steps (24 hours ahead), 100 lags will be chosen.
Once the number of lags is defined, the next parameter to tune in the Random Forest
is the number of trees. The model is run several times, iterating among a range of trees
and analysing the performance of each case. However, it is important to mention that is
computationally expensive to the models so many times due to the size of the training
dataframes, specially for long-term predictions applying multi-output forecast.
(a) Park 2
(b) Park 4
(c) Park 9
(d) Park 14
Figure 7.5: RMSE in the validation set for different number of trees, applying recursive forecast
for 4 steps ahead predictions (1 hour ahead)
52
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:61==
(a) Park 2
(b) Park 4
(c) Park 9
(d) Park 14
Figure 7.6: RMSE in the validation set for different number of trees, applying multi-output forecast
for 4 steps ahead predictions (1 hour ahead)
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
53
==PAGE:62==
(a) Park 2
(b) Park 4
(c) Park 9
(d) Park 14
Figure 7.7: RMSE in the validation set for different number of trees, applying recursive forecast
for 96 steps ahead predictions (24 hours ahead)
54
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:63==
(a) Park 2
(b) Park 4
(c) Park 9
(d) Park 14
Figure 7.8: RMSE in the validation set for different number of trees, applying multi-output forecast
for 96 steps ahead predictions (24 hours ahead)
As the plots show, the RMSE tends to reach a steady value around 100 trees, spe-
cially for long-term predictions and, even for the parks with higher fluctuations, the vari-
ations in the RMSE are small. According to the values used in Breiman 2001, 100 trees
is an usual number for defining the model, so this parameter can be fixed at 100 for a
standard approach.
Thus, the Random Forest is built with 100 trees and 10 lags of the power observations
as endogenous parameters for short-term predictions and 100 lags for long-term predic-
tions. For the exogenous parameters, the table 6.2 made when building the ARIMAX
model showed that including the wind speed, wind direction, pressure, temperature, and
relative humidity increases the performance of the forecast model in most of the cases.
The same situation happens in the Random Forest, which increases its accuracy when
more inputs are available. Thus, the Random Forest is fitted with the same exogenous
parameters.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:65==
8
Building the Neural Network model
The Neural Network model uses similar inputs than the Random Forest, so sev-
eral parts of the code can be taken from the Random Forest and adapted to the Neu-
ral Network, such as the generation of lags and the building of the features and targets
dataframes for fitting the model.
Defining the Neural Network requires several functions from the tensorflow.keras li-
brary. The function Sequential defines a linear stack of layers, and the add method allows
to define the architecture of each layer.
The first architecture built is a multi-layer perceptron, which can be defined by the
Dense function. This is a feed-forward network that follows the structure shown in Figure
2.1, with a certain amount of inputs and neurons in the inner layer, and an output layer.
The output layer will have 1 neuron for the recursive forecast method, as it will produce
one prediction per iteration, and as many neuron as defined steps ahead to predict for the
multi-output forecast, as it will produce all the predictions in one iteration.
The Neural Network defines internal parameters related to the weights in each layer.
The details of the model can be explored through the model.summary() method in Python,
which will show the structure of the Neural Network with the number of parameters in each
layer:
Figure 8.1: Neural Network parameters (re-
cursive forecast)
Figure 8.2:
Neural Network parameters
(multi-output forecast)
As it has been mentioned, the recursive forecast only requires one neuron in the
output layer. The multi-output forecast, however, requires as many neurons in the out-
put layer as steps-ahead are going to be predicted. The Figures 8.1 and 8.1 show the
structures of two Neural Networks, both with an inner layer of 200 neurons and for 4 steps
ahead predictions. Thus, the recursive method requires 1 neuron in the output layer while
the multi-output requires 4 neurons.
It also important to mention how the multi-output forecast presents more internal pa-
rameters than the recursive forecast, as the dimension of the input is larger (according to
the equation 5.6).
Once the network is defined, it is fitted in a loop for a certain number of epochs. These
number of epochs is the number of passes through the train set. Each pass updates the
internal parameters of the model, trying to reduce the error. This number of epochs is
usually large, of hundreds or thousands, so the training algorithm can run through the
train set until the error is sufficiently minimized.
After training the Neural Network, the code follows the same structure than the Ran-
dom Forest for generating the predictions for any defined number of steps ahead, both
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
57
==PAGE:66==
in the recursive and in the multi-output forecast, and for updating the history once new
observations are available.
8.1
Training the Neural Network
In the figures 8.1 and 8.2, 200 neurons where chosen as a first approach to the multi-
layer perceptron structure in order. However, the network can be tuned in order to avoid
overfitting. This follows a standard rule of satisfying the following ratio:
nr. train data points ∗nr. inputs
nr. parameters
> 10
(8.1)
So the number of neurons is chosen as the lower amount that satisfies this ratio for
both the recursive and the multi-output forecasts. For this example, with 200 neurons,
the ratio for short term predictions (4 steps ahead) is 313.09 for the recursive method and
304.05 for the multi-output. For long term predictions (96 steps ahead), this ratio is 347.85
for the recursive case and 303.08 for the multi-output. Thus, the model is far from being
tuned with this simple approach.
In order to tune the network, each possible architecture must be evaluated in order to
satisfy the ratio. Furthermore, instead of defining so many neurons in just one layer, split-
ting them into several inner layers will increase the complexity of the model and possibly
the performance.
This is evaluated in the tables 8.1 to 8.4, which compile some different architectures
with different amount of Dense layers and distributions of neurons. The model is run for
4 steps ahead predictions using both recursive and multi-output forecasts.
Table 8.1: Neural Network Dense architectures and performance in Park 2 using recursive
forecast, 4 steps ahead predictions (1 hour ahead)
]
Model nr.
Middle
layers
Activation
function
Structure
(neurons)
Parameters
Train/param
ratio
RMSE [%]
1
2
tanh
Dense (300) x2
95,401
11.44
9.20
2
4
tanh
Dense (180) x4
100,801
10.83
9.20
3
4
tanh
Dense (280)
Dense (180)
Dense(180)
Dense (100)
105,841
10.31
9.20
Table 8.2: Neural Network Dense architectures and performance in Park 2 using multi-
output forecast, 4 steps ahead predictions (1 hour ahead)
Model nr.
Middle
layers
Activation
function
Structure
(neurons)
Parameters
Train/param
ratio
RMSE [%]
1
2
tanh
Dense (300) x2
100,804
21.66
9.22
2
4
tanh
Dense (180) x4
104,044
20.98
9.20
3
4
tanh
Dense (280)
Dense (180)
Dense(180)
Dense (100)
110,344
19.78
9.20
58
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:67==
Table 8.3: Neural Network Dense architectures and performance in Park 2 using recursive
forecast, 96 steps ahead predictions (24 hours ahead)
]
Model nr.
Middle
layers
Activation
function
Structure
(neurons)
Parameters
Train/param
ratio
RMSE [%]
1
2
tanh
Dense (300) x2
122,401
62.11
41.06
2
4
tanh
Dense (180) x4
117,001
64.98
42.35
3
4
tanh
Dense (280)
Dense (180)
Dense(180)
Dense (100)
131,041
58.02
42.24
Table 8.4: Neural Network Dense architectures and performance in Park 2 using multi-
output forecast, 96 steps ahead predictions (24 hours ahead)
Model nr.
Middle
layers
Activation
function
Structure
(neurons)
Parameters
Train/param
ratio
RMSE [%]
1
2
tanh
Dense (300) x2
293,496
142.90
42.05
2
4
tanh
Dense (180) x4
219,696
190.90
42.28
3
4
tanh
Dense (280)
Dense (180)
Dense(180)
Dense (100)
273,636
153.27
42.22
As it can be seen from the tables, adding more Dense layers does not have a big
influence in the performance of the model, and it does not necessarily increase it. As
the next approach for increasing the performance of the model, the network will contain
LSTM (Long-Short-Term Memory) neurons in its middle layers.
8.1.1
Adding Long-Short-Term Memory neurons
LSTM neurons are recurrent neurons, i.e. neurons with memory. This type of net-
work, unlike the feed-forward case, has backwards connections. By using this type of
neurons, more complex architectures can be successfully built and trained.
A comparison between different LSTM configurations is shown in the tables 8.5 to
8.8 for the same conditions than in the previous section.
Table 8.5: Neural Network LSTM architectures and performance in Park 2 using recursive
forecast, 4 steps ahead predictions (1 hour ahead)
Model nr.
Middle
layers
Activation
function
Structure
(neurons)
Parameters
Train/param
ratio
RMSE [%]
4
1
tanh
LSTM (300)
99,751
10.94
9.21
5
4
tanh
LSTM (60) x4
105,421
10.35
9.21
6
4
tanh
LSTM (100)
LSTM (45)
LSTM (45)
LSTM (12)
108,237
10.08
9.20
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
59
==PAGE:68==
Table 8.6: Neural Network LSTM architectures and performance in Park 2 using multi-
output forecast, 4 steps ahead predictions (1 hour ahead)
Model nr.
Middle
layers
Activation
function
Structure
(neurons)
Parameters
Train/param
ratio
RMSE [%]
4
1
tanh
LSTM (300)
109,204
19.99
9.19
5
4
tanh
LSTM (60) x4
109,204
19.99
9.20
6
4
tanh
LSTM (100)
LSTM (45)
LSTM (45)
LSTM (12)
114,276
19.10
9.20
Table 8.7: Neural Network LSTM architectures and performance in Park 2 using recursive
forecast, 96 steps ahead predictions (24 hours ahead)
Model nr.
Middle
layers
Activation
function
Structure
(neurons)
Parameters
Train/param
ratio
RMSE [%]
4
1
tanh
LSTM (300)
153,751
49.45
40.54
5
4
tanh
LSTM (60) x4
127,021
59.85
42.01
6
4
tanh
LSTM (100)
LSTM (45)
LSTM (45)
LSTM (12)
144,237
52.71
42.19
Table 8.8: Neural Network LSTM architectures and performance in Park 2 using multi-
output forecast, 96 steps ahead predictions (24 hours ahead)
Model nr.
Middle
layers
Activation
function
Structure
(neurons)
Parameters
Train/param
ratio
RMSE [%]
4
1
tanh
LSTM (300)
453,096
92.57
41.54
5
4
tanh
LSTM (60) x4
246,816
169.93
42.27
6
4
tanh
LSTM (100)
LSTM (45)
LSTM (45)
LSTM (12)
335,472
125.02
42.27
From these tables it can be seen how the LSTM neurons can increase the accuracy in
the predictions for some cases, although the effect is small and the training time increases.
The error for short-term predictions is almost the same as when using Dense neurons,
but the error for long-term predictions is slightly improved in the model number 4, which
contains 300 LSTM neurons in one middle layer. Thus, this architecture will be chosen.
After tuning the model’s parameters, the best configuration for the Neural Network
models is defined with 10 lags of the power observations as endogenous parameters for
4 steps ahead predictions, and 100 lags for 96 steps ahead predictions, following the
standard defined for the Random Forest model. As exogenous parameters, the wind
speed, wind direction, pressure, temperature and relative humidity are chosen.
Once the Neural Network architecture is defined, it must be fitted for a certain number
of epochs. For this, the performance of the model is evaluated for the already defined
60
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:69==
architecture, testing different numbers of epochs during the fitting, from 50 to 1000 in
steps of 50.
Figure 8.3: Neural Network accuracy for different number of epochs. 4 steps ahead pre-
dictions (1 hours ahead). Park 2
Figure 8.4: Neural Network accuracy for different number of epochs. 96 steps ahead
predictions (24 hours ahead). Park 2
Training the model through more epochs does not necessarily increase the accuracy
of the model. For short-term predictions, the best performance of the network is found at
100 epochs applying the recursive method and at 800 epochs for the multi-output method.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
61
==PAGE:70==
However, the accuracy of the model for this multi-output case is almost the same for 50
epochs, which would be a most efficient parameter as the training time would be signifi-
cantly lower.
In general, the differences in the RMSE for these short-term predictions are low,
oscillating between 9.05% and 9.35%, so it is not a very significant parameter. For long-
term horizons, the recursive method has the highest accuracy at 50 epochs while in the
multi-output it is almost constant for all cases, so the optimum number of epochs can be
fixed at 50 for both forecast methods.
62
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:71==
9
Results of the Random Forest
This chapter analyses the results obtained from the Random Forest model, compar-
ing its output to the weighted forecast obtained by the ConWx forecasting method. The
results are split into some different test cases, in order to assess the performance of the
model in different scenarios.
9.1
Test case 1: Impact of differencing in the Random Forest
According to Berlin 2005, when non-stationary data is applied to a regression model,
a classical approach is to difference the time series in order to achieve stationarity. How-
ever, the time series studied in this project include wind speed and power observations,
which are highly correlated. According to this source, the cointegration between these
variables makes it interesting to assess the relationship between them without differenc-
ing the data, in spite of the non-stationarity. In the time series studied here, the wind
speed (x variable) can explain the behaviour of the power observations (y variable), so
the regression of the Random Forest could be performed without differencing.
Thus, this first test case investigates the performance of the Random Forest model
when the input data is not differenced (although it is still scaled). First, it will be evaluated
for short-term predictions.
Figure 9.1: Predictions of the Random Forest model with and without differencing the
inputs. Recursive forecast, 4 steps ahead predictions (1 hour ahead). Park 2
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 9.2: Predictions of the Random Forest model with and without differencing the
inputs. Multi-output forecast, 4 steps ahead predictions (1 hour ahead). Park 2
The figures 9.1 and 9.2 show that the predictions follow the shape of observations for
differenced and non-differenced data. However, as it is shown in table 9.1, for short-term
predictions the error is higher when the input data is not differenced.
The following plots show the same validation period for 24 hours ahead predictions.
Figure 9.3: Predictions of the Random Forest model with and without differencing the
inputs. Recursive forecast, 96 steps ahead predictions (24 hours ahead). Park 2
64
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:73==
Figure 9.4: Predictions of the Random Forest model with and without differencing the
inputs. Multi-output forecast, 96 steps ahead predictions (24 hours ahead). Park 2
Here, the performance of the model is significantly better when the differencing is not
applied.
From the Python function for defining the Random Forest it is possible to extract a
plot showing the relative importance of each feature used by the model for generating the
predictions. For this test case 1, the first lags of the power observations and the wind
speed are the most important features, and thus the ones driving the predictions.
Figure 9.5: Features relative importance in Random Forest model, by test case 1. Park 2
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
65
==PAGE:74==
The following table compiles the errors in the time series of predictions for differenced
and non-differenced input data. The reference error of the ConWx weighted forecast is
17.94%. According to these results, differencing the input data is beneficial for short-term
predictions. However, for long-term predictions, the Random Forest model is not catching
some trends of the power observations accurately, as it can be seen in the figures 9.3 and
9.4 around the 2018-12-16 or 2018-12-19. Due to this, although the model without the
differenced data does not follows perfectly the ramps in the time series, the general error
of the predictions is lower.
Table 9.1: RMSE of the Random Forest predictions, comparing results for differenced and
non-differenced inputs
Forecast method
Forecast horizon
Differenced data
RMSE [%]
Recursive
4 steps ahead
Yes
8.51
No
8.75
96 steps ahead
Yes
33.95
No
24.80
Multi-output
4 steps ahead
Yes
8.45
No
8.57
96 steps ahead
Yes
32.14
No
17.57
This test set shows that not applying differencing to the input data can be benefitial for
long-term predictions, while short-term predictions are more accurate when the input data
is differenced. Also, the multi-output forecast method performs better than the recursive
method.
This can be due to a larger amount of information available in the multi-output case.
Although the recursive method generates predictions step by step, each prediction is
based in other predicted values, as explained in the section 5.2.1, which can decrease
the accuracy.
On the other hand, the multi-output forecast predicts for the entire period between
refreshing points, i.e. 4 steps or 96 steps at a time, depending on the forecast horizon.
For generating these predictions, the model has been trained in the relations between the
parameters for the entire period, as explained in the section 5.2.2 (eq. 5.6), which can
improve the accuracy of the model.
9.2
Test case 2: Forecasting without access to previous
observations
During their operation, ConWx not always have the power observations available up
to the current day when they start delivering the forecast. Due to this, as only the weather
parameters are available, the Random Forest is fitted only with the exogenous data for
simulating this scenario.
In order to see how the time series of predictions follow the shape of the power obser-
vations, the following figures show the predictions for 4 and 96 steps ahead, for recursive
and multi-output forecasts:
66
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:75==
Figure 9.6: Predictions of the Random Forest model only with exogenous data. 4 steps
ahead predictions (1 hour ahead). Park 2
Figure 9.7: Predictions of the Random Forest model only with exogenous data. 96 steps
ahead predictions (24 hours ahead). Park 2
Similarly as for the previous test case, the relative importance of the features applied
here are shown below. As the model is now only fitted with the exogenous parameters,
the wind speed becomes the most important features, reason why the time series of the
predictions is mainly following the shape of the wind speed, which can be specially notices
in figure 9.7.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 9.8: Features relative importance in Random Forest model, by test case 2. Park 2
The performance of the model for the configurations of these test case is compiled
in the following table:
Table 9.2: RMSE of the Random Forest predictions fitted only with exogenous data
Forecast method
Forecast horizon
RMSE [%]
Recursive
4 steps ahead
9.08
96 steps ahead
26.57
Multi-output
4 steps ahead
9.04
96 steps ahead
27.12
In this test case, fitting the Random Forest only with exogenous data, the recursive
forecast method performs slightly better, giving a lower RMSE and also considering that
this option takes less time to train the model.
As it has been seen in the previous test case, section 9.1, fitting the model with non-
differenced data can improve the accuracy of the predictions. In order to check if that also
applies to this test case, the performance is tested for non-differenced input data. The
predictions in this case have an error of 17.03% and 17.89%, for long-term predictions,
with recursive and multi-output forecasts, respectively. These are lower than the values
shown in the table 9.2, which means that not applying the differencing is also benefitial in
this test case for long-term horizons.
9.3
Test case 3: Weighting of the NWP power forecasts
Another interesting test case is to assess how the Random Forest weights the differ-
ent time series of NWP power forecasts used by ConWx for obtaining their final weighted
forecast. In the previous test cases, these NWP power forecasts were not included among
the exogenous inputs of the model, as they are the parameters that build the time series
of NWP weighted forecast used for comparison. Here, the Random Forest is fitted just
with three time series of data, corresponding to the three NWP models and the predictions
are shown in the figures below, together with each NWP power time series:
68
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:77==
Figure 9.9: Predictions of the Random Forest model with NWP power forecasts. 4 steps
ahead predictions (1 hour ahead). Park 2
Figure 9.10: Predictions of the Random Forest model with NWP power forecasts. 96
steps ahead predictions (24 hours ahead). Park 2
For this third test case, the model gives almost the same importance to the three
NWP power forecasts used as inputs. As it can be seen in the figures 9.9 and 9.10, these
three time series are similar, and no one of them is specially driving the predictions.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 9.11: Features relative importance in Random Forest model, by test case 3. Park
2
The errors are shown below for the different forecast methods and time horizons:
Table 9.3: RMSE of the Random Forest predictions fitted with the NWP power forecasts
Forecast method
Forecast horizon
RMSE [%]
Recursive
4 steps ahead
9.21
96 steps ahead
26.97
Multi-output
4 steps ahead
9.00
96 steps ahead
24.32
When the Random Forest is fitted only with the NWP power forecasts, the multi-output
method performs better than the recursive, specially for long-term predictions.
Finally, as for the previous test cases, the Random Forest model is fitted with non-
differenced input data, in order to check if the accuracy of the model is higher.
In this case, the errors for non-differenced input data are 16.23% and 15.34% for
long-term predictions, using recursive and multi-output forecasts, respectively. These are
lower errors than the ones shown in the table 9.3, which means that, as in the previous
test cases, not applying the differencing gives a higher accuracy for long-term horizons.
9.4
Compilation of results of Random Forest test cases
The following table compiles the errors of all test cases performed in this chapter.
The test cases have been applied with and without differenced input data and for different
parks. The RMSE is shown in percentage for all the cases, adding the ConWx weighted
forecast at the bottom for reference.
70
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:79==
Table 9.4: Compilation of RMSE of Random Forest model test cases
Test case
Forecast
method
Forecast
horizon
Differenced
data
RMSE
Park 2
RMSE
Park 4
RMSE
Park 9
RMSE
Park 14
1. Effect of
non-diff.
input data
Recursive
4 steps
ahead
Yes
8.51
6.07
7.52
4.07
No
8.75
6.19
8.26
4.65
96 steps
ahead
Yes
33.95
16.00
14.83
9.16
No
24.80
12.90
20.75
7.65
Multi-output
4 steps
ahead
Yes
8.45
5.95
7.67
4.08
No
8.57
6.07
8.48
5.03
96 steps
ahead
Yes
32.14
13.84
11.87
7.93
No
17.57
12.87
12.72
6.32
2. Fitted only
with exog.
data
Recursive
4 steps
ahead
Yes
9.08
6.57
7.48
4.13
No
17.03
18.18
12.81
5.72
96 steps
ahead
Yes
26.57
13.66
14.36
8.95
No
17.03
18.18
12.81
5.72
Multi-output
4 steps
ahead
Yes
9.04
6.37
7.28
3.97
No
16.47
16.99
12.31
5.65
96 steps
ahead
Yes
27.12
14.47
12.71
8.04
No
17.89
11.03
12.60
6.29
3. Weights of
NWP power
forecasts
Recursive
4 steps
ahead
Yes
9.21
6.77
7.95
4.70
No
16.23
13.76
12.43
7.64
96 steps
ahead
Yes
26.97
15.14
14.64
19.69
No
16.23
13.76
12.43
7.64
Multi-output
4 steps
ahead
Yes
9.00
6.37
7.15
4.13
No
16.14
13.33
12.30
6.84
96 steps
ahead
Yes
24.32
13.81
10.09
7.34
No
15.34
12.17
11.87
6.04
ConWx weighted forecast
17.94
11.28
11.31
6.04
In general, the multi-output forecast method gives a better performance except for
the test case 2, where the recursive method, although not for all the parks. Between both
forecast methods, the models trained with non-differenced data gives a higher accuracy
than the ones trained with differenced data, also for most of the parks. From these results
if can be seen how the behaviour of the model is highly dependent on the plant data, and
the best performance is obtained by one or another model configuration depending on
the plant.
9.5
Random Forest and NWP weighted forecast for same
time horizon
This section presents a fairer comparison between the Random Forest model and
the NWP weighted forecast obtained by ConWx. This weighted forecast generates a time
series of 48 hours ahead predictions, which means that a fair comparison would mean
applying the Random Forest model for 192 steps ahead.
The previous test cases have been useful for assessing the effect of different inputs
to the Random Forest performance. As it has been seen, the results are quite dependent
on the plant data, which makes different model configurations perform better for one plant
or another. In general, the multi-output forecast method performs better than the recur-
sive method, but its training time is several times higher. This training time increases
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
71
==PAGE:80==
exponentially for longer time horizons, as the number of inputs for the model increases.
Looking at the differences in terms of RMSE between the recursive and the multi-
output methods, they are lower than 1% in some of the test cases. For such small dif-
ferences, the significantly lower training time of the recursive method makes it a more
feasible option for very long time ahead predictions such as 48 hours ahead.
From table 9.4, the best performance for Park 2 applying recursive forecast is ob-
tained by the test case 3 with non-differenced input data. Thus, the configuration of that
test case will be applied for this comparison. In order to see the behaviour of the model
in different scenarios, the following figures show the time series of predictions for three
different periods of the validation set, one where the time series have more periods closer
to zero, one when it is closer to the capacity and one with high fluctuations.
The first scenario shown is that for which the power observations have more periods
closer to zero:
Figure 9.12: Predictions of the Random Forest model by test case 3. 192 steps ahead
predictions (48 hours ahead). Time series closer to zero. Park 2.
For this model configuration, the predictions are based on the three NWP power
forecasts, which makes the predictions follow quite accurately the shape of these three
time series, and thus the ConWx weighted forecast. For this particular validation period,
the regions where the NWP power is close to zero, the predictions follow the time series
without decreasing below zero, issue that happened for other test cases and that required
handling the negative predictions in the post-processing. The errors of the Random Forest
predictions and the ConWx weighted forecast are compared below:
72
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:81==
Figure 9.13: Line plot of errors for Random Forest model by test case 3. Time series
closer to zero. Park 2.
Figure 9.14: Histogram plot of errors for Random Forest model by test case 3. Time series
closer to zero. Park 2.
Figures 9.13 and 9.14 show how the errors in the Random Forest predictions and
the ConWx weighted forecast are quite similar, without any special under-predictions or
over-predictions.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
73
==PAGE:82==
The next scenario applies the same model configuration when the time series of the
validation set has more periods closer to the capacity:
Figure 9.15: Predictions of the Random Forest model by test case 3. 192 steps ahead
predictions (48 hours ahead). Time series closer to capacity. Park 2.
Similarly as when the time series are closer to zero, the Random Forest generates
predictions that can follow the ConWx weighted forecast without exceeding the capacity of
the plant. In the errors, no over-predictions or under-predictions are particularly observed:
Figure 9.16: Line plot of errors for Random Forest model by test case 3. Time series
closer to capacity. Park 2.
74
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:83==
Figure 9.17: Histogram plot of errors for Random Forest model by test case 3. Time series
closer to capacity. Park 2.
Finally, the last scenario shows a period with high fluctuations in the time series:
Figure 9.18: Predictions of the Random Forest model by test case 3. 192 steps ahead
predictions (48 hours ahead). Time series with higher fluctuations. Park 2.
In this case, as in the previous ones, the predictions follow the ConWx weighted
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
75
==PAGE:84==
forecast. However, as the fluctuations in this range are larger and the input data does not
contain the power observations, the model cannot catch properly some of the larger and
sudden fluctuations, such as the valley just before 2018-06-15 or the peak before 2018-
06-17. However, as these fluctuation are not caught by the ConWx weighted forecast
either, the error plots in figures 9.19 and 9.20 do not show high deviations between the
two forecast time series.
Figure 9.19: Line plot of errors for Random Forest model by test case 3. Time series with
higher fluctuations. Park 2.
76
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:85==
Figure 9.20: Histogram plot of errors for Random Forest model by test case 3. Time series
with higher fluctuations. Park 2.
The following table compiles the RMSE of the Random Forest predictions and the
ConWx weighted forecast for these three scenarios:
Table 9.5: RMSE of the ConWx weighted forecast and the Random Forest applied for 192
steps ahead predictions (48 hours ahead)
Validation period
Random Forest RMSE [%]
ConWx forecast RMSE [%]
2017-07-11 to 2017-07-20
Time series closer to zero
12.81
14.19
2019-01-11 to 2019-01-20
Time series closer to capacity
12.35
14.89
2018-06-11 to 2018-06-20
Time series with high fluctuations
15.96
17.56
As the table shows, the Random Forest model can improve the predictions of the
ConWx weighted forecast, getting approximately the same range of improvement for any
scenario, around a 1.5% or 2%.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
77
==PAGE:86==
78
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:87==
10
Additional results using ARIMAX and
Neural Network
This chapter shows the results of the ARIMAX and the Neural Network forecast mod-
els, for the best configurations obtained in chapters 6 and 8.
10.1
Results of the ARIMAX model
The ARIMAX model is defined as explained in the chapter 6, and the predictions are
shown in the following pictures for short and long-term horizons, applying the recursive
and the multi-output forecast methods:
Figure 10.1: Time series of observations and predictions of the ARIMAX model. 4 steps
ahead forecasting (1 hour ahead). Park 2
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure 10.2: Time series of observations and predictions of the ARIMAX model. 96 steps
ahead forecasting (24 hour ahead). Park 2
The RMSE of the all the cases are compiled in the table below. For comparison, the
error of the weighted forecast obtained by ConWx is 17.94% for this validation period.
Table 10.1: Root Mean Square Error of the ARIMAX model
Forecast method
Forecast horizon
RMSE [%]
Recursive
4 steps ahead
8.94
96 steps ahead
27.40
Multi-output
4 steps ahead
8.98
96 steps ahead
27.05
Even after tuning the parameters of the ARIMAX model, its performance if signifi-
cantly higher than the one obtained for some of the test cases of the Random Forest.
The errors are more deeply shown in the figures below, comparing them to the errors
of the ConWx weighted forecast in histograms and line plots:
80
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:89==
Figure 10.3: Histogram of errors of the ARIMAX model. 4 steps ahead forecasting (1 hour
ahead). Park 2
Figure 10.4: Line plot of errors of the ARIMAX model. 4 steps ahead forecasting (1 hour
ahead). Park 2
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure 10.5: Line plot of errors of the ARIMAX model. 96 steps ahead forecasting (24
hours ahead). Park 2
Figure 10.6: Line plot of errors of the ARIMAX model. 4 steps ahead forecasting (24
hours ahead). Park 2
For short-term predictions, figures 10.3 and 10.4 show more accurate predictions,
with low deviations from the power observations. For long-term predictions, the figure
10.6 show much higher deviations, specially on 2018-12-16 and 2018-12-18, compared
to the NWP weighted forecast.
82
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:91==
10.2
Results of the Neural Network model
For the Neural Network model, architecture number 4 is applied (from tables 8.5 to
8.8). The model is applied for recursive and multi-output forecasts, and for short and
long-term predictions.
The following figures show the predictions of the Neural Network for these scenarios,
compiling the errors in the table 10.2:
Figure 10.7: Predictions of the Neural Network model. 4 steps ahead predictions (1 hour
ahead). Park 2
Figure 10.8: Predictions of the Neural Network model. 96 steps ahead predictions (24
hours ahead). Park 2
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
83
==PAGE:92==
Table 10.2: RMSE of the Neural Network predictions
Forecast method
Forecast horizon
RMSE [%]
Recursive
4 steps ahead
9.27
96 steps ahead
41.51
Multi-output
4 steps ahead
9.19
96 steps ahead
41.69
Compared to the RMSE of 17.94% of the ConWx weighted forecast, the Neural Net-
work has a significantly lower accuracy for long-term predictions. The figure 10.8 show
that the model is not following the shape of the observations correctly, either for the re-
cursive or the multi-output forecasts, not handling the fluctuations of the data and giving
almost constant values for each refreshing period. This is reflected in the figures below
as high deviations between the Neural Network and the weighted forecast.
Figure 10.9: Histogram of errors of the Neural Network model. 4 steps ahead forecasting
(1 hour ahead). Park 2
84
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:93==
Figure 10.10: Line plot of errors of the Neural Network model. 4 steps ahead forecasting
(1 hour ahead). Park 2
Figure 10.11: Line plot of errors of the Neural Network model. 96 steps ahead forecasting
(24 hours ahead). Park 2
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
85
==PAGE:94==
Figure 10.12: Line plot of errors of the Neural Network model. 4 steps ahead forecasting
(24 hours ahead). Park 2
Due to these results, the Neural Network defined here seems not to be handling
correctly long-term predictions, which makes it a not feasible tool. More work would be
recommended in order to optimize the architecture of the model and its performance.
86
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:95==
11
Comparison between forecast models
A final comparison of the results of the forecast models is shown in this chapter. The
project has been more focused in the Random Forest, reason why that model compiles
more test cases and a deeper analysis of its performance. However, the three models
are compared here in order to see their behaviour for the same validation period.
Figure 11.1: Time series of observations and predictions by the different forecast models.
192 steps ahead predictions (48 hours ahead). Park 2.
As the plot shows, the Random Forest is the only model that can follow the shape of
the observations accurately. The ARIMAX model can catch some trends of the data but
is not able to follow the fluctuations or the big ramps up or down. In the Neural Network,
the predictions are completely off as it is not able to follow the shape of the time series.
The error of each case is shown in the table below, compared to the error of the
ConWx weighted forecast:
Table 11.1: RMSE of the different forecast models for the same validation period
Model
RMSE [%]
Random Forest
16.27
ARIMAX
31.02
Neural Network
46.57
ConWx weighted forecast
17.94
As shown in section 9.5, the Random Forest is able to generate better predictions
than the ConWx weighted forecast when the model is defined by the test case 3, with the
NWP power forecasts as input data. The performance of the ARIMAX and the Neural
Network models, however, is much lower.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
87
==PAGE:96==
88
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:97==
12
Conclusion
This report has defined different forecast models, aiming to propose a tool that could
improve the performance of the forecast generated at ConWx. After building different test
cases, the Random Forest model, trained with the non-differenced NWP power forecasts
as input data is the model with the highest performance. These NWP time series are
the ones used at ConWx for generating their weighted forecast, used in this project as
reference.
Thus, the Random Forest model is a potentially useful tool for improving the pre-
dictions. While the ConWx method generates the weighted forecast by applying con-
stant weights to the NWP power time series, as explained in chapter 3, the Random For-
est could be a feasible tool for improving this constant weighting by a machine learning
method that dynamically combines the NWP data for producing accurate predictions.
About the other forecast methods evaluated, both showed potential as forecasting
tools in the Special Course Methodology Benchmark for Power Forecasting developed
on January 2020, but they would require deeper work and analysis for generating more
accurate predictions, specially in the case of the Neural Network. The Random Forest
model is a fairly simple model to build, and flexible enough for the problem handed in this
project, reason why it has been the focus of the final analysis.
Finally, it is important to mention that the analysis performed here are very depen-
dent on the plant data, as it has been seen during the test cases of the Random Forest.
Thus, there is not a specific configuration of the Random Forest that can provide the best
performance for every plant, although the mentioned test case 3 is the one that provides
the higher accuracy for most of the plants assessed.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
89
==PAGE:98==
90
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
1. “Power markets and power sector planning in Europe - Lessons learnt for China”
(2015). In: Danish Energy Agency.
2. Madsen, Henrik (2007). Time series analysis. Chapman Hall/CRC. DOI: 10.1201/
9781420059687.
3. Hodge, Bri-Mathias et al. (2011). “Improved Wind Power Forecasting with ARIMA
Models”. In: Computer Aided Chemical Engineering 21st European Symposium on
Computer Aided Process Engineering, pp. 1789–1793. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-444-
54298-4.50136-7.
4. Radziukynas, Virginijus and Arturas Klementavicius (2014). “Short-term wind speed
forecasting with ARIMA model”. In: 2014 55th International Scientific Conference
on Power and Electrical Engineering of Riga Technical University (RTUCON). DOI:
10.1109/rtucon.2014.6998223.
5. Kavasseri, Rajesh G. and Krithika Seetharaman (2009). “Day-ahead wind speed
forecasting using f-ARIMA models”. In: Renewable Energy 34.5, pp. 1388–1393.
DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2008.09.006.
6. Drisya, G. V. et al. (2014). “Deterministic prediction of surface wind speed varia-
tions”. In: Annales Geophysicae 32.11, pp. 1415–1425. DOI: 10.5194/angeo- 32-
1415-2014.
7. Kiplangat, Dennis C., K. Asokan, and K. Satheesh Kumar (2016). “Improved week-
ahead predictions of wind speed using simple linear models with wavelet decompo-
sition”. In: Renewable Energy 93, pp. 38–44. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2016.02.054.
8. More, Anurag and M.c. Deo (2003). “Forecasting wind with neural networks”. In:
Marine Structures 16.1, pp. 35–49. DOI: 10.1016/s0951-8339(02)00053-9.
9. Kalogirou, Soteris A. (2000). “Applications of artificial neural-networks for energy
systems”. In: Energy Systems, pp. 17–35. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-08-043877-1.50005-
x.
10. Gangwar, Satyam, Vikram Bali, and Ajay Kumar (2018). “Comparative Analysis of
Wind Speed Forecasting Using LSTM and SVM”. In: ICST Transactions on Scalable
Information Systems 0.7. DOI: 10.4108/eai.13-7-2018.159407.
11. L.pinjare, S. and Arun Kumar M (2012). “Implementation of Neural Network Back
Propagation Training Algorithm on FPGA”. In: International Journal of Computer
Applications 52.6, pp. 1–7. DOI: 10.5120/8203-1599.
12. Harrington, Peter De B. (1998). “Temperature-Constrained Cascade Correlation Net-
works”. In: Analytical Chemistry 70.7, pp. 1297–1306. DOI: 10.1021/ac970851y.
13. Premkumar, M. and R. Sowmya (2018). “Wind power forecasting using artifical neu-
ral network”. In: International Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics 118, pp. 145–
152.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
91
==PAGE:100==
14. Olaofe, Z. O. and K. A. Folly (2012). “Wind power estimation using recurrent neural
network technique”. In: IEEE Power and Energy Society Conference and Exposition
in Africa: Intelligent Grid Integration of Renewable Energy Resources (PowerAfrica).
DOI: 10.1109/powerafrica.2012.6498633.
15. Chen, Q. and K.a. Folly (2018). “Wind Power Forecasting”. In: IFAC-PapersOnLine
51.28, pp. 414–419. DOI: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2018.11.738.
16. Lotfi, Ehsan et al. (2014). “Wind power forecasting using emotional neural networks”.
In: 2014 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC).
DOI: 10.1109/smc.2014.6973926.
17. Lahouar, A. and J. Ben Hadj Slama (2017). “Hour-ahead wind power forecast based
on random forests”. In: Renewable Energy 109, pp. 529–541. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.
2017.03.064.
18. Breiman, Leo (2001). “Machine Learning: Random Forests”. In: Kluwer Academic
Publishers 45, pp. 5–32.
19. —
(1996). “Bagging predictors”. In: Machine Learning 24.2, pp. 123–140. DOI:
10.1007/bf00058655.
20. Liaw, Andy and Mathew Wiener (2002). “Classification and Regression by random-
Forest”. In: R News 2, pp. 18–22.
21. Drisja, G.V et al. (June 2017). “Wind speed forecast using random forest learning
method”. In: International Journal on Computer Science and Engineering 9, pp. 362–
367.
22. Zhou, Zehong, Xiaohui Li, and Huaren Wu (2016). “Wind Power Prediction based
on Random Forests”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 4th International Conference on
Electrical Electronics Engineering and Computer Science (ICEEECS 2016). DOI:
10.2991/iceeecs-16.2016.73.
23. Shi, Kunpeng et al. (July 2018). “An improved random forest model of short-term
wind-power forecasting to enhance accuracy, efficiency, and robustness”. In: Wind
Energy 21.12, pp. 1383–1394. DOI: 10.1002/we.2261.
24. Ahmad, Muhammad Waseem, Monjur Mourshed, and Yacine Rezgui (2017). “Trees
vs Neurons: Comparison between random forest and ANN for high-resolution pre-
diction of building energy consumption”. In: Energy and Buildings 147, pp. 77–89.
DOI: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2017.04.038.
25. ECMWF (Mar. 2020). URL: https://www.ecmwf.int/.
26. ETA model (2020). URL: http://etamodel.cptec.inpe.br/.
27. Global Forecast System (GFS) (n.d.). URL: https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-
access/model-data/model-datasets/global-forcast-system-gfs.
28. Berlin, University of (Mar. 2005). Regression Models for Time Series. URL: http:
//sfb649.wiwi.hu-berlin.de/fedc_homepage/xplore/tutorials/xegbohtmlnode40.html.
29. Denil, Misha, David Matheson, and Nando de Freitas (2014). “Narrowing the Gap:
Random Forests In Theory and In Practice”. In: Proceedings of the 31st International
Conference on Machine Learning 32, pp. 665–673.
92
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:101==
30. Biau, Gérard (2012). “Analysis of a Random Forests Model”. In: Journal of Machine
Learning Research 13, pp. 1063–1095.
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
93
==PAGE:102==
94
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
==PAGE:103==
Improving Wind Power Forecast Quality Using Big Data and Machine Learning
95
==PAGE:104==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Frederiksborvej 399
4000 Roskilde
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
