==PAGE:1==
Deep Learning for Detection of
Malicious DNS traﬃc
Niklas Refsgaard
Kongens Lyngby
2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The domain name system, DNS, is an omnipresent component of today’s Internet.
DNS is responsible for routing applications and for translating easy-to-read
domain names into numerical IP addresses. The ubiquity of DNS has attracted
the attention of malicious actors that abuse DNS for nefarious purposes such as
phishing, malware distribution, and botnet command & control communication.
Machine learning systems have proven to be useful in combating a variety of
malicious DNS traﬃc. The issue with classical machine learning is the need for
eﬀective feature extraction, which often requires signiﬁcant eﬀort and expert
knowledge. Deep neural networks can learn eﬀective feature representations
when trained to solve an objective, making them desirable substitutes for
classical machine learning algorithms.
This project proposes a deep supervised binary classiﬁer that learns to detect
malicious DNS traﬃc from domain names and passive DNS data augmented
with geolocation data. The proposed classiﬁer is the result of experimentation
with deep supervised and unsupervised models on a synthetic dataset. The
supervised classiﬁer achieved a precision of 0.97, a recall of 0.94, and a Matthew’s
Correlation Coeﬃcient of 0.94 on a held-out test set, making it a promising
solution against real-world malicious DNS traﬃc.
Motivated by the potential of avoiding the need for labeled data, three
unsupervised approaches took part in the experimentation as well. A Deep
Support Vector Data Descriptor (DSVDD) model showed the most promising
results among the unsupervised approaches, but its high false negative rate
makes it unsuitable for deployment. However, its innate threshold mechanism
makes it desirable to explore the potential of the DSVDD approach further.
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
The work presented in this thesis was carried out from the 27th of January to
the 22th of June and represents a workload of 30 ECTS.
Kongens Lyngby, June 22, 2020
Niklas Refsgaard
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
I want to thank my supervisors Christian Damsgaard Jensen, Sam Afzal-
Houshmand, and Sajad Homayoun for your excellent advice, guidance, and
availability even during these trying times of COVID-19.
I would also like to express my gratitude to my family for your much-needed
love and support throughout my work on this Master’s thesis.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgments
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related work
3
2.1
Deep supervised learning techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Deep unsupervised learning techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Deep semi-supervised learning techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Threshold mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theoretical background
8
3.1
Domain Name System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Malicious domains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Passive DNS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Fully connected feedforward networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Convolutional neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.6
Dilated causal convolutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.7
Autoencoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.8
Deep neural autoregressive density estimation . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.9
Deep Support Vector Data Descriptor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Analysis
28
5
Procedure overview
32
5.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Dataset
34
6.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Feature extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.4
Visual feature inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Methods
43
iv
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
7.1
Supervised model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2
Deep SVDD model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.3
Autoencoder model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.4
Masked autoregressive ﬂow model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.5
Adaptive threshold mechanism
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.6
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.7
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8
Results
54
9
Discussion
58
10 Conclusion and future work
60
10.1 Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A All feature visualizations
62
Bibliography
72
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The Domain Name System (DNS) plays a signiﬁcant role in the workings of
the current day Internet. DNS is critical for routing application access, and
one of the most visible responsibilities of DNS is to resolve domain names to
IP addresses, relieving users from the burden of memorizing IP addresses for
every web server that the user wishes to visit. Because DNS is so essential for
every user of the Internet, DNS has also attracted the attention of malevolent
actors and has become one of the primary attack vectors for attackers, causing
downtime and ﬁnancial cost of companies globally. The DNS threat landscape
is diverse and includes threats such as phishing, DNS-based malware, botnet
communication and coordination, and DNS tunneling. Fouchereau and Rychkov
from the International Data Corporation (IDC) announce in their 2019 Global
DNS Threat Report[16] that the number of companies experiencing DNS-based
attacks have increased since 2018 and reached 82% with an average cost of
$1.07M per attack.
One of the primary measures against malicious DNS traﬃc is the use
of blacklists that contain known malicious and suspicious domains and IP
addresses. Blacklists are helpful and generally have a low false alarm rate. Still,
they do not extrapolate to new emerging threats, and the process of creating
and maintaining blacklists sometimes require high-eﬀort tasks such as reverse
engineering malware.
Researchers have trained machine learning algorithms to detect malicious
DNS traﬃc automatically in a proactive manner as a way to address the
drawbacks of blacklists. The beneﬁt of machine learning algorithms is that they
require a lot less attention and manual maintenance than blacklists. Additionally,
they learn which patterns indicate malicious and benign, which allows the
machine learning algorithms to generalize to new and unseen threats. The
drawback of classical machine learning algorithms is that they typically require
extensive feature engineering based on expert domain knowledge.
Deep artiﬁcial neural networks can learn useful feature representations when
trained on a task, which therefore signiﬁcantly lowers the requirements of
feature engineering. In recent years diﬀerent neural network architectures that
set the state-of-the-art in detecting malicious domains of various kinds have
been proposed. This project aims to explore the potential of using deep learning
to detect malicious DNS traﬃc with the use of passive DNS data. The main
contribution of this project is a deep supervised neural network that uses domain
1
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
2
names and passive DNS data to accurately solve the binary classiﬁcation task
of categorizing DNS traﬃc as being malicious or benign.
A well-performing unsupervised neural network could potentially avoid the
need for labeled data. For this reason, the project also explores unsupervised
deep learning approaches by attempting to solve the task as an anomaly detection
problem. Three kinds of unsupervised deep learning approaches are explored:
A deep Support Vector Data Description neural network, an autoencoder, and
a masked autoregressive ﬂow.
A synthetic passive DNS dataset has been created to train the neural
network models and to evaluate their performance with a series of performance
measures. The dataset consists of features extracted for individual passive DNS
records combined with aggregations computed for domains and DNS answers.
Additionally, the passive DNS dataset has been augmented with IP geolocation
data.
A comparison of the evaluation results revealed that the proposed super-
vised model showed high performance on all evaluation metrics, while all the
unsupervised models had high false negative rates.
1.1
Thesis overview
Following this introduction, chapter 2 describes recent related work that has been
studied in preparation for this project. The related work covers deep learning
approaches to detect malicious DNS traﬃc along with deep unsupervised and
semi-supervised anomaly detection techniques. Following the related work,
chapter 3 provides a theoretical description of the Domain Name System (DNS),
how malicious actors may abuse DNS to conduct their attacks, and passive DNS.
Following the DNS related theory, chapter 3 gives an overview of fully-connected
neural networks and convolutional neural networks followed by more detailed
accounts of the deep learning components used in the proposed neural networks.
Chapter 4 provides an analysis of the problem and the requirements of the
desired solution. The chapter then describes how this project aims to solve the
problem and fulﬁll the requirements. Chapter 6 describes how the synthetic
dataset used for training and evaluate the neural network models is created.
The dataset creation involves how passive DNS data have been collected and
how features have been extracted. Chapter 6 ends with a visual inspection
of some of the extracted features. Next, chapter 7 describes the candidate
neural network architectures, how their hyperparameters were selected, and
how the networks were trained before evaluation. Following the descriptions
of the networks, chapter 7 describes the hardware and software tools and how
the evaluation metrics are deﬁned and interpreted. Chapter 8 shows the results
of evaluating the four diﬀerent neural network models on test data, and the
results are discussed in chapter 9. Finally, chapter 10 concludes the project and
provide suggestions for potential improvements for future work.
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Related work
This section describes recent related work and state-of-the-art methods regarding
the problem of identifying malicious DNS traﬃc with deep learning techniques
that have inspired the solution presented in this project. The section is divided
into diﬀerent approaches:
• Deep supervised learning techniques. This section presents related work
that assume labeled training data is available.
• Deep unsupervised learning techniques. This sections mentions related
work that is concerned with density modeling, unsupervised representation
learning, and anomaly detection. These approaches do not depend on
labeled data.
• Deep semi-supervised learning techniques. This section mentions tech-
niques that oﬀer methods of augmenting unsupervised approaches with a
small number of labeled anomalies.
• Adaptive thresholds. Most unsupervised approaches provide anomaly
scores but leave the problem of specifying a threshold to the user. This
section discusses recent proposals to automatic and adaptive threshold
mechanisms that can be used in conjunction with the unsupervised or
semi-supervised approaches.
Supervised approaches to identifying malicious DNS traﬃc have received
much more attention than unsupervised approaches.
For this reason, the
unsupervised approaches discussed in this section are not explicitly developed
with malicious DNS traﬃc in mind, but rather the general task of anomaly
detection which can be applied to the problem addressed in this project.
2.1
Deep supervised learning techniques
Much work before this project has been focused on using supervised deep
learning techniques to identify malicious DNS traﬃc, especially regarding the
problem of identifying algorithmically generated domains.
A literature study[47] on recent supervised techniques has already been
produced in preparation for this project. The literature study mainly covered
the widespread adaption of supervised deep learning to detect algorithmically
3
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2. RELATED WORK
4
generated domain names. A brief overview of the proposed methods in the
literature study is covered here.
Woodbridge et al. were among the ﬁrst
to propose the use of long short-term memory (LSTM) networks to detect
algorithmically generated domains from the domain name alone in their paper
”Predicting Domain Generation Algorithms with Long Short-Term Memory
Networks”[60]. The neural network surpassed the performance of the state-
of-the-art DGA detection methods with a 90% detection rate with a 1:10000
false positive rate. The work and results of Woodbridge et al. have inspired
other deep learning techniques for the detection of domain generated algorithms.
Chen et al. proposed using LSTM networks with the attention mechanic, which
showed slight improvements to the results.[8] Curtin et al. have proposed
adding WHOIS side information, which in conjunction with domain names
passed to a LSTM network, was provided as features to a logistic regression
classiﬁer.[13] Besides applying LSTM networks to domain names, Le et al.
have proposed URLNet[30], which utilizes convolutional neural networks with
word and character embeddings as an alternative inspired by the performance
of convolutional neural networks for text classiﬁcation. Zhou et al. provided
in their paper[62] another approach based on convolutional neural networks
structured into multiple blocks with residual connections and dilated causal
convolutions to reach high coverage. Besides neural network architectures, Yu
et al. attempt to address in their paper[61] the problem of providing the neural
networks with labeled data by proposing heuristic rules for automatic labeling
data. While the approach can reduce the amount of data being labeled by
people, the heuristic approach also increases the amount of noise in the training
set.
While the literature study in [47] was mainly concerned with DGA detection,
other approaches for supervised classiﬁcation of malicious domains have been
proposed. Lison and Mavroeidis describe in their paper[32] a supervised deep
learning model trained on passive DNS data that is able to automatically detect
if DNS records are benign, malicious or sinkholes. The best variant of this
model achieved a recall 0.74 for a false positive rate of 1:100K, 0.92 for a false
positive rate of 1:1000, and 0.97 for a false positive rate of 1:100.
2.2
Deep unsupervised learning techniques
The related work presented in this section consists of recent advancements in
data distribution learning and anomaly detection.
In 2015 Germain et al. proposed the Masked Autoencoder for Distribution
Estimation (MADE)[17] which was competitive with the state-of-the-art of
tractable distribution estimators and showed improved speed and scaling com-
pared to competing autoregressive estimators. MADE is a modiﬁcation for
autoencoders that masks the autoencoder’s parameter to satisfy autoregressive
constraints. By satisfying the autoregressive constraints, each output of the
autoencoder can be considered a conditional probability that is conditioned on
the preceding inputs, and their product is the full joint distribution as given by
the chain rule of probability. Multiple of the more recent deep neural network
architectures presented here have been build on the idea of MADE to improve
it for various purposes.
Papamakarios, Pavlakou, and Murray propose the Masked Autoregressive
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2. RELATED WORK
5
Flow (MAF)[44] for density estimation as an approach to increase the ﬂexibility
of autoregressive models. MAF increases the ﬂexibility of a MADE[17] model
by considering it as a normalizing ﬂow which allows for stacking models of
the same type. The stack of models achieves a higher ﬂexibility and remains
tractable.
Nash and Durkan propose in their paper[39] the Autoregressive Energy
Machine (AEM). Maximum-likelihood training usually states that models specify
an explicit probability density. AEMs address this constraint by using neural
networks to simultaneously learn the energy function, the unnormalized density,
of the data while also computing an importance-sampling estimate of the
normalizing constant for each conditional in the autoregressive decomposition.
Nash and Durkan observe that direct density estimation can reduce ﬂexibility
and expressiveness of neural networks, and that neural networks may be better
suited to learn energy functions.
Mirsky et al. presents in their paper[36] Kitsune, an online ensemble of
autoencoders for online network intrusion detection.
The authors trained
autoencoder networks to reconstruct features of incoming data instances. A high
reconstruction error therefore indicates potential anomalies. The autoencoders
function as an ensemble by each outputting their respective 0-1 normalized
root-mean-square error signal to an output autoencoder which acts as a ﬁnal
voting mechanism. The output of the Kitsune network is considered an anomaly
score for the input instance, where larger scores indicates greater anomalies. The
anomaly detection therefore requires a threshold that distinguishes anomalies
from normal traﬃc. According to Mirsky et al. it is up to the user to determine
a suitable threshold. When Kitsune is installed it initiates a training phase
before anomaly detection is performed, during which Kitsune assumes that all
traﬃc is normal and no attacks take place on the network.
Zong et al. present their Deep Autoencoding Gaussian Mixture Model
(DAGMM) for unsupervised anomaly detection[63]. DAGMM makes use of an
autoencoder to generate low-dimensional representation and a reconstruction
error that is passed to a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) for unsupervised
anomaly detection. Instead of training the autoencoder separately from the
GMM, DAGGM jointly optimizes the deep autoencoder and the GMM simulta-
neously by utlizing a separate estimation network that performs the parameter
learning of the mixture model. The joint optimization helps the autoencoder
avoid less attractive local optima, reduces the reconstruction errors, and pre-
vents the need of pre-training the autoencoder. Given a sample, DAGMM use
the estimation network to estimate the energy of the sample which corresponds
to an unnormalized anomaly score. Zong et al. do not provide any recommended
threshold mechanism for DAGMM.
Most of the unsupervised approaches discussed so far involve a neural density
estimator that needs to be combined with a threshold mechanism in order to
classify samples as being anomalous. To address the relative scarcity of direct
deep learning approaches to anomaly detection, Ruﬀet al. introduce a method
called Deep Support Vector Data Description (Deep SVDD)[51]. The method
is a novel anomaly detection based training objective for training deep neural
networks. The objective consists of training the neural network to minimize
the volume of a data-enclosing hypersphere. The objective therefore forces
the network to extract common factors of variation of the input data in order
to map the data points closely to the center of the sphere. During anomaly
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. RELATED WORK
6
detection, the network can then provide an anomaly score as the distance to
the hypershpere center, or label data points as anomalies if they are outside
the hypersphere.
2.3
Deep semi-supervised learning techniques
Ruﬀet al. describe in their paper[52] Deep SAD which is an extension to the
previous work on Deep SVDD[51] that provides semi-supervised capabilities.
Deep SAD is the authors’ proposal to a end-to-end methodology for general
semi-supervised anomaly detection. With Deep SAD, Ruﬀet al. consider the
scenario where the user have access to a small pool of labeled anomalies which
can be used to augment the anomaly detection capabilities of the deep neural
network. Deep SAD is based on the same objective function as Deep SVDD, but
introduces a new term that is weighted via a hyperparameter that determines
the emphasis on labeled data. Deep SAD is based on the one-class Deep SVDD
variant that does not specify a radius to the hypersphere. For this reason,
Deep SAD does provide an anomaly score but it does not supply a threshold
mechanism for anomaly detection.
Iwata and Yamanaka propose in their paper[28] a method which augments
deep autoregressive density estimators with anomaly label information. When
provided with the anomaly labels, the method reduces the density in areas of
the given anomaly. This is achieved by introducing a regularization term to
the objective function which is calculated using the log likelihood ratio between
normal and anomalous instances. Since the proposal is simply a change to the
objective function diﬀerent architectures can utilize this method and produce
negative log likelihood anomaly scores. Iwata and Yamanaka do not provide a
threshold mechanism.
Pang, Shen, and Van Den Hengel introduce Deviation Networks (DevNet)[42]
that, like Deep SVDD[51] and Deep SAD[52], address the issue of the usual two-
step indirect optimization for anomaly detection. Whereas the objective of Deep
SVDD[51] and Deep SAD[52] are still focused on feature representation, DevNet
is directly optimized according to the anomaly scores in an end-to-end manner.
DevNet leverages a training dataset with 0.005%-1% of the samples being
labeled anomalies, and a Gaussian prior is used to perform direct optimization of
anomaly scores with a Z-score based deviation loss. According to the experiments
conducted by Pang, Shen, and Van Den Hengel, DevNet showed improved
averaged Area Under Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve (AUC-ROC)
and Precision-Recall curve (AUC-PR) when compared to competing methods:
Deep SVDD[51], RPEN[43], prototypical networks for few-shot learning[55],
and iForest[33]. While showing improved average performance, DevNet does
not provide the same ﬂexibility as the regulariation term[28] proposed by Iwata
and Yamanaka or the objective function of Deep SAD[52] that both incorporate
labeled anomalies as optional improvements instead of being a strict requirement
to the training phase.
Like with Deviation Networks[42], Hendrycks, Mazeika, and Dietterich also
utilize labeled anomalies by introducing the Outlier Exposure (OE)[22] method.
The OE method works by training a deep parametrized anomaly detector
network with an auxiliary Outlier Exposure dataset that is disjoint from the
test dataset. This can be accomplished by adding a term to the original objective
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. RELATED WORK
7
function that considers the labeled anomalies in the OE dataset. Hendrycks,
Mazeika, and Dietterich ﬁnd that the learned heuristics generalize to unseen
distributions.
2.4
Threshold mechanisms
Most anomaly detection methods provide some form of anomaly score which
works well when comparing how anomalous samples are to each other. The
problem of deciding on a sensible threshold that separates anomalies from
normal data is still left to the user. In this section, recent related work that
proposes solutions to automatic and adaptive threshold mechanisms is discussed.
Hundman et al. propose in their paper[26] an unsupervised nonparametric
anomaly threshold mechanism that avoids reliability on labels or false para-
metric assumptions. The threshold is a mean and standard deviation based
computation of a list of historical error signals. The computation arrives at a
threshold such that, if all values above the threshold are removed, would cause
the greatest percent decrease in the mean and standard deviation of the list of
error signals.[26]
Clark, Liu, and Japkowicz also propose an adaptive threshold for anomaly
detection on data streams called variable-window-size adaptive threshold up-
dating (VATU) [11]. With VATU, the authors assume no outliers are present
in the training set but data received during deployment can be either normal
or anomalous. Additionally, VATU considers that the data stream is not sta-
tionary but that it may shift over time. The threshold mechanism considers
the anomaly scores of one class learning algorithms and tests for statistical
signiﬁcant changes in the mean of the scores as reported by a Z-test. If the mean
value changes signiﬁcantly the threshold is updated to reﬂect the evolution of
the data stream. By updating the threshold dynamically, VATU reduces the
need for retraining the underlying model when the data stream evolves. While
the model is trained on the training set, the initial VATU threshold is computed
from anomaly scores on a validation set.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 3
Theoretical background
This chapter describes the theoretical background of the work presented in
this thesis. Section 3.1 describes the domain name system to establish general
knowledge about the system that the methods in later chapters are trying to
protect. Afterward, section 3.2 describes examples of how cyber attackers have
been exploiting the domain name system for malicious purposes. Section 3.3
informs about the kind of data passive DNS provides. Passive DNS data have
been used to create the dataset that is used to train the neural network models
presented in later chapters. A general description of fully-connected neural
networks, the most fundamental component in deep learning, is provided in
section 3.4.
Sections 3.5, 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9 describe more speciﬁc types of deep
learning architectures and techniques, most of which are based on speciﬁc
papers. These sections are best read after the related work in chapter 2 and
the analysis in chapter 4, which argues why these architectures and techniques
have been used in the project.
3.1
Domain Name System
One of the primary functions of the Domain Name System (DNS) is the
translation from textual domain names to numerical IP addresses. This section
provides an overview of the structure and parts that constitute DNS to provide
the reader with the necessary information to understand the description of the
data and preprocessing decisions described in this thesis.
DNS provides a hierarchical, distributed, and replicated database system
that stores resource records under domain names.[25] DNS consists of three
major components:
• Domain name space and resource records.
• Name servers.
• Resolvers.
Domain name space and resource records
The domain name space is a tree structure with interconnected nodes and
leaves. Each node and leaf in the tree structure contains a set of information,
8
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
9
and the domain system does not diﬀerentiate between the use of interior nodes
and outer leaves of the tree structure. The purpose of a query operation in
the domain system is to extract types of information from a speciﬁc set by
providing the domain name and what type of resource that is of interest.[37]
Each node or leaf in the domain name space is associated with a label. A
label is 0 to 63 octets in length, but the 0 length label, called the null label, is
reserved for the root of the domain name space. The domain name of a node
corresponds to the sequence of labels on the path from the node to the root of
the domain name space. The sequence of labels that compose a domain name
is printed from left to right, such that the leftmost label is farthest from the
root, and the rightmost label is closest to the root. A domain name therefore
locates a particular node or leaf in the domain name space. A domain name
consists of the list labels separated by dots, and it is limited to a be represented
by a maximum of 255 octets. For example, ”www.dtu.dk” is a domain name
composed of three labels: www, dtu, and dk, where dk is the label closest to
the root of the domain name space, and www is the label farthest from the root.
Additionally, domain name comparisons are case-insensitive, meaning that, for
instance, ”www.dtu.dk” is considered equal to ”www.DTU.dk”.[37] A domain
name that unambiguously speciﬁes its exact location in the tree structure of the
domain name space is called a Fully Qualiﬁed Domain Name (FQDM). [24] A
domain can contain subdomains, and the domain can itself be a subdomain of
another domain. The subdomain relationship can be tested with domain names.
The domain name of a subdomain ends the domain name of its containing
domain.[37] For example, ”www.dtu.dk” is a subdomain of ”dtu.dk”, ”dk”, and
the root as illustrated in ﬁgure 3.1. A domain which is a direct subdomain of
the root, which is a zone one layer below the root, is called a Top-Level Domain
(TLD). Top-Level Domains can be further divided into Country-Code Top-Level
Domains (ccTLDs), Generic Top-Level Domains (gTLDs), and others. [24]
The set of information that is associated with a domain name consists of
resource records. The information ﬁelds of a resource record include[37]:
• Owner name: the domain name where the resource record is found.
• Type: a 16-bit value that speciﬁes the type of resource in the resource
record.
Each type is associated with diﬀerent RRDATA which is a
variable-length string of octets that describes the resource[38].
• Class: a 16-bit value that identiﬁes the protocol family, for example the
IN (Internet) system.
• TTL: a 32-bit unsigned integer, which speciﬁes the maximum time to live
of the resource record in seconds. Short TTLs minimize caching, and a
0-valued TTL prohibits caching.
Many types of resource records associated with diﬀerent RDATA exist, some of
which are described in table 3.1.
Name servers
Name servers are programs that contain information on the structure and
set information about the domain name space. Typically, a name server has
complete information about a speciﬁc subset of the domain name space, and
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
10
Root
com
org
dk
mozilla
archive
wired
dtu
dr
dtu
www
inside
Top-Level
Domains
Second-Level
Domains
Third-Level
Domains
Figure 3.1: Example illustrating the concept of the label hierarchy in the domain
name space tree. Top-Level Domains org, com, and dk are directly connected to
the root node. Below are the Second-Level Domains mozilla, archive, wired, dtu,
and dk which are connected to their respective Top-Level Domains. Farthest
from the root are the Third-Level Domains www and inside which are found as
leaves connected to the Second-Level Domain dtu. The highlighted path shows
the sequence of labels composing the fully qualiﬁed domain name www.dtu.dk.
RR type
Description
RRDATA
A
A host address.
IPv4 address.
AAAA
A host address.
IPv6 address.
NS
Authoritative name server for the domain.
A host name.
CNAME
Canonical name for an alias.
A domain name.
PTR
Pointer to a part of the domain name space.
A domain name.
Table 3.1: Examples of resource records types, their description, and their
associated RRDATA.[37]
contain pointers to other name servers that hold information about other parts
of the domain name space. A name server with complete information of some
part of the name space is said to be an authority of that part of the name
space. The authoritative information of the name space is organized into zones
that can be distributed to names servers to provide redundancy for information
in a zone.[37] Besides authoritative information, a name server hold, possibly
incomplete, cached data acquired by a local resolver to improve performance
when non-local data is accessed repeatedly.[38]
Resolvers
User programs utilize resolvers to retrieve domain name information. Resolvers
are responsible for extracting information from name servers. For a resolver to
function, it must know about at least one name server that can either provide
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
11
the resolver with the answer to a query directly or give referrals to other name
servers the resolver can pursue.[37, 38] There exist various types of resolvers,
including:
• Stub resolver: A resolver that cannot make all resolution by itself, and
generally depends on a recursive resolver to undertake the resolution.
Stub resolvers allow the host to pass on the burden of resolving to the
name server on another host.[24, 6]
• Iterative resolver: When a server in iterative resolution mode receives
DNS queries, it responds with a referral to another server and lets the
client pursue the query.[24]
• Recursive resolver: When a server in recursive resolution mode receives
DNS queries, it responds from a local cache or sends queries to other
servers to get the answer to the original query. Opposite to the iterative
resolution mode, a server operating in recursive resolution mode pursues
the query for the client.[24]
Figure 3.2 illustrates the steps involved in resolving an IP-address.
3.2
Malicious domains
This section describes examples of how the DNS system can be abused for
malicious purposes.
A simple type of malicious domains that are employed by potential attackers
is domains resulting from typosquatting. Typosquatting targets internet users
that make typographical errors when typing in the website addresses. The
incorrectly typed address may direct the internet user to a malicious website
that could be designed to steal personally identiﬁable information, credit card
credentials, or to install malware on the user’s computer through drive-by
downloads. Typosquatting can also be combined with phishing in order for the
web address to appear credible and increase the likelihood that an unsuspecting
user might go to the malicious website.[34]
Fast-ﬂux is a technique used by attackers to obscure and protect their
DNS infrastructure by forwarding traﬃc through compromised hosts.[31] A
compromised device is typically an easy target that is used by the attacker
as a tunnel to redirect command and control messages or data to and from
the attacker’s infrastructure. By using round-robin and low TTL values, the
attacker frequently updates the A, or AAAA, records for subdomains of a
domain resulting in new requests being answered with new IP addresses. The
widespread use of fast-ﬂux is, therefore, one of the reasons that malicious
domains often have lower TTL values.[31, 24]
An extended variation of the fast-ﬂux technique is called double-ﬂux. Double-
ﬂux is the use of the fast-ﬂux technique on the authoritative name servers of
the attacker’s domain. Double-ﬂux is achieved by using compromised hosts
as fake name servers. DNS queries send a fake name server are forwarded to
the actual authoritative name server. In case the IP address of a compromised
name server is blocked, the attacker can use a new compromised host as the fake
name server. [31] Double-ﬂux therefore increases the robustness and obscurity
of the attackers infrastructure even more.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
12
Figure 3.2: Diagram illustrating the eight steps in resolving the IP-address of
example.com adapted from [12]. 1) A client sends a query for example.com to a
recursive resolver. If the recursive resolver had cached the answer from an earlier
query, it would be able to answer the query immediately. This is not the case
in this example. 2) The resolver sends an iterative query to a root name server.
3) The root name server answers with the address of a Top-Level Domain name
server com. 4) The resolver sends an iterative query to the TLD name server
for com. 5) The resolver receives the IP address for the Second-Level domain
name server for example.com. 6) The resolver queries the example.com name
server. 7) The resolver receives the IP-address for example.com from the name
server. 8) The recursive resolver provides the IP-address of example.com to the
client.[12]
Whereas the fast-ﬂux and double-ﬂux techniques provide the attacker with
an extra layer of anonymity and help mobilize the IP address of intermediary
name servers and hosts used for command and control communication, the
domains controlled by the attacker can be blacklisted by defenders. Domain
generation algorithms are used signiﬁcantly reduce the eﬀectiveness of blacklists
by dynamically generating a large number of domain names, and only use a
small subset of the domain names for command and control communication.[46]
Domain generation algorithms are often the primary method of communication
in botnets. Botnets are networks of hosts infected by malware called bots,
which are controlled remotely by the attacker, called the botmaster, through
command and control communication. The botmaster uses the botnet for denial-
of-service attacks, sending spam, and other malicious purposes. To establish
communication, the attacker only needs to access to a single domain in order
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
13
to communicate with, and migrate, the bots. On the other hand, in order
to block the botmaster from its botnet, defenders need to control all of the
domains. This requires much eﬀort from people defending against botnets, as
demonstrated by the Conﬁcker botnet version C, which employed a domain
generation algorithm that generated 50 000 domain names per day spread over
113 TLDs.[46]
3.3
Passive DNS
Passive DNS is a technique ﬁrst described by Florian Weimerin in 2005 that is
used to store DNS responses from servers in a database passively. The database
of passively collected DNS responses provides historical information that is
not usually logged at recursive name servers. The historical information may
include which DNS records were available at what times in the past, observation
dates, source IP, the answer RRDATA, TTL value, name server information,
and more. The passive DNS database provides analysts with useful information
about how a domain has changed throughout its lifetime.[31, 24]
3.4
Fully connected feedforward networks
A fully-connected feedforward network is loosely inspired by neuroscience on
the concept of neurons. The primary objective of the feedforward network is to
approximate some function f ∗. This is achieved by designing the feedforward
network as a mapping y = f(x; θ) and learn the parameters θ that result in
the best approximation.[18]
A feedforward network is generally represented as a composition of multiple
diﬀerent functions which account for its network structure. For instance, a
feedforward network composed of three functions connected in a chain f (1), f (2),
f (3) would form f(x) = f (3)(f (2)(f (1)(x))). Each function in the chain denotes
a layer in the feedforward network. In the example f (1) would be the ﬁrst
layer, f (2) the second layer, and f (3) the third and ﬁnal layer of the feedforward
network. The number of layers in a feedforward network corresponds to the
depth of the network. The ﬁrst layer of a feedforward network is called the input
layer since this layer receives the input vector x. The last layer of the network
is the output layer. If the feedforward network approximates a classiﬁer, the
ﬁnal layer outputs the network’s classiﬁcation. The layers in between the input
layer and the output layer are called the hidden layers. [18]
The vector-to-vector functions that constitute layers of a feedforward network
can each be interpreted as a collection of units acting in parallel, where each unit
receives a vector and outputs a scalar value, as illustrated in ﬁgure 3.3. Each
input xj is assigned a weight wj and the output, also known as the activation,
of the unit is an activation function σ applied to the weighted sum of inputs
plus a bias term b:
output = σ

X
j
wjxj + b


(3.1)
The weights allows the unit to express the importance of each of its inputs and
the bias term allows the network to further adjust the input by shifting the
activation function. Without the activation function, the feedforward network
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
14
is only able to approximate linear functions. The introduction of a non-linear
activation function σ of the weighted sum and bias, allows the feedforward
network to approximate non-linear functions. The output of the unit is then
combined with the outputs of the other units in the same layer to form the
input vector to the next layer.[40] This way, the information ﬂows through the
feedforward network from the input layer to the output layer, which is called
a forward propagation. Figure 3.4 illustrates the interconnected layers of a
feedforward neural network.
Figure 3.3: Visual representation of unit inspired by [40]. The unit receives
three values and outputs a single scalar resulting from an activation function
applied to the weighted sum of inputs plus the bias.
Inputs
Outputs
Figure 3.4: Illustration of a feedforward neural network adapted from [40].
Units are represented as circles, and layers are represented by columns of units.
The left-most layer is the input layer, the right-most layer is the output layer,
and the layer in between is the hidden layer. Even though it looks like a unit
outputs multiple values, each outbound edge from a unit represents the same
output value.
Several types of activation functions can be used for the units in a feedforward
network. In the work of this thesis, three types of activation functions have
been used: the sigmoid activation function, the hyperbolic tangent activation
function, and the rectiﬁer activation function.
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
15
Sigmoid activation function
The sigmoid activation function computes
the sigmoid function of its input which is deﬁned as:
f(x) =
1
1 + exp(−x)
(3.2)
The sigmoid function is bounded between 0 and 1. This property makes the
sigmoid activation function useful for binary classiﬁcation since the value can be
interpreted as a probability. The sigmoid function has a characteristic sigmoidal
curve, as demonstrated in ﬁgure 3.5.
-8
-8
-6
-6
-4
-4
-2
-2
2
4
6
8
0.5
0.5
1
0
Figure 3.5: The sigmoid curve.
Hyperbolic tangent activation function
The hyperbolic tangent (tanh)
activation function is deﬁned as:
f(x) = tanh(x)
(3.3)
The tanh activation function has a smooth sigmoidal curve, which is bounded
between -1 and 1, as shown in ﬁgure 3.6.
-4
-4
-3
-3
-2
-2
-1
-1
1
2
3
4
-1
-1
-0.5
-0.5
0.5
0.5
1
0
Figure 3.6: The hyperbolic tangent curve.
The rectiﬁer activation function
A unit using the rectiﬁer activation
function is called a rectiﬁed linear unit, ReLU. The rectiﬁer activation function
is deﬁned as follows:
f(x) = max(0, x)
(3.4)
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
16
-10
-10
-8
-8
-6
-6
-4
-4
-2
-2
2
4
6
8
10
10
2
4
6
8
0
Figure 3.7: The rectiﬁer function.
In contrast to the sigmoid and tanh activation functions, the rectiﬁer activation
function is not smooth or bounded. The curve of the rectiﬁer activation function
is shown in ﬁgure 3.7.
In order for a neural network to learn, it needs to update θ, its weights
and bias parameters, such that the network provides the desired outputs. In
supervised learning, a vector of labels y is provided to the network determines
which outputs are correct and incorrect, and a loss function L tells the network
how much its predictions deviate from the labels.
For the purpose of this thesis, two kinds of loss functions will be described
here: mean squared error (MSE) and binary cross-entropy. The MSE is useful
for regression and the loss function is deﬁned as follows:
LMSE(x, y) = 1
d
d
X
i=1
(xi −yi)2
(3.5)
where x is the d-dimensional prediction vector and y is the d-dimensional label
vector.
The binary cross-entropy loss function is useful for binary classiﬁcation tasks
and it is deﬁned as follows[40]:
LBCE = −(y log(p(x) + (1 −y) log(1 −p(x)))
(3.6)
where y ∈{0, 1} is the label where 0 indicates a negative and 1 indicates a
positive, and p(x) is the predicted probability of the input x being a positive.
Training a neural network corresponds to optimizing the weights and bias of
the neural network to minimize the loss function. In practice, this is achieved by
using the backpropagation algorithm. The backpropagation algorithm computes
the gradients of the loss function with respect to the weights and bias terms of
the network by propagating the output error backwards from the output layer
to the earlier layers. The backpropagation algorithm, therefore, requires the
loss function is diﬀerentiable to compute the gradients. The gradients express
the rate at which the loss function changes when the given weight or bias is
changed.[40] During training, an optimization algorithm such as stochastic
gradient descent, or an adaptive method like Adam[29] or RMSprop[23], is
employed. The optimization algorithm utilizes the gradients computed by
backpropagation to update the weights and bias terms of the network to
minimize the loss.
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
17
The optimization algorithms can compute the gradient based on the entire
training set, called deterministic gradient methods, on single samples at a time,
called stochastic or online methods, or using subsets of the training set called
mini-batches.[18] When the training set is divided into mini-batches, the loss
function is averaged over samples in the mini-batch. The mean loss of the
mini-batch is then used to compute the gradients and update the weights of
the neural network. An iteration is denoted as one batch being processed, and
an epoch is denoted when the training procedure has processed the dataset.
Parameters that are not trainable like the network weights and bias are
called hyperparameters. Examples of hyperparameters include the learning rate,
choice of the optimization algorithm, the activation function, mini-batch size,
number of epochs, and even architectural parameters such as the number of
units and layers in the neural networks. These kinds of parameters are usually
tuned manually by comparing the network’s loss on a separate validation set.
Grid search is the process of comparing the several combinations of multiple
hyperparameters against each other. The combination of hyperparameters that
achieves the lowest validation cost is selected.
The validation set used for hyperparameter selection is also useful for
detecting if the neural network model is overﬁtting its training data. When
the model is overﬁtting, the training loss keeps decreasing, but the validation
loss increases, which indicates the model’s ability to generalize to new data
drops. Regularization helps prevent the model from overﬁtting its training
data. Regularization can be applied to the neural network model in many forms.
Examples used in this project include dropout, where a random number of
neurons are deactivated in a layer, and L2 regularization, where large weights
are penalized in the loss function.
3.5
Convolutional neural networks
Convolutional neural networks are specialized in processing information orga-
nized in a grid-like structure such as two-dimensional images or one-dimensional
time series data.[18] In fully-connected feedforward neural networks, hidden
layer units are connected to all units in the previous layer. In order for the
network to infer spatial structure, it must do so from the training data. Convolu-
tional neural networks, on the other hand, are designed for spatially structured
data.[40]
Convolutional neural networks are based on the concepts of local receptive
ﬁelds and shared weights, and may combine these concepts with others such as
pooling. Each neuron in the hidden layer is connected to a localized region of
the input called the local receptive ﬁeld. Each connection between the neurons
in the local receptive ﬁeld and the hidden neuron learns a weight. The receptive
ﬁeld slides over the input with a speciﬁed stride length. Each new local receptive
ﬁeld that results from the sliding is connected to a new neuron in the subsequent
hidden layer. The same weights and bias are used for all receptive ﬁelds on the
input, which causes the hidden neurons to learn the same feature at diﬀerent
locations in the input. This makes the convolutional neural network well suited
for the translation invariance of images in the case of object classiﬁcation.[40]
When the input is two-dimensional, the activation of a hidden neuron at
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
18
Figure 3.8: A two-dimensional example where input neurons in 5 × 5 local
receptive ﬁeld are connected to a hidden neuron. The local receptive ﬁeld has
been slided to the left with a stride length of 1. Figure adapted from [40].
position j, k is deﬁned as:
σ
 
b +
L
X
l=1
M
X
m=1
wl,maj+l,k+m
!
(3.7)
where σ is some activation function, b is a shared bias of the local receptive ﬁeld,
wl,m denotes the array of shared weights of the L × M sized local receptive
ﬁeld, and aj+l,k+m is the activation of the input neuron. The linear operation
passed to the activation function σ in (3.7) is known as a discrete convolution,
why the network is called a convolutional neural network.[40, 18] Equation 3.7
can also be written as follows:
a1 = σ(b + w ∗a0)
(3.8)
where a1 is the set output activations, a0 is the set of input activations, and ∗
is the convolution operation.[40]
The map from the input to the hidden layer is called a feature map, and the
weights deﬁning a feature map are called shared weights. The shared weights,
together with the bias, are often called ﬁlter or kernel. A convolutional layer
typically consists of multiple feature maps, each with their set of shared weights
and bias. The use of multiple feature maps allows the convolutional layer to
detect diﬀerent types of features.[40]
An optional addition to convolutional layers is the use of pooling layers.
A pooling layer produces a condensed version of the convolutional layer by
summarizing local regions of neurons. Examples of pooling techniques include
max-pooling, which computes the maximum activation in the region, and L2-
pooling, which computes the square root of the sum of the squares of the
activations in the region.[40]
3.6
Dilated causal convolutions
A dilated causal convolution is a combination of a causal convolution and a
dilated convolution. Dilated causal convolutions are used in temporal convolu-
tional networks for the prediction of one-dimensional sequences.[3]
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
19
The purpose of causal convolutions is to prevent any leakage of information
from the future to the past. The output at some time t is convolved exclusively
with elements at time t and prior elements. Causal convolutions, therefore,
prohibits the model from violating the ordering of the input data as illustrated
in ﬁgure 3.9. [3, 41]
Figure 3.9: A stack of causal convolution layers.[41]
A problem with causal convolutions is demonstrated in ﬁgure 3.9, where the
four layers above the input layer allow the network to predict an output based
on four timesteps earlier in the input history. The amount of input history that
a prediction can be based on therefore depends linearly on the number of causal
convolutional layers used in the network.
To allow temporal convolutional neural networks to use a more substantial
amount of the input history to predict its outputs, they make use of dilated
convolutions. In dilated convolutions, the ﬁlter is applied to a larger area than
its size by skipping input values with a speciﬁed step called the dilation rate.
The dilated convolution achieves the same result as if a standard convolution
ad been used with a larger ﬁlter that was constructed from the original ﬁlter by
expanding it with zeros but more eﬃcient.[41] For a one-dimensional sequence,
the dilated convolution operation F is deﬁned as:
F(s) = (x ∗d f)(s) =
k−1
X
i=0
f(i) · xs−d·i
(3.9)
with an input sequence x ∈Rn, a ﬁlter f : {0, . . . , k −1} →R, the dilation rate
d, and ﬁlter size k. s −d · i takes the direction of the past into account.[3]
A dilation rate of 1 would be equivalent to the standard convolution. By
stacking dilated convolutional layers with increasing dilation rates, the dilated
convolutional network can achieve a large receptive ﬁeld with very few layers. By
combining causal and dilated convolutions, the temporal convolutional network
can predict outputs based on a much larger history with fewer layers than would
be possible with only causal convolutions. The fewer number of layers translates
to higher computational eﬃciency. A common technique is to increase the
dilation rate exponentially with each layer by starting at a dilation rate of 1
and the progressing to 2, 4, 8, 16, ... for deeper layers. [41] By exponentially
increasing the dilation rate for subsequent layers, it is ensured that a ﬁlter
covers each input in the eﬀective history and simultaneously allows for a vast
eﬀective history.[3]
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
20
Figure 3.10: Stacked dilated causal convolutional layers with an exponentially
increasing dilation rate.[41] The dilation allows the prediction to be based on a
large amount of input history with fewer layers.
3.7
Autoencoder
Autoencoders are special cases of feedforward neural networks that are trained
to reconstruct their input. An autoencoder typically consists of two parts: an
encoder function that encodes the input to a hidden code h, and a decoder
function that given code h attempts to reconstruct the original input. The
training process of an autoencoder, therefore, involves a loss function which
measures the dissimilarity between the input and its reconstruction. The loss
value of an autoencoder is also denoted as its reconstruction error.[18] In case
the input features are continuous, the autoencoder is posed to a regression
problem where the reconstruction error can be measured with the mean squared
error shown in equation 3.5 on page 16.
Input reconstruction can be achieved trivially by the identity function,
why the task itself is not very interesting.
Instead of purely learning the
identify function, various constraints are imposed on the autoencoder network,
which allows it only to reconstruct its input approximately. By constraining
the autoencoder network, it is forced to prioritize and learn the most salient
features of its training data.[18]
One of the most basic autoencoder types is the undercomplete autoencoder.
In an undercomplete autoencoder, the number of units in the hidden code h
is restricted to be less than the dimensionality of the input. An example is
displayed in ﬁgure 3.11, where the input has six dimensions, and the hidden
code has two dimensions. While lower dimensionality of the hidden code poses
a signiﬁcant constraint on the network’s ability to reconstruct its input, if the
encoder and decoder are allowed too much capacity, the autoencoder can still
learn to reconstruct its inputs without learning useful information about the
distribution of its training data.[18]
Besides undercomplete autoencoders, other types of autoencoders exist with
diﬀerent constraints. Sparse and denoising autoencoders are two types of regu-
larized autoencoders. Sparse autoencoders are constrained in the sense that its
loss function encourages the model to learn other properties besides reconstruc-
tion. The loss function of sparse autoencoders consists of the reconstruction
error with an added sparsity penalty. Denoising autoencoders do not receive the
normal input but a version that has been corrupted with noise. The objective
of the denoising autoencoder is then to remove the noise from the input.
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
21
Encoder
Code
Decoder
Figure 3.11: Illustration of an undercomplete autoencoder. The left part of
the network is the encoder, which encodes the six-dimensional input to a two-
dimensional code in the middle. The left part is the decoder, which attempts
to reconstruct the input from the code.
3.8
Deep neural autoregressive density estimation
Deep neural autoregressive density estimation addresses the unsupervised prob-
lem of density estimation from a set of examples in a tractable way using neural
network architectures. Autoregressive density estimators utilize the chain rule
of probability, which states that any joint distribution p(x) can be decomposed
into a product of conditionals:
p(x) =
Y
i
p(xd|x1:d−1)
(3.10)
In the case of density estimation, the joint distribution is computed for a
sample x, and the conditionals are distributions of the input units of xd. The
autoregressive models must satisfy the autoregressive property which states,
that the model forms a proper distribution if each conditional distribution of
an input unit xd only depends on the previous input units x1:d−1 and no other
input units.[17]
Each of the conditionals that constitute the joint distribution is modeled as
a parametric distribution where the parameters for conditional p(xd|x1:d−1) are
a function of some hidden state hd.[44] Diﬀerent kinds of deep neural network
architectures are able the to model the conditionals. One example is recurrent
neural networks where the hidden state hi is a function of previous hidden
states h1:d−1 and the current input variable.[44] The conditionals are therefore
computed sequentially. The problem with the sequential approach is that the
recurrent neural network model is not well adapted to parallel architectures like
GPUs since a forward pass is required for each conditional, where as a usual
neural network model is only evaluated once.[17, 44]
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
22
Masked autoencoder for distribution estimation
Another type of neural autoregressive density estimator architecture has been
designed to address the high number of forward passes needed to compute
the density estimation for recurrent architectures. The Masked Autoencoder
for Distribution Estimation is based on the autoencoder architecture with a
modiﬁcation to the weights. The weights in the network are masked such
that the output is autoregressive for any given ordering of the inputs. The
masking technique enables the neural network to compute the conditionals
simultaneously in one forward pass as shown in ﬁgure 3.12. Using the mask,
the weights are zeroed such that there is no computational path in the network
between an output unit ˆxd any input units xd:D for a D dimensional input
sample x and therefore satisﬁes the autoregressive property.[17]
Figure 3.12: Illustration of masks being applied to the autoencoder weights in
order to satisfy the autoregressive property.[17] Input and output units have
been assigned an integer according a speciﬁed ordering of the units. The hidden
units have each been assigned an integer between 1 and D −1. MV in the ﬁgure
corresponds to the mask of the weights between the last hidden layer and the
output layer, which is denoted as M W L in the text.
The weights are zeroed by element-wise multiplication with the binary mask,
where a 0 in the binary mask indicates the weight is removed:
W l
masked = W l ⊙M W l
(3.11)
where W l is a weight matrix for some hidden layer l and M W l is its respective
binary mask. The masks are created by assigning an integer to each hidden
unit. In a network with L hidden layers, for each layer l ∈{1, . . . , L} with K
hidden units, the kth hidden unit is assigned an integer ml(k) between 1 and
D −1 where k ∈{1, . . . , K}. The ml(k) value assigned to the unit indicates the
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
23
maximum number of input units that it can connect to. ml(k) is not allowed
to be equal to D, since a unit that depends on all inputs would not be useful
for modeling any of the conditionals. Also, ml(k) may not be 0 either, since it
would create units with constant activation.[17]
Given the integers assigned to each of the hidden units, the masks for the
weights can be created. The mask between the input layer and the ﬁrst hidden
layer can be encoded from the integer values as follows:
M W 1
k,d =
(
1
if m1(k) ≥d
0
otherwise
(3.12)
where d ∈{1, . . . , D} is the index of each input unit xd of input x. Between
hidden layers, the mask layer l is deﬁned by[17]:
M W l
k′,k =
(
1
if ml(k′) ≥ml−1(k)
0
otherwise
(3.13)
In order to satisfy the autoregressive property, an output unit ˆxd, d ∈{1, . . . , D},
may only be connected to input units x1:d−1. The weights between the last
hidden layer L and the output layer may then only connect an output unit xd
to hidden units where mL(k) < d[17]:
M W L
d,k
=
(
1
if d > mL(k)
0
otherwise
(3.14)
The integer assignments ml(k) are sampled uniformly at random, and to avoid
unconnected hidden units, each integer value ml(k) is sampled to be greater
than or equal to the minimum connectivity of the previous layer.[17]
Masked autoregressive ﬂow for density estimation
The masked autoencoder for density estimation addressed the problem of
computing the conditionals with a single forward pass.
A drawback that
remains is that the order of the input units matters to the performance of the
model. While one order makes the model unable to learn the density, another
order may allow the model to estimate the density perfectly.[44]
A masked autoregressive ﬂow model addresses the problem by interpreting
autoregressive models, the masked autoencoder in particular, as a normalizing
ﬂow, and improves the model by stacking multiple masked autoencoders with
diﬀerent orderings of the input units in between.
Normalizing ﬂows are characterized by representing p(x) as an invertible
and diﬀerentiable transform f of a base density πu(u) such that x = f(u)
when u ∼πu(u). The base density is chosen to be some distribution that is
easily evaluated for any input such as the standard Gaussian. By assuming f is
invertible, p(x) can be computed as follows:
p(x) = πu
 f −1(x)
 det
∂f −1
∂x

(3.15)
For equation 3.15 to be tractable, it is required that f is is constructed to be
easily invertible and that the determinant of its Jacobian is easy to compute as
well.[44]
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
24
For an autoregressive model with parameters, which are parameterized as
single Gaussians, the dth conditional is given by:
p(xd|x1:d−1) = N(xd|µd, (exp αi)2)
(3.16)
where µd = fµd(x1:d−1) and αd = fαd(x1:d−1). fµd and fαd are unconstrained
functions which compute the mean and log standard deviation of the dth
conditional given previous input units.[44] New data can then be sampled from
the model as follows:
xd = ud exp αd + µd
(3.17)
where µd = fµd(x1:d−1), αd = fαd(x1:d−1), and ud is sampled from a standard
Gaussian distribution, ud ∼N(0, 1). ud ∈u and u = (u1, u2, . . . , uD) is a vector
of random numbers typically generated using a random number generator. [44].
Equation 3.17 shows the autoregressive model as a transformation f from
u, the space of random numbers, to the data space x, which by construction is
easily invertible and diﬀerentiable. Whereas equation 3.17 shows how sampling
could be performed from the random numbers, the random numbers used to
generate a sample can likewise be computed as follows:
ud = (xd −µd) exp(−αd)
(3.18)
where µd = fµd(x1:d−1) and αd = fαd(x1:d−1). The Jacobian of f −1 is triangular
because of the autoregressive structure, why the absolute determinant can be
computed as follows[44]:
det
∂f −1
∂x
 = exp
 
−
X
d
αd
!
(3.19)
where αd = fαd(x1:d−1).
The autoregressive model is then also represented as an invertible and
diﬀerentiable transform for which the determinant of the Jacobian is easy to
compute. For this reason, the autoregressive model can be interpreted as a
normalizing ﬂow for which p(x) can be computed by substituting equations
3.18 and 3.19 into equation 3.15.[44]
The masked autoregressive ﬂow utilizes the masked autoencoder architecture
to implement the set of functions {fµd, fαd}. The feedforward network of the
masked autoencoder receive samples x as input and outputs µd and αd for
each input unit xd in x in a single forward pass. Instead of relying on a single
masked autoencoder, the masked autoregressive ﬂow chains multiple masked
autoencoders together into a deep ﬂow for increased modeling ﬂexibility. By
chaining the autoregressive masked autoencoders, the density of the random
numbers u1 of the ﬁrst masked autoencoder, M1, are modeled with the next
autoregressive masked autoencoder, M2, and so forth until the random numbers
of the last autoregressive masked autoencoder are modeled with a standard
Gaussian. The masked autoregressive ﬂow therefore uses masked autoencoders
with Gaussian conditionals as building blocks. Even though each of the individ-
ual autoregressive autoencoders has unimodal conditionals, by chaining them
together, the masked autoregressive is able to learn multimodal conditionals.[44]
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
25
3.9
Deep Support Vector Data Descriptor
The problem with autoencoders and density estimation methods is that they
leave the problem of thresholding the anomaly scores to the user, which may
require a considerable amount of expert knowledge and testing to get satisfactory
results. The deep SVDD (Deep Support Vector Data Description) technique,
speciﬁcally the soft-boundary variation proposed by Ruﬀet al. in [51] sets its
boundary during training. Figure 3.13 illustrates the principle behind the Deep
SVDD technique.
Figure 3.13: Illustration of the Deep SVDD technique from [51]. Deep SVDD
learns a network transformation from input space X to output space R with
the purpose of mapping the output data into a hypersphere deﬁned by a center
c and radius R of minimum volume. Normal data lies within the hypersphere,
and anomalies fall outside the hypersphere.[51]
Deep SVDD is a loss function designed to train a neural network to map the
data into a hypersphere of minimum volume. The soft-boundary Deep SVDD
loss function is deﬁned as follows:[51]
LDSVDD = R2 + 1
νn
n
X
i=1
max{0, ||φ(xi; W) −c||2 −R2} + λ
2
L
X
l=1
||W l||2
F (3.20)
for a neural network φ(·; W) with L ∈N hidden layers and a set of weights
W = {W 1, . . . .W L} where W l are weights for layer l ∈{1, . . . , L}. The ﬁrst
term, R2, penalizes the radius of the data-enclosing hypersphere. The second
term penalizes points for which the distance to the hypersphere center is greater
than the radius, i.e., points lying outside the hypersphere. The third term is a
weight decay regularizer that penalizes large weights W in the network where
λ > 0 and || · ||F is the Frobenius norm.[51]
ν ∈(0, 1] is an upper bound on the fraction of outliers and, as such,
functions as a trade-oﬀbetween the volume of the hypersphere and the number
of boundary violations. The hypersphere center c is ﬁxed as the mean of
the mapped training data from an initial forward pass before training. The
radius R is optimized separately for the weights of the neural network. With
deep SVDD, typically, the network begins training with a warmup period of a
speciﬁed number of epochs where the radius is ﬁxed at 0. After the warmup
period, the R is computed as the (1 −ν)-th quantile of ||φ(xi; W) −c||2 for
every iteration.[51, 53]
A disadvantage of the Deep SVDD technique is that it requires the neural
network to comply with certain architectural constraints in order to avoid the
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
26
so-called hypersphere collapse. Hypersphere collapse is the event that the neural
network optimization yields an optimal, but trivial, solution by mapping all
inputs to the same point in the output space F. The architectural constraints
are[51]:
• No bias terms. Neural networks with bias terms can learn any constant
function independently on the input. For this reason, bias terms allow
the network to map all inputs to the hypersphere center easily.
• No bounded activation functions. Neural network units with bounded
activation functions can get saturated for every input that has at least
one feature with a common sign. The saturated unit thereby acts as a
bias term in the subsequent layer.
Constraining the Deep SVDD network with constrains on bias terms and
activation functions may have a signiﬁcant negative impact on its performance
when detecting malicious DNS traﬃc. Fortunately, Ruﬀet al. propose in [53]
two regularization techniques that address the problem of hypersphere collapse:
a random noise injection regularizer and a minibatch variance regularizer. Due
to time constraints, both regularizers could no be implemented and tested,
so for this project, the random noise injection regularizer was selected for
implementation and will be described here because it showed the general best
performance in the authors’ experiments.
The random noise injection regularizer is implemented by attaching a second
output layer with linear activation to the neural network. Let φ(·; W0) : X →F
be the neural network, and g(·; W1) : F →K be the linear layer, then the
second output of the neural network is given by z(x, W) = g(φ(·; W0); W1) ∈K.
Given a sample xi, let zi,q be the q-th element of the k-dimension logits vector
z(xi; W) and σ be the sigmoid function (see equation 3.2). The following
sigmoid cross-entropy loss is used for the regularization output layer[53]:
Lreg = −1
nk
n
X
i=1
k
X
q=1
yrnd log σ(zi,q) + (1 −yrnd) log(1 −σ(zi,q))
(3.21)
The regularization loss function is computed on each mini-batch of n samples.
For each of the n minibatch samples, yrnd is a random binary label sampled from
the uniform discrete distribution of {0, 1}. Ruﬀet al. based the regularization
loss function on inspiration from methods that address the overﬁtting issue
in convolutional neural networks.
Given the random labels, the classiﬁer
attempts to prevent hypersphere collapse along a randomly changing set of
hyperplanes, which the Ruﬀet al. claim may result in better convergence[53].
The regularization loss layer is removed at test time.
To prevent the Deep SVDD loss (eq. 3.20) inﬂuencing the overall loss too
much, the authors propose the following adaptive weighted loss[53]:
Lﬁnal = LDSVDD + ct · Lreg
(3.22)
ct = αct−1 + β(1 −α)L(t)
DSVDD
Ltreg
(3.23)
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
27
The regularization loss is weighted with the adaptive value ct which updates
at every iteration t based on its previous value and the ratio of the deep SVDD
loss and the regularization loss for the current mini-batch. The hyperparameter
α controls the contribution of each component to the computation of the new
value of ct, and β weighs the ratio of the LDSVDD and Lreg[53].
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Analysis
The problem that this project attempts to address is the detection of malicious
DNS traﬃc using deep learning. In order for a model to solve this problem in a
useful manner, it must satisfy the following requirements:
• High detection rate. If the detection rate is too low, the model is likely
will not worth the eﬀort to deploy.
• Low false alarm rate. A model with a high detection rate, but also a
high false alarm rate, will frustrate any security personnel who have to
consider the reports from the model and risk making subsequent alarms
disbelieved.
• Fast inference. The model should not slow down the DNS traﬃc more
than necessary.
• Wide coverage. The threat landscape is diverse, why model should target
as many types of malicious DNS traﬃc as possible.
• Adaptable. The threat landscape is constantly changing, why the model
must be adaptable to new and emerging threats.
• Low human interference. The model should function autonomously during
deployment.
In order to satisfy the requirements, the model should be trained one an
eﬀective dataset with features that are useful for detecting various kinds of
malicious DNS traﬃc. Additionally, the architecture of the model should be
considered both with regard to accuracy and performance.
It is known that malicious DNS traﬃc exists in many forms and is used with
diﬀerent purposes in mind, why the various types of malicious DNS traﬃc will
share commonalities and have their diﬀerences. In order to use deep learning
to detect malicious DNS traﬃc eﬀectively, it is crucial to consider which data
sources would be helpful for the neural network to distinguish malicious domains
from the benign.
Domain names generated via domain generation algorithms are typically
very diﬀerent in composition compared to benign domains. This is the reason
previous work on deep learning detection methods for DGA domains were mainly
concerned with the domain name as the primary data source. On the other
28
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
29
hand, other types of malicious traﬃc, such as phishing, are often concerned
about scamming the victim by attempting to seem benign. In these cases,
the domain name is designed to look benign, and it is often a typosquatted
version of real benign domains, which may signiﬁcantly reduce the eﬀectiveness
of relying solely on the domain name. Another type of malicious DNS traﬃc
is command and control communication between a botmaster and its bots. A
telltale sign of malicious domains controlled by botmasters would be unusually
low TTL values and frequently changing IP addresses for a domain due to the
use of fast-ﬂux and double ﬂux. For this reason, additional side information
besides the domain name would signiﬁcantly widen the scope of which types of
malicious domains the ﬁnal neural network would be able to detect.
Passive DNS data conveys historical records containing information about
the behavior of the domain over its observed lifespan. For instance, information
like a historical low TTL and many diﬀerent IP addresses could help the
neural network detect domains used for botnets that use fast-ﬂux. Passive
DNS data could, therefore, provide useful information about the domains that
could expand the neural network’s detection capabilities and address the wide
coverage requirement.
Since passive DNS data convey historical information about domains, the
DNS data could be preprocessed and aggregated into values that provide a
summary of the passive DNS history. Alternatively, the records of the passive
DNS data could be passed to the neural networks individually, providing more
ﬁne-grained information. The beneﬁt of passing the individual passive DNS
records is that they can be combined with aggregations computed over the
domain in total and aggregation related to the DNS answer across domains.
Additionally, records with A and AAAA resource record types can be enriched
with geolocation location data from the IP address. In the case of botnets using
fast-ﬂux techniques, the IP address is frequently changing to new compromised
hosts, which may be in the many diﬀerent geographical locations. Since infor-
mation about records can be combined with aggregation values and geolocation
data, the granularity of the dataset will be at the record level.
In addition to creating an eﬀective dataset, the neural network architectures
must satisfy the requirements of high accuracy, fast inference, low human
interference, and adaptability. Most of the previous work that uses deep learning
methods to identify malicious DNS traﬃc uses supervised neural networks and
have shown state-of-the-art detection rate and low false alarm rate. Since the
likelihood of maliciousness can be determined by a single forward pass through
the network, the supervised network will be able to perform inference fast.
Besides, by adding newly discovered threats to the training set, the model can
be adapted to changes in the threat landscape. For these reasons, a supervised
model will be proposed as a solution to this project.
A major caveat of supervised models is the requirement of labeled data,
which is typically created through intensive human eﬀort. By depending on
already labeled training data, a supervised model will mostly learn to generalize
from patterns of already existing threats. Unsupervised methods do not pose
the same requirement to labeled data. Instead, unsupervised methods will be
trained solely on benign data and be able to detect when malicious DNS traﬃc
does not resemble the ordinary and benign DNS traﬃc, in other words, the
network performs anomaly detection. For this reason, this project will explore
the potential of selected unsupervised deep learning techniques and compare
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
30
them to the proposed supervised method.
Most of the proposed unsupervised anomaly detection methods covered in
the related work section, such as autoencoders and density estimation, propose
a method of computing an anomaly score. The anomaly score is useful in
measuring how much a sample diﬀers from ordinary DNS traﬃc. However,
typically it is up to the user in determining the threshold, which would require
signiﬁcant testing, expert knowledge, and human eﬀort in updating the threshold
over time.
The soft-boundary deep SVDD maps normal samples inside a
hypersphere and anomalies outside the hypersphere, with the hypersphere
boundary being adapted during training. Deep SVDD, therefore, addresses the
problem of thresholding the anomaly score. For this reason, this project will
explore the potential of the soft-boundary version of the deep SVDD.
While soft-boundary deep SVDD incorporates its threshold during training,
adaptive threshold mechanisms have been proposed for time series and data
streams. An external adaptive threshold mechanism applied to an autoen-
coder’s reconstruction error, or a density estimator’s negative log-likelihood
score addresses the issue of thresholding the anomaly scores as well. The project
will, therefore, also explore the anomaly detection potential of combining an
autoencoder and density estimator with an adaptive threshold mechanism. Un-
dercomplete autoencoders have been successfully applied for anomaly detection
on computer networks in Kitsune[36], why this type of autoencoder will be used
for this project as well. Many types of deep neural density estimators have
been proposed in previous work. Recurrent autoregressive density estimators
based on LSTM architectures may not satisfy the requirement for fast inference
since the density is estimated sequentially. The MADE architecture addresses
this issue, but its performance may depend a lot on how the features of input
samples are ordered. The masked autoregressive ﬂow architecture can compute
the density in a single forward pass, and its stacking of MADE autoencoders
makes it less dependent on the ordering of input features. For this reason, a
masked autoregressive ﬂow architecture will be used as the deep neural density
estimator.
Two diﬀerent proposed threshold mechanisms have been identiﬁed in the
related work section. The threshold mechanism proposed by Hundman et al.
is dynamically computed from the history of anomaly scores[26]. While the
thresholding is performed automatically, its computation treats the data stream
as a time series where the most recent events are weighted the most. While
passive DNS data do associate data records timestamps, it is usually for when
the record was ﬁrst observed and last observed. Between these timestamps,
the record may have been observed multiple times with no precise timestamps
involved. With passive DNS data, it would, therefore, be challenging to create
a dataset that corresponds to an accurate time series.
An alternative thresholding mechanism that has been identiﬁed in previous
work was proposed by Clark, Liu, and Japkowicz in [11]. The thresholding
mechanism does not assume the data stream to be a time series. Additionally,
the thresholding mechanism adapts to general changes in the data stream as it
evolves. This is a beneﬁcial property since the DNS traﬃc of a network is likely
to be a non-stationary data stream that changes over time. A disadvantage is of
this thresholding mechanism is that it assumes the distribution of the anomaly
scores is Gaussian, which may not be the case and could reduce the eﬀectiveness
of the threshold mechanism. Despite the distribution assumption, the adaptive
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 4. ANALYSIS
31
thresholding mechanism will be used in conjunction with the autoencoder and
MAF network.
To summarize, in order to solve the problem of detecting malicious DNS
traﬃc with deep learning, it is essential the solution has a high detection rate,
low false alarm rate, fast inference, wide coverage, is adaptable, and requires
low human interference. The ﬁrst part of the solution is the creation of an
eﬀective dataset for which passive DNS was considered a useful data source.
The second part of the solution is selecting candidate models based on the
desirable properties of their architecture. Based on previous work reporting
high accuracy on test data, a supervised model will be the primary candidate.
Motivated by the potential of avoiding the need for labeled data, unsupervised
candidates will be explored as well. The three unsupervised candidate models
will be explored: soft-boundary deep SVDD, and an autoencoder and masked
autoregressive ﬂow model used with an adaptive threshold mechanism. The
proposed supervised model and the three unsupervised models will be evaluated
on a held-out test set to compare their detection performance.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 5
Procedure overview
5.1
Overview
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview of the methodological
procedures described in the following chapters. Figure 5.1 illustrates the whole
procedure starting at the top and ending at the bottom. The ﬁrst part of the
procedure is the collection of benign and malicious passive DNS records. Next,
any benign domains found among the malicious domains are ﬁltered from the
dataset to reduce the number of false negatives in the dataset. The passive
DNS records for benign and malicious domains are then combined, and feature
extraction is performed on the combined set of records to create the complete
dataset. The dataset is then split into a train set and a held-out test set. A
feature scaler is ﬁtted to the train set, and it is then used to transform the
train set and test set. The resulting transformed train set and test set are
used for model training and evaluation, respectively. Chapter 6 describes the
data collection, feature extraction, and feature scaling. Next, hyperparameter
optimization is performed on all candidate models, which is then followed by
an extended training session with the selected hyperparameters. The candidate
model architectures, hyperparameter optimizations, and model training are
described in chapter 7.
Finally, all candidate models are evaluated on the test set, and their per-
formances are compared with a variety of metrics. The metrics are deﬁned
in chapter 7, and the results of the evaluation are displayed in chapter 8 and
discussed in chapter 9.
32
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 5. PROCEDURE OVERVIEW
33
Dataset
Test set
Train set
Feature
scaler
Transformed
test set
Transformed
train set
Blacklist
ﬁlter
Feature extraction
Model training &
hyperparameter
tuning
Transform
Fit & transform
Model evaluation
Benign
pDNS
records
Malicious
pDNS
records
Benign
pDNS
records
Evaluation
metrics
A candidate model
Selected model
Model comparison
Feature extraction
Figure 5.1: A graphical overview of the dataset creation and model evaluation
procedure.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 6
Dataset
From the analysis, it was determined that passive DNS would be a suitable
source of information that would improve the coverage of the neural networks’
detection capabilities. This chapter describes the source of the passive DNS
data and the following feature extraction. Finally, the extracted features are
examined visually.
6.1
Data collection
Several providers, including Farsight Security[14], RiskIQ[49], VirusTotal[59],
CIRCL[10], Spamhaus[56], and Mnemonic[7], expose API access to their passive
DNS databases. Most of the providers grant a free trial that is too limited
to create a dataset of signiﬁcant size while the paid tiers are too expensive.
Computer Incidence Response Center Luxembourg (CIRCL) was kind to provide
authenticated access to their passive DNS database[10].
CIRCL provided
unlimited access as long the query rate was limited to two queries per second.
However, the database records did not contain any information about observed
TTL values, which would have been useful information for the detection of
fast-ﬂux protected botnet communication. Ultimately, it was decided that
the passive DNS data was going to be collected from Mnemonic using their
public passive DNS REST API[7]. The Mnemonic database records include
information about the TTL values of the records, and the public API has a
generous query limit allowing the creation of a substantive dataset.
When a domain name is queried to the Mnemonic passive DNS API, a list
of zero or more records is returned. Each record is described with a set of ﬁelds
that are explained in table 6.1
The record ﬁelds rrclass, tlp, customer, createdTimeStamp, and lastUpdated-
Timestamp are considered irrelevant for the subsequent feature extraction. The
rrclass is IN for all records in the dataset, why it would not help discriminate
between the benign and malicious domains. TLP, the abbreviation of Traﬃc
Light Protocol, designates the appropriate audience for shared information.[15]
The TLP is white for all records since API is public. TLP white indicates that
the “(...) information carries minimal or no foreseeable risk of misuse (...)”[15].
Likewise, the costumer ﬁeld is null for all records due the API being public.
The createdTimestamp and lastUpdatedTimestamp values are always zero and
therefore also not informative.
34
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 6. DATASET
35
Field
Description
Used
rrtype
DNS record type.

query
The queried domain name.

answer
The DNS record answer.

ﬁrstSeenTimestamp
First registered timestamp.

lastSeemTimestamp
Last registered timestamp.

maxTtl
Maximum TTL observed.

minTtl
Minimum TTL observed.

times
Number of observations.

rrclass
DNS record class.

tlp
The TLP of this record.

customer
The customer owning the record.

createdTimestamp
Always 0.

lastUpdatedTimestamp
Always 0.

Table 6.1: The ﬁelds for each record in a passive DNS query result. A 
indicates the ﬁeld is used for creating the synthetic dataset, and a  indicates
the ﬁeld is not used.
With passive DNS data source in place, the lists of benign and malicious
domains to be queried are created.
The benign domain names were collected from the top 100 000 domain names
from the Alexa[2] top 1 million domains list downloaded1 on May 28, 2020.
The malicious domain names were retrieved from the complete DNS-BH
domain blacklist[48] downloaded on March 19, 2020. The blacklist contains
27 084 domains that have been used for phishing, malspam, distributing malware
and trojans, and other malicious activities. The number of passive DNS records
associated with benign domains has been observed to be much higher than the
number of passive DNS records associated with malicious domains. To reduce
the class imbalance in the dataset, domain names from two additional blacklists
were collected as well. One is the Maltrail[57] blacklist of malware and malicious
domain names downloaded on the 29th of May 2020, which contains 96 982
malicious domains. The other is a combination of the high sensitivity, medium
sensitivity, and low sensitivity blacklist of suspicious domains provided by the
Internet Storm Center (ISC). The ISC blacklist was downloaded on the 29th of
May 2020 and contains 70 452 domain names.
Before feature extraction, the Alexa domain names were ﬁltered with the
malicious domain names resulting in 207 Alexa domains being removed from
the dataset. After ﬁltering, a total of 4 547 962 passive DNS records were
collected for the benign domains, and 1 277 569 passive DNS records belonged
to malicious domains.
6.2
Feature extraction
The features selected for extraction are inspired by [4] and [32]. Feature extrac-
tion is performed on three diﬀerent levels: record based features, aggregation
1Downloaded from http://s3.amazonaws.com/alexa-static/top-1m.csv.zip
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6. DATASET
36
values computed for the DNS answer over all domains, and aggregation values
computed over the record’s domain. Table 6.2 lists all the extracted features
and their description.
The country feature is the result of enriching the passive DNS data with IP
geolocation data. DB-IP provides geolocation databases that cover the whole
IPv4 and IPv6 address space. This project makes use of the free DB-IP IP to
country lite database downloaded in May 2020[27]. The IP addresses in passive
DNS data represents 206 diﬀerent countries. Each country is represented by
a unique integer between 0 and 206, where one of the integers is reserved for
unknown. The country of all records where the RR type is not A or AAAA is
always set to unknown.
After feature extraction, 15% of the dataset is held out as a test dataset
used exclusively for evaluation, and the remaining 85% of the dataset is used for
training and hyperparameter optimization of the neural network models. Since
a domain can be associated with multiple passive DNS records, a simple dataset
split risks that samples in train and test data belong to the same domains.
This is a problem because the domain aggregation values of these samples are
the same, and the model will then be able to achieve a good evaluation score
by simply remembering these values. Instead, the samples in the dataset are
grouped by domain. Samples belonging to 15% of the domains are then reserved
as the test set used for evaluation, and the samples belonging to the remaining
85% of the domains are used for training and validation.
6.3
Preprocessing
Before the training data is passed to the neural network all features, with the
exception of RR type and country, are preprocessed by standardizing them
to have zero mean and unit variance. In practice this is achieved by ﬁtting a
StandardScaler object from scikit-learn[45] on the training data only. The same
StandardScaler object is then used to transform the training set, validation set,
and test set in order to prevent information about the distribution of validation
or test data from leaking into the models.
The domain names are also preprocessed via tokenization before they are
passed to some of the neural networks. Tokenization is the process of dividing
a domain name into smaller units. An option would be to tokenize the domain
names at the word-level by identifying words in the domain name string, as done
in [62]. Alternatively, the domain name could be tokenized at the character
level. A problem with word-level tokenization is the likely occurrence of unseen
words in the test set, all of which would fall into a common unknown category
and cause a loss of information. All characters that are allowed in a domain
name are known in advance, why the character-level tokenization would allow
the model to process domain names with unseen words. For this reason, the
preprocessing of the domain names is a character level tokenization of the
domain name strings. The domain names only contain ASCII letters, digits,
dots, and hyphens why each unique character is represented by a number
between 1 and 38. An example demonstrating character-level tokenization is
shown in ﬁgure 6.1. It is required that the tokenized domain name sequences are
of equal length in order to divide input data into mini-batches. The maximum
length of a fully qualiﬁed domain name is 255 characters, and the tokenized
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 6. DATASET
37
domain name sequences are therefore padded with zeros after the domain name
tokens until the sequence is 255 characters long. Keras[9], the library used to
implement the neural networks, supports masking layers that allow subsequent
layers to ignore the padding.
w
w
w
.
g
o
o
g
l
e
.
c
o
m
23 23 23 37
7
15 15
7
12
5
37
3
15 13
Tokenization
Figure 6.1: Character-level tokenization of the www.google.com domain name.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6. DATASET
38
Feature
Description
Observation count
Number of times the record has been observed.
Minimum TTL
The minimum TTL observed for the record.
Lifespan
Time in seconds from ﬁrst time to last time the
record has been observed.
RR type is A/AAAA
1 if the record’s RR type is A or AAAA, 0
otherwise.
RR type is cname
1 if the record’s RR type is cname, 0 otherwise.
RR type is dname
1 if the record’s RR type is dname, 0 otherwise.
RR type is naptr
1 if the record’s RR type is naptr, 0 otherwise.
RR type is rp
1 if the record’s RR type is rp, 0 otherwise.
RR type is svr
1 if the record’s RR type is svr, 0 otherwise.
Country
An integer between 0 and 206 representing the
country of the IP address.
Answer lifespan
Time in seconds from ﬁrst time to last time the
answer was observed among all records.
Answer observation count
Sum of the observation count for all records
with this DNS answer.
Answer unique domains
Number of unique domains associated with the
answer of this record.
Domain observation count
Total observation count for the domain of this
record.
Domain unique IP addrs.
Number of unique IPv4 and IPv6 addresses
associated with the domain of this record.
Domain unique cnames
The number of unique cname answers associ-
ated with the domain of this record.
Domain unique min TTLs
Number of unique minimum TTL values asso-
ciated with the domain of this record.
Domain unique countries
The number of unique countries associated with
the domain of this record.
Domain lifespan
Time in seconds from the ﬁrst observed record
to the last observed record of the domain.
Domain inactivity
Time in seconds since the domain of the record
was last observed (computed from May 30,
2020).
Table 6.2: Features used in the dataset.
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 6. DATASET
39
6.4
Visual feature inspection
In this section, a selection of features is visualized and inspected. The visual-
izations tell how the feature values are distributed for benign and malicious
domains using bar plots, Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) plots, and heat
maps. The feature values of benign domains should be distributed separately
from the malicious domain as much as possible to help the neural network
models to discriminate between the two domain types. While not all features
are visualized in this section, they can all be found in appendix A.
Figure 6.2 shows the number of benign and malicious DNS records of diﬀerent
resource record (RR) types. A and AAAA resource record types are combined
into a single category, A/AAAA. It is the case for both benign and malicious
domains that A/AAAA, cname, and ptr are the most occurring RR types. The
dname, naptr, and rp resource record types are observed for benign records
exclusively, although in a relatively small number.
a/aaaa
cname
ptr
dname
srv
naptr
rp
rr type
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
count
RR type count
label
benign
malicious
Figure 6.2: The number of diﬀerent RR types for benign and malicious passive
DNS records. The y-axis has logarithmic scale.
Figure 6.3 shows a KDE plot that illustrates the distribution of the number
of domains associated with the DNS answer. The DNS answers for malicious
records have generally been reused across a larger number of diﬀerent domains
than DNS answers for benign DNS records.
Figure 6.4 displays a KDE plot showing how the minimum observed TTL
value is distributed among benign and malicious domains. The main motiva-
tion of including the minimum observed TTL as a feature is its potential for
identifying the use of fast-ﬂux. It is observed that the minimum TTL values of
the malicious records are primarily split into a group of very small TTL values
and another group with very large TTL values that exceed the TTL values of
benign records.
Figure 6.5 is a KDE plot that shows how the domain lifespan is distr´ıbuted
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6. DATASET
40
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
0.000000
0.000025
0.000050
0.000075
0.000100
0.000125
0.000150
0.000175
0.000200
Distribution of answer unique domain count
benign
malicious
Figure 6.3: KDE plot of number of unique domains associated with a DNS
answer.
among benign and malicious domains. It is observed that benign domains
typically have a longer lifespan, although a signiﬁcant amount of malicious
domains have a long lifespan as well.
Figure 6.6 shows how the benign and malicious IP addresses are distributed
in the various countries on a world map. It is observed that a signiﬁcant number
of both benign and malicious IP addresses are located in the United States of
America. Besides the US, benign IP addresses are typically located in Germany,
Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the
Netherlands. The number of malicious IP addresses located in Ukraine is nearly
as many as in the US, and next is the Russian Federation. Ukraine and the
Russian Federation are therefore strong indicators of malicious IP addresses,
while countries such as Germany, Sweden, and the UK indicate benign IP
addresses.
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 6. DATASET
41
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1e8
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1e
13
Distribution of minimum TTL
benign
0
1
2
3
4
1e9
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1e
12
malicious
Figure 6.4: KDE plot of the minimum observed TTL.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1e8
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
1e
8
Distribution of domain lifespan
benign
malicious
Figure 6.5: KDE plot of the domain lifespan for benign domains and malicious
domains. Generally, benign domains have a longer lifespan.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6. DATASET
42
(a) Log count of benign IP addresses located in diﬀerent countries.
(b) Log count of malicious IP addresses located in diﬀerent countries.
Figure 6.6: Heat map showing the relative number of benign and malicious IP
addresses in various countries.
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 7
Methods
7.1
Supervised model
The proposed supervised model is designed to receive all types of extracted
features. The output of the supervised model is a probability that its input is
malicious. The neural network has three inputs: the tokenized domain name,
passive DNS features except for the country, and the country as a separate
input. An overview of the supervised model is shown in ﬁgure 7.2.
The tokenized domain name is passed through an embedding layer that
embeds each of the character tokens into 12-dimensional dense vectors. The
embedded domain name characters are then passed to a residual block of dilated
causal convolutions. The architecture of the residual block was initially proposed
by Zhou et al. in [62] and is illustrated in ﬁgure 7.1. The residual block consists
of a dilated causal convolutional layer with a ReLU activation function followed
by batch normalization and a dropout layer. The output of the residual block is
a residual connection from the input added to the output of the dropout layer.
The dilated casual convolutional layer in the residual block has 12 ﬁlters, a
kernel size of 12, a stride length of 1, and a dilation rate of 1. The dropout layer
of the residual block has a dropout rate of 0.2. The residual block is used as an
alternative to an LSTM due to the faster training and inference of convolutional
layers. The output of the residual block is then ﬂattened and passed to a dense
layer with 128 units.
The second input to the supervised neural network is the extracted passive
DNS features except for the country feature. The passive DNS inputs are
processed by three dense fully-connected layers with 32, 64, and 128 units,
respectively.
The third input is the country feature, which is passed to an embedding layer
that embeds each country into an 8-dimensional dense vector. The embedding
is then ﬂattened and passed to a fully-connected layer with 50 units.
The last part of the supervised network concatenates the dense outputs of
the domain name part, the passive DNS part, and the country part into a single
vector which is passed to two dense layers each with 1 256 units, and then to
the output layer which has a single unit.
All hidden dense layers in the network use the ReLU activation function, and
the output layer uses the sigmoid activation function. To prevent overﬁtting,
dropout with a rate of 0.5 was used for all hidden fully-connected layers.
43
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7. METHODS
44
Dilated Causal
Convolution
ReLU
Normalization
Dropout
Addition
Input
Output
Residual
block
Figure 7.1: Illustration of the components in a residual block adapted from [62].
The supervised neural network is the result of a hyperparameter grid search
over the learning rate and the number of consecutive residual blocks. A vali-
dation set consisting of samples belonging to 15% of the training set domains
was held out for hyperparameter selection. The grid search was performed on
the learning rates [0.01, 0.001, 0.0001] and the number of residual blocks [1, 3, 6].
The ﬁrst residual block has a dilation rate of 1, and for each subsequent residual
block, the dilation rate is doubled. During grid search, the network was trained
for ﬁve epochs with the Adam[29] optimizer and a mini-batch size of 128. A
learning rate of 0.0001 and 1 residual block resulted in the lowest validation
loss for the model, why this hyperparameter conﬁguration was selected for the
supervised model.
Having selected the hyperparameters via grid search, the model was trained
on the training set for ten epochs with a training time of approximately 1 hour
and 25 minutes.
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 7. METHODS
45
Domain name input
Passive DNS input
Country input
Flatten
Input
Output
(?, 255, 12)
(?, 3060)
Residual
block
Input
Output
(?, 255, 12)
(?, 255, 12)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 3060)
(?, 128)
Input
Output
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 20)
(?, 32)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 32)
(?, 64)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 64)
(?, 128)
Flatten
Input
Output
(?, 1, 8)
(?, 8)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 8)
(?, 50)
Concatenate
Input
Output
[(?, 128), (?, 50), (?, 128)]
(?, 306)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 306)
(?, 1256)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 1256)
(?, 1256)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 1256)
(?, 1)
Embedding
Input
Output
(?, 255)
(?, 255, 12)
Embedding
Input
Output
(?, 1)
(?, 1, 8)
Output
Figure 7.2: The supervised model.
Each layer describes its type and its
input/output dimensionality. The ? marks indicate the mini-batch size which
is speciﬁed at train time. Dense layers are fully-connected layers.
7.2
Deep SVDD model
The deep SVDD model is designed similarly to the supervised model and receives
three inputs: tokenized domain names, passive DNS features except for the
country, and the country as a separate input. Like the supervised model, the
tokenized domain name tokens are passed through an embedding layer and a
single residual block with a dilated causal convolution. The passive DNS inputs
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 7. METHODS
46
are passed through three fully-connected layers, and the country input is passed
through an embedding layer and a fully-connected layer. The outputs of the
domain name branch, the passive DNS branch, and the country branch of the
network are concatenated and passed through a fully-connected layer, which
is ﬁnally connected to the output layer eight units. An additional Random
Noise Injection (RNI) layer with ﬁve units is connected to the output layer to
regularize against hypersphere collapse of the loss function. All hidden layers
use ReLU activation function, and dropout with a rate of 0.5 is applied to all
fully-connected hidden layers with more than four units. Figure 7.3 displays a
diagram of the deep SVDD model.
The hyperparameters of the deep SVDD model have been selected via grid
search over the following hyperparameter options:
• Number of residual blocks: 1, 3, 6.
• Number of units in the RNI layer: 5, 30, 60, 100.
Models with each hyperparameter conﬁguration were trained for four epochs
using the Adam optimizer, a learning rate of 10−6, and a minibatch size of 128.
The ﬁltering of the benign domains revealed a group of malicious domains, why
it is expected that some malicious domains may be found among the benign
domains why the ν parameter was set to 0.2. For the adaptive weighting of
the loss function, α = 0.9, β = 0.5, and c0 = 0. The hypersphere center
was initialized to be mean of representations from an initial forward pass of
the training set. The ﬁrst two epochs are used as the warmup period with
the hypersphere radius ﬁxed at R = 0, after which the radius was allowed
updates. The model with the lowest validation SVDD loss was selected for
further training, which turned out to be a model with one residual block and
ﬁve units in the RNI layer. The model was then trained with the selected
hyperparameters for six epochs with a training time of 28 minutes.
While the random noise injection layer regularizes the model and helps
counter hypersphere collapse, it was observed that large learning rates caused
hypersphere collapse, which was also reported in [53], and that training the
model for many epochs cause hypersphere collapse as well. For these reasons,
the learning rate was set to 10−6, and the number of epochs was limited to 6.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 7. METHODS
47
Domain name input
Passive DNS input
Country input
Flatten
Input
Output
(?, 255, 12)
(?, 3060)
Residual
block
Input
Output
(?, 255, 12)
(?, 255, 12)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 3060)
(?, 32)
Input
Output
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 20)
(?, 16)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 16)
(?, 8)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 8)
(?, 4)
Flatten
Input
Output
(?, 1, 8)
(?, 8)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 8)
(?, 8)
Concatenate
Input
Output
[(?, 4), (?, 8), (?, 32)]
(?, 44)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 44)
(?, 32)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 32)
(?, 8)
RNI
layer
Input
Output
(?, 8)
(?, 5)
Embedding
Input
Output
(?, 255)
(?, 255, 12)
Embedding
Input
Output
(?, 1)
(?, 1, 8)
RNI layer output
Output
Figure 7.3: The deep SVDD model.
7.3
Autoencoder model
The autoencoder model receives the passive DNS features except for the RR
type and country features. A diagram of the autoencoder model is displayed in
ﬁgure 7.4. The autoencoder is an undercomplete autoencoder which accepts
13-dimensional input. The input is encoded via four hidden layers with 10,
8, 5, and 3 units into a 3-dimensional code. The code is then decoded to a
13-dimensional reconstruction using four decoder layers with 5, 8, 10, and 13
units. All hidden layers use the tanh activation function, and the output layer
has linear activation.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 7. METHODS
48
The choice of autoencoder architecture was the result of a grid search over
selected candidate hyperparameters. The candidate hyperparameters were:
• Hidden activation function: ReLU, tanh, sigmoid.
• Learning rate: 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001.
• Number of encoder/decoder layers: 0, 1, 2, 3.
The number of encoder/decoder layers denotes the number of layers between
the input layer and the code layer, and between the code layer and the output
layer. The number of units in each encoder/decoder layer was computed as
rounded evenly spaced numbers between 13 (input dimension) and 3 (code
dimension) using the NumPy linspace function. The number of units in the
decoder layers were mirrored from the number of units in the encoder layers.
A model with each of the possible hyperparameter conﬁgurations was trained
with the Adam optimizer and a batch size of 256 until a maximum of 30 epochs
with early stopping if the validation loss did not decrease after ﬁve consecutive
epochs. The hyperparameter conﬁguration with the lowest validation loss was
selected, which was was a model that uses tanh as its activation function for
the hidden layers, a learning rate of 0.001, and three encoder/decoder layers.
A model with the selected hyperparameter conﬁguration was then retrained
on the training set until its validation loss stopped decreasing after three
consecutive epochs. The model was trained in approximately 32 minutes until
it stopped early when the validation loss stopped decreasing after 48 epochs.
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 7. METHODS
49
Passive DNS input (continuous features)
Input
Output
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 13)
(?, 10)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 10)
(?, 8)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 8)
(?, 5)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 5)
(?, 3)
Output
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 3)
(?, 5)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 5)
(?, 8)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 8)
(?, 10)
Dense
Input
Output
(?, 10)
(?, 13)
Figure 7.4: The autoencoder model
7.4
Masked autoregressive ﬂow model
The masked autoregressive ﬂow (MAF) model receives the passive DNS data
as input except for domain name, RR type, and country features. Categorical
features are excluded since they often repeat among samples which causes spikes
in the density estimation and misleading results according to [44].
The ﬁnal MAF model is a masked autoregressive ﬂow consisting of a stack
of eight MADE networks. Each MADE network has three layers, all of which
have 256 units. An L2 regularization with a coeﬃcient of 10−6 was applied
to the MADE layers as suggested in [44]. Additionally, as proposed by [44],
between each MADE network is a batch normalization layer and a permutation
layer which reverses the order of the input features.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 7. METHODS
50
The proposed MAF model is a result of a hyperparameter grid search over
the following hyperparameter options:
• Learning rate: 0.0001, 0.00001.
• Hidden activation: ReLU, tanh, sigmoid.
• Number of MADE networks: 2, 4, 8.
The grid search was performed with the Adam optimizer with a mini-batch
size of 256 for ﬁve epochs, and the hyperparameter conﬁguration with the lowest
validation loss was selected. The hyperparameter conﬁguration with learning
rate 0.0001, tanh activation function, and eight stacked MADE networks was
selected from the grid search. The model with the selected hyperparameters
was then trained until no decrease in validation loss was observed for three
consecutive epochs. The training stopped at epoch 5 with a training time of 37
minutes.
7.5
Adaptive threshold mechanism
The autoencoder and MAF neural networks require a thresholding mechanism
in order to label predictions as being benign or malicious. Through the analysis,
it was determined that the adaptive thresholding mechanism proposed by Clark,
Liu, and Japkowicz in [11] is the most suitable among alternatives. Algorithm
1 displays the Variable-window-size Adaptive Threshold Updating mechanism.
The algorithm initiates by training the unsupervised model on normal data.
The trained model is then used to compute an anomaly score on a held-out
validation set of normal samples. The collection of validation anomaly scores
are stored in zw1 and used to compute the initial threshold value. During test
time, the model is used to compute an anomaly score st for each incoming
sample xt in the data stream. The sample score st is compared to the threshold
value and classiﬁed as being an outlier or normal. The sample score st is then
added to zw2 and tw, and zw1 if its window is not ﬁlled. If the zw2 window has
been ﬁlled with new samples, it is tested if the mean of the anomaly scores
in zw2 is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the mean of the anomaly scores in zw1
using a ztest. If the p-value of the ztest is less than 0.05, the algorithm has
detected a concept shift in the data stream, which results in the threshold value
being updated from the values in tw. Old values in tw are then emptied, zw1 is
assigned the values in zw2, and zw2 is emptied to be ﬁlled with new incoming
samples. If zw2 is full, but the ztest did not report any signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
the mean values of zw1 and zw2, the ﬁrst element of zw2 is removed. Finally,
the M value determines the frequency of threshold updates when no concept
drift has been observed.[11]
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 7. METHODS
51
Algorithm 1
Variable-window-size Adaptive Threshold Updating (VATU) as proposed in [11]
on page 4. T = 50 is the window size of the ztest, M = 100 is the window size
for updating the threshold, and Upper Bound is 1, 000.
f ←trainModel(trainData)
validationScores ←getValidationCost(f, validationData)
threshold ←2 · std(validationScores) + mean(validationScores)
zw1 ←validationScores
while xt is available do
scoret ←f(xt)
if scoret > theshold then
yt ←outlier
else
yt ←normal
end if
zw2 ←zw2
S scoret
tw ←tw
S scoret
if length(zw1) < T then
zw1 ←zw1
S scoret
end if
if length(zw2) ≥T then
if ztest(zw1, zw2) < 0.05 then
threshold ←2 · std(tw) + mean(tw)
tw ←tw[length(tw) −T] to tw[length(tw)]
zw1 ←zw2
ww2 ←∅
else
zw2.pop(0) // Remove ﬁrst element
end if
end if
if length(tw) mod M = 0 then
threshold ←2 · std(tw) + mean(tw)
end if
if length(tw) > Upper Bound then
tw.pop(0)
end if
end while
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 7. METHODS
52
7.6
Tools
Hardware
All neural networks were trained and evaluated on the same Windows 10
computer that features an Intel Core i5-3570K CPU, an Nvidia GTX 980Ti
GPU, and 16 GB RAM.
Software
All neural networks were implemented, trained and evaluated with Python 3.7
using the Tensorﬂow[1] framework version 2.2.0 and its Keras API[9]. Keras
was used to implement the neural networks, running the training and testing
procedures, and to write the custom Deep SVDD loss function and the Deep
SVDD random noise injection regularization layer. The TensorFlow Probabil-
ity[58] library version 0.10 was used to implement the masked autoregressive
ﬂow model, which was then trained with Keras.
Pandas[35] version 1.0.4 was used for passive DNS feature extraction and
conversion to the CSV format for later retrieval.
Scikit-learn[45] version 0.22.1 was used for standardizing the continuous
passive DNS features and computing the evaluation metrics. Keras was used
for tokenization of the domain name strings.
GuildAI[21] version 0.6.6 was used setup and track the hyperparameter
optimization experiments.
7.7
Evaluation metrics
The neural network models described in sections 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, and 7.4 have all
been evaluated for their ability to detect the malicious domains on the same
held out test set. This chapter describes the metrics used for reporting the
result displayed in section 8
Recall
Recall is deﬁned as:
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(7.1)
where TP and FN are the number of true positives and false negatives respec-
tively. Recall ranges in value from 0 to 1. Recall is also known as true positive
rate and measures the proportion of actual positive samples that were identiﬁed
correctly why a recall of 1 is best.[19]
Precision
Precision is deﬁned as:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(7.2)
where TP and FP are the number of true positives and false positives respec-
tively. Precision ranges in value from 0 to 1, and it measures what proportion
of the samples classiﬁed as positive were correct why a higher precision of 1 is
best.[19]
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 7. METHODS
53
F1 score
The F1 score is deﬁned as:
F1 = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
(7.3)
and can be interpreted as a weighted average of precision and recall that ranges
in value from 0 to 1, where 0 is the worst F1 score and 1 and is the best F1
score.[54]
AUC score
The AUC score measures the area under the ROC curve. The ROC curve
(receiver operating characteristic curve) plots the true positive rate against the
false positive rate at multiple classiﬁcation thresholds.[20] A lower threshold
increases the number of samples classiﬁed as positives and therefore increases
both the number true positives and false positives.
AUC is an aggregate
measure of the model’s performance across all possible classiﬁcation thresholds.
AUC ranges in value from 0 to 1. 0 is the worst possible AUC value and
measures a model with only wrong predictions. 1 is the best possible AUC and
measures a model that only predicts samples correctly.[20] AUC is robust to
class imbalance.[5]
Matthew’s Correlation Coeﬃcient
Matthew’s Correlation Coeﬃcient is deﬁned as:
MCC =
TP · TN −FP · FN
p
(TP + FN)(TP + FP)(TN + FP)(TN + FN)
(7.4)
where TP is the number of true positives, TN is the number of true negatives,
FP is the number of false positives, and FN is the number of false negatives.[5]
Matthew’s Correlation Coeﬃcient (MCC) provides a summary of the perfor-
mance of a binary classiﬁcation algorithm based on the elements of the confusion
matrix (TP, TN, FP, FN). MCC ranges in value from -1 to 1, where -1 shows
complete disagreement between the model and the ground truth labels, 0 shows
that the model predictions are uncorrelated with the ground truth, and 1 shows
complete agreement between the models prediction and the ground truth labels.
MCC is robust to class imbalance.[5]
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 8
Results
The neural networks have been measured on a held-out test set and their
performance measured with the metrics described in section 7.7. The results
are shown in ﬁgures 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, and 8.5 where the supervised model is
labeled as ”Supervised”, the deep SVDD model is labeled as ”DSVDD”, the
autoencoder model is labeled as ”AE”, and the masked autoregressive ﬂow is
labeled as ”MAF”.
Figure 8.1 is a bar plot of the measured precision. It is observed that
the supervised model, the deep SVDD model achieves high precision above
0.95. The autoencoder model achieved a precision of 0.84, while the masked
autoregressive ﬂow has a signiﬁcantly lower measured precision at 0.26.
Figure 8.2 shows the measured recall. The supervised model scores the best
recall at 0.94, while the deep SVDD model is second with a recall measured
at 0.29. The autoencoder and masked autoregressive ﬂow both have a low
measured recall at 0.04 and 0.13, respectively.
Figure 8.3 is a bar plot of the measured F1 score. The plot shows that the
supervised model scores the best F1 score at 0.96, which is followed by the deep
SVDD model at 0.45. The autoencoder has the lowest F1 score at 0.07, and
the masked autoregressive ﬂow model has a slightly higher F1 score at 0.17.
A bar plot of the AUC score is shown in ﬁgure 8.4. Again, it is observed
that the supervised model achieves the best metric score at 0.97, followed by
the deep SVDD model at 0.64, the autoencoder at 0.52, and ﬁnally, the masked
autoregressive ﬂow at 0.50.
The Matthew’s Correlation Coeﬃcient (MCC) score for each model is shown
in ﬁgure 8.5. The supervised model scores the best MCC at about 0.94. The
deep SVDD model scores the second-highest MCC score at 0.47, followed by the
autoencoder at 0.15. The masked autoregressive ﬂow scored the lowest MCC
at 0.00043, indicating that its predictions were nearly uncorrelated with the
ground truth labels.
All in all, the supervised model showed the highest performance across all
evaluation metrics. Among the unsupervised models, the deep SVDD model
generally performs the best. The autoencoder model performs better than the
masked autoregressive ﬂow in most metrics except for recall and F1 score. While
the masked autoregressive ﬂow scores a higher recall value and F1 score than
the autoencoder, its precision, and Matthew’s Correlation Coeﬃcient values
are the absolute lowest. It is positive that most of the unsupervised models
54
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 8. RESULTS
55
typically have a low false positive rate, but they all have a low detection rate.
Supervised
DSVDD
AE
MAF
Model
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Precision
0.9709
0.959
0.8436
0.2565
Figure 8.1: Precision.
Supervised
DSVDD
AE
MAF
Model
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Recall
0.9418
0.2922
0.0384
0.1317
Figure 8.2: Recall.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 8. RESULTS
56
Supervised
DSVDD
AE
MAF
Model
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
F1
0.9561
0.448
0.0735
0.174
Figure 8.3: F1 score.
Supervised
DSVDD
AE
MAF
Model
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
AUC
0.9661
0.644
0.518
0.5017
Figure 8.4: AUC score.
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 8. RESULTS
57
Supervised
DSVDD
AE
MAF
Model
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
MCC
0.9418
0.4698
0.1468
0.0043
Figure 8.5: Matthew’s Correlation Coeﬃcient.
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 9
Discussion
The results in chapter 8 show that the generally worst performing model was
the masked autoregressive ﬂow for which Matthew’s Correlation Coeﬃcient
indicates that the model’s predictions were near uncorrelated with the ground
truth labels. The poor performance could either be due to the model itself or
the threshold mechanism applied to it. When inspecting negative log-likelihood
scores produced by the model on the test data, it is observed that the smallest
value is −1003.11, and the largest value is −976.31. These values indicate that
the masked autoregressive ﬂow model has diﬃculties diﬀerentiating between
malicious and benign samples by ﬁnding all samples highly likely. A possible
reason would be that the masked autoregressive ﬂow density estimation is best
at modeling high-density regions with smooth transitions. The model would,
therefore, ﬁnd it diﬃcult to diﬀerentiate between small dissimilarities in feature
values for benign and malicious samples.
The predictions of the autoencoder are more correlated with the ground
truth labels than the masked autoregressive ﬂow, although its recall is lower
than the masked autoregressive ﬂow. By inspecting the reconstruction errors
on the test set and comparing them to the labels, it is observed that the benign
samples have a minimum of 0.000392, a 25th percentile of 0.009144, a median
of 0.020247, a 75th percentile of 0.076588, and a maximum of 698.509644. For
malicious samples, it is observed that the minimum reconstruction error is
0.000428, the 25th percentile is 0.017035, the median is 0.395, the 75 percentile
is 0.351259, and the maximum is 39553.55. Malicious samples are associated
with signiﬁcantly higher reconstruction errors than that of the benign domains,
why the adaptive threshold mechanism may be at fault. The adaptive threshold
mechanism is based on the assumption that the samples of the data stream are
Gaussian distributed. The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test has been used to check if
this is the case. With a p-value of approximately 0, it can be concluded that
the sample reconstruction errors are not Gaussian distributed. This discrepancy
with the assumption of the threshold mechanism is likely a major reason for
the low detection performance.
The deep SVDD model was the best performing unsupervised model with
a signiﬁcantly higher detection compared to the autoencoder and masked
autoregressive ﬂow. While the performance is still signiﬁcantly worse than the
supervised model, its innate threshold mechanism, and consideration for noise
in the training set are considerable beneﬁts.
58
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 9. DISCUSSION
59
The performance of the supervised model on the test set was superior to
that of any of the unsupervised models for all performance measures. The
results show that training a neural network classiﬁer with domain names and
passive DNS data is useful for detecting malicious DNS traﬃc while satisfying
the requirements posed in the analysis of the problem.
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 10
Conclusion and future work
The objective of this project was to use deep learning to detect malicious DNS
traﬃc that satisﬁes the requirements of high detection rate, low false alarm rate,
fast inference, wide coverage, adaptability, and low need for human interference
during deployment. To solve the objective, a deep supervised binary classiﬁer
that accepts domain names, passive DNS data, and IP geolocation was proposed.
The proposed model showed promising results in all performance measures when
evaluated on a held-out test set. The model was trained and tested on a synthetic
dataset consisting of passive DNS records for benign domains and a wide variety
of malicious domains. The results show that passive DNS data proved useful
as side information for training a neural network classiﬁer to detect malicious
domains of various types. It can, therefore, be concluded that a deep learning
model that satisﬁes the posed requirements can learn to detect malicious DNS
traﬃc with high accuracy.
Inspired by the potential of avoiding the necessity of labeled training data,
three unsupervised approaches were explored as well: Deep Support Vector
Data Descriptor, and an autoencoder and a masked autoregressive ﬂow used in
conjunction with an adaptive threshold mechanism. The unsupervised models
showed a high false negative rate, why their performance is deemed to low for
use in any real-world application yet.
10.1
Future work
While the proposed supervised model showed good results, this section describes
ideas for possible improvement that could be done in future work.
The results presented in this thesis are produced from neural networks trained
on a synthetic dataset. While the dataset was created to train and evaluate
how well the models generalize, the dataset exhibits the idealistic property of
having a very low amount of noise. By collecting the benign domains from the
top 100 000 Alexa domain names, and ﬁltering with an extensive blacklist, very
few malicious domains are likely to be present among the benign domains. As
future work, it would be desirable to train and test the model on DNS traﬃc
originating from a real-world computer network. A dataset that reﬂects real
DNS traﬃc would provide a more accurate measure of how well the models
generalize. This project was initially planned with training and evaluating
models on real-world DNS data provided by CSIS, but the data was not ready
60
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 10. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
61
in time for this thesis. As future work, the experiments demonstrated in this
thesis could be reproduced on the data from CSIS when it becomes available.
Another potential for improvement in future work is the hyperparameter
optimization. The implementation of most models was ﬁnished late in the
process of the project, leaving little time for extensive hyperparameter opti-
mization. Most of the hyperparameter optimizations presented in this report
were performed on the hyperparameters considered most inﬂuential. The rest
of the hyperparameters were conﬁgured according to recommendations from
related work. With more time and by training the networks remotely on the
DTU HPC cluster, more optimal hyperparameters might be discovered.
The deep SVDD model showed the most promising results among the
explored unsupervised approaches. Its innate threshold mechanism is desirable
for the requirements posed in the analysis, making it worth further exploring the
potential of this model type. Random noise injection regularization was used to
allow the use of bias terms in the neural network. This type of regularization
was selected because it allowed for better performance in most experiments
demonstrated in [53]. Hypersphere collapse prevention by regularization using
hinge loss[50] to penalize mini-batch variance if it falls below a speciﬁed threshold
was also proposed in [53]. The mini-batch variance regularization could be
worth exploring in future work.
The masked autoregressive ﬂow model had diﬃculties diﬀerentiating between
benign and malicious DNS traﬃc by assigning them similar log-likelihood scores.
This is likely due to the model having diﬃculties modeling low-density regions
and sharp transitions.
A potential improvement to the density modeling
approach could be the use of Autoregressive Energy Machines[39] proposed by
Nash and Durkan which addresses these issues.
Another note for future work is to include other types of DNS side informa-
tion, which could bring potential improvements to the table. Whereas passive
DNS data consists of passively observed DNS records, WHOIS could be used to
collect information about a domain actively. WHOIS would be able to provide
the models with new types of information such as exact creation, expiration, and
last updated dates, registrant and registrar information, contact information,
and hosting history, which is not obtainable through passive DNS alone.
Finally, it is worth to consider attackers targeting the neural network model
itself. If a potential attacker gains knowledge about the data features, or the
neural network, the attacker could construct malicious DNS traﬃc that imitates
features that characteristic for benign domains. If the malicious DNS traﬃc
manages to go undetected and enters the training set, the attacker could directly
aﬀect the model. If the kinds of neural networks described in this thesis were
to be deployed, it is worth researching adversarial attacks against the neural
networks in future work.
==PAGE:69==
Appendix A
All feature visualizations
a/aaaa
cname
ptr
dname
srv
naptr
rp
rr type
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
count
RR type count
label
benign
malicious
Figure A.1: Counts of the diﬀerent RR types. Notice the y-axis has logarithmic
scale.
62
==PAGE:70==
APPENDIX A. ALL FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS
63
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1e8
0
1
2
3
4 1e
13
Distribution of observation counts
benign
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1e6
0
1
2
3
4
1e
9
malicious
Figure A.2: KDE plot showing the distribution of the number of observations.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1e8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1e
8
Distribution of record lifespan
benign
malicious
Figure A.3: KDE plot showing the distribution of the record lifespan.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A. ALL FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS
64
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1e8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1e
8
Distribution of record lifespan
benign
malicious
Figure A.4: KDE plot showing the distribution of the record lifespan.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1e8
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1e
13
Distribution of minimum TTL
benign
0
1
2
3
4
1e9
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1e
12
malicious
Figure A.5: KDE plot showing the distribution of the minimum TTL observed.
==PAGE:72==
APPENDIX A. ALL FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS
65
(a) Log count of benign IP addresses located in diﬀerent countries.
(b) Log count of malicious IP addresses located in diﬀerent countries.
Figure A.6: Visualization of number of benign and malicious IP addresses in
various countries.
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A. ALL FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS
66
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1e8
0
1
2
1e
12
Distribution of answer observation count
benign
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
1e7
0
1
2
3
1e
7
malicious
Figure A.7: KDE plot showing the distribution of the number of observations
for DNS answers.
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX A. ALL FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS
67
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1e8
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1e
8
Distribution of answer lifespan
benign
malicious
Figure A.8: KDE plot showing the distribution of the number of the lifespan of
DNS answers.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
0.000000
0.000025
0.000050
0.000075
0.000100
0.000125
0.000150
0.000175
0.000200
Distribution of answer unique domain count
benign
malicious
Figure A.9: KDE plot showing the distribution of the number of unique domains
associate with DNS answers.
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A. ALL FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS
68
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1e8
0.0
0.5
1.0
1e
9
Distribution of domain observation count
benign
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
1e6
0.000000
0.000002
0.000004
malicious
Figure A.10: KDE plot showing the distribution of the number of observations
of domains.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1e8
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
1e
8
Distribution of domain lifespan
benign
malicious
Figure A.11: KDE plot showing the distribution of the lifespan of domains.
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX A. ALL FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS
69
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
1e8
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
1e
8
Distribution of domain inactivity
benign
malicious
Figure A.12: KDE plot showing the distribution of domain inactivity.
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
0.0000
0.0002
0.0004
0.0006
0.0008
0.0010
0.0012
0.0014
0.0016
Distribution of domain unique IP addresses count
benign
malicious
Figure A.13: KDE plot showing the distribution of the number of distinct IP
addresses associated with domains.
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A. ALL FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS
70
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
Distribution of domain unique cname count
benign
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
0
1
2
3
malicious
Figure A.14: KDE plot showing the distribution of the number of distinct
cname answers associated with domains.
0
20
40
60
80
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Distribution of domain unique countries count
benign
malicious
Figure A.15: KDE plot showing the distribution of the number of distinct
countries associated with domains.
==PAGE:78==
APPENDIX A. ALL FEATURE VISUALIZATIONS
71
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
Distribution of domain unique minimum TTL count
benign
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
malicious
Figure A.16: KDE plot showing the distribution of the number of distinct
minimum TTL values of domains.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
Mart´ın Abadi et al. “TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Het-
erogeneous Distributed Systems”. In: (2016). url: www.tensorflow.org.
%20http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.04467.
[2]
Alexa. Alexa - Top sites. url: https://www.alexa.com/topsites.
[3]
Shaojie Bai, J. Zico Kolter, and Vladlen Koltun. “An Empirical Evaluation
of Generic Convolutional and Recurrent Networks for Sequence Modeling”.
In: (2018). url: http://github.com/locuslab/TCN.%20http://arxiv.
org/abs/1803.01271.
[4]
Leyla Bilge et al. “EXPOSURE : Finding Malicious Domains Using
Passive DNS Analysis”. In: Ndss (2011), pp. 1–17. issn: 10949224. doi:
10.1145/2584679. url: http://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&
btnG=Search&q=intitle:EXPOSURE+:+Finding+Malicious+Domains+
Using+Passive+DNS+Analysis#0.
[5]
Sabri Boughorbel, Fethi Jarray, and Mohammed El-Anbari. “Optimal
classiﬁer for imbalanced data using Matthews Correlation Coeﬃcient
metric”. In: PLoS ONE 12.6 (June 2017). issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0177678.
[6]
R. Braden. RFC 1123 - Requirements for Internet Hosts - Application
and Support. Oct. 1989. url: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1123.
[7]
Joakim von Brandis. Passive DNS Simpliﬁed Integration Guide. Aug. 2017.
url: https://docs.mnemonic.no/display/public/API/Passive+DNS+
Simplified+Integration+Guide.
[8]
Yang Chen et al. “Towards a deep learning approach for detecting ma-
licious domains”. In: Proceedings - 3rd IEEE International Conference
on Smart Cloud, SmartCloud 2018 (2018), pp. 190–195. doi: 10.1109/
SmartCloud.2018.00039.
[9]
Fran¸cois Chollet. Keras. 2015. url: https://keras.io.
[10]
CIRCL. CIRCL ≫Passive DNS. url: https://www.circl.lu/services/
passive-dns/.
[11]
James Clark, Zhen Liu, and Nathalie Japkowicz. “Adaptive threshold
for outlier detection on data streams”. In: Proceedings - 2018 IEEE 5th
International Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics, DSAA
2018 October (2019), pp. 41–49. doi: 10.1109/DSAA.2018.00014.
[12]
Cloudﬂare. What Is DNS? — How DNS Works. url: https://www.
cloudflare.com/learning/dns/what-is-dns/.
72
==PAGE:80==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
[13]
Ryan R. Curtin et al. “Detecting DGA domains with recurrent neu-
ral networks and side information”. In: ACM International Conference
Proceeding Series (2019). doi: 10.1145/3339252.3339258.
[14]
Farsight Security. Passive DNS historical internet database: Farsight
DNSDB. 2020. url: https://www.farsightsecurity.com/solutions/
dnsdb/.
[15]
FIRST. Traﬃc Light Protocol (TLP). url: https://www.first.org/
tlp/.
[16]
Romain Fouchereau and Konstantin Rychkov. “2019 Global DNS Threat
Report”. In: IDC infobrief sposored by eﬃcient IP June (2019), pp. 1–13.
url: https://www.efficientip.com/resources/idc-dns-threat-
report-2019.
[17]
Mathieu Germain et al. “MADE: Masked autoencoder for distribution
estimation”. In: 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML 2015 2 (2015), pp. 881–889.
[18]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning.
MIT Press, 2016. url: https://www.deeplearningbook.org/.
[19]
Google Developers. Classiﬁcation: Precision and Recall. Feb. 2020. url:
https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/crash-course/
classification/precision-and-recall.
[20]
Google Developers. Classiﬁcation: ROC Curve and AUC. Feb. 2020. url:
https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/crash-course/
classification/roc-and-auc.
[21]
GuildAI. Home - Guild AI. url: https://guild.ai/.
[22]
Dan Hendrycks, Mantas Mazeika, and Thomas Dietterich. “Deep anomaly
detection with outlier exposure”. In: 7th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2019 (2019), pp. 1–18.
[23]
Geoﬀrey E. Hinton. “Neural Networks for Machine Learning Lecture 6a
Overview of mini-batch gradient descent”. In: (). url: https://www.cs.
toronto.edu/˜tijmen/csc321/slides/lecture_slides_lec6.pdf%
0Ahttp://www.cs.toronto.edu/˜tijmen/csc321/slides/lecture_
slides_lec6.pdf.
[24]
P. Hoﬀman, A. Sullivan, and Fujiwara. K. RFC 7719 - DNS Terminology.
Dec. 2015. url: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7719.
[25]
Huawei. RFC 6895 - Domain Name System (DNS) IANA Considerations.
Apr. 2013. url: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6895.
[26]
Kyle Hundman et al. “Detecting spacecraft anomalies using LSTMs
and nonparametric dynamic thresholding”. In: Proceedings of the ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining (2018), pp. 387–395. doi: 10.1145/3219819.3219845.
[27]
DB-IP. IP to Country Lite Free Database Download. url: https://db-
ip.com/db/download/ip-to-country-lite.
[28]
Tomoharu Iwata and Yuki Yamanaka. “Supervised Anomaly Detection
based on Deep Autoregressive Density Estimators”. In: (2019). url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1904.06034.
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
74
[29]
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Lei Ba. “Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization”. In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions, ICLR 2015 - Conference Track Proceedings. 2015.
[30]
Hung Le et al. “URLNet: Learning a URL Representation with Deep
Learning for Malicious URL Detection”. In: i (2018). url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1802.03162.
[31]
Allan Liska and Geoﬀrey Stowe. “Chapter 6 – DNS network security”. In:
DNS Security. 2016, pp. 93–119. isbn: 9780128033067. doi: 10.1016/B978-
0-12-803306-7.00006-1. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
12-803306-7.00006-1.
[32]
Pierre Lison and Vasileios Mavroeidis. “Neural reputation models learned
from passive DNS data”. In: Proceedings - 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data, Big Data 2017 2018-Janua (2017), pp. 3662–
3671. doi: 10.1109/BigData.2017.8258361.
[33]
Fei Tony Liu, Kai Ming Ting, and Zhi Hua Zhou. “Isolation-based anomaly
detection”. In: ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data 6.1
(2012). issn: 15564681. doi: 10.1145/2133360.2133363.
[34]
McAfee. What is Typosquatting? July 2013. url: https://www.mcafee.
com/blogs/consumer/what-is-typosquatting/.
[35]
Wes McKinney. “Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python”.
In: Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference. 2010, pp. 56–61.
doi: 10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a.
[36]
Yisroel Mirsky et al. “Kitsune: An Ensemble of Autoencoders for Online
Network Intrusion Detection”. In: February (2018), pp. 18–21. doi: 10.
14722/ndss.2018.23204.
[37]
P. Mockapetris. RFC 1034 - Domain names - concepts and facilities. Nov.
1987. url: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1034.
[38]
P. Mockapetris. RFC 1035: Domain names, implementation and speciﬁ-
cation. 1987. url: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc1035.
[39]
Charlie Nash and Conor Durkan. “Autoregressive energy machines”. In:
36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019 2019-
June (2019), pp. 3127–3138.
[40]
Michael Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination
Press, 2015. url: http://neuralnetworksanddeeplearning.com.
[41]
Aaron van den Oord et al. “WaveNet: A Generative Model for Raw Audio”.
In: (2016). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.03499.
[42]
Guansong Pang, Chunhua Shen, and Anton Van Den Hengel. “Deep
anomaly detection with deviation networks”. In: Proceedings of the ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining (2019), pp. 353–362. doi: 10.1145/3292500.3330871.
[43]
Guansong Pang et al. “Learning representations of ultrahigh-dimensional
data for random distance-based outlier detection”. In: Proceedings of the
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (2018), pp. 2041–2050. doi: 10.1145/3219819.3220042.
==PAGE:82==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
[44]
George Papamakarios, Theo Pavlakou, and Iain Murray. “Masked autore-
gressive ﬂow for density estimation”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 2017-Decem (2017), pp. 2339–2348. issn: 10495258.
[45]
F. Pedregosa et al. Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. Tech. rep.
2011, pp. 2825–2830. url: http://scikit-learn.sourceforge.net..
[46]
Daniel Plohmann et al. A Comprehensive Measurement Study of Domain
Generating Malware. 2016, p. 263. isbn: 978-1-931971-32-4. url: https://
www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity16/technical-sessions/
presentation/plohmann.
[47]
Niklas Refsgaard. “Deep Learning for detection of malicious domains”.
In: (2019), pp. 1–25.
[48]
RiskAnalytics. DNS-BH – Malware Domain Blocklist by RiskAnalytics.
url: https://www.malwaredomains.com/.
[49]
RiskIQ. Passive DNS. 2020. url: https://www.riskiq.com/platform/
architecture/internet-data-sets/passive-dns/.
[50]
Lorenzo Rosasco et al. “Are Loss Functions All the Same?” In: Neural
Computation 16.5 (2004), pp. 1063–1076. issn: 08997667. doi: 10.1162/
089976604773135104.
[51]
Lukas Ruﬀet al. “Deep one-class classiﬁcation”. In: 35th International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018 10 (2018), pp. 6981–6996.
[52]
Lukas Ruﬀet al. “Deep Semi-Supervised Anomaly Detection”. In: (2019).
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02694.
[53]
Lukas Ruﬀet al. “Simple and Eﬀective Prevention of Mode Collapse in
Deep One-Class Classiﬁcation”. In: (2020). url: http://arxiv.org/
abs/2001.08873.
[54]
Scikit-Learn. sklearn.metrics.f1 score — scikit-learn 0.23.1 documenta-
tion. url: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/
sklearn.metrics.f1_score.html.
[55]
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. “Prototypical networks
for few-shot learning”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 2017-Decem (2017), pp. 4078–4088. issn: 10495258.
[56]
Spamhaus. Passive DNS. 2020. url: https://www.spamhaustech.com/
product/passive-dns/.
[57]
Miroslav Stampar and Mikhail Kasimov. GitHub - stamparm/maltrail:
Malicious traﬃc detection system. 2020. url: https://github.com/
stamparm/maltrail#developers.
[58]
TensorFlow. TensorFlow Probability. url: https://www.tensorflow.
org/probability.
[59]
VirusTotal. VirusTotal. 2020. url: https://www.virustotal.com/gui/
home/upload.
[60]
Jonathan Woodbridge et al. “Predicting Domain Generation Algorithms
with Long Short-Term Memory Networks”. In: (2016). url: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1611.00791.
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
76
[61]
Bin Yu et al. “Inline DGA detection with deep networks”. In: IEEE
International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, ICDMW 2017-
Novem (2017), pp. 683–692. issn: 23759259. doi: 10.1109/ICDMW.2017.
96.
[62]
Shaofang Zhou et al. “CNN-based DGA detection with high coverage”. In:
2019 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Infor-
matics, ISI 2019 (2019), pp. 62–67. doi: 10.1109/ISI.2019.8823200.
[63]
Bo Zong et al. “Deep autoencoding Gaussian mixture model for unsuper-
vised anomaly detection”. In: 6th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2018 - Conference Track Proceedings (2018), pp. 1–
19.
