==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Information management for operation 
and maintenance of buildings 
 
 
MSc in Architectural Engineering 
Katja Skov s144579 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supervisor: Per Anker Jensen, DTU Management 
Submission date: 27 June 2020 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
i 
 
Title page 
Project 
Master’s thesis 
English title 
Information management for operation and maintenance of buildings 
Danish title 
Informationsstyring til drift og vedligeholdelse af bygninger 
Author and student number 
Katja Skov s144579 
MSc Programme 
Architectural Engineering 
University 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) 
Project period 
27 January 2020 – 27 June 2020 
Language 
English 
ECTS-points 
30 
Number of pages 
95 
Supervisor 
Per Anker Jensen 
Company collaboration 
MT Højgaard 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
ii 
 
 
 
Preface 
This master’s thesis is the product of a research project carried out at Technical University of Den-
mark (DTU) as part of the MSc programme in Architectural Engineering. The thesis is written by the 
student Katja Skov (s144579) under the supervision of Per Anker Jensen from DTU Management, 
Department of Technology, Management and Economics. The thesis is moreover written in collab-
oration with MT Højgaard under guidance of Peter Bo Olsen, Senior Technical Director, VDC Plan-
ning & Support.  
The thesis project is equivalent to 30 ECTS points, and the project period was initiated on the 27 
January 2020 and ended on the 27 June 2020.  
 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to extend a special thanks to my thesis supervisor, Per Anker Jensen for guidance 
through the project period. Furthermore, thanks to Peter Bo Olsen for providing additional support 
and direction within the topic of information management. Finally, I would like to thank all the inter-
view participants; René Borup Knorborg, Kenneth Passarge, Katja Holst, Claus Lindhé, Leo Ras-
mussen, Nicolai Jensen, Poul Ebbesen, Nis Boile Christensen, Khoa Dang Ngo, Stig Brinck, and 
Michael Ørsted for providing knowledge about the construction project CPH BFW, and opinions con-
cerning information management for the building operations.  
 
 
Date:  
 
 
Signature:  
 
Katja Skov s144579 
 
 
27-06-2020 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
iii 
 
 
 
Abstract 
There are a limited collection and utilisation of information generated in the design, construction and 
operation and maintenance of buildings. This is mainly because of the challenges that the Danish 
construction industry faces in connection with the digital transition. The building owner plays an es-
sential role in digital collaboration, as they set the framework through their information requirements 
and the use of BIM and digital processes. However, the industry is increasingly working digitally with 
BIM-models to support the use and exchange of project information. The use of BIM-based pro-
cesses will increase the value of project information in each project phase. The exchange of infor-
mation will be further supported by international standards such as ISO 19650 series of standards, 
which enable the building owners to convert requirements for digital collaboration and information 
management early in the process.  
This thesis has studied the practice of information management in preparation for building operations 
according to the ISO 19650 series of standards in a Danish context. The thesis furthermore aimed 
to investigate how the building owner and operator can benefit from the use of BIM and information 
management standards. The methodology was based on a combination of literature study and case 
study, and data collection for qualitative research, including eleven interviews and document analy-
sis. The case study involved an ongoing construction project “CPH Baggage Factory West” with the 
Copenhagen Airports A/S as the building owner and MT Højgaard as the design-build contractor. 
The case study presented interesting results concerning the building owner’s information require-
ments, the project team’s information delivery, and the process of commissioning and digital hand-
over of operation and maintenance information with the involvement of the operating organisation. 
The analysis and results examined how the building owner requirements are established in the early 
phases with requirements for the structure and format of the information so that the information de-
livery can be actively used in the building operations. It furthermore examined the digitisation of 
building operations concerning advantages and challenges, as well as the use of BIM and infor-
mation management standards to support the process of involving the operating organisation and 
establishing building owner requirements. Based on these results, the potential benefits for the build-
ing owner and operator of using BIM and information management standards were presented. More-
over, some recommendations were developed, including establishing building owner requirements 
with a standard process of gathering information from previous construction projects and existing 
building operations in BIM-models, and a better digital handover process with the use of FM BIM-
models as information containers. 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
iv 
 
 
 
Resumé  
Der er en begrænset opsamling og udnyttelse af informationer genereret i design, udførelse og drift 
af byggerier. Det er hovedsageligt på grund af de udfordringer som den danske byggeindustri står 
over for i forbindelse med den digitale udvikling. Bygherren spiller en vigtig rolle i det digitale samar-
bejde, da de fastlægger rammerne for det digitale samarbejde via informationskrav og krav til brugen 
af BIM og digitale processer. Industrien arbejder dog i stigende omfang digitalt med BIM-modeller, 
som understøtter udvekslingen og udnyttelsen af projektinformationer. Brugen af BIM-baseret pro-
cesser vil øge værdien af projektinformationer i alle byggeriets faser. Udvekslingen af informationer 
vil blive yderligere understøttet med brugen af internationale standarder så som ISO 19650 standar-
derne, som muliggør bygherrens kravstillelse i forbindelse med det digitale samarbejde og informa-
tionsstyring i de tidlige faser af byggeriet.  
Dette kandidatspeciale har studeret praksissen med informationsstyring til drift og vedligeholdelse 
af bygninger i overensstemmelse med ISO 19650 standarderne i en dansk kontekst. Kandidatspe-
cialet havde yderligere til hensigt at undersøge hvordan byg- og driftsherren kan få gavn af brugen 
af BIM- og informationsstyringsstandarder.  Metodologien var baseret på en kombination af littera-
turstudie og casestudie, og dataindsamling til en kvalitative undersøgelse, herunder elleve interviews 
og dokumentanalyse.  Casestudiet omfattede et igangværende byggeprojekt ”CPH Baggage Factory 
West” med Københavns Lufthavne A/S som bygherre og MT Højgaard som totalentreprenør.  
Casestudiet præsenterede interessante resultater vedrørende bygherrens informationskrav, projekt-
teamets informationsleverance, samt processen med commissioning og digital aflevering af drift og 
vedligeholdelses materiale med involvering af driftsafdelingen. Analysen undersøgte hvordan byg-
herrekravene er stillet i de tidlige faser med krav om struktur og format af informationerne, således 
informationsleverancen kan blive brugt aktivt i driften. Fordele og ulemper ved digitaliseringen af 
driften blev yderligere undersøgt, såvel som brugen af BIM og informationsstyringsstandarder til at 
understøtte bygherrens kravstillelse samt involveringen af driftsafdelingen. Baseret på disse resul-
tater de potentielle fordele for byg- og driftsherren ved brugen af BIM of informationsstyringsstan-
darder blev præsenteret. Ydermere blev nogle anbefalinger udviklet på baggrund af resultaterne. 
Den første anbefaling er rettet mod bygherrens kravstillelse, som bør baseres på en standard proces 
for informationsindsamling i BIM-modeller med viden fra tidligere byggeprojekter og eksisterende 
drift. Den anden anbefaling er rettet mod en forbedret digital afleveringsproces med brugen af FM 
BIM-modeller som informationsbærer.  
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
v 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
1. Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 Background ........................................................................................................................... 1 
1.2 Problem statement ................................................................................................................ 4 
1.3 Delimitation of research ......................................................................................................... 5 
1.4 Learnings objectives .............................................................................................................. 5 
1.5 Structure of report.................................................................................................................. 5 
2. Methodology.............................................................................................................................. 7 
2.1 Literature study ...................................................................................................................... 8 
2.2 Case study ............................................................................................................................ 8 
2.3 Data collection ....................................................................................................................... 8 
3. Theory and literature study .................................................................................................... 13 
3.1 “Det Digitale Byggeri” in Denmark ....................................................................................... 13 
3.2 Virtual Design and Construction (VDC) ................................................................................ 19 
3.3 Facilities Management ......................................................................................................... 24 
3.4 BIM for building owners and facilities managers .................................................................. 29 
3.5 Digital handover .................................................................................................................. 32 
3.6 Commissioning management .............................................................................................. 34 
3.7 Information management and ISO 19650 ............................................................................ 36 
4. Case study – Practice of information management .............................................................. 42 
4.1 Copenhagen Airports A/S .................................................................................................... 42 
4.2 MT Højgaard A/S ................................................................................................................. 43 
4.3 CPH Baggage Factory West (CPH BFW) ............................................................................ 44 
4.4 Evaluation of case study ...................................................................................................... 59 
5. Analysis and results ............................................................................................................... 61 
5.1 Establishing building owner requirements ............................................................................ 61 
5.2 Digitisation of building operations ........................................................................................ 67 
5.3 BIM and information management ....................................................................................... 73 
5.4 Summary of the analysis and results ................................................................................... 78 
6. Discussion ............................................................................................................................... 80 
6.1 Results and limitations of research ...................................................................................... 80 
6.2 Potential benefits of using BIM and information management standards ............................. 88 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
vi 
 
 
 
7. Conclusion .............................................................................................................................. 92 
7.1 Main findings ....................................................................................................................... 92 
7.2 Perspectives and further research ....................................................................................... 94 
8. Bibliography ............................................................................................................................ 96 
 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
vii 
 
 
 
List of Figures  
Figure 1: Conceptual diagram of the value of project information through its lifecycle (p. 3) 
Figure 2: Structure of the report (p. 6) 
Figure 3: Triangulation (p. 7) 
Figure 4: Data collection for qualitative research with interviews and document analysis (p. 9) 
Figure 5: “Det Digitale Byggeri” and its focus areas (p. 14) 
Figure 6: ICT organisation and responsibility (p. 20) 
Figure 7: Building Information Modelling (p. 21) 
Figure 8: Information sharing with BIM (p. 22) 
Figure 9: BIM-BAM-BOOM by Patrick McLeamy (p. 24) 
Figure 10: FM spiral (p. 25) 
Figure 11: Processes in relation to digital handover (p. 32) 
Figure 12: The commissioning process before handover of a new building (p. 34) 
Figure 13: Interfaces between parties and teams in terms of information management (p. 37) 
Figure 14: Hierarchy of information requirements (p. 39) 
Figure 15: Information delivery flowchart (p. 40) 
Figure 16: Common data environment (CDE) concept (p. 41) 
Figure 17: MT Højgaard A/S organisation chart (p. 44) 
Figure 18: Visualisation of CPH BFW and existing buildings (p. 45) 
Figure 19: Workflow of information management and quality assurance on CPH BFW (p. 46) 
Figure 20: CPH’s asset management systems and FM-systems (p. 48) 
Figure 21: Organisation chart for CPH’s commissioning process (p. 50) 
Figure 22: CPH’s commissioning phases (p. 51) 
Figure 23: ICT organisation on CPH BFW (p. 52) 
Figure 24: The project team’s use of CDE (p. 55) 
Figure 25: The digital handover process on CPH BFW (p. 58) 
Figure 26: The process of information gathering (p. 90) 
Figure 27: Standardised digital handover process with FM BIM-models as information containers (p. 91) 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
viii 
 
 
 
List of Tables 
Table 1: List of case study interviews and expert interviews (p. 10) 
Table 2: CPH BFW project data  (p. 12) 
Table 3: The building owner requirements described in DDB (p. 16) 
Table 4: FM-activities in construction project phases (p. 26) 
Table 5: Potentials and challenges of BIM for Facilities Management (p. 28) 
Table 6: CPH’s requirements for the O&M and QA documentation on CPH BFW (p. 48) 
Table 7: Challenges in establishing building owner requirements based expert interviews (p. 65) 
Table 8: Advantages of digitising building operations based on expert interviews and theory (p. 68) 
Table 9: Challenges of digitising building operations based on expert interviews and theory (p. 71) 
 
List of Appendices 
Appendix A: Interview with René Borup Knorborg from CPH Airports A/S 
Appendix B: Interview with Kenneth Passarge from CPH Airports A/S 
Appendix C: Interview with Katja Holst from MT Højgaard A/S 
Appendix D: Interview with Claus Lindhé from MT Højgaard A/S 
Appendix E: Interview with Leo Rasmussen from MT Højgaard A/S 
Appendix F: Interview with Nicolai Jensen from MT Højgaard A/S Design & Engineering 
Appendix G: Interview with Poul Ebbesen from Rambøll 
Appendix H: Interview with Nis Boile Christensen from BIM Equity A/S 
Appendix I: Interview with Khoa Dang Ngo from DTU Campus Service 
Appendix J: Interview with Stig Brinck from Niras 
Appendix K: Interview with Michael Ørsted from Copenhagen Properties and Procurement 
Appendix L: CPH’s ICT specification, incl. appendices 
Appendix M: CPH’s Commissioning specification, incl. appendix 
Appendix N: MTH’s ICT agreements with the project parties, incl. the ICT-process manual 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
ix 
 
 
 
List of Acronyms, Abbreviations and Definitions 
AIM 
Asset Information Model 
AIR 
Asset Information Requirements  
BIM  
Building Information Modelling 
BAM  
Building Assembly Modelling 
BOOM 
Building Operation Optimisation Modelling 
CAD 
Computer Aided Design 
CAFM 
Computer Aided Facility Management 
CAS  
Campus Service  
CCS 
Cuneco Classification System 
CDE 
Common Data Environment 
COBie 
Construction Operations Building information exchange 
CMMS 
Computerised Maintenance Management System 
CPH 
Copenhagen Airports A/S 
CPH BFW 
CPH Baggage Factory West 
Cx 
Commissioning 
CxM 
Commissioning Manager 
DBK 
Dansk Bygge Klassifikation (Danish Building Classification) 
DDB 
“Det Digitale Byggeri” (Digital Construction) 
DFM 
Dansk Facilities Management 
DGN 
File extension for a Computer Aided Design (CAD) drawing file format 
DTU  
Technical University of Denmark 
DWG 
Proprietary binary file format used for drawings 
EIR 
Exchange Information Requirements 
FM 
Facility Management or Facilities Management 
FSG  
Functional Safety  
ICT 
Information and Communication Technology 
IFC  
Industry Foundation Classes 
ISO 
International Organisation for Standardisation 
IT 
Information Technology 
IWMS  
Integrated Workplace Management System 
Metadata 
“Data about data” Data that provides information about other data 
MTH 
MT Højgaard A/S 
MTH D&E 
MT Højgaard Design & Engineering 
O&M 
Operation & Maintenance 
OIR 
Organisational Information Requirements 
PIM 
Project Information Model 
PIR 
Project Information Requirements 
 
QA 
Quality Assurance 
XML 
Extensible Markup Language  
VDC 
Virtual Design and Construction 
 
==PAGE:11==
1. Introduction  
 
1 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
1.1 Background 
The digital transition of the construction industry is ongoing and has been so for a long time. Back in 
2001, the report “Det Digitale Byggeri” concluded that the construction projects would be able to reap 
great benefits by better utilisation of IT and integrated digital work processes across the companies. 
On the basis of this, the project “Det Digitale Byggeri” was developed to strengthen the use of digital 
technologies in the construction industry. (Realdania, 2020) The digital technologies are continually 
being developed, and the industry must follow this development to improve digital work processes 
and collaboration. According to (Seismonaut, 2018), the technological development in the construc-
tion industry has been slow, but new technological opportunities and requirements from the building 
owners have kickstarted the development. 
The industry is increasingly working digitally with digital models to support building processes and 
collaboration, digital communication, and the use and exchange of information. (Seismonaut, 2018) 
Building Information Modelling (BIM) is an integrated method for digitising the building process and 
creating closer collaboration between parties in construction projects, which makes the parties in a 
construction project able to share knowledge and exchange information. (DTU BIMlab, 2013a) It is 
a prerequisite for reaping the benefits of the digital collaboration that all parties have the same level 
of competence within the use of digital tools. If the architects, engineers, and building owners do not 
have the same level of competences, the digital processes will fall flat. (Molio, 2019b) Today, BIM 
and other digital tools are primarily being used in the architectural, engineering, and contracting 
companies. However, the building owners play an essential role in digital collaboration as they set 
the framework through their requirement specifications for how the BIM potentials are fully utilised. 
The building owners have started to discover the opportunities for the use of BIM and digital pro-
cesses, which can push the industry in the right direction. It is essential that the building owner 
proactively engages in the processes by knowing their needs and goals of using digital tools. 
(Bygherreforeningen, 2017a) 
You could argue that the digital transition is a public matter. The governments can take the lead and 
break the inertia that slows the construction industry from entering a digital era. One approach is to 
craft a digital construction strategy that encourages the use of digital tools. (Blanco et al., 2019) In 
2019, the Ministry of Transport and Housing in Denmark published a strategy for digital construction, 
which presents a number of initiatives to support the collaboration and better utilisation of information 
in all the construction project phases. It provides a proposal for how to approach the challenges that 
==PAGE:12==
1. Introduction  
 
2 
 
 
 
the industry faces in the digitisation. One of the initiatives presented in the strategy for digital con-
struction is a better utilisation of digital tools. The building owners must make requirements for the 
use of digital tools and be aware of the organisation, communication, and contractual terms as the 
building owners frame the ambitions for the digital collaboration and more efficient construction and 
building operations. The building owners have very different competencies and experiences with 
digital construction, which affect the use of digital tools in construction projects. Hence, an initiative 
for better guidance for the building owners on the utilisation of digital tools and how to determine the 
requirements, are presented as part of the strategy. Furthermore, the strategy presents a roadmap 
for BIM-standardisation and initiatives for the use of open formats and common standards, which 
can ensure a common basis for the utilisation of digital tools and the management of information in 
the construction process. (Transport- og Boligministeriet, 2019)  
Digital collaboration needs some guidelines for the exchange of information and BIM, e.g. in the UK, 
a guidance has been developed to support individuals and organisations to understand the funda-
mental principles of BIM and information management according to ISO 19650 series of standards 
which is implemented in the British construction industry. (UK BIM Alliance, 2020) There is a focus 
on how information can be used to make the processes more efficient. There are a limited collection 
and utilisation of information generated in the construction and operation and maintenance of build-
ings. Thus, there is a need for better utilisation of information across the industry to ensure more 
effective building operations. Information relevant for the operation and maintenance of the building 
is generated in the planning and construction of the project and is delivered digitally to the operating 
organisation at the handover of the project. However, there are some challenges with the collection 
and exchange of information. It is not considered early enough in the process what kind of infor-
mation is needed for the building operations, and O&M plans are delivered in closed formats or with 
insufficient information. The lack of digital readiness constitutes a barrier to the effective utilisation 
of digital opportunities. (Transport- og Boligministeriet, 2019)  
With the use of digital standards, better digital practice, and a common framework for digital collab-
oration is enabled. The development is supported by the increased use of BIM and other digital tools, 
and it creates a basis for a better exchange of information between all the parties in the entire project 
process. Figure 1 indicates the value of project information through a project life cycle, using a tra-
ditional drawing-based process or a collaborative BIM-based process.  
==PAGE:13==
1. Introduction  
 
3 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Conceptual diagram of the value of project information through its lifecycle (Eastman et al., 2018) 
The result of using BIM-based processes is an improved integrated design process, which will in-
crease the value of project information in each of the project phases. With the traditional drawing-
based process, the result is a loss of value in information across the project phases as information 
often is re-entered or produced during handover between phases and organisations. (Eastman et 
al., 2018) Interoperability is enabled by ensuring that information can be re-opened, reviewed, and 
further used. BIM provides an opportunity to manage and communicate information better, whereas 
the loss of information is decreased. The basis for better exchange of information is further supported 
by international standards such as the ISO 19650 series of standards, which enable the building 
owners to convert requirements for digital collaboration and information management early in the 
process.  
“ISO 19650 defines the collaborative processes for the effective management of information through-
out the delivery and operational phase of assets when BIM is being used.” (Olsen, 2019)  
 
==PAGE:14==
1. Introduction  
 
4 
 
 
 
1.2 Problem statement  
The thesis is studying the practice of information management in preparation for the operation and 
maintenance of buildings according to the ISO 19650 series of standards. The study is empirically 
based on the ongoing construction project “CPH Baggage Factory West” with Copenhagen Airports 
A/S as the building owner and MT Højgaard as the design-build contractor. The focus of the study 
is to investigate the information management process, including the information requirements made 
by the building owner and the information delivered by the project team in the digital handover to the 
operational phase of the construction project.  
Building Information Modelling (BIM) can be used for managing information on a construction project, 
and the information needed for the operation of the building is established and included in the 3D-
models. The ISO 19650 series of standards frame the management of the information requirements 
and digital collaboration in the construction industry. These standards can assist the building owner 
in the process of establishing the information requirements for the operation and maintenance of 
buildings.  
The thesis will answer the following problem statement: How can the building owner and operator 
benefit from the use of BIM and information management standards? 
This provides the basis for the following sub-questions to be answered: 
I. 
What is the process of commissioning and digital handover of operation and mainte-
nance information on CPH BFW? 
II. 
What information requirements are made by the building owner on CPH BFW? 
III. 
What information is delivered by the project team on CPH BFW?  
IV. 
How are the building owner requirements established in the early phases to ensure that 
the information delivery can be used in building operations?  
V. 
What are the advantages and challenges of digitisation of building operations? 
VI. 
How can BIM be used in the information management process? 
VII. 
How can the ISO 19650 standard form the basis for the building owner’s establishment 
of information requirements on construction projects? 
VIII. 
Why is ICT management essential in digital collaboration? 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
1. Introduction  
 
5 
 
 
 
1.3 Delimitation of research 
The master’s thesis is delimited to investigate the information management process of the construc-
tion project, including the information requirements and delivery, and the digital handover to the 
operational phase. It will mainly focus on digital collaboration with the use of BIM and standardisa-
tions from the building owner’s perspective.  
Furthermore, the research is delimited only to involve digital construction in the Danish construction 
industry. The case study includes one project with a mature Danish building owner with one of the 
greatest procedures for establishing the requirements in relation to digital handover in construction 
projects in Denmark. It is a project where access to all parties in and around the digital handover is 
available to be included in the case study.  
1.4 Learnings objectives  
When completing the master’s thesis “Information management for operation and 
 
maintenance of buildings”, the student should be able to: 
• 
Define the concept of Building Information Modelling (BIM) and standardisation 
• 
Define the concept “Det Digitale Byggeri”  
• 
Explain the different parties in a construction project’s role in the digital collaboration  
• 
Explain the process of digital handover and commissioning 
• 
Investigate the requirements for information in operation and maintenance of buildings  
• 
Apply collected data to explain the potential benefits of using BIM and information manage-
ment standards 
• 
Investigate the importance of ICT management in the digital collaboration 
• 
Discuss the development in the construction industry and potential value creation  
1.5 Structure of report 
The thesis is divided into seven chapters; Introduction, Methodology, Theory and literature study, 
Case study – Practice of information management, Analysis and results, Discussion, and Conclu-
sion. The chapters are further divided into sections, which is illustrated in Figure 2. The introduction 
provides a description of the background for the research conducted in the thesis. Furthermore, the 
problem statement that the thesis will answer, including sub-questions, is presented. The methodol-
ogy chapter will present the methodology used to investigate and answer the problem statement and 
sub-questions and the collection and processing of qualitative data. The theory and literature study 
will provide an introduction to the initiative “Det Digitale Byggeri” in Denmark, Facilities Management 
==PAGE:16==
1. Introduction  
 
6 
 
 
 
in a BIM context, the principles of digital handover, and the concept of Commissioning Management. 
This chapter furthermore provides a presentation of the Danish and international practice of infor-
mation management. The case study will investigate the practice of information management on a 
construction project in a Danish context, including a presentation of the ongoing construction project 
CPH BFW and the involved project parties. The analysis and results chapter aims to answer the 
problem statement and sub-questions by comparing results from the theory and literature study with 
results from the case study and expert interviews conducted. The discussion chapter will discuss the 
most significant results to evaluate the answers to the problem statement and sub-questions. More-
over, the discussion chapter will provide some recommendations for the information management 
process. At last, the conclusion will present the main findings of the thesis and perspectives and 
further research within the topic.  
 
Figure 2: Structure of the report  
 
==PAGE:17==
2. Methodology 
 
7 
 
 
 
2. Methodology 
The methodology used to investigate and answer the problem statement and relevant sub-questions 
in this thesis are based on triangulation. The methodology is based on a combination of relevant 
theoretical knowledge, basic knowledge from the case study project, and interview data, including 
relevant parties within the case study project and experts within the topic. Furthermore, access to 
the project communication platforms has been provided, whereas project data concerning the case 
study has been collected and analysed as part of the methodology. Thus, a combination of several 
research methods is used to collect data by combining two forms of qualitative research; interviews 
and document analysis. Triangulation entails an approach that uses more than one method, theo-
retical perspectives, or sources of data, resulting in greater confidence in findings. It is employed as 
a technique for establishing the credibility of findings by cross-checking findings deriving from both 
qualitative research methods. (Bryman, 2012) Figure 3 shows the concept of triangulation.  
 
Figure 3: Triangulation (source: https://uthsc.edu/tlc/triangulation.php) – Adapted by Katja Skov 
The thesis is based on the approach where a problem statement and additional research questions 
are formulated on the basis of a discovered problem within a topic of interest. Then a relevant case 
study and relevant research participants were identified and involved in the collection of qualitative 
data. After the collection of data, the data is interpreted, whereas key findings are used to answer or 
tighten the specifications of the research questions. This leads to a collection of further data, and 
further interpretation before conclusions are made. Therefore, the approach can be defined as in-
ductive and explorative, as the inductive process is likely to entail an iterative process. After carrying 
out a theoretical reflection on the data collected, it might be necessary to collect further data to 
==PAGE:18==
2. Methodology 
 
8 
 
 
 
establish whether the theory will or will not hold. Hence, the process involves a weaving back and 
forth between data and theory. (Bryman, 2012) 
2.1 Literature study 
A literature study has been conducted to accumulate and gain insight into already existing knowledge 
related to the chosen topic. This will form the basis for the analysis and discussion in the thesis. The 
literature study is the preliminary research of the topic, which initiated with a general idea of the 
problem and some research questions to be answered. It provided better insight within the topic, 
which enabled an elaboration of the research questions to be answered. Furthermore, it created a 
stronger scientific foundation for the rest of the research and data collection. The literature study 
intended to examine existing knowledge about Building Information Modelling (BIM), Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) and Virtual Design and Construction (VDC), Facilities Manage-
ment (FM), commissioning, digital handover, and information management. The thesis supervisors 
from DTU and MT Højgaard provided most of the literature, and a minor part of the literature is 
provided by the interviewees. Additional relevant literature was found by searching in the DTU data-
base. 
2.2 Case study  
A case study research has been performed as a detailed and intensive analysis of a single case. It 
is being performed as an intensive examination of an exemplifying case of interest with the aim of 
providing an in-depth elucidation of its unique features. The case study includes research on a con-
struction project and the processes within the project organisation and the organisation of the project 
parties. The case is chosen on the basis of its suitable context for specific research questions to be 
answered, and the building owner’s mature approach in getting a digital foundation for the operation 
and maintenance of the building. The research and data collection are determined by the research 
questions that are derived from theoretical concerns. (Bryman, 2012) The case considered in the 
study is an ongoing construction project “CPH Baggage Factory West” with the Copenhagen Airports 
A/S as the building owner and MT Højgaard as the design-build contractor. (CPH, 2020a) The case 
study will be described later in chapter 4. 
2.3 Data collection 
The data collection for the qualitative research is shown in Figure 4. In the qualitative data collection, 
eleven interviews have been conducted, including six case study interviews and five expert inter-
views. Furthermore, as part of the qualitative data collection different project data from the case 
==PAGE:19==
2. Methodology 
 
9 
 
 
 
study project CPH BFW has been collected to form the basis of document analysis, including lists of 
metadata and ICT specifications, and access to the project’s digital platform.  
 
Figure 4: Data collection for qualitative research with interviews and document analysis 
2.3.1 Interviews 
A number of interviews have been conducted as part of the qualitative research. The aim of the 
interviews was to gather knowledge about the construction project CPH BFW, and information man-
agement for the operation and maintenance of buildings from the interviewee’s point of view. The 
aim of the interviews was also to get insight into what the interviewees believe is relevant and es-
sential in relation to digital collaboration. The interviews were conducted as semi-structured inter-
views. This means that a list of questions or topics to be covered were defined as an interview guide 
and forwarded to the interviewee prior to the interview. The questions were not followed exactly as 
outlined in the interview guide, and additional questions were asked as the interviewees’ statements 
were picked up to be elaborated on. (Bryman, 2012) The interviews were structured differently ac-
cording to the interviewee, but most of the questions were repeated in the interviews. Generally, the 
interviews were initiated with some introductory questions about the interviewee’s educational back-
ground and work experience, followed by some specific questions related to the case study and 
more general questions about the topic. Table 1 is showing the interviewees stating their name, 
company, job title and role in the study, relevance to the study, and a reference to the interview 
summaries in the appendices.  
==PAGE:20==
2. Methodology 
 
10 
 
 
 
Table 1: List of case study interviews and expert interviews  
Type 
Name 
Company 
Job title/role 
Relevance to the study 
Appendix 
Case study 
interviews 
René Borup 
Knorborg 
CPH Airports A/S 
Commissioning 
manager on CPH 
BFW 
Knowledge about CPH BFW in regard 
to the commissioning process and 
CPH’s information requirements 
A 
Kenneth 
Passarge  
CPH Airports A/S 
ICT coordinator on 
CPH BFW 
Knowledge about CPH’s ICT specifica-
tions and information requirements, in-
cluding structure and format, and the 
use of BIM 
B 
Katja Holst 
MT Højgaard A/S 
BIM manager on 
CPH BFW 
Knowledge about CPH BFW in regard 
to digital communication platforms, 
structure and format of the information 
delivery and obstacles 
C 
Claus Lindé 
MT Højgaard A/S 
ICT manager on 
CPH BFW 
Knowledge about CPH BFW in regard 
to ICT management and information 
management processes 
D 
Leo Rasmus-
sen 
MT Højgaard A/S 
Project manager 
and commission-
ing coordinator on 
CPH BFW 
Knowledge about CPH BFW in regard 
to the project team’s involvement in the 
commissioning process. Introduction to 
project data, incl. test schema and 
metadata list  
E 
Nicolai Jensen 
MT Højgaard D&E 
Designer and 
model responsible 
on CPH BFW 
Hands-on experience of the information 
delivery on CPH BFW 
F 
Expert in-
terviews 
Poul Ebbesen 
Rambøll  
Senior consultant 
Knowledge about digital building opera-
tions, incl. operation and maintenance 
information, and potentials and barriers 
of using BIM and ICT 
G 
Nis Boile 
Christensen 
BIM Equity A/S 
FM-advisor, busi-
ness developer 
and consultant 
Knowledge about BIM and ICT-pro-
cesses and the enhancement of BIM-
use for building owners and operators, 
incl. advantages and challenges  
H 
Khoa Dang 
Ngo 
DTU Campus Ser-
vice 
Section leader 
DTU CAS Digital 
Knowledge about standardisation of 
BIM and ICT processes and the estab-
lishment of building owner requirements 
at DTU CAS and in general 
I 
Stig Brinck  
Niras 
Expertise man-
ager within ICT 
and process de-
velopment 
Knowledge about standardisation of 
BIM and ICT processes, incl. infor-
mation management 
J 
Michael Ørsted 
Copenhagen 
Properties and 
Procurement 
Digitisation man-
ager  
Knowledge about digital building opera-
tions, and the building owners and op-
erator’s use of BIM and ICT. Additional 
knowledge about CPH’s information re-
quirements from a previous job position 
at CPH  
K 
 
==PAGE:21==
2. Methodology 
 
11 
 
 
 
The sequence of interviews was not randomly chosen, and before starting the interview process, not 
all interviewees were known. From the beginning, it was desirable to first involve relevant persons 
from Copenhagen Airports A/S who is the building owner of the case study project, in order to be 
referred to other relevant persons from the organisation. Secondly, relevant persons from MT 
Højgaard with relation to the case study project needed to be involved, who could refer to relevant 
persons such as suppliers of the information and geometry for the operation and maintenance at 
Copenhagen Airports A/S. Thirdly, expert interviews were conducted by involving relevant persons 
with significant knowledge within the topic who was referred to by the thesis supervisors or the inter-
viewees. Therefore, the qualitative data collection is engaging a wide range of people including per-
sons within building owner and operator organisations, an advisor for the building owners, persons 
within consulting companies and a contracting company. 
All interviews were recorded with the interviewee’s permission, so the audio files could be used to 
transcribe the interviews. The transcripts were used to make a summary of the interview, which was 
sent to the interviewee for comments and validation. The interview summaries can be seen in Ap-
pendix A-K. For data processing, the programme NVivo has been used to sort the statements from 
the interviews in themes with coding nodes. The coding of the statements supported the process of 
identifying patterns in the statements to be used in the analysis and discussion, which enable the 
possibility for a better comparison of statements. Thus, the most important statements from the in-
terviews were highlighted in the interview transcript, coded into themes and used as quotations in 
the analysis and discussion by translating them from Danish to English.  
2.3.2 Project data and document analysis 
In addition to the qualitative interview data, access to relevant project data was provided to be in-
cluded as part of the qualitative research. There was granted access to the project’s digital commu-
nication platforms containing documents such as ICT specifications and appendices, a list for 
metadata, and operation and maintenance documentation, which will be included in the case study, 
and the analysis and results. Table 2 provides an overview of the project data and the types of 
documents that are included in document analysis.  
As part of the data processing, an examination of the project data has been performed. This is done 
in order to get greater insight into the building owner’s information requirements and the project 
team’s information delivery. Thus, a comparison of the content of the project data with the case study 
interviews has been conducted. By doing this, the content of the project data can be used to support 
the statements from the case study interviews. In addition, a comparison of CPH’s ICT specification 
and MTH’s ICT agreement has been conducted to evaluate on MTH’s preservation of CPH’s 
==PAGE:22==
2. Methodology 
 
12 
 
 
 
information requirements. Lastly, an examination of a part of the project team’s preliminary infor-
mation delivery has been conducted to be able to evaluate on the project team’s compliance with 
the information requirements, including the filling in of the metadata lists and commissioning test 
schema.  
Table 2: CPH BFW project data 
CPH Bagage Factory West project data 
• 
CPH BFW tender documents  
• 
CPH’s ICT specification (pdf), incl. appendices (Appendix L) 
- 
Appendix A ICT-technical CAD-specification CPH (pdf) 
- 
Appendix B ICT-technical BIM-specification CPH (pdf) 
- 
Appendix B Shared parameters CPH (Excel sheet)  
- 
Appendix C ICT-technical O&M-QA-specification CPH (pdf) 
- 
Appendix C O&M plan CPH (Excel sheet)  
- 
Appendix D ICT-technical self-regulation schema CPH (Excel sheet) 
- 
Appendix E ICT-metadata list CPH (Excel sheet)  
• 
CPH’s Commissioning specification (pdf), incl. appendix (Appendix M)  
- 
Cx test schema (Excel)  
• 
MTH’s ICT agreements with the project parties MTH D&E, Sweco and Rubow Ar-
kitekter, incl. the ICT-process manual (pdf) (Appendix N) 
• 
A part of the project team’s preliminary information delivery  
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
13 
 
 
 
3. Theory and literature study 
This chapter will provide an introduction to the initiative “Det Digitale Byggeri” (Digital Construction) 
in Denmark, and the implementation and application of BIM and ICT for building owners as the Dan-
ish practice of information management. Furthermore, an introduction to Facilities Management in a 
BIM context and the principles of digital handover, and the concept of commissioning for quality 
assurance is provided. Lastly, the chapter will describe the international practice of information man-
agement in relation to the ISO 19650 series of standards.  
3.1 “Det Digitale Byggeri” in Denmark 
“Det Digitale Byggeri”, forward referred to as DDB, is an initiative initiated by the Danish government 
in 2003. The purpose of the initiative was to digital integrate all processes from idea to finished 
construction to strengthen the utilisation of IT and enhance the productivity and quality in the con-
struction industry. (Realdania, 2020) The aim of DDB was to propagate the digital tools and methods 
to the entire industry in order to enhance the efficiency and the quality of the construction by using 
a common language between all parties in a construction project. According to (DTU BIMlab, 2013b), 
the requirements from DDB have very much given the digitisation of the construction industry a lift, 
and many companies face a great challenge of implementing the digital tools and methods in their 
business processes. 
As the background for initiating DDB, three reports are mentioned in (Jespersen, 2008); IT in the 
future construction by the PPU-consortium, resource area analysis by the Danish Business Author-
ity, and a task force report about the future construction. The first mentioned report summed up the 
construction industry’s experiences with a digital communication platform, object-oriented building 
models, digital catalogues and quantity-take offs. It concluded that the construction industry had a 
high IT-readiness. Still, a massive coordinated effort was needed to be made to enhance the coor-
dination between the parties in a construction project. The second mentioned report concluded that 
the Danish construction industry was facing three significant challenges. The end-users could not 
rely on the prices they were offered, the productivity in the construction industry was stagnant, and 
the expenses of too many errors in the construction project was disproportionately large due to mis-
understandings, delays and opaqueness. The third and last-mentioned report discovered that the 
enhancement of productivity should be found in the interfaces between the parties in a construction 
project. If all parties have access to relevant information exactly when it is needed, wasted time, 
misunderstandings, and errors can be avoided. Construction projects are a constellation of special-
ised companies who each have their professional role. The way that construction projects are 
==PAGE:24==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
14 
 
 
 
organised requires a great deal of information exchange between the parties. Digitisation of the con-
struction industry is therefore seen as a technology to solve the productivity problem in the industry, 
as digital information is easier exchanged and managed.  
Hence, to deal with the challenges of low productivity in the construction industry, a development 
project was initiated. In the period 2004-2006, five consortiums, bips1 and Sbs counselling developed 
the project DDB on behalf of the Danish Building and Property Agency. The project concluded in a 
statutory instrument for DDB and the building owner requirements which became effective in January 
2007. (Jespersen, 2008) The initiative and focus areas of DDB are illustrated in Figure 5.  
 
Figure 5: “Det Digitale Byggeri” and its focus areas (Jespersen, 2008) – Translated by Katja Skov 
DDB covered four focus areas; “Det Digitale Fundament”, best practice cases, development of build-
ing requirements, and digital project planning.  
“Det Digitale Fundament” was developed to create a common framework and standards for the dig-
itisation of the construction industry. The project was developed by bips, which today is known as 
Molio, and resulted in the preparation of a new classification system (DBK) and reports regarding 
 
1 https://www.molio.dk/kampagner/molio-anvisninger  
==PAGE:25==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
15 
 
 
 
standard 3D-working methods. These reports ensure that all parties in a construction project are 
speaking the same digital language and form the basis of the building owner requirements and the 
realisation of the other focus areas. To exemplify and document the content and potentials of DDB, 
a collection of best practice cases was developed. The focus area concerning digital project planning 
was developed to investigate the methods of collecting information about existing buildings. The 
development of the building owner requirement resulted in ten specific building owner requirements 
which all public building owners had to require from the participating parties in a construction project. 
Thus, all participants that wished to submit a tender on a public construction project were required 
to utilise digital tools. (Jespersen, 2008) 
3.1.1 Building owner requirements 
“Det Digitale Byggeri” concerns all parties in a construction project, from the idea phase through the 
design and planning of the project to the operation and maintenance of the building. The result of 
DDB was a number of building owner requirements formulated in statutory instruments. The building 
owner requirements were derived from the vision of a process where the architect, engineer, con-
tractor and subcontractor individually contributed to the set of information in a construction project. 
The building owner requirements described in DDB are divided into four areas:  
• 
Digital tender (Requirement 6a, 6b and 7) 
• 
3D building models (Requirement 4a, 4b, 5a and 5b) 
• 
Digital communication platform (Requirement 1, 2 and 3)  
• 
Digital handover (Requirement (8, 9 and 10)  
The purpose of the building owner requirements derived from a wish to enhance the IT application 
in the construction industry through consistent requirements from the public building owners. As 
mentioned earlier, the ICT statutory instruments became effective in 2007. The building owner re-
quirements were revised in 2010, and from 2013 all companies that wished to bid on a public con-
struction project, both government, municipal, regional and general construction projects, over a 
specific contract sum limit had to meet the building owner requirements described in DDB. The pri-
vate construction projects are indirectly influenced by the building owner requirements, as many 
companies are working with both public and private construction projects. The ten specific building 
owner requirements are listed in Table 3. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
16 
 
 
 
Table 3: The building owner requirements described in DDB (Transport- Bygnings- og Boligministeriet, 2006) 
No. 
Building owner requirement 
Description 
1 
Use of digital communication plat-
form 
The building owner must ensure that all relevant project parties in a construc-
tion project are using digital communication platform. Thus, al project docu-
mentation is shared via this. 
2 
Digital communication platform so-
lution 
The building owner must ensure that an effective and reliable digital commu-
nication platform solution is at the disposal of the project parties.  
3 
Drawings in A3 format  
The building owner must ensure that the working drawings can be printed in 
A3 format on the construction site. 
4a 
Use of 3D building models in com-
petitive biddings 
The building owner must consider if the use of 3D building models in compet-
itive biddings is beneficial. 
4b 
Use of 3D building models in com-
petitive biddings 
The building owner must make requirements on the handover of 3D building 
models including a description of the use and exchange of the models, for 
contract sums above DKK 40 m. 
5a 
Use of 3D building models 
The building owner must consider if the use of 3D building models in the pro-
ject design and tender is beneficial. 
5b 
Use of 3D building models 
The building owner must make requirements on the preparation of 3D build-
ing models including requirements on structure, information level, con-
sistency control, use and availability, for contract sums above DKK 40 m. 
6a 
Standardisation of tender docu-
ments and descriptive record of 
quantities 
The building owner must make requirements on project specifications ac-
cording to bips, and descriptive record of quantities structured in accordance 
with the Danish Building Classification (DBK).  
6b 
Standardisation of tender docu-
ments, descriptive record of quan-
tities, and models for quantity 
take-offs. 
The building owner must require that the building models are used for quan-
tity take-off, for contract sums above DKK 40 m. 
7 
Digital tender, bidding and com-
petitive bidding 
Contracts must be put out to tender via the internet in which the tender docu-
ments are available. The bidders must submit their offer on a portal in which 
the competitive bidding is arranged by announcing tender simultaneously.  
8 
Digital handover of operation and 
maintenance information 
The building owner must make requirements on digital handover of infor-
mation relevant for the operation and maintenance, determine which project 
participants are included in the digital handover, ensure the use of digital de-
ficiency lists in accordance with bips standards.  
9 
Digital handover of operation and 
maintenance information, extent 
The building owner must ensure that the digital handover consists of both an 
information model and related documents. 
10 
Digital handover of operation and 
maintenance information, ap-
proach 
The building owner chooses whether operation and maintenance information 
must be handed over XML-based, IFC-based or whether the information 
must be directly fed into an operation and maintenance system.  
==PAGE:27==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
17 
 
 
 
3.1.2 Status of the implementation of DDB 
In 2007, when the statutory instrument for DDB and the building owner requirements became effec-
tive, an implementation network was established. This implementation network was in charge of the 
communication and implementation of DDB.  
The implementation of DDB has brought a number of benefits in digital communication, design 
choices, and information flow. Digital handover and digital communication platform have made it 
possible to centralise information and make project changes available for all parties at the same 
time. The use of digital communication platform has eased the administrative work processes in 
construction projects and reduced the number of errors in the information flow between the project 
parties. Furthermore, 3D-modelling and BIM have provided the opportunity to test and pursue an 
idea before making any final decisions. (Jespersen, 2008) In the first digitisation wave, CAD and 
calculation software were introduced to the construction industry, which led to sub optimisation of 
internal processes in relation to the production of digital 2D drawings. In the second digitisation wave, 
Building Information Modelling (BIM) was introduced, which represented a paradigm shift where the 
industry changed from being document-based to model-based. BIM made it possible to work directly 
in digital building models with a 3D representation of the building components and rooms as objects 
with attached property data. According to (Vestergaard et al., 2012), the BIM concept is consistent, 
easy to understand, and solves a number of problems with the exchange, consistency and redun-
dancy of information in the document-based methods. 
The biggest challenge in the implementation of DDB is the construction industry’s readiness to 
change. It takes time, companies must invest in new technologies, and it requires upgrading of qual-
ifications and a change in work processes. Another challenge in the implementation of DDB, accord-
ing to (Jespersen, 2008), is the lack of requirements from the building owner on digital construction. 
The contractors are missing financial incentive to invest in the upgrading of qualifications, software 
and hardware. The effort to implement ICT-tools and digitisation of working methods based on DDB 
and the building owner requirements was initiated with the architects and consultant engineers. The 
implementation happened naturally as the digital building models are created in the project planning 
phase. Later the contractors and building owners started to show a growing interest which is an 
important development, since digitisation, according to (Vestergaard et al., 2012), only shows its true 
potential through an integrated collaboration between most of the parties involved in a construction 
project.  
The building owners’ interest is an important factor in the digitisation of the construction industry. 
The professional building owners can lead the way for productive development and make require-
ments that integrate digital tools to create a better construction project, smarter operation and 
==PAGE:28==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
18 
 
 
 
maintenance and better service for the users. According to (Bygherreforeningen, 2017a), the build-
ing owner is included as a proactive part in the future practice of digital collaboration. The building 
owner must understand the digital perspectives and work digitally. In the future digital collaboration, 
all involved parties have a digital mindset and understand the value of digitisation, and VDC is a 
platform for collaboration and communication on construction projects.  
The building owner requirements that make up the primary constituent of DDB were, as mentioned 
earlier, revised in 2013, and today the requirements are being defined and regulated through the 
ICT statutory instruments no. 118 of 06-02-2013 and no. 119 of 07-02-2013. The digital building 
owner requirements include requirements in the following areas:  
• 
ICT coordination 
• 
Management of digital building objects  
• 
Digital communication and digital communication platform 
• 
Utilisation of digital object-based building models  
• 
Digital tender and offer 
• 
Digital handover  
• 
Digital deficiency list  
The ICT statutory instruments, however, do not include requirements for how the building owner 
must make requirements on the construction project parties. Thus, the building owner must transform 
the requirements in the ICT statutory instruments into value-added building owner requirements 
which are done in the agreements with the project team. Furthermore, the building owner must eval-
uate their own needs for digital methods and process with regard to the ICT specifications as early 
as possible in the project. (Bygningsstyrelsen, 2019) The Danish Building and Property Agency rec-
ommend that the building owner uses the industry paradigms and instructions for ICT specifications 
created by Molio, which is presented later in section 3.2.1. 
 
 
==PAGE:29==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
19 
 
 
 
3.2 Virtual Design and Construction (VDC) 
When engaging in a construction project, it might be challenging to see the whole, and the project 
team members might struggle to see the project from other points of views than their own. A holistic 
view of the project enables a productive collaboration among the multiple disciplines resulting in an 
optimisation of design and construction. A virtual design, construction, and operation make it possi-
ble to communicate what a building will look like and to ensure that a building will perform according 
to its intended use before it is built. Virtual Design and Construction (VDC) is the use of multidisci-
plinary performance models of construction projects, including their facilities, organisations, and 
work processes for business objectives. VDC brings together BIM and management principles within 
a collaborative team and provides a common understanding among the project participants ensuring 
that the design stays true to the values and goals of the building owner. (Fischer et al., 2017) Thus, 
VDC is part of the work of transforming the building owners wishes, requirements and needs into a 
construction project through digital collaboration.  
In VDC, BIM and ICT are two of many aspects for the future cooperation model together with pro-
cesses, collaboration, and metrics for measuring the progress and quality assuring. 
 
(Bygherreforeningen, 2017b) BIM can display design information as it will be seen in a finished build-
ing. 3D-models can be used to test whether the building is usable, buildable, operable, sustainable, 
and meets the wishes, requirements and needs of the building owner. In Denmark, ICT is essential 
in the understanding of how digital collaboration is working on construction projects, in which BIM 
forms part of the basis of information management.  
3.2.1 Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
As mentioned earlier, the result of DDB was a number of building owner requirements formulated in 
ICT statutory instruments. The purpose of the ICT statutory instruments is to contribute to a produc-
tive application of ICT in construction, renovation, or operation and maintenance of buildings in the 
public and social sector. Molio has created and published paradigms and instructions for ICT speci-
fications to be used by the construction industry in Denmark. The purpose of the publications is to 
give the building owner instructions in which requirements to place concerning information delivera-
bles on a construction project and also the benefits of placing the requirements. The publications 
moreover aim to make the requirements more standardised and value-adding for the building own-
ers, and also easier for the project team to assess. (Molio, 2019c) The organisation and responsibility 
regarding the Danish practice of information management are shown in Figure 6. 
==PAGE:30==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: ICT organisation and responsibility (Molio, 2019c) – Adapted by Katja Skov 
As part of the building owner’s ICT demanding, the standard terms of contract; AB18, ABR18, and 
ABT18 form the basis for industry standards and tender/procurement rules which results in ICT spec-
ifications and project description. The ICT specifications and project description form the basis for 
an agreement of how the ICT requirements must be realised and create an optimal basis for digital 
collaboration on a construction project. Molio’s standard ICT specification makes it easier to define 
the extent of the ICT services and information deliverables which form part of the basis for a contract 
with the construction project parties which ultimately results in an optimal basis for digital collabora-
tion on the project for the benefit for all parties. (Molio, 2019a)  
Due to the many project parties involved in a construction project, it can be challenging to align 
information deliverables together. To support digital collaboration between the project parties best 
possible and to tie the parties’ work processes together, a document describing the common guide-
lines on the specific project can be conducted. As part of the project team’s compliance with the ICT 
requirements, an ICT process manual, also referred to as the BIM execution plan is conducted which 
states the ICT project roles and processes in relation to the information deliverables. The ICT pro-
cess manual is typically involving the consultants, such as architects and engineers, and the con-
tractor. (Molio, n.d.) A standard ICT specification can easily be modified to comply with an organisa-
tion’s needs.  
3.2.2 Building Information Modelling (BIM)  
Building Information Modelling (BIM) is an integrated method for digitising the construction process. 
BIM is an effective collaboration platform, which is the focal point for the construction project activities 
==PAGE:31==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
21 
 
 
 
and collaboration between the project parties through the entire project life cycle (Figure 7). BIM is 
both a model and a working method, and it supports better integrated collaboration between the 
parties via the exchange of discipline models.  
BIM is a process for managing the information produced during a construction project, in a standard 
format, from the earliest feasibility stage through design, construction, operation and finally demoli-
tion or renovation, to make the best and most efficient use of that information. BIM is based on digital 
3D-models of a building that store information about the project in a way that enables information 
exchange across and between different design and construction disciplines. These digital models 
can be used to refine the design, and to test and validate its potential performance across a range 
of criteria, including buildability, energy performance etc. (Gelder et al., 2013)  
 
Figure 7: Building Information Modelling (DTU BIMlab, 2013a) – Translated by Katja Skov 
BIM-based design solutions are, according to (Davis Langdon, 2012), developed on digital data-
bases which enable collaboration and effective information exchange between different disciplines. 
Much design and construction work are document-based. Information is stored and shared via a 
variety of drawings and reports that are unstructured, despite being stored and shared digitally, and 
held in a variety of forms and locations that are not formally coordinated. This approach can poten-
tially lead to information conflicts and redundancy. By providing an intelligent, digital structure for 
project information, BIM opens a wide range of possibilities for better ways of generating, exchang-
ing, storing, and reusing information. It furthermore improves communication between different 
==PAGE:32==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
22 
 
 
 
design and construction disciplines through the life of the asset. Figure 8 illustrates the information 
sharing with BIM.  
 
Figure 8: Information sharing with BIM (Davis Langdon, 2012) – Adapted by Katja Skov 
BIM has three key elements; The consistent, conventional naming of documents and information, a 
method for storing and managing information, and a method for exchanging or issuing information 
about the building, including its construction, performance, operation, and maintenance. The use of 
BIM makes it possible to track and find information throughout the life of the asset. (Gelder et al., 
2013) BIM-models are three-dimensional representations of buildings and spatial database that doc-
uments the location and attributes of every building component in a construction project. Virtual de-
sign of the building is developed before work proceeds on site. Spatial clashes can be identified and 
resolved in the model instead of on-site. Thus, the use of BIM can increase efficiency and reduce 
errors.  
Open standards 
For BIM to be effective, information must flow through the design, construction and operation pro-
cesses via various construction disciplines. Shared three-dimensional models are, according to 
(Gelder et al., 2013), the most evident feature of BIM. However, an information structure and ex-
change format are just as important as the model. The collection and exchange of information in a 
common format and intelligent, structured databases are key features of BIM. Much work has been 
==PAGE:33==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
23 
 
 
 
done by committees to define information structures for all the building components and how they 
related to each other. This system is known as the Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) and is an 
industry-wide open and neutral information format. By working in an environment of open standards 
and interoperability, the construction industry can move away from working in silos towards collabo-
ration and coordinated information. The construction industry uses many different BIM software with 
different kind of formats. The IFC format is an open and international standard that makes it possible 
to exchange and share information in models between the project participants, which provides 
greater potential for interoperability. According to buildingSMART International, OpenBIM extends 
the benefits of BIM by improving the accessibility, usability, management and sustainability of digital 
information in the built asset industry. OpenBIM processes can be defined as sharable project infor-
mation that supports simple digital collaboration for all project participants. OpenBIM furthermore 
facilitates interoperability to benefit projects and assets throughout their lifecycle. (buildingSMART 
International, n.d.) 
3.2.3 BIM and ICT in the operation of buildings  
Digitisation and Information and Communication Technology (ICT) creates value for the building 
owner and operator, especially in the operation and maintenance phase. In this phase, significant 
cost savings and a more effective administration and operation are the benefits of better utilisation 
of information generated in the construction phase. However, the building owners and operators are 
challenged in creating the desired effect. The building owners and operator have a hard time making 
the right requirements and live up to the ICT statutory instrument issued by the government stating 
the statutory requirements that the public building owners must place in a construction project of a 
specific size. (Bygherreforeningen, n.d.) 
According to (Bygherreforeningen, 2017b), the fundamental understanding of ICT is the model-
based approach which is indicative for the paradigm shift in the construction industry as the result of 
the introduction of BIM. A closer interaction between the construction phase and the operational 
phase is needed for information about the operation and maintenance to form the basis of the initial 
processes of the construction project. For the building owner and operator, it is about utilising sys-
tematic and valid information as the background for a dialogue with the project team and the users 
to ensure an effective construction process and information exchange. The focus should be moved 
to the operation of buildings, as the most significant expenses and potentials are present in this 
phase. Figure 9 shows the cost over time for a construction designed, build and operated using BIM-
tools. For every dollar spent in design, 20 dollars is spent in construction, and 60 dollars is spent in 
operation.  
==PAGE:34==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
24 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: BIM-BAM-BOOM by Patrick McLeamy (Rosenfield, 2012) 
BIM supports the investigation of design options and testing of building performance early on to 
optimise the building’s design. The BIM-model is then handed over to the contractor who streamlines 
the construction processes with BAM (Building Assembly Modelling), which results in a decrease in 
construction costs. Once the construction is completed, the BAM-model is handed over to the build-
ing owner or operator and becomes BOOM (Building Operation Optimisation Modelling). During a 
building’s lifetime, the building owner can lavish BIM and BAM to optimise building operations. 
BOOM helps the building owner manage energy consumptions and scheduled maintenance, and 
the cost savings potential is enormous. (Rosenfield, 2012) The BIM-BAM-BOOM illustrates the po-
tential benefits of optimising the building operations early in the process. Studies show that a cost 
saving of 30% can be achieved by consistent use of BIM. (Bygherreforeningen, 2017b) Thus, it is 
worth investing in the optimisation of the building operations in the early stages. 
3.3 Facilities Management  
Facilities Management is about operation, design and development of buildings and infrastructure 
so that the physical surroundings creates value for both people and business. FM occurs both at a 
strategical, tactical, and operational level; real estate, space management, building operations, and 
organisational service. (DFM netværk, n.d. b) According to (Jensen, 2014), the crucial element in 
FM is to balance needs and deliverables on all levels, and FM is a management discipline to ensure 
this balance. The strategic activities are long-term development of the building portfolio and support 
functions. The tactical activities include planning of changes in the building portfolio and support 
functions in connection with changes in the company. The operational activities include the day-to-
day operations of buildings to comply with the company’s needs. 
==PAGE:35==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
25 
 
 
 
The construction industry primarily focuses on and is organised around new buildings and construc-
tion, which traditionally consider a linear process followed by the building operations. However, the 
building operations and maintenance is a prerequisite for buildings to frame the life and work of the 
users. Effective FM is furthermore a prerequisite for buildings to maintain their value and expected 
lifetime. Thus, operation and maintenance is part of the Facilities Management spiral and must be 
seen in a circular life cycle perspective of the building. (fm3.dk, 2019) FM is not limited to specific 
phases in the building life cycle. In principle, FM includes both the building owner and operator func-
tions, and portfolio management and investor functions, as all of these functions are essential when 
ensuring that the building supports the FM-activities, which is illustrated in the FM-spiral shown in 
Figure 10. 
 
Figure 10: FM spiral (Jensen, 2014) (fm3.dk, 2019) – Adapted by Katja Skov 
FM is often seen as a function that primarily concerns the finished building. However, it is just as 
important for FM to be actively involved in the construction of the building to take into account the 
use and operation of the building. FM provides experiences from existing buildings that can be uti-
lised in connection with new construction. An essential requisite for the new construction to function 
optimally regarding the company’s future development is that the company’s organisation and work-
ing processes are included in the daily operation, which FM supports. (Jensen, 2014) 
In cases where the company has an internal building owner and operator function, the FM function 
can be involved in the planning and construction of the building. The FM function can provide infor-
mation about existing buildings, incorporation of operation and maintenance considerations, require-
ments for documentation, user involvement, and planning and organisation of future operation of the 
==PAGE:36==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
26 
 
 
 
building. (Jensen, 2014) In Table 4 an overview of the different FM-activities in the different phases 
in a construction project is shown.  
Table 4: FM-activities in construction project phases (Jensen, 2014) – Translated by Katja Skov 
Phase in construction project 
FM-specific activities 
Feasibility studies 
- 
Attention to property strategies 
- 
Information about area needs etc.  
- 
Operational, economical information 
Programming 
- 
User’s needs and requirements  
- 
Attention to operational and environmental conditions 
- 
Overall requirements for O&M documentation  
Design 
- 
Follow-up on operational and environmental conditions 
and user’s needs  
- 
Determination of operation and maintenance concepts 
- 
Requirements for building automation systems 
Construction 
- 
Preparation of commissioning with the participation of 
FM and project parties  
- 
Instruction of operating organisation  
- 
Handover of O&M and QA documentation 
- 
The procedure of flaws and deficiencies registration 
- 
The basis for service agreements  
Handover and putting into operation 
- 
Incorporation of building in day-to-day operation 
The involvement of the FM function in the planning and construction of the building will ultimately 
result in a user- and operation-friendly building. A user- and operation-friendly building is achieved 
by considering the operational conditions in the early phases, such as the building service life, energy 
consumption, functionality, flexibility, and accessibility. (Due, Tolstrup and Teisen, 2013) 
3.3.1 FM-systems in Denmark 
Characteristic of the digitisation of building operations is that operational processes are planned and 
managed by the use of digital FM-systems. According to (Jensen, 2014), the number one factor of 
significance for the development of FM is the information technology (IT), and the use of IT-based 
tools is today an inevitable part of the FM-practice. However, there are still gaps in the use of inte-
grated IT-solutions in building operations. From the building operator’s point of view, the marked for 
FM-systems is enormous, hence the selection and implementation of the FM-systems is a resource-
demanding process. (DFM netværk, n.d. a)  
In (Ebbesen, 2018) it is described how the digitisation of FM can be managed in a structured and 
value-adding way so that the FM-work processes and FM-strategies are supported best possible. 
An IT-strategy must be established partly to ensure that the digitisation supports work processes 
and partly to ensure that the organisation’s strategies are being supported. Hence, the organisation 
==PAGE:37==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
27 
 
 
 
must establish the IT-strategy in FM by clarifying what processes they wish to support digitally and 
what management information they wish to generate digitally. When the IT-strategical questions are 
clarified, it must be clarified what information and digital technologies the organisation wishes to 
utilise. Digitisation is about creating, storing, exchanging and using information by the application of 
software and hardware in ways that generates useful information. The selection and implementation 
of FM-systems very much depend on the organisation’s level of digital maturity. 
The first level of digital maturity is characterised by the collection, sorting and storing of information 
in different information containers such as CAD, BIM, digital communication platforms and database 
systems. Spreadsheets are often used for storing information, which increases the risk of redundant 
information. Besides, there is a lack of focus on collecting information that can support specific work 
processes, as information is collected at a too high level of detail. Only the absolute most needed 
information should be included. When the use of these technologies become routine in the FM-
organisation, it might be considered what process supporting technologies should be implemented.  
The second level of maturity is characterised by isolated digitisation of specific processes. IT-sys-
tems, such as CAFM/CMMS-systems, are implemented to support specific operational activities. 
CAFM-systems (Computer Aided Facilities Management) is utilised to connect a CAD-system with 
an attached drawing database and an alpha-numeric database with relevant information about the 
building. (Jensen, 2014) CAFM-systems has lots of applications, such as updating digital drawings 
and room information, space allocation, and planned and reactive maintenance. The core in a 
CAFM-system is often comparable to the CMMS-systems (Computerised Maintenance Management 
System), which consists of an information model containing assets, locations, and resource man-
agement to support the management of operation and maintenance activities. (DFM netværk, n.d. 
a) CAFM-systems can be used for the exchange of information about maintenance between the 
operating organisation and a provider of operation and maintenance services. However, in these 
systems, information is stored in proprietary formats, which complicates the exchange of information 
between systems resulting in a low degree of interoperability.  
The third level of maturity is characterised by the implementation of integrated IT-systems, such as 
IWMS-systems that supports groups of operational activities. By doing so, information can be used 
across operational activities, which creates the opportunity to coordinate, plan and perform the ac-
tivities jointly, resulting in a high degree of interoperability. However, the systems are often too com-
plex, making the implementation process very resource-demanding. IWMS-systems (Integrated 
Workplace Management System) contain all functionalities from both CMMS and CAFM but also 
functions within financial management, portfolio management, space management and surveys. The 
fourth level of maturity differs from the third level by the dynamic generation of management 
==PAGE:38==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
28 
 
 
 
information to form the basis for strategical decisions. However, this often results in a reduction of 
resources used for the digital support of operation and maintenance activities. (Ebbesen, 2018) 
3.3.2 BIM in Facilities management  
While BIM has proven its value during design and construction, some building owners also see that 
adoption of BIM for Facilities Management is eyeing numerous potential benefits. However, the build-
ing owners face a range of cultural and technological challenges. (McGraw Hill Construction, 2014) 
Some of the potentials and challenges of BIM for Facilities Management and Operations are shown 
in Table 5. 
Table 5: Potentials and challenges of BIM for Facilities Management (McGraw Hill Construction, 2014) 
Potentials 
Challenges 
Complete and accurate information that is linked directly to 
graphics 
Building owners do not see the value of investing upfront 
BIM-FM software integration eliminates double-entry of infor-
mation into existing automated systems  
Culture challenges as BIM information are perceived to be 
changing established O&M practices   
Ability to capture real-time performance information in a “digital 
double” of the physical facility 
Resistant to change  
Reliable as-built model that can be maintained  
FM software and systems do not integrate with BIM deliverables 
Scheduled maintenance integrated into the models and work or-
der systems  
FM is not prepared for models yet 
For building owners, several factors play into the success of a BIM/VDC project. It is essential to 
understand the BIM-FM goals and objectives and why you are pursuing the implementation of BIM-
FM. By not defining the scope of the building owner’s specific BIM information requirements, failing 
to contractually require that scope in BIM clause, and not actively managing compliance of the pro-
ject team against these requirements, the BIM-FM implementation is according to (Dougherty, 2013) 
destined to fail. The building owner must articulate their asset management goals and objectives 
before providing the project team with detailed requirements for BIM deliverables or handover pro-
tocols. The building owner must be able to explain to the project team that building information is 
essential for them and how they plan to use the information. For a building owner to be able to 
convey specific BIM deliverable requirements to their project team effectively, the building owner 
should make an overall assessment of their existing procedures, systems, and people. Afterwards, 
they can conclude if BIM information that is created during the design and construction of a project 
can either support their existing systems or recognise gaps where different approaches or methods 
may be in order. It also requires that the building owner has a detailed understanding of the systems 
used to manage their facility maintenance, operations, and assets. Without understanding when, 
where, and how their systems will process the information that a project collects, the building owner 
cannot mandate or gather BIM information. (Dougherty, 2013) If a building owner properly mandates 
==PAGE:39==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
29 
 
 
 
that a project team standardise the information collection and embed specific equipment-related in-
formation into BIM deliverables, that information can then be extracted for incorporation into the 
building owner’s preventive maintenance and work order systems. According to (Dougherty, 2013), 
it can result in a reduction in the building owner’s lost downtime when trying to locate current and 
accurate systems information. 
In the report “Skab bedre drift, bæredygtigt vedligehold og optimale tilstandsvurderinger” formulated 
by fm3.dk, three cases have shown some challenges in the collection and digitisation of information 
used in building operations. BIM/CAD cannot contain all necessary information for operation and 
maintenance, including maintenance manuals, and not all information can be procured digitally, such 
as the conditions of the building. Furthermore, a part of the information is variable and user-depend-
ent, such as the quality of cleaning. A part of the information is not about the building and the building 
components, but about organisation and finances. Hence, digitisation of building operations requires 
a manual collection and processing to be able to retrieve digital information. It furthermore requires 
an interaction between the FM-system, finances and BIM-tools. The three cases also showed that 
the increased digitisation of building operations must be a means for both creating better building 
operations and a better foundation for decisions in a total economic lifetime perspective. (fm3.dk, 
2019) In spite of the challenges, the digitisation of building operations will, according to (Ebbesen, 
2018), continue for many years into the future due to the expectation that digitisation can streamline 
and standardise operational processes.  
3.4 BIM for building owners and facilities managers 
As mentioned earlier, the use of BIM was initially driven by architects, engineers and contractors. As 
BIM consistently advances around the world, building owners are becoming more and more involved 
in understanding its value. According to (McGraw Hill Construction, 2014), building owners are in-
creasingly becoming more directly involved with BIM which provides a greater alignment of the BIM 
use and the building owners’ specific project goals and are the greatest beneficiaries of BIM. For the 
design team, BIM analyses, visualisations and simulations enable better engagement and alignment 
of building owner requirements and expectation, and improvements of design solutions. The con-
tractors benefit from BIM using spatial coordination and digital fabrication to reduce costly rework 
and assure quality. All of this ultimately provides benefits for the building owner and helps them to 
deliver excellent projects on time and within budget. (McGraw Hill Construction, 2014) 
Once the building owner has initiated BIM, they need reliable internal support and adequate external 
resources to expand the volume and value of their BIM involvement successfully. McGraw Hill Con-
struction performed a research study in 2014 on the business value of BIM for owners reporting the 
==PAGE:40==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
30 
 
 
 
US and UK building owners’ most significant obstacles in expanding their BIM involvement and the 
governmental impact on their interest in BIM. The research study showed that the US and UK build-
ing owners wish for more BIM skills at design teams to be able to rely on proper model development 
and among contractors and fabricators. Furthermore, they wish for more ability for operation and 
maintenance to utilise the model, standards of model development and information exchange be-
tween parties, and more. The research study moreover introduced some observations and recom-
mendations that intended to help building owners implement and derive more value from BIM on 
their projects and in their managed facilities. The recommendations are, among other things, that 
building owners should actively embrace BIM and get familiar with the resources that can help them 
to initiate a BIM program or expand their existing activities to enjoy more significant benefits. Building 
owner organisations can apply BIM to address its specific challenges in the markets where it oper-
ates to identify achievable goals based on their BIM maturity or a specific project and tailor its pro-
cesses and expectations to the organisational BIM goals. Once the BIM goals are established, time 
should be invested in early-stage BIM planning to make decisions about the processes and deliver-
ables that will optimise BIM. (McGraw Hill Construction, 2014) 
To get the most out of BIM for the building owners, they will need to clearly define their intention to 
use BIM, what they want from it, and how their objectives will be achieved. The intention to use BIM 
is set out in a project strategy document to which all project participants are committed. This docu-
ment describes the project purpose and vision, key objectives and BIM goals, and benefits of using 
BIM. To support the strategy, a project execution plan is needed to describe how the project will be 
delivered. The project execution plan should document the role of BIM and how it will be organised, 
including the role of the different project parties involved. Furthermore, the project execution plan 
should clearly state the responsibility for leading on BIM, what software and tools to be used, stand-
ards for information exchange, version and change control, and document management, levels of 
detail required, and different analyses required. The project execution plan should also state the 
resources, including who will be responsible for modelling and information management. Lastly, a 
communication plan for the project is vital. It should cover all necessary communication and including 
information sharing, storage and retrieval, access rights and permissions, etc. (Davis Langdon, 
2012) The project execution plan is often referred to as the BIM execution plan or the ICT process 
manual.   
According to (McGraw Hill Construction, 2014), the building owners’ greatest obstacles to expanding 
the use of BIM on their projects are the lack of skilled users and training investment. A factor that 
will increase BIM involvement and value is more BIM skills among design firms, contractors and 
fabricators, and more use by other building owners in the areas where they work. BIM gained traction 
==PAGE:41==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
31 
 
 
 
in the global construction industry as a practitioner-driven initiative and has grown through a constant 
process of trial and error by architects, engineers, contractors and owners. Another obstacle pre-
sented in the McGraw Hill Construction research is the lack of standards of BIM across the industry. 
As BIM matured, the more experienced users documented and institutionalised proven practice 
within their organisation to achieve the benefits of BIM, and different groups in the industry initiated 
the formulation of guidelines and standards. Thus, it is becoming increasingly important for the public 
and private owners to engage with these initiatives and provide comprehensive guidance to their 
project teams about the use of BIM, resulting in national-level government policies.  
The research study showed that BIM use in the UK enormously accelerated by the Government 
Construction Strategy in 2011, which mandates a minimum requirement for fully collaborative 3D 
BIM with digital project and asset information and documentation. It indicated that government poli-
cies encouraged most of the building owners to initiate a specific BIM project and add BIM resources. 
Like the UK, Denmark is mandating BIM to ensure that their construction industry is keeping pace 
with innovative technologies and practices. The national mandate became, as mentioned earlier, 
effective by the Danish Building and Property Agency in 2007 and updated in 2013 to improve coor-
dination and communication among project team members, shorten project delivery timeframe and 
enhance productivity. Where other Scandinavian countries have policies that are more prescriptive 
and are centred around delivery of IFC models at various points in the building lifecycle, Denmark 
has a more performance-based approach. Denmark is setting performance objectives and guide-
lines for BIM projects defining goals for the use of BIM but leaving it to the industry to determine how 
to deliver it best. (McGraw Hill Construction, 2014) 
Building owners are critical to the continued advancement of BIM. Another recommendation for the 
building owners to implement and derive more value from BIM is that building owners should identify 
the opportunities to utilise BIM after construction and require proper and timely information transfer 
from the construction phase to the operation and maintenance phase of construction projects.  
 
 
==PAGE:42==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
32 
 
 
 
3.5 Digital handover  
Only a limited amount of all information generated during construction projects are relevant for build-
ing operations. Most of the information controlling the process of design and construction is not rel-
evant for the building operations, and only a part of the information specifying the product to be 
constructed, mainly as-built information, is relevant. Thus, the necessary amount of information for 
operation from the construction project is lower than the information generated during construction, 
and new information is created during the building operations. An investigation of the state of the art 
of digital handover concluded that FM organisations are showing increased interest and awareness 
in specifying and receiving information from construction projects. However, most of the information 
is needed solely for documentation of the building without being used actively during operation. In 
contrast, other information is used more actively and updated during the operation processes. It is 
essential to develop a model for digital handover based on delivering information according to a 
common standard and generally accepted exchange format without the need for manual manipula-
tion of information. (Jensen, 2006) 
 
Figure 11: Processes in relation to digital handover (Jensen, 2006) – Adapted by Katja Skov 
Needs and requirements for the digital handover should be defined as early as possible in the con-
struction project, and if possible, with input from the FM organisation, ensuring that information struc-
ture and processes are established. Accurate and careful formulation of requirements forms the 
basis for a great digital handover; however, many building owners are challenged by this. 
(Bygherreforeningen, 2017b)  
==PAGE:43==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
33 
 
 
 
Information can be structured in many ways. As mentioned earlier, the BIM execution plan, which is 
part of the ICT specification should clearly state what software and tools to be used, standards for 
information exchange, version and change control, and document management. If an information 
model is not defined as part of the ICT specification, the project team must individually establish an 
information structure. A requirement specification can be used as a contractual document by the 
building owner with addition of some project-specific information and choices and defines the form, 
content, and extent of the digital information that the FM-organisation wishes to receive at the end 
of a project. The process of digital handover is illustrated in Figure 11.  
In the design and construction phase, building information is created, applied and complied. At the 
end of construction, this information is handed over digitally to the operational phase with the use of 
an information model and attached project documentation and operation and maintenance material. 
The information model specifies the structured form and extent of information that is handed over to 
the FM organisation and is based on the FM organisation’s need for information during building 
operations. Depending on the building owner’s needs and wishes, the information can be created in 
an object-oriented CAD-tool or be directly handed over into the building owners FM system. The 
attached project documentation and operation and maintenance material consist of a description of 
the construction project and is related to the objects in the information model, often linked with the 
use of metadata.  
Another important factor in digital handover is the use of open standards and formats. BIM requires 
a collaborative exchange of information between all project parties. Collaboration across the industry 
is key. The cost of buildings is incurred during the operational phase, from energy and maintenance 
costs. BIM enables better information delivered to the building operators, and manufacturers can 
supply building owners and operators with information about their products like maintenance require-
ments and operating instructions in the BIM models. The manufacturer can collect information from 
a multitude of existing documents and drawings and put it into one place, in the BIM models. For 
manufacturers, the main requirement for structured information is the delivery of product information 
in an open standard format known as COBie, which stands for Construction Operations Buildings 
information exchange. COBie files are often in the form of tabular electronic worksheets. (Gelder et 
al., 2013) 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
34 
 
 
 
3.6 Commissioning management  
At the end of a construction project, operation and maintenance documentation and quality assur-
ance documentation are handed over to the FM organisation. In this process, the building owner 
must be accurate about what information is needed and how the information should be structured. 
However, the building owner also needs to ensure that the project team is delivering what is expected 
from them. The purpose of the quality assurance documentation is to ensure that the delivered pro-
ject material including building models, descriptions, and documentation qualitatively meet the build-
ing owner’s needs and expectations and that it meets the legislative requirements within the area. 
Often, the parties in a construction project lose focus on the fact that the building must meet the 
building owner’s requirements for future operation and maintenance. The commissioning-process 
ensure that this focus is secured through all construction project phases.  
 
Figure 12: The commissioning process before handover of a new building  
(Teisen, Tolsrup and Due, 2013) – Translated by Katja Skov  
Commissioning is a proactive dialogue- and quality-based management process that focuses on the 
overall economy and the interaction between technical systems. Commissioning is a process, de-
fined as “a quality-focused process for enhancing the delivery of a new and existing building project. 
The overall process focuses upon verifying and documenting that all of the commissioned systems 
and assemblies are planned, designed, installed, tested, operated, and maintained to meet the 
owner’s requirements.” (Burton et al., 2014) The result of implementing commissioning processes is 
energy-optimised and efficient buildings with satisfied users and operating organisation. The com-
missioning process runs parallel to the construction project and can continue throughout the lifetime 
==PAGE:45==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
35 
 
 
 
of the building. (Teisen, Tolsrup and Due, 2013) The commissioning process with activities before 
the handover of a new building is shown in Figure 12. It illustrates an increase in the number of 
commissioning activities through the construction project up until putting into operations.  
The commissioning process creates a link between different technical systems and project stake-
holder by involving the operating organisation, users, consultants, contractors and subcontractors. 
Furthermore, a significant purpose of commissioning management is to handle the interfaces be-
tween different subcontractors on a construction project. (Teisen, Tolsrup and Due, 2013) The com-
missioning process must create value, and it provides value and benefits to the building owner, the 
project design and construction team, and ultimately the users and building operators in many ways. 
According to (Burton et al., 2014), the added value and many benefits to the building owner by com-
missioning a building are revealed in higher-performing buildings that efficiently serve the users. 
Furthermore, the commissioning process streamlines and accelerate the workflow of the project from 
start to finish. The potential advantages of applying a commissioning process on a construction pro-
ject are (Burton et al., 2014): 
• 
Design and submittal reviews assure compliance with owner requirements  
• 
Checklists are issued and documented, establishing prerequisites for timely provision of 
equipment and system installations 
• 
Performance testing assures compliance with design objectives and requirements 
• 
Start-ups are performed as an integral part of the process and documented before any per-
formance testing is started 
• 
Training is facilitated to ensure continued operations 
• 
The operating organisation is provided with comprehensive system manuals and operation 
and maintenance documentation  
• 
Fewer costs due to downtime, delays, change orders, clarifications, and requests for exten-
sion of time for completion  
The users and operating organisation are involved in the commissioning process, and it requires 
time and resources. Thus, it is necessary to reserve time for the commissioning activities in the 
construction project schedule. However, the process is proactive and prevents lack of time in the 
construction phase and up until project handover. (Teisen, Tolsrup and Due, 2013) 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
36 
 
 
 
3.7 Information management and ISO 19650 
In the previous sections of this chapter, the implementation and use of BIM and ICT for building 
owners and facility managers have been described. BIM is presented not only as a 3D-tool for man-
aging digital information, but also as a new approach to managing projects where digital information 
is being exchanged between project parties at all stages of a project, including design, procurement, 
commissioning, and construction. Thus, according to (EFCA BIM Task Force, 2018), BIM provides 
an opportunity for better management of the information exchange by the use of improved tools for 
checking quality and enhancing the credibility of the information exchanged. The Danish practice of 
information management is described in section 3.2.1. For the purpose of comparing the Danish 
practice with the international practice of information management, this section will describe the in-
ternational information management practice with the implementation of ISO 19650 processes.  
3.7.1 International information management practice with ISO 19650 
In the introduction, it was mentioned that digital collaboration needs some guidelines for the ex-
change of information and BIM. The ISO 19650 series of standards is an international BIM-standard 
of good practice which defines information management principles and requirements. Part 1 of the 
series establishes recommended concepts and principles for business processes across the con-
struction industry to support the management of information, including exchanging, recording, ver-
sioning, and organising for all project parties, through the building’s life cycle. (Dansk standard, 
2019a) Part 2 of the series defines the information management processes and activities and aims 
to make it possible for the building owner to establish the requirements for information in the project 
handover phase and to provide the right collaborative environment for the project team to create 
information in an efficient and desirable way. (Dansk standard, 2019b)  
Information management using BIM enables an improvement of information delivery and perfor-
mance efficiencies by catalysing increasingly innovative ways of collaborating across the built envi-
ronment. (UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB, 2019) According to (UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB, 
2020) BIM plays a key part in the management of information by providing a methodology which 
helps us to structure as much of the information as possible so that technology can process it. Be-
sides, structuring information using industry standards helps to improve interoperability. Information 
management as defined in the ISO 19650 series depends on each project party, such as the building 
owner, designers, contractors, and subcontractors, taking responsibility for their part of the overall 
process.  
 
==PAGE:47==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
37 
 
 
 
Roles and responsibility in information management 
The ISO 19650 series refers to the appointing party (the building owner), lead appointed party (the 
contractor) and appointed party (the subcontractors), and the project team, delivery team, and task 
team. Figure 13 shows the interfaces between the parties and teams in relation to information man-
agement.  
 
Figure 13: Interfaces between parties and teams in terms of information management  
(UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB, 2020)  
Before the invitations to tender are issued, the appointing party (building owner) must, according to 
(UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB, 2020), complete the following activities: 
• 
Establish the project’s information requirements, information delivery milestones, and infor-
mation standards 
• 
Identify specific procedures for the production of information, including its generation, deliv-
ery, and secure management 
• 
Identify existing information and/or resources that are relevant to the delivery teams 
• 
Establish the project’s information protocol for incorporation into all project appointments 
• 
Review each delivery team’s information against information requirements  
• 
At project closeout, the project information model is completed, and information containers 
are archived 
• 
Establish a common data environment (CDE) to support the project and the collaborative 
production of information 
==PAGE:48==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
38 
 
 
 
The lead appointed party (contractor) is responsible for coordinating information between the deliv-
ery team and the building owner. In response to the invitation to tender, the contractor must complete 
the following activities in collaboration with the members of the delivery team: 
• 
Establish the BIM execution plan to be confirmed with each appointed party (subcontractor) 
• 
Summarise the delivery team’s capability and capacity to manage and produce information 
• 
Formulate own information requirements in additions to the building owner’s information re-
quirements  
• 
Compile the master information delivery plan through the collation of the task information 
delivery plans  
• 
Authorise each task team’s information model to ensure compliance with the project’s infor-
mation standards, BIM execution plan, and the exchange information requirements  
The key activities of the appointed party (subcontractor) or task team is as follows: 
• 
Confirm the delivery team’s BIM execution plan  
• 
Assess capability and capacity to manage information and to produce information  
• 
Assess the availability of appropriate IT 
• 
Establish a task information delivery plan  
• 
Check information containers to ensure they are in accordance with information production 
methods and procedures and they meet the information requirements  
• 
Review the information model  
Information requirements and models 
Information management is about ensuring that the right information is delivered to the correct des-
tination at the right time to meet a specific purpose for someone to make use of the information. 
Information requirements specify the precise information someone needs. According to (UK BIM 
Alliance, BSI and CDBB, 2020), without information requirements, there is no information manage-
ment process. The building owner should understand what information is required concerning their 
assets or projects to support their organisational or project objectives. The building owner should 
furthermore state their purpose for requiring information deliverables. (Dansk standard, 2019a) The 
different types of information requirements and information models are illustrated in Figure 14.  
==PAGE:49==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
39 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14: Hierarchy of information requirements (Dansk standard, 2019a) 
Organisational information requirements (OIR) are the starting point for all information management 
activities and detail the information required by the organisation across its whole asset portfolio. The 
establishment of OIRs ensures the correct information is fed back into an organisation to support 
strategic business decisions.  
Asset information requirements (AIR) are generated from OIRs to ensure the correct information is 
delivered to an organisation to fulfil the built asset part of the OIRs. AIRs specify the information 
required for each asset, including operation and maintenance manuals. AIRs are defined prior to any 
related appointment. For a design and construction project, AIRs form part of the EIRs to ensure the 
delivery of operational information. Exchange information requirements (EIR) set out information 
standard and the production method and procedures to be implemented by the delivery team. EIRs 
are also defined when appointments are being established and should specify detailed information 
needed to answer the Project information requirements (PIR). PIRs explain the necessary infor-
mation to answer or inform high-level strategic objectives in relation to a specific asset project.  
Project information models (PIM) support the delivery of the information and should be stored to 
provide a long-term archive of the project and for auditing purposes. PIMs can contain information 
on construction methods and details of the installed technical systems, components and equipment, 
including maintenance requirements. PIMs furthermore contribute to the AIMs to support asset man-
agement activities. Asset information models (AIM) support the strategic and day-to-day asset man-
agement processes established by the building owner and can also provide information at the start 
of the information delivery process. 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
40 
 
 
 
Establishing information requirements and planning the information delivery  
For a successful implementation of the ISO 19650 series, the building owner commences with the 
statement of needs, ensuring that the information requirements are clearly defined at the start of the 
project. The building owner furthermore clarifies the types of information and how different types of 
information should be structured and exchanged, which can be supported by a description of why 
information is required. The designers and contractor response to these information requirements in 
their BIM execution plan also referred to as the ICT process manual. During mobilisation, the building 
owner, contractor and subcontractors collaborate to agree on key roles and responsibilities and to 
agree on an information delivery plan, which outlines the coordination and delivery mechanisms. 
Information is managed and delivered by the designers and contractor and approved by the building 
owner. The information delivery flowchart is shown in Figure 15. According to (UK BIM Alliance, BSI 
and CDBB, 2019), clearly defined information requirements prepared at the start of the project is a 
key enabler to collaborative and effective information management. Thus, the information manage-
ment process is about transforming the building owner’s wishes, requirements and needs into the 
right construction project trough digital collaboration. 
 
Figure 15: Information delivery flowchart (UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB, 2019) – Adapted by Katja Skov 
BIM, according to the ISO 19650 series is about getting benefit through better specification and 
delivery of just the right amount of information concerning the design, construction, operation and 
maintenance of buildings. According to (UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB, 2019), a successful out-
come of the implementation of the processes in the ISO 19650 series is as follows: 
• 
Clear definitions of the information needed by the project building owner or asset owner, and 
of the standards, methods, processes, deadlines and protocols that will govern its production 
and review 
• 
The quantity and quality of information produced is just sufficient to satisfy the defined infor-
mation needs  
• 
Efficient and effective transfer of information between those involved in each part of the build-
ing life cycle 
 
==PAGE:51==
3. Theory and literature study 
 
41 
 
 
 
Common data environment (CDE) 
According to (UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB, 2019), the success of construction projects boils 
down to the parties involved and how well they work together to meet both their own objectives and 
those of the project. To enable work in a collaborative environment, the information should be shared 
on a regular basis during the project phases across the project’s common data environment (CDE). 
A CDE is provided and managed by the building owner for the management of all information that is 
developed and exchanged by the delivery team throughout the life of the project. However, the de-
livery team may implement their own CDE. (UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB, 2020).  
 
Figure 16: Common data environment (CDE) concept (Dansk standard, 2019a) 
Information develops throughout the life of the project, which happens in stages. The concept of 
CDE and the information workflow are illustrated in Figure 16. The work in progress state is used for 
information while it is being developed by its task team, and information containers in this state 
should not be visible or accessible to any other task teams. When sharing the information container 
on the CDE, the information containers are checked, reviewed and approved by comparing it against 
the information delivery plan and agreed standards, methods, and procedures. In the shared state, 
information containers become visible and accessible for other task teams, enabling constructive 
and collaborative development of the information model within the delivery team. When publishing 
the information containers, the information exchange is compared against the information require-
ments for coordination, completeness and accuracy, before the information can be authorised for 
use. (Dansk standard, 2019a) 
==PAGE:52==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
42 
 
 
 
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
The thesis is written in collaboration with the contracting company MT Højgaard A/S (MTH), who 
provided access to one of their ongoing construction projects, which created the basis for performing 
a case study research. The case study research is aiming to investigate the practice of information 
management on construction projects in a Danish context and the approach of getting a digital foun-
dation for the operation and maintenance of an asset. The ongoing construction project that is in-
vestigated in the thesis is “CPH Baggage Factory West” (CPH BFW), which is owned by Copenha-
gen Airports A/S (CPH). Through the collaboration with MTH, who is the contractor on the construc-
tion project, contact with relevant stakeholders at CPH with relation to CPH BFW was established. 
It furthermore enabled the opportunity to gain insight into relevant project information to be evalu-
ated. Initially, the case study will provide a general presentation of the involving parties CPH and 
MTH concerning the organisations. After that, the case study will provide a presentation of the con-
struction project CPH BFW. An investigation of the project organisation, the processes of commis-
sioning and digital handover, and the information requirements and delivery are provided in order to 
answer sub-question I, II, and III presented in chapter 1. The results will be based on the provided 
project material and interviews with René Knorborg, commissioning manager at CPH, Kenneth 
Passarge, ICT coordinator at CPH, Leo Rasmussen, project Manager at MTH, Katja Holst, BIM 
manager at MTH, Claus Lindhé, ICT manager at MTH, and Nicolai Jensen, responsible for the struc-
tural model at MTH D&E.  
4.1 Copenhagen Airports A/S 
4.1.1 Organisation  
Copenhagen Airports is one of Europe’s fastest-growing airports. Up until March 2020, before large 
parts of the air traffic in the world was shut down due to the COVID-19 outbreak resulting in a drop 
of one third in the number of passengers in Copenhagen Airports (CPH, 2020b), the traffic in the 
airport was growing significantly. A plan for a historic expansion of Copenhagen Airport providing 
more capacity for both passengers and baggage was presented to ensure the future viability of the 
airport. The plan aims to create capacity and facilities to handle 40 million passengers a year. (CPH, 
2016) The expansion involves four major construction projects, a new hotel, a new pier E, an expan-
sion of Terminal 3, and more adequate facilities for the airport’s baggage handling – the new bag-
gage factory CPH BFW.  
The Executive Management is in charge of the day-to-day management of CPH and consists of 
Thomas Woldbye, CEO at Copenhagen Airports A/S. The Executive Management complies with the 
==PAGE:53==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
43 
 
 
 
guidelines and directions provided by the Board of Directors in the instructions for the Executive 
Board and ensures timely reporting and information about day-to-day operations and financial mat-
ters. The division Assets & Technology is responsible for all of the technical installations, IT-systems, 
runway facilities, and buildings at Copenhagen Airports A/S. (CPH, 2020c) Within this division, the 
department Technical Knowledge and Documentation is responsible for the handling of technical 
documentation, including filing and dissemination of information concerning the construction projects 
in CPH. Besides, according to Kenneth Passarge (CPH), CPH has a great focus on the implemen-
tation and use of BIM on their projects to gain benefits from it, primarily in their construction project. 
The department Technical Knowledge and Documentation is moreover responsible for CPH’s BIM 
strategy and digitisation of existing buildings, implementation, and support of BIM and ICT Manage-
ment, quality assurance, and asset information for the operation and maintenance of buildings. They 
have a great focus on project handover and optimisation. The department is involved in the con-
struction projects as they undertake the role of ICT coordinators and have close cooperation with 
the assigned ICT managers on the construction projects. (Passarge, 2020) 
4.2 MT Højgaard A/S 
4.2.1 Organisation 
MT Højgaard A/S (MTH) is one of the leading contracting companies in the Nordic countries with 
customers in Denmark and selected places around the world. MTH is involved in design-build con-
tracts, general contracts, and individual trade contracts, project development, renovations, and Pub-
lic-Privat Partnerships (PPP). Over the last 100 years, MTH has constructed a lot of big and complex 
building and infrastructure projects, including residences, datacentres, hospitals, schools, roads, 
bridges, and urban spaces. (MT Højgaard, 2020a) Figure 17 shows MTH’s organisation chart. MT 
Højgaard A/S is one of the companies in MT Højgaard Holding together with the subsidiary compa-
nies Enemærke & Petersen, Scandi Byg, and Ajos. MT Højgaard A/S is divided into three business 
units; MT Højgaard Denmark, MT Højgaard International, and MT Højgaard Project Development.  
MTH has an internal engineering division, Design & Engineering (MTH D&E), as illustrated in Figure 
17, who can act as both consultants to the building owner and consulting engineers within structures 
and technical installations. In this way, MTH is part of the construction project process from idea to 
building operations working with all kind of consulting and contracting services.  
==PAGE:54==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
44 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17: MT Højgaard A/S organisation chart (MT Højgaard, 2020b) – Translated by Katja Skov 
MTH’s approach to a construction project is to build virtually before building in real life. The advanced 
technology, digital tools, and the new way of collaborating on construction project have become part 
of the company’s construction processes. Today MTH is leading in the field of Virtual Design and 
Construction (VDC) which ensure a digital communication platform for collaboration with all parties 
involved in the construction projects, such as architects, consultants, manufacturers, subcontractors, 
and building owner. As the mature contractor MTH is, the company gets involved in construction 
projects in the earliest stages and is part of the process from the pre-project phase to the operational 
phase. MTH’s mission is to get involved with the customers, suppliers, engineers, and architects to 
establish the best contact from the beginning of the construction project. The early involvement en-
tails that the rightful technical competencies are unified early in the construction project to ensure 
the best possible result of the project. (MT Højgaard, 2020a) 
4.3 CPH Baggage Factory West (CPH BFW) 
4.3.1 Project description 
Copenhagen Airport has two existing baggage facilities to screen and sort incoming and outgoing 
baggage. Due to an intensified EU-legislation on further screening of baggage, the need for new 
baggage factory has occurred to create space for new and bigger screening machines. CPH’s vision 
for the new baggage factory is to create a reliable and modern solution and great working conditions, 
and daylight and great ergonomic conditions for the employees have a high priority. 
The new baggage factory will allow increased flexibility in the check-in allocation for the benefit to 
both the passengers and airline companies. (CPH, 2020a) The construction project is called “CPH 
Baggage Factory West”, referred to as CPH BFW from now on, and is illustrated in Figure 18. The 
==PAGE:55==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
45 
 
 
 
main fields of the construction project consist of a new building west of Terminal 2, modification of 
surrounding existing buildings, a new connection in the basement between buildings, and new build-
ings for a transformer station and a diesel generator. The new building located west of Terminal 2 
consists of a double high floor with the baggage factory in the ground floor and first floor, a new 
canteen for CPH’s employees on the second floor, offices with 120 regular workstations and meeting 
rooms on the third floor, and changing rooms, storeroom and technical room in the basement. The 
first floor with the canteen will be joined with the existing administration building by a walkway and 
with the Finger West by a south-facing terrace. In the basement, a new connecting to Terminal 2 will 
be established to transfer baggage to the new building. (RUBOW arkitekter, 2020) 
 
Figure 18: Visualisation of CPH BFW and existing buildings  
(Project proposal by MTH, Rubow, Sweco, 2019) – Translated by Katja Skov 
The project team consists of MT Højgaard as the design-build contractor and consultant, Sweco as 
the consultant, and Rubow Arkitekter as the architect. The project has been put out to tender as a 
cooperation model in two phases in close collaboration with Copenhagen Airports. The contract has 
a value of almost 290 million Danish kroner. (MT Højgaard, 2019) The new building with the baggage 
factory of approx. 10.000 square meters will be finished in the middle of 2020, after which the bag-
gage system will be installed and be ready to be put into operation in the summer of 2021. (CPH, 
2020a)  
==PAGE:56==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
46 
 
 
 
 
Figure 19: Workflow of information management and quality assurance on CPH BFW 
In the subsequent sections, the information management and quality assurance process on CPH 
BFW will be described, including the building owner’s information requirements, commissioning pro-
cess, ICT management, the project team’s information delivery, and the digital handover of operation 
and maintenance information.  
The workflow of the information management and quality assurance on CPH BFW from the pro-
gramming phase up until the project close-out is illustrated in Figure 19.  
4.3.2 The building owner’s information requirements 
The information management process is initiated with the establishment of the building owner’s in-
formation requirements. According to Katja Holst (MTH), the building owner tends to require more 
than they need. CPH has had a look at their requirements to see if they require more information 
than is needed and sharpen the information requirements to avoid drowning in too much information. 
(Holst, 2020) The ICT coordinator cooperates with the asset managers to ensure that the right infor-
mation is available for the operation and maintenance of the buildings. According to Kenneth 
Passarge, the ICT coordinator on CPH BFW, the only way to ensure that the right information is 
available is to talk to the asset managers and understand the process for the operating organisation. 
The ICT coordinator and project manager might have an idea of what information is relevant, but the 
==PAGE:57==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
47 
 
 
 
asset managers might have a different view on what information is relevant. (Passarge, 2020) In 
connection with the preparation of the tender and project material, CPH as the building owner trans-
lates the wishes and needs of the asset managers. Thus, the asset information requirements (AIRs) 
is translated into requirements for the project team in the form of exchange information requirements 
(EIRs) which is formulated in CPH’s ICT specification.  
CPH’s ICT specification is describing CPH’s information requirements and consists of a requirement 
specification and associated technical specifications with attached active documents to be filled out 
by the project team. The requirement specification is describing the responsibility in relation to the 
ICT management and requirements to the digital collaboration. The document describes the use of 
BIM, the information structure and metadata for the purpose of structuring the digital deliverables, 
the digital communication platform, and the requirements for the digital handover, including format 
and amount of documentation to be delivered. In addition to the requirement specification, some 
technical specifications are provided with requirements for the information delivery, including BIM 
specification, CAD specification, and a specification for the operation and maintenance documenta-
tion and quality assurance documentation. The technical BIM and CAD specifications are complying 
with bips’ standards specifications2.  
The BIM specification forms the basis for the production of digital building models and the additional 
information deliverables. The document describes the requirement for the use of BIM, including the 
naming, drawing production, and exchange of models. On CPH BFW, the project team is required 
to produce separate discipline-based models within architect, structural, electrical, plumbing, and 
ventilation, which should be assembled into one integrated model. The building models must be 
used for drawing production, collisions control, quantity take-off, and classification for linking the 
models to the tender list, quantity take-off and building component descriptions. (CPH, 2018) As a 
supplement, the CAD specification describes the requirements for the CAD production, including 
requirements for the file and folder structure, the structuring of models and objects, the use of models 
for drawing production, and requirements for the delivered as-built documentation.  
The specification for the operation and maintenance documentation and quality assurance docu-
mentation is describing the type of documentation that is required to be delivered and how. CPH’s 
requirements for the O&M and QA assurance documentation is listed in Table 6. According to René 
Knorborg (CPH), the operation and maintenance costs at CPH Airport is high, and therefore CPH 
requires uniformity in the delivered documentation. (Knorborg, 2020) The specification ensures that 
CPH’s operating organisation has the best possible foundation for the operation and maintenance 
 
2 https://www.molio.dk/kampagner/molio-anvisninger  
==PAGE:58==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
48 
 
 
 
of CPH’s buildings and technical systems, which will contribute to the compliance of the liability of 
the guarantor and the maintenance of the conditions of the technical systems.  
Table 6: CPH’s requirements for the O&M and QA documentation on CPH BFW (CPH, 2018) 
Operation and Maintenance  
documentation 
Quality Assurance  
documentation 
Instruction manuals 
Funtioncal tests 
Data sheets  
Balancing reports of technical systems 
Legal documents 
Legal documents 
List of replacement parts 
Safety documents 
Service contracts 
Measurements  
Replacement guides 
Test documentation 
Maintenance guides 
Test and control reports 
The project team must deliver O&M documentation for all building components and technical sys-
tems, including an O&M plan reflecting the service lifetime and maintenance procedures, and O&M 
material including product catalogues, quality assurance of information and floor plans showing the 
accessibility for servicing and maintenance of technical systems. The project team is furthermore 
required to deliver documentation for the quality assurance, which must be signed and approved by 
the contractors and the technical inspectors. 
 
Figure 20: CPH’s asset management systems and FM-systems  
CPH furthermore is very determined in relation to requirements about the formats of the documen-
tation, as the operating organisation in CPH Airport is using some specific asset management sys-
tems and FM-systems to access the operation and maintenance documentation (Figure 20). CPH 
uses the document management software ProjectWise as an archive to store, find and share project 
information, including BIM-models and drawings. The O&M plans delivered by the project team are 
registered in CPH’s asset management system SAP with information about the operation and 
==PAGE:59==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
49 
 
 
 
maintenance activities. Thus, the SAP-system helps CPH to keep track of when to maintain or re-
place building components or technical systems. CPH furthermore uses the CAFM-system MDOC 
FM to get an overview of the building operations and property portfolio. MDOC FM is used mainly 
for Space Management by CPH to get a visual overview of the buildings and to optimise the utilisa-
tion of areas in relation to the rental of tenancies in the airport. Floor plans with ‘spaces’ are extracted 
from the BIM-models and imported to the system. Hence, the BIM-models are not directly linked to 
MDOC FM. (Passarge, 2020) 
CPH requires that the project team deliver the BIM-models in Revit, in the open format IFC, and as 
one assembled model in Solibri. CPH has some challenges with only receiving the IFC-files, for 
which reason they wish to receive the models in Revit-format as well. If the models are developed 
in any other software than Revit, the models should be converted into a Revit-file. Moreover, the 
BCF format used for collision control is delivered when entering a new project phase. For 2D-drawing 
material, CPH wishes to receive the documentation in DWG and DGN-format, and PDF. CPH en-
sures uniformity in the delivered documentation by describing requirements of how the information 
is named and structured.  
Along with the technical specifications, some active Excel files are a part of CPH’s ICT specification 
that is required to be filled out and delivered by the project team. Besides delivering an O&M plan 
and a list of quality assurance items within the different disciplines, the project team is required to fill 
out and deliver a metadata list (Appendix L). The metadata list is filled out with all relevant information 
about the documentation for an automatic generation of the file names. Thus, the metadata list is a 
tool for correct naming of information which helps CPH with the registration of information and doc-
umentation into their asset management systems and FM-systems and to provide an overview of 
the handover. At project handover, all documentation that is delivered on the project must appear 
from this list. It is desirable for CPH to be able to use the information delivery in connection with the 
subsequent operation of the building and for information exchange with other construction projects 
in CPH Airport. If all documentation is named correctly, the operating organisation and asset man-
agers in CPH Airport can retrieve information about the building easily, whenever it is needed, to 
support the operation and maintenance of the building and the rental of tenancies.  
4.3.3 Commissioning process 
As part of the project review process, CPH has decided to implement a commissioning process on 
their construction projects. The aim of the commissioning process is to manage and document the 
quality of CPH’s construction projects and ensure a planned, effective, and coordinated handover to 
the building operations. The commissioning process furthermore ensures that the building meets the 
defined asset information requirements and that the project team’s documentation for their tests and 
==PAGE:60==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
50 
 
 
 
pre-tests are available before the final test of the technical systems with the participation of CPH is 
conducted. (Jarløv, 2017) The commissioning process includes all the involved parties in a construc-
tion project, which is illustrated in Figure 21. CPH appoints a commissioning manager (CxM) who 
has the overall responsibility for the commissioning process on the construction project. The com-
missioning manager is furthermore cooperating with both the CPH’s operating organisation and as-
set managers and the project team. CPH requires that the project team appoint a dedicated and 
competent resource to participate in the commissioning process. They further require that the design 
manager participates in the whole commissioning process in the project design phase. 
 
Figure 21: Organisation chart for CPH’s commissioning process (Jarløv, 2017) – Translated by Katja Skov 
On the construction project CPH BFW, CPH has appointed René Knorborg to be the commissioning 
manager. MTH has assigned Leo Rasmussen to be the commissioning manager or commissioning 
coordinator, whose responsibility is to make sure that the subcontractors are delivering the docu-
mentation that needs to be delivered to CPH before any tests of the technical systems are conducted. 
The commissioning process regarding the planning, design, construction, and operation and mainte-
nance of CPH’s construction project is described in a specification developed by the strategic com-
missioning managers at CPH. The specification is divided into sections for each involving party in 
the construction project describing the respective party’s specific work and delivery in the different 
project phases. The specification is incorporated and made project-specific in the initial phase of the 
project. Figure 22 is showing a diagram of the commissioning process. The upper line illustrates 
CPH’s project life cycles, the middle line illustrates the phases of a construction project, and the 
boxes illustrate the commissioning activities which are placed in terms of when they must be per-
formed. The process requires that the building owner and contractor invest some time in the initial 
phases of the construction project. (Knorborg, 2020) 
==PAGE:61==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
51 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22: CPH’s commissioning phases (Jarløv, 2017) – Translated by Katja Skov 
During the programming phase, CPH is establishing the implementation of commissioning and the 
specific commissioning requirements for the construction project, which the consultants Niras are 
formulating in the project documents. CPH’s commissioning requirements is verified over the project 
period and include requirements for the consultant to incorporate CPH’s project design manuals, 
CPH’s ICT specification in cooperation with the ICT coordinator, and CPH’s commissioning specifi-
cation. Furthermore, the specification is describing the requirements of what the project documents 
must contain and the control of it.  
In the project design phase, CPH is establishing further commissioning requirements, and the con-
sultants Niras are composing an inspection plan, a system and test schema, and a preliminary test 
schedule and are formulating the tender documents of which all must be controlled by CPH. The 
system- and test-schema is acting as a working document containing an outline of which technical 
systems that must be tested and controlled before putting into operation. The overview must contain 
a description of the technical systems, including name, type, location, room type, and manufacturer. 
The preliminary test schedule must show that sufficient time is allocated in the project schedule to 
perform the required tests.  
==PAGE:62==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
52 
 
 
 
4.3.4 ICT management  
All of CPH’s construction projects are initiated with an ICT agreement to agree on the information 
management process. The ICT agreement is formulated to ensure that the project team’s information 
delivery meets CPH’s information requirements, which is described in section 4.3.2. For quality as-
surance of the project team’s compliance with CPH’s ICT specification and information requirements, 
the commissioning process aims to ensure an effective and coordinated handover of the construction 
project. The ICT agreement is a document stating the ICT services and specifications that are re-
quired and forms the basis for the digital services that need to be delivered. The information man-
agement process on CPH BFW was mobilised with start-up meetings and some succeeding BIM-
meeting to establish the roles and responsibilities. The ICT organisation on CPH BFW is shown in 
Figure 23. 
 
Figure 23: ICT organisation on CPH BFW – Adapted by Katja Skov 
CPH has assigned an ICT coordinator, Kenneth Passarge, to the construction project whose role is 
to keep track of the project handover regarding the agreed ICT requirements on the project. Thus, 
his job is to quality assure the information deliverables at each project phase or any preliminary 
handovers. He ensures that the project team is delivering what is expected from them at the given 
time. Kenneth Passarge is involved in several projects at the same time. Therefore, he relies on 
having close cooperation with the ICT manager assigned by the contractor, as his primary contact 
with the project is via the ICT manager. (Passarge, 2020)  
MTH is responsible for the ICT management, activities and deliverables on CPH BFW, including 
preservation of the ICT specifications defined by CPH, preparation of the ICT schedule regarding 
the agreed information deliverables (master information delivery plan) with meetings and exchange 
==PAGE:63==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
53 
 
 
 
of digital information, administration of the digital communication platform, overall interdisciplinary 
coordination, and collection of as-built documentation. MTH has assigned Claus Lindhé to be the 
ICT manager. The ICT manager is coordinating the digital collaboration between the project parties 
and communicating what the project team must deliver to ensure that they deliver what is required 
from them. Thus, Claus is supervising and quality assuring the technical documentation, concerning 
the ICT specification defined by CPH, and managing the information exchange and delivery on the 
basis of CPH’s information requirements.  
Katja Holst is assigned to be the BIM manager on the project whose role is mostly administrative 
and is to give the project team access to the construction project’s digital communication platforms. 
Moreover, Katja supports the project team in doing quality assurance and collision controls. She is 
making sure that everything is being done in accordance to CPH’s requirements, and every file is 
named correctly. (Holst, 2020) Every project party has assigned a person responsible for the digital 
discipline model who is required to participate in the BIM-meetings. It is then that person’s respon-
sibility to disseminate the information provided on these meetings to other persons in their company 
who needs the information. MTH D&E has assigned Nicolai Jensen as the person responsible for 
the structural model. Thus, he has contributed to the project team’s information delivery. According 
to Claus Lindhé (MTH), it is essential to be in control of the ICT organisation and agree on who must 
do what, when, and how. It is the ICT manager’s responsibility that CPH’s ICT specification is fol-
lowed through, the project is well-coordinated, and all project parties are acquainted with the project 
requirements. (Lindhé, 2020) 
CPH’s ICT specification is formulated prior to the start of a project in cooperation between the project 
manager, the CPH ICT coordinator, and the client-consultant Niras. (Passarge, 2020) After contract-
ing with the project team, the ICT agreement is adjusted in cooperation with the assigned ICT man-
ager and finally approved by CPH’s ICT coordinator. As a supplement to CPH’s ICT requirements, 
MTH is preparing an ICT agreement in cooperation with both the architect and the consultants on 
the construction project, Rubow, Sweco and MTH D&E, to ensure that the project team is familiar 
with the extent of the information delivery. The purpose of MTH’s ICT agreement is to bring clarity to 
the ICT services and information deliverables that the project parties must deliver, which is further 
described in an attached ICT process manual, also called a BIM execution plan. MTH’s ICT agree-
ment is describing the BIM use and goals, the role and responsibility of BIM and information man-
agement, project delivery, and digital collaboration within the project team.  
4.3.5 The project team’s information delivery 
During the construction phase, MTH is managing the information management process and the 
commissioning process as they are the design-build contractor. The project team’s information 
==PAGE:64==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
54 
 
 
 
delivery is established by the building owner CPH with information requirements formulated in CPH’s 
ICT specification, as described in Section 4.3.2-4. MTH is responsible for some commissioning ac-
tivities during the construction phase (Figure 22). MTH composes a detailed test schedule for regu-
lations, function tests, safety tests, pre-tests, and the final test with the participation of CPH for all of 
the technical systems in the project. The system- and test-schema is updated and maintained by 
MTH concurrently with the installation and test of the technical systems during the entire construction 
phase, and the consultants are supervising it. The system- and test schema is, according to Leo 
Rasmussen (MTH), working as a delivery note which helps the project team keep up with the pro-
gress. (Rasmussen, 2020)  
MTH furthermore prepares an ICT schedule regarding the agreed information deliverables with 
meetings and exchange of digital information. CPH has framed the information management and 
digital collaboration by requiring the use of a common digital communication platform (common data 
environment (CDE)) to secure the desired information delivery on the construction project. The digital 
communication platform Byggeweb is put at the project team’s disposal and establish the structure 
and process of exchange and release of BIM on the project, both internally in the project team and 
with the building owner. Byggeweb is divided into different areas for information exchange. The 
working area is the area for the consultant’s temporary work files before the information is being 
released as valid. At project handover or when going from one phase to another, the information is 
released and distributed in a locked version. The distribution area is used for the distribution of doc-
uments to the project stakeholders who only need access to download the information. The project 
team is required to show how they intend to ensure great digital collaboration by applying the infor-
mation requirements and the conditions of digital collaboration in the project CDE. The project team’s 
information delivery is happening in the release areas on Byggeweb. The digital handover process 
is further described in section 4.3.6. 
In CPH’s ICT specification, it is furthermore described that the project team must use digital BIM-
models actively throughout the entire construction project, as a communication tool, for review and 
as the basis for decisions. It is required that all objects in the BIM models are classified according to 
a specific classification system to create consistency in the project material during design, construc-
tion and handover. By classifying the BIM-models the operating organisation is able to filter the mod-
els by type, which will ease the extraction of information about the technical systems and related 
documentation in the building operations. The requirement of consistency ensures that CPH can use 
the project information and BIM models for documentation. All discipline models are required to be 
available for all project parties and must as a minimum be updated on Byggeweb every Friday. 
Before the exchange of the digital models, the different project parties must complete a consistency 
==PAGE:65==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
55 
 
 
 
control to ensure that the models comply with the information and quality requirements formulated 
in the ICT technical specifications. 
 
Figure 24: The project team’s use of CDE  
Additionally, as part of the information management, CPH requires that MTH deliver collision con-
trols, at least before entering any new project phase, in which the project team have evaluated the 
extent of the collisions. Thus, CPH ensures that the as-built material is delivered without any colli-
sions. Nicolai Jensen (MTH D&E) is responsible for the preparation of the as-built material for the 
structural parts of the project. As part of preparing the as-built material, Nicolai must ensure that the 
BIM-models contain all the relevant information. CPH has specified in detail what information is rel-
evant in the BIM-models by sharing a file with an overview of shared parameters, including infor-
mation about building component type, area of responsibility, information level, classification system 
etc. Nicolai must furthermore ensure that the BIM-models are consistent and can be linked to the 
other discipline models and the models of the existing buildings in the airport provided by CPH. The 
models of the existing buildings are also updated and delivered as a new as-built. (Jensen, 2020) In 
MTH’s ICT agreement, it is described how the project team is using the digital communication plat-
form BIM360 for management of the BIM-models and the interdisciplinary review of the project ma-
terial before handover to the CPH (Figure 24). By using BIM360, which is a cloud-based platform for 
real-time information exchange, the project parties have access to the BIM-models all the time.  
Besides preparing the as-built BIM-models, Nicolai Jensen (MTH D&E) must also ensure that the 
metadata list provided by CPH is filled out for correct file naming of the structural BIM-models and 
main floor plans. The metadata list must be filled out with information about the building code, 
==PAGE:66==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
56 
 
 
 
discipline code, project code etc. (Appendix L) The metadata list is, of the project team’s own choice, 
divided into individual lists for each discipline. Many different project team members are providing 
the relevant information to the metadata list, and the process of filling it out is both comprehensive 
and complex. (Holst, 2020) Therefore, to facilitate the process, a person from each discipline was 
selected to be responsible for filling out the list. The ICT manager, Claus Lindhé (MTH), is responsi-
ble for instructing that person in how to fill out the list, and that person then instructs his subcontrac-
tors in how to fill it out. The subcontractors are the ones delivering and installing the technical sys-
tems, which is why the subcontractors are the ones delivering all the relevant information about the 
technical systems. Therefore, it makes sense to divide the metadata list further into individual lists 
for each subcontractor. When the metadata lists for each subcontractor are completed with all rele-
vant information, and the documentation is named correctly, the lists are assembled into one 
metadata list per discipline which is then handed over to CPH. (Lindhé, 2020) 
As mentioned earlier, the ICT manager is responsible for the quality assurance of the technical doc-
umentation and information delivery to ensure that it complies with CPH’s information requirements. 
Hence, Claus Lindhé (MTH) has stepped up the process in connection with the information delivery 
and requested a test handover of the metadata lists from each discipline to ensure that they are filled 
out correctly. CPH also requires that a test handover is conducted where MTH hands over the project 
documentation, operation and maintenance documentation and quality assurance documentation to 
be controlled by the consultants. For this test handover, the project team delivered the BIM-models 
and the metadata list to be controlled by CPH. In this way, CPH could give feedback on the infor-
mation delivery, and the project team could incorporate possible comments and make modifications 
if needed. CPH control whether the metadata list is filled out correctly, providing a correct file name 
for registration of the documentation. 
Moreover, CPH controls the BIM-models to ensure that the project parameters are filled out as re-
quired. A specific parameter is especially important to be filled out on CPH BFW, stating whether the 
building component is air-site or land-site. CPH needs to be able to distinguish between what is air-
site and land-site due to different security restrictions. (Lindhé, 2020) According to Claus Lindhé 
(MTH), this test handover is a great idea, so that the project team early in the process is in control 
of the information delivery, resulting in a high-quality project handover.  
4.3.6 Digital handover of operation and maintenance information  
Before project handover, the technical systems are tested in the 1-1 test with CPH, which is con-
ducted simultaneously with the review of any deficiencies in the building (Figure 22). Prior to the final 
1-1 test with CPH, MTH must conduct their own test and participate in a 1-1 pre-test. The 1-1 pre-
test is verifying that the technical systems are working according to the project requirements and 
==PAGE:67==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
57 
 
 
 
must include an integration test of several systems that are functionally connected. Approved test 
reports from the contractor’s own test must be presented before the 1-1 pre-test can be conducted. 
CPH requires that the consultants are involved and control the test that the contractor conducts. The 
consultants establish the prerequisites for the technical systems, and the contractor installs the tech-
nical systems. Together they must agree that the technical systems installed by the contractor com-
ply with the systems’ design criteria. (Knorborg, 2020) When the contractor and consultants have 
agreed to this, and all compulsory tests are completed, and all relevant documentation and drawings 
are available, the final 1-1 test with CPH is conducted. This test is conducted to verify that all the 
technical systems comply with CPH’s project design manuals and project requirements. If any faults 
and deficiencies are observed, these must be rectified, and a new test is conducted.  
According to René Knorborg (CPH), it is of great value if the persons who operate the technical 
systems have seen the systems before putting into operation. (Knorborg, 2020) Therefore, all rele-
vant personnel from CPH’s operating organisation is involved in the testing of the technical systems. 
The 1-1 test is an operational instruction of the systems for CPH’s operating organisation so that 
they get familiar with the technical systems before putting into operation. If all requirements are ful-
filled in the tests, the technical systems are handed over to CPH’s operating organisation. CPH fur-
thermore requires that a training programme with operational instructions is conducted with the par-
ticipation of CPH’s operating organisation. According to MTH’s commissioning manager, Leo Ras-
mussen, the most important part of the handover process is the carrying out of the tests prior to the 
final handover. It enables the project team to follow up on unresolved issues and address the issues 
quickly. It provides security for all project parties, including the subcontractors, knowing that the 
technical systems function correctly and are ready to be put into operation. (Rasmussen, 2020) 
On CPH BFW the digital handover takes place in stages, as the basement and transformer station 
are delivered as separate handovers. The dates of the separate handovers are clearly stated in the 
CT schedule (master information delivery plan). MTH is responsible for planning, coordinating and 
managing the digital handover. The ICT manager is in charge of collecting as-built documentation, 
including information for the operation and maintenance, and ensures that the documentation com-
plies with the requirements and procedure described in CPH’s ICT specification. As part of the digital 
handover, all documentation exchanged in connection with the construction project must be deliv-
ered digitally on the digital communication platform Byggeweb in the release area. The information 
delivery includes the delivery of as-built material, such as drawings and diagrams, and classified 
BIM-models, containing building component information and room information, and O&M and QA 
documentation (Figure 25). At handover, the as-built material must be consistent with the metadata 
==PAGE:68==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
58 
 
 
 
list for easy registration of documentation in CPH’s asset management systems and FM-systems. 
(CPH, 2018) 
 
Figure 25: The digital handover process on CPH BFW 
The ICT manager calls for a handover-meeting with the project manager and ICT coordinator at 
which a review of the documentation and a spot check of the chosen files is carried out by CPH. The 
review and spot check ensure that the extent and content of the documentation comply with CPH’s 
exchange information requirements (EIR). The review and spot check of the delivered documenta-
tion provides, according to Kenneth Passarge (CPH), a sense of security when CPH is taking over 
the building by ensuring that the building is operational. (Passarge, 2020) After the preliminary ap-
proval of the documentation at the handover-meeting, the ICT coordinator disseminates the docu-
mentation for registration in the department Technical Knowledge and Documentation, after which 
the digital handover can be approved. (CPH, 2018)  As something new, CPH require that the project 
team deliver the documentation 14 days prior to the final handover, no matter what stage the docu-
mentation is at, while keep working on as-built material. That gives CPH more time to go through the 
documentation, provide the project team with some feedback, and if necessary, push the date of the 
final handover. In this way, no time is wasted on reviewing documentation which is not finalised. 
(Passarge, 2020) Furthermore, CPH wants to receive the documentation as soon as the technical 
systems are installed, as they are responsible for the operation of the systems after the installation. 
By receiving the documentation regularly as the technical systems are being installed, CPH can 
review it bit by bit.  
==PAGE:69==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
59 
 
 
 
4.4 Evaluation of case study  
The performed case study concerning the practice of information management in a Danish context 
on the construction project CPH BFW presented several interesting results. The results indicate that 
the project team has had a great cooperation both internally and with the building owner. All com-
munication between the project team and CPH goes through the ICT manager, as the ICT manager’s 
role is to coordinate the digital collaboration between the project parties and communicate what the 
project team must deliver to ensure compliance with CPH’s information requirements. According to 
Claus Lindhé (MTH), it is essential to be in control of the ICT organisation and agree on who must 
do what, when, and how. As the person responsible for the structural model Nicolai Jensen (MTH 
D&E) do not communicate directly with CPH but is a big part of the information delivery on the project, 
he depends a great deal on the cooperation with the ICT manager. Nicolai Jensen emphasises that 
the cooperation between the persons responsible for the discipline models and the ICT manager has 
been good. If any uncertainties about the information delivery occur, the ICT manager communicates 
it to CPH (Jensen, 2020) Claus Lindhé, the ICT manager on CPH BFW, also emphasises the good 
cooperation between him and CPH. However, some challenges have arisen, which has required an 
extra effort from MTH’s part to ensure that the information delivery complies with the information 
requirements.  
CPH has described their requirements very comprehensively (Jensen, 2020); however, according to 
Claus Lindhé (MTH), CPH is still a relative newcomer to the placement of digital information require-
ments. In some cases, CPH wanted to receive more than is described in the ICT agreement, or the 
descriptions were insufficient. In those cases, CPH was rather perceptive if MTH suggested some 
changes. Thus, as a result of inputs provided by MTH, requirements in CPH’s ICT specification have 
changed since the project was initiated. As an example, Claus Lindhé mentioned the choice of the 
classification system. It was initially agreed that the project team should use SfB and CCS as the 
classification system. However, during the process, the agreement was changed, and the project 
team could choose between using SfB and CCS or using BIM7AA as the classification system. To 
ease the information delivery, the project team has chosen to use BIM7AA, as only one classification 
code is to be filled out. (Lindhé, 2020) Thus, time is saved, and the accuracy of the information can 
be enhanced. For CPH it requires that they make a conversion of the existing BIM-models from 
previous projects so that the models are structured the same way as the new BIM-models. This 
change is a sign of CPH’s digital development, as they are learning and adapting to the current 
situation. (Passarge, 2020)  
The BIM manager on the project, Katja Holst (MTH), expresses her concern about the metadata list 
and acquainting the subcontractors with CPH’s information requirements. She emphasises the 
==PAGE:70==
4. Case study – Practice of information management 
 
60 
 
 
 
difficulties in getting the subcontractors to understand the purpose of filling out the metadata list 
because of the complexity of it. (Holst, 2020) The project team has been proactive in the process of 
information delivery as they realised how time-consuming it is. Even though the technical systems 
were not installed yet, the project team was aware of which systems were to be installed. Therefore, 
the subcontractors could start filling out the metadata list before starting the installation, saving them 
some time in the end by levelling the workload a little. (Holst, 2020) However, according to Nicolai 
Jensen (MTH D&E), filling out the metadata list has not been a considerable task, as no information 
about operation and maintenance is required for the structural parts. The metadata list should only 
be filled out with information about the BIM-models and main floor plans. (Jensen, 2020) Thus, it is 
primarily the metadata list for the technical systems that require a lot of work to fill out because of 
the number of drawings and O&M material to be handed over to CPH’s operating organisation.  
The results furthermore emphasise the importance of starting the process of generating information 
to the building operations early in the construction project with the involvement of the operating or-
ganisation. According to René Knorborg (CPH), it is of great value if the operating organisation is in 
the testing of the technical systems so that they get familiar with the systems before putting it into 
operation. (Knorborg, 2020) CPH has a high focus on handing over technical systems that are tested 
and validated and collecting information about the systems to be stored in CPH’s asset management 
systems. The aim of the commissioning process is to manage and document the quality of CPH’s 
construction projects and ensure a planned, effective, and coordinated handover to the operation 
and maintenance. The commissioning process has proven to be of great value for the building owner, 
given that the building owner receives a building that meets the project requirements. In projects 
without a commissioning process, there is a gap between the two parties, the building owner and 
the contractor. Hence, the building owner has experienced receiving a building that is impossible to 
operate and maintain. René Knorborg (CPH) furthermore emphasises the potential for the building 
owner in ensuring that they place the right project requirements by involving the operating organisa-
tion in the early phases of the construction project. (Knorborg, 2020) 
Nevertheless, there is a motive for further development of the process of information management 
and the establishment of building owner requirements. The result analysis will examine the value of 
involving the operating organisation in the establishment of building owner requirements and in the 
project handover. The case study furthermore forms the basis for an investigation of how the building 
owner and operator can benefit from the use of BIM and information management standards. 
 
 
==PAGE:71==
5. Analysis and results 
 
61 
 
 
 
5. Analysis and results 
This chapter aims to answer the problem statement and sub-question IV, V, VI, VII and VIII presented 
in chapter 1 by comparing the relevant results from the theory and literature study with results from 
the case study with the practice of information management, and the expert interviews conducted.  
5.1 Establishing building owner requirements  
When asking how the building owner establishes the requirements for the project team in a construc-
tion project, several of the expert interviews pointed out that the requirements are established based 
on the needs and wishes of the building owner and operator. The establishment of building owner 
requirements is initiated with the question of what is necessary to do to comply with statutory instru-
ments and what information is desirable to receive. Thus, the building owner requirements are es-
tablished based on compulsory requirements, but also on the basis of a need for information to be 
available in a specific structure and format in order to be utilised actively in construction and opera-
tion of buildings. For the building owner, it is a matter of figuring out what information they are used 
to get, how the information is received, and how it is utilised in the building operations. (Christensen, 
2020) According to Michael Ørsted, it is very different from building owner to building owner how 
they establish their requirements, but generally, two things are important when establishing building 
owner requirements.  
Firstly, the building owner establishes the requirements based on their experiences. The building 
owner should evaluate what are the biggest obstacles and then address it by breaking it down into 
requirements. (Ørsted, 2020) Kenneth Passarge shares this point of view and states that CPH is 
gathering experience from previous construction projects to see what kind of mistakes are generally 
made in the information deliverables, and who is responsible for the mistakes. This is not to blame 
it on one specific part, but CPH uses it to know why mistakes are made to be able to address it. In 
this way, CPH knows whether to correct their ICT specifications or procedures or if it is a misunder-
standing on the part of the contractor or consultant and more focus should be brought to the training 
of the project team. (Passarge, 2020)  
Secondly, the building owners should cooperate crosswise to agree on the establishment of building 
owner requirements and learn from each other. So, the building owner investigates what other build-
ing owners have formulated in their ICT specifications, which might be based on the experience of 
another building owner. Like that, there is a uniformity in the establishment of building owner require-
ments. There might be a difference in what is relevant or important for the building owner, also based 
on the criticality of the construction project, which is reflected in the requirements. However, a lot of 
==PAGE:72==
5. Analysis and results 
 
62 
 
 
 
fundamental information is relevant in most construction projects, which is common for all building 
owners. (Ørsted, 2020) Thus, the building owners should agree on some fundamental requirements 
for all construction projects, and then take into consideration what is important in specific cases to 
make it project- or organisation-specific.  
Nis Boile Christensen also emphasises the challenges for the contractor of working with different 
building owners as each building owner has different requirements. Thus, it would ease the work of 
the contractors if the building owners had a well-defined approach and some sort of uniformity in the 
establishment of the requirements. (Christensen, 2020) Furthermore, according to the expert inter-
views and the theory, the building owner should take the industry approach as its starting point by 
using Molio’s ICT standards to establish uniformity in the building owner requirements. The para-
digms and instructions for ICT specifications created by Molio aim to make the information require-
ments more standardised to benefit both the building owner and the project team. (Molio, 2019c) A 
standard ICT specification can easily be modified to comply with a project’s or an organisation’s 
needs.  
Khoa Ngo indicates that it is a long process of defining ICT requirements because the requirements 
are many and diverse. Some of the requirements aim to describe how to create a digital frame for 
better collaboration across project parties in a construction project. In contrast, other requirements 
aim to describe how information is delivered at the end of a construction project. The information 
delivery includes requirements of consistent and coordinated project material, the use of digital com-
munication platforms, and how O&M and QA documentation is named, structured and handed over 
to the operating organisation. (Ngo, 2020)  
Hence, the ICT specification should describe what information is needed for building operations. 
When asking what information is needed for the building operations, the interviewees pointed out 
that the information need depends on what and how the buildings are operated. Different operating 
organisations are operating differently. Thus, what information is necessary is based on how they 
are planning to operate and maintain the building. One can operate on the basis of when the tech-
nical systems break, after which it is replaced, but one can also replace the technical systems on 
the basis of the guarantee before the systems break. A third option is to do predictive maintenance, 
in which the service life of the technical systems is predicted based on the performance history of 
previous systems, including the load of the systems in different areas. (Passarge, 2020) According 
to Nis Boile Christensen, it is about understanding what you are operating, what information is re-
quired on what level in order to maintain the function of the building. An operating organisation needs 
certain information about the operation and maintenance activities in the day-to-day operation, and 
some relevant information necessary to uphold the guarantee. (Christensen, 2020)  
==PAGE:73==
5. Analysis and results 
 
63 
 
 
 
Even though each building operator operates differently, some basic information is fundamental for 
the day-to-day operation. Michael Ørsted mentions a project concerning information for building op-
erations made in collaboration with Molio in which operation and maintenance activities from seven 
different building operators were collected. After sorting out all common activities, the project con-
cluded in one long list of a few hundred operation and maintenance activities that are typical for a 
building which was shared with the building operators. In this way, the building operator would know 
which information to ask for depending on what and how they operate. (Ørsted, 2020) Some of the 
fundamental information that the expert interviews pointed out as relevant for the building operations 
is as-built material, and operation and maintenance documentation for each building component, 
including instructions and descriptions of any legal- or guarantee-related activities. It is important 
that this information is as accurate as possible to be incorporated into the building operator’s FM-
system. Furthermore, it is relevant to know the extent of the operation and maintenance and which 
activities are in-house or outsourced. If the building operator takes over a larger building, it might be 
necessary to outsource some of the activities. Then service agreements are formulated on the basis 
of how the building operator wishes to operate the building. (Ebbesen, 2020)  
5.1.1 Involvement of the operating organisation  
No matter how the building operator wishes to operate the building, it is essential that the building 
owner establishes the right requirement for them to receive the information needed in a defined 
structure and format to be utilised in the building operations. Nis Boile Christensen states that on 
larger construction projects, a lot of information is generated, and without a defined structure, it is 
hard to create an overview of the information received. (Christensen, 2020) There was a broad con-
sensus among the interviewees that the only way to ensure that the right requirements are estab-
lished is to involve the operating organisation in the establishment of requirements. The case study 
CPH BFW indicated that the only way to ensure that the right information is available is to talk to the 
asset managers and understand the process for the operating organisation. The project managers 
might have an idea of what information is relevant, but the asset managers might have a different 
view on what information is relevant. (Passarge, 2020) In connection with the preparation of the 
tender and project material, CPH translates the wishes and needs of the asset managers.  
Khoa Ngo underlines this point of view by stating that the ICT specifications should reflect the needs 
of the operating organisation. The requirements concerning the project team’s information delivery 
are the communication of the operating organisation’s need for documentation used in the day-to-
day building operations. DTU CAS has been asking the operating organisation what information is 
relevant for them when the building is handed over to them. DTU CAS then used this enlightenment 
as a framework for the establishment of requirements. It is, according to Khoa Ngo, a changeable 
==PAGE:74==
5. Analysis and results 
 
64 
 
 
 
process that needs to be revisited in continuous dialogue with the operating organisation, as they 
grow wiser every time a construction project is finished and has been put into operation. (Ngo, 2020) 
As mentioned in the theory and literature study, it is important for Facilities Management to be ac-
tively involved in the construction project to take into account the use and operation of the building. 
In cases where the company has an internal building owner and operator function, such as DTU 
CAS, the FM function can be involved in the planning and construction of a building. (Jensen, 2014) 
Khoa Ngo agrees and states that as an internal building owner and operator function, they are re-
sponsible for the communication of their needs in regard to information delivery which is formulated 
in the building owner requirements. (Ngo, 2020) It is also stated in Table 4 that the consideration of 
the user’s needs and requirements is part of the FM-activities in the programming and design phases 
of a construction project, ultimately resulting in a user- and operating-friendly building. 
Several of the expert interviews stated that knowledge from existing building operations should be 
incorporated into the building owner requirements. According to Poul Ebbesen, the operating organ-
isation should show the building owner or project team how the information is utilised in the operation 
of the existing buildings. The project team must then introduce a counterpart to that information. In 
this way, the new building can be incorporated into the building portfolio and be operated and main-
tained the same way as the existing buildings. (Ebbesen, 2020) Hence, knowledge and experience 
from the operating organisation are pushed forward into new construction projects. Michael Ørsted 
also points out that the operating organisation must be involved continuously so that the operating 
organisation takes ownership of the construction project. Usually, the operating organisation is dis-
connected from the construction project. However, in the future, the operating organisation will try to 
be more directly involved to avoid that the construction project does not fulfil their needs and wishes. 
By involving them in the early phases, the operating organisation gain ownership of the construction 
project from the beginning. (Ørsted, 2020) 
According to Stig Brinck, the operating organisation should be involved at two different times in a 
construction project; In the early stages when establishing the building owner requirements to ensure 
that the building is operating-friendly, and in the handover process. (Brinck, 2020) Several of the 
expert interviews pointed out that knowledge from the contractor is effectively transferred to the op-
erating organisation by involving them in the construction and handover process. Furthermore, by 
involving the operating organisation continuously in the construction and handover process in a dia-
logue with the contractor, all project parties can feel secure knowing that the building complies with 
the requirements. (Ørsted, 2020)  
The case study CPH BFW indicated that the commissioning process aims to document the quality 
of the construction project and ensure that the building complies with the defined requirements. As 
==PAGE:75==
5. Analysis and results 
 
65 
 
 
 
mentioned in the theory and literature study, the commissioning-process ensures that the construc-
tion project parties do not lose focus on the compliance with the building owner’s requirements for 
future operation and maintenance through the all construction project phases. Michael Ørsted fur-
thermore indicates that the commissioning process and early involvement of the operating organi-
sation secure a better quality assurance of the information delivery so that the information can be 
registered in the FM-systems used by the operating organisation. (Ørsted, 2020)  
According to Stig Brinck, it is essential that the operating organisation is part of a training process in 
which they get instructed in how to operate the technical systems based on the delivered operation 
and maintenance material. Thus, a process where the project team can transfer their knowledge to 
the operating organisation. (Brinck, 2020) This is also illustrated in Figure 12 where the training of 
operating staff is part of the commissioning activities before handover. Nis Boile Christensen under-
lines this point of view by stating that the commissioning process and user-involvement enhance the 
quality of the building. Many issues with accessibility of technical systems are addressed earlier, 
resulting in a more user- and operating-friendly building. (Christensen, 2020) 
5.1.2 Challenges in establishing building owner requirements  
This section aims to identify the challenges in establishing building owner requirements based on 
the results from the expert interviews. The greatest challenges in establishing building owner re-
quirements in terms of digital collaboration and information management based on expert interviews 
are shown in Table 7. 
Table 7: Challenges in establishing building owner requirements based expert interviews 
Challenges in establishing building owner requirements 
• 
The building owner’s lack of experience in establishing requirements is a challenge, 
as it is often trial and error for the building owner (Christensen, 2020) 
• 
The operating organisation has a hard time describing their needs, thus the operating 
organisation’s needs are rarely transformed into ICT requirements (Ørsted, 2020) 
• 
The building owner requirements are too complex and is missing freedom of method 
(Christensen, 2020) 
• 
Information generated in the construction project is rarely used in the building opera-
tions (Ebbesen, 2020) 
• 
Project parties have different points of view. The contractor might understand it in one 
way, and the operating organisation might understand it in another way which leads to 
disagreements (Ørsted, 2020) 
Although there was a broad consensus that the only way to ensure that the right requirements are 
established is to involve the operating organisation, several of the expert interviews also pointed out 
that the building owner or operator often has a hard time describing their needs. According to Stig 
==PAGE:76==
5. Analysis and results 
 
66 
 
 
 
Brinck, it is a challenge that the building owner or operator does not always know what they need in 
order to be precise and clear in the description of their requirements. Some building owner or oper-
ator has a tendency to require too much information and they might end up with insufficient infor-
mation. (Brinck, 2020) Hence, the building owner or operator’s ability to make specific and relevant 
requirement is important. Michael Ørsted shares this point of view and states that the operating 
organisation has difficulty in describing the requirements, and then it is hard for the project team to 
know if they have delivered a satisfying project or not. Thus, if the building owner is not clearly 
describing the quality requirements of the handover, disagreements between the building owner and 
contractor about what and how to deliver can occur. It must be clear for the project team when the 
requirements are fulfilled. (Ørsted, 2020)  
Nis Boile Christensen also emphasises the importance of describing the requirements in a way so 
that it is understandable for the project team. Sometimes there is a tendency of making it too complex 
(Table 7). He furthermore believes in some sort of freedom of method for the contractor, consultants 
and architect. As an example, he mentions the use of classification systems. It should not necessarily 
be a requirement that the project team uses a specific classification system such as CCS or BIM7AA 
to structure the information if it is not value-adding to the construction project or even utilised in the 
building operations. By being less dictating in relation to the naming and structure of the information, 
the work of the project team is eased significantly, as long as the information is in a well-defined 
structure. In that way, the information deliverables are, according to Nis Boile Christensen, prepared 
more thoroughly as default. (Christensen, 2020)  
The case study also indicated that the classification of the models is not used as it should be used. 
CPH BFW only uses classification on type level and not for identification of each building component. 
Then, according to Claus Lindhé, the whole point of classifying disappears, and there is no point in 
forcing people to do it. (Lindhé, 2020) Katja Holst also shared her concern about getting the project 
team to understand the purpose of filling out CPH’s metadata list because of the complexity of it. 
(Holst, 2020) 
As stated earlier, the building owner should establish the requirements based on their experiences 
and knowledge from the operation of existing buildings. Thus, the existing structure of the information 
should be incorporated into the new construction project to ensure compliance with the building port-
folio. However, according to Poul Ebbesen, the information generated in the construction project is 
rarely used in the building operations (Table 7). The information generated in the construction project 
is often just used to ensure buildability and not to ensure operability. Poul Ebbesen furthermore 
emphasises that the establishment of information requirements for building operations is without 
great importance. It does not matter for most operating organisations whether they take over a 
==PAGE:77==
5. Analysis and results 
 
67 
 
 
 
building from a construction project or they buy an existing building. Many operating organisations 
do not use the information generated in the construction project. Whenever they take over a new 
building, they examine the building and make a new registration for the use in building operations. 
(Ebbesen, 2020) The theory and literature study also states that only a limited amount of information 
generated during construction projects is relevant for building operations, and the amount is lower 
than the amount of necessary information for this phase. Thus, new information is created during 
building operations. (Jensen, 2006) 
5.2 Digitisation of building operations   
As mentioned in the introduction, the building owners have started to discover opportunities for the 
use of digital tools, and it is essential that the building owner engages in the digital processes by 
knowing their needs and goals of using digital tools. (Bygherreforeningen, 2017a) The theory and 
literature study furthermore indicates that digitisation and ICT create value for the building owner 
and operator, especially in the operational phase, by better utilisation of information generated in the 
construction phase. However, the building owner and operators are challenged in creating the de-
sired effect. (Bygherreforeningen, n.d.)  
To create the desired effect of digitisation of building operations, the building owner must be able to 
make requirements for the use of digital tools and information management. However, as mentioned 
earlier, the building owner and operator find it difficult making the right requirement. The challenges 
in establishing the building owner requirement are further addressed in section 4.1.2. Furthermore, 
for the operating organisation to be able to utilise the information generated in the construction 
phase, the digital information delivery must fit into the digital FM-systems used in the building oper-
ations. (Ngo, 2020) Nis Boile Christensen points out that the building owner needs information about 
the building, and information originates from some sort of data in some sort of structure. Thus, when 
delivering information, the data must be in a defined structure to be able to utilise the information in 
the building operations. (Christensen, 2020) Stig Brick underlines this point of view by stating that it 
is important that the building owner takes responsibility for the form and structure of the information 
delivery. (Brinck, 2020)  
Hence, the building owner must make requirements on the information delivery, including how the 
operation and maintenance documentation is delivered, named, structured and linked to the BIM-
models. The operating organisation need information about the technical systems they operate. If 
the information is valid in the BIM-model and it is classified and identified as required, then the op-
erating organisation is able to get an overview of the quantity of technical systems and where the 
==PAGE:78==
5. Analysis and results 
 
68 
 
 
 
technical systems are located. If the BIM-model is consistent, it is possible to extract information 
about the technical systems and related documentation. At project handover, the operating organi-
sation quality assures the technical system to ensure that it is operable and that the necessary and 
relevant information about the technical system is available. Then, the operating organisation can 
use the BIM-model to locate the technical systems. (Ngo, 2020) 
As mentioned in the introduction, there is a need for better collection and utilisation of information 
generated in the construction and operation of buildings to ensure a more effective building opera-
tions. The information generated in the construction phase is delivered digitally to the operating or-
ganisation at the handover of the project, but a lack of digital readiness in the operating organisations 
constitutes a barrier to the effective digitisation of building operations. (Transport- og Boligministeriet, 
2019) However, according to Poul Ebbesen, the digitisation of building operations has come to stay. 
The digitisation is being pushed forward by the conception that things can be done in a more inter-
esting way, and it will become easier to achieve one’s stated objectives by digitising. Poul Ebbesen 
furthermore states that the operating organisations have an enormous drive to become more digital, 
and according to him, requirements for information delivery will increase the use of digital tools in 
the building operations. (Ebbesen, 2020) 
5.2.1 Advantages and challenges of digitising building operations 
In order to further evaluate the benefits for the building owner and operator in terms of digitisation of 
building operations, the different advantages and challenges have been assessed. Several of the 
interviewees indicate that there is a lot of advantages as a result of digitising building operations. 
Table 8 lists the main advantages based on expert interviews, the theory and literature study, and 
the case study. 
Table 8: Advantages of digitising building operations based on expert interviews and theory 
Advantages of digitising building operations 
• 
FM-systems can structure data in a way so that information can be utilised in the optimisation 
and visualisation of performance of the building operations (Christensen, 2020) 
• 
By storing and exchange information digitally, information is available and accessible for real-
time use (Ngo, 2020) 
• 
Through continuously update and communication of building conditions, the interest of pre-
ventive maintenance and the quality of the portfolio are sustained (fm3.dk, 2019) 
• 
Better collection of knowledge and experience from the operating organisation to be pushed 
back into new construction projects for better establishment of building owner requirements 
(Ørsted, 2020)  
• 
Early establishment of digital FM-system gives rise to a progressively hand over of infor-
mation which can conclude in a more effective digital handover (Brinck, 2020) 
==PAGE:79==
5. Analysis and results 
 
69 
 
 
 
The value of digitising building operations depends, according to Kenneth Passarge, on how infor-
mation is managed. It can become one big mess, but if the information is structured, information can 
be utilised. Furthermore, if the information is digital and organised, it can be placed in “boxes” and 
shared with others in the operating organisation that can use the information. (Passarge, 2020) In-
formation can be used to optimise the building operations. Kenneth Passarge explains that by col-
lecting information about technical systems in specific areas that are more worn down than other 
systems for some reason, the operating organisation can evaluate on what areas are the most critical 
and why. Like that, the operating organisation is able to respond to this information and make nec-
essary modifications to the technical systems and then optimise the building operations. He further 
emphasises the possibility of doing predictive maintenance, as the operating organisation operate 
and maintain on the basis of some historical data. (Passarge, 2020)  
According to Khoa Ngo, information is only of value if it supports an operating activity such as a legal 
service or a repair job. However, before the operating activity can be performed, an accurate basis 
of information must be present. Thus, information must be available and accessible. By storing in-
formation digitally, information can be accessed anywhere and anytime whenever it is needed via 
digital communication platforms and apps. Like that, the documentation is always close at hand for 
real-time use. (Ngo, 2020) Hence, an advantage of digitisation of building operations is that docu-
mentation is available at the right time and place. Michael Ørsted states, in brief, that transparency 
is an advantage of digitising building operations. It is clear what has been done and what is placed 
where. Furthermore, it enables the possibility to extract knowledge from the FM-systems. (Ørsted, 
2020) Nis Boile Christensen shares this point of view and states that the FM-systems can organise 
the data in a structure.  
As mentioned earlier, information originates from some sort of data in some sort of structure, and 
data must be in a defined structure to be able to utilise the information in the building operations. In 
FM-systems, a well-documented structure can be defined, making it possible to incorporate infor-
mation from the construction phase into the systems (Table 8). Like that the information can be 
visualised and compared in a much smarter way which can be used to see the buildings’ benchmark 
and performance crosswise, resulting in some sort of transparency in the work of the operating or-
ganisation. (Christensen, 2020)  
Besides, Nis Boile Christensen also points out that the advantage of digitising building operations is 
that information is easy to file and easy to find. He explains how metadata can be attached to the 
information like when a table of contents is placed in a ring binder. Like that, a much easier way of 
searching for information is available. (Christensen, 2020) The case study also indicated the im-
portance of structuring the information correctly in order for the building owner or operator to use the 
==PAGE:80==
5. Analysis and results 
 
70 
 
 
 
information in the building operations. According to Leo Rasmussen (MTH), it is essential for a build-
ing owner like CPH, who has a lot of buildings and construction projects to incorporate the operation 
and maintenance documentation into their FM-systems with the correct naming. Information from 
the sub-contractors about a technical system’s service life is incorporated into the FM-systems, and 
then after the end of the service life, the information pops up automatically. (Rasmussen, 2020) The 
metadata list can be filled out with all relevant information about the documentation for an automatic 
generation of the file names. Hence, a metadata list is a tool for correct naming of information which 
supports the registration of information into the FM-systems.  
Stig Brick agrees and further states that the greatest benefits of digitising building operations are 
created if the FM-systems are established early, and the contractor is able to incorporate it into the 
construction process. Hence, information can be handed over progressively during the construction 
phase, ensuring that it is not happening after finishing the construction. If the contractor is involved 
early and secures a good process of delivering information, the handover becomes part of the con-
struction project. It is, according to Stig Brick, a huge advantage and can result in a more effective 
digital handover (Table 8). However, it also requires that the FM-systems are established in the right 
way, and specific agreements are in order before the construction phase. (Brinck, 2020) According 
to the theory and literature study, accurate and careful formulation of requirements forms the basis 
for a great digital handover. Needs and requirements for the digital handover should be defined as 
early as possible in the construction project to ensure that information structure and processes are 
established. (Bygherreforeningen, 2017b) 
Despite the various advantages of digitising building operations, there remain several obstacles to 
overcome in terms of digitisation of building operations in practice. Table 9 lists the main challenges 
based on expert interviews, the theory and literature study, and the case study. 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
5. Analysis and results 
 
71 
 
 
 
Table 9: Challenges of digitising building operations based on expert interviews and theory 
Challenges of digitising building operations 
• 
BIM/CAD cannot contain all necessary information for operation and maintenance, including 
maintenance manuals, and not all information can be procured digitally, such as the condi-
tions of the building (fm3.dk, 2019) 
• 
FM software and systems do not integrate with BIM information deliverables (McGraw Hill 
Construction, 2014) 
• 
A lot of information from construction projects are of limited relevance to the building opera-
tions. (fm3.dk, 2019) Most information generated in the construction phase is to ensure build-
ability and not operability. (Ebbesen, 2020) 
• 
The embedment of the strategies of digitisation of building into an organisation. It is a chal-
lenge to create an administrative set up and describe responsibility, purpose and benefits, 
including argumentations (Ebbesen, 2020) 
According to Michael Ørsted, a prerequisite for the advantages of digitisation of building operations 
is a valid and updated FM-system. If one is not in control of the data governance in the digitisation 
process, the FM-systems will stall, and then information cannot be extracted from it and becomes 
useless. (Ørsted, 2020) Khoa Ngo also states that when digitising the building operations, it is im-
portant to establish roles and ownership of the digital information in the organisation. If any changes 
are made in the building operations, it is important that the changes are incorporated into the existing 
documentation. In a situation like that, it is important to establish who is doing what, when the docu-
mentation must be updated. Khoa Ngo emphasises the difficulty of communicating if any changes 
are made in the building operations. Thus, if the changed technical system is revisited within a few 
years, and the documentation is not updated, it is a challenging task for the operating organisation. 
(Ngo, 2020)  
The expert interviews indicated a wide disagreement in terms of the benefits or challenges of main-
taining information digitally. Several of the interviewees point out that it is difficult to maintain digital 
information. It is important that changes are incorporated into the existing documentation if any 
changes are made in the building operations. According to Kenneth Passarge, the biggest criticality 
in relation to building operations is the maintenance of information. If information is not maintained, 
it becomes unreliable, and then it becomes questionable. Thus, if the operating organisation is 
changing a technical system or component, they are responsible for the communication of it in order 
to keep the operation and maintenance documentation updated. (Passarge, 2020) In addition, Stig 
Brinck states that it is important to establish the process of updating the digital information to prevent 
it from being invalid. If only 80% of the information is correct, it is impossible to know what part is 
correct and what part is incorrect, and then it becomes useless. (Brinck, 2020)  
==PAGE:82==
5. Analysis and results 
 
72 
 
 
 
However, on the contrary, Nis Boile Christensen argues that it is easy to maintain information digi-
tally. According to him, it is easier to maintain information digitally than on a piece of paper or an 
Excel sheet, because it is easier to manage more information simultaneously. However, there is a 
challenge in creating digital platforms that can manage a large amount of information, and then it will 
be difficult to maintain the information. It is a very cost- and resource-intensive process to maintain 
information. (Christensen, 2020) Hence, the building owner must be careful asking for information 
they do not need if it is not value-adding to the building operations. 
The presented report “Skab bedre drift, bæredygtigt vedligehold og optimale tilstandsvurderinger” in 
the theory and literature study introduced eight obstacles to overcome to obtain more digital building 
operations. One of the challenges introduced is the fact that the building owner is not always the 
building operator as well, that is when the one responsible for the construction of the building is not 
responsible for the operation of the building. (fm3.dk, 2019) Thus, the involvement of the operating 
organisation is a difficult process in cases where the building owner and operator are placed in sep-
arate organisations or functions of an organisation. Another challenge introduced is the lack of digital 
behaviour and competences. Khoa Ngo shares this point of view and states that a challenge is the 
implementation of new work processes and the communication of digitisation. It places new de-
mands on the employees in the operating organisation to access information digitally instead of a 
physical folder. Besides, it requires new competencies to work with digitisation. Khoa Ngo empha-
sises the importance of getting people to follow the digital development, which requires a strategic 
communicative effort to do so. It must be communicated in a way, so people understand it without 
talking too much about technology. Technology is a prerequisite for digital platforms to work. How-
ever, when all comes to all, it is the people who need to benefit from the use of digital platforms and 
the availability of information. (Ngo, 2020) 
Also, according to the theory and literature study, the most significant expenses are present in the 
operational phase. Thus, significant cost-savings are the potential benefits of better utilisation of 
information generated in the construction phase. However, Michael Ørsted points out the lack of 
standardisation of information across the industry as a barrier for the digitisation of building opera-
tions. The industry must agree on how technical systems or components are defined and named, 
and what information must be attached. Otherwise, it is difficult for contractors and sub-contractors 
to deliver information. As mentioned earlier, the building owners should cooperate crosswise to 
agree on the establishment of building owner requirements to create uniformity, and this uniformity 
should also be reflected in the definition and naming of technical systems and components. Like 
that, it would be much easier for the manufacturers to link the documentation directly to the FM-
systems used by the operating organisation. (Ørsted, 2020) Today the processes of information 
==PAGE:83==
5. Analysis and results 
 
73 
 
 
 
management are not uniform across the industry which create challenges for the digitisation of build-
ing operations.  
5.3 BIM and information management  
The BIM potentials were presented in the theory and literature study. BIM-models are three-dimen-
sional representations of buildings that enable the possibility to identify and resolve spatial clashes 
in the models instead of on-site, resulting in increased efficiency and reduction of errors. According 
to Kenneth Passarge, the potential advantage of applying BIM on construction projects is the under-
standing of the project as a whole, that is the visualisation of the project. In this way, it is easier to 
decode a drawing, which is particularly essential for the CPH’s different stakeholders, such as the 
cleaning staff or the store managers. These people do not necessarily understand technical draw-
ings or floor plans like people in the construction industry. (Passarge, 2020) Stig Brinck emphasises 
that BIM enables interdisciplinary coordination across the parties in construction projects. It is a huge 
advantage that the project parties can see the project in connection with other disciplines, for in-
stance, when sharing the information models within the project team. BIM improves communication 
and interoperability, which results in fewer misunderstandings because there is a common under-
standing of the project scope, including any possible issue to be addressed. (Brinck, 2020) By visu-
alising the building in 3D, people get a much better and quicker understanding of things, which ulti-
mately saves time, also in the construction phase. In the construction phase, BIM can enable the 
possibility to solve issues early to create some more well thought out project solutions. However, 
Kenneth Passarge also indicates that it is a time-consuming process, and it requires that the project 
parties allocate more time and resources. (Passarge, 2020)  
Poul Ebbesen disagrees on this matter and states that 3D-models are given too much importance. 
According to him and what he experiences, most people prefer to look at a drawing and then picture 
the spacious building in their minds. However, Poul Ebbensen also acknowledges the advantages 
of the possibility to see the building visually in 3D, which enables a better consistency and collision 
control and management of quantities. (Ebbesen, 2020) 
According to Michael Ørsted, a barrier for the implementation of BIM is that the potentials of using 
BIM and the value of it are not clear to the parties involved in a construction project. There is a wide 
misconception that BIM can only be used to make fancy visualisations. This barrier can be mitigated 
or overcome by addressing BIM in a much wider format. BIM is more than a geometrical represen-
tation of the building; BIM is also digitisation of the building, including the modelling of information 
about the building. (Ørsted, 2020) The theory and literature indicated that BIM opens a wide range 
of possibilities for better ways of generating, exchanging, storing, and reusing information by 
==PAGE:84==
5. Analysis and results 
 
74 
 
 
 
providing an intelligent, digital structure for project information. BIM is a process for managing and 
storing of information in digital 3D-models that enables better information exchange across and be-
tween different project stakeholders, as illustrated in Figure 12. According to (Gelder et al., 2013), 
the key elements of using BIM are the consistent naming of documents and information, a method 
for storing, managing and exchanging information about the building, including its construction, per-
formance, operation, and maintenance. Thus, there is a lot of potentials in the use of BIM, but in a 
different way than before. However, it requires a modification of the approach and redefinition of the 
term. (Ørsted, 2020)  
Several of the interviewees also pointed out that one of the greatest potentials of using BIM is the 
collection of information in one place. According to Stig Brinck, a lot of time is wasted on information 
searching. By collecting information in the BIM-models, there is much greater certainty in that the 
information is updated and valid. (Brinck, 2020) The aspect of BIM in regard to information manage-
ment enables the accessibility of information, as information is available at the right time and right 
place, which was also presented in section 4.2. The information in the BIM-models can get some 
property data attached to it, which make it possible to retrieve the information that is available, such 
as the choice of material, component type, etc. (Passarge, 2020) According to Khoa Ngo, BIM ena-
bles a more parametric way of working if the BIM-models are structured, which provides benefits for 
the project parties in the optimisation of work processes. Furthermore, by collecting information in 
one place, in the BIM-models, the information is integrated and can be linked to and interact with 
other work processes. (Ngo, 2020) 
As mentioned earlier, the building owner must make requirements on the information delivery, in-
cluding how the information is named, structured and linked to the BIM-models. If the BIM-model is 
consistent, it is possible to extract information about the building in an automated way. (Ngo, 2020) 
Kenneth Passarge explains how CPH uses the property data in the BIM-models for automated qual-
ity assurance of building regulation requirements and their asset information requirements. For ex-
ample, the required space in front of the technical systems to be able to access and operator it or 
required escape route conditions. When CPH review the project, they use a defined ruleset in a 
programme that automatically reviews the BIM-models on the basis of the information in the models 
with the property data attached to it. (Passarge, 2020) Nis Boile Christensen also emphasises the 
use of BIM in the quality assurance of information deliverables. A wide variety of BIM tools enables 
the possibility to make rule-based collision controls and quality assurance. The building owner spec-
ifies the needs concerning the property data on the building objects in the model or information about 
means of access in the building. By creating a basic ruleset, the building owner can keep track of 
the quality of the information deliverables. (Christensen, 2020) 
==PAGE:85==
5. Analysis and results 
 
75 
 
 
 
5.3.1 The use of BIM-standards 
Another potential advantage of using BIM is, according to Stig Brinck, that working digitally with 
building information models creates a greater homogeneity in the way parties involved in a construc-
tion project are working, which is of great benefit to the projects. However, if everyone does it differ-
ently, you lose the value of working with BIM. (Brinck, 2020) Khoa Ngo furthermore indicates that a 
barrier for the use of BIM is the lack of standardisation across the industry. In section 5.2.1 it is 
mentioned that the processes of information management are not uniform across the industry which 
creates challenges for the digitisation of building operations. This also applies for the digitisation of 
other phases of a construction project. Thus, an effort to standardise the way we work with BIM and 
information management can potentially create a more homogeneous way of collaborating on con-
struction projects. When using standards, it is, according to Khoa Ngo, not necessary to “reinvent 
the wheel”. It is both resource-intensive to reinvent the good practice every time and to communicate 
it. If one has many different practices, there are many different ways of communicating and under-
standing it. However, if good practice is more standardised, it is easier to communicate it. Thus, 
standardisation makes it easier for the industry to coordinate and communicate in a BIM context. 
(Ngo, 2020)  
Nis Boile Christensen also points out the potential of using standards for the exchange of information, 
such as the IFC format which is an open and international standard. According to buildingSMART 
International, OpenBIM extends the benefits of BIM by improving accessibility, usability and man-
agement of digital information. (buildingSMART International, n.d.) Thus, the use of open standards 
provides greater potential for interoperability by making it possible to exchange and share infor-
mation in BIM-models between the project parties. 
Michael Ørsted emphasises the benefits that the building owner and operator can gain from the use 
of standards. Standardisation will give the building operator a greater insight into their portfolio of 
building information across FM-systems. Most building owners and operators have several buildings, 
and to be able to manage them crosswise no matter who delivers the information or what FM-system 
is chosen enables them to optimise. It is easier to make uniform service agreements that are updated 
continually. As mentioned earlier in section 5.2.1, it is important that information relevant for the 
building operations is as accurate as possible to be incorporated into the building operator’s FM-
system and to form the basis for an accurate service agreement for outsourced operational activities. 
For instance, if any changes are made in the building, the information must be updated in the FM-
system and the service agreements. According to Michael Ørsted, it may be perceived as simple, 
however, it is often something that is not followed up on. Thus, by creating a standardised and 
==PAGE:86==
5. Analysis and results 
 
76 
 
 
 
uniform way of registering crosswise, it is easier to receive operation and maintenance material, 
incorporate it into the FM-systems and make uniform service agreements on this basis. (Ørsted, 
2020)  
Additionally, according to the theory and literature study, a building owner and operator with a high 
level of digital maturity can implement integrated IT-systems such as IWMS-systems. In these sys-
tems information can be used across operational activities, resulting in a higher degree of interoper-
ability as the activities can be coordinated, planned and performed jointly. This can be further sup-
ported by the use of standards for the registration of building information, resulting in greater benefits 
for the building owner and operator.  
As described earlier in section 5.1.1, Michael Ørsted points out that the operating organisation must 
be involved continuously during the construction phase, so that the operating organisation takes 
ownership of the construction project. The operating organisation should be more directly involved 
to avoid that the construction project does not fulfil their needs and wishes. In continuation hereof, 
Michael Ørsted states that the ISO 19650 series describe the construction project as part of the 
operational phase. A natural part of the building operations is new construction, reconstruction or 
renovation. Hence, the ISO 19650 series support the process of involving the operating organisation 
and the data governance in relation to information modelling. The standards can help overcome the 
previously mentioned barrier for the implementation of BIM by describing BIM in a wider format, 
including the use of BIM for information management. The standards furthermore describe the roles 
and responsibility in the information management process; who is responsible for what, who needs 
to inform who etc. When these roles and ownership of information are clearly defined, there is a 
standardised process of who is doing what, when and how. When this process is standardised, the 
operating organisation’s process of managing its portfolio of building information in their FM-system 
can be standardised. Like that, it is much easier to digitise the building operations. (Ørsted, 2020) 
According to the theory and literature study, the ISO 19650 series of standards is an international 
BIM-standard of good practice which defines information management principles and requirements. 
According to (UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB, 2019), information management using BIM can en-
able improvement in performance efficiencies by catalysing increasingly innovative ways of collabo-
rating across the built environment. Stig Brinck agrees and states that the ISO 19650 series creates 
a common understanding of how we collaborate. When a common understanding is created, it is 
easy to collaborate in new project teams. It is often preferable to work in the same project teams in 
a strategic partnership time after time, as you agree on many conditions beforehand. Though, the 
standards induce some kind of freedom in who we collaborate with, which is a huge advantage as 
project teams are established faster. It furthermore induces a more standard way of establishing 
==PAGE:87==
5. Analysis and results 
 
77 
 
 
 
building owner requirements. Like that, the project team does not need to adjust their information 
delivery every time they work with another building owner on a new project. (Brinck, 2020) Claus 
Lindhé also indicates that by using common standards like the ISO19650 series to uniformise the 
information management processes, it is ensured that things are done in the same way every time, 
and the project roles and responsibilities are communicated.  
Claus Lindhé furthermore emphasises that if the information management processes are controlled 
like they are controlled with the use of an ICT agreement, more disputes can be avoided. (Lindhé, 
2020) According to the theory and literature study, the ICT agreement creates an optimal basis for 
digital collaboration on a construction project for the benefit of all parties. Nis Boile Christensen like-
wise accentuates that BIM-standards are important because they strengthen the use of BIM in the 
industry and frames digital collaboration. He mentions the ICT statutory instruments as a standard 
for the establishment of building owner requirements that opens up a positive dialogue and forces 
some people to take a stand regarding digital collaboration. The standards are based on a lot of 
knowledge used to define some kind of tool that the project parties can take stock of to understand 
how to use it in a specific situation. For the consultants, the standards support them in the dialogue 
with the building owners. By referring to the standards, it is easier to justify their choices and actions 
in a construction project. The standards furthermore support the building owners in understanding 
BIM processes much better because some well-defined methods of using BIM are established. 
(Christensen, 2020) 
As part of the data collection, the interviewees were asked about the importance of ICT management 
in digital collaboration. According to the interviewees and the case study, it requires a lot of coordi-
nation when working with BIM as a lot of different project parties are involved in a project. It is the 
ICT manager’s responsibility to coordinate between the different BIM coordinators or the person 
responsible for the discipline models. Furthermore, the ICT manager is responsible for the ICT 
agreement being followed through, the project being well-coordinated, and all project parties being 
acquainted with the project requirements. (Lindhé, 2020) The role of the ICT manager is, according 
to Khoa Ngo, essential in a construction project in the communication of how to enhance an envi-
ronment in which people can cooperate around a BIM-model. (Ngo, 2020) Michael Ørsted also un-
derlines that ICT is the link between the construction project and the building operations. It is the ICT 
manager’s role to ensure that each project party understands its role and how they come into play 
in digital collaboration. According to Michael Ørsted, ICT management is one of the most important 
factors in a construction project in ensuring that the information deliverables are balanced continu-
ously. (Ørsted, 2020) If the ICT manager does not facilitate the digital processes of the information 
delivery throughout the project, it becomes confusing for the project team. Besides, if there is 
==PAGE:88==
5. Analysis and results 
 
78 
 
 
 
uncertainty about what and how to deliver, a lot of time is wasted on understanding it, which may 
overshadow the fact that the information is delivered at all. (Brinck, 2020) However, Poul Ebbesen 
also emphasises the suspicious ring to the word “management”. According to him, the ICT managers 
do not have management competences or the powers necessary to ensure that the requirements in 
the ICT agreement are fulfilled, and the challenge is that the ICT agreements are often not being 
followed. 
5.4 Summary of the analysis and results 
The results in section 5.1 indicated how the building owner requirements are established in the early 
phases on the basis of a need for information to be available in a specific structure and format to 
ensure that the information delivery can be actively used in the building operations. Hence, an an-
swer to sub-question IV has been provided. The results indicated that the requirements should be 
established based on experiences from previous projects or by cooperating crosswise in the industry 
to agree on a uniform way of establishing building owner requirements. The information need de-
pends on how the building is operated, and each building operator operates differently. However, 
some basic information is fundamental for most building operators in day-to-day operations. The 
importance of the accuracy of the information was furthermore emphasised to be able to incorporate 
it into the building operator’s FM-system. Thus, it is essential that the FM-systems are established 
early to be able to establish requirements for the structure and format of the operation and mainte-
nance information. The only way to ensure that the information fits into the FM-systems is to involve 
the operating organisation and incorporate their knowledge and experience into the building owner 
requirements. In addition, better quality assurance of the information delivery is ensured by making 
requirements for the implementation of a commissioning process with the involvement of the oper-
ating organisation. However, some challenges in establishing building owner requirements should 
be overcome to ensure that the information generated in the construction phase can be utilised in 
the building operations.  
The results in section 5.2 presented the advantages and challenges of digitising the building opera-
tions, by which sub-question V is answered. There is a need for better collection and utilisation of 
information generated in the construction and operation of buildings to ensure a more effective build-
ing operations. The information generated in the construction phase is delivered digitally to the op-
erating organisation at the handover of the project, but a lack of digital readiness in the operating 
organisations constitutes a barrier to the effective digitisation of building operations. The results in-
dicated various advantages of digitising building operations based on the expert interviews, the the-
ory and literature study, and the case study (Table 8). Nevertheless, several challenges remain to 
==PAGE:89==
5. Analysis and results 
 
79 
 
 
 
overcome in order for the building owner or operator to benefit from the digitisation of building oper-
ations (Table 9).  
The results in section 5.3 indicated that there is a wide misconception of the use of BIM. BIM is often 
mentioned in connection with 3D representations and visualisations of a building. However, BIM can 
also be used in the information management process, as BIM is a process of generating, exchang-
ing, storing and reusing information by providing a defined structure of information. Thus, the results 
provided an answer to sub-question VI. One of the greatest potentials of using BIM is the collection 
of information for better utilisation. Therefore, the building owner must make requirements of the 
information delivery, including how information is named, structured and linked to the BIM-models.  
The results in section 5.3 furthermore indicated that the ISO 19650 series induces a more standard 
way of establishing building owner requirements, by which sub-question VII is answered. The ISO 
19650 moreover creates a common understanding of how we collaborate, which makes it easier to 
collaborate in new project teams. In addition, by creating a standard way of establishing building 
owner requirements, the project teams’ information delivery is uniform and do not need to be ad-
justed according to specific requirements made by different building owners on different projects. 
The results also indicated that the ISO 19650 series describe the construction project as part of the 
operational phase. Thus, it supports the process of involving the operating organisation to ensure 
that the information delivery fits into the FM-systems. Finally, the results emphasised the benefits 
that the building owner and operator can gain from the use of BIM and information management 
standards. ICT management can be used to control the information management process by facili-
tating the digital processes of information delivery throughout the project. Hence, an answer to sub-
question VIII has been provided. The ICT statutory instruments constitute a standard for the estab-
lishment of building owner requirements in regard to digital collaboration. There was a broad con-
sensus among the expert interviews that ICT management is key in digital collaboration.  
 
 
==PAGE:90==
6. Discussion 
 
80 
 
 
 
6. Discussion 
This chapter consists of a discussion of the results and limitations of the research, including a general 
evaluation of the collected data. The chapter aims to discuss the relation between the problem state-
ment and the results from the literature study, the case study and expert interviews. The discussion 
will be based on the previously presented content of the thesis. Hence, a comparison of the case 
study CPH BFW and the international practice of information management will be discussed. The 
chapter furthermore aims to discuss the use of BIM in building operations and the barriers of involv-
ing the operating organisation. Lastly, the potential benefits for the building owner and operator of 
using BIM and information management standards are presented, including some recommendations 
for the information management process. 
6.1 Results and limitations of research 
6.1.1 Evaluation of the collected data and processing  
The methodology used to investigate and answer the problem statement and relevant sub-questions 
in the thesis were based on a combination of a literature study, case study and expert interviews. 
The process of collecting data has been an iterative process, where qualitative data is collected and 
processed to answer or further specify the research questions before any conclusions were made. 
The literature study conducted was able to provide an insight into already existing knowledge related 
to the chosen topic. An overview of the Danish and international practice of information management 
with the use of BIM, including an introduction to BIM in FM was provided. Thus, the literature study 
set the framework for further research and data collection to be included in the case study, analysis 
and results, and discussion. The case study research performed made it possible to examine the 
case CPH BFW and the building owner’s mature approach in regard to the Danish practice of infor-
mation management. It provided a lot of interesting results concerning the establishment of the build-
ing owner’s information requirements and the project team’s information delivery. The case study 
was applied as a background for the results analysis and discussion, which examined the opportu-
nities and barriers in relation to the establishment of building owner requirements, digitisation of 
building operations, and the use of BIM and information management.  
The results presented in chapter 4 and 5; the case study, and the analysis and results respectively, 
are primarily based on the collection of qualitative interview data, including case study and expert 
interviews (Figure 4). As mentioned earlier, the interviews aimed to provide an insight into the inter-
viewees’ opinions about the chosen topic and to generate relevant and sufficient knowledge regard-
ing the establishment of building owner requirements, digital collaboration and information 
==PAGE:91==
6. Discussion 
 
81 
 
 
 
management. An effort to conduct interviews that could provide a broader perspective of the topic 
by involving people with different points of view and functions within a construction project has been 
made. Thus, the expert interviews were shared among two persons within a building owner organi-
sation, two persons from a consulting company, and lastly one person as an advisor for the building 
owner. These persons were furthermore chosen on the basis of their many years of experience with 
relevance to the study.  
In regard to the case study interviews, it was desirable to get a more even representation of people 
from both organisations, CPH and MTH. However, there was an overrepresentation of people from 
MTH. Therefore, the case study has potentially been mainly evaluated from the contractor’s per-
spective, which constitutes a risk of a minor uncertainty in the results. It has moreover been desirable 
to interview an asset manager in CPH, as they are part of the establishment of building owner re-
quirements in connection with construction projects in the airport. However, the circumstances in the 
airport, followed by the COVID-19 outbreak eliminated the chance of conducting an interview within 
the organisation. Furthermore, it has been desirable to interview a manufacturer of the technical 
systems on CPH BFW, as they could provide further knowledge about the information delivery and 
the complexity of CPH’s metadata list. Nonetheless, it must be emphasised that all the interviewees 
have a broad knowledge concerning the ICT management and information requirements on CPH 
BFW, which ultimately led to some interesting results to be analysed and discussed on the thesis.  
Another uncertainty in the results, is the fact that qualitative interviews will be affected by subjective 
opinions based on prior experience, which will always influence the results. This, however, is miti-
gated with the attempt to involve people with different points of view to be compared in the analysis 
and results. Besides, an emphasis should be placed on the difficulty of asking correct and sufficient 
questions in the interviews to be able to answer the presented problem statement. Even though, the 
interviews were conducted as semi-structured with a list of predefined questions or topics to be cov-
ered, the questions changed according to the interviewees’ responses. However, it is hard to say 
whether it has affected the results and whether the results would have been any different if the 
questions were asked differently. Over time, the interview technique and the questions were im-
proved during the period of data collection simultaneously as you learn from the experience of con-
ducting interviews. Thus, it was possible to ask more in-depth questions during the interviews. Fur-
thermore, the data processing is an uncertainty, as the interviews were conducted and transcribed 
in Danish and thereafter translated to English. The transcriptions aimed to capture the interviewees’ 
statements as accurate as possible to avoid any misunderstandings, however, some interpretations 
of the meaning of the statements were necessary, as the tone of voice and the body language could 
not be included.  
==PAGE:92==
6. Discussion 
 
82 
 
 
 
Since the project is an ongoing project, the conditions of the project documents changed during the 
period of data collection, which constituted a risk of including invalid data. Furthermore, the project 
is not finalised, and therefore the results do not represent any final results in regard to the digital 
handover and the project team’s compliance with the information requirements. In addition, it is not 
possible to analyse the real benefits in relation to the information management process. However, 
the results are still interesting as they indicate some potential benefits, as digital collaboration during 
the construction phase has proven to be strengthened by the use of ICT management. Still, some 
areas of concerns have also been presented. The chosen methodology, data collection and pro-
cessing, and the delimitation of the research have formed the results. The study was delimited to 
only involve digital construction in the Danish construction industry. However, it could have been 
interesting to include an international case study for comparison with the Danish practice. Also, it 
has been necessary to delimit the research in order to ensure adequate time for data collection, 
processing and analysis within the thesis’ limited time frame.  
6.1.2 Comparison of CPH BFW and ISO 19650 series of standards 
Several interesting results were presented in regard to the case study concerning the practice of 
information management in a Danish context on the construction project CPH BFW. The results of 
the case study indicate that the process of information management on the project CPH BFW is very 
much in agreement with the process described in part 2 of the ISO 19650 series of standards. 
In the theory and literature study, the roles and responsibilities in regard to the information manage-
ment process were described. It is described how the building owner must establish the project’s 
information requirements, information delivery milestones and information standards. According to 
Nicolai Jensen (MTH D&E), CPH has described the project information requirements much more 
comprehensively, than he has ever experienced on other construction projects. Usually, in a con-
struction project, the building owner tries to formulate their requirements exactly as described in the 
ICT standard specifications. (Jensen, 2020) However, as mentioned in the analysis and results, the 
building owner should agree on some fundamental requirements to be incorporated into a construc-
tion project, and then make it project- or organisation-specific by considering the criticalities within 
specific cases. Thus, an industry-wide approach is taking as a starting point by using the ICT stand-
ard specification to establish information requirements, which is then further defined based on expe-
riences with previous construction projects. (Ørsted, 2020) Even though CPH is relatively new to the 
placement of digital information requirements (Lindhé, 2020), CPH is gathering experience from their 
previous construction projects to ensure a detailed description of the information requirements, in-
cluding how the information should be named, structured and delivered and when to deliver. 
(Passarge, 2020)  
==PAGE:93==
6. Discussion 
 
83 
 
 
 
Furthermore, CPH and MTH have strengthened the Danish ICT-paradigms with the use of an ICT 
schedule (master information delivery plan) regarding the agreed information deliverables with meet-
ings and exchange of digital information. According to (UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB, 2020), the 
contractor is responsible for the preparation of the master information delivery plan by the collation 
of the task information delivery plans. MTH’s ICT manager has compiled the project team’s ICT 
activities in a schedule to ensure compliance with CPH’s information delivery milestones.  The ICT 
manager has furthermore established a BIM execution plan in agreement with the parties involved 
in the construction project, as a supplement to CPH’s information requirements. In addition, the ICT 
manager has quality assured and authorised the information exchange and delivery to ensure com-
pliance with the information requirements and the BIM execution. CPH has moreover framed the 
information management and digital collaboration by establishing a common data environment 
(CDE) to secure the desired information delivery on the construction project. This is, according to 
(UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB, 2020) done to support the project and the collaborative production 
of information.  
The results of the case study moreover indicate that ICT has strengthened the digital collaboration 
and compliance of information requirements. However, it is essential to emphasise a point of criticism 
of the Danish standard ICT-specifications. In the Danish ICT-paradigms, the information delivery on 
a construction project is divided into several parts, such as classification, digital communication, 
digital models and in the end, digital handover. It is then up to the individual building owner to deter-
mine which parts are relevant to be included in the ICT-agreement in relation to the construction 
project. The digital handover is described as a separate process of handing over collected project 
information at the end of the construction project. However, this thesis has established that digital 
handover is closely related to the remaining parts of the ICT-paradigms throughout the entire project 
process. The results indicate that the use of digital communication platforms supports the exchange 
and sharing of information, the digital BIM-models support the generating, storing and reuse of in-
formation by providing a structure for project information with the use of classification. Hence, it is 
important that the building owner makes requirements on the information delivery, including the 
structure and format, to ensure that project information can be handed over progressively during the 
construction project and incorporated into the FM-systems used by the operating organisation. 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
6. Discussion 
 
84 
 
 
 
6.1.3 The use of BIM in building operations  
The results show that there are several advantages and challenges of digitising building operations. 
As mentioned earlier, the construction projects would be able to reap great benefits by better utilisa-
tion of IT and integrated digital work processes. Since the biggest part of a building’s expenses is 
present in the building operations (Figure 9), the digitisation and ICT potentially create great value 
for the building owner and operator, especially in building operations.  
As mentioned in theory and literature study, BIM enables the possibility for a better generation, ex-
change, storage, and reuse of information across and between different project stakeholders, includ-
ing the FM-organisation (Figure 8). At project handover, the as-built BIM-models are handed over to 
the building owner or operator to be used in the building operations. Then, if the BIM-models are 
consistent, information about the location and condition of the technical systems and related docu-
mentation, including operating activities, can be extracted by the FM-organisation for real-time use, 
which is of great value for the FM-organisation. However, as mentioned earlier, it can be a challenge 
to keep the BIM-models updated constantly in order to be current and accurate at all time. A lot of 
different technologies are developed that can ensure optimised processes for operation and mainte-
nance by ensuring accessibility of information and keeping the BIM-models and drawings updated 
automatically during the building operations.  
Theoretically, with a BIM-based FM-system, information from a project’s as-built BIM-models can be 
linked to O&M plans to ensure a more effective building operations. Also, an effective FM is a pre-
requisite for buildings to maintain their value and expected lifetime. In addition, the link between the 
BIM-models and FM-systems works both ways, as the building operators can export and share their 
BIM-models with project teams in connection with new construction, reconstruction or renovation, 
which is a natural part of the building operations. Nevertheless, it should be kept in mind that there 
is a difference in theory and practice. Actually, it might take some time before the building owners 
and operators embrace the BIM-technologies and redeem the financial benefits of the use of BIM in 
building operations. However, is it just a matter of time before digital construction becomes an inte-
grated part of the operation and maintenance? Kenneth Passarge mentions that CPH does not use 
BIM in building operations. In CPH, there is a great focus on using BIM in connection to construction 
projects, and they have not yet invested in the operating part of it. It is, however, part of their plan to 
reach a point where the operating organisation is able to access the information via the BIM-models. 
CPH is already using a FM-system that supports the use of BIM. MDOC FM is a CAFM-system that 
supports all kind of file formats and registration of building objects in any kind of structures. Thus, 
the foundation for the use of BIM in building operations is present. 
==PAGE:95==
6. Discussion 
 
85 
 
 
 
Michael Ørsted furthermore mentions that CPH is currently working on how they can make a stand-
ard for incorporating the project BIM-models and transform them into FM BIM-models. He also em-
phasises that the BIM-models that are handed over as-built to the building operations is the entire 
detailed project. Thus, the operating organisation ends up with an enormous BIM-model in which 
half of the information cannot be used. Then, the information is not used, not even the part that 
actually is usable, because the FM-systems cannot handle the models. (Ørsted, 2020) But, then how 
is BIM used in practice in FM? This seems to be a difficult question to answer. However, the inter-
viewees emphasise the potentials of using BIM in the building operations.  
One can imagine receiving an FM BIM-model in which it is possible to select a building object to 
retrieve information about the type, name, date of mandatory maintenance or replacement. However, 
the operating organisations are not ready for it. It is difficult to find an FM-system that can handle the 
models and keep them updated and valid. Furthermore, the building owners and operators are miss-
ing an incentive to apply BIM in building operations, as it takes time to implement, and it is expensive. 
Michael Ørsted can easily imagine a digital handover of a project without any drawings, but all infor-
mation is fed directly into the FM-systems. But then it is important to understand the needs and 
requirements in order to utilise the digital tools to model the information correctly and deliver the 
information accurately. (Ørsted, 2020) Thus, it is essential that the building owner and operator pro-
actively engage in the digital process by knowing their needs and goals of using BIM in building 
operations.  
The results indicate that a barrier for the implementation of BIM is that the potentials of using BIM 
and the value of it are not clear to the parties involved in a construction project. The maturity and 
knowledge about BIM and ICT are generally too low in the industry. As mentioned earlier, there is a 
broad misconception about what BIM is. Thus, it is necessary to communicate and address the use 
of BIM and ICT in a different way. According to Michael Ørsted, BIM is crucial in how to establish 
information requirements and how we collaborate digitally. ICT is the key to better digitisation, as it 
ensures that the intention of digital collaboration is accomplished. The ICT statutory instruments 
bring the building operations into focus, as they define the requirement that public building owner is 
placing in regard to digital handover. The building owner transforms the requirements in the ICT 
statutory instruments into value-added building owner requirements, which is done in the agree-
ments with the project team. In this way, the project team deliver the information necessary for a 
BIM-based operation and maintenance. However, it is essential to reinvent to terms and emphasise 
the importance of ICT on smaller projects as well to overcome the challenges for the building owner 
to create the desired value of BIM and ICT.  
==PAGE:96==
6. Discussion 
 
86 
 
 
 
Furthermore, what is necessary to be done in order to promote the development and increase the 
digitisation of building operations? The information generated in the construction phase is delivered 
to the operating organisation at the digital handover of the project. However, a lack of digital readi-
ness in the operating organisations constitutes a challenge to the effective digitisation of building 
operations. Thus, it is necessary to articulate the industry-wise challenges. The Ministry of Transport 
and Housing in Denmark has published a strategy for digital construction that provides a proposal 
for how to approach the challenges that the industry faces in regard to digitisation. As a result of this, 
some motions in the industry have arisen, and some activities concerning digitisation have been 
initiated in task forces. The top management within Danish construction and Danish building owners 
must discuss and try to elaborate on the strategy for digital construction and make it operational. 
Khoa Ngo emphasises that the building owners must be more proactive by responding to the strat-
egy. However, it is also necessary to get followership by the people in the operating organisations, 
which requires a strategic communicative effort. (Ngo, 2020) The challenge is that digitisation re-
quires new competencies and new work procedures. Thus, it is important to get the people to un-
derstand the value of digitisation to avoid any resistance to change.  
6.1.4 Barriers of involving the operating organisation  
The results show that the operating organisation must be involved continuously during a construction 
project in a dialogue with the project team. However, there seems to be a gap between construction 
projects and building operations and an insufficient dialogue between the project teams and the FM-
organisations. As mentioned earlier, a natural part of building operations is new construction, recon-
struction or renovation, and thus it is essential to consider the buildings in a more circular life cycle 
perspective (Figure 10). FM is often seen as a function that primarily concerns the finished buildings. 
However, FM should be involved actively in the construction projects to ensure more user-and op-
eration-friendly buildings and a more effective handover to the building operations.  
Nevertheless, there is a challenge of involving the operating organisation in cases where the building 
owner and the building operator are placed in separate functions or organisations. According to Poul 
Ebbesen, there is a systematic perception of FM that the building owner is always part of the FM-
organisation. However, for the building owner, it is of little or no relevance what information is avail-
able for the operation and maintenance. It is the building operator that is relevant in that connection, 
for which reason the operating organisation should be involved in the construction projects. Besides, 
Poul Ebbesen emphasises that the built environment is organised in a way where one part, the 
building owner and project team, is constructing and another part, the building operator, is using and 
operating. Thus, the operating organisation is usually disconnected from the construction project. 
Furthermore, the building owner has little or no interest in ensuring that the buildings are user- and 
==PAGE:97==
6. Discussion 
 
87 
 
 
 
operation friendly. (Ebbesen, 2020) So how is the building operations included in the construction 
projects? The results show that in cases where the building owner and operator are internal func-
tions, FM should be involved in the planning and construction of a building. Besides, they are re-
sponsible for communicating their needs in regard to information delivery. Thus, the operating or-
ganisation has an influence on the establishment of building owner requirements.  
For a more operations-oriented construction project, the building owner and operator should describe 
and incorporate the operational requirements in the early phases and ensure that attention is brought 
to the operation-friendliness throughout the construction process. For quality assurance of the oper-
ation-friendliness, the commissioning process is implemented as part of the construction project. In 
the commissioning process, the project team make sure to involve the operating organisation as 
early as possible in regard to the putting into operation and training of the operating staff. Like that, 
operation and maintenance material can be handed over in a reasonable time and correct format. 
The case study also emphasises the importance of commissioning process. The process of gener-
ating information to the building operations is initiated early in the construction project with the in-
volvement of the operating organisation to ensure a planned, effective, and coordinated handover to 
the operation and maintenance. However, to ensure a great digital handover, specific information 
requirements must be established in the early phases to ensure that the information delivery fit into 
the FM-systems used in the building operations.  
 
 
==PAGE:98==
6. Discussion 
 
88 
 
 
 
6.2 Potential benefits of using BIM and information management  
standards 
The results present some of the potential benefits for the building owner and operator as a result of 
using BIM and information management standards. Furthermore, the challenges of establishing 
building owner requirement with the involvement of the operating organisation have been presented 
and discussed. In this section, the challenges will be discussed with the purpose of determining how 
BIM and information management standards can be used to overcome these challenges for the 
benefit of the building owner and operator.  
As a result of “Det Digitale Byggeri” initiated by the Danish government, a number of building owner 
requirements were formulated in the ICT statutory instruments to support the public building owners 
in establishing digital information requirements. Requirement no. 8 (Table 3) concerns the digital 
handover of operation and maintenance information. It states that the building owner must assess 
what information is relevant on a construction project in relation to digital handover of operation and 
maintenance information. The results indicate that the interviewees were unclear in describing what 
information is relevant for the building operations, as it is different from building operator to building 
operator. Thus, the information need depends on how the operating organisation are planning to 
operate and maintain the building. In addition, there are no standards that define what information is 
relevant for building operations.  
A challenge in establishing building owner requirements is that the operation and maintenance in-
formation from the construction project is not used in the building operations. (Ebbesen, 2020) During 
the planning and construction of a building, the project team generate a large amount of information 
with the primary purpose of ensuring buildability. As mentioned earlier, only a limited amount of 
information relevant in the construction phase is relevant for the building operations. Like that, the 
operating organisation might end up being buried in too much information, which may result in infor-
mation not being used at all. Michael Ørsted furthermore points out that there is a lack of standardi-
sation of information across the industry, which constitutes a barrier for the digitisation of building 
operations. (Ørsted, 2020) It is essential that the industry agrees on the definition and naming of 
building components and technical systems, and the amount and structure of the information at-
tached. Hence, a standard for a more uniform way of operating buildings is necessary. If information 
relevant for the building operations is as accurate as possible, it is easier to receive operation and 
maintenance information and incorporate it into the FM-systems.  
Requirement no. 9 and 10 described in DDB (Table 3) also concern the digital handover of operation 
and maintenance. They state that the building owner must choose the extent and approach of digital 
==PAGE:99==
6. Discussion 
 
89 
 
 
 
handover. Another challenge in establishing building owner requirements to ensure that the infor-
mation delivery can be used in FM is to define the structure of the information. As mentioned earlier, 
the building owner should establish the requirements based on their experiences and knowledge 
from the operation of existing buildings. Like that, the existing structure of the information should be 
incorporated into the new construction project to ensure compliance with the building portfolio. 
(Ebbesen, 2020) Thus, a standard for the involvement of the operating organisation is necessary.  
As mentioned in section 6.1.4, there seems to be a gap between the construction projects and the 
building operations. Despite a number of tools and descriptions available in the industry, the digital 
handover of operation and maintenance information is still often insufficient or inaccessible. The 
digital information generated in the construction phase should be stored and exchanged in a defined 
structure in an FM-system for the purpose of reusing and updating the information in the building 
operations. If the information is kept valid and the BIM-models are updated with any changes during 
the building operations, the information can be reused in new construction projects. Thus, knowledge 
and experience from the existing building operations are used as parameters in the new construction 
project to show consideration for the operation and maintenance early in the process. A standard for 
this process of information gathering is necessary to overcome the barrier of insufficient dialogue 
between the project teams and the FM-organisations. Michael Ørsted states that the ISO 19650 
series describes the construction project as part of the building operations, which can support the 
process of involving the operating organisation and the data governance in relation to information 
modelling. If this process is standardised, the operating organisation’s process of managing its port-
folio of building information in their FM-system can be standardised. Like that, it is much easier to 
digitise the building operations. This could furthermore give the Danish construction industry an in-
centive to apply BIM in the entire building life cycle, which will support the digital transition of the 
industry.  
6.2.1 Recommendations for information management processes  
The thesis has been studying the practice of information management from the early establishment 
of building owner requirements to the digital handover of operation and maintenance information on 
construction projects. On the basis of own evaluation and interpretation of the results, some recom-
mendations for the information management process have been developed. The case study has 
shown that the CPH is a mature building owner that has described their information requirements 
very comprehensively. However, some challenges in relation to the project team’s information deliv-
ery have occurred. Furthermore, the case study has underlined the importance of involving the op-
erating organisation in the quality assurance of project information by the implementation of a 
==PAGE:100==
6. Discussion 
 
90 
 
 
 
commissioning process to ensure an effective digital handover. The analysis and results supported 
these outcomes by emphasising the challenges of establishing building owner requirements and the 
advantages of digitising building operations for better involvement of the operating organisation. 
Thus, a recommendation for the establishment of building owner requirements and a recommenda-
tion for a better digital handover of O&M information are developed.  
Recommendation for establishing building owner requirements  
The establishment of building owner requirements should be based on knowledge and experience 
from the industry to create a common structure of operation and maintenance information. Further-
more, the building owner requirements should be established based on knowledge and experience 
from previous construction projects and existing building operations. Thus, a standard for the pro-
cess of gathering information from construction projects and existing building operations is devel-
oped inspired by the information management process in the ISO 19650 series. The process of 
information gathering is illustrated in Figure 26. BIM-models are used as information containers of 
information generated, exchanged and stored during the construction phase and information used 
and updated during the operational phase.  
 
Figure 26: The process of information gathering 
Like that, it will be easier for the building owner and operator to describe their needs for operation 
and maintenance information and the use of BIM in building operations. As a result of a better de-
scription of their information needs, the delivered as-built BIM-models is a reduced version of the 
BIM-models used in the construction phase only containing information relevant for the building op-
erations. The standard for the process of gathering information will contribute to a more standardised 
way of operating buildings and of involving the operating organisation, which will mitigate a lot of the 
remaining challenges in establishing building owner requirements. The standard will support the di-
alogue between the building owner and operator and the project parties, as a common understanding 
is created, which will reduce the number of disagreements. To conclude, the standard will form the 
basis of the establishment of building owner requirements in regard to relevant information for the 
operation and maintenance. The standard is moreover applicable in cases where the operating 
==PAGE:101==
6. Discussion 
 
91 
 
 
 
organisation cannot be involved in the early phases to ensure that the relevant information is still 
collected for the building operations.  
Recommendation for a better digital handover of operation and maintenance information 
As mentioned earlier, the building owner should ensure a planned and effective digital handover and 
an operation-friendly building by involving the operating organisation with the implementation of a 
commissioning-process. With a larger operational focus in the early phases and an early establish-
ment of FM-systems used in the building operations, operation and maintenance information can be 
handed over progressively during the construction phase. As a result of this, the operating organi-
sation can be involved for quality assurance of the operation-friendliness, which can conclude in a 
more effective digital handover.  
 
Recommended considerations to be considered early to ensure an effective digital handover: 
• 
Requirements and expectations to the project parties should be established in the tender 
material so that processes and the foundation for a great digital handover are clear 
• 
Operation and maintenance information should be delivered continuously throughout the 
construction process to quality assure the operation-friendliness 
• 
The digital handover process should be standardised to ensure a coordinated and quality 
assured O&M material (Figure 27)  
• 
The establishment of requirements should be more standardised to make it easier for project 
teams to collaborate with a new building owner 
• 
Focus on the operation and maintenance in the early phases to ensure that the information 
generated in the construction phase fits into the FM-systems in the building operations 
 
Figure 27: Standardised digital handover process with FM BIM-models as information containers 
==PAGE:102==
7. Conclusion 
 
92 
 
 
 
7. Conclusion 
7.1 Main findings 
The thesis has contributed to an understanding and clarification of the digital transition of the con-
struction industry in which the building owners are an essential factor as they set the framework of 
digital collaboration through the establishment of building owner requirements. The thesis examined 
the practice of information management in preparation for building operations with the purpose of 
determining how the building owners and operators can benefit from the use of BIM and information 
management standards. A case study has been performed considering an ongoing construction 
project in Copenhagen Airport, CPH BFW. Thus, the results are derived from the data collected and 
processed as part of the case study and expert interviews, and project material to support the state-
ments. Several conclusions can be drawn on the basis of the presented results in the thesis in order 
to answer the problem statement and sub-questions.  
The building owner requirements are established based on the need and wish for information in a 
specific structure and format to be utilised actively in the construction and operation of buildings. The 
building owners should establish the requirements based on their experiences from previous projects 
or by cooperating crosswise in the industry to agree on fundamental requirements to be made pro-
ject- or organisation-specific. Thus, uniformity in the establishment of building owner requirements 
is created, which will ease the information delivery process for the project teams. The expert inter-
views state that a number of challenges in establishing building owner requirements should be over-
come to ensure that the information generated in the construction phase can be utilised in the build-
ing operations. The main challenge is that the building owner or operator finds it difficult describing 
their needs. The information must be as accurate as possible to able to be incorporated into the FM-
systems used in the building operations. However, the information generated in the construction 
project is rarely used in building operations.  
There was a broad consensus among the interviewees that the operating organisation should be 
involved in the early stages when establishing the building owner requirements to ensure that the 
building is operating-friendly. However, there seems to be a gap between construction projects and 
building operations. The operating organisation is usually disconnected from the construction pro-
ject, and the dialogue between the project teams and operating organisations is insufficient. The 
operating organisation should be more directly involved in the construction project and the handover 
process to ensure compliance with the building owner requirements. The commissioning process 
==PAGE:103==
7. Conclusion 
 
93 
 
 
 
with the involvement of the operating organisation secures a better quality assurance of the infor-
mation delivery so that the information can be incorporated into the FM-systems 
Digitisation creates value for the building owner and operator, especially in the operational phase, 
by better utilisation of information generated in the construction phase. As part of the evaluation of 
the benefits for the building owner and operator in terms of digitisation of building operations, differ-
ent advantages and challenges were assessed. By storing information digitally in BIM-models, infor-
mation is easy to register and retrieve in FM-systems, and information is available and accessible 
for real-time use. Hence, needs and requirements for the digital handover should be defined as early 
as possible to ensure that information structure are established, including the establishment of FM-
systems. With an early establishment of FM-systems, information can be handed over progressively 
during the construction phase, resulting in a more effective digital handover. However, a lack of 
digital readiness in the operating organisations constitutes a barrier to the effective digitisation of 
building operations and the use of BIM. 
Furthermore, the lack of standardisation of information management across the industry is a barrier 
for the digitisation of building operations. An effort to standardise the way we work with BIM and 
information management can potentially create a more homogeneous way of collaborating digitally 
on construction projects. Thus, a more standardised way of operating buildings and involving the 
operating organisation is necessary to mitigate the challenges in establishing building owner require-
ments and digitisation of building operations. The biggest challenges in the implementation of DDB 
were the industry’s readiness to change and the missing incentive to invest in the digitisation. Stand-
ardisation can give the Danish construction industry an incentive to apply BIM in the entire building 
life cycle, which will support the digital transition of the industry.  
Based on the results presented and discussed in the thesis, some recommendations for the infor-
mation management process have been developed. Firstly, a recommendation for establishing build-
ing owner requirements is presented. The establishment of requirements should happen on the basis 
of knowledge and experience from previous construction projects and existing building operations. 
Thus, a standard for the process of information gathering is presented with inspiration from the ISO 
19650 series. An advantage of digitising the building operations is precisely a better collection of 
knowledge from the operating organisation to be pushed back into new construction projects for 
better establishment of building owner requirements. Finally, some recommended considerations to 
be considered early to ensure a better digital handover of operation and maintenance information is 
presented, including a suggestion for a standardised digital handover process with FM BIM-models 
as information containers.  
 
==PAGE:104==
7. Conclusion 
 
94 
 
 
 
7.2 Perspectives and further research 
This section will provide a description of perspectives and potential areas of further research based 
on the research of the practice with information management conducted in the thesis. The results 
presented some potential benefits for the building owner and operator as a result of using BIM and 
information management. However, it has not been possible to analyse the real benefits, since the 
project included in the case study, CPH BFW, is not finalised. Thus, further research at the end of 
the construction project CPH BFW would be helpful in a final assessment of the digital handover and 
the project team’s compliance with the information requirements. In addition, further research could 
be based on quantitative data, such as a questionnaire survey to be answered by people in operating 
organisations. Like that, the research could potentially provide measurable results, which will create 
a better insight into the benefits for the building operators of using BIM and information management 
standards.  
There are many aspects of the topic of information management that could be included in additional 
research in connection with further research. Firstly, additional research of the ISO 19650 series of 
standards could be conducted. Part 3 and 4 of the series is currently under development. Part 3 is 
designed to enable the building owner or asset owner to establish the requirements for the infor-
mation management process during the operational phase of assets. (Dansk standard, 2019c) Thus, 
it is describing digital collaboration in the operational phase focusing on the use and maintenance of 
BIM in FM. Part 4 is designed to enable the building owner or asset owner to establish requirements 
for the information exchange and is describing a digital handover process with the use of BIM. In 
addition, part 4 of the series of standards is contributing to the UN Sustainable Development Goals. 
(ISO, 2020) Thus, it could be interesting to investigate the ISO 19650 series’ influence on the sus-
tainable development and the future development within the area of the use of BIM in the building 
operations.  
Furthermore, further research on international practice with information management can be con-
ducted. The Norwegian Property Agency has developed a document “Grunnlag for digital eien-
domsledelse”, which intend to contribute to the development of great digital IT-systems for admin-
istration and management of properties. In the document, it is described how BIM-models and open 
formats are vital prerequisites for the exchange and utilisation of information throughout the entire 
life cycle of a building. A document has furthermore been developed to provide recommendations 
for the processes of the building owner’s requirements regarding a specific quality of BIM-models. 
(Norsk Eiendom, 2020) Hence, it could be interesting to compare the Danish practice with the Nor-
wegian practice by including Norwegian case studies.  
==PAGE:105==
7. Conclusion 
 
95 
 
 
 
Lastly, additional research of the challenges of digitisation of building operations and the use of 
openBIM in airports could be conducted. buildingSMART International hosted a number of virtual 
summit webinars, including a webinar about the missing entities for airports. The webinar presented 
the current challenges and possible solutions for the missing entities in the IFC schema. Entities are 
essential for the processing and utilising the information in the BIM-models. A current challenge for 
the airports is that the IFC schema does not contain every airport object class (entity). Thus, a tem-
porary workaround is provided in order to deal with the missing entities. Generic objects are created 
to represent the missing entities. (buildingSMART International, 2020) Therefore, it could be inter-
esting to investigate the potential information loss in IFC models as a result of the missing entities 
and the potential approaches to identify and overcome the challenges of missing entities.  
 
 
==PAGE:106==
8. Bibliography 
 
96 
 
 
 
8. Bibliography 
Blanco, L. et al. (2019) ‘Governments can lead construction into the digital era’, 
McKinsey&Company, (April), pp. 1–8. Available at: https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/capital-
projects-and-infrastructure/our-insights/governments-can-lead-construction-into-the-digital-era. 
Brinck, S. (2020) ‘Interview’. Appendix J. 
Bryman, A. (2012) Social Research Methods. 4th editio. Oxford University Press Inc. 
buildingSMART International (2020) Airport Room 1: Missing Entities on Vimeo. Available at: 
https://vimeo.com/419694543 (Accessed: 22 June 2020). 
buildingSMART International (n.d.) openBIM definition. Available at: 
https://www.buildingsmart.org/about/openbim/openbim-definition/ (Accessed: 2 June 2020). 
Burton, R. et al. (2014) ‘The Strategic Guide to Commissioning’, ASHRAE Presidential Ad-Hoc 
Committee, Building Performance Alliance on Commissioning. Available at: 
https://www.ashrae.org/technical-resources/bookstore/commissioning-essentials. 
Bygherreforeningen (2017a) ‘Pejlemærker for fremtidens digitale samarbejde’. Available at: 
https://bygherreforeningen.dk/pejlemaerker-for-fremtidens-digitale-samarbejde/. 
Bygherreforeningen (2017b) ‘Smart drift med dynamiske data’. Available at: 
https://bygherreforeningen.dk/smart-drift-med-dynamiske-data/. 
Bygherreforeningen (n.d.) IKT-værktøj. Available at: http://ikt-
vaerktoej.bygherreforeningen.dk/vaerktojer/ikt/registrering (Accessed: 30 April 2020). 
Bygningsstyrelsen (2019) Generelt om IKT-specifikationer. Available at: 
https://bygst.dk/byggeri/digitalisering/generelt-om-ikt-specifikationer/ (Accessed: 1 June 2020). 
Christensen, N. B. (2020) ‘Interview’. Appendix H. 
CPH (2016) Historic expansion of Copenhagen Airport. Available at: https://www.cph.dk/en/about-
cph/press/news/2016/12/historic-expansion-of-copenhagen-airport (Accessed: 22 April 2020). 
CPH (2018) ‘CPH’s projektspecifikke IKT-ydelsesspecifikation’, pp. 1–19. 
CPH (2020a) Bagagefabrik Vest. Available at: https://www.cph.dk/om-cph/igangvarende-
==PAGE:107==
8. Bibliography 
 
97 
 
 
 
byggerier/bagagefabrik-vest (Accessed: 17 April 2020). 
CPH (2020b) ‘CPH trafiktal februar 2020’. Available at: https://www.cph.dk/om-
cph/presse/nyheder/2020/3/cph-trafiktal-februar-2020 (Accessed: 31 May 2020). 
CPH (2020c) Organisation. Available at: https://www.cph.dk/en/about-cph/organisation (Accessed: 
22 April 2020). 
Dansk standard (2019a) ‘DS/EN ISO 19650-1:2018 - Organisering og digitalisering af information 
om bygge- og anlægsarbejder, herunder BIM – Informationshåndtering med BIM – Del 1: Begreber 
og principper’. 
Dansk standard (2019b) ‘DS/EN ISO 19650-2:2018 - Organisering og digitalisering af information 
om bygge- og anlægsarbejder, herunder BIM – Informationshåndtering med BIM – Del 2 : 
Afleveringsfasen’. 
Dansk standard (2019c) ‘DS/EN ISO 19650-3:2018 - Organisering og digitalisering af information 
om bygge- og anlægsarbejder, inklusiv BIM – Informationsstyring med BIM – Del 3: Aktivernes 
driftsfase (Draft)’. 
Davis Langdon (2012) ‘Getting the most out of BIM - A guide for clients’, AECOM. 
DFM netværk (n.d. a) FM systemer i Danmark. Available at: https://www.dfm-net.dk/faglig-
viden/fm-systemer-i-danmark (Accessed: 3 June 2020). 
DFM netværk (n.d. b) Hvad er Facilities Management? Available at: https://www.dfm-net.dk/om-
os/hvad-er-facilities-mangement (Accessed: 2 June 2020). 
Dougherty, J. (2013) ‘BIM-FM for Healthcare Facilities Management’, Navigant Consulting. 
DTU BIMlab (2013a) Hvad er BIM? Available at: http://www.bim.byg.dtu.dk/BIMlab/Hvad-er-BIM 
(Accessed: 17 April 2020). 
DTU BIMlab (2013b) Hvad er Det Digitale Byggeri? Available at: 
http://www.bim.byg.dtu.dk/BIMlab/Hvad-er-DDB (Accessed: 28 April 2020). 
Due, P. H., Tolstrup, C. and Teisen, O. (2013) ‘Driftorienteret byggeproces’, Værdiskabende 
Byggeproces. 
Eastman, C. et al. (2018) ‘BIM for Owners and Facility Managers’, in BIM Handbook, pp. 151–192. 
==PAGE:108==
8. Bibliography 
 
98 
 
 
 
Ebbesen, P. (2018) ‘Strategisk styret digitalisering i FM-branchen’, in Facility Management som 
digital forandringsagent. DFM netværk, pp. 7–25. 
Ebbesen, P. (2020) ‘Interview’. Appendix G. 
EFCA BIM Task Force (2018) ‘BIM and ISO 19650 from a project management perspective’, 
EFCA. Available at: https://www.frinet.dk/media/1307/381783_efca_flipbook_bim_fri.pdf. 
Fischer, M. et al. (2017) Integrating Project Delivery. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
fm3.dk (2019) ‘Skab bedre drift , bæredygtigt vedligehold og optimale tilstandsvurderinger’. 
Available at: https://fm3.dk/Strategi_for_digitalt_byggeri/Skab-bedre-drift-baeredygtig-vedligehold-
og-optimale-tilstandsvurderinger-TBST.html. 
Gelder, J. et al. (2013) ‘BIM for the terrified - a guide for manufacturers’, Construction Products 
Association and NBS. 
Holst, K. (2020) ‘Interview’. Appendix C. 
ISO (2020) ISO/WD 19650-4 - Organization and digitization of information about buildings and civil 
engineering works, including building information modelling (BIM) — Information management 
using building information modelling — Part 4: Information exchange. Available at: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/78246.html (Accessed: 22 June 2020). 
Jarløv, T. T. (2017) ‘Commisioning Ydelsesbeskrivelse’. CPH Airport A/S, pp. 1–48. 
Jensen, N. (2020) ‘Interview’. Appendix F. 
Jensen, P. A. (2006) ‘Digital Handover of Data from Building Projects to Operation’, Facility 
Management 2006 : European Facility Management Conference 2006. 
Jensen, P. A. (2014) Håndbog i Facilities Management. Dansk Facilities Management. 
Jespersen, J. M. (2008) ‘Det Digitale Byggeri’, Hfb Opslag, (Implementerings: netværket), pp. 19–
24. Available at: 
http://www.hfb.dk/fileadmin/templates/hfb/dokumenter/artikler/Det_digitale_byggeri.pdf. 
Knorborg, R. B. (2020) ‘Interview’. Appendix A. 
Lindhé, C. (2020) ‘Interview’. Appendix D. 
==PAGE:109==
8. Bibliography 
 
99 
 
 
 
McGraw Hill Construction (2014) ‘The Business Value of BIM for Owners’, McGraw Hill 
Construction, pp. 1–64. Available at: 
http://i2sl.org/elibrary/documents/Business_Value_of_BIM_for_Owners_SMR_(2014).pdf. 
Molio (2019a) ‘Anvisning IKT-specifikationer (A102)’, pp. 1–41. Available at: 
https://anvisninger.molio.dk/. 
Molio (2019b) Byggeriet står over for digital revolution. Available at: 
https://www.molio.dk/index.php/byggeriet-staar-over-for-digital-revolution (Accessed: 16 March 
2020). 
Molio (2019c) ‘Vejledning - IKT-kravstillelse (A303)’, pp. 1–32. Available at: 
https://anvisninger.molio.dk/. 
Molio (n.d.) Molio Anvisninger. Available at: https://anvisninger.molio.dk/aftale_og_kommunikation 
(Accessed: 2 June 2020). 
MT Højgaard (2019) MT Højgaard skal opføre Bagageterminal i Københavns Lufthavn. Available 
at: https://mth.dk/Nyheder/2019/Maj/MT-Hojgaard-skal-opfore-Bagageterminal-i-Kobenhavns-
Lufthavn (Accessed: 24 April 2020). 
MT Højgaard (2020a) MT Højgaard. Available at: https://mth.dk/ (Accessed: 23 April 2020). 
MT Højgaard (2020b) ‘MT Højgaard organisation chart’. 
Ngo, K. D. (2020) ‘Interview’. Appendix I. 
Norsk Eiendom (2020) ‘Digital eiendomsledelse’, pp. 1–20. Available at: 
https://www.norskeiendom.org/portfolio-items/digital-eiendomsledelse-bestillerkompetanse-bim/. 
Olsen, P. B. (2019) ‘The game-changing new EN ISO 19650-standard’, Planet Tech, pp. 1–12. 
Available at: https://www.planet-tech.dk/bim/en-iso-19650-construction-bim/#. 
Ørsted, M. (2020) ‘Interview’. Appendix K. 
Passarge, K. (2020) ‘Interview’. Appendix B. 
Rasmussen, L. (2020) ‘Interview’. Appendix E. 
Realdania (2020) Det Digitale Byggeri. Available at: https://realdania.dk/projekter/det-digitale-
==PAGE:110==
8. Bibliography 
 
100 
 
 
 
byggeri (Accessed: 17 April 2020). 
Rosenfield, K. (2012) The Future of the Building Industry: BIM-BAM-BOOM!, ArchDaily. Available 
at: https://www.archdaily.com/262008/the-future-of-the-building-industry-bim-bam-boom 
(Accessed: 30 April 2020). 
RUBOW arkitekter (2020) Baggage Factory West CPH. Available at: 
https://rubowarkitekter.dk/?projekter=bagage-factory-west-bfw&rubowtax=1803 (Accessed: 24 
April 2020). 
Seismonaut (2018) ‘Rapport: Byggeriets digitale udvikling’, Molio, pp. 1–15. Available at: 
https://www.molio.dk/sites/default/files/files/paesentation_af_kvalitative_data_uddrag.pdf. 
Teisen, O., Tolsrup, C. and Due, P. H. (2013) ‘Commissioning-processen’, Værdiskabende 
Byggeproces. 
Transport- Bygnings- og Boligministeriet (2006) Bekendtgørelse om krav til anvendelse af 
Informations- og Kommunikationsteknologi i byggeri, Retsinformation. Available at: 
https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/2006/1365 (Accessed: 28 April 2020). 
Transport- og Boligministeriet (2019) ‘Strategi for digitalt byggeri’. Available at: 
https://www.trm.dk/publikationer/2019/strategi-for-digitalt-byggeri/. 
UK BIM Alliance (2020) Information management according to BS EN ISO 19650. Available at: 
https://www.ukbimalliance.org/project/information_management/ (Accessed: 17 April 2020). 
UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB (2019) ‘Information management according to BS EN ISO 19650 
- Guidance Part 1: Concepts’, UK BIM Alliance, (2), p. 42. Available at: 
https://www.ukbimalliance.org/stories/information-management-according-to-bs-en-iso-19650/. 
UK BIM Alliance, BSI and CDBB (2020) ‘Information management according to BS EN ISO 19650 
- Guidance Part 2: Processes for Project Delivery’, UK BIM Framework, (3), p. 42. Available at: 
https://www.ukbimalliance.org/stories/information-management-according-to-bs-en-iso-19650/. 
Vestergaard, F. et al. (2012) ‘ØG-DDB Teknisk Rapport Afrapportering af projektet: Måling af 
økonomiske gevinster ved Det Digitale Byggeri’, DTU Department of Civil Engineering. 
 
