==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Cost optimization of catenary mooring for floating offshore 
wind farms using shared anchors with outlook to 
integration of this in farm design optimization 
 
 
 
Mads Mohr Madsen 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0372 
July 2020 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In recent years Floating Offshore Wind Turbines(FOWT) are rapidly moving to-
wards commercial deployment of wind farm scale. With this an interesting mooring
concept with wind turbines sharing anchors are investigated for different depths
and turbine spacing. As the turbines share anchor, the footprint of the moor-
ing(horizontal distance from turbine to anchor) determines the turbine spacing.
The cost of station keeping is investigated for a range of different depths and tur-
bine spacing. It is found that cost of catenary mooring, with the same thickness
along the mooring line, varies significantly with turbine spacing. The greater the
depth, the greater the optimal turbine spacing gives the lowest cost of mooring
using shared anchors. Further it is found that the bigger the park, the greater
the effect of using shared anchors is. Depending on assumption, significant cost
savings are found. This investigation is also to serve as a foundation to be used in
layout optimization for FOWT parks.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Wind Energy at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Masters
degree in Wind Energy in collaboration with Copenhagen Offshore Partners.
Mads Mohr Madsen (s144416)
Copenhagen 28/06-2020
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank everybody involved in this project, my DTU supervisors
Albert Meseguer Urban, Katherine Dykes and Mikkel Friis-Møller for the great
support though the whole project. It is a pleasure to work with competent, dedi-
cated people that also know how to have a laugh. Also thanks to Richard Copeland
from Copenhagen Offshore Partners for the support. To Richard and Albert also
a thanks for being open an willing to discuss the possibilities that ended up being
this project. I would like to thank also my younger brother, Jeppe Mohr Madsen,
for proofreading a lot of material both for this project - but actually for everything
important i have ever handed in. Also thanks to Rasmus Sode Lund for provid-
ing feedback on this report. A special thanks to Rasmus and the rest of my great
friends from DTU for a great time and for all help and support I have received over
the last 6 years. Last but not least, thanks to my girlfriend for always listening
and being supportive.
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
iv
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
A
Swept area
a
Shape parameter for catenary mooring line
Cmooring Cost of one mooring line
Cp
Power coefficient
CSSI
cost of sub sea investigations
ctot
Total cost of station keeping system for a wind farm
D
Water depth
dchain Diameter of mooring chains
FT
Line tension
H
Horizontal force
l
Horizontal length projected on seabed
nanchors Number of anchors
nSSI
number of sub sea investigations
nWTG Number of WTG
Prated Rated power
Q
Maximum allowable force in mooring line
rf
Footprint
S
Mooring line length
UR
Utilization ratio
V
Vertical force
==PAGE:8==
Acknowledgements
vi
wair
weight per length of mooring line in air
wwater weight per length of mooring line in water
xadm
Maximum allowable offset
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope of project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Outline of thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Literature review
10
2.1
System engineering in the wind industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Studies in farm optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Modeling of components for floating wind
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Summary of findings and relation to project
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Methodology
18
3.1
Pattern selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Mooring modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Anchor calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4
Installation of mooring systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.5
Subsea investigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.6
Economic evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Mooring optimization on single turbine
44
4.1
Optimization model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Footprint and depth sensitivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Layout and mooring optimization
59
==PAGE:10==
Contents
viii
5.1
Threesome patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2
Layout and mooring optimization on Case 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
Layout and mooring optimization across cases . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Discussion
78
6.1
Mooring and anchor modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.2
Turbine spacing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.3
Different floaters forcing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.4
Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7
Conclusion
81
8
Further Work
82
8.1
Advancement of mooring and anchor models used . . . . . . . . . .
82
8.2
Farm design optimization of for FOWT including mooring cost . . .
83
A Standardization bodies and redundancy
84
A.1 Comparison of certifications organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
A.2 Redundancy and shared anchors setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
B Investigation of feasibility in very soft clay
89
B.1 Original anchor model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.2 Tweaked anchor model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C Other
93
C.1 AEP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
Bibliography
94
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The Offshore wind industry has grown exponentially over the last decade going
from from 1 Giga Watt(GW) installed offshore capacity in 2008 to 18,5 GW in
2018 in Europe[1]. The market is predicted to go from not only being bottom
fixed structures but also floating, with as much as 6.9-13.7GW of installed floating
wind capacity globally by 2030 [2]. The structures are moving further offshore
due to large wind resources[3] and are predicted to induce less conflict regarding
visual and acoustic impact [4].
With depths reaching over 50m, bottom fixed
structures start becoming economic unviable according to [5], more recently though
industry finds the limit to be 60m, both economically and technically[6]. From
there on the use of Floating Offshore Wind Turbine(FOWT) is predicted to be
the solution. Though many markets have access to shallow water with great wind
resources, eg.
in the Northern sea or the US east cost, large cities with high
power consumption are found at coastal areas where water depth increases rapidly,
making bottom fixed wind farms impossible. These areas include South Korea,
Japan and the US west coast[2].
The ability to provide economically feasible
floating offshore wind, would allow these areas to access large amounts of renewable
energy that is not available with current technology. This with production close to
consumption, ultimately helping solve the global climate crisis. The use of FOWT,
has some uncertainty related to the fact that no full scale FOWT farm has yet
been commissioned, the biggest yet is Hywind Scotland with 30 MW. Further the
Levelized Cost Of Energy(LCOE) for floating projects are still a lot higher than for
bottom fixed[7]. It is however predicted that floating wind will be competitive due
to larger wind resources with more stable winds further offshore leading to higher
capacity factors(CF), compensating for larger CAPital EXpenditures(CAPEX).
First example of this is seen with Hywind Scotland achieving a CF of 56% [8],
the average of dansish wind farms is a CF of 41 % [9]. Further large drops in
CAPEX are expected as the technology matures. One factor for achieving lower
CAPEX for FOWT is the foundation itself will not be site specific and could be
mass produced [10]. CAPEX reductions from a simpler installation method is also
predicted, featuring turbine installation on the foundation from quay side. It is
==PAGE:12==
1.1 Motivation
2
found by [11] that the installation cost of semi-submersible foundation will have
a cost reduction of 50% compared to monopiles in a site up to 37m deep. The
concepts used in FOWT leverage the technology from the Oil and Gas industry,
including both mooring, anchoring and foundation design. One central difference
though, is the number of units to be placed near each other, as many FOWT will
likely be placed in a farm while typically Oil/Gas platforms will be placed alone.
This opens for the possibility of sharing anchors, as proposed and studied by [12].
This research uncovers the potential for significant savings on anchors for FOWT
parks. Using shared anchors however will have an impact on the layout of the
FOWT farm. As the layout of the park is determined by numerous parameters,
these have to be taken into account also when considering the use of shared anchors.
This study seeks to explore and cost optimize the use of shared anchors, while
considering the effect of this on the layout of the farm.
1.1.1
State of floating wind
Seeking to fulfill the predictions of future floating capacity, are as more than 30
foundation designs are under development[7]. These with different level of, Tech-
nology Readiness Level (TRL) [13], which as the name indicates measures how
mature the technology is with the end target ”Extensive implementation”. They
have very different foundation- and mooring design. There is however no consen-
sus about what will be the dominating design in the future, if there will be one.
Main types are Tension Leg Platform(TLP), Semi-submersible and Spar. These
types are as of now inspired by the oil and gas industry. Some of types of floaters
has reached full scale deployment:
• Hywind Scotland was commissioned late 2017 [14], using a Spar type foundation
and catenary mooring(i.e slack chain providing restoring force from its own
weight), featuring 6 MW turbines.
• PrinciplePower is, at the time of this thesis, constructing Wind Float Atlantic
[15] featuring 3 commercial scale turbines.
• In august 2019 Hywind Tampen was announced, which will feature 11× 8[MW]
turbines and have shared anchors [16] i.e. several mooring lines from different
turbines attaching the same anchor. With 88MW Hywind Tampen will be the
biggest floating wind farm yet approaching triple digit MW capacity, known
from most modern wind farms.
The Offshore industry is moving very rapidly towards commercial FOWT farm
scale, though it is rather new and immature with no consensus about the how/if
the design will converge. The use of shared anchors is also a very novel feature in
floating offshore wind. Furthermore, the interest in floating wind is increasing and
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Motivation
3
includes interest from the oil-majors[17]. With this major interest and relative
immaturity of technology, any research clarifying challenges in moving floating
wind to farm scale is highly relevant and helping the technology mature. This
project seeks to investigate how floating wind mooring systems is affected by the
introduction of shared anchors and how this effects the economic case.
1.1.2
System thinking in wind turbine design, layout
optimization and floating wind
In cases there trade offs like the before introduced a system thinking approach is
often used. This is also known from the design of wind turbines trying to capture
the best overall performance of the turbine, rather that looking at maximizing per-
formance of one component at a time. An example of this is the design of blades.
These are often designed to minimize weight and maximize aerodynamic perfor-
mance and structural stability. Whilst this could seem to be enough for design
purposes, it is found that including considerations for the rest of the turbine; drive
train tower etc. leads to better solutions as these are all coupled and dependent
on each other[18]. A system thinking approach explores the trade off between the
different components. A greater mass of the blade could result in better structural
performance of the blade, but at the same time raise the requirements for the rest
of the turbine’s structural performance that have to support the blades, all raising
the cost. In this case, what is found to be a better blade considering only the blade,
might not be the optimal considering the turbine as a system [18]. Optimization
can be used as a tool to explore these trade offs. The same method is to some
extent also used in wind farm optimization. In this regard the layout and cabling
routes are two of the main design variables which are often considered in the op-
timization. One of the main trade offs is turbine spacing, where larger spacing
will yield larger AEP due to less power loss from wakes. Counteracting this is the
array cables, where larger spacing will lead to an increase in CAPEX due to longer
cables[6]. Significant amount of research have been done in this area and much
more is being done trying to further advance this method and the models being
used, with key areas including control strategy, wake modeling, load modeling,
turbine type and tower height. For both onshore and offshore wind farms both
commercial and research tools to optimize layout and many other design variables
exist. However no examples of FOWT farm optimization were found. In the inves-
tigation of feasibility of the use of shared anchors, investigating the influence on
other parts of the park must be considered. This project seeks to include floating
wind into an optimization tool developed by DTU Wind, TOPFARM. TOPFARM
is the optimization tool developed and used by DTU for advancement and research
==PAGE:14==
1.2 Scope of project
4
of this topic. Introducing cost of station keeping(station keeping system in this
case as mooring chains and anchors) using shared anchors in an existing farm
optimization tool will allow for further exploration of the trade offs arising when
designing FOWT farms. However, actual wind farm layout optimization is not
done in this study. Though a parameter sweep over the investigated area is done,
seeking to explore the area, the first step towards layout optimization of floating
wind in TOPFARM. As being integrated in TOPFARM, a preliminary analysis of
the impact on AEP can be made using existing TOPFARM AEP modules.
1.2
Scope of project
In this project catenary mooring design will be investigated by cost optimizing
station keeping design with chain length and thickness as design variables. This
will be done under different assumptions and with changing input parameters in-
cluding a range of depths. This will be used to evaluate the economic feasibility of
using shared anchors. The impact on turbine spacing and the trade offs between
mooring considerations and AEP is investigated.
The work is centered around the following research question:
1.2.1
Research question
Can a floating wind farm designed using shared anchors result in a
better economic case for floating wind farms?
The research question is answered trough the following sub-questions which elab-
orates the area further:
• How is catenary mooring effected by the introduction of shared anchors for
different depths, forces and mooring footprints?
Known theory is applied for calculating mooring forces. This is integrated into
the DTU software TOPFARM and optimized for minimizing cost of mooring.
This is done with and without constraints on the mooring footprint.
• How is anchoring affected from the introduction of shared anchors and which
requirement is put on shared anchors?
Different anchor designs are explored taking outset in both real world cases and
design standard guides.
• How does turbine spacing and layout patterns affect the cost of mooring and
AEP in a floating wind farm with shared anchors? and how does this affect the
overall economic case?
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Scope of project
5
Having used an existing optimization framework, this allows for the use of its
AEP calucation tool along with evaluating the cost of mooring. Several layout
patterns are analysed coarsely without calculating their economic performance
and one is modeled for a range of turbine spacing, evaluating on cost of mooring
per energy and IRR.
1.2.2
Limitations and main focus
As described in earlier sections, the use of systems thinking and optimization seeks
to find optimal trade offs to between counter acting effects of design parameters.
With more complex problems this becomes more relevant as intuition and expe-
rience becomes insufficient. The better the system is modeled the more accurate
the optimums will naturally be. This also means to include all components and
parameters of the system. In a context of wind farm design, this means that in
order to have a holistic view on wind farm layout and make decisions about this
in a fully informed matter, every part of the park has to be described well. To
show what must be modeled, an overview of the cost and revenue of a floating
wind farm is seen in figure 1.1. Marked in bold is what has been explored in this
project. It is known that other parts will be directly affected by the findings of this
such as changing layout will change the cable routes and therefore the cost of inter
array cables. However, in order to limit the project, these are not considered. The
design of the mooring and anchoring will only be preliminary and the installation
is only modeled very simply. If this project is later supplemented by a similar
study investigating the parts not described in this study, these will then pave the
way for more accurate and adequate results.
In the following, the parameters in figure 1.1 are described in order to place this
project in the context of a full wind farm model.
==PAGE:16==
1.2 Scope of project
6
Figure 1.1: Break down of LCOE/NPV/IRR with CAPEX based on NREL off-
shore Balance Of Plant(BOP) model.
One of the main parts of calculating an overall economic measure are the rev-
enue streams. The revenue streams from wind farms are governed by the following
three equations, which can be calculated from the input parameters seen in figure
1.1.
Annual revenue = AEP × Price of energy
(1.1)
AEP = 365 × 24h × CF × nwt × Prated
(1.2)
P = 1
2 × ρ × Cp × A × V 3
(1.3)
Equation 1.1 is the annual revenue, expressed by the Annual Energy Produc-
tion(AEP) and the price the power is sold for. Equation 1.2 is the AEP expressed
by the hours in a year, the capacity factor (CF), and plant capacity(number of
turbines times rated capacity of the turbines). The capacity factor is the utilized
percentage of the total available capacity, calculated based on the wind resources
and power curve of the turbine. The power curve is defined by the power produc-
tion for different velocities, given by equation 1.3. With ρ being density of air, Cp
being the power coefficient defining the ratio between power in the wind and the
power produced by the turbine, A being the swept area of the turbine rotor and
V being the speed of wind.
Revenue:
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Scope of project
7
• Rotor size; the rotor size is one of the main dimensions used for modeling the
power output. The rotor used in this study is the rotor from the DTU 10 MW
reference turbine, [19]. The rotor size defines A in equation 1.3
• Power curve; As with the rotor size, this is given with the choice of the DTU
10 MW reference turbine. This is used for calculating the AEP through the
capacity factor in equation 1.2.
• Wind resources; the wind resources include information about the wind velocity
and the direction, often given as distributions. The wind and general climate
is of stochastic nature, but is treated as deterministic by assuming it to follow
a distribution exactly i.e all probabilities are always realized . Having the wind
speed from the wind resources along with the above allows for calculating the
power output of a turbine free from any wakes. This is input for the CF. In
this project wind resources at Horns Rev 1 are used.
• Layout; this along with wind resources allows for calculating wake effects on
each individual turbine in a wind farm and thereby the wind speed each turbine
experiences which is input for equation 1.2 through the CF and equation 1.3
directly.
• PPA; Power Purchase Agreement, with a power purchase agreement the price
of energy is given. This is often assumed to be a constant price though this is
often not true. Having this and the above allows for calculating the revenue
stream, equation 1.1.
• Control strategy; Though not being a topic of interest in this thesis, it is in-
cluded to acknowledge recent research in this area that might affect farm design
in the future.
CAPEX:
Counteracting the revenue stream is the cost associated with a wind farm, the
greatest of these is CAPEX. In the following a CAPEX breakdown is shown using
definitions from NREL[20].
• Turbine; The cost of the Turbine is included in this, the turbine is very de-
sign determining, however only the DTU 10 MW turbine is considered. Some
reflections are done on turbines in relation to turbine spacing absolute values
changing with rotor diameter.
• Development; This features all expenditures of development from early site and
wind assessments, EIA, construction plan etc. Development also includes sub
sea site investigations, SSI. The number of SSI needed in different scenarios are
considered.
• Lease Price; Price of leasing land, if any, and fees associated with this. This is
not considered in this project and not believed to be design determining.
• Soft costs; Soft costs include plant commissioning, decommissioning, contin-
gency, construction finance and insurance during construction.
With larger
==PAGE:18==
1.3 Outline of thesis
8
uncertainties in floating wind compared to bottom fixed this might change,
however it is not believed to be design determining and is not considered.
• Electrical infrastructure; This features all cost associated the electrical infras-
tructure, inter array cables, export cables, On-shore substation and offshore
substation. The electrical infrastructure is largely impacted by layout. How-
ever, to limit the project this is not considered in this thesis.
• Assembly and installation; Installation of substructures, turbines, electrical
equipment etc. This cost will mainly be affected by the use of different anchors
as these will have different installation methods. This is considered in a very
simple way in this project.
• Engineering and management; All cost associated with design engineering and
management of the project. While this might be affected by the changes in
design made in this project, it is not considered.
• Substructure and foundation; In a floating context, this can be split into the
foundation itself (the ”floater”) and the station keeping system. The foundation
is the platform the turbine is attached to. The station keeping system is the
system that keeps the floater in place i.e. mooring chains/wires and anchors.
For TLP(Tension Leg Platform) these are also key in the stability. Spar and
semi submersibles can be used with catenary mooring, which is considered in
this project. Station keeping system is the core of this project.
• Port & staging, logistics and transport; All cost associated with the the use of
ports e.g. entrance/exit fees for vessels, wharf fees during loading and installa-
tion etc.
OPEX , OPerational EXpendetures are all costs related to the operation and
maintenance. In an NREL cost of energy review, this was reported to acount for
34% of total cost of a floating wind farm [21] over the life time of the project. This
is not considered in this project.
As described in the above, quite a lot of assumptions will be made and quite a lot
will be left out of the design process in direct opposition to what the whole idea
of the systems thinking is.
1.3
Outline of thesis
The above introduced project will be executed and structured as described below.
• Literature review
A literature review will be conducted seeking to identify relevant literature, this
especially focusing on systems engineering in the wind industry, mooring and
anchor calculations and floating wind optimization.
• Methodology
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Outline of thesis
9
In this section first different patterns are explored, they are evaluated on their
potential for redundancy and theoretical minimum number of anchors per tur-
bine, ending this section a pattern for further exploration is found. Next it is
described in in detail how mooring and anchoring forces are calculated for differ-
ent orientations and offsets. A validation against mooring calculation software is
performed and the preliminary design is obtained through optimization Lastly,
the assumptions and methods used in relation to subsea investigations(SSI),
installations and financial calculations are presented.
• Results.
The results section consists of two main parts; the results of mooring optimiza-
tion and the results of layout evaluations by a parameter sweep. The mooring
optimization consists of results from mooring optimization with different input
parameters including depth, force etc. Next, the sensitivities of these are pre-
sented. Lastlconstraints on footprint are introduced and the effects of these are
evaluated.
In the second part, one of the analysed patterns is evaluated in detail for dif-
ferent turbine spacing, presenting total cost of mooring, AEP, cost of mooring
per energy and the IRR. Next the trends across farm size is presented both for
different anchors and subsea investigation assumptions.
Last the results will be discussed, conclusions made based on these and recommen-
dation for further work addressed.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2
Literature review
In this section a literature review is presented with emphasis on systems engineer-
ing in the wind industry, mooring, anchoring and floating wind optimization.
2.1
System engineering in the wind
industry
In order to have a systems thinking approach in the evaluation of the use of shared
anchors, relevant literature is reviewed seeking to leverage existing research and
experience. The use of optimization in wind turbine design was inspired by the ex-
perience in the aerospace industry, both fields being strongly multidisciplinary[18].
This is illustrated in figure 2.1, inspired by a similar illustration for aeroplanes.
It is seen how different disciplines would design their ”Dream Machine”. e.g. the
manufacturing group with a simple to build design and the grid division with a
generator close to connection point. Obviously, neither of these are optimal in an
overall perspective, but only if considering only one discipline. If a similar illustra-
tion were made for layout optimization on an offshore farm this could include the
grid group having the turbines very close, the wake/AEP discipline with major
turbine spacing, the foundation group with all the turbines in the most shallow
part of the park etc. Relating this to figure 1.1, the park could be optimized for
any part contributing to the overall economic measure.
It is found in the reviewed studies, that the optimization on layout is character-
ized by the use of multidisciplinary, single objective optimization, this often being
LCOE. Optimizations of this kind often feature both continuous and discrete vari-
ables, e.g. as space is continuous the layout also is, while the number of turbines
is discrete. Traditionally, wind farm optimization are single decision problems,
meaning that only at a single point in time a choice is made; when designing the
park and deciding on layout, turbine type etc. However, increasing attention is
being paid to control strategies and wake steering and incorporating these in the
design. If these are included, the problem could become a multi decision prob-
lem[18]. With this, the operator of the park will have to make decisions on how it
==PAGE:21==
2.1 System engineering in the wind industry
11
Figure 2.1: Dream design of wind turbines from for each discipline, by Rick Hin-
richs.
is controlled along the lifetime of the park.
Farm level optimization is currently being developed further and significant re-
sources are being spent on research seeking to lower computational cost, raise
accuracy and introduce more sophisticated control strategies etc. In order to cap-
ture the effects on design for future FOWT farms, including the station keeping
design dimension in same frameworks as the other parts, will be highly relevant
i.e. the effect of using shared anchors must be seen in relation to other parameters
that effect the design.. Two main long term academic efforts doing this are found,
both seeking to include all main aspects of wind farm optimization e.g. loads and
layout with economics as main objective function, WISDEM by NREL and TOP-
FARM by DTU Wind Energy [18]. Both are based on the opensource optimization
framework OpenMDAO [22] [23].OpenMDAO, Open Multi Disciplinary Analysis
and Optimization, is used in aerospace and other multi disciplinary industries.
OpenMDAO drives the optimizations and TOPFARM/WISDEM builds models,
variables etc. into OpenMDAO. E.g. wakemodels developed by DTU/NREL or
other is built into OpenMDAO in TOPFARM/WISDEM. There are also several
commercial software tools available[24], including OpenWind, WindFarmer, Wind-
PRO, WindSim and WindFarm. In spite of the effort to create these holistic tools
of design of wind parks, this has yet to fully reach deployment in industry. It
is however recognized that many parks have been designed using optimization [6]
[24]. In an order to leverage on existing capabilities and add to these, this study
seeks to integrate FOWT station keeping in TOPFARM.
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Studies in farm optimization
12
2.2
Studies in farm optimization
In order to determine the performance of farm optimization, a few studies in farm
optimization have been reviewed, and the outcome and performance of these eval-
uated. Quite a number of studies on wind farm optimization has been conducted,
overall finding great results using coupled optimization, compared to decoupled
optimization and existing parks. This has been done reviewing optimizations us-
ing different solvers including both gradients- and non-gradients based methods,
optimizations of both onshore parks and offshore parks and with different design
variables. Below a few are described, all studies found have showed promising
results:
Wind farm power output optimization has been done using lower fidelity wake
models for years [25]. In a study from 2012 work by [25] optimized an on-shore
park using the Park wake model and a randomized local search algorithm, yielding
up to 10% increase in power output. This study also compared its algorithm to
other existing AEP optimization tools. This study was only looking at optimiz-
ing power production, and not an overall economic measure like LCOE. Thereby
not all disciplines are captured, however AEP optimizations are found being the
foundation for later LCOE/COE optimizations, which capturing more disciplines
as also considering the costs.
Quite more complex, [26] studied the effect of optimizing an offshore farm
with multiple design variables, including rotor diameter, rated power, hub height
and layout. In this study, the authors found that a significant lowering in Cost
Of Energy, COE, could be found by coupling optimization of turbine design and
layout. This is a case of full coupling including also turbine design in the farm
design process, and looking at an overall economic measure. This was compared
to sequential optimization, i.e. optimizing first turbines and then park layout, and
found to be clearly superior. The biggest difference were found for optimizations
with constraints specifying small turbine spacing. This study used a FLORIS wake
model and using only analytical gradients allowing for fast computation.
Also showing superiority of coupled optimization is work done by the IEA [27]
using a completely different optimization strategy; Particle Swarm Optimization,
PSA. This is a non-gradient based optimization strategy. This was used to op-
timize Levelized Cost of Energy, LCOE, with the design variables being turbine
placement. The main drivers of LCOE was AEP(due to wake effects), substructure
cost and electrical cost(cabling routes). This study showed that using a Multidisci-
plinary Design Analysis and Optimization, MDAO, method to optimize the layout
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Modeling of components for floating wind
13
yielded lower LCOE on a reference park than what the original design yielded by
lowering the LCOE by 1.11%, in contrast to a reduction of 0.28% by sequential
optimization. It is noted however that this only used lower fidelity models, i.e.
The Jensen Wake model.
It is found in line with expectations that coupled optimization on wind farms yield
great results, both compared to non-optimized farms and to sequential optimiza-
tion. However, naturally, all parts of the wind farm must be modeled in the same
optimization in order to do a fully coupled optimization. If floating wind farms are
to be optimized, mooring and anchoring models needs to be included, both in the
case of using shared anchors and not using shared anchors, with shared anchors
probably introducing the most complexity to the system.
2.2.1
Floating wind optimization
Another approach to using optimization in floating wind, is found in the design
of the floater and mooring system. In [28], different combinations of floaters and
mooring systems are tested and optimized yielding a Pareto front on cost vs. tower
movement. As the mooring and floater both affects the stability of the structure,
optimizing these coupled makes great sense. For different floaters, quite different
mooring systems were found optimal, as the Pareto front revealed a trade off be-
tween stability and cost. It was found for submersibles, depending on the structure,
that slack to semi taut lines would be most cost effective. Consequently, to do op-
timization on mooring systems without taking into account the stability provided
by a specific floater, might yield sub-optimal results. In this study however, the
stability will not be considered, and thus not have much relevance. However, it
is acknowledged that if including stability, considering stability from mooring and
floater, is needed. As floating is a quite new field, less research has been found on
optimizing floating wind.
2.3
Modeling of components for floating
wind
Though it is a novel thing to include floating wind in a holistic wind farm optimiza-
tion, the main components in this are not new areas of research. In the oil and
gas industry, anchoring and mooring have long been used for station keeping of
platforms, wherefore much of the technology is known. One of the key differences
is that instead of commissioning a single platform, a lot of FOWT are going to be
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Modeling of components for floating wind
14
commissioned in a commercial scale park. For most floating devices, a minimum
of three lines are applied to keep this in position to secure that the station keeping
system can handle forces from any direction, this is with the exception of TLP
foundations. Traditionally each mooring line is then connected to an anchor. In
some appliances, it has been suggested to include more than 3 lines both for safety
and for cost optimization. In the following, literature regarding design of mooring
and anchoring systems are reviewed and described:
2.3.1
Anchors
In a traditional setup known from the Oil and Gas industry, one mooring line is
attached to one anchor. Assuming 3 mooring lines per FOWT, this would also
result in 3 anchors per FOWT. However, it has been suggested to connect several
mooring lines to the same anchor. This would allow for fewer anchors to be de-
ployed introducing cost savings. Differing from conventional anchor setups with
3 mooring lines per turbine attached to 3 anchors, is a novel system suggested by
[12]. In this work shared anchors are introduced with 3 or 6 mooring lines per
anchor. The resulting force on the anchors is evaluated in a Wind-wave climate
using a reference semi-submersible floater, with the overall conclusion that lower
anchor forces are experienced in the 3 line system and but higher forces are expe-
rienced in the 6 line system. Furthermore, the cost of shared anchors vs single line
anchors is compared, showing a significant cost reduction in mooring/anchoring
cost. The 3-line system is adopted by Equinor in Hywind Tampen[16]. Shared
anchors of pile type are also suggested by [4] for FOWT parks with ”strategically
positioned anchors and mooring lines”.
Another approach using less anchors is investigated by [29], evaluating the possi-
bility for turbine-turbine connections. Given a semi-submersible platform with 3
lines, it is concluded that forming a triangle of turbine-turbine connections with
3 anchors, one at each corner, is found more economically feasible. It is noted
that these two, the shared anchors and the turbine-turbine connections, could pos-
sibly be combined. In this project, the novel concept of shared anchors will be
assessed using optimization while turbine-turbine connections will be kept out of
the project but could be an interesting further advancement for later inclusion.
2.3.2
Mooring modeling
Along with anchors, mooring systems will naturally have to be modeled. Modeling
of mooring systems will be a core element in this project and preliminary design
and dimension will be developed for the optimizations. The existing experience
is reviewed in order to leverage these when modeling mooring. Mooring systems
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Modeling of components for floating wind
15
have long been used in the Oil and Gas industry. Several differences the Oil and
Gas industry applications and the application for FOWT are listed in [4], includ-
ing possibly lower security requirements due to lower hazards in case of faults, as
FOWT will not be manned or have the same risk of polluting the ocean. This pos-
sibly enables FOWT parks to lower the safety factors if it is found feasible. From
the Oil and Gas industry catenary lines are known to be favoured for applications
with water depths lower than 100[m] [4] and in water depths below 200[m] taut or
semi-taut lines are used. For applications below 500[m] TLP are used.
Existing models of this is reviewed. It is found that modeling of mooring lines
has been done in various ways with different fidelity, including or excluding dy-
namics, segmentation etc. Several fully coupled programs for solving dynamics of
mooring of FOWT exists, including HAWC2 from DTU Wind Energy and FAST
from NREL[4], however these models are also the most time and computational
extensive. A simpler model is found in an open source software that does quasi-
static calculations; MAP++[30]. This has a full calculation of stiffness matrices
and forces from the mooring system. This allows for different chain sizes along
one mooring chain. This software is integrated into NREL software WISEM and
can be used for optimization on mooring/foundation design. This is found to have
good accuracy and fast computation.
Besides reviewing existing software and experience from Oil and Gas industry,
several mooring optimization studies have been reviewed, both optimizations on
FOWT and Oil/Gas units are included. In this study several of the methods in the
reviewed studies have been adopted and results taken into account. In other cases
the studies provided knowledge of the further potential if expanding the models.
In [31] an approach for segmentation of catenary mooring is modelled, yielding a
significant price reduction in mooring lines compared to having same type along
the whole length of mooring line. This project will only consider mooring lines
with one type of line, due to simplicity.
A thorough study [32] looked at mooring line design specifically for FOWT also
comparing differences and taking outset in DNV-GL standards [33]. A 6-line sys-
tem is recommended by the author and two site cases are examined and a cost
based design optimization is done for each of them. Furthermore, it is found that,
in contradiction to some cases in the oil and gas industry, onshore maintenance of
chains is found infeasible for FOWT. This study used stiffness matrix derived by
[34] having all 6 DOF, building on previous work deriving only a displacement 3
DOF stiffness matrix. Further [34] introduces the well known equations for forces
from the catenary mooring lines.
In a work done by [35], modeling of mooring lines is done statically and dynam-
ically, optimizing on total weight of the mooring system including anchors. In
this work, it is found that applying 11 mooring lines not uniformly spaced is more
==PAGE:26==
2.4 Summary of findings and relation to project
16
feasible than 9 lines uniformly spaced for a given site in the Mediterranean. This
study uses ULS, Ultimate Limit State and ALS, Accidental Limit State to design
the mooring system. Also [36] finds that a higher number of lines is feasible with
increasing depth.
It is found in the different optimizations of mooring systems that mooring lines
have been subject to being able to withstand ULS, ALS and FLS, Fatigue Limit
State. It it is noted that for a given number of lines in a given pattern, length of
line,S, and line weight per meter,w is used as design variables. In a few cases the
number of lines and the pattern is also considered as design variables. In most
cases, further than having load cases as constraints, optimizations it is often con-
strained on maximum admissible displacement, xadm. It is recommended by [35]
to use 15% of the depth as the maximum offset.
2.4
Summary of findings and relation to
project
It is found in the literature review that optimization is a very powerful tool when
working with multidisciplinary problems. This includes both turbine design but
also wind farm design. Especially coupled optimization is found to show great
results. Furthermore, it is found that optimization including both CAPEX and
revenue has been concluded superior to only looking and AEP maximization. It
is also recognized that the introduction of floating wind requires to leverage on
mooring and anchoring design from the oil and gas industry. The novel feature
of shared anchors in farm optimization will possibly introduce new trade offs, or
add complexity to existing ones. This project will use existing theory from the
oil and gas industry by modeling of preliminary design catenary mooring chain
and anchors, also using the recommended maximum allowable offset of 15% of the
depth. These will then be used for exploring the potential cost savings by using
shared anchors. As a part of this, it will be explored how this will interfere with
other trade offs in farm design. Though it is found economically feasible in several
studies to use more than 3 mooring lines, only 3 per FOWT is used in this study.
It is also recognized, that in order to evaluate the effect of using shared anchors
in the most accurate way, more advanced models should be used and every key
aspect must be included. Though being a very significant part, installation is only
included in a very simple way. Further the most basic mooring modeling is chosen
as this seems as a natural first step. Advancements looking at floater/mooring dy-
namics, as done in many of the reviewed studies, and installation would beneficial
for the accuracy of the results. In this regard, an in-depth look at the literature
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Summary of findings and relation to project
17
about installation of mooring systems and anchors would be appropriate, though
this is not done in this literature review.
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
In this section the overall approach used in this project is presented. First the
method for finding the design load for the mooring is presented in 3.1.1. In section
3.1.2 consideration regarding the resulting force on a shared anchor is presented.
in 3.1.3 Several possible patterns are investigated and evaluated on their potential
for redundancy and theoretical minimum number of anchors per turbine. From
this a pattern for further investigation is chosen. In 3.2 the mooring model uses is
presented. This order to investigate the chosen pattern, it is presented in detail how
mooring and anchoring forces are calculated for different directions of displacement
and turbine offsets i.e displacement from initial position. This is verified against
another mooring calculation software to ensure correct results. In 3.3 the anchor
calculations are presented for both drag and suction anchors. Further this is used
for doing optimization minimizing weight of mooring and thereby cost, with chain
length and thickness as design variables. Next installation in 3.4 is presented, in
3.5 the number subsea investigations(SSI) needed per site is investigated resulting
in several viable assumptions. Last, it is described how economic calculations of
the above are done in 3.6.
3.1
Pattern selection
If using shared anchors, the anchors must be placed in a certain pattern, in order
for them to reach the same shared anchor. This can be done in several manners,
which are investigated throughout this section.
3.1.1
Floater properties and Load cases
In the design of mooring lines safetyfactors are used in the literature and in ac-
cordance with design standards, the safety factors are imposed using Design Load
Cases, DLC. The studies found in the literature review in general ensured compli-
ance with Ultimate Limit States, ULS, Accidental limit States, ALS and Fatigue
Limit States, FLS[33]. In order to calculate all of these however, a specific floater
is needed, as these will take into account the wave forces on the floater and the
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Pattern selection
19
dynamic properties of the floater. In this study, main focus is on preliminary de-
sign of mooring and the related trade offs in farm design, which is why detailed
calculations of on a foundation is not done. The effects of a changing design load
will be evaluated at a later stage, however how much the design load will change
with changing safety factors will require calculations using a foundation design.
In this study, it is assumed that the maximum force on the structure will be two
times the maximum thrust. It is known that the maximum thrust will occur at
rated power, just before the blades pitch out, seen in the thrust curve in figure 3.1
at 11 m/s.
Figure 3.1: Thrust curve for the DTU 10 MW reference turbine
In addition to the thrust, there will be forces due to waves and current. With
the assumption above, it is assumed that these will at all times be below or the
same as the maximal thrust by using a design load of 3000kN for mooring chain.
The lower the design load, the cheaper the station keeping system will be. The
lower the safety factor, the lower the design load will also be. Thus it is desired to
have the lowest safety factor still insuring sufficient safety, as lower design load will
yield lower cost. The safety factor needed is defined by the different certification
organization. Depending on the setup, different safety factors will be implied in
order to be certified by the organization. A review of the different requirements
from the organizations are found in appendix A.
==PAGE:30==
3.1 Pattern selection
20
3.1.2
Forces from multiple turbines on the same
anchor
If using shared anchors, the resulting force on these is a key question. In a compre-
hensive study by Casey Fontana [12], the forces on shared anchors were explored.
In this study the NREL 5MW reference turbine was fitted on a DeepCwind OC4
floater. This study considers several load cases on this setup and analyzes the
forces on anchors in both a single line anchoring system, a system with three lines
per anchor and a system with 6 lines per anchor, all with 3 lines per floater.It was
concluded that a system with three mooring lines per anchor resulted in a smaller
force on the anchors than with just a single mooring line per anchor[12]. For the 6
lines per anchor case, the opposite was the case with higher resulting anchor force.
The study by [12] study treats these cases as non-redundant. Besides this study,
not much literature is found that in detail describes the forces on shared anchors
patterns.
3.1.3
Patterns geometry
As mentioned, in order to use shared anchors they must be placed in a certain
way. In the following the patterns available using regular structures are explored.
Three mooring lines are the minimum number of mooring lines needed per turbine
using catenary or slack/(semi-)taut mooring, in order to have restoring force in
every direction. However, up to 11 mooring lines have been suggested in some
studies due to economic benefits [36].
In this exploration of mooring patterns
with shared anchors, all patterns that are expandable until any size and have
angles above 60 degrees between evenly spaced mooring lines are explored. The
properties of the patterns elaborated with the goal of finding a pattern for further
investigation. Only regular patterns are explored in the following. It is in this
section also review how much potential the different patterns have for redundancy.
A pattern is considered redundant if it is able to withstand a loss of anchor/mooring
chain without major consequences as turbine-turbine collisions. These are further
explained in appendix A
3.1.3.1
Threesome patterns
The threesome pattern have three mooring lines per turbine and three mooring
lines per anchor, and is seen in figure 3.2 It is common for all of the patterns that
they can be expanded in any direction. In figure 3.2 and 3.3c the expansion of the
pattern is shown in a triangle shape, however the same pattern can be expanded to
fit most shapes. In figure 5.2 it is seen how the pattern expands in a foursome. The
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Pattern selection
21
resulting force on the anchors have been studied in [12], with the conclusion that
this will result in lower resulting force on the anchors, due to cancellation effects
from the different direction of force. This pattern has equal spacing throughout
the pattern.
(a) Layout pattern with shared anchors
and three mooring lines per WTG
(b) Same pattern shown in greater scale
Figure 3.2
The pattern is evaluated to have a medium potential for redundancy, as with
the loss of one mooring line/anchor only two mooring lines will retain, a major
drift offs will occur. In this case, an axis symmetrical anchor that can withstand
loads in any horizontal direction must be used, as suction anchors. This situation
is shown in figure 3.3. It is here stressed that no calculations have been made in
effort to check what it will take to make this design classified as redundant i.e.
withstand the below failure.
==PAGE:32==
3.1 Pattern selection
22
(a)
Layout
pattern
with
shared anchors and three
mooring lines per WTG in-
tact
(b) Same pattern with a an-
chor failure
(c)
Same
pattern
with
largest
possible
drift
off,
given all other components
survive
Figure 3.3: Illustration of the possible drift off if an anchor is lost
It is seen in figure 3.3 that with the loss of one anchor, though large drift of
may occur for three turbines, if all other component withstands the new situation,
no collision with nearby structure will occur.
3.1.3.2
Foursome patterns
Two patterns can be made with four mooring lines per turbine, one where an-
chors have two mooring lines attached and one with 4 attached. Non of them
have been either investigated comprehensively or have any particular potential for
redundancy. The four mooring lines cover the two main directions(vertical and
horizontal in the figure) in respectively positive and negative direction. With the
loss of one anchor or mooring line, the system will have only very little restraining
force in the direction covered by that mooring line. The turbine spacing is not
equal over the course of the pattern. The pattern shown in 3.4a has a minimum
spacing of
q
2 × (r2
f) but a spacing along the mooring lines of 2 × rf. The pattern
in figure 3.4b has a minimum spacing of 2 × rf but a spacing across of
q
2 × (2r2
f).
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Pattern selection
23
(a) Pattern with 4 mooring lines per WTG
and 4 mooing lines per WTG
(b) Pattern with 4 mooring lines per WTG
and 2 mooring lines per anchor
Figure 3.4
3.1.3.3
Hexagon patterns
The hexagon pattern can be made in two ways, with six mooring lines per turbine
and three per anchor 3.5a or three mooring lines per WTG and six per anchor
as seen in figure 3.5a. The first with a high potential for redundancy due to the
large number of mooring lines per turbine. However due to this, the number of
anchors per turbine will converge towards 2, which is amongst the highest number
of anchors per turbines in the investigated patterns. This pattern has like the
pattern shown in figure 3.2 evenly spaced turbines with 1, 73×rf. No investigations
of the resulting anchor force has been found.
Quite opposite properties is found for the pattern in 3.5b. This structure has very
little or no possibility for redundancy, as the loss of any mooring line will result
in a potential collision with another turbine. Any loss of an anchor will result
in 6 potential collisions with other turbines. However, this has the lowest found
theoretical number of anchors per turbine, with down to 0,5 anchors per turbine.
The spacing of this pattern is not even, with 1 × rf the nearest three turbine, but
2 × rf to the furthest turbine in the perimeter of a turbine.
==PAGE:34==
3.1 Pattern selection
24
(a) Pattern with mooring lines per WTG
and 3 mooring lines per anchor
(b) Pattern with 3 mooring lines per WTG
and 6 mooring lines per anchor
Figure 3.5
3.1.3.4
Summary of findings of patterns
As shown in the section above, a range of patterns to use for shared anchors exists,
this under the described limitations. An overview of the properties of the explored
patterns are found in table 3.1. It is found that the lower theoretical minimum ratio
of anchors per turbine, the less potential for redundancy. Due to the limitations of
not including actual calculations of floater dynamics and forces from environment
in this in this study, the effects of having or not having redundancy is not captured
in this study. The lowest theoretical number of anchors per turbine will have an
impact in the later cost analysis, as these will be key in determining how much
can be saved on anchor cost. In only two of the patterns, a detailed analysis of
the forces on the anchors have been conducted - done by [12]. Of these only the
threesome pattern with 3 mooring lines per anchor and 3 mooring lines per FOWT
finds lower forces. In this case the anchors can be designed to withstand the same
force as the mooring line, as this will not be exerted. In the other investigated
pattern by [12] greater forces on the anchor is seen, making this case a bit more
complicated. If this was chosen for a further investigation two different design loads
should be used for the mooring lines and the anchors. It is found that minimum
turbine spacing vary between 1 and 2 for different patterns.
In the following the threesome pattern will be investigate the potential of the
threesome pattern and use the same design load for anchors as for mooring lines.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Mooring modeling
25
Model
Mooring
lines per
floater
Mooring
lines per
anchor
Anchors
per WTG
minimum
Potential for
redundancy
Force
study
conducted
Min
turbine
spacing
Threesome
3
3
1
Medium
Yes –
lower
resulting
force[12]
1,73 x rf
Foursome
4
2
2
Low
No
2 x rf
Foursome
4
4
1
Low
No
1,41 x rf
Hexagon
6
3
2
Very High
No
1,73 x rf
Hexagon
3
6
0,5
Very Low
Yes –
Higher
resulting
force[12]
1 x rf
Table 3.1: Overview of patterns and their properties
3.2
Mooring modeling
Having a pattern for further investigation, the mooring lines for this must be
modeled for investigating the cost and trying to minimize this.
3.2.1
Selection of mooring model
Several solutions for mooring modeling already exist with different advantages and
fidelity. A small overview is found in table 3.2. Generally these can be categorized
as static, quasi static or Dynamic. In static calculations, time dependant forces
are neglected, i.e, inertia forces and vibrations. In quasi-static, the calculations are
done as static but trying to take into account the dynamic forces, e.g. a quasi-static
calculation method recommended by DNV-GL is to add a bigger turbine offset for
quasi-static calculations taking into account the dynamic effects, without doing a
full dynamic time series[37]. Dynamics are done calculating time series that take
into account the inertia forces and vibrations.
==PAGE:36==
3.2 Mooring modeling
26
Model:
Simple
catenary
equations
MAP++
MoorDyn
Fast/Hawc2/
OrcaFlex etc
Time
dependence
Static
Static/quasi-static
Dynamic
Dynamic
Fidelity
Low
Medium
Medium
High
Suitable for
optimization
Yes
Yes
No
No
Language
Any
C++ wrapped in
several languages
including Python
C++ wrapped in
several languages
including Python
Various
Table 3.2: The considered models for mooring modeling
Dynamic calculations are generally computational expensive to run, as the
system is solved in every time step instead of just in one instance. Therefore a
static or quasi-static modeling is preferred for this application. Furthermore, as
TOPFARM is a Python based framework, the model must be the same or at least
integrate-able. An overview of the considered modeling tool and their properties
are found in 3.2. It is found that MAP++ [30] and the by NREL used software
PyMAP which wraps MAP++ in Python seems suitable, but implementation
issues prevented the use of this. From known theory, a script was made calculating
the force exerted by the mooring chains.
3.2.2
Mooring calculations
As it is found in the literature review catenary mooring will be the cheaper option
for low and intermediate water depths, which is why this is modeled in this study.
In this study a small script for calculating mooring forces is made, PyMADS
(Mooring Analysis and Design Software). The theory of this is presented in the
following:
A relationship between depth and mooring line length, can be found by equation
3.1[35], S being line length, D depth, FT line tension, wwater the weight of the
submerged mooring chain per meter, H the horizontal force exerted by the mooring
chain due to its weight. As the calculations are static, it is assumed that an equal
size opposite direction force will counteract H:
S
D =
s
2
FT
wwaterH −1
(3.1)
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Mooring modeling
27
According to DNV-GL [38] the maximum breaking load i.e the force that will break
the chain, Q, can be determined dependant on chain diameter as:
Q
wwater
= 103.84 (44 −0.08dchain)
(3.2)
From publicly available data from mooring line supplier Vicinay[39], the weight
in water and air for a given chain diameter is found by linear interpolation between
points for every 5[mm]. The points in table 3.3 are a truncated version of the table
with dchain ranging up to 225[mm].
dchain[mm]
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
wair [kg/m]
50
60.5
72
84.5
98
112.5
128
144.5
162
wwater[kg/m]
43.5
52.6
62.6
73.5
85.3
97.9
111.4
125.7
140.9
Table 3.3: Mooring chain properties
Assuming that the maximum breaking load is reached just as the whole chain
is lifted from the seabed and vertical forces will be present at the anchor and using
equation 3.1 and equation 3.2, equation 3.3 can be found[35], with Smax being the
total line length and SF being the Safety Factor:
Smax
D
=
s
2
SF ·
Q
wwaterD −1
(3.3)
In figure 3.6 the maximum allowable line length can be found using 3.3 for different
values of D and dchain. If more than the allowable line length is used, the chain
will break before all of the chain is lifted from the seabed. By making the line
length S longer than Smax, no more restoring force will be obtained.
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Mooring modeling
28
Figure 3.6: Maximum allowable line length
The fraction of the line length used compared to the allowable length is defined
as the utilization ratio, UR.
UR =
S
Smax
(3.4)
The a parameter defines the shape of the catenary mooring. a can be found from
the chain length S, in the case when all of the chain is suspended can be found as:
a = S2
2D −D
2
(3.5)
The maximum horizontal force exerted by a mooring chain with line length S can
be found using following, using a from 3.5:
Hmax = awwater
(3.6)
The maximum vertical force exerted by the mooring line with length S can be
found as:
Vmax = S ∗wwater
(3.7)
Equations for calculating the force when not all of the line is suspended, is found
from equations used by [34], that are simplified to be inelastic. These are used
to calculate the force from each mooring line, seen in equation 3.8, where l is the
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Mooring modeling
29
horizontal distance from turbine to anchor and D is the depth.
l = S −V
w + H
w sinh−1
 V
H

D = 1
w
h√
H2 + V 2 −H
i
(3.8)
From the maximum horizontal and vertical force equations 3.6,3.7, the maximum
length is found, lmax, from the anchor point to the wind turbine connection using
equation 3.9, illustrated in figure 3.9. For any value of l larger than lmax vertical
forces will be present on the anchor.
lmax = S −Vmax
w
+ Hmax
w
sinh−1
 Vmax
Hmax

(3.9)
A force-displacement curve can then be made, varying the value of l in a range up
to lmax and solving the equations 3.8 for V and H.
The results obtained PyMADS is compared to PyMAP. In a case with; S = 1435,
D = 200 and dchain = 89[mm] yielding the results shown in figure 3.7. As theory
is known, this is simply an additional check to ensure that implementation is done
correctly.
Figure 3.7: Force displacement curve for PyMAP and PyMADS
As expected, the forces from the two methods are almost identical, only showing
a small discrepancy for a distance to lmax of 2, where PyMAP is found a bit more
==PAGE:40==
3.2 Mooring modeling
30
conservative.
Having the force from one mooring line, the restoring force from the multiple
mooring lines is combined as:
Hrestoring =
X
i
cos(αi) ∗Hi
(3.10)
Where α is the angle between the mooring line and the direction of the displace-
ment, as shown in figure 3.8 and i is for the different lines. A top view of the setup
is provided in figure 3.8, showing a FOWT (threesome) connected to three anchors,
A1, A2 and A3. On figure the direction of displacement is marked, β = 60◦and
the angle between the direction of movement and the mooring, α3 corresponding
to anchor A3. In this case the value of the cos(α3) is -1, meaning that the whole
horizontal force from the third mooring line will counteract the movement of the
turbine, in direction β = 60◦as of equation 3.10. It can also be seen how anchor
line one and two will only be able to enforce the movement, as they are only able
to pull. The force line 1 and 2 exerts in the direction of the movement will however
fall with displacement as can be seen from figure 3.7.
In order to ensure that the maximum force from the mooring system is reached
before the maximum allowable offset is reached, attention must be paid to the
initial position of the system. The initial position is in the following also referred
to as the pre-tension.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Mooring modeling
31
Figure 3.8: Figure showing displacement direction β = 60 and α for line 3
The pretension of the mooring lines is found using equation 3.11 as described
in [35]. lpre is the horizontal distance from anchor point to the turbines initial
position and xadm is the maximum admissible offset as seen in figure 3.9.
==PAGE:42==
3.2 Mooring modeling
32
Figure 3.9: A catenary mooring line is shown in its initial shape(lpre) and fully
extended (lmax) with the maximum allowable offset (xadm)
lpre = lmax
v
u
u
tsin2 α +
 
cos α −∆xadm
lmax
!2
(3.11)
It is found, that dependent of the direction of the displacement,β, different preten-
sion lengths are needed to ensure that lmax is reached when the turbine is displaced
xadm. This is due to the fact that a change in β will give a change in α, as shown
in figure 3.8. For a system with 3 mooring lines with equal spacing, the cases
between β = 0◦and β = 60◦are interesting, as any other case will be the same as
one of these, due to symmetry. Here with β = 0◦defining the case where there is
a displacement so that the turbine moves equally away from two of the anchors,
along the mooring line for the third anchor shown in figure 3.10a, equal to along
the x-axis in figure 3.8. The case with β = 60◦is defined as where one line is in
direct pull, and the turbine is displaced away from this lines anchor, along with a
line defined by that mooring line seen in figure 3.10b and also shown in figure 3.8
by the green arrow.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Mooring modeling
33
(a) Case with β = 0◦degrees, fully
extended with xadm = 30[m] and
l = 1401.5[m]
(b) Case with β = 60◦, fully ex-
tended with xadm = 17.5[m] and
l = 1401.5[m]
Figure 3.10: Shape of catenary mooring systems for displacement direction β = 0◦
and β = 60◦marked by the orange arrow
It is found that β = 0◦yields the longest length and β = 60◦yields the shortest.
The footprint rf is defined as the single value of lpre that is used for all of the 3
mooring lines in a system as seen in figure 3.8.
An investigation of the force
dependent on different footprints and angles has been made with the same case
as used for camparison of PyMAP and PyMADS. The footprint has been varied
between rf = lmax−60◦= 1386.5[m] and rf = lmax−0◦= 1401.5[m].
For every
footprint the total restoring force is calculated for different angles of displacement,
between β = 0◦and β = 60◦, shown in figure 3.11.
==PAGE:44==
3.2 Mooring modeling
34
Figure 3.11: Force comparison for different β values
In the cases where the line has reached full extension before maximum allow-
able displacement, the force at this point is used. e.i. if the maximum allowable
offset is 30m but lmax of one of the lines reached at 25m, the force at 25m will
be used. This is especially the case for larger β angles and larger footprint, one
example of this is seen in figure 3.10b where the maximum extension is reached at
17.5m for β = 60◦while for β = 0◦the 30m is reached. As it is assumed that the
turbine will have the same external forces from all directions, the mooring system
should be designed to withstand the same load from any direction. As of this, it
is desired to have the footprint rf so that the same restoring force is obtained no
matter the direction of displacement. In figure 3.11 this is obtained for a footprint
just above 1400m. However, it is seen that this footprint is very close to the foot-
print of l0◦= 1401.5m where the plotted lines cross, showing that the maximum
force the mooring system can exert is the same in any direction. Therefore in the
mooring design, the footprint is taken as rf = l0◦. All other angles than β = 0◦
are fairly close to each other, and the limit force is chosen to be calculated from
β = 60◦.The force found is denoted as Hmooring.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Anchor calculations
35
The mass of mooring line is simply calculated as:
m = S × wair
(3.12)
A cost of 2200[€/Tonne] is used to calculate the cost of mooring chains.
3.3
Anchor calculations
As for mooring chain modeling, anchor modeling naturally also have to be modeled
in order to model anchors that can withstand the necessary force. In the following
anchors for both drag anchors and suction anchors will be presented. This for the
soil types Medium soft clay and very soft clay.
3.3.1
Drag anchors
For anchors that only have one mooring line connected, drag anchors could be
used. The name of drag anchors comes from the installation method, where they
are dragged along the seabed which make them catch on to this and penetrate it.
These are known to be cost efficient and easy to install and often used in with
catenary mooring[4]. However, these only take forces in one horizontal direction
and do not have any capacity for vertical forces.
The mass of the anchors is
determined from the soil type and maximum holding capacity.
The following
equation can be used for Vryhof anchors[40].
manchor = Hext
a
1/b
(3.13)
Medium clay
Soft clay
a
229,19
161.23
b
0,91
0,91
With a and b given dependent of soil type and anchor model. An overview of
these can be found in [40]. In this study the model in Stevin MK3 is used. A cost
of 4.5 [k€/tonne] [6]is used for calculating the cost of anchors. The weight of the
drag anchors found from this method is comparable with an undisclosed document
provided by [6], the weight of drag anchors in both very soft and medium clay is
seen in figure 3.12.
==PAGE:46==
3.3 Anchor calculations
36
3.3.2
Suction anchors
For anchors with multiple mooring lines attached, suction anchors can be used as
these can absorb force in any horizontal direction. Suction anchors are cylinders
that are open in one end only, the open end is placed on the seabed and the anchors
are then forced into the seabed by lowering the pressure inside the cylinder during
installation. Having forced the cylinder into the seabed the valves are closed off.
In accordance with American Bureau Of Shipping, ABS [41] the length L, outer
diameter danchor and wall thickness Tof the anchors can be found using:
L, danchor, T = c ∗Hdcalc
(3.14)
Where c and dcalc are different for the different dimensions calculated i.e. if T
is to be calculated, the corresponding values of c and dcalc are to be used found in
table 3.4 for very soft clay and 3.5 for medium soft clay.
T
danchor
L
c
2,0580
0,3095
1,1161
dcalc
0,2803
0,2798
0,3442
Table 3.4: calculation factors for very soft clay
T
danchor
L
c
0,8998
0,1260
0,5166
dcalc
0,3361
0,3561
0,3995
Table 3.5: calculation factors for medium soft clay
The weight of the anchors are only dependent of the external force and the soil
type. These scales as is shown in figure 3.12.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Anchor calculations
37
Figure 3.12: The mass of the anchors using the models from the ABS design guide.
The suction anchor calculations are done based on a trustworthy source and
they are found comparable to results in the reviewed literature. It is found in [42]
that an anchor weighing 56.7[T] is capable of withholding a force of 9960[kN] in
soft clay, to reach the same holding capacity with the method presented in this
paper, a weight of 38.21 Tonnes must be used in medium clay and 73.92 Tonnes
in very soft clay. Though these results are not directly comparable, these are in
the same range, considering also that the softness in [42] is ”Soft” witch suggest
to be between ”very soft” and ”medium”, which the weight of the anchor also is.
However, no detailed investigation of what the definitions of ”Very soft”, ”Soft”
and ”medium” covers have been carried out. In another study investigating shared
anchors[12], suction anchors with a mass in the range 44-67 tonnes was found, this
for forces in the range 5400-7700kN, again, in line with the results found in this
study.
However, it is found that the results seems quite optimistic compared to other data
points. In Hywind Scotland anchors weighing 300 tonnes were used for the 8[MW]
turbines [43], and in a non-published document a 120 tonnes suction anchor were
suggested[6]. These real world data are not comparable at all to what is found
by the calculations and in the reviewed literature. This suggest some uncertainty
about the trustworthiness of previous presented calculations. The weight of the
anchors can be quite crucial in cost comparisons between shared anchors using
suction anchors and not shared anchors using drag anchors.Therefore two different
==PAGE:48==
3.3 Anchor calculations
38
anchors sizes are presented. One size based on the models from the design guide
and one trying to match the real world data points. An effort was made in order to
match the results from the real world cases onto the model. The holding capacity
on neither of the real world cases is known precisely, but the anchor with a mass
of 120 tonnes is approximated to have a holding capacity of 2000 kN, by analysing
the rest of the suggested mooring system in the document. The holding capacity
of the anchor with a mass of 300 Tonnes is unknown, besides the fact that is would
have to be able to withstand the forces from the 8 MW turbine. Further the soil
type is not known the neither of them either. It is found that by multiplying
the dimensions of the anchors by 2, for a force of 2000 kN leads to an anchor
mass of around 150 tonnes if assuming very soft clay, while a mass of 300 tonnes
corresponds to roughly 4600kN, as seen in figure 3.13.
No clarity is found about the reason for this major discrepancy between real world
cases and the model from an trustworthy source, which matches the reviewed
literature. However, from here on both cases will be considered.
Figure 3.13: The mass of anchors, for the tweaked model of suction anchors.
In figure 3.12 the weight of anchors found using the original model is seen, here
the mass of drag anchors and suction anchors in very soft clay raise with the same
pace. In contradiction, the weight of the drag anchors are raising faster in medium
clay compared to suction anchors in the same soil. Furthermore, it is seen that
the suction anchors are the heaviest in very soft clay until approximately 4150 kN
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Anchor calculations
39
but the lightest in medium clay.
In the tweaked model, it is found that suction anchors are the heaviest in any
case, with quite a large margin, seen in figure 3.13. As cost of 3[k€/T] is used for
suction anchors and 4.5[k€/T] for drag anchors, both cost found in an undisclosed
document provided by [6]. This results in the cost shown in figure 3.14 and 3.15.
It is noted that the cost of anchors here is only for supply, not installation. In the
original model figure 3.14, it is seen that the suction anchors are actually found
cheaper in supply, than drag anchors in same soil. Again, this is upside down in
the tweaked model figure 3.15 where the suction anchors are the most expensive
in any case.
Figure 3.14: Cost of anchors using original model
==PAGE:50==
3.4 Installation of mooring systems
40
Figure 3.15: Cost of anchors using the tweaked model
3.3.2.1
Other anchors options
Besides drag and suction anchors several other anchor options exist, both for sin-
gle direction and multiple directions in loading direction[3].The choice of suction
anchors, for anchors with multiple lines attached is not given, as other options
that could be cost competitive exist. These include driven piles and Dynamically
installed piles(DIP) [3]. Another option is to combine three single directional an-
chors e.g. drag anchors with a load ring, which then distributes the force to the
anchor that best takes the load direction. However as this option requires at least
three anchors, it is only feasible if 4 or more lines are attached. However, none of
these will be further studied here.
3.4
Installation of mooring systems
With a change in mooring system, the installation of this will naturally change
as well. A simple model for this is proposed in the following, in this regard. it is
stressed that the focus of this study is not particularly on the installation thus mak-
ing this a very simple model. Furthermore, the level of validation in this model will
be low and errors and inaccuracies might be present. It is included in recognition
==PAGE:51==
3.5 Subsea investigations
41
of the fact that a significant part of the cost will be due to installation. From an
undisclosed document provided by COP the following is achieved: for installation
of suction anchors 0.32 days of Weighing On Weather(WOW) is included and 0.07
for drag anchors.
Installation time [days]
Installation of suction anchor
1,27
installation of mooring line for suction anchor
0,48
installation of drag anchor and mooring line
1
Table 3.6: Expected number of days for installation of station keeping system
The time estimate for installation of suction anchors include; load of anchor,
positioning on site, installation itself and transit to and from site.
The installation of mooring lines include load of mooring line and installation itself.
The installation of drag anchor and mooring line includes all activities from load
of anchors and mooring lines, transit, positioning and the installation itself.
Day rate vessel for suction anchor
0,6 [k€/tonne]
Day rate vessel for drag anchor
2[k€/tonne]
Table 3.7: Rates for installation vessels
The cost of vessels are taken from a single cost reference point and assumed
to scale with the weight of the anchors, however it is known that this have quite
serious limitations.
3.5
Subsea investigations
When anchoring or installing bottom fixed foundations, soil information is impor-
tant in order to calculate the holding capacity of the anchor/foundation. As the
subsea investigations will represent a cost that will possibly vary with the number
of turbines or anchors, it is important to capture this cost in the design optimiza-
tion also. As with the load cases and redundancy considerations, the certification
organizations prescribe to what extend this is needed in order to be certified. The
same three organizations’ guidelines are reviewed for this information:
According to Bureau Veritas,[44] the extend of investigations vary with soil homo-
geneity. It is stated that for homogeneous soil (assumable over the area of the
site), only one CPT (cone penetration test) is required per foundation. However,
in the following section, it is stated that ”For wind farm, in addition to [2.3.3], a
==PAGE:52==
3.6 Economic evaluation
42
minimum of one investigation per corner and one in the centre of the area covered
by the wind farm may be recommended when soil conditions are homogeneous”.
This could suggest that only 5 investigations are needed (for a foursome area).
However it is not specified whether the requirement of one test per foundation is
in addition to this or if only 5 tests would be sufficient even for many turbines.
ABS refers to its bottom fixed guide[45], where it states that ”borings or prob-
ings are to be taken at all foundation locations to a suitable depth of at least the
anticipated depth of any pile penetrations plus a consideration for the soil vari-
ability [..]”, however there is a possibility to alternatives by; ”As an alternative,
geophysical surveys may be carried out and correlated with at least two borings or
probings in the vicinity to establish the soil profile at each foundation location”. It
is noted in this regard, that floating guide refers to the bottom fixed guide that is
naturally not designed for the purpose of floating. A similar description is found in
DNV-GLs system, where the FOWT guide refers to the bottom fixed guide, that
states: ”For multiple foundations such as in a wind farm, the soil stratigraphy and
range of soil strength properties shall be assessed per foundation location” but
follows with the guidance note that in case of very homogeneous soil across the
site this requirement might discarded. It is speculated in industry how much these
requirements will change during the maturation process of FOWT technology [6].
As it seems the standard overall would be 1 investigation per anchor, it seems that
some sources would prefer 1 per turbine[6].
From the study by Casey Fontana [12], it is found that the cost of Subsea investi-
gations is 83 k$ which is about 73.5k€.
3.6
Economic evaluation
The overall objective in the FOWT design optimization is to make a better eco-
nomic case. In the following it is presented how the economic case is evaluated.
3.6.1
Cost calculations
The total cost of mooring is evaluated in the following, and found as:
Ctot = Cmooring × 3 × nWTG + Canchor × nanchors + Cinstallation + CSSI × nSSI (3.15)
With cmooring being the cost of one mooring chain,nWTG being the number of
turbines, canchor being the cost of one anchor, nanchor being the number of anchors,
cinstallation being the total cost of installation and cSSI being the cost per SSI and
nSSI being the number of SSI. The cost of mooring chain and anchors are as
earlier presented calculated per tonne. The cost of installation is as described in
==PAGE:53==
3.6 Economic evaluation
43
the precocious section. The economic cases is calculated under assuming either,
5 SSI per site, one per turbine or one per anchor. In the case where a greater
footprint is needed to obtain the wanted turbine spacing, than what is possible
with a UR of one or less, more line is added at the same chain thickness as in the
rest of the line in order to connect to the anchor.
CChains k€/tonne
2.2
CSuction k€/tonne
3
CDrag k€/tonne
4.5
3.6.2
AEP calculations
In the DTU TOPFARM framework an AEP calculator is set up using the x and y
positions of all of the turbines along with the wind resources to calculate the AEP.
The wind data used are from Horns rev 1 and already integrated in the TOPFARM
context with in another script. This is applied for calculating the AEP and the
Weibull distribution can be found in Appendix C.1. A Gausian wake model from
the DTU software PyWake was used in these calculations.
3.6.3
IRR calculations
The revenue stream for the Internal Rate of Return, IRR is calculated based on
a price of 38[€/MWh] as found as a realistic market price found on Nordpool
[46]. The total CAPEX cost is calculated by assuming that the average cost of
mooring in the investigated ranges counts for 9 % of the total CAPEX cost as
found appropriate according to [5]. The average cost for case 6 which is described
in most detail, is found to be 39422 [k€]. The project life time is set to be 25 years
with the whole CAPEX as cost in year 0 and followed by 25 years of revenue with
constant AEP and cost of energy. The IRR calculations are done with the python
package Numpy.IRR.
3.6.4
Optimization
The TOPFARM framework is made based on the OpenMDAO software made for
optimizing multi-disciplinary problems, including aerospace and Wind park layout
optimization. The TOPFARM work is done over several development rounds and
includes a lot of the research done at DTU Wind. The mooring optimizations
are done using this framework. Some build-in modules are used, especially the
software for calculating AEP from pyWake.
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 4
Mooring optimization on
single turbine
The first optimization conducted is optimizing the mooring for a single turbine
having line length, S and chain diameter dchain as design variables.
4.1
Optimization model
The mooring design is found by optimizing on following optimization problem.
Given :
UR, dchain
Minimize :
cmooring
Such that :
10[mm] < dchain < 225[mm]
Hmooring(xadm, w, D, S) > Hext
0 < UR < 1
Where
wchain(dchain)
rf(S, D, xadm)
Hmooring(S, rf, w, xadmissible)
Smax(dchain, D, SF)
S(Smax, UR)
With S being the total line length, D being the depth, dchain being the diameter of
the chain, cmooring is the cost of a single mooring chain, Hmooring being the restoring
force from the mooring chains, xadm being the maximum admissible offset for the
platform, Hext is the maximum external force, SF is the Safety Factor on the chain,
Smax maximum chain length, S is the chain length, wchain is the weight of the chain
in water per meter.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Optimization model
45
The constraints on UR and dchain are imposed as bounds, using equation 3.4, with
UR in the interval [0.3;1]. Lower bound as found appropriate for not having a
unrealistic short line and 1 as the line length cannot exceed the maximum allowable.
dchain is varied between [10;225]mm as data is only collected in this range. There
is found no clear restrictions on the diameter in it self, however both end of the
bounds are believed to for extreme cases. Any increase in S or dchain will result in
an increase in both the cmooring and the total force exerted by the mooring system
Hmooring, as of equations 3.8 and 3.12 i.e an decrease in exerted force will lead to
a decrease in cost. Therefore, naturally the constraint on the minimal mooring
force is binding in any case.
As base case following is used; SF = 1, D = 100[m], Hext = 3000[kN], xadm =
0.15 × D = 15[m].
In figure 4.1 the area of solution is explored showing the
resulting force from maximum displacement in figure 4.1a along with the limit
state e.i. Hext. The mass of the same solutions are marked in figure 4.1b, the limit
state is marked in red. Along this line, the lower force constraint is binding and
it is known that on this edge the minimum mass must be found. In this case, it is
found to be for UR = 1, dchain = 61.3[mm] the lowest mass is obtained. It is found
in any optimization done, that the maximum line length is used, e.i. UR = 1.
(a) The mooring force for different config-
urations of the mooring system in the base
case
(b) The mass of the mooring system at
the intersection between the limit state
and mooring force, optimum marked by
the red dot
Figure 4.1: Mooring force and mass for the same range of UR and chain diameter
The same optimization is done in Topfarm, using a SLSQP driver. This opti-
mizer can be used to find the optimal mooring design for various input and have
can impose constraints on e.g. footprint also for the above manually calculated
results the optimizer find exactly the same optimum as desired as shown in table
4.1.
==PAGE:56==
4.2 Sensitivity analysis
46
dchain
UR
TOPFARM
61.3[mm]
1
Validation calculation
61.3[mm]
1
Difference
0
0
Table 4.1: Difference between calculations and optimizations results
4.2
Sensitivity analysis
Having the optimization of the mooring system, the sensitivities of this is tested.
Several sensitivity studies have been conducted. For these two either input pa-
rameters or constraints have been varied while all other inputs are from the base
case described earlier. In this investigation, the sensitivities to depth, force and
X/D ratio has been found. By varying two parameters/constraints a surface plot
is obtained. In the sensitivity analysis on optimization is done for every point on
the surface showing the cost of one mooring line. From the results the gradients
for the two parameters are found, calculated with the Python numpy function
”numpy gradient” finding the gradients of a surface. The gradients of the surfaces
is equivalent to the cost sensitivity to the two varied parameters/constraints. The
gradients of the surface are found along the two axes.
4.2.1
Depth and force sensitivity
In figure 4.2 the cost dependent of the depth and external force is plotted. These
parameters are chosen as these might be specially interesting for farm planning,
as depth is given by a site and the external force represents the force from the
turbine and floater.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Sensitivity analysis
47
Figure 4.2: Cost for mooring for different depths and external forces
The results is showing as expected, increasing cost with raising depth and
external force. The range for the depth is as found in the literature review, the
catenary mooring is preferred by oil and gas industry in the range [75;250]m.
The gradient along the D axis shown in 4.3d and the gradient along the Hext axis
in figure 4.3c. Above these the absolute costs corresponding to these are found.
==PAGE:58==
4.2 Sensitivity analysis
48
(a) Cmooring plotted for different depths
along a external force axis
(b) Cmooring plotted for different external
force along a depth axis
(c) Sensitivity to external force plotted for
different cases of depth along a external
force axis
(d) Sensitivity to depth plotted for differ-
ent cases of external force along a depth
axis
Figure 4.3: Sensitivity investigation for external force and depth
In figure 4.3c it is seen that the sensitivity to Hext does not vary a lot along the
plotted lines, i.e for different values of Hext. However, the sensitivity to Hext varies
quite a lot for different depths. The sensitivity is found to be greater, the greater
the depth. The greater the depth, the longer mooring chain is deployed, as shown
in figure 4.4b. A force increase will result in a increased chain diameter dchain as
seen in figure 4.4a. The longer the chain that has to increase chain diameter, the
greater mass increase will naturally follow this and there by the cost, thus this
trend makes sense. Further it is seen that the total cost of mooring scales linearly,
as of the constant gradients. For a depth of 100m it is found that, for 1000kN the
cost is 50k€ , for 2000kN the cost is 100 k€ and 150 k€ for 3000kN.
In figure 4.3d the sensitivity to depth is found, this is decreasing with greater
depth. It is seen that for larger Hext, larger sensitivities are also found. This
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Sensitivity analysis
49
can be explained with almost the same logic as for explaining figure 4.3d, in this
case, the thicker the prolonged chain is, the larger sensitivity as this will lead to a
greater mass increase and thereby cost increase, compared to a shorter chain.
It is seen that when optimizing for chain length and chain thickness, the footprint
naturally varies also, as seen in figure 4.5.
(a) Change in chain diameter for different
depths
(b) Change in chain length for different
depths
Figure 4.4: Gradients for design variables for Hext = 3000[kN]
Figure 4.5: Footprint dependent variations to D and H
==PAGE:60==
4.2 Sensitivity analysis
50
4.2.1.1
Depth and X/D ratio sensitivity
It is found relevant to test the sensitivity of X/D along with D as the xadm is
directly dependant on the depth. The cost of one mooring line is seen in figure
4.6.
Figure 4.6: Mooring cost for different depths and X/D ratios
It is found that the cost raises with increasing depth and falls with increasing
X/D ratio. With an increasing X/D ratio an increase follows in xadm. It is noted
that the cost increase is largest when the value of depth is large and the X/D ratio
is small.
In figure 4.7c the sensitivity to depth is found and it is seen that the higher value of
X/D, the higher sensitivity to depth. For all of the plotted X/D ratios, it is found
that the sensitivity to depth is largest at low depths. Opposite it is found that at
greater depths, the sensitivity to depth is lowest. The relative change is found to be
greatest for low X/D ratios e.g for X/D=0.1 the sensitivity drops from 0.94 at 75m
to 0.67 at 250m while for X/D=0.2 drops from 1.12 at 75m to 0.9 at 250m. This
corresponds to drops of 27% and 19% respectively. The corresponding absolute
drops are 0.27 and 0.22. In a design optimization of a FOWT farm, that included
different depths across the site, this would result in greater economic savings if
a FOWT is moved from location with 75m to a location of 80m compared to a
FOWT moved from a position with 245m to 250m. In the same case, for both of
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Sensitivity analysis
51
the mentioned positions the savings will be greater for a larger value of X/D.
In figure 4.7d, the sensitivity to X/D is seen. Overall, it is seen that the sensitivity
to X/D is smaller absoulte at shallower water. It is seen for all the plotted lines
of depth, that the sensitivity is showing signs of convergence. For low values of
X/D, the sensitivity to X/D is great, especially for larger depths. In the range
X/D=[0.1:0.18] the sensitivity decreases a lot, e.g. from almost -867 to -260 for
D=250m, a decrease of 70%. Across all the plotted lines of depth, all most no
change in sensitivity is seen after X/D=0.18. In order to minimize mooring cost,
the larger the X/D ratio the better.
In this study the X/D ratio is an input
parameter, although it could be used as a design parameter. In this case trade offs
related to this should be explored, as these could be connection to array cable for
power export or negative effects on overall power performance for the farm due to
larger movement of turbine. The savings on mooring by using larger X/D ratio
should be evaluated against what must be found of trade offs, in order to evaluate
what the cheapest solution overall is. It is stressed that these are possible trade offs
that have not been found in this study. As the savings on mooring will be greatest
for a change in X/D the smaller the X/D ratio is. The potential savings from a
larger X/D are significant, especially for larger depths. Changing from X/D=0.1
to X/D=0.2 results in a cost reduction of 15% for D=250 and a reduction from
150 to 138 for D=75m equal to 8%. As all ways, these cost reductions must be
seen in relation to other coupled cost as describes above. The sensitivity to depths
is likewise significant, doubling the cost of mooring form 75m to 225 for an X/D
ratio of 0.2.
==PAGE:62==
4.2 Sensitivity analysis
52
(a) Cost of mooring for varying depth, for
different cases of admissible offset ratio
(b) Cost of mooring for varying admissible
offset ratio, for different cases of depth
(c) Sensitivity to depth for varying depth,
for different cases of admissible offset ratio
(d) Sensitivity to admissible offset ratio
for varying admissible offset ratio, for dif-
ferent cases of depth
Figure 4.7: sensitivity for varying the parameters for the optimization
4.2.2
Force and X/D ratio sensitivity
Next, the sensitivity relation between force and X/D is investigated, as seen in
figure 4.8. It is seen that the change in cost in the plotted range is clearly greatest
for force, compared to X/D ratio.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Sensitivity analysis
53
Figure 4.8: Cost of mooring for different depths and X/D ratios
In figure 4.9c the sensitivity for changes in force is seen. It is found that this
does not change a lot for different values of Hext neither in absolute size of relative
size. This is also reflected in the absolute values in figure 4.9a with almost strait
lines very close to each other.
The X/D ratio gradient is seen in figure 4.9d. This has a very similar shape to
4.7d. The larger the force, the greater the potential cost savings is to be found by
a change in X/D ratio. Again, the sensitivity is greatest for small X/D ratios. As
the sensitivity to the X/D ratio increases with the force, larger sensitivities would
be found in figure 4.7d if a greater force had been used. Though it is concluded
that the X/D ratio represents a potential for cost savings if the value is raised,
the scale of change for Hext is a lot larger. The cost seems to be proportional to
the external force with a cost of 60k€ at 1000kN, 120k€ at 2000kN and 180 for
3000kN.
==PAGE:64==
4.2 Sensitivity analysis
54
(a) Cost of mooring for varying external
force, for different cases of admissible off-
set ratio
(b) Cost of mooring for varying admissible
offset ratio, for different cases of external
force
(c) Sensitivity to external force for varying
external force, for different cases of admis-
sible offset ratio
(d) Sensitivity to admissible offset ratio
for varying admissible offset ratio, for dif-
ferent cases of external force
Figure 4.9: sensitivity for varying the parameters for the optimization
4.2.3
Summary of findings
Throughout the investigation of the sensitivity, several findings are made and are
here summarized.
The sensitivity to external force is found close to constant
across different values of Hext, and the mooring cost is therefore also found to
be linearly scaling with the external force. The sensitivity to depth is found to
be greatest at lower depths, decreasing most in the range 75-175m and therefrom
stating to flatten out with less change in sensitivity, this shape resembling the an
exponential decay. If looking at the absolute sensitivity to the X/D ratio, the same
pattern is seen. The sensitivity to X/D is greatest in absolute value at low X/D
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Footprint and depth sensitivity
55
ratios, falling fast in the range 0.1-0.15 and there after flattening out, showing
sign of convergence. The shape of the absolute value of X/D sensitivity resemble
an exponential decay, though the absolute value is not plotted. These trends for
sensitivity of external force, depth and X/D ratio is found in all variations of other
parameters, i.e the cost is found to scale linear with force for both different values
of X/D ratio and different depths. Further it is found that across the different
parameters and constraints strong couplings exist. The sensitives of X/D ratio
and force are found to be greater with greater depth, the sensitivity to depth and
X/D ratio are found to be greater the greater force and the sensitivity to depth
and force are found to be greater the lower the X/D ratio.
In table 4.2 the sensitivities under base case assumptions are listed, along with
the price change calculated with a 1% change in value. It is seen that the larges
change is with a change in force, next the depth and lowest change is for X/D
ratio.
Parameter
D
Hext
X/D ratio
Value
100[m]
3000[kN]
0.15
Sensitivity
0,95 [k€/m]
0.05[k€/kN]
-137
Price change with 1% change in value [k€]
0,95
1,5
0,2055
Table 4.2: summary of sensitivity at base case
4.3
Footprint and depth sensitivity
In the following, instead of calculating the footprint given by the chain length
and depth as given by equation 3.11, the footprint is constrained. This implicitly
puts bounds on the chain length. This is formulated in the following optimization
problem, only differing from the former with an extra constraint:
==PAGE:66==
4.3 Footprint and depth sensitivity
56
Given :
UR, dchain
Minimize :
cmooring
Such that :
10[mm] < dchain < 225[mm]
Hmooring(xadm, w, D, S) > Hext
0 < UR < 1
rf = rf−limit
Where
wchain(dchain)
Hmooring(S, rf, w, xadmissible)
Smax(dchain, D, SF)
S(Smax, UR)
As described earlier, the footprint will be determining the turbine spacing along
with the pattern used. It is therefore of high interest to investigate the impact on
mooring cost of constraining the footprint. The result of this is seen in figure 4.10.
The footprint has been constrained differently for the different depths, as Smax
constrains the upper bound for rf and varies with depth as seen in figure 3.6. It
is here noted that greater line length could be used in order for the mooring lines
to reach a shared anchor, though this would not give greater restoring force, as
described in equation 3.3. This is seen in figure 4.12a where UR=1 is reached at
the limit state footprints. The lower bound is due to the upper limit of dchain being
reached, as seen in 4.12b. Note that the lower bound on rf is manually adjusted,
which is why the limit is not fully reached but approached closely.
It is seen that great price increases are found by constraining the footprint.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Footprint and depth sensitivity
57
Figure 4.10: Cost of mooring across different depths
As the range of footprint is varied across different depths, no sensitivity to depth
is made, keeping the footprint constant across different depths. In figure 4.11b the
sensitivity to the footprint is seen. The shape of the sensitivity for different depths
is seen to be approximately the same shape for the different depths only shifted
to larger footprint the larger the depth. It is seen that the sensitivity raises fast
towards the smallest footprint and slower towards the largest footprint used i.e.
UR=1. Constraining footprint leas to shorter and thicker mooring lines, which in
any case investigated is found heavier and thereby more expensive.
==PAGE:68==
4.3 Footprint and depth sensitivity
58
(a) Cost of one mooring line for across
footprint, plotted for different depths
(b) Sensitivity to footprint for different
footprints, plotted for different depths
Figure 4.11
(a)
Utilization
ratio
for
investigated
depths and footprints
(b)
Chain
diameter
for
investigated
depths and footprints
Figure 4.12
It is found, that the sensitivity to constraining footprint increases a lot with
lower footprint, resembling the shape of a exponential decay in absolute values.
The magnitude of the sensitivity to footprint is not found to vary a lot for different
depths.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5
Layout and mooring
optimization
Having investigated the cost of mooring on different depths for different external
forces and X/D ratio, this knowledge is used to evaluate the impact on layout. It
is found that for every case of mooring optimization with unconstrained footprint,
a certain footprint will give the lowest cost.
In the case with shared anchors,
the footprint will also determine the turbine spacing.
With the spacing being
determined by the mooring footprint, it is very likely that there will be a trade of
between mooring cost and other layout considerations. In figure 5.1 it is seen how
the spacing will be determined by the mooring footprint is shown.
Given :
S, dchain, rfootprint
Maximize :
IRR/cost of mooring per energy
Such that :
10[mm] < dchain < 225[mm]
and
Hmooring(xadm) > Hext
Schain < Smax
Where
wchain(dchain)
Tspacing(rfootprint)
rfootprint(S, D, xadm)
Hmooring(S, rf, SF, w, xadmissible)
Smax(dchain, D)
Though a real optimization will not be conducted, a parameter sweep over the
footprint/turbine spacing is performed, from this optimums can be found. This is
done with a course discretization that in most plots are clearly spotted. Naturally,
this has to be taking into account when reviewing the result. In some cases the
optimum appears in the same point across depths, with a greater discretization
==PAGE:70==
5.1 Threesome patterns
60
this would posibly not be the case.
5.1
Threesome patterns
The threesome pattern described earlier is further studied in this section.
Figure 5.1: Setup with three turbines sharing anchor, anchors marking anchors
and threesomes marking placement of turbines
The pattern shown in figure 5.1 can be expanded to many shapes, in this case
a foursome is chosen, as seen in figure 5.2. On this figure, 5 cases are marked, each
with a different shade darkest and smallest being the first and the lightest shade
being the biggest, case five.
With a greater size of the project, fewer anchors are found per turbine, as seen in
figure 5.3. As each turbine has three mooring lines and each anchor has the same
in this pattern, the number of anchors per turbine will converge towards 1.
==PAGE:71==
5.1 Threesome patterns
61
Figure 5.2: Threesome pattern in a foursome shaped perimeter
Figure 5.3: Anchors per turbine for different numbers of turbines
==PAGE:72==
5.2 Layout and mooring optimization on Case 6
62
5.2
Layout and mooring optimization on
Case 6
In the following, a foursome shaped site similar to figure 5.2, with six layers instead
of the maximum 5 that is shown in the figure is investigated. This is composed
of 33WTGs and 44 anchors making the anchor to turbine ratio 1.33. Though the
ratio will continue to decrease it is found that most of the effects of having shared
anchors is archived at this state. As described earlier, two sizes of anchors are
investigated, one size using the size prescribed by the models and one tweaked
model matching better with the found data points from real world cases. In the
following only suction anchors are considered for shared anchors, even though drag
anchors could have been used for the anchors in the perimeter of the park with only
one turbine connected. The same investigation is done for both normal and larger
anchors and presented in the following. This is done for the soil type medium soft
clay.
5.2.1
Original model anchors
The total cost of station keeping system is plotted in figure 5.4, where it is seen that
with changing depth the lowest cost of shared anchors are found a different turbine
spacing. The diameter of the DTU 10MW reference turbine is 178[m]. Depending
on depth, the lowest possible footprint and thereby also turbine spacing changes,
in figure 5.4 it is tried to evaluate the cost down to the lowest possible for every
depth. It is notable, that though the cost of station keeping varies a lot with
depth, the difference between depths diminish with larger spacing. Considering
the findings of 4.10 this makes sense, as it is seen that by constraining footprint,
significant cost increase is found.
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Layout and mooring optimization on Case 6
63
Figure 5.4: Cost of mooring
In figure 5.5 the cost of mooring along with the cost of mooring only is seen.
It is seen that cost of mooring in the shared anchor setup is lowest at turbine
spacing of roughly 10. It can also be seen that this is mainly driven by the cost
of mooring chain. In the range 3-10 rotor spacing the cost drops with a shape
similar to exponential, while after 10 rotor spacing distance it grows linear. This
is due to the fact that in order to connect the turbine to the shared anchor, the
line length is expanded further than UR = 1. The extra line length needed will
grow linearly with the turbine spacing, as seen in the range 10-15. Also it is noted
that in this setting, the drag anchors are found to be significantly more expensive
than the suction anchors, as seen by the distance between the two lines for drag
anchors(green lines) vs. the two lines for shared anchors (Blue lines).
==PAGE:74==
5.2 Layout and mooring optimization on Case 6
64
Figure 5.5: Price break down supply op station keeping system for D=100[m]
In this setup, the mooring chains used with drag anchors are assumed to always
have the optimal length.It can be seen that at 10 turbines spacing, the cost of
chains in the shared setup and non-shared is the same, as the chains used with
shared anchors are of optimal length at that point. At this point has been reached
Smax and no additional force will be gained by using a longer line. However, it
is assumed that for any distance further than this point, more line length is used
simply to connect to the shared anchor.
In figure 5.6 the installation and sub sea investigations, SSI are also included,
assuming one SSI per anchor.
It is seen, that for the suction anchors, only a
very small cost is associated with the installation, while a more significant cost is
associated with installation of drag anchors. It is found in all cases above 6 rotor
diameters spacing that the use of shared anchors are cheaper, but especially at 10
diameters rotor spacing.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Layout and mooring optimization on Case 6
65
Figure 5.6: Cost of station keeping for D=100[m] including installation and SSI
Figure 5.7: AEP for different turbine spacing
==PAGE:76==
5.2 Layout and mooring optimization on Case 6
66
Along with the development in footprint, mooring cost and turbine spacing the
AEP changes accordingly. As theory prescribes it, after roughly 10 rotor diameters
spacing the change in AEP is marginal compared to changes in for smaller spacing.
This is seen with a 7, 8% growth in AEP from 5 diameters spacing to 10, while
only a 3, 75% growth from 10-15.
Having the AEP and cost of mooring, the cost of mooring per energy can be found
as seen in figure 5.8, with the lowest cost marked by a star. The cost of mooring
per energy is comparable to LCOE, only this is only including mooring. The trend
of cost of mooring per energy is very comparable to the cost or mooring in figure
5.4 though it is found that a steeper decline is seen in the lower range of rotor
diameters spacing, as the AEP also grows significantly in this range. The same
turbine spacnings are found for the lowest cost of mooring per energy and for just
the cost of energy.
Figure 5.8: Cost of mooring per energy
LCOE is often recognized as an overall economic measure to optimize on, in
order to find the lowest cost of energy. Besides calculating the cost of mooring
per energy, the IRR is also calculated, as shown in figure 5.9. As with the cost of
mooring per energy, significant and rapid improvements are seen in the lower range
of rotor diameters spacing until around 8. However, the highest IRR is not found
at the same spacing as the lowest cost of mooring per energy, e.g. for D=75[m]
the lowest cost of energy is found at 8 rotor diameters spacing while the IRR for
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Layout and mooring optimization on Case 6
67
the same case is higher for higher spacing. It is seen that no matter the depth, the
highest IRR is found for higher rotor spacing. It is seen that for higher spacing,
more than 12, the IRR curve is almost flat. In this range only small improvements
are found on AEP also by raising spacing.
Figure 5.9: IRR for different turbine spacing
It is seen that both judging on cost of mooring per energy and IRR the best
investment is for a turbine distance above 6. Further, it is seen in this investiga-
tion, that for turbine spacing above 6 rotor diameters, shared anchors are cheaper.
Therefore shared anchors will be the optimal solution juging by economic measure
for rotor spacings above 6.
Depth [m]
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
IRR[%]
14,6
14,6
14,6
14,6
14,5
14,5
14,4
14,4
No. rotor diameters spacing
11,4
11,5
11,6
11,7
13,4
13,4
15
15
Table 5.1: maximum IRR for original anchor model for different depths
==PAGE:78==
5.2 Layout and mooring optimization on Case 6
68
Depth[m]
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
Cost of mooring per energy [k€/MWh]
0,4
0,44
0,53
0,54
0,61
0,63
0,71
0,72
No. rotor diameters spacing
7,8
9,8
11,6
11,7
13,4
13,4
15
15
Table 5.2: Minimum cost of mooring per energy for original anchor model for
different depths
In table 5.1 and 5.2 the optimum points found by the parameter sweep is shown,
and also seen in figure 5.9 and 5.8. It is found that the results in IRR vary only
little while the cost of mooring varies a lot. This due to the whole CAPEX being
included in the IRR calculations i.e. the cost of energy is more sensitive to change
in this as this is the only thing considered. Both showing better results at shallower
water. Furthermore, it is seen that quite a difference is found in the found optimal
rotor spacings, as the IRR calculations show rotor spacings of 11-14 while the Cost
of Mooring Per energy is in the range 7,8-15 rotor spacings.
5.2.2
Tweaked model anchors
As earlier presented, two sizes of anchors are evaluated the weight of the larger
of the two is seen in figure 3.13. As with smaller anchors, the cost for different
depths and spacing is plotted, figure 5.10. This following the same pattern as in
the other case, only with larger cost.
Figure 5.10: Total cost of station keeping for large shared anchors
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Layout and mooring optimization on Case 6
69
Figure 5.11: Price break down for 100[m] shared anchors assuming larger anchors
The difference is really seen in figure 5.11, where the cost of suction anchors
are larger than the cost of drag anchors, this can be compared to 5.5. The cost
of a single suction anchor is 250 [k€] while the cost of a drag anchor is 73.6 [k€]
at 3000 kN. However, as fewer suction anchors are used, the price difference is
smaller.
Including the installation also, the total cost stations keeping systems using shared
anchors and drag anchors are almost the same in this case for a spacing of 10 rotor
diameters, figure 5.12. With fewer anchors in the shared anchor setup, naturally
fewer installations and SSI are needed.
One SSI is assumed per anchor.
The
installation of mooring lines in table is included in the installation of drag anchors,
while it is not in suction anchors, the cost of installation per anchor is not directly
comparable per anchor. The effect of having less anchors is in this case almost
enough to even out the cost, even with large anchors. However, in figure 5.13 the
same results are plotted for case 2, i.e. 2 anchors per turbine. It is seen that the
cost of using shared anchors instead of drag anchors are clearly more expensive.
Further exploration of the effects of park size is in the next section.
==PAGE:80==
5.2 Layout and mooring optimization on Case 6
70
Figure 5.12: Price break down for 100[m] shared anchors assuming larger anchors
Figure 5.13: Case 2
==PAGE:81==
5.2 Layout and mooring optimization on Case 6
71
As for the original model the cost of mooring per energy and IRR is also
calculated for the tweaked model. As seen in figure 5.14 and 5.15. The same trend
is seen here as with the smaller anchors, having the maximum IRR at large turbine
distance and the cost of mooring per energy for different distances corrosponding
to the minimum cost for that depth.
Figure 5.14: IRR tweaked for tweaked anchor model
==PAGE:82==
5.2 Layout and mooring optimization on Case 6
72
Figure 5.15: Cost of mooring per energy for tweaked anchor model
The shape of the IRR and cost of mooring per energy is very similar to what is
found with the original model, however with lower IRR and higher cost of mooring
per energy as expected. The results of this is found in summarized in table 5.3
and 5.4.
Depth[m]
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
Cost of mooring per energy [k€/MWh]
0,64
0,67
0,76
0,77
0,85
0,86
0,94
0,95
No. rotor diameters spacing
7,8
9,7
11,6
11,7
13,4
13,4
15
15
Table 5.3: Minimum Cost of mooring per energy for each depth and corresponding
turbine spacing
Depth[m]
75
100
125
150
175
200
225
250
IRR [%]
14,2
14,25
14,2
14,2
14,17
14,15
14
14
No. rotor diameters spacing
11,43
11,5
11,6
11,7
13,4
13,4
15
15
Table 5.4: maximum IRR for each depth and corresponding turbine spacing
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Layout and mooring optimization across cases
73
5.2.3
Comparison of case 6 results with original and
tweaked model
In the comparison between using the original model and the tweaked model to fit
real world data points, it is found that the use of shared anchors overall is feasible
using the original model, while unfeasible using the tweaked model. The use of
shared anchors is feasible in the range 6-14 rotor spacing for the original and only
barely at the same cost for the tweaked model at 10 rotor spacing. The impact on
the cost of mooring per energy is significant, with cost of mooring per energy at
0,41-0,72 for the original model, this for the tweaked is 0,64-0,95. The impact on
IRR is less, as all IRR is found to be 14.xx%.
5.3
Layout and mooring optimization
across cases
In the above section, the case 6 has been explored and elaborated in terms of the
breakdown of the cost and the variation of this with the turbine spacing. This
has all been under the assumption of one SSI per anchor. In the following, it is
investigated how the shared anchors and drag anchors compare, under different
assumptions about SSI for different cases of park size. This is all done under the
assumption of medium soft clay, the same study is conducted on very soft clay, seen
in appendix B.1 to B.4. In these and the following, three different assumptions is
made in regards to SSI as found appropriate based on the review of standards; 5
per site, 1 per WTG or 1 per anchor.
5.3.1
Original model suction anchors
As in earlier sections two sizes of suction anchors are assessed. Using the original
model for modeling suction anchors, two different turbine spacing are explored, 8
rotor diameters and 10, table 5.6 and table 5.5.
As seen in figure 5.11 the cost of mooring chain is larger at 8 rotor diameters
spacing using shared anchors, but in spite of this the shared anchor setup is found
cheapest in any case with a saving of between 6.4% and 28.8%, table 5.6. A clear
trend is seen in with any assumption of SSI that the larger the park the greater
savings. This trend is especially clear when assuming one SSI per anchor, here the
savings raise from 18,8% to 28.8%, giving 10% additional saving of using shared
mooring compared to non-shared. It is seen that the greatest savings are found
==PAGE:84==
5.3 Layout and mooring optimization across cases
74
for the assumption of 1 SSI per turbine, this as there is fewer SSI needed in the
case with shared anchors.
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Case 7
no. WTG
3
8
14
23
33
46
no. Anchors
6
14
21
33
44
60
WTG/
anchor ratio
2
1,75
1,5
1,43
1,33
1,30
Supply only
Shared
770
751
732
727
719
717
Drag
823
823
823
823
823
823
Difference[%]
6,4
8,7
11,1
11,7
12,6
12,9
Supply&
Installation
Shared
817
793
769
762
752
750
Drag
967
967
967
967
967
967
Difference[%]
15,5
18,0
20,5
21,2
22,2
22,4
Supply,
Installation
& 5 SSI
Shared
939
839
795
778
764
758
Drag
1089
1012
993
983
978
975
Difference[%]
13,8
17,1
19,9
20,9
21,9
22,3
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/WTG
Shared
890
866
842
836
826
823
Drag
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
Difference[%]
14,4
16,7
19,0
19,6
20,6
20,9
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/Anchor
Shared
964
921
879
868
850
845
Drag
1187
1187
1187
1187
1187
1187
Difference[%]
18,8
22,4
25,9
26,9
28,4
28,8
Table 5.5: Original anchor model 8 rotor diameters spacing for D=100, all costs
in k€
At a rotor spacing of 10 at 100[m] depth, the lowest cost of mooring chain is
found, seen in table 5.6. Using shared anchors in this setup leads to larger savings
on mooring cost by using shared anchors compared to drag anchors. Generally,
it is seen that the percentage of savings raise with around 10-12% compared to
table 5.5. The same overall trends are seen in this in table 5.6 as in table 5.5 with
greater savings with more SSI and larger park size.
==PAGE:85==
5.3 Layout and mooring optimization across cases
75
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Case 7
no. WTG
3
8
14
23
33
46
no. Anchors
6
14
21
33
44
60
WTG/
anchor ratio
2
1,75
1,5
1,43
1,33
1,30
Supply only
Shared
672
653
634
629
621
619
Drag
823
823
823
823
823
823
Difference[%]
18,3
20,7
23,0
23,6
24,5
24,8
Supply&
Installation
Shared
719
695
671
664
655
652
Drag
967
967
967
967
967
967
Difference[%]
25,6
28,1
30,6
31,3
32,3
32,6
Supply,
Installation
& 5 SSI
Shared
842
741
697
680
666
660
Drag
1089
1012
993
983
978
975
Difference[%]
22,7
26,8
29,8
30,8
31,9
32,3
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/WTG
Shared
793
768
744
738
728
725
Drag
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
Difference[%]
23,8
26,2
28,5
29,0
30,0
30,3
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/Anchor
Shared
866
824
781
770
753
748
Drag
1187
1187
1187
1187
1187
1187
Difference[%]
27,0
30,6
34,2
35,1
36,6
37,0
Table 5.6: Original model for 10 rotor diameters spacing and D=100
5.3.2
Tweaked model anchors
As earlier described, larger suction anchors are also investigated to match findings
of sizing of suction anchors found in real life examples. As with the anchors from
the original model, this is done for 100m depth and at both a spacing of 8 rotor
diameter, table 5.7 and for a spacing of 10, table 5.8. In table 5.7 it is found that in
no cases it is found feasible to use shared anchors, due to the combination of more
expensive mooring line as of the spacing and the more expensive anchors with an
additional expense from using shared anchors of 55.1-10.3%. It is seen as in the
other tables, that with bigger parks the use of shared anchors get relative cheaper.
Anyway, the extra expense from using shared anchors is no less than 10.3% in the
most favorable setup, case 6 with one SSI per anchor.
==PAGE:86==
5.3 Layout and mooring optimization across cases
76
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Case 7
no. WTG
3
8
14
23
33
46
no. Anchors
6
14
21
33
44
60
WTG/
anchor ratio
2
1,75
1,5
1,43
1,33
1,30
Supply only
Shared
1117
1054
991
975
950
942
Drag
720
720
720
720
720
720
Difference[%]
-55,1
-46,4
-37,6
-35,4
-31,9
-30,8
Supply&
Installation
Shared
1268
1189
1111
1090
1059
1050
Drag
818
818
818
818
818
818
Difference[%]
-55,0
-45,4
-35,8
-33,3
-29,5
-28,4
Supply,
Installation
& 5 SSI
Shared
1390
1235
1137
1106
1070
1057
Drag
940
864
844
834
829
826
Difference[%]
-47,9
-42,9
-34,7
-32,6
-29,1
-28,0
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/WTG
Shared
1341
1263
1184
1164
1132
1123
Drag
891
891
891
891
891
891
Difference[%]
-50,5
-41,8
-32,9
-30,6
-27,0
-26,0
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/Anchor
Shared
1415
1318
1221
1196
1157
1145
Drag
1038
1038
1038
1038
1038
1038
Difference[%]
-36,3
-27,0
-17,6
-15,2
-11,5
-10,3
Table 5.7: Cost of mooring for D=100 8 rotor diameter spacing
Considering the case with a larger spacing of 10 rotor diameters spacing, the
difference between the use of drag anchors and shared suction anchors falls sig-
nificantly.
For a park size of 46 turbines, the greatest extra expense is 17.4%
compared to 30.8% under the same assumptions. Under the assumption of one
SSI per anchor, the extra expense is only 1%.
==PAGE:87==
5.3 Layout and mooring optimization across cases
77
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Case 7
no. WTG
3
8
14
23
33
46
no. Anchors
6
14
21
33
44
60
WTG/
anchor ratio
2
1,75
1,5
1,43
1,33
1,30
Supply only
Shared
1019
956
894
877
852
845
Drag
720
720
720
720
720
720
Difference[%]
-41,5
-32,8
-24,2
-21,8
-18,3
-17,4
Supply&
Installation
Shared
1170
1092
1013
993
961
952
Drag
818
818
818
818
818
818
Difference[%]
-43,0
-33,5
-23,8
-21,4
-17,5
-16,4
Supply,
Installation
& 5 SSI
Shared
1293
1138
1039
1009
972
960
Drag
940
864
844
834
829
826
Difference[%]
-37,6
-31,7
-23,1
-21,0
-17,2
-16,2
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/WTG
Shared
1244
1165
1087
1066
1034
1025
Drag
891
891
891
891
891
891
Difference[%]
-39,6
-30,8
-22,0
-19,6
-16,0
-15,0
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/Anchor
Shared
1317
1220
1123
1098
1059
1048
Drag
1038
1038
1038
1038
1038
1038
Difference[%]
-26,9
-17,5
-8,2
-5,8
-2,0
-1,0
Table 5.8: Cost of mooring for D=100 and 10 rotor diameter spacing
==PAGE:88==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
6.1
Mooring and anchor modeling
As it is described in the results, the use of shared anchors have very different eco-
nomic consequences depending on the depth and turbine spacing. It is found that
the biggest cost driver is the mooring chains, however, this is under the assumption
of having only one thickness of mooring chain. It has not been investigated how
this would be affected by more advanced designs, e.g. clamped mass or different
thickness along the line. It is seen for small footprints that the cost raises rapidly,
however this might not be the case if more advanced models were introduced. Fur-
ther it has been assumed that for any additional mooring line more than Smax is
needed to connect the turbine to the anchor, the mooring line is assumed to be of
the same thickness as elsewhere. However, as this piece of mooring line will only
experience horizontal loads, a thinner mooring line would be able to withstand the
load which would lower the cost of additional mooring chain. The use of shared
anchors are evaluated against the use of drag anchors. The length of the mooring
lines for the drag anchors are assumed to always be of the optimal length, under
the assumption that there are room for these without problems with entangle-
ment, crossing lines, anchors being located too close to each other etc. The largest
difference between the use of drag anchors and shared anchors are found at small
turbine spacing, were shared anchors have small footprints while drag anchors have
much larger as the mooring chain is assumed of optimal length. In this region the
drag anchors are clearly most economic favorable, but the chance of mooring lines
crossing are likely to be biggest.
Besides the modeling of mooring chains, the modeling of anchors have also been
under quite a bit of uncertainty, as described earlier. This study has covered this
effect by modeling two different anchor sizes and for two different soil types.
6.2
Turbine spacing
As described above, the footprint is very determining for the cost of mooring and
the optimal footprint varies with depth. In the results it is shown how this will
==PAGE:89==
6.3 Different floaters forcing
79
affect the turbine spacing, using the rotor diameter of the DTU 10MW reference
turbine with 178[m] rotor. This reveals some depths where the optimal footprint
is in the same range a realistic turbine spacing e.g. 10 rotor spacing for 100[m]
depth. For 250[m] depth, 14 around turbine spacing is found optimal. With greater
rotor size though, this might change as the optimal footprint will not change a lot
with greater force on mooring chains and thereby chain diameter, as seen in figure
3.6. For a rotor size of 222[m], the optimal footprint for 250[m] is found to 8
rotor diameters spacing instead of 14 with the 178m from the DTU reference
turbine, assuming same absolute footprint does not change. The footprint would
change some with greater force and there by chain diameter, but not significant.
However, as it is found that the greatest extra cost of using shared anchors is
found for smaller footprint than optimal, rather than for larger, it might still be
economically feasible to use shared anchors with very large turbines that requires
large footprint in order obtain enough spacing between each other. This however,
is very dependant on the case.
6.3
Different floaters forcing
The results in the study is obtained assuming a certain force without further
consideration to how this force emerges. The assumption of 3000kN needs to be
further investigated in order to be creditable. Most of the key results in this study
are founded in this assumption, that is not very well founded itself. Though this
might change most results, this will not change the overall trends and found trade
offs found i.e though the cost of mooring overall will rise/fall with a larger/smaller
force the trends will in most cases be unaffected as e.g. seen in figure 4.9 where
the sensitivity follows the same trend for different forces, though with different
magnitude.
Furthermore, it is found in other studies, that the design of floater and mooring
can with advantage be coupled. This was focusing on mooring cost vs. stability.
With very different mooring designs found to be optimal depending on floater.
Besides the stability, there might also be quite different environmental forces from
waves and current depending on floater design, leading to different requirements
for mooring. This also needs to be considered.
6.4
Patterns
It is found that for different patterns, quite different properties are found. In detail
studies are only done for a pattern with 3 anchors per turbine and 3 mooring lines
==PAGE:90==
6.4 Patterns
80
per WTG. This pattern has in earlier investigations shown that lower resulting
anchor force would be present. In addition, the use of 3 lines per turbine is what
is used in known demo projects and commercial scale FOWT. This pattern has a
turbine spacing of 1.73 times the footprint. However, other patterns have quite
different footprint turbine spacing relation, but all between 1 and 2. This might be
interesting to investigate for different rotor sizes and depths, as a different pattern
might yield the optimal footprint for different depths and rotor sizes. For a large
rotor at a large depth a pattern with 2 times the footprint might give an optimal
footprint in terms of mooring cost, while a pattern with 1 could give the most
optimal mooring cost for a smaller rotor at a lower depth.
The investigation also showed a natural relation that the fewer anchors per turbine,
the less potential for redundancy. There seems to be a trade of that is not very well
described yet. In the case with no redundancy higher safety factors will be imposed
leading to higher costs, on the other hand in these patterns the fewest anchors per
turbine is present leading to lower cost.
For patterns with high potential for
redundancy - the opposite is true. This though would have to be investigated
along with floater calculations.
This project only investigated regular layout patterns for shared anchors, however
other studies have found regular patterns sub-optimal compared to irregular, this
though for bottom fixed wind. The use of irregular patterns would open up a
wide range of different patterns that could be investigated, drastically increasing
the number of possible patterns. Furthermore, as the research is moving towards
more advanced control strategies, this might further favour irregular patterns.
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
From optimization of mooring systems, it is found that that longer and thinner
mooring chains are the most cost effective. This is found across cases with different
depths, forcing and X/D ratios. Further the sensitivity to these are found to be
very coupled, with higher force leading to higher sensitivities to X/D ratio and
depth, greater depth leading to higher sensitivity to X/D and force and finally
lower X/D ratio leads to higher sensitivity to force and depth. It is found that
the sensitivity to force scales linearly with force, while sensitivity to depth decays
with larger depth and sensitivity to X/D decays with larger X/D. With changing
values of input parameters and constraints, it is found that a certain footprint
corresponds to the optimum solution. It is found that if constraining the footprint,
the cost will raise. The sensitivity to the footprint constraint raises with lower
footprint. e.i. the lower footprint the faster the cost will grow, if further lowering
the footprint. On the other hand it is found that if the footprint is to be larger that
the optimum, the sensitivity will be constant yielding a linear growth. This due to
the fact that the same solution of chain thickness and UR is used, only prolonged
extra in order to reach the anchor.
Further it is concluded that the optimum
point value of footprint yields a trade off with AEP. The AEP grows with larger
turbine spacing, but as the turbine spacing is given by the footprint when using
shared anchors a certain footprint yields a certain turbine spacing. Thereby, it is
concluded that there will be a trade off between the optimum footprint and the
AEP. It is also found that for different layout patterns that allow shared anchors,
different relations between footprint and turbine spacing are found, all with a
turbine spacing equal to 1-2 times the footprint.
For a farm size with a 1.33
anchors per turbine, it is found that the cost of mooring per energy is found at the
same turbine spacing as the lowest cost is found. In contradiction the IRR with an
assumed fixed value of the rest of the CAPEX is found at higher turbine spacing
with higher AEP. Last it is found that the feasibility of shared anchors is strongly
depending on the farm size and assumptions of SSI and anchors. For medium clay
it is found to be between 55.1 % additional cost and savings of 37%.
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER 8
Further Work
This investigation serves as a starting point for further work in this area. As not
much as been done in floating park optimization, much is yet to be investigated.
Below some is described.
8.1
Advancement of mooring and anchor
models used
In order to fully capture the potential off shared anchors, an investigation of more
anchor concepts is needed.
In this study, only suction anchors is investigated
though it is known that several other alternatives exist. Also this could be in-
vestigated across several soil types. An investigation of which anchors is most
favorable in which soil conditions, could unveil further potential. Along with this,
quite some uncertainty is found in this study in regards to the suction anchor type.
The uncertainty needs to be addressed in order to fully understand this question.
As with the anchors used for shared anchors, the anchors used in the non-shared
setup needs further investigation in order to reveal what is the most favorable in
this setup.
In this study, one of two patterns that is known to be investigated in terms of
anchor force is investigated. If more patterns are to be investigated, more studies
on the force on the shared anchors are needed allowing to investigate these further,
as done with one pattern in this study. The mooring model used in this study is
very simple and more advanced models needs to be used for mooring modeling,
in order to have more creditable results, this could include an elastic model for
mooring chain, multi segmented mooring chain and clamped mass. Some of these
might represent feasible options over the simple mooring chain that is modeled
in this study. Further, the external force which is simply assumed in this project
needs to be modeled more in detail with a floater. Further this would allow for
investigating evaluating the question if redundant layout design feasible.
==PAGE:93==
8.2 Farm design optimization of for FOWT including mooring cost
83
8.2
Farm design optimization of for FOWT
including mooring cost
As it is argued in this study, an integration of mooring of FOWT needs to be
included in an optimization with any other key part of a wind farm, in order to
capture all trade offs. In this work, it is concluded that a trade off between AEP
and mooring cost exist. It is expectable to find other trade offs that is also found in
bottom fixed offshore wind farms e.g an trade off with cables. In order to capture
the full potential, this also needs to include both regular and irregular patterns to
unveil the potential of this. It is found in some studies, that irregular patterns are
favoured over regular in bottom fixed structures.
The limits of this is hard to define considering that ideally all parts of a floating
wind farm design would be included in high fidelity models. It is known though
that this often introduces high computational expenses. The development and
research is area is as described in the literature review high and already and much
effort is being used to advance the models and lower computational cost. FOWT
would benefit from being included in farm optimization along with these.
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX A
Standardization bodies
and redundancy
A.1
Comparison of certifications
organization
Organizations that certify wind parks have developed standards to follow in the
design of FOWT parks including redundancy in the mooring system.
It is in
general found that non-redundant systems are allowed, if a larger safety factor is
applied. In the following the standards of the leading standardization bureaus are
examined.
A.1.1
DNV-GL
It is specified in ”DNVGL-ST-119 Floating wind turbine structures” [33] section
2 and 8, that the safety class targeted is a nominal annual probability of failure of
10−4, Consequence class 1. However, it is also stated that if there is no redundancy
in the system the design shall be done targeting a safety class of 10−5, Consequence
class 2. If it is likely that a failure will lead to ”unacceptable consequences” this
including collision with adjacent structures, consequence class 2 must be used.
To comply with targeted failure rates, safety factors are raised. However, as the
standard is made with partial safety standards, calculating the effect of chancing
consequence class requires detailed calculations, which is not done in this study.
However, it can be noted that the partial safety factors in general will be up
with 0.15-0.45 in ULS and ALS for load cases for mooring line design, the ”DFF”
Design fatigue factor increase from 5 to 10. The design loads for anchors will be
the same as for the mooring lines, wherefore the anchor design will also be affected.
Further the characteristic geotechnical anchor resistance, holding capacity, will be
divided by a material factor γm, which is an additional safety factor. Changing
consequence class will result in a material factor for anchor calculation raising
from γm = 1 and up to γm = 1.3 in some cases, and no change in other cases. In
==PAGE:95==
A.1 Comparison of certifications organization
85
the case of a pile anchor(Not including suction) a material factor of γm = 1.7 is
to be used, ”When there is little or no possibility for redistribution of loads from
one pile anchor to another”. It is specified that ”[..]it is not so obvious whether a
station keeping system is redundant or not. For example, failure of a slack mooring
line in a three-line system, causing a large drift-off, does not necessarily imply a
system without redundancy.”. Though it is not throughout assessed in this study,
it is clear that that changing consequence class due to lack of redundancy will
significantly raise the safety requirements and thereby make the mooring system
more expensive. On the other hand redundancy will raise requirements to handle
ALS load case, which may also raise cost. In a case of redundancy, a check of an
ALS design criterion prescribing the structure to be able to withstand a one year
load with one lost anchor/mooring line must be performed, in order for it to be
said to be redundant. DNV-GL certified the Hywind projects, [16].
A.1.2
American Bureau of Shipping, ABS
In the ABS ”guide for building and classing floating offshore wind turbine installa-
tions”, similar recommendations are found [47]. The ABS guide refers to the ISO
standard ”ISO 19900 - Petroleum and natural gas industries — General require-
ments for offshore structures” [48] and ”ISO 19904-1 - Petroleum and natural gas
industries – Floating offshore structures – Part 1: Ship-shaped, semi-submersible,
spar and shallow-draught cylindrical structures (ISO 19904-1:2019)” [49], from
which the exposure levels L2 and L3 are found. The exposure levels does not state
the exact targeted annual failure rate probability but has L1 as the most strict
level, followed by L2 and last L3. As the levels are defined in ISO 19900 and this
is for the oil and gas industry, the requirements are mainly about the possibility of
oil spill etc. ABS uses a safety level equivalent to L2, which in briefly characterized
by not having a large flow/storage of hydrocarbons and the ability to evacuate the
personal on board. However, the ABS standard states that a safety level of L1
”may be warranted” if amongst other points ”The Floating Support Structure is
likely to have a low level of redundancy”. In this section, ABS also mentions the
fact that ”There is limited design and operation experience with floating offshore
wind turbines.” and that there is a risk that if the same design error is repeated
over a whole park, this could be a larger risk. It is notable also, that if following the
characteristics stated in the ISO 19900, it is found that the floating wind turbine
meets the requirements for being classified as exposure level L3, which is briefly
characterized by a not normally manned structure with low/no oil flow. However,
the ABS standard solely considers L1 and L2 for FOWT.
If the structure has no redundancy, the use of a safety factor of 2 is required in
design load cases, instead of 1.05-1.67 depending on load case. Similar to DNV-GL,
==PAGE:96==
A.2 Redundancy and shared anchors setup
86
the FDF is 5 for redundant and 10 for non-redundant, both assuming that that
the components are not ”inspectable and repairable”. Further the safety factors
raise with 20% for non-redundant systems, compared to redundant.
For redundant systems, a transient load case where the floater is moving towards
a new equilibrium and a Damaged condition load case around a new equilibrium
is to be performed. This is to be performed in a worst case scenario in terms of
which mooring line to be broken or removed and to be done assuming a ”extreme
design storm condition”. ABS certified the WindFloat projects [50].
A.1.3
Bureau Veritas
Bureau Veritas does not provide classes of exposure or consequences as DNV-GL
and ABS, but does differentiate between redundant and not redundant systems
[44]. Bureau Veritas defines non-redundant systems as ”Non-redundant station
keeping system means station keeping system which does not fulfill requirements
in damaged condition.”Similar to what is found in the other standard Bureau
Veritas has increasing safety factors for non-redundant systems. This with a simple
increase in safety factors by 20% for both mooring analysis and anchors.
According to Bureau Veritas, the case of failure of mooring line must also be
able to withstand ”Severe movement” and ”misalignment”.
Several load cases
are described, including for the FOWT in parked condition:” extreme wind and
extreme sea state with return period not less than 50 years.” Bureau Veritas is not
know to have approved any full scale deployed projects in the time of writing, but
has granted a preliminary design approval for a floater design by DNCS [51].
A.2
Redundancy and shared anchors
setup
Considering a comparison of certification bureaus,four strategies for layout possi-
bilities emerge as presented in the following sections. This considering the choice
of share or non shared anchors and redundant or not.
A.2.1
Non-redundant single line
The simplest is the non-redundant single line anchors(one mooring line per anchor),
with 3 mooring lines per turbine. In this setup there is no redundancy, however
with this option no matter the certification company used, a greater safety factor
will have to apply both in the design of anchors and of mooring chains due to no
==PAGE:97==
A.2 Redundancy and shared anchors setup
87
redundancy. Naturally a non-redundant setup can also be done with more than
3 mooring lines, which could result in a less costly setup. It can be argued that
in the case of more than 3 mooring lines it makes sense to design for redundancy,
as in the case of a failure of either a mooring line or anchor, there would still be
at least 3 mooring lines left. The WindFloat projects [52], use 3 single line drag
anchors, which thereby has no possibility for redundancy and have only on line
per anchor.
A.2.2
Redundant single line anchors
In the case where single line anchors are used in a redundant setup, this could
possibly be done with anchors that does not have a preferred angle of horizontal
force e.g. suction anchors or piles. In this case the anchors and mooring lines would
have to be able to withstand the loss of one anchor/mooring line. This is most likely
to include both the transient period just after the loss of an anchor/mooring line
and the equilibrium achieved after the removal of one line, but no specification
for this is found. While the new equilibrium may just be a mirrored load case
compared to earlier load cases, significant movement of the turbine with no or
very limited force preventing the turbine from building velocity is a new load case,
this is illustrated in figure 3.3. In this case the anchors and mooring line must
be able to withstand the force arising from both the static and kinematic forces.
However, as it is a redundant system, the safety factor can be lowered in other
load cases.
In Hywind Scottland a layout with three mooring lines and three
suction anchors per turbine was used [43]. This layout is not necessarily classified
as redundant just because it used axis symmetrical anchors, but with the axis
symmetrical anchors it is possible.
A.2.3
Shared anchors redundant
Only in the DNV-GL standard, shared anchors are considered and it is stated that;
”In general, anchors will mainly be subject to one-way cyclic loading, whereas for a
shared anchor point the cyclic loading can be one-way loading in one direction and
two-way loading in another direction. This more complex cyclic loading pattern
for shared anchors shall be considered when assessing cyclic soil strength degrada-
tion and the anchor holding capacity”.
ABS states similarly, in the guide for bottom fixed foundations, that cyclic loads
should be taken into account. It is noted here, that the standards are not par-
ticularly specific about the load cases for loss of an anchor or mooring line in a
pattern of shared anchors. The DNV-GL standard is the only standard explicitly
considering shared anchors, and this states the in the ST-199 standard that
==PAGE:98==
A.2 Redundancy and shared anchors setup
88
”The load pattern of an anchor shared by two or more mooring lines or two or
more tendons may change significantly, should one of the attached lines or ten-
dons break or fail or otherwise be lost. The effect of such a changed load pattern
shall be considered when the structural integrity of the anchor is assessed in the
ALS in the post-accidental damaged condition.”
However, if the turbines are part of a greater sized grid, it is not explicitly stated
whether only one line breakage/removal should be considered over the whole park.
It could be considered also if two turbines connected to the same anchor lose one
other mooring line each, in which case the shared anchor might have greater force
from both of the turbines. It is stressed that this load case is not stated, but nor is
it stated that no such case is to be made. DNV-GL is known to be involved with
the Hywind projects, of which the newest Hywind Tampen planned to be operating
2022. Hywind Tampen features 11 8MW turbines using shared suction anchors
with up to three lines per anchor[16]. Each turbine will have three mooring lines.
For the planned Hywind Tampen layout, such load case could maybe arise.
A.2.4
Shared anchors, non-redundant
As with the non-shared anchors, the shared anchor setup can be made in both a
redundant and a non-redundant setup. As in the other case, this would be the
choice of higher safety factors or additional load cases considering the loss of an
anchor/mooring line.
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX B
Investigation of feasibility
in very soft clay
B.1
Original anchor model
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Case 7
no. WTG
3
8
14
23
33
46
no. Anchors
6
14
21
33
44
60
WTG/
anchor ratio
2
1,75
1,5
1,43
1,33
1,30
Supply only
Shared
770
751
732
727
719
717
Drag
823
823
823
823
823
823
Difference[%]
6,4
8,7
11,1
11,7
12,6
12,9
Supply&
Installation
Shared
817
793
769
762
752
750
Drag
967
967
967
967
967
967
Difference[%]
15,5
18,0
20,5
21,2
22,2
22,4
Supply,
Installation
& 5 SSI
Shared
939
839
795
778
764
758
Drag
1089
1012
993
983
978
975
Difference[%]
13,8
17,1
19,9
20,9
21,9
22,3
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/WTG
Shared
890
866
842
836
826
823
Drag
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
Difference[%]
14,4
16,7
19,0
19,6
20,6
20,9
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/Anchor
Shared
964
921
879
868
850
845
Drag
1187
1187
1187
1187
1187
1187
Difference[%]
18,8
22,4
25,9
26,9
28,4
28,8
Table B.1: 100m, 8 rotordiamets spacing
==PAGE:100==
B.1 Original anchor model
90
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Case 7
no. WTG
3
8
14
23
33
46
no. Anchors
6
14
21
33
44
60
WTG/
anchor ratio
2
1,75
1,5
1,43
1,33
1,30
Supply only
Shared
672
653
634
629
621
619
Drag
823
823
823
823
823
823
Difference[%]
18,3
20,7
23,0
23,6
24,5
24,8
Supply&
Installation
Shared
719
695
671
664
655
652
Drag
967
967
967
967
967
967
Difference[%]
25,6
28,1
30,6
31,3
32,3
32,6
Supply,
Installation
& 5 SSI
Shared
842
741
697
680
666
660
Drag
1089
1012
993
983
978
975
Difference[%]
22,7
26,8
29,8
30,8
31,9
32,3
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/WTG
Shared
793
768
744
738
728
725
Drag
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
Difference[%]
23,8
26,2
28,5
29,0
30,0
30,3
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/Anchor
Shared
866
824
781
770
753
748
Drag
1187
1187
1187
1187
1187
1187
Difference[%]
27,0
30,6
34,2
35,1
36,6
37,0
Table B.2: depth 100m and rotorspacing 10
==PAGE:101==
B.2 Tweaked anchor model
91
B.2
Tweaked anchor model
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Case 7
no. WTG
3
8
14
23
33
46
no. Anchors
6
14
21
33
44
60
WTG/
anchor ratio
2
1,75
1,5
1,43
1,33
1,30
Supply only
Shared
1852
1697
1543
1502
1440
1422
Drag
823
823
823
823
823
823
Difference[%]
-125,0
-106,2
-87,5
-82,5
-75,0
-72,8
Supply&
Installation
Shared
2225
2031
1838
1787
1708
1686
Drag
967
967
967
967
967
967
Difference[%]
-130,1
-110,0
-90,1
-84,8
-76,6
-74,4
Supply,
Installation
& 5 SSI
Shared
2348
2077
1864
1803
1720
1694
Drag
1089
1012
993
983
978
975
Difference[%]
-115,6
-105,2
-87,7
-83,4
-75,9
-73,7
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/WTG
Shared
2299
2105
1911
1861
1782
1759
Drag
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
Difference[%]
-121,1
-102,4
-83,8
-78,9
-71,3
-69,1
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/Anchor
Shared
2372
2160
1948
1892
1806
1782
Drag
1187
1187
1187
1187
1187
1187
Difference[%]
-99,8
-82,0
-64,1
-59,4
-52,1
-50,1
Table B.3: depth 100 meter 8 rotor diameters spacing
==PAGE:102==
B.2 Tweaked anchor model
92
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Case 6
Case 7
no. WTG
3
8
14
23
33
46
no. Anchors
6
14
21
33
44
60
WTG/
anchor ratio
2
1,75
1,5
1,43
1,33
1,30
Supply only
Shared
1754
1599
1445
1405
1342
1324
Drag
823
823
823
823
823
823
Difference[%]
-113,1
-94,3
-75,6
-70,7
-63,1
-60,9
Supply&
Installation
Shared
2127
1934
1740
1689
1611
1588
Drag
967
967
967
967
967
967
Difference[%]
-120,0
-100,0
-79,9
-74,7
-66,6
-64,2
Supply,
Installation
& 5 SSI
Shared
2250
1979
1766
1705
1622
1596
Drag
1089
1012
993
983
978
975
Difference[%]
-106,6
-95,6
-77,8
-73,4
-65,8
-63,7
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/WTG
Shared
2201
2007
1813
1763
1684
1662
Drag
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
1040
Difference[%]
-111,6
-93,0
-74,3
-69,5
-61,9
-59,8
Supply,
Installation&
1 SSI/Anchor
Shared
2274
2062
1850
1795
1709
1684
Drag
1187
1187
1187
1187
1187
1187
Difference[%]
-91,6
-73,7
-55,9
-51,2
-44,0
-41,9
Table B.4: depth 100 meter 10 rotor diameters spacing
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX C
Other
C.1
AEP
wind dir
0
30
60
90
120
150
180
210
240
270
300
330
f
3,6
3,9
5,2
7,0
8,4
6,4
8,6
11,8
15,2
14,7
10,0
5,2
a
9,2
9,8
9,5
9,9
10,0
9,6
9,6
10,5
11,4
11,7
11,6
10,1
k
2,4
2,4
2,4
2,6
2,8
2,6
2,6
2,5
2,5
2,6
2,6
2,3
Table C.1
==PAGE:104==
Bibliography
[1]
Wind Europe. Wind energy in Europe in 2018 - Trends and statistics. 2019.
[2]
J. Bernthal-Hooker Richard Aukland Vasilis Markatseli. Floating Wind: Chang-
ing Gear. 2019.
[3]
Brian D Diaz et al. “Multiline Anchors for Floating Offshore Wind Towers”.
In: (2016).
[4]
Jinlong Qi et al. “Station Keeping Systems For Offshore Wind Turbines”. In:
(2019), pp. 1176–1185.
[5]
“Levelised cost of energy for offshore floating wind turbines in a life cycle
perspective Levelised cost of energy for offshore fl oating wind turbines in a
life cycle perspective q”. In: Renewable Energy 66.June (2014), pp. 714–728.
issn: 0960-1481. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2014.01.
017.
[6]
Richard Copeland - Technical Developmemt Director at COP. 2020.
[7]
Marc Costa Ros Rhodri James. Floating Offshore Wind: Market and Tech-
nology Review Prepared. 2015.
[8]
Equinor. 2020. url: https://www.equinor.com/en/news/2019-11-28-
hywind-scotland-data.html. (accessed: 20.06.2020).
[9]
energynumbers.info. 2020. url: https://energynumbers.info/capacity-
factors-at-danish-offshore-wind-farms. (accessed: 27.06.2020).
[10]
E. Uzunoglu, D. Karmakar, and C. Guedes Soares. “Floating Offshore Wind
Platforms”. In: (2016), pp. 53–76.
[11]
Georgios Katsouris and Andrew Marina. “Cost Modelling of Floating Wind
Farms”. In: March (2016), p. 36. issn: 0197-3533. doi: 10.1207/s15324834basp0902.
[12]
Casey Fontana. “A multiline anchor concept for floating offshore wind”. PhD
thesis. University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2019.
[13]
Dr. Roberts Proskovics. Floating Offshore Wind: A Situational Analysis.
2018.
==PAGE:105==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
95
[14]
4C. 2019. url: https : / / www . 4coffshore . com / windfarms / united -
kingdom/project-dates-for-hywind-scotland-pilot-park-uk76.html.
(accessed: 29.01.2020).
[15]
Vestas. 2019. url: http://www.mhivestasoffshore.com/first-turbine-
of-windfloat-atlantic-moves-into-position/. (accessed: 29.01.2020).
[16]
Stephen Bull. 2019. url: http://northseasenergydays.com/onewebmedia/
Equinor.pdf. (accessed: 29.01.2020).
[17]
Recharge News. 2019. url: https://www.rechargenews.com/wind/oil-
giant- shell- sets- seal- on- takeover- of- floating- wind- player-
eolfi/2-1-728720. (accessed: 07.06.2020).
[18]
Quick Julian Ning Andrew Dykes Katherine. Systems Engineering and Op-
timization of Wind Turbines and Power Plants. 2019.
[19]
Christian Bak. Frederik Zahle. Robert Bitsche. Taeseong Kim. Anders Yde. Lars
C. Henriksen. Anand Natarajan. Morten Hansen. “Description of the DTU
10 MW Reference Wind Turbine”. In: (2013).
[20]
Michael Maness, Benjamin Maples, and A. Smith. “NREL Offshore Balance-
of- System Model NREL Offshore Balance-of- System Model”. In: January
(2017).
[21]
Tyler Stehly and Philipp Beiter. “2018 Cost of Wind Energy Review. NREL/TP-
5000-74598.” In: December (2019), pp. 1–71. url: www.nrel.gov/publications..
[22]
DTU Wind Energy. 2018. url: https://topfarm.pages.windenergy.dtu.
dk/TopFarm2. (accessed: 30.01.2020).
[23]
NREL. NWTC Information Portal (WISDEM). 2015. url: https://nwtc.
nrel.gov/WISDEM. (accessed: 30.01.2020).
[24]
“A multi-objective optimization framework for offshorewind farm layouts and
electric infrastructures”. In: Energies 9.3 (2016), pp. 1–42. issn: 19961073.
doi: 10.3390/en9030216.
[25]
Markus Wagner, Jareth Day, and Frank Neumann. “A fast and effective
local search algorithm for optimizing the placement of wind turbines”. In:
Renewable Energy 51 (2013), pp. 64–70. issn: 09601481. doi: 10.1016/j.
renene.2012.09.008. arXiv: 1204.4560. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.renene.2012.09.008.
[26]
Andrew P.J. Stanley and Andrew Ning. “Coupled wind turbine design and
layout optimization with nonhomogeneous wind turbines”. In: Wind Energy
Science 4.1 (2019), pp. 99–114. issn: 23667451. doi: 10.5194/wes-4-99-
2019.
==PAGE:106==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
96
[27]
S. Sanchez Perez-Moreno et al. “Multidisciplinary design analysis and optimi-
sation of a reference offshore wind plant”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference
Series 1037.4 (2018). issn: 17426596. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1037/4/
042004.
[28]
Karimi Meysam & Hall Matthew & Buckham Brad& Crawford Curran. “A
multi-objective design optimization approach for floating offshore wind tur-
bine support structures”. In: (2015).
[29]
Michael Muskulus Marek Goldschmidt. “Coupled mooring systems for float-
ing wind farms”. In: (2015).
[30]
url: https://map- plus- plus.readthedocs.io/en/latest/theory.
html.
[31]
Paulo A. Figueiredo and Francisco M. Brójo. “Parametric study of multicom-
ponent mooring lines at catenary form in terms of anchoring cost”. In: Energy
Procedia 136 (2017), pp. 456–462. issn: 18766102. doi: 10.1016/j.egypro.
2017.10.303. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.10.303.
[32]
A. Campanile, V. Piscopo, and A. Scamardella. “Mooring design and se-
lection for floating offshore wind turbines on intermediate and deep water
depths”. In: Ocean Engineering 148.November 2017 (2018), pp. 349–360.
issn: 00298018. doi: 10.1016/j.oceaneng.2017.11.043. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2017.11.043.
[33]
DNVGL-ST-0119. “Floating wind turbine structures”. In: Det Norske Veritas
- Germanischer Lloyd July (2018), p. 162.
[34]
Mohammed Khair Al-Solihat and Meyer Nahon. “Stiffness of slack and taut
moorings”. In: Ships and Offshore Structures 11.8 (2016), pp. 890–904. issn:
17445302. doi: 10.1080/17445302.2015.1089052. url: https://doi.org/
10.1080/17445302.2015.1089052.
[35]
Guido Benassai et al. “Optimization of Mooring Systems for Floating Off-
shore Wind Turbines”. In: Coastal Engineering Journal 57.4 (2015), pp. 1–19.
issn: 17936292. doi: 10.1142/S0578563415500217.
[36]
G Benassai et al. “Ultimate and accidental limit state design for mooring
systems of fl oating offshore wind turbines”. In: Ocean Engineering 92 (2014),
pp. 64–74. issn: 0029-8018. doi: 10.1016/j.oceaneng.2014.09.036. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.oceaneng.2014.09.036.
[37]
DNV GL. “OFFSHORE STANDARD DNV GL AS Position mooring”. In:
July (2015), p. 114.
[38]
DNV GL AS. “Offshore Mooring Chain - DNVGL-OS-E302”. In: Offshore
Standard July (2015), pp. 22–23.
==PAGE:107==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
97
[39]
Vicinay. url: https://www.vicinaycadenas.net/mooring-chain/offshore-
mooring-chain.asp.
[40]
Corporate Offshore ABS. “Offshore Anchor Data for Preliminary Design of
Anchors of Floating Offshore Wind Turbines”. In: August (2013).
[41]
ABS American Bureau of Shipping. “Offshore Anchor Data for Preliminary
Design of Anchors of Floating Offshore Wind Turbines”. In: August (2013).
[42]
Conference Series. “Multiline Ring Anchor system for floating offshore wind
turbines Multiline Ring Anchor system for floating offshore wind turbines”.
In: (2020). doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1452/1/012036.
[43]
Statoil. “Hywind Scotland Park - Brochure”. In: (2016), p. 300. url: http://
www.statoil.com/en/TechnologyInnovation/NewEnergy/RenewablePowerProduction/
Offshore/HywindScotland/Pages/default.aspx?redirectShortUrl=
http://www.statoil.com/HywindScotland.
[44]
Bureau Veritas. “Classification and Certification of Floating Offshore Wind
Turbines.” In: 33.October (2019), p. 56.
[45]
“BOTTOM-FOUNDED OFFSHORE WIND TURBINE INSTALLATIONS
OCTOBER”. In: ABS (2018).
[46]
Nordpool. 2020. url: https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/. (accessed: 17.06.2020).
[47]
ABS American Bureau of Shipping. “GUIDE FOR BUILDING AND CLASS-
ING FLOATING OFFSHORE WIND TURBINE INSTALLATIONS”. In:
2013.July (2014).
[48]
DS ISO. “Petroleum and natural gas industries — General requirements for
offshore structures”. In: (2020).
[49]
“DS / EN ISO 19904-1 : 2019”. In: (2020), p. 283682.
[50]
ABS American bureau of shipping. 2019. url: https://ww2.eagle.org/
en/news/press-room/abs-classes-worlds-biggest-floating-wind-
turbine.html. (accessed: 01.06.2020).
[51]
Renewables now. 2017. url: https://renewablesnow.com/news/dcns-
floating-wind-foundation-gets-bureau-veritas-design-approval-
572169/. (accessed: 01.06.2020).
[52]
Principle Power. 2019. url: http://www.principlepowerinc.com/en/
windfloat. (accessed: 01.06.2020).
==PAGE:108==
