==PAGE:1==
Energy Management: algorithm and security
assessment
A study on energy management systems and
their application in microgrids
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
A study on energy management systems and their application in microgrids
Master Thesis
July, 2020
By
Avi Meyer SZYCHTER
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Avi Meyer SZYCHTER - s172275
Signature
Date
ii
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In the context of the fight against the global warming, the energy production is diversify-
ing: nuclear/coal power plants are associated with photovoltaic producers, wind turbines,
external storage batteries.... The energy needs also continue to grow, and adapting pro-
duction to demand is becoming increasingly difficult. As a result, the network managers
have to find new algorithms, called energy management. My master thesis analyses
an energy management situation: identifying an algorithm to optimize energy production
within a microgrid (composed of electric vehicle charging stations, external storage sys-
tems, intelligent buildings and solar panels), to limit the contribution of the macrogrid (the
global grid). After presenting the current electric vehicle market and the importance of
energy management, the notion of smart grid and the impact of electric vehicles, I will
present one microgrid’ an aspect of cyber security (thread modeling) and different en-
ergy management techniques. Using the Model Predictive Control algorithm used, we
will show the performance of the studied algorithm, detailing the results obtained in our
simulation.
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Christian D. Jensen, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science
For its guidance and understanding throughout the whole master thesis.
Olivier MARIDAT and Dimitri DOUTRIAUX, TRIALOG
For their help with the data gathering and guidance within the industry
My whole family, especially my parents
For their support throughout my whole studies and the bad times that I have been through.
Special acknowledgement to the whole DTU administration for their understanding and
authorizing me to write this master thesis in particular conditions.
iv
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The new generation of electric networks: Smart grids and microgrids . . . .
3
1.3
V2G: Vehicle to Grid technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Scope of the master thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
The microgrid studied in this document
11
2.1
System description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Regulations surrounding microgrids and EMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.3
Threat assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3
Energy Management System (EMS)
25
3.1
Architecture of a resilient EMS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2
A short review of candidates Energy Management algorithms . . . . . . . . 25
3.3
Model-predictive control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.4
Attacks on an EMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4
Model-Predictive Control with a single command variable
39
4.1
Defining the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.2
Hypothesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.3
Scenarios studied
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.4
SC.1: No charging vehicle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4.5
SC.2: A single charging vehicle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.6
SC.3: Two charging vehicles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5
Improvements and industrialisation
53
6
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
57
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
By the way Science and academic researches are organized in today’s Society - that is
unfortunately driven by money and profit - innovation and development have been explor-
ing areas of researches based on ”buzz words”. In Computer Science, the big topic of the
end of the twentieth Century was the ”Information Technologies” while the 2010’s have
seen the (re-)emergence of Artificial Intelligence topics with all the data that was being
made available to the biggest companies. In other domains such as Power engineering,
the main concern has typically shifted from central big production stations to distributed
smaller but cleaner production sites; car manufacturers have been participating in this ini-
tiative as they started prototyping and developing hybrid and electric vehicles. Let’s focus
on the latter for a bit.
The adoption of electric vehicles
Electric cars have been constructed since the end of the XIXth century. They were re-
placed in the beginning of the XXth century when gasoline motors became cheaper and
easier to produce; car manufacturers only recently started investing significantly in the
area. Besides all the environmental benefit, electric cars also bring comfort to their users
(as, for instance, they are quieter). The first modern electric cars were produced in the
1990s and today more than three million of them are present in the international car pop-
ulation.
At the beginning, electric cars raised a lot of concerns: are they powerful enough to be
worth the investment ? Indeed, their price is very high (no low-cost models exist, the most
popular models are high-end models and even the few entry-level ones are still expensive)
so, for most people, it must replace the investment of a ”more conventional” car. Carley
et al. 2013 finds that, in large American cities, some of the main concern are:
1. Battery autonomy: the range of the vehicle should cover most of one’s needs
2. Overall price: the price of the vehicle is a factor but people also take the gas sav-
ings into consideration (in particular, most people interrogated believe that the petrol
prices will increase)
3. Charge time: vehicles with long charging cycles are less likely to be adopted. The
study did not ask the participant about the charging location (i.e. in public spaces or
private garages) but one can easily assume that it would be a concern as well. All
methods are considerable: conventional charging, fast charging, battery swapping,
...
Different articles in the literature address these concerns in different locations of the world.
Rafique and Town 2019 shows that the potential for EV is very high in Australia as their
range is sufficient in order to guarantee the majority of trips (88% of Australian’s trips are
less than 30 km). Egbue et al. 2012 (the survey was conducted in the United States)
shows that most EV users needs do not exceed 50 miles per day (but they are still most
interested by vehicles whose range surpass 200 miles). Plötz and Dütschke 2020 studies
the usage of EV in Germany and confirms Carley et al. 2013’s results. They highlight
that current users are relatively young (36 years old on average) and most non-users are
interested in buying a Plug-in Electric Vehicle (PEV, that is rechargeable from home or in
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
1
==PAGE:10==
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Unit solds (millions)
Europe
United States
China
Others
Figure 1.1: Sales of electric vehicles in the recent years. In 2017, China possesses more
than 1 million vehicles on its territory. In the same year, Norway’s market share represent
close to 40% of the global sales making Norwegian people the biggest adopters of EV in
front of Icelanders, Swedes and Chinese. Source IEA 2018
dedicated stations); charging infrastructures play a big role in the survey’s participants’
opinions. Moreover, they show that more people will be inclined in buying a PEV once
they become widespread.
Since the end of the 2000s, governments all over the world have started encouraging their
citizens to buy electric vehicles through benefits, subsidies and tax credits. They have
given a lot of money towards innovation and developments. However, the technology
still takes some time to clearly penetrate the market despite all the subsidies given by a
number of government. Langbroek et al. 2019, among other things, questions - on a small
scale: mostly tourists on the Swedish island of Gotland - if people are afraid of adopting
EV. They find out that renting an EV was a satisfying experience (they were not dissatisfied
in not renting a ICEV, an internal combustion engine vehicle) for the participants and that
charging the vehicles was not an issue. The authors note that the island was already
equipped with a significant charging infrastructure (as part of a European project) and
could still benefit of some more charging capabilities in some areas of the island. They
conclude by encouraging more policies to promote the PEV to people that are not yet
convinced by the technology.
With all the environmental benefits that are expected with EVs and the health concerns
that gas (in particular diesel-powered) cars raise, one can expect the international govern-
ments to keep on going with the same incentives. Therefore, one can expect a widespread
transformation of the car population in the upcoming decades.
An upcoming challenge: powering all the new equipment
The current infrastructure of our electrical systems is powerful enough to our homes, our
data centers, our entertainment centers, logistic stations, ... As we have just seen, in
the near future, we will also need them to charge our transportation means and each of
them require between 6 to 60 kW to charge (depending on the model and the method of
charging; Tesla cars even require up to 200 kW). The question of introducing them in our
2
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:11==
electrical network is more challenging, interesting and vital than it seems at first because:
1. On the one hand, constructing powerful energy sources (like nuclear power plants)
is not a solution: they solve a short term situation but are expensive and raise lots of
environments questions. On the other hand, renewable energies seem to be helpful
on a local level but are weak on a broad scale (they require large surfaces).
2. We must adapt large networks in a short interval
3. In general, only building new power system is not an option and we need to more
efficiently distribute and consume the energy that we create
4. Cars need to find a way to be the least negatively impactful on the current system
(the introduction of a car on a local network should not be creating black out or
incredibly increase the power bill of an household)
Part of the solution that is nowadays globally researched is the energy’s consumption
and distribution optimisation. In particular, here we will focus on the electric vehicles’
consumption optimisation.
1.2
The new generation of electric networks: Smart grids
and microgrids
1.2.1
Smart grids, the large-scale networks
Smart grid is a term designating the currently industrialized (and in-development) gener-
ation of electricity networks. The difference with its predecessors is the central part that
the data plays inside: electricity producers and consumers constantly share information
about the production, distribution and consumption of electricity.
Small history on the topic
Researches started in the 1980’s with the conception of communicating meters: the idea
was to remotely retrieve the end-user’s consumption in order to regularly and automati-
cally control it. Engineers then progressively improved the meters to retrieve finer data.
In 2004, the Italian electricity provider ENEL reports that their project Telegestore has
equipped more than 15 millions homes with a communicating meter (International 2004).
More than 12 million of them were fully operational and could be read remotely.
Meanwhile, other parts of the networks started being researched: all the nodes of the
network had to be analyzed. The first intent was to increase the reliability of the elec-
tricity grids. In 2005, the European Commission launches the Smartgrids technological
platform, popularizing the term and definitely launching a series of international projects
on data collection and exchange.
Challenges
Smart grids address different objectives related to optimizing the production, distribution
and consumption of the electrical energy. Because the latter is volatile, meaning it cannot
be stored on a large scale instantaneously and economically, the technological improve-
ments seak to adjust in real time the production and consumption. For instance, advanced
routing of the electrical energy allows to minimize power line loss and maximize the per-
formance of all the units of production.
The first goal addressed is the grid control, meaning the real time monitoring of all the
nodes in the network. This ranges from monitoring the nodes’ charge to retrieving the
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
3
==PAGE:12==
end consumers’ needs. After analysis, one could manually (or automatically if tools and
communication protocols allow it) set up the optimal configuration for the grid.
Moreover, the communication between all nodes of the network plays a big role in the
introduction of decentralized and greener source of production like solar panels, wind tur-
bines, hydroelectric power plants: these small units of production become more effective
and efficient because the energy they produce can be locally consumed: the producer
produces its electricity without worrying about other issues like the power line loss, the
distribution network retrieves the energy and computes the best location to consume it
(usually the highest criteria being the shortest distance), then the energy is routed towards
end-consumers. The energy mostly does not have to travel long distances so there are
not a lot of overhead introduced by decentralizing the production and therefore introducing
more and more green energy sites. Day-ahead prediction also provides visibility on the
operating intervals of the production sites (renewable energies operating intermittently,
e.g. solar panels do not work in bad weather, wind turbines require a substantial wind to
operate at full capacity, etc.) so one can set up alternatives when required.
Consumers can also become producers (and why not even isolate themselves from the
rest of the grid?). Generally speaking, the Smart grid allows for the introduction of many
production locations, which encourages the implementation of renewable energies but
also makes it theoretically less vulnerable to physical and computer attacks.
1.2.2
Energy management
Optimal power management, like what is described in the subsection above, is achieved
by considering the ways all actors can operate and optimize their production, transport
and consumption. This applies not only to the whole energy industry (gaz, petrol, electric-
ity) but also to the logistic and transportation world where energy management consists
in optimizing the flow of goods but also the type of transportation (trains versus trucks,
ships, ...). On an international level, the industry represents more than 50% of the global
energy consumption and transportation more than 25% (Prabhakar and Dattatray. 2017).
Domestic consumption (i.e. the consumption of individuals in their activities at home) only
represents 14% of the global energy consumption. Focusing efforts on industrialists and
transport companies (e.g. by reducing their consumption) can have a greater impact than
on individuals.
Energy strategies
The first step is to get a reference, i.e.
analyze the current situation to evaluate the
progress that the changes bring. Then, an entity seeking to optimize its energy man-
agement must design a global strategy in order to be effective in its research and devel-
opment. Pr. Johannes KALS (Kals, Jonas, and Vandewall 2010) takes an economical
point of view and describes 5 kind of strategies: passive (no action is taken), short-term
profit maximization (only action that have short-term interests are considered), long-term
profit maximization (the entity is ready to consider short-term losses in order to lower its
energy consumption and increase its long-term profits), and do everything for the climate
whatever the cost.
Energy management systems
Energy Management Systems (EMS) are control systems that monitor and seek to opti-
mize that energetic consumption and production while while ensuring that it is carried out
in a safe and reliable manner. An EMS is often associated with a SCADA system (Super-
visory Control And Data Acquisition) and is often referred to as SCADA/EMS. Here, the
SCADA component represents the data acquisition part, actuators (alarm systems, order
4
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.2: Generic example of a mi-
crogrid:
various power sources and
loads are connected to the same power
bus. The latter is controlled by a cen-
tral EMS who distributes the energy con-
sidering real-time constraints and re-
quests (and occasionally sells) power
from the macrogrid. Source of the pic-
ture: www.blueskypower.com
sending to network components such as circuit breakers/transformers, ...) and network
visualization; the EMS component represents the advanced functions: state estimation
(non-measurable quantities are calculated directly on the network from collected data and
network topology), safety analysis (what happens if a network node is compromised or
fails), predictions, etc. Smart grids and related system need a lot of EMS to manage the
networks at large and small scales.
1.2.3
Microgrids
A microgrid is a localised group of electricity producers and consumers which cooperates
with the macrogrid (the global electricity grid) but which can also operate autonomously
(sometimes referred to as ”island mode”) if necessary: production and consumption is
adapted so as not to use the energy produced by the macrogrid. The United States
Department of Energy defines a microgrid as a single entity that possesses clearly defined
topological limits.
• Autonomous buildings and neighbourhoods: houses have energy sources (e.g. so-
lar, wind) and centralized storage centre(s) (batteries) to meet the needs of users.
HVAC (Heating, Ventilation and Air-Conditioning) are also powered by these energy
sources.
• University campuses
• Military bases voluntarily disconnected from the macrogrid for security and integrity
reasons
• Voluntary off-grid areas: Islands/regions away from the macrogrid for which it is
more environmentally (and economically) viable to generate electricity indepen-
dently (and through renewable energy). A problem that may arise in these areas
is the mismatch between local generation and consumption (i.e. too much or too
little is produced), which can lead to overvoltages, undervoltages or deviation from
the grid’s natural frequency. One solution being considered to limit the occurrence
of this problem is the interconnection of microgrids (a scenario that can be seen in
remote islands that have several microgrids operated by different companies).
Microgrids are often composed of the following components:
• Local generators: solar panels, wind turbines, biogas generator, etc.
• External storage systems (ESS): batteries used for frequency and voltage regula-
tion. Useful for smoothing the production of local generators.
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.3: Simple representation of all the actors involved in the V2G ecosystem. From
left to right: the EV, charging stations, Charge Point Operators (their mission is to mon-
itor and maintain parks of charging stations) and e-Mobility service providers (while the
CPO only focuses on the physical assets, e-Mobility service providers are responsible of
delivering the electricity and billing the consumers))
• Consumers: small- and medium-scale systems (houses, but also large buildings
such as shopping centres) that consume electricity
• Point of common coupling (PCC): point of interconnection with the macrogrid (ab-
sent in the case of disconnected zones).
Microgrids are a central part of this thesis as the system that will be studied is a microgrid.
1.3
V2G: Vehicle to Grid technologies
Vehicle-to-grid (V2G) is a term regrouping all the systems in which a PEV can communi-
cate with the main power grid to schedule its charge or discharge. The idea is that, being
a load that is inactive most of the time and equipped with a storage, PEV can participate in
the energy distribution. The first articles on the subject dates back to 1997 where Kemp-
ton and Letendre 1997 describes the vehicles’ battery as power resources. To ensure
they do push the potential users away by not cooperating, car and energy industrialists
have invested a significant amount of resources in standardizing the V2G communication
protocol (of course, there still are battles between standards but this is less visible and
problematic to the end users).
1.3.1
Basic communication between charging stations and vehicles: IEC
61851
On its most basic level, V2G look at optimizing the charge of the vehicles and ensur-
ing the safety of the EV users. IEC 61851, whose first version was edited in 2001, look
at transmitting the most basic information between a Supply Equipment Communication
Controller (SECC, the communication controller of a charging station) and an Eletric Vehi-
cle Communication Controller (EVCC, the communication controller of an Eletric vehicle).
Only a single analog signal is used and duty cycle (PWM) and mean voltage are used to
describe the complete status of a charge.
7 different states are defined:
6
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.4: Illustration of the different states defined by IEC 61851 standard. Both the
EVCC and SECC can act on the Control Pilot which makes it a lightweight way of trans-
mitting simple data between the EVSE and EV. Source of the image: Praëm 2015
Label name
Mean voltage
Description
State A
12 V
The EVCC/SECC are not connected
State B
9 V
The EVCC/SECC are connected and the EV is not
ready to charge
State C
6 V
The EVCC/SECC are connected and the EV is ready
to charge
State D
3 V
Like state C but ventilation is required
State E
0 V
The charging station experiences a utility problem
State F
−12 V
The charging station is currently unavailable
All three states A, E and F correspond to error states and are sometimes confounded.
The duty cycle has then three different kinds of values: between 10% to 85%, it is used to
describe basic charging sessions with a relatively low current (up to 51 A); between 85%
to 96%, it is used to describe basic charging sessions with a relatively high current (up to
80 A); 5% to indicate that a digital communication must be used as V2G protocol.
1.3.2
High-level communication: CHAdeMO and ISO/IEC 15118
While IEC 61851 only assures operational safety, other communication protocols are re-
quired to implement more complex services: bi-directional charge (the vehicle not only
can act as a load on the electric network but can also discharge to support the macro-
grid), charging profiles to set up limits over time and power (the principle of a charging
profile is the following: a sequence of intervals are defined and over each interval, one
defines minimum and maximum charge/discharge limits), metering data exchanges, etc.
Here is a brief overview of the current major competing standards:
• CHAdeMO: Japanese standard, pushed by brands like Toyota, Nissan, Mitsubishi
or Panasonic
• Combined charging System (CCS): pushed by Occidental companies like Renault,
Ford, Tesla, or BMW
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
7
==PAGE:16==
Tesla proposes its own Supercharger with its dedicated charging methods but they do
not support V2G so users must rely on CCS for V2G. So basically, there are only two
competing standards in this field. They both propose the same functionalities; the differ-
ences are mostly in terms of max/fast charging (400 kW for CHAdeMO 2.0 (2018), 350
kW for ISO 15118 (2016)) and the underlying low-level communication protocol (Home-
plug GreenPhy, a PLC protocol designed for smart grid applications, for ISO 15118 which
allows for a high data rate; CAN, a protocol stricter and slower than PLC but also cheaper
to implement, for CHAdeMO).
1.3.3
Supervision protocols: OCPP and IEC 63110
Two use cases emerge when referring to supervision protocol. The first one is illustrated in
Figure 1.3: Charge Point Operator require an efficient communication protocol to monitor
and maintain their charging station parks; the second one is the advanced computation of
charging profiles: an EMS computes the schedule and applies it to the relevant charging
station through the supervision protocol. Of course, a mixture of these two use cases also
forms another valid use case.
Today, the main supervision protocol is OCPP (Open Charge Point Protocol) although the
IEC is trying to define a new competing standard, the IEC 63110. Their main benefits are
the possibility to precisely identify a person, to authorize them (or not) to load his vehicle
according to advanced rules (for example, we can reserve spaces for certain groups of
people), and to organize the loads in different transactions in order to analyze them easily
(especially for invoicing).
1.3.4
Examples of V2G services
The GIFT project (https://www.gift-h2020.eu/)is a European project seeking to highlight
the principle of energy flexibility. This principle consists in allocating part of a global power
pool for each energy sub-group and letting these sub-groups spread their consumption
over time so that they can always ensure their proper operation while reducing the instan-
taneous power needed as much as possible.
An example of the subgroups considered in this project are the electric vehicle charging
stations. These require energy to charge the vehicles, but by spreading the loads over
time or even using secondary energy sources, they can reduce their instantaneous power
requirements. For example, if two vehicles need to charge simultaneously at 22 kW for 6
hours but the two vehicle owners do not return to pick up their vehicles until 12 hours, it is
possible to charge one vehicle after the other. By doing so, the peak power consumption
of 44 kW for 6 hours will be reduced to 22 kW for 12 hours. The remaining 22 kilowatts
are recovered by the flexibility agent in order to supply other energy subgroups.
V2G technologies are here critical for this use-case: they allow a supervising software
to gather enough information to schedule the different charges over different charging
stations and electric vehicles.
1.4
Scope of the master thesis
The previous sections presented different technologies introduced by the new type of
electrical grid. They offer the possibility of improving the performance of the global network
by looking at local minimums instead of global minimums.
In this master thesis, I will look at a specific type of microgrid: one which contains electric
vehicle charging station associated with renewable energies and external storage. The
first section of this chapter clearly shows the impact this may have on the future global
consumption of electric vehicles (which can influence global opinions and policies in the
8
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:17==
long run) and why this field of research has the potential to greatly impact the industry.
The objective will be to design an algorithm which will recover charging powers from the
external storage, renewable energy and the macrogrid. I will assume that the communi-
cation is perfect between all the components and therefore I will not focus on the problems
that can arise while using specific protocols.
This master thesis was written with the help of TRIALOG, a French consulting company,
which provided some of the components
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
9
==PAGE:18==
10
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:19==
2
The microgrid studied in this document
Some problem definitions allow one to fully theoretically reason about the methods and
solutions. EMS algorithms however require a fully-defined system and one cannot design
a fully-generic solution. In this chapter, I will describe a sample microgrid on which sim-
ulations will be applied: it is inspired from a test environment used in a research project
conducted at TRIALOG (french consulting company notably specialised in energy, elec-
tric vehicles and e-mobility) with one of its clients. Different other test systems exist and
could have been also used. They are grouped together as ”IEEE test-systems” (e.g. IEEE
5-bus system, IEEE 13-bus system, etc. the associated number indicates the number of
loads present in the network). They are used in some research papers on microgrids
but especially when researchers are interested in power exchanges between nodes of
the power grid and in the design of innovative components that bring added value to mi-
crogrids. When one looks at EMSs and the exchanges of information, they become too
complicated to be studied succinctly (this incidentally raises a real question about the vi-
ability of microgrids on a medium scale). For this master thesis, a 5-component microgrid
brings enough complexity to produce an interesting study.
The first step is to describe the components and their physical relationships, then I will
introduce physical variables and equations that model
The system as a whole represents a cyber-physical system. So, beyond the equations
that links the loads to the power sources and the models that will be used to optimize
the production and consumption, one must also analyse under the point-of-view of the
computer security: how vulnerable to cyber-attacks is the microgrid ? Therefore, the last
section will focus on the security perspective.
2.1
System description
2.1.1
Components
MACROGRID
MICROGRID
EXTERNAL
SUPPLY
PV
ESS
EVSE
EV
Figure 2.1: Full representaion of the microgrid and its link with the macrogrid. The arrows
indicates that all components except for the EV can produce energy onto the DC bus.
The EV can only consume electricity while the ESS can do both, the two EVSE may or
may not be connected to an EV. The pictograms used in this diagram and all the other
associated parts of the document originate from http://iconfinder.com
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
11
==PAGE:20==
The system is composed of 5 different components:
External supply: An external (and supposedly infinite) source of electricity.
This is the only input from the macrogrid. It can be controlled such that if
the external supply is zero, it corresponds to piloting the microgrid on island
mode.
PV (Photovoltaic): A solar panel station. The characteristics of such a
component is that it is an unreliable and a production site Production site:
Energy is locally created; however, it cannot be locally stored. In particular,
if no storage or load (ie. a component that consumes the energy) is avail-
able, the energy ”is lost” (in industrial settings, the energy would be actually
sold back to the macrogrid) Unreliable: The energy (and power) produced
depends of the lighting conditions so one cannot neither assume nor predict
the power that will be produced. However, one can assume the maximum
power that can be produced.
ESS: An external storage system. The purpose of this component is to
collect the energy that comes from the other components when no EV is
charging and assist the macrogrid when at least one EV is charging. The
ESS would then charge from the external supply and the PV when no EV is
connected. Different technologies exist to model the ESS: for instance li-ion
or hydrogen batteries.
EVSE (Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment): EV charging station. The
microgrid here contains two of these. They are ”transparent components”
in the sense that one can assume they don’t consume power but are just
”plugs” on which EV can connect in order to charge. In practice, EVSE
are the leaf components that communicate with the macrogrid in order to
negociate the charging power and the billing details.
EV (Electric vehicle): Loads of the microgrid. The vehicles are equipments
that need to be recharged according to a target: the users plug their vehicle
and ”wish” to reach a certain State of Charge (SOC, ie. percentage of the
battery capacity that is available) when taking it back. Most of the time, the
user ”wish” to have the highest SOC possible however it is a valid use-case
to aim for a lower target SOC.
2.1.2
Constraints and variables
Each component introduces a set of mathematical variables and constraints. They will be
used to construct a mathematical model of the whole microgrid.
One property to consider is the sign convention: let x be a variable representing a power
in the microgrid.
(
∀t, x(t) ≥0 =⇒The component is injecting electricity into the microgrid’s DC bus
∀t, x(t) ≤0 =⇒The component is retrieving electricity into the microgrid’s DC bus
(2.1)
Constraints and variables introduced by the EVSE
Electrical constraints apply to the EVSE: it is limited in the amount of charging power it
can provide to a vehicle but also while discharging. So, an EVSE can theoretically act
both as a source of power and a load depending on the scenario.
Therefore, I introduce three new variables in the system: EV SE(t), EV SEmax, EV SEmin.
EV SEmax is constant, strictly positive and represent the maximum discharging power of a
12
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:21==
Supervisor embedded
computer
Figure 2.2: The microgrid system from the computational point of view. The solid lines rep-
resent the power links (ie. which components are connected on the same power buses)
while the dashed ones represent the communication links. Especially it can be seen that
a single computational unit that care of adjusting the behaviour of both the ESS and PV. A
single EVSE has been represented on the diagram because both behave the same way.
EV user
EV
EVSE
Supervisor PC
Cloud
ESS
PV
Figure 2.3: Simplified view of the system including the external inputs (EV user, Grid
requirements and other requests)
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
13
==PAGE:22==
pair (vehicle, EVSE); EV SEmin is constant, strictly negative and represent the maximum
charging power of a pair (vehicle, EVSE); finally, the following equation holds for all instant
t:
EV SEmin ≤EV SE(t) ≤EV SEmax
(2.2)
Because they are two EVSE in the microgrid, EV SE(t) is replaced by EV SE1(t) and
EV SE2(t) representing respectively the power at the EVSE #1 and the power at EVSE
#2.
Finally, I introduce EV SE1
presence(t) and EV SE2
presence(t), binary variables that indicates
if a electric vehicle is currently connected to the EVSE.
(
∀t, EV SEi
presence(t) = 1
=⇒An EV is connected to EVSE #i at instant t
∀t, EV SEi
presence(t) = 0
=⇒No EV is connected to EVSE #i at instant t
(2.3)
EVSE introduce a total of 4 variables and 2 configurable constants to the system.
Constraints and variables introduced by the PV
Solar panels and RES (Renewable Energy Sources) in general are unpredictable. The
only information an EMS can get is the instantaneous power. So, I introduce a single
variable for the PV: PV (t). We know that the PV will only act as a power source and
never as a load, so we have PV (t) ≥0 kW.
As the master thesis took place under particular conditions, I wondered about the use of
fabricated data to model the behaviour of solar panel fields. Fortunately, many openly
accessible databases of solar panel farm production data exist (for instance, Solar Power
Data for Integration Studies n.d. provides production profiles of Californian photovoltaic
farms for the whole year 2006). Since TRIALOG is involved in innovation projects on
microgrids containing solar panels, another possibility is to determine production profiles
from data directly taken from the systems in question.
I therefore immediately set aside the use of false data because the models I could have
imagined would not have been sufficiently representative of real production. In order to
establish the first versions of the model, I first used online databases so that I could quickly
prototype. Then, as soon as the opportunity arose, I collected all the information I needed
from the solar panels available to me.
Constraints and variables introduced by the ESS
The ESS is a central component of the microgrid: it is is charge of equalizing the power
production at all instant. If no EV is connected and the PV is producing electricity, it will
charge; if a EV connects, it will discharge to assist the macrogrid and provide the con-
sumer with cheaper electricity. One must separately consider the cases where the ESS
is charging (acting as a load) and when it is discharging (acting as a power source). Dif-
ferent limitations apply to both situations: the maximum charging and discharging powers
are independents.
I assume that the maximum limits are constant and I introduce ESSmax,charge and
ESSmax,discharge. Both constants are strictly positive and expressed in kW. Then, I intro-
duce a new variable ESS(t) representing the instantaneous power of the ESS. Consider-
ing the sign convention described at the beginning of the section, the following equation
holds:
14
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:23==
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
1
2
3
4
5
Time (in hours)
PV (t) (in kW)
Figure 2.4: Example of a photovoltaic production profile over 24 hours.
∀t, −ESSmax,charge ≤ESS(t) ≤ESSmax,discharge
(2.4)
However, when looking at an ESS (or a battery in general), we are more interested at
looking at its State Of Charge (SOC). So, I create a new variable SOCESS(t) which is
linked to the ESS’ power by the following equation:
SOC′
ESS(t) = −ηESS
CESS
ESS(t)
(2.5)
where CESS is the capacity of the ESS, expressed in KWh, and ηESS is the efficiency of
the battery. Carlos Bordons 2020 uses this equation as is while Halvgaard 2014 goes a
little further by separating the efficiencies for charging and discharging:
CESS SOC′
ESS(t) = ηESS,charge ESS+(t) + ηESS,discharge ESS−(t)
(2.6)
ESS+(t) represents the charging power and ESS−(t) represents the discharging power.
ESS+(t) = min(0, ESS(t))
(2.7)
ESS−(t) = max(0, ESS(t))
(2.8)
or if we want to express ESS(t) as a function of ESS+(t) and ESS−(t):
ESS(t) = ESS+(t) + ESS−(t)
(2.9)
Constraints and variables introduced by the macrogrid
The macrogrid is modelled by two different concepts: the allocated power and the ap-
plied power. The allocated power is the maximum power that the macrogrid can use at
a given instant, the applied power is the instantaneous power for all instants. I introduce
Pgrid,max(t) and Pgrid(t) to respectively represent them.
∀t,
0 ≤Pgrid,max(t)
(2.10)
∀t, −Pgrid,max(t) ≤Pgrid(t) ≤Pgrid,max(t)
(2.11)
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
15
==PAGE:24==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
-20
0
20
Time (in hours)
Pgrid(t) (in kW)
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the difference between the allocated power (in red) and the
applied power (in black). The system is allowed to use up to a certain limit. This limit is
valid in both buying (Pgrid(t) ≥0 with the model’s sign convention) and selling (Pgrid(t) ≤
0) electricity. It can also change with time: for instance, Pgrid,max(t) can be used to model
off-peak and peak hours with respectively a high value and a low value.
(2.11) gives the lower and upper bounds for Pgrid(t) with the following assumption: the
allocated power is valid for both buying energy from the macrogrid (ie. injecting power into
the microgrid) and selling energy to the macrogrid (ie. power flows out of the microgrid
into the microgrid).
Constraints and variables introduced by the EV
The EV is ”hidden” from the rest of the microgrid. Indeed, the power that reaches the EV
first goes through the EVSE. If EV SEmax
=
EVmax, EV SEmin
=
EVmin and
EV (t) = EV SEi
presence(t) ∗EV SEi(t), then we can act as if there is no EV in the mi-
crogrid, only EVSEs.
Balance equation
All the powers are linked together by the following statement:
The sum of the powers that come inside the microgrid is equal to the sum of
the powers consumed by the loads.
Effectively, because of the sign convention, this translates into the following equation that
I will call balance equation:
EV SE1(t) + EV SE2(t) + Pgrid(t) + PV (t) + ESS(t) = 0
(2.12)
2.2
Regulations surrounding microgrids and EMS
Electricity management is a very essential industry. To protect the countries, plants, con-
sumers, etc. but also the providers’ industries, numerous standards and regulations sur-
round the activities of the DSO (Distribution System Operators, electricity providers are
one of them). I will not describe them all here but I will focus on some recent rules that
address information security in the context of microgrid. I will only focus on the European
regulations.
The NIS directive (2016)
16
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:25==
The Network and Information Security directive creates a legislation for the security in
computer network and information systems. One part of the directive is about the cooper-
ation between the member states (which must create a dedicated national authority), and
the other part is about defining ESO (Essential Service Operators, companies that deliver
an essential service to a country) and DSP (Digital Service Provider) and the requirements
they must meet in terms of security infrastructure. In the domain of Energy management,
I will focus on the ESO which is a term gathering all the operators that provide electricity,
gas, petrol, ... DSP are online shops, Internet providers, etc. which are not in the scope
of the thesis.
For ESO, the NIS directive requires:
• Create a specific department (or at least a representative if the company is small)
dedicated to the security aspects of the services the companies provide.
• Declare all the networking and information systems used for all the services deliv-
ered (even the ones that are externally operated)
• Set up security-related risk management, in particular
– Create and implement designated security policies for the network and infor-
mation security
– Create and document a clear system architecture and system administration
– Detect and treat security incidents (clear processes must be used here)
• Declare any security incident to the national authority
In the context of an EMS, this means:
• The databases must be correctly secured as well as all the exchanges/networks
used to collect the data from all the actors (energy producers, distributors and smart
end-points).
• DSO must conceive risk assessment and management procedures to monitor the
security risks associated with the system
Of course, controls may happen to force the ESO to enforce the directive.
GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation) (2016)
This regulation is about the privacy of the personal data which are the data that can,
directly or indirectly, be associated with a physical person.In the context of Energy man-
agement, this refers to the information that can be gathered from the end-users but not
from the middle nodes: for instance, the GDPR covers the electrical consumption of peo-
ple but not the electric consumption of a Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment.
Here are the most relevant principles of the regulation:
• Explicit and positive consent: the end-users MUST give their consent in order to
collect their personal data
• The right of erasure: people can ask to delete all the data that concern them
• The right to access: people can ask to consult all the data gathered about them in
a structured format (”readable by a machine”)
• Personal data protection: Information systems used must be secured (”Privacy by
design” and ”Security by design”)
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
17
==PAGE:26==
• Companies must make studies about their services and their impact on privacy
For energy management systems, the following actions must be taken:
• Identify the personal data that must be collected for the algorithms
• Organize the personal data so that ...
– they can be easily used for computation
– they can be easily accessed individually and deleted if needed
• Assess the risks for the storage of the data and the exchanges needed to gather
them
• Document the system, its algorithms and its processes
• Create a consent interface so the user can opt out (or choose not to use the EMS if
their personal data are required) of the data collection.
The CyberSecurity Act (2019)
The CyberSecurity Act is a very recent European regulation. The EU’s member states
have until March 2021 to enact it. As a result, the governing authorities (and the ”aver-
age citizen”) do not yet have a clear view of its effectiveness and there is not as much
documentation on the Internet as for the GDPR.
According to the European Commission, the goal is ”a framework for European Cyberse-
curity Certificates”. The regulation is centered around two main axis: Firstly, describe a
cybersecurity certification framework, secondly, enhance ENISA (the European Agency
for Cybersecurity, created in 2004) by extending its missions and powers. It will be in
charge of setting up and maintaining the European-wide certification framework (partly by
increasing the member states’ cooperation) and organize all the activities linked to it. In
case of a large scale attack (or an attack that affect two or more member states at once),
ENISA would also be in charge of coordinating the responses.
The certification framework concerns all the services, processes and products used and/or
sold by any company located in at least one of the member states. The certificate will be a
guarantee of protection recognized everywhere in the EU and will break barriers between
the member states’ markets. Different test suites will be created by ENISA for different
kind of services or products. The goal is to push businesses to adopt security features
and processes early in the design and development stages.
Certificates will then be delivered with an assurance level (three grades: basic, substan-
tial, high) that evaluate the risks associated with the use of the certificated product or ser-
vice. The European Commission website indicates that an high assurance level means
that the most complete test suites have been successfully passed while a basic assur-
ance level means that only the most basic test suites were passed and that some risks
are to be considered when using the certificated product or service.
Because the regulation is very new, it is not clear how DSO will address it in their next
generation of EMS. The certification is not required in order to operate such a service but
a future regulation may force DSO to certify their systems. Without much more hindsight,
it is not possible to further describe what change will the Cybersecurity Act bring apart
from incentivizing developers to integrate security aspect early in their developments.
18
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:27==
2.3
Threat assessment
Research papers often focus on a single part of cyber-physical systems: either the secu-
rity or algorithmic aspect but never both at the same time. While the rest of the document
focuses on the EMS, I believe it is insightful to perform a cybersecurity-oriented analysis
of the microgrid I have presented in the previous section. Threat modeling techniques will
help help us identifying the critical parts of the system, in particular I will use the same
methodology as in Khan et al. 2017 which separates the analysis in 5 steps:
1. Identify the assets
2. Describe the system’s architecture
3. Identify the vulnerabilities
4. Identify the threats
5. Rate the threats
2.3.1
Assets of the system
One difficulty that one can encounter when doing threat modeling is a lack of focus. In-
deed, while it is always interesting to search for the highest amount of threats and vulner-
abilities, one must focus its analysis on a set of identified assets to limit the complexity
of the analysis. Here, I ignore all the system’s actors that cannot be controlled by the
microgrid operator.
Component
name
Properties
Comment
EVSE
Independant
station
The communication with the rest of the grid
happens through predefined protocols
PV
Non-intelligent
system
Must be controlled by an external controller
ESS
Non-intelligent
system
Must be controlled by an external controller
Embedded
computer (EBC)
Most
valuable
component
of
the system
Controls all the ESS and RES, possess an
EMS charged of scheduling (and optimizing) the
charge and discharge of all the other power
source.
Table 2.1: List of the physical assets of the studied system. The electric vehicles and
macrogrid are external parts of the system and do not belong to the microgrid operator.
The latter is the responsibility of the Distribution System Operator (DSO) while the cars
are the (physical) responsibility of the end-users.
2.3.2
Attack surface
One important security issue for the microgrid is that all its components are physically
accessible: the charging station is meant to be used by the public so it is not possible to
hide it inside a high-security compound (also, it would not be viable financially speaking...).
The supervisor computer can be locked inside a cabin but from a security point-of-view,
one cannot assume that it is not physically accessible and therefore, the EVSEs, PV, ESS
and EBC are all physically accessible. All the assets are potential entry points of an
attack which means that an attacker could potentially compromise all the actors of the
system.
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
19
==PAGE:28==
Nevertheless, from a computing point of view, the EVSE, EV and EBC discuss through
secure protocols which do not grant privileges to one another (they are only used for data
exchanges). Therefore, remotely gaining access to another machine with high privileges
is not possible.
2.3.3
Describing the system’s architecture
Different diagrams (such as Figure 2.1 or 2.3) already describe the basic links between
the components. Here, I will use the standard representation called Data flow diagram
(DFD) which makes the distinction between the entities, the protocols and the actions that
are performed or the data that is exchanged.
These diagrams serve as an entry point for computer system robustness studies. They
apply very well to cyber-physical systems since the entities are separated from each other
and the only links are the information exchanged. In theory, if a DFD is done correctly,
all the vulnerabilities of the system are represented on it. Of course, several levels of
description exist for the same system and it is often not necessary to represent the low-
level characteristics (for example, it is not useful to ”pollute the analysis” by explaining
the OSI layers 2 to 6 protocols used as long as it is known that a secure communication
channel is used).
Figure 2.6 highlights the main information that are exchanged between the different ac-
tors of the microgrid but also shows where the computation happens and where is the
relevant data stored. We can see that the EMS must constantly know the whole state of
the microgrid (ie. the instantaneous configuration of the PV, ESS and EVSEs) but must
also the available capacity of the macrogrid. This can be configured manually in some
cases but must sometimes be extrapolated based on what the DSO is able to provide in
industrial settings.
The EVSEs must also store decentralized information about their status. This results in
different charging profiles (retrieved from the EMS) representing:
• the default behaviour when connecting a new vehicle (in order to provide an uninter-
rupted service during the initialization phase in which the EMS has not yet indicated
the powers to be applied)
• the instantaneous behavior that replaces the default behavior when it is set
20
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:29==
Grid
User
EMS
PV controller
ESS controller
EVSE
EV
Supervisor
computer
Grid contraints
processing
Charge communication
(IEC 61851, ISO 15118)
Actual power, health
status of the EVSE
Information about the EV
end-user
Charging proﬁle
Constraints of the system, actual
power of all the components of
the grid (even external entities)
User data processing
(authentication,departure date, ...)
Controller data
Controller
data
Local charging proﬁle store
Figure 2.6: Data flow diagram (DFD) of the microgrid. Sharp rectangles represent the external entities, rounded rectangles are the assets,
the arrow represent the data flows (and their description are in the rectangles along the them), and finally the rectangle with bold upper and
lower borders is a data store. The protocols are not shown because emphasis is placed on the data exchanged rather than the means of
communication.
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
21
==PAGE:30==
2.3.4
Vulnerabilities
Still following Khan et al. 2017’s methodology, the third step in threat modeling is to an-
alyze the vulnerabilities of the microgrid. More specifically, I will focus on the elements
that I have described in Figure 2.6. Different frameworks have been created by engineers
from various companies, the most famous one (and probably the most used one) being
the STRIDE framework created by Microsoft’s security team (Kohnfelder and Garg 1999).
The acronym stands for:
Spoofing
The attacker successfully impersonate a component (or part
of it) of the system.
Tampering
The attacker modifies (part of) a system that has been
legitimately created. One of the concerns this created is that
a system could have been tampered to become harmful to its
users.
Repudiation
The attacker can send and/or receive data from the system
and deny having so. Because the system is not able to assure
the authenticity of the exchanges, it is impossible to confirm or
infirm the attacker’s claim.
Information disclosure
Data
breach
or
unauthorized
access
to
confidential
information
Denial of Service
Disruption of service for legitimate users
Elevation of privilege
Getting higher privilege access to a system element by a user
with restricted authority
The growing popularity of STRIDE has allowed cyber-security to be taken into account
in the development of many industrial projects, digital or not. Research projects have
sought (and are still seeking) to extend this approach to other aspects of IT security:
for example, LINDDUN (DistriNet Research Group n.d.) is seeking to develop a privacy-
centric framework so that developments integrate the GDPR early in their design.
In Table ??, we look at all the elements that compose that DFD and see which threats
can affect them.
1. Entities of the system (but also external entities) can be impersonated. Because
they store potential confidential data and communicate directly with other compo-
nents of the microgrid, they are also susceptible of disclosing classified information.
Denial of Service is also a threat that target them.
2. Data flows can be intercepted, transformed, repeated. Using secure channels can
prevent some of the security flaws but Denial of Service is always possible if the
attacker takes control of the communication channels.
3. Most of the time data store are only vulnerable through the entity that carry them.
Then, the next step is to find the goals of a potential attacks. We can list them and give
them code names for further analysis.
22
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:31==
DFD Element type
DFD Element name
S
T
R
I
D
E
Entity
EVSE



EV user



EV



EBC



Data flow
Charge communication



EV User data



EV User data #2



Charging profiles



EVSE health status



Grid constraints



Data store
EBC databases




EVSE databases




Process
EMS






Code
Description
F1
Charge or discharge of the battery outside of its safe limits
F2
The EV user sees its personal data exposed
F3
The microgrid operator sees its operational data exposed
F4
The EVSE furnishes power outside of its safe limits
F5
Inability to control the ESS and PV
F6
Inability to fulfill the microgrid’s short-term goals
F7
The EMS database’s contents get exposed or modified in a harmful way (i.e.
the system has trouble correctly functioning afterwards)
F8
An unauthorized actor can remotely control the microgrid
F9
The EVSE charging strategies are altered or removed
Table 2.2: List of vulnerabilities (”threat consequences” in Khan et al. 2017) that could
negatively affect the microgrid system in terms of hardware and software. Users and
operators could be physically or digitally affected by a cyber-attack.
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
23
==PAGE:32==
Threats
Possible targets
Possible
consequences
Spoofing
All the entities
F2, F3
Tampering
ESS, PV, EVSE, EVSE Health status
F1, F4, F5, F6
Charge communication, EV User data
F6
Grid constraints, Charging profiles
F6, F9
Repudiation
Information
disclosure
Man-in-the-middle attacks
F2
Denial
of
service
EVSE, EMS
Elevation of
privilege
EMS
F2, F3, F5, F6, F7,
F8, F9
Table 2.3: Summary of the possible attacks on all the elements of the microgrid
24
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:33==
3
Energy Management System (EMS)
3.1
Architecture of a resilient EMS
As described in Chapter 1, an Energy Management System (EMS) is a term that can
describe a wide range of different software, depending on the surface they cover (both
in terms of computing equipment and ”real area”). In the context of microgrid, I have fo-
cused on small-scale systems. This means that I do not consider communication aspects
because the EMS and its reporting tool are located on a single computer. On Figure 2.3,
the EMS is located on the Supervisor PC.
The EMS runs in an endless loop. Each iteration of the loop try to estimate the total power
needed to charge/discharge all the components of the system and distribute the contri-
butions of the ESS, PV and macrogrid. The iteration are spread out at regular intervals
in order to not overload the CPU (and because it would be counter-productive not to do
so): 10-20 seconds gives a good compromise between rapid adaptability to new events
and not overloading the CPU.
The objectives during an iteration are the following:
1. Gather all the required data for a computation
2. Check the reliability of the data (in particular, estimate if the system is currently under
a False-Data Injection attack)
3. Compute the power requirements and the contribution of each source
Figure 3.1 illustrates all the stages of a step of computation. I have included some stages
that are not relevant from an academic point of view but are necessary in industrial envi-
ronments, such as the reporting on attack stage and and the transmission of the computed
power to the sources of energy.
Post-analysis and post-processing also are out of the scope of this document.
They
address different situations that are fundamental in industrial settings: firsly, the noise
and rapid variations in the EMS’s algorithm’s outputs which ; secondly, the translation
from ”raw values” to data messages that are understandable by their recipients. For in-
stance, as shown in Figure 2.3, the EMS communicates through OCPP with the EVSEs
so it must compute the next instruction as a Charging schedule and integrate it to a
SetChargingProfile message.
3.2
A short review of candidates Energy Management
algorithms
The optimisation of energy production and consumption has been a field of study for many
decades: various optimisation techniques exist and/or are currently being researched.
Some industrial applications are based on mature technologies and can be found, for
example, in nuclear power plants.
3.2.1
Heuristic methods
The principle of heuristic methods is to define a set of rules that an EMS will follow. The
aim is not to achieve an optimal result, but to find a solution that will satisfy a short-term
objective. An example of such a method is ”Hysteresis Band Control” (HBC): the EMS
organizes the charging and discharging of ESS in a ”hysteresis band” (see Figure 1 for
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
25
==PAGE:34==
Begin computing next
step's operational state
No
Yes
Is the result of the
previous operation
positive ?
Interrupt the current
step's computations
Run the energy
management
algorithm
Post-analysis and
post-processing (in
industrial settings)
Transmit the new states
to the relevant actuators
End of the computations
for the current step
Report a potential on-
going attack
Check the input data
for FDI attacks
Figure 3.1: Global flowchart for a single step of a computation. The two most important
processes are in bold and are detailed in their respective sections of the report
a visual representation of such a scheme). The ESS is charged using the macrogrid and
RES until it reaches its upper limit and then fully discharged to its lower limit as required.
When this limit is reached, power generation can no longer be provided by the ESS and
must be supported by the macrogrid or even stopped. Many additional rules can be added
to the basic algorithm to improve its efficiency.
3.2.2
Numerical optimisation methods
The difference between heuristic methods and numerical optimization methods is that the
objective behind the latter is to get as close as possible to the optimal solution through an
optimization problem and numerical solving methods.
The basis of an optimization problem is the establishment of a cost function (also called
an error function) and a set of constraints. They are all established by modeling the
problem in the form of equations. By this characteristic, it is well understood that an
optimization problem is rigid and can only be applied to a particular system (the equations
must be adapted to each system). A generic algorithm is therefore not possible where a
heuristic method can be more easily flexible. The field of applied mathematics that seeks
to minimize a cost function under certain constraints is called operational research.
When boolean variables are used (e.g. EV present or absent), it is called ”integer pro-
gramming”. When using a set of continuous (e.g. State of Charge of an ESS) and boolean
variables, it is called ”Mixed-integer linear programming” or even ”Mixed-integer non-linear
programming” if the problem is not linear.
The Model-Predictive Control, detailed below, is a modeling method that allows to define
a Quadratic Programming problem (the error function is a polynomial of the second de-
gree) or a Non-linear Quadratic Programming problem depending on the complexity of
the model and the objectives to be achieved.
26
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:35==
SOCESS
PESS
One must charge the whole ESS
before one can use the energy
stored in the component
Upper limit
Lower limit
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the principle of Hysteresis Band Control.
3.2.3
Metaheuristic methods
Metaheuristic methods are a set of methods that seek to define a large number of heuristic
rules and refine them over iterations so that they are increasingly effective. These meth-
ods are therefore based on a score that would evaluate their performance: we define that
the best set of two distinct sets of rules is the one with the highest score; we then try to find
more and more efficient sets until we find a local optimum (and at best a global optimum).
The best known methods are inspired by the fields of biology and genetics.
• Genetic algorithms: this consists of representing the rules by a ”chromosome”.
Many chromosomes are initially randomly generated to form a population. The pop-
ulation then reproduces forming crosses (beware of random mutation phenomena)
and only the strongest, i.e. those with the highest score (principle inspired by natural
selection), then form the next generation. The process is repeated until there is no
further improvement in the result (the score).
• Artificial neural networks (ANN): no need to go into too much detail here. One can
just note that like optimization methods (based on an error function to be minimized),
ANNs are very rigid and linked to a particular system.
• Others: Taboo search, simulated annealing, Optimization by particulate swarms
(ant colony algorithm), ...
Most of the time, there is a trade-off between rigidity of the models and the flexibility of
their application.
3.3
Model-predictive control
In the following section, I will consider that the system consists of n state variables, m
output variables and q control variables. The mathematical model is inspired by the work
of Wang 2009.
3.3.1
State-space model
xm(t + 1) = Amxm(t) + Bmu(t)
y(t) = Cmxm(t) + Dmu(t)
Because of the receding horizon control principle, we implicitly assume that u(t) has no
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
27
==PAGE:36==
impact on the output y(t) and therefore Dm = 0 and the state-space model can be rewrit-
ten as:
xm(t + 1) = Amxm(t) + Bmu(t)
(3.1)
y(t) = Cmxm(t)
(3.2)
Let ∆xm(t) = xm(t)−xm(t−1) and ∆u(t) = u(t)−u(t−1). They represent the displace-
ment of the state and control variables between the instants t −1 and t. Then (3.1) can
be rewritten as:
∆xm(t + 1) = Am∆xm(t) + Bm∆u(t)
We can also note that
y(t + 1) −y(t) = Cm
 xm(t + 1) −xm(t)

= Cm∆xm(t + 1)
=⇒y(t + 1) −y(t) = CmAm∆xm(t) + CmBm∆u(t)
(3.3)
The next step is to define x(t) = [∆xm(t)T y(t)T ]T and use (3.1) and (3.3)
∆xm(t + 1)
y(t)

=
Am∆xm(t) + Bm∆u
Cmxm(t)

=

Am∆xm(t) + 0 ∗y(t) + Bm∆u
CmAm∆xm(t) + y(t) + CmBm∆u(t)

=⇒
∆xm(t + 1)
y(t)

=
 Am
0
CmAm
1
 ∆xm(t)
y(t)

+
 Bm
CmBm

∆u(t)
Using a compact matrix form, we get the following state-space system:
(
x(t + 1)
= Ax(t) + B∆u(t)
y(t)
= Cx(t)
with











A =
"
Am
0
CmAm
1
#
, B =
"
Bm
CmBm
#
C =

0 ... 0
| {z }
n times
1

(3.4)
(3.4) is called the Augmented model.
Until here, I have considered that the controller evolves in a strictly controlled environ-
ment such that no disturbances ever affect the values of the output and state variables.
While this assumptions can sometimes be valid in a simulated system, it cannot hold in
a real industrial environment. Therefore, we must add a new term to take disturbances
in consideration. The latter are described by a function d(t) independent from the state,
output and command variables. I introduce a new term Bd which characterises the impact
of the disturbances on the state variables:
28
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:37==
xm(t + 1) = Amxm(t) + Bmu(t) + Bdd(t)
(3.5)
y(t) = Cmxm(t)
(3.6)
We can redo all the calculations from (3.1) to (3.4) to have the following updated aug-
mented model:
(
x(t + 1)
= Ax(t) + B∆u(t) + Ndd(t)
y(t)
= Cx(t)
(3.7)
where Nd is computed similarly to B (same computations; one just need to replace Bm
by Bd).
3.3.2
Predictive control
Idea: can we further adapt the model in order to not only get the value of ∆xm(t + 1) and
y(t+1) but also ∆xm(t+2), ∆xm(t+3), ..., ∆xm(t+Np) and y(t+2), y(t+3), ..., y(t+Np)
? Using (and later constraining) those values will help us achieve better efficiency.
First, let us consider the disturbances-less case. We will expand the calculations later on
to include the disturbances-linked terms.
Let Y =

y(t + 1)T , y(t + 2)T , ..., y(t + Np)T T be the values of the output variables of
the prediction horizon. Y has dimensions (Np ∗m) × 1.
Let ∆U =

∆u(t)T , ∆u(t + 1)T , ..., ∆u(t + Nc −1)T T be the values of the command
variables over the control horizon. ∆U has dimensions (Nc ∗q) × 1.
For instants until t + Nc, known the initial state x(t) and u(t −1):
x(t + 1) = Ax(t) + B∆u(t)
x(t + 2) = A(Ax(t) + B∆u(t)) + B∆u(t + 1)
= A2x(t) + AB∆u(t) + B∆u(t + 1)
...
x(t + Nc) = ANcx(t) + ANc−1B∆u(t) + ANc−2B∆u(t + 1) + ... + B∆u(t + Nc −1)
For instants after t + Nc −1, we suppose that u is constant so the state variables are only
controlled by what has happened between the instants t and t + Nc −1. This gives the
following equations:
x(t + Nc + 1) = ANc+1x(t) + ANcB∆u(t) + ANc−1B∆u(t + 1) + ...
+ AB∆u(t + Nc −1)
...
x(t + Np) = ANpx(t) + ANp−1B∆u(t) + ANp−2B∆u(t + 1) + ...
+ ANp−NcB∆u(t + Nc −1)
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
29
==PAGE:38==
Using these equations with (3.4), we get:


y(t + 1)
y(t + 2)
...
y(t + Np)

=


CA
CA2
...
CANp

x(t)+


CB
0
0
...
0
CAB
CB
0
...
0
CA2B
CAB
CB
...
0
...
...
...
...
0
CANp−1B
CANp−2B
...
...
CANp−NcB




∆u(t)
∆u(t + 1)
...
∆u(t + Nc −1)


Which, under a compact matrix form can be rewritten as
Y = Fx(t) + Φ∆U
(3.8)
The only unknown of the equation is ∆U. Finding the optimum sequence of xm, x and y
comes down to finding the optimum sequence of ∆U (and therefore u).
Now, if we add the disturbances in the analysis again (and redo all the steps which led to
(3.8), we get the following matrix equation:
Y = Fx(t) + Φ∆U + ΦdD
(3.9)
where D =

d(t) d(t + 1) ... d(t + Nc −1)

and Φd is computed the same way as Φ except
B is replaced by Nd in the calculations.
3.3.3
The unconstrained minimization problem
General form of the cost function: Using ∥.∥as the 2-norm
J =
Np
X
i=1
∥y(t + i) −w(t + i)∥2
A +
Nc−1
X
i=0
∥∆u(t + i)∥2
L +
Nc−1
X
i=0
∥u(t + i) −uref(t + i)∥2
G
(3.10)
J = α
Np
X
i=1
 y(t + i) −w(t + i)
2 + λ
Nc−1
X
i=0
∆u(t + i)2 +
Nc−1
X
i=0
∥u(t + i) −uref(t + i)∥2
G
(3.11)
The transition from (3.10) to (3.11) use A = α INp×Np and L = λ INc×Nc. Using compact
matrix forms, the 2-norm operation translates into matrix multiplications and we get:
J = α (Y −W)T (Y −W) + λ ∆UT ∆U + (U −Uref)T G (U −Uref)
(3.12)
The cost function has three different parts:
30
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:39==
1. Set point objective Minimizing this part means setting the measurements as close
as possible from the given set point.
2. Regularization on the command variation Big variations of the input variables
may be costly (for instance rapidly changing the power produced in a power plant)
. We may try to avoid that.
3. Regularization on the command itself Values for the commands that differ greatly
from the reference may be costly. The references can be dynamically computed
according to different events.
Each part has its importance given by a strictly positive coefficient. They don’t have to
sum up to 1 but one can normalize the whole equation by dividing by α + λ + γ which
would give an equivalent cost functions (the maxima and minima’s locations would not
change). So, one can assume that α + λ + γ = 1.
At this point, a Model-Predictive Controller is represented by a ”simple” minimization prob-
lem which will yield the optimal value for ∆U. Because the term in U depends of G which
itself depends on the system, I will consider here G = 0 and will detail the case for G ̸= 0
later:
J = α(Y −W)T (Y −W) + λ∆UT ∆U
= α(Fx(t) + ΦdD + Φ∆U −W)T (Fx(t) + ΦdD −W + Φ∆U) + λ∆UT ∆U
Using the properties of the transposition:
J = α

(Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)T + (Φ∆U)T ]
 Fx(t) + ΦdD −W + Φ∆U) + λ∆UT ∆U
= α

(Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)T (Fx(t) −W) + (Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)T Φ∆U+
(Φ∆U)T (Fx(t) + ΦdD −W) + (Φ∆U)T Φ∆U

+ λ∆UT ∆U
= α

(Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)T Φ∆U

+ α(Φ∆U)T (Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)
+ ∆UT (αΦT Φ + λI)∆U + α

(Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)T (Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)]
(Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)T (Fx(t) + ΦdD −W) is a constant for each step. Removing this term
from the cost function will not change its variations.
J = α

(Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)T Φ∆U

+ α∆UT ΦT (Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)
+ ∆UT (αΦT Φ + λI)∆U
= α

(Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)T Φ∆U

+ α

(Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)T Φ∆U
T
+ ∆UT (αΦT Φ + λI)∆U
Because J is a scalar, we have (Fx(t) −W)T Φ∆U =

(Fx(t) −W)T Φ∆U
T and we can
simplify the cost function again down to
J = ∆UT (α ΦT Φ + λI)∆U + 2

α(Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)T Φ
T ∆U
(3.13)
= 1
2∆UT H∆U + fT ∆U
(3.14)
With H = 2 (α ΦT Φ + λI) and f = 2 α (Fx(t) + ΦdD −W)T Φ.
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
31
==PAGE:40==
Let’s now see the case of G ̸= 0 by looking at it independently:
J = (U −Uref)T G(U −Uref)
(3.15)
= UT GU −UT
refGU −UT GUref + UT
refGUref
(3.16)
= UT −2UT
refGU
(3.17)
From (3.15) to (3.16), I use the properties of the transposition. From (3.15) to (3.16), I
used the same arguments as before: I can remove a term because of the variation of the
cost function and I can gather two terms together due to the nature of the cost function (J
is a scalar).
Now we need a way to define U as a function of ∆U. The complete proof of this is written
in section 3.3.4. Now, we can say that:
U = C1u(t −1) + C2∆U
(3.18)
where C1 =


1
1
...
1

and C2 =


1 0 0 0 ... 0
1 1 0 0 ... 0
...
1 1 1 1 ... 1

. The complete proof that leads tp C1 and C2 is
in section (3.3.4).
Finally, we have:
J = (C1u(t −1) + C2∆U)T G(C1u(t −1) + C2∆U) −2UrefG(C1u(t −1) + C2∆U) (3.19)
And using the same properties as before, we can simplify this expression even more:
J = ∆UT CT
2 GC2∆U + 2u(t −1)T CT
1 GC2∆U2UT
refGC2∆U
(3.20)
We can add the relevant terms to H and f and we have expressed the MPC problem as
a Quadratic Programming problem which is classically solvable by commercial solvers
such as MATLAB’s Optimization Toolbox, IBM CPLEX or even the free GNU Octave
solver. With no constraints, analytical resolution methods are usable and can compute
very quickly the best ∆U at each timestep. Carlos Bordons 2020 provides a very clear
step-by-step demonstration on how to compute the optimum value; unfortunately, ana-
lytically computing the optimum becomes very hard once constraints are added (a big
amount of equations are introduced into the problem) and numerical methods (like the
interior point algorithm), and therefore solvers, become the preferred resolution method.
3.3.4
Adding constraints on the minimization problem
In the current form, the minimization problem is unconstrained which means that neither
the command variables’ values nor their variations are bounded. Because, in the context
of microgrids and EMS, this would only lead to unrealistic (and impossible) solutions, one
must add constraints to the previously defined problem to produce real solutions.
Like the cost function that is composed of different terms, three different types of con-
straints are possible, represented by the following equations:
32
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:41==
0
1
2
3
4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
·105
Elasped time (h)
Pgrid (kW)
0
1
2
3
4
0
20
40
60
80
100
Elasped time (h)
SOC (%)
Figure 3.3: Illustration of a failed simulation when no constraint is applied. The system
used here is the microgrid described in Section 2.1 where no vehicle is charging and the
solar panel are not producing any electricity. The ESS charges very quickly (200 × 103
kW), in a single step. This simulation is not applicable in the real world for two reasons:
the macrogrid may not be authorized to deliver this much power, ESS cannot charge at
that much power.
∀t, ∆umin(t) ≤∆u(t) ≤∆umax(t)
(3.21)
∀t, umin(t) ≤u(t) ≤umax(t)
(3.22)
∀t, ymin(t) ≤y(t) ≤ymax(t)
(3.23)
1. (3.21) constraints ∆U. In the scope of the present master thesis (as we will see
later), the command variables are power; restraining the variations on them is not
very useful as one can consider that all the power components are capable of in-
stantly adapting their power production.
2. (3.22) constraints the command variables. Useful to impose a minimum and maxi-
mum value on the macrogrid’s contribution for instance.
3. (3.23) constraints the output variables. Useful to impose an operational range on a
ESS for instance.
We must express (3.21), (3.22) and (3.23) in a matrix form to form a complete optimization
problem.
Constraining ∆U
Regrouping all the equations together together for instant t to t + Nc −1:


∆umin(t)
...
∆umin(t + Nc −1)

≤


∆u(t)
...
∆u(t + Nc −1)

≤


∆umax(t)
...
∆umax(t + Nc −1)


which can be rewritten as:
∆Umin ≤∆U ≤∆Umax
(3.24)
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
33
==PAGE:42==
with
∆Umin = [∆umin(t) ... ∆umin(t + Nc −1)]T
∆Umax = [∆umax(t) ... ∆umax(t + Nc −1)]T
Constraining u
u(t) = u(t −1) + ∆u(t)
(3.25)
u(t + 1) = u(t −1) + ∆u(t) + ∆u(t + 1)
(3.26)
...
(3.27)
u(t + Nc −1) = u(t −1) + ∆u(t) + ... + ∆u(t + Nc −1)
(3.28)
Before regrouping all the equations together to make ∆U appear, we must identify how
to express the sum all the ∆u terms for all values of u. We see that:
• ∆u(t) appears in all the equations
• ∆u(t + 1) appears in all the equations but the first
• ∆u(t + 2) appears in all the equations but the two first
• ...


∆u(t)
∆u(t) + ∆u(t + 1)
...
∆u(t) + ... + ∆u(t + Nc −1)

=


1 0 0 0 ... 0
1 1 0 0 ... 0
...
1 1 1 1 ... 1

× ∆U = C2 × ∆U
C2 is a lower triangular square matrix of dimension Nc ×Nc whose non-zero elements are
equal to 1. Using this result with (3.25) to (3.28):


u(t)
u(t + 1)
...
u(t + Nc −1)

=


1
1
...
1

× u(t −1) + C2 ∆U = C1 u(t −1) + C2 ∆U
(3.29)
Finally, introducing Umin = [umin(t) ... umin(t + Nc −1)]T and Umax = [umax(t) ... umax(t + Nc −1)]T ,
we can reconstruct the constraints in a more compact form:


umin(t)
umin(t + 1)
...
umin(t + Nc −1)

≤


u(t)
u(t + 1)
...
u(t + Nc −1)


≤


umax(t)
umax(t + 1)
...
umax(t + Nc −1)


=⇒
Umin
≤
C1 u(t −1) + C2 ∆U
≤
Umax
(3.30)
Constraining y
34
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:43==
We define Ymin = [ymin(t + 1) ... ymin(t + Np)]T and Ymax = [ymax(t + 1) ... ymax(t + Np)]T .
Then, we can directly gather the equations for all instants and use (3.9):


ymin(t + 1)
...
ymin(t + Np)

≤
Y
≤


ymax(t + 1)
...
ymax(t + Np)


=⇒
Ymin
≤Fx(t) + Φ∆U + ΦdD ≤
Ymax
(3.31)
Putting everything together
To obtain a constrained minimization problem, we must express the constraints and cost
function as:
arg min
∆U J = 1
2∆UT H∆U + fT ∆U
R ∆U ≤c
(3.32)
where R has Nc columns and c is a column vector. Upper bounds in (3.24), (3.30) and
(3.31) are expressed as-is but lower bounds must be reversed, ie. expressed as a function
of −∆U.
Equation
Lower bound expression
Upper bound expression
(3.24)
−INc×Nc ∆U ≤−∆Umin
INc×Nc∆U ≤∆Umax
(3.30)
−C2 ∆U ≤−Umin + C1 u(t −1)
C2 ∆U ≤Umax −C1 u(t −1)
(3.31)
−Φ∆U ≤−Ymin + Fx(t) + ΦdD
−Φ∆U ≤Ymax −Fx(t) −ΦdD
Using the expressions in the table above,
we define R
=


−INc×Nc
INc×Nc
−C2
C2
−Φ
Φ


and
c =


−∆Umin
∆Umax
−Umin + C1 u(t −1)
Umax −C1 u(t −1)
−Ymin + Fx(t) + ΦdD
Ymax −Fx(t) −ΦdD


and we are done modeling the Model-Predictive Controller.
3.4
Attacks on an EMS
3.4.1
Global overview
In this subsection, I will take a step back to list vulnerabilities linked to SCADA/EMS.
Kolosok and Gurina 2018 describe threats that energy power systems like smart grids
and microgrids may suffer. In their article, they take the example of the Russian elec-
tric grid; they separate all the components of the global control system into 4 subsystems:
time synchronization subsystem (TSS), measurement subsystem (MS), data transfer sub-
system (DTS), and data processing subsystem (DPS).
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
35
==PAGE:44==
• Availability attacks: the attacker tries to overcharge the systems by jamming the MS
and/or DTS. This includes the well-known Denial-of-Service attacks, replay attacks,
...
• Knowledge-gathering attacks (also known as reconnaissance attacks): the attacker
randomly probes the system (mostly the DTS and DPS) in order to find patterns
in the responses. Eventually, the attacker finds finer approaches as they gather
information on the system. A weakly-secured system can be hacked this way.
• False-data injections (FDI): the attacker infiltrates his own measurements into the
MS in order to transform the DPS’s logical representation of the state of the system.
3.4.2
Focus on False-data Injections
FDI are a type of spoofing attack: the attacker impersonates sensors (generally speaking,
they try to impersonate the whole MS) and tries to report to the DPS by transmitting false
measurements.
FDI may have a big impact because they aim at breaking several properties of the system:
integrity, availability, and operability of the system.
1. Integrity: The integrity of the system is compromised because one cannot assume
that the sensor are the real sender behind all the data sent to the EMS. A system
must be set up either to assure secure transmissions that assure the identity of the
sender, or to detect when false data is behind sent.
2. Availability: There are two cases to consider here: firstly, wrong measurement can
partly or entirely disable a system because the EMS thinks that the sensors and/or
actuators are broken. Secondly, False Data Injection can be combined with Denial
of Service attacks (because the attacker can send valid messages, why not send a
lot of them to completely disable the system ?).
3. Operability: A system under a False Data Injection cannot be completely operable
by operators because some sensors cannot respond to the central system/EMS.
In the following subsections, we will see one technique that can be used to detect FDI
attacks. The analysis is based on two articles published in 2016 and 2019: Zhang, Liu,
and Zhu 2016 and Deng, Zhuang, and Liang 2019.
3.4.3
Detecting FDI attacks
Let z = [z1, ..., zm] be the measured state, let x = [x1, ..., xn] be the state variables and
h be the equations linking the measurements to the state variables and finally let v the
measurement errors. In a DC power flow model, h can be described as a matrix H (called
the Jacobian matrix) and we have:
z = Hx + v
(3.33)
H both depends of the measurements and the network topology. Moreover, in most cases,
the measurements’ random error are assumed to follow a Gaussian distribution centered
at zero. Therefore, we can describe the measurement errors with a co-variance matrix
R = diag(σ2
1, ..., σ2
m) .
The idea of state estimation is, given some measurements z, find the value of x that fits
the most (the problem being that v is unknown). Because z is a random variable, we
can look at its probability distribution which is defined as the following density probability
function:
36
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:45==
f(z) =
1
(2π)m/2(det R)1/2 exp(−1
2 [z −Hx]T R−1[z −Hx])
(3.34)
Note: this formula directly derives from the distribution assumption of the measurement
errors.
Then, State Estimation becomes the problem of maximizing this function with regards to
x. A analytical method is easily applicable in this case: first, we know that the maximum
of such a function a found at the minimum of the term in the exponential.
arg max f(z) = arg min J(x) = −1
2 [z −Hx]T R−1[z −Hx]
(3.35)
Then, we look at its derivative and nullify it to get an equation that gives us the minimum:
δJ
δx (x) = −HT R−1(z −Hx) = 0
(3.36)
Which gives us ˆx, the estimator (ie. the state that has the highest probability of being the
true one):
ˆx = (HT R−1H)−1HT R−1z
(3.37)
After ˆx has been computed, one can look at the residual z −Hˆx. In particular, let τ be a
threshold, we say that z is suspicious if L(x) = ∥z −Hˆx∥2 > τ. There are different ways
of computing τ, but using the fact that L(x) is chi-square distributed one can define α, the
significance level, such that P(L(x) > τ 2) = α.
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:47==
4
Model-Predictive Control with a single
command variable
The goal of this chapter is to use the system’s equations of Section 2.1 and apply them to
the Model-Predictive Control described in the last chapter. After stating the base equation,
I will look at the performance of the model in different scenarios and do a benchmark using
different model parameter.
The computations have been executed on a Intel i7 2.60 GHz (4 cores), 16 GB RAM with
MATLAB R2017b and the Optimisation Toolbox.
4.1
Defining the model
To recall, to completely define a MPC controller, one must define a set of state variables
x, a set of command variables u and a set of output variables y.The three of them are
linked together by Am, Bm and Cm.
Combining equations (2.5) and (2.12), we get a continuous equation describing the evo-
lution of the State of Charge depending on the input from the ESS, PV and macrogrid.
ESS(t) = −
 EV SE1(t) + EV SE2(t) + Pgrid(t) + PV (t)

=⇒
SOC′
ESS(t) = ηESS
CESS
 EV SE1(t) + EV SE2(t) + Pgrid(t) + PV (t)

Next step is integrating.
SOCESS(t+1) = SOCESS(t)+Ts
ηESS
CESS
 EV SE1(t)+EV SE2(t)+Pgrid(t)+PV (t)

(4.1)
Note: (4.1) introduces a new parameter: Ts. This parameter is the integration length. We
also make the assumption that EV SE1(t) + EV SE2(t) + Pgrid(t) + PV (t) is piecewise
constant which isn’t far from the true behaviour because the power change every Ts min-
utes (except for PV which may be subject to change more frequently. Appendix A gives
a more detailed proof of this equation.
With a little reorganisation, we get the following:
SOCESS(t + 1) = SOCESS(t) + ηESS
CESS
Pgrid(t)
+ ηESS
CESS
 EV SE1(t) + EV SE2(t) + PV (t)

(4.2)
Equation (4.2) is the base equation I will use for defining the MPC controller in this chapter.
Next chapter will feature a little tweak in the same equation to define another model. Here
we can have x(t) = SOCESS(t), u(t) = Pgrid(t) and y(t) = x(t) and therefore Am = 1,
Bm =
ηESS
CESS and Cm = 1. This still leaves the term EV SE1(t) + EV SE2(t) + PV (t)
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
39
==PAGE:48==
unsassigned. (3.5) still has one stop open: the perturbation term. Note that defining
d(t) = EV SE1(t) + EV SE2(t) + PV (t) means that the load on the microgrid must be
modeled as a disturbance. This puts a strong assumption on the model as we will see
later in the chapter.
Going back to (2.12), the microgrid puts some constraints on the acceptable values for
Pgrid(t):
ESSmin ≤ESS(t) ≤ESSmax
=⇒
ESSmin ≤Pgrid(t) + d(t) ≤ESSmax
=⇒
ESSmin −d(t) ≤Pgrid(t) ≤ESSmax −d(t)
=⇒



Pgrid(t) ≤ESSmax −d(t)
−Pgrid(t) ≤−ESSmin + d(t)
This is the last new equation that will be introduced in this chapter, for a total of two new
constraints and one model equation.
4.2
Hypothesis
4.2.1
Timestep length
I decide that a timestep in a single MPC computation lasts 5 minutes. This means that not
only the EMS has 5 minutes to compute the next step commands (which is largely enough)
but the plan it calculates is a succession of steps with a fixed duration of 5 minutes.
4.2.2
Minimum and maximum values for the main variables
Now is the moment to give some values to all the parameters of the system. Table 4.1
summarizes all the maximum and minimum values that can be reached by the power
variables of the model.
Because the model uses differential equations, one must also look at the minimum and
maximum values of the derivative. Actually, this isn’t really important because all the
components have a lot of time to adjust to the command. But in analysis with shorter
timestep length, it could have some importance (Carlos Bordons 2020 uses timesteps
with duration 10 seconds). Therefore, I have decided to not put constraints on the ∆·
variables.
4.2.3
Additional hypothesis due to the nature of the MPC model
The only command variable here is Pgrid(t). However, the two connected vehicles are
also powered by EVSE1 and EVSE2 respectively. Therefore, it is necessary to make a
hypothesis about the behaviour of these two variables. I have chosen to introduce the
following new constraint:
∀i ∈1, 2, EV SEi(t) = EV SEmin ∗EV SEi
presence(t)
(4.3)
To recall, the convention here used is that negative powers are ”taken out” of the microgrid
while positive powers represent powers that ”come into” the microgrid. This is why I used
EV SEmin and not EV SEmax in 4.3: EV SEmin is negative while EV SEmax is positive. If I
used the second one, that would mean that when a EV connects to the microgrid, it would
discharge instead of charging.
40
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:49==
Minimum
Maximum
EV SEi(t)
−22.00 kW
22.00 kW
Pgrid(t)
−44.00 kW
44.00 kW
ESS(t)
−22.00 kW
12.00 kW
SOCESS(t)
10 %
90 %
PV (t)
0 kW
−
Table 4.1: Minimum and maximum values for all the variables. PV (t) has no maximum
because it is a parameter of the problem (and not a command variable: it can never
be controlled to provide less energy to the microgrid) sp I decided not to constrain it.
Nevertheless, because it is a source of electricity, it never consumes electricity so the
minimum is 0 kW). The ESS is limited between 10 % and 90 % to avoid the issues of
overcharge and undercharge that damage the batteries (whatever the type of battery it is:
li-ion, hydrogen, etc.).
Finally, the last hypothesis is: as long as the vehicle is connected, it must be charged.
This hypothesis is not impossible to follow in a real environment where one can just code
that when the EV is fully charged, it is labeled as disconnected by the EVSE and therefore
EV SEi
presence(t) = 0. Moreover, it is actually a hypothesis that most EMS for charging
stations use nowadays because the current technology cannot transmit the energy left
before the battery is fully charged from the EV to the EVSE; the EMS has therefore no
ways of getting this information as well.
4.3
Scenarios studied
The present section will describe the principle behind the scenarios that will be studied
in this chapter and the next one. Carlos Bordons 2020 (section 4.4.4) uses the same
approach to analyze the performance of their model but they define three different mean-
ingful situations (cloudy day, sunny day and wind turbine as RES instead of solar panels)
while, for different situations, my scenarios are mainly aimed at validating the model’s
capabilities and determining the edge cases in which it could not work.
Code
Title
Description
SC.1
No
charging
vehicle
No vehicle ever connects to a charging station, the PV and
ESS function normally.
SC.2
A single charging
vehicle
A vehicle connects to a charging station in the morning
and stays connected until the end of the afternoon. The
PV and ESS function normally
SC.3
Two
concurrent
charging vehicles
A vehicle connects to a charging station in the morning and
stays connected until the end of the afternoon. A second
vehicle connects at noon and only charges for a couple of
hours.
I use different metrics to analyze the performance of the model: I look at the state variables
and the command variables; I gather the data outputted for every step and plot them over
the whole simulation. These variables are: SOCESS(t), Pgrid(t), ESS(t), PV (t). I also
use EV SEi
presence(t) to mark the connection and disconnection time of the EVs.
Finally, I use the balance equation to assess the feasability of the solution. This equation
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.1: Powers for the whole simulations. The plotted variables are ESS(t), Pgrid(t),
PV (t) and EV SE1(t) + EV SE2(t). Here the values do not correspond to the model with
a single command variable but they serve to illustrate what results can be obtain from the
simulation.
Figure 4.2: Representation of SOCESS (in blue) and its derivative (in orange). The values
of this state variable is computed from the same model used in Figure 4.1.
states that a ”balance function”, a sum of input parameters and computed values, must
always be equal to zero. Not taking into account approximation errors (due to floating-
point calculations), if this equality is broken, then the solution is infeasible.
4.4
SC.1: No charging vehicle
In this scenario, as described before, no EV connects to the charging stations. The ESS
starts half full and has a set point of 100%. That means that its ”optimum point” is when
the battery is full.
The simulation lasts a full day. For the cost function, I decided to use α = 10−4, λ = 0.
Also, there is a single command variable and i decided that G = γ = 0. This configuration
is the one that gives the best results on this scenario.
Figures 4.4 provides a full outlook of all the powers considered in the microgrid. Figure
4.5 gives a more detailed view on the grid input.
In the night, the PV does not produce any energy. The battery uses this situation to ask
for energy from the grid until the PV stats producing. Then, at one point in the morning,
the PV starts producing energy. The grid does not have to handle the battery charge by
42
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.3: Evolution of the SOC in the whole simulation. The blue plot line is the SOC
itself while the orange one is the derivative. Because no vehicle is charging, the battery
slowly charges and never discharge.
Figure 4.4: Overview of all the powers involve in the microgrid: the plot shows the pro-
duction of the PV, as well as the input from the microgrid and what is given to the ESS.
As stated by the scenario, the ”Load on the network” line shows that no load was put on
the network.
itself so it decreases the energy it provides to the battery.
Moreover, we can see that there is a point from which the microgrid starts to sell energy
to the macrogrid. This is because the algorithm has decided that less energy is required
to charge the battery than is produced. Therefore, the surplus is sold to the macrogrid.
From a performance perspective, Figure 4.3 that the SOC grows slowly because ESS(t)
is low. This is because Pgrid is also low in order to not be a burden to the macrogrid.
Finally, Figure 4.6 shows us if the solution is feasible. We can see that the performance
score is 54. The way this score is calculated is by taking the 2-norm of [f(0), f(t1), . . . , f(tn)]
where t1, . . . , tn are all the timesteps and f is the balance function.
On Figure 4.6 we can see that the approximation errors never grows over 15 W. In a situ-
ation where components work with kilowatts of energy, the approximation error is almost
negligible. This is what is shown by the very good performance score.
λ ̸= 0 gives worse results
One may wonder why the best results are obtained with α ̸= 0 and λ = γ = 0. First of all, I
chose γ = 0 because the other case means that a set point should be chosen for Pgrid(t)
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.5: Focus look on Pgrid(t). Three different phases can be distinguished: two
phases in which the grid charges the battery by itself (at the beginning and at the end)
and one phase in which the PV support is sufficient so that the grid does not need to
provide any energy (and moreover sells the surplus).
Figure 4.6: (Scenario 1) The balance equation shows the difference between the actual
value and the calculated value: when the balance is 0, hat means that the balance equa-
tion is strictly respected; when the balance is not 0, then that means that approximation
errors or other phenomenons prevented the right value from being calculated. Here we
see that the biggest approximation error (in absolute terms) is 12 and that the balance
score is pretty good: the latter is expressed in W and is the 2-norm of the blue line; other
powers are expressed in kW so there’s a 103 difference between the score and the actual
powers.
44
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.7: (Scenario 1) Power plot of all the components when λ ̸= 0. Recall that the
ESS is discharging into the microgrid when ESS(t) ≥0 because of the energy convention
described in the previous chapters. The performance score of this simulation is 136, which
is worse than the previous simulation but still very good.
which does not mean anything here: should one aim for a constant value of Pgrid(t) higher
or lower than 0 ? In general, aiming for a value different than 0 is incoherent as one in
principle searches for the lowest grid participation.
Secondly, let’s have a look at λ ̸= 0. Figure 4.7 shows what results we get with α =
10−6 and λ = 10−4. The battery does not get any input from the grid and actually only
charges when the PV produces energy. However, once the PV production starts to slowly
decrease, the ESS strangely starts discharging into the grid causing the sale of electricity
to the macrogrid. I don’t see what interpretation to give to this result as the behaviour is
not what should be commonly expected.
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.8: (Scenario 2) Presence of the EV in SC.2. The vehicle arrives at the beginning
of the day (08:00) and only leaves at the end of the afternoon (17:00). This models a
human being’s behaviour that would arrive at their workplace in the morning and leave it
only in the afternoon. The vehicle is then connected the entire day.
4.5
SC.2: A single charging vehicle
In this scenario, a an EV comes at the beginning of the day and only leaves at the end of
the afternoon. Figure 4.8 shows the interval on which the EV is connected.
Figure 4.9 was computed with α = 10−6, λ = 10−4 and γ = 0. The lower bound for the
ESS was configured at 10% and its upper limit at 90%.
Ignoring the first part where no EV is connected nor is the PV producing electricity, the
microgrid acts as if it were in an ”eco” mode: it firstly drains all the energy it can get
from the ESS before the grid intervenes. Then, when the vehicle disconnects, the battery
recharges. This last part is because of the lambda term in the cost function: the algo-
rithm will prefer not changing the command variable’s value and the ESS profits from the
situation by charging. When it reaches its top limit, the charge stops.
The overall behaviour is actually pretty interesting and close from what we would expect of
a microgrid in ”eco mode” (meaning firstly assisting the charge with battery before relying
on the grid). Its performance score (327) also shows that a great feasibility.
46
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.9: (Scenario 2) Three plots representing the whole behaviour of the microgrid
in front of SC.2. The top plot shows the SOC evolution (the blue line is the SOC and
the orange one is its derivative, ie ESS(t)), the middle one shows the grid’s involvement
(plot of Pgrid(t)), and the bottom one shows all the powers involved in the microgrid. As
for SC.1, we see three steps: nothing happens in the first one, the battery charges the
vehicle alone in the second one, and finally the third one where the grid charges both the
vehicle and the ESS.
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.10: (Scenario 2) Plot of the balance function. Like for scenario 1, the perfor-
mance score is good.
48
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:57==
4.6
SC.3: Two charging vehicles
SC.3 is the last scenario that is studied in this thesis. It features two vehicles charging at
the same time. The presence intervals of each vehicle are detailed in figure below.
Figure 4.11: (Scenario 3) Presence of each vehicle at the two EVSE. Like for scenario 2
described the last section, the first vehicle arrives in the morning and leaves at the end
of the afternoon. The second vehicle only stays a couple hours in the morning (arrives at
10:00, leaves at 12:00) like a contractor or client that would come discuss a contract at a
company’s office.
The challenge here is that the microgrid shall provide energy for both vehicle on a short
period of time and for a single vehicle for a long period of time while being limited. Indeed,
recall that Table 4.1 defines limits for the EVSE, the ESS but also for the macrogrid input.
Here, on the interval

10:00,
12:00

, the microgrid must supply 44.00 kW of power to
supply all the required energy. So the macrogrid must rely on the ESS and PV to correctly
charge the two vehicles.
The computation was calculated with α = λ = 10−6 and γ = 0. Figure 4.13 shows how
the powers are distributed. It is clear that the ESS takes care of loading the first vehicle
on its own during the 8:00-10:00 interval and receives some help from the macrogrid as
it empties. However, for the 10:00-12:00 period, the battery reaches its lower limit and
cannot participate in charging both vehicles. The macrogrid is therefore charged by itself.
When the second vehicle disconnects, the battery is recharged to its maximum charge.
Just looking at Figure 4.13, we might miss an important issue in the result of the computa-
tion: the simulation is not feasible. This is what is show in Figure 4.12 which highlights
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.12: (Scenario 3) Balance plot. The average error outside of the interval 10:00-
12:00 seems negligible compared to what happens in the latter. Inside, the lowest point is
−10.14 kW and the highest point is −8 kW which is not negligible anymore. The simulation
cannot be declared as feasible. The performance score of 45690 also shows that there
is a problem with the simulation.
the balance equation: the interval 10:00-12:00 is not balanced. The balance is broken
and the values at stake are of the order of 10e4 (in absolute value) which is no longer
negligible as in SC.1 and SC.2. The performance score also shown on Figure 4.12 is
sufficient to declare the simulation as invalid.
Therefore, the algorithm shows one of its limits: it cannot charge two vehicles at the same
time under the current assumptions. But this is its main goal as the microgrid described
in chapter 2 showcases two different EVSE to charge on. If the algorithm fails on this
particular scenario, it means that it is not sufficient enough to be applied to real use-cases.
50
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.13: (Scenario 3) The top plot represents the ESS evolution (SOCESS(t) in blue
and ESS(t) in orange. We clearly see that the ESS is emptied at 10:06 and does not par-
ticipate in the charge of the vehicles until 12:00. The middle plot represent the macrogrid
contribution. The top plateau is at 31.21 kW. The last plot shows all the powers all the
microgrid together.
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:61==
5
Improvements and industrialisation
Adaptation to the MPC algorithm
Under the current form, the algorithm in itself is not applicable to real industrial environ-
ments because it suffers from the following:
• The need for an extended MATLAB license with the Optimization Toolbox. Al-
though MathWorks makes bulk discount on the purchase of licenses, they still indi-
vidually cost too much to be easily deployed on MPC controlleres. An alternative is
to use open-source engine which accept syntaxes close to MATLAB’s and offer a
solver for Quadratic Program. GNU Octave (https://www.gnu.org/software/octave/)
is one of the candidates.
• Find a unique configuration that fits all the scenarios. In the thesis, I presented
the application of different scenarios with different configurations of cost function.
Of course, it is not possible to predict in advance the number of vehicles that will
connect on a day, or even the total energy demand over the same period of time.
Thus, where I have been able to use several configurations for different scenarios,
it is necessary, in industrial conditions, to use a single configuration that will cover
all possible cases of vehicle load on both EVSEs.
• Make the MPC process more robust by preventing crashes. I have identified that
the crashes happen when the ESS is fully charged or fully discharged. It happens
when the solver would like to break the limit while solving the Quadratic Problem.
So, one would need to include back-up mechanisms that will take over when the
solver does not find a solution to the problem. Moving the set-point of the battery
from 100% to a lower value (like 70%) would help resolve some upper-limit issues
but not the lower limits issues.
• Verify that all legal requirements are met. Like we have seen in chapter 2, several
requirements must be fulfilled for the algorithm to be deployed industrially (or even
as a research project) by Distribution System Operators (DSO).
Moreover, industrial software are usually not designed with MATLAB (or a compatible en-
gine like discussed), and as stated in the microgrid description in section 2.1, one needs
to transmit the results of the computation from the supervisor to the macrogrid and the
EVSE (mostly). Therefore, the academic software that I have produced must be adapted
to include a communication aspect that would help it communicate with another process
charged charged with interpreting the results, transform them and wrap them in the ap-
propriate envelopes for each protocol and finally send them to the relevant recipients.
This part is not trivial but tools such as the Boost library in C++ (Boost.Process) ease
the process so that piping information in and out of child processes while taking care of
computation errors and crashes.
Add FDI attacks detection
I have described the process by which an EMS could prevent FDI attacks. However,
as indicated, I was not able to develop this process in the context of this master thesis.
However, as computer security is becoming more and more important, especially in cyber-
physical systems such as microgrids, this represents a very important module of an EMS
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 5.1: Example of how the communication with a host process charged with the
communication aspect of the system could be achieved. When the host process decides
that a new computation is needed (for instance on a timeout), a child process is launched
to which all the required input data are given through the standard input. Then, when
all the data has been read, the computation strictly speaking can start and the result are
written on the standard output. The host process intercepts the results, interpret them
before sending them to the right recipient. The child is terminated and the host goes back
to its usual behaviour.
that must be able to trust all the data it receives. A sanitazation algorithm, e.g. following
the procedure described in section 3.4.3 should be implemented.
It is important to note that this is not the only way to address this problem. Machine
learning algorithms (supervised or unsupervised) could be imagined to identify different
patterns in certain attacks. And in order to make the EMS even more robust, different
methods can be combined together to obtain better protection against attacks.
54
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:63==
6
Conclusion
The results of our study show that our energy management algorithm can identify optimum
operating points within the microgrid, as long as the consumer needs are less than the
capacity of the microgrid. On the other hand, if the macrogrid is no longer sufficient, we
have shown that a single set point (fully filling the battery of electric vehicles at full power)
is no longer sufficient. So, for example, if the microgrid is limited to 40 kWh, with 2 vehicles
of 22 kWh and under the hypothesis used in the simulation, if the battery is empty, the
macrogrid itself cannot supply enough energy for both vehicles. Different strategies like
load shifting can solve this issue but they both require to change the hypothesis.
I have shown that it is impossible to find a unique configuration that works in all cases, but
on the contrary, I have shown that energy management requires more or less assumptions
depending on the constraints imposed between the customer experience (vehicles must
be fully charged in x hours), the alternative energy rate, etc. Artificial Intelligence has the
opportunity to secure the inputs, bring new algorithm to better utilize the reusable energies
and external storage systems.
The report also identified the importance of IT security to sort out the wrong information
(e.g. false data injection attack). I have presented an algorithm to try to prevent these
risks, but I could not realize the code. This cyber risk is very clever, as it could, for example,
declare the external storage battery as full when it is in fact empty and thus deteriorate it
by forcing it to go to the end of the discharge.
This master thesis was the opportunity to exercise new techniques that require a good
mathematical and Computer Science background. It also show that while Artificial Intel-
ligence is currently a hot topic, other algorithms may be simplier (although current tools
allow to easily develop Artificial Neural Networks) and provide similar results. Because
algorithms for EMS are specific to the system they are applied to, benchmarks on specific
systems are the only way to find the best algorithm for the given situation.
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
Carley, Sanya et al. (2013). “Intent to purchase a plug-in electric vehicle: A survey of
early impressions in large US cites”. In: Transportation Research Part D: Transport and
Environment 18, pp. 39–45. ISSN: 1361-9209. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2012.
09.007. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361920912001095.
Rafique, Sohaib and Graham E. Town (2019). “Potential for electric vehicle adoption in
Australia”. In: International Journal of Sustainable Transportation 13.4, pp. 245–254.
DOI: 10.1080/15568318.2018.1463416. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/15568318.2018.
1463416. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/15568318.2018.1463416.
Egbue, Onanwa Nneka et al. (2012). A SOCIO-TECHNICAL ANALYSIS OF WIDESPREAD
ELECTRIC VEHICLE ADOPTION.
Plötz, Patrick and Elisabeth Dütschke (2020). “Electric Vehicle Adoption in Germany: Cur-
rent Knowledge and Future Research”. In: Who’s Driving Electric Cars: Understanding
Consumer Adoption and Use of Plug-in Electric Cars. Ed. by Marcello Contestabile,
Gil Tal, and Thomas Turrentine. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 189–211.
ISBN: 978-3-030-38382-4. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-38382-4_10. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-38382-4_10.
Langbroek, Joram H.M. et al. (2019). “Electric vehicle rental and electric vehicle adoption”.
In: Research in Transportation Economics 73. Modal shift, emission reductions and
behavioral change: Transport policies and innovations to tackle climate change, pp. 72–
82. ISSN: 0739-8859. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retrec.2019.02.002. URL: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0739885919300587.
IEA, Paris (2018). Global EV Outlook 2018. URL: https://www.iea.org/reports/global-ev-
outlook-2018.
International, Smart Energy (Mar. 2004). ENEL Telegestore Project is on track. URL: https:
//www.smart-energy.com/regional-news/europe-uk/enel-telegestore-project-is-on-track/.
Prabhakar, Gaikwadkaran and Devkarsanchita Dattatray. (2017). “Energy Management.”
In: International Journal of Advanced Research 5.2, pp. 2296–2298. DOI: 10.21474/
ijar01/3408.
Kals, Johannes, Tina Jonas, and Roman Vandewall (2010). Betriebliches Energieman-
agement: Eine Einführung. Kohlhammer.
Kempton, Willett and Steven E. Letendre (1997). “Electric vehicles as a new power source
for electric utilities”. In: Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 2.3,
pp. 157–175. ISSN: 1361-9209. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1361-9209(97)00001-1.
URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361920997000011.
Praëm, Per (Nov. 2015). Sådan virker ladeboksen - Gennemgang af teknikken bag AC
opladning. URL: http://www.danskelbilkomite.dk/S%C3%A5dan_viker_ladeboksen.html.
Solar Power Data for Integration Studies (n.d.). URL: https://www.nrel.gov/grid/solar-
power-data.html.
Carlos Bordons Félix Garcia-Torres, Miguel A. Ridao (2020). Model Predictive Control of
Microgrids. eng. Springer International Publishing. ISBN: 3030245705, 3030245691.
Halvgaard, Rasmus (2014). “Model Predictive Control for Smart Energy Systems”. eng.
Khan, Rafiullah et al. (2017). “STRIDE-based threat modeling for cyber-physical systems”.
eng. In: 2017 Ieee Pes Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe, Isgt-
europe 2017 - Proceedings 2018-, pp. 1–6. ISSN: 21654824, 21654816. DOI: 10.1109/
isgteurope.2017.8260283.
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
57
==PAGE:66==
Kohnfelder, Loren and Praerit Garg (1999). The threats to our products. URL: https://
adam.shostack.org/microsoft/The-Threats-To-Our-Products.docx.
DistriNet Research Group (n.d.). URL: https://www.linddun.org/.
Wang, Liuping (2009). Model predictive control system design and implementation using
MATLAB. eng. Springer, XXIX, 375 S. (unknown). ISBN: 1848823312, 1848823304,
1282018310, 1849968365, 9786612018312, 9781848823303.
Kolosok, Irina and Liudmila Gurina (2018). “Cyber Security-Oriented Smart Grid State Es-
timation”. In: E3S Web of Conferences 69, p. 02004. DOI: 10.1051/e3sconf/20186902004.
Zhang, J., X. Liu, and P. Zhu (2016). “Securing Power System State Estimation”. In: 2016
IEEE Trustcom/BigDataSE/ISPA, pp. 699–706.
Deng, R., P. Zhuang, and H. Liang (2019). “False Data Injection Attacks Against State
Estimation in Power Distribution Systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 10.3,
pp. 2871–2881.
58
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
==PAGE:67==
Energy Management: algorithm and security assessment
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
