==PAGE:1==
7KHJUHHQJDWH
WR&RSHQKDJHQ 
'HYHORSPHQWRI3HDUO-&KDLQ
FRQFUHWHVWUXFWXUHVVSDQQLQJ
RYHUDIUHHZD\ 
1DWDVMD(PLOLH%XFKKROGWV 
7HFKQLFDO8QLYHUVLW\RI'HQPDUN 
-XQH 
'78&LYLO(QJLQHHULQJ 
'HSDUWPHQWRI&LYLO(QJLQHHULQJ 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis will, along with an oral defense, represents the basis for the ful’¼üllment of the requirements
for the degree Master of Science in Civil Engineering (Kandidatret. i Byggeteknologi) at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark. The o’¼ācial English title of the thesis is Development of Pearl-Chain
concrete structures spanning over a freeway and the o’¼ācial Danish title is Udvikling af Perlek├”de-
betonkonstruktioner til overd├”kning af en motorvej.
The theses has been completed between January 2nd and June 23rd 2020, under supervision by Philip
Skov Halding and Kristian Dahl Hertz. It poses the workload of 30 ECTS credits, where the main
report is 57 pages while the whole report, including appendix, is 133 pages.
Natasja Emilie Buchholdt, s143864,
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, June 23rd 2020.
Page i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this thesis di’¼Ćerent initial proposals for the creation of a pearl-chain arch cover of the Elsinore
freeway at the area of Ryparken-Lundehus has been developed and investigated. The proposals have
been developed on basis of site limitations and legal regulations along with a preliminary investigation
of the in’¼éuence of rise to span ratios of arches. The structure is designed for both crowds to be assem-
bled and the presence of a rescue vehicle, according to "Eurocode 1, Part 2: Tra’¼āc loads on bridges".
The initial proposal with a low rise to span ratio was chosen. Simple force and moment equilibrium
were used to calculate the reaction force and the internal moment and normal forces for ’¼üve di’¼Ćerent
load cases. The most critical load case was then found by NavierŌĆÖs formula. A cross-section solution
was designed for the arch with the largest internal forces by the use of a MathCad program for
super-light concrete deck elements.
The arches were designed with a small rise to span ratio. Therefore a solution for taking the horizon
reaction forces was made. The solution chosen is additional arches with a tension tie between the
ends and an anchor from the ends to the ground. The additional arches geometry were designed to
create a small bending moment in the case of only dead load. Afterwards a new cross-section was
designed to withstand the internal forces with the same method used for the initial proposal. Finally
a solution for the anchor of the additional arches was found.
Page iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Resume
I dette kandidatspeciale er der udviklet og unders├Ėgt forskellige indledende forslag til en overd├”kning
af Helsing├Ėr motorvejen omkring Ryparken-Lundehus. Forslagene er udviklet p├ź baggrund af be-
gr├”nsninger i omr├źdet og lovbestemmelser samt en indledende unders├Ėgelse af buers h├Ėjde i forhold
til sp├”nd.
Overd├”kningen er designet til store forsamlinger samt tilstedev├”relsen af et udrykn-
ingsk├Ėret├Ėj, efter ŌĆØEurocode 1, Del 2: Tra’¼üklaster p├ź broerŌĆØ.
Den valgte indledende l├Ėsning blev en konstruktionen med lavt h├Ėjde-til-sp├”nd forhold. Simpel kraft-
og momentligev├”gt blev brugt til beregning af reaktionskr├”fterne, momentet samt normal kr├”fter
for fem forskellige last tilf├”lde. Den mest kritiske last kombination blev fundet med NavierŌĆÖs formel.
Et tv├”rsnit blev designet for den bue med st├Ėrste interne kr├”fter ved hj├”lp af et MathCad program,
der kan beregne tv├”rsnit af superlette beton elementer.
En l├Ėsning blev fundet for at optage de store horisontale reaktionskr├”fter der kommer af et lille h├Ėjde
til sp├”nd forhold. Den valgte l├Ėsning blev supplerende halvbuer p├ź siden af hovedkonstruktionen,
med en tr├”kline imellem enderne og en forankring af enderne af de supplerende buer. Geometrien
af de supplerende buer er designet til at danne sm├ź momenter under lasttilf├”lde med kun egenv├”gt
og fyld. Herefter er et tv├”rsnit fundet ved brug af samme metode som ved f├Ėrste forslag. Til sidst
blev en l├Ėsning fundet for forankringen af de supplerende buers ender.
Page v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations and symbols
Symbol
Explanation
Ac
Cross-section area of regular concrete
ALAC
Cross-section area of LAC blocks
AE
Axial sti’¼Ćness
cc
Thickness of cover layer above LAC blocks
C’¼üll(x)
Vertical distance to the centroid of the ’¼ülling below the crown at position x
cs
Position of slack bars in the cross-section
Ecm
YoungŌĆÖs modulus for regular concrete
ELAC
YoungŌĆÖs modulus for light aggregate concrete
EI1
Flexural sti’¼Ćness around axis 1
EI2
Flexural sti’¼Ćness around axis 2
EIx
Flexural sti’¼Ćness around the x-axis
EIy
Flexural sti’¼Ćness around the y-axis
g
Acceleration of gravity
garch
Dead load of the arch pr. meter span
garch.AD
Dead load of the additional arch AD pr. meter span
garch.BE
Dead load of the additional arch BE pr. meter span
gDL
Dead load of the arch and the uniformly distributed ’¼ülling above the crown
g’¼üll(x)
Dead load of the ’¼ülling below the crown at position x
g’¼üll.AD(x)
Dead load of the ’¼ülling for additional arch AD at position x
g’¼üll.BE(x)
Dead load of the ’¼ülling for additional arch BE at position x
g’¼üll.t
Dead load of the uniformly distributed ’¼ülling above the crown
gSL
Dead load of an SL-deck element
gSL.tot
Total dead load of SL-decks that make up an arch
h
Rise of the arch
HA
Horizontal reaction force at A
HB
Horizontal reaction force at B
HD
Horizontal reaction force at D
HE
Horizontal reaction force at E
h’¼üll
Height of the ’¼ülling
Htop
Thickness of an in-situ cast concrete top
KFI
Factor for consequence class
L
Span of the arch
L2
Length of the additional arches
Larch
Length of the arch curve
LSL
Length of SL-deck
Page vii
==PAGE:10==
M
Moment
Mcrack.neg
Maximum negative cracking moment in SLS
Mcrack.pos
Maximum positive cracking moment in SLS
Mneg
Maximum negative bending moment in ULS
Mpos
Maximum positive bending moment in ULS
N
Normal force
nbot2
Number of pre-tensioning lines in layer 2 of the cross section
nbot3
Number of pre-tensioning lines in layer 3 of the cross section
NL
Normal force from post-tensioning
nLAC.L
Number of LAC blocks in the length of the cross-section
nLAC.w
Number of LAC blocks in the width of the cross-section
NLmax
Ultimate normal force resistance
ns
Number of slack bars in the cross-section
ntop
Number of pre-tensioning lines in top layer of the cross section
qfk
Live load from crowd loading
Qserv
Live load from service vehicle
RA
Vertical reaction force at A
RB
Vertical reaction force at B
RD
Vertical reaction force at D
RE
Vertical reaction force at E
t
Height of SL-deck
y
Distance to the centroid
y(x)
Formula for the arch curve
yAD(x)
Formula for the arch curve of the additional arch AD
yBE(x)
Formula for the arch curve of the additional arch BE
WSL
Width of SL-deck
╬▒
Reduction factor for number of ’¼éoors
╬Ą
Strains
ŽĢ
Angle between the main axis, parallel with the arch, and secondary axis, parallel
with the surroundings
Žā
Stresses
╬Ė
Angle between horizontal and tangent (normal) on the arch
Abbreviation
Explanation
LAC
Light Aggregate Concrete
LC
Load Combination
LCA
Life cycle analysis
LCC
Life cycle cost
LG
Load Group
PC
Pearl Chain
SL
Super Light
SLS
Serviceability limit state
UDL
Uniformly distributed load
ULS
Ultimate Limit State
Page viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
1
Background
1
2
Preliminary analysis
3
2.1
Formula for the three shapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Angle between horizontal and the tangent (normal) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Moment and normal force analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Discussion and conclusion on preliminary analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Basis for design
11
3.1
Site dimensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Local regulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Clearance height regulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Rise for a maximum rise-to-span ratio of 1/10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.5
Pearl chain arches and light aggregate concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.6
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.7
Loads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Initial design proposals
19
4.1
Geometry suggestions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2
Maximum slope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Design proposals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Design speci’¼ücations for the initial design proposal
25
5.1
Deck width, length and height
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Dead load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.3
De’¼ünition of load combinations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4
Calculation of most critical load combination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.5
Calculation of limit state design to verify the cross section
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6
Conclusion on the cross section of the SL-deck
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Final design proposal
41
6.1
How to take the horizontal reaction forces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Connections between the northern and southern structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Design proposals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Page ix
==PAGE:12==
7
Design speci’¼ücations for the ’¼ünal design proposal
47
7.1
Calculation of dead load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.2
Calculation of the additional archesŌĆÖ geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.3
Calculation of limit state design to verify the cross section
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.4
Anchor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8
Conclusion
55
Appendix
A Pre-analysis appendix
III
B Design Limitations appendix
XI
C Design speci’¼ücations appendix
XIII
D Final design proposal appendix
XXXIX
E
Final design speci’¼ücations appendix
XLVII
F
Results for the initial design
LIX
G Results for the iterated design
LXI
H Results for the ’¼ünal design
LXIII
Page x
==PAGE:13==
1
Background
The construction of the Elsinore freeway, which runs from Elsinore and to Copenhagen, has created a
gap in the neighborhood of Ryparken-Lundehus which is part of Bispebjerg. The gap is both physical
and physiological. The freeway creates a large barrier between the green areas in the neighborhood
and divides the citizens on each side. Furthermore the freeway is an immense source of air and noise
pollution from the cars. Due to these enormous nuisances a cover of the freeway in this area is
suggested by Bispebjerg Lokaludvalg. In this thesis a proposal for the cover of the freeway is created.
The cover of the freeway is going to be The Green Gate to Copenhagen. The top of the cover is
intended for green areas which can be used by the residents to a variety of activityŌĆÖs. This will also
connect the divided neighborhood.
The cover will be created of pearl-chain arches. This is a system of super light concrete deck ele-
ments, that is assembled on a chain of pre-stressing wires and post-tensioned into an arch. The deck
elements can be prefabricated and transported in small pieces and assembled on site. This makes the
transport of the arches easier and allows tra’¼āc on the freeway to run smooth, because form work
is not required. Furthermore the light aggregate concrete in the super light deck elements is sound
absorbing and ’¼üre resistant.
The scope of this thesis will be to address the cover of the freeway and create the most optimal
proposal for the PC-arch solution, when considering regulations and limitations of the site. Di’¼Ćerent
design proposals will be suggested and the most promising proposal will be subjected to static
calculations to ’¼ünd the optimal cross-section.
Page 1
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
2
Preliminary analysis
The term arch will be used as a structural expression and not a geometrical expression. The de’¼ünition
of an arch is therefore a structure, that supports load primarily in compression. This will lead to a
reduction in the bending moment compared to a beam. (Kharagpur, 2008)
To get a better understating of the forces in an arch, an investigation has been made with knowledge
from (Kharagpur, 2008). It is studied what impact the rise to span ratio has on the bending moment
and normal forces in the arch under a uniformly distributed load. Three shapes of the arch have been
investigated, the parabola, the circle and the catenary. For all calculations through the report, it is
assumed that the coordinate system for the arches has origin at the beginning of the main arch.
2.1
Formula for the three shapes
The formula for the three shapes has been found as an expression giving the height y at a position
x from the beginning of the arch.
2.1.1
Parabola
The formula for a parabola shaped arch of span L and height h has been found. This is done by
de’¼üning the top point of the arch, Tp(x, y) =

L
2; h

, and inserting it into the formula for the top
point of a parabola. This gives two equations with three unknowns. The last equation is for the
determinant of a second degree equation. This makes in total three equations, with three unknowns.
The unknowns can be solved and inserted into the equation for the parabola. The calculations can
be seen in appendix A.1.
The equation for the height y of a parabola as a function of the distance x from the beginning of
the arch is therefore expressed by eq. 2.1.
Page 3
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
y(x) = ŌłÆh ┬Ę 4
L2 ┬Ę x2 + h ┬Ę 4
L
┬Ę x
(2.1)
2.1.2
Circle
The formula for the circle shaped arch of rise h and span L is found, by the equation for the circle
and three known positions on the circle/arch. The three known points on the arch are the start
point of the arch P(0; 0), the top point on the arch Q

L
2; h

and the endpoint on the arch R(L; 0).
This gives three equations with three unknowns. The unknowns are found, and y is isolated in the
equation for the circle. The calculations can be seen in appendix A.2.
The equation for the height y of a circular arch as a function of the distance x from the beginning
of the arch is therefore expressed by eq. 2.2.
y(x) =
q
ŌłÆ(4 ┬Ę x2) + 4 ┬Ę L ┬Ę x + ( L2
4┬Ęh ŌłÆh)2 ŌłÆ( L2
4┬Ęh ŌłÆh)
2
(2.2)
2.1.3
Catenary
To ’¼ünd the catenary curve, the equation from (Gimsing & Georgakis, 2012, eq. 2.18) was used. This
equation describes the shape of the catenary, see eq. 2.3.
y(x) = ŌłÆa

cosh
1
a

x ŌłÆ1
2 ┬Ę L

ŌłÆcosh
 L
2 ┬Ę a

(2.3)
Where L is the span of the arch and a is given by eq. 2.4.
a = T
g
(2.4)
a is iterated to set a speci’¼üc rise of the catenary equation. a is therefore di’¼Ćerent for di’¼Ćerent rises
and spans of the arch. Depending on the span and the rise of the catenary arch, the used a values
can be seen in table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Values used for a when giving the arch length, L, and height, h.
L
h
a
30
9
13.78341210
30
3
37.98973081
2.1.4
Comparison
The larger the rise of the arch the greater the di’¼Ćerence between the three shapes will be. The
following ’¼ügure 2.1 shows the three di’¼Ćerent shapes of arches, with a span of 30 m and rise of 9 m.
Here it is possible to distinguish the three shapes.
Page 4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
Figure 2.1: Comparison of the three types of arch geometry parabola, circle and catenary for an arch
with a rise to span ratio of 3/10
The following ’¼ügure 2.2 shows the three di’¼Ćerent shapes of arches with span of 30 m as before, but
now with a rise of 3 m. Here it is no longer possible to distinguish the three shapes.
Figure 2.2: Comparison of the three types of arch geometry parabola, circle and catenary for an arch
with a rise to span ratio of 1/10
If the relation between the rise and the span is 1/10 or less, there will be no signi’¼ücant di’¼Ćerence
between the three shapes.
2.2
Angle between horizontal and the tangent (normal)
To calculate the normal force, the angle between horizontal and tangent to the arch at any position
should be known. This angle can be found by taking the derivative of the height and set it equal to
the tangent of the angle, see eq. 2.5.
tan(╬Ė) = d
dx y(x)
(2.5)
The angle is therefore arcus tangent to the derivative of the height, which was found as y(x) in
section 2.1. The angle is calculated for all three arch types.
Page 5
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
2.2.1
Parabola
The formula for the height of a parabola, eq. 2.1, is inserted into eq. 2.5 and solved for the angle
╬Ė, see eq. 2.6
╬Ė(x) = atan
4 ┬Ę h
L
ŌłÆ8 ┬Ę h ┬Ę x
L2

(2.6)
2.2.2
Circle
The formula for the height of a circle, eq. 2.2, is inserted into eq. 2.5 and solved for the angle ╬Ė,
see eq. 2.7
╬Ė(x) = atan
’Ż½
’ŻŁ
ŌłÆ(2 ┬Ę x) + L
q
ŌłÆ8┬ĘL2┬Ęh2ŌłÆL4
16┬Ęh2
+ 4 ┬Ę L ┬Ę x ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę x2 + h2
’ŻČ
’ŻĖ
(2.7)
2.2.3
Catenary
The formula for the height of a catenary, eq. 2.3, is inserted into eq. 2.5 and solved for the angle ╬Ė,
see eq. 2.8
╬Ė(x) = atan

ŌłÆsinh
1
a ┬Ę

x ŌłÆL
2

(2.8)
2.3
Moment and normal force analysis
Two arches with uniformly distributed load, UDL = 10 kN/m, and rise to span ratio of 3/10 and
1/10 is investigated and the moment distribution and normal force distribution is found. This is done
for all three types of arch shapes.
Figure 2.3: Uniformly distributed load UDL over three hinged arches of rise h and span L.
Page 6
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
2.3.1
Rise to span of 3/10
The span of the arch is L = 30 m while the rise of the arch is h = 9 m. First the reaction forces are
found, then the moment distribution and normal force distribution are calculated.
2.3.1.1
Reaction forces
The reaction forces at the supports A and B are calculated with eq. A.12, A.13, A.14 and A.15 from
appendix A.3.1. The results can be seen in table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Reaction forces for the arch with rise h = 9 m and span L = 30 m.
RA
RB
HA
HB
[kN]
[kN]
[kN]
[kN]
150
150
125
125
The reaction forces are not depending on the shape of the arch, but only the rise, the span and the
load. Therefore the reaction forces in table 2.2 are for all three shapes. Because the load is uniformly
distributed, the reaction forces at the supports A and B will be the same.
2.3.1.2
Moment distribution
The moment distribution is calculated with eq. A.16 and A.17 from appendix A.3.2. The results can
be seen in ’¼ügure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Moment distribution of the arches with rise h = 9 m and span L = 30 m for the three
shapes.
It is seen in ’¼ügure 2.4, that the bending moment for the parabola shaped arch is equal to 0 along
the entire span. For the catenary shape, there is a small moment, while the circle shape is creating
a larger moment compared to the parabola and the catenary.
Page 7
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
2.3.1.3
Normal force distribution
The normal force distribution is calculated with eq. A.18 and A.19 from appendix A.3.3. The results
can be seen in ’¼ügure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Normal force distribution of the arches with rise h = 9 m and span L = 30 m for the
three shapes.
The normal force is almost the same for all three shapes, where the largest di’¼Ćerence will be at the
ends and the smallest will be in the middle. The di’¼Ćerence is largest at the ends since the angle
between the horizontal and the tangent of the three shapes are largest here. There is no di’¼Ćerence
in the middle where the angle for all the shapes are equivalent, 0.
2.3.2
Rise to span of 1/10
The span of the arch is L = 30 m while the rise of the arch is h = 3 m. First, the reaction forces are
found, and then the moment distribution and normal force distribution are calculated.
2.3.2.1
Reaction forces
The reaction forces at the supports A and B are calculated the same way as for the arch with rise
to span ratio 3/10, see section 2.3.1.1. The results can be seen in table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Reaction forces for the arch with rise h = 3 m and span L = 30 m.
RA
RB
HA
HB
[kN]
[kN]
[kN]
[kN]
150
150
375
375
The vertical reaction forces are the same as for rise to span 3/10, since the uniformly distributed
load is the same. The horizontal reaction forces are larger for the rise to span ratio 1/10 than for
the rise to span ratio 3/10, because of the decrees in the rise.
Page 8
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
2.3.2.2
Moment distribution
The moment distribution is calculated the same way as for the arch with rise to span ratio 3/10, see
section 2.3.1.2. The results can be seen in ’¼ügure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Moment distribution of the arches with rise h = 3 m and span L = 30 m for the three
shapes.
The di’¼Ćerence in the internal moment is small for the rise to span ratio of 1/10.
2.3.2.3
Normal force distribution
The normal force distribution is calculated the same way as for the arch with rise to span ratio 3/10,
see section 2.3.1.3. The results can be seen in ’¼ügure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Normal force distribution of the arches with rise h = 3 m and span L = 30 m for the
three shapes.
The normal force is larger due to the larger horizontal reaction forces.
Page 9
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARY ANALYSIS
2.4
Discussion and conclusion on preliminary analysis
For a parabola shaped arch, the rise to span ratio will have no impact on the moment under a
uniformly distributed load. The moment will be constantly 0 in this case. This is due to the funicular
shape the parabola is taking under a uniformly distributed load. A funicular shape is the shape that
a cable or a chain, which is hinged in both ends and is hanging freely, will take under any applied
load. If the chain or cable are inverted it will be in equilibrium with the applied load.
For the catenary shaped arch, there is an internal moment, though not as large as for the circle.
The catenary will take a funicular shape when it is subjected to only dead load, and in this case it
will not have any internal bending moment. The catenary shape and the parabolic shape are very
similar, which is seen in ’¼ügure 2.1, which also creates similar internal forces, see ’¼ügure 2.4.
The circular shaped arch is the most distinct of the three shapes investigated, see ’¼ügure 2.1. Under
uniformly distributed load for a large rise to span ratio, the circle is also the shape with the largest
bending moment, see ’¼ügure 2.4. The advantage of a circle shape is the uniform change of geometry
along the span. This is an advantage when constructing the arch elements because the same mould
can be used multiple times, whereas for the parabola or catenary the mould must have di’¼Ćerent
shapes along the span.
For a lower rise to span ratio the three shapes will be more di’¼ācult to distinguish, see ’¼ügure 2.2.
When the rise to span ratio is 1/10 or less, there will be no signi’¼ücant di’¼Ćerence between the arch
shapes, and the internal forces will be similar. The lower rise to span ratio is though increasing the
horizontal reaction forces at the supports, see table 2.3, when compared to a larger rise to span ratio,
see table 2.2. The lower rise to span ratio is also increasing the normal forces in the arch, see ’¼ügure
2.7, when compared to a larger rise to span ratio, see ’¼ügure 2.5.
For the arches designed in this report, it is decided to use a circle shape to create an easier and
cheaper fabrication, and it is decided to use a rise to span ratio of maximum 1/10 in order to lower
the internal moment.
Page 10
==PAGE:23==
3
Basis for design
An examination is conducted of the design limitations due to site conditions along with general
engineering assumptions and rules in order to make design proposals for the cover of the freeway.
3.1
Site dimensions
The structure is wished designed over the Elsinore freeway between the two sideways both called
Ryparken, see Fig. 3.1. An already existing bridge is spanning across the freeway for tra’¼āc crossing.
It is placed approximately in the middle of the new structure that is wished designed.
At the existing bridge the freeway measures 30 m across. At the northern end of the new structure
the freeway spans 35 m. The change in width is due to the extra lane that is coming for exiting and
entering the freeway. The distance between the northern end of the new structure and the existing
bridge is 110 m. The length of the existing bridge is 40 m.
The Elsinore freeway is changing in height from level with Lyngbyvejen and down to 5 m below it to
get under the crossing bridge, see Fig. 3.2. The di’¼Ćerence in height between the freeway and Lyng-
byvejen is only 2 m at the northern end of the new structure. There is a wall between Lyngbyvejen
and the Elsinore freeway. The wall goes from level of the freeway and to 1 m above Lyngbyvejen.
The wall stretches along the freeway between the two side ways both called Ryparken.
At the southern end of the new structure the width across the freeway is 42 m. The level of the
freeway stays constant 5 m below Lyngbyvejen between the existing bridge and the southern end of
the new structure. At this end the Elsinore freeway has an exit on the right when driving south.
This exit rises and goes above and across the Elsinore freeway, see Fig. 3.3. The exit is only raised
approximately 1 m above the freeway at the most southern position of the new structure.
The
distance between the most southern end of the new structure and the existing bridge is 130 m.
Page 11
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. BASIS FOR DESIGN
Figure 3.1: Suggested location of the new structure over the Elsinore freeway. In the middle of the
new structure there is an already existing bridge. Elsinore is north on the map and Copenhagen is
south. (Bispebjerg Lokaludvalg v/ Tanja M├Ėller Jensen, 2019)
Page 12
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. BASIS FOR DESIGN
Figure 3.2: Picture of the Elsinore freeway from the existing bridge facing towards north (Elsinore).
It is seen that the Elsinore freeway changes in height from level with Lyngbyvejen at the sides, to
5 m beneath the bridge where the picture is taken.
Figure 3.3: Picture of the exit from the Elsinore freeway at the right, that rises and goes across the
freeway to the left. The picture is facing towards Copenhagen from the existing bridge.
Page 13
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. BASIS FOR DESIGN
3.2
Local regulations
A local plan concerning Rymarksvej has been developed.
This is the residential area beside the
Elsinore freeway at the northern end of the new structure, see ’¼ügure 3.4. The local plan states that
buildings closest to Lyngbyvejen must be between 3 and 4┬Į ’¼éoors. This does not concern the Elsi-
nore freeway but should be in mind when considering the height of the new structure. (K├Ėbenhavns
Kommune Planorientering, 1980)
A local plan concerning Nordhavnsvej is also developed. This concerns areas three ares, I, II, and
III where area I is interesting for this report. This is the area around the Elsinore freeway south of
the crossing bridge and further towards Copenhagen. The area can be seen in ’¼ügure 3.4. The very
Elsinore freeway is not restricted by this local plan since it is a "hovedlandevej". The local plan
states that area I is restricted to a maximum building height of 10 m, which should be in mind when
designing the new structure. (K├Ėbenhavns Kommune Teknik- og Milj├Ėforvaltningen, 2010)
Figure 3.4: The local plan for Rymarksvej is valid in the green area. The local plan for Nordhavnsvej
area I, is valid in the blue area.
Page 14
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. BASIS FOR DESIGN
3.3
Clearance height regulations
For Danish freeways, the minimum clearance height is 4.5 m (Tra’¼ükministeriet, 1998). This is there-
fore the minimum distance between the road and emergency lane to the new structure.
Figure 3.5: The minimum legal clearance height on Danish freeways.
3.3.1
Northern end
To have this clearance height, the arch must have a rise of approximately 16 m at the northern end,
assuming that it can be standing on the 1 m walls at Lyngbyvejen between Lyngbyvejen and the
freeway. An arch with span 35 m and rise 16 m of circle geometry will at 0.2 m from the end have a
height of 1.5 m. In addition to the 1 m wall and and the 2 m level di’¼Ćerence between Lyngbyvejen
and the freeway, this gives a 4.5 m clearance height. If the walls were to be extended the arch could
have a lower rise.
3.3.2
Southern end
From the existing bridge and south the freeway is 5 m below level with Lyngbyvejen. The exit of the
freeway that is rising and going across the freeway, is approximately 1 m height at the most southern
end of the new structure. The height di’¼Ćerence between the level of the exit and Lyngbyvejen is
therefore 5 m ŌłÆ1 m = 4 m. Adding the height of the existing wall, this gives 4 m + 1 m = 5 m. The
minimum clearance height is therefore full ’¼ülled regardless of the rise of the arch. The arch can
therefore have any desired rise.
3.4
Rise for a maximum rise-to-span ratio of 1/10
It was found in the preliminary analysis that the circle form was preferred because it is easier and
cheaper to create. It was also found that with a rise to span ratio of maximum 1/10, the bending
moment in the arch was signi’¼ücantly smaller since there were no signi’¼ücant di’¼Ćerence between the
shapes, and the arch therefore got the properties of a parabolic arch. The maximum rise for a rise
to span ratio of 1/10 is therefore calculated.
It is known that the largest span at the northern end is 35 m. This will make a maximum rise of
1/10 ┬Ę 35 m = 3.5 m. The smallest span of the northern end is at the existing bridge. This is 30 m
Page 15
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. BASIS FOR DESIGN
and this will make a maximum rise of 1/10 ┬Ę 30 m = 3 m. The largest span at the southern end is
42 m which gives a rise of 1/10 ┬Ę 42 m = 4.2 m. The smallest span for the southern end is the same
as for the northern end 30 m, which gives the same maximum rise of 3 m.
3.5
Pearl chain arches and light aggregate concrete
The pearl chain theory is used in the cover of the freeway. It consists of a number of prefabricated
super light concrete decks (SL-deck), that is connected on site with post-tensioning cables. The
prefabricated elements are short straight elements, which makes it easier to transport. The duct
inside the elements has the desired curved shape which makes it possible to follow the arch shape,
even though straight elements are used. On site the arches are assembled and lifted into place, which
creates a better tra’¼āc ’¼éow on the freeway compared to mould work for casting concrete. (Halding,
Hertz, & Schmidt, 2015)
The SL-decks consists of a number of super light concrete blocks (LAC blocks) cast into regular
concrete. One of the advantages of LAC blocks is the lighter weight, which makes it possible to lift
longer spans in place. Other advantages of LAC blocks is ’¼üre resistance, sound absorption and more
frost resistance than regular concrete. (Hertz, 2009)
3.6
Materials
The following section includes general guidelines for SL-deck geometry and material parameters for
bridge design.
3.6.1
General guidelines
The general guidlines for SL-deck elements is from (Halding, 2016)
The concrete cover should be at lest 50 mm.
The SL-deck height of bridge element should be at lest 270 mm.
It is required that at least 50 mm of normal concrete is added on both sides of the SL-deck.
The post tensioning duct must be placed in a height that ensures it will not create any bending
moment inside the deck.
The post-tensioning cable must be perpendicular to the end at the joints to ensure a smooth tran-
sitioning of the cable from element to element without any sudden bending.
The joints between the SL-decks must consist of at least 200 mm massive regular concrete.
Page 16
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. BASIS FOR DESIGN
3.6.2
Material parameters
The regular concrete in the SL-desck elements has a compressive strength of 55 MPa and a density
of 2400 kg/m3
The LAC blocks has an elastic modulus of 2.1 GPa and a density of approximately 700 kg/m3.
The strands (both pre and post tensioning) have the ultimate strength of 1860 MPa.
The back’¼ülling material that has been developed is a pervious concrete with density of 1800 kg/m3.
3.7
Loads
A de’¼ünition of the loads working on the structure is given. Only dead load and live load are considered.
3.7.1
Dead load
The dead load will be divided into the dead load of the arches, and the superimposed dead load of
the ’¼ülling.
Dead load of the arches
The structure will consist of pearl-chain arches that consist of super light concrete, normal concrete
and steel reinforcement along with pre-tensioning and post-tensioning strands.
Superimposed dead load
The superimposed dead load will be the ’¼ülling on top of the structure.
The ’¼ülling consist of a
pervious concrete.
3.7.2
Live load
The structure is used as a green area for people to stay on. The live load will therefore consist of
people, bicycles and a service vehicle.
Load from service vehicle
According to (ŌĆ£DS/EN 1991-2ŌĆØ, 2003, sec. 5.6.3) a service vehicle on the bridge should be con-
sidered if no permanent obstacle is preventing cars on the bridge. This service vehicle consists of
two axle load groups of 80 kN and 40 kN. For this report the service vehicle is working in the 1/4
point on the arch with a force of Qserv = 120 kN, which would be considered as worst case scenario.
According to (ŌĆ£DS/EN 1991-2ŌĆØ, 2003, sec. 5.6.3(3)) no variable action, such as crowed loading,
shall take place while a rescue vehicle is accounted fore.
Crowd loading
Crowed loading should be accounted for when the possibility of many people are present at the
same time occurs, (ŌĆ£DS/EN 1991-2ŌĆØ, 2003, sec. 5.3.2.1(2) NOTE). Since this bridge is designed
Page 17
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. BASIS FOR DESIGN
for people gathering, the crowed loading should be considered. The uniformly distributed load for
crowed loading is qfk = 5 kN/m2.
Accidental load
Since a heavy rescue vehicle is accounted for in the load combinations, there is no need to consider
the vehicle accidental, (ŌĆ£DS/EN 1991-2ŌĆØ, 2003, sec. 5.3.2.3(1)P NOTE 1).
Page 18
==PAGE:31==
4
Initial design proposals
This chapter will create di’¼Ćerent design proposals from the limitations given in chapter 3 Basis for
design. A conclusion on the proposals will be given at the end to ’¼ünd the most optimal solution
from these initial considerations.
4.1
Geometry suggestions
The following suggestions are for the geometrical appearance of the new structure. It has been
decided to let the existing bridge stand for the composition of this report, instead of tearing it down
and make a new bridge incorporated in the new structure. This is based on the concern of material
savings and thereby thinking green. It would be possible to make an LCA and an LCC analysis to
’¼ünd the best solution when considering money and material, but it will not be conducted in this
report. The structure made on the northern side of the existing bridge will be referred to as the
northern structure whereas the structure on the southern side of the existing bridge will be referred
to as the southern structure. A suggestion for the connection between the northern and the southern
structure is created too.
4.1.1
Cone shape
It was found in section 3.3 that at the northern end of the northern structure the freeway is only
2 m below level of Lyngbyvejen. An arch with rise of 16 m is therefore needed to get the required
clearance height, which is higher compared to the southern end of the northern structure, where the
clearance height is already obtained and the arch can therefore have any chosen rise. It is therefore
possible to create a cone shape with a higher rise at one end compared to the other. By using a
cone shape the arch change in height over the distance, and therefore the structure might not take
up as much of the landscape as if it was necessary to keep the height of the rise at the northern end.
Furthermore it might be a visual experience both to look at and to drive into.
Page 19
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4. INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSALS
Figure 4.1: The new structure for covering the freeway could be a cone shape.
4.1.2
Arch vault
An arch vault could be a suggested solution. This solution would keep the same rise along the
whole structure. The rise would be determined by the minimum allowable rise, 16 m for the northern
structure, and 15 m for the southern structure. This would be a simpler structure than the cone
shape, the two suggestions would be very similar.
Figure 4.2: The new structure for covering the freeway could be an arch vault.
4.1.3
Suggestion for connection
The structure over the existing bridge to connect the northern and southern structure could be an
arch going from one side of the existing bridge to the other (the opposite way of the arches over
the freeway). See ’¼ügure 4.3 ’¼ürst from the right. This arch could be supported on a wall or on the
ground. Depending on the height of the wall the arch could have a higher or lower rise.
A shell supported on the 4 corners and on the edge of the arches going over the freeway is also a
possibility, see ’¼ügure 4.3 second from the right. But then again the rise needs to be large to get the
tra’¼āc going under.
A suggestion could also be an arch/shell that rests on the northern and southern structure, see ’¼ügure
4.3 second from the left. This way the end of the connecting arch is already above ground and the
rise of this connecting arch/shell do not need to be as high as if it starts on the ground/wall.
Page 20
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4. INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSALS
It is possible to make one larger structure as a connection. But it is also possible to make two smaller
symmetrical structures if they are to be resting on the northern and southern structure. This would
be done to lower the dead load of the connecting structure. See ’¼ügure 4.3 ’¼ürst from the left.
Figure 4.3: Suggested solutions for the connection between the the structures.
4.2
Maximum slope
If the cone shape is to be used, there should be set a maximum slope for the height di’¼Ćerence in
order to make it comfortable to walk on. This slope is found from the danish regulations regarding
wheelchair access.
According to Bygningsreglementet section 2.4.3 Adgangs- og tilk├Ėrselsarealer stk. 2, a ramp for
wheelchairs should not exceed the angle of 1 : 25 = 2.29┬░.
The di’¼Ćerence in height between the two end arches in the cone can be found by the trigonometric
formula with tangent. The angle is given above and the distance between the two end arches in
known from section 3.1, 110 m.
tan(angle) = mod
hos = Difference
h
ŌćĢ
Difference = tan(1 : 25) ┬Ę 110 m = 4.4 m
(4.1)
4.4 m is therefore the maximum height di’¼Ćerence between the two end arches which gives the maxi-
mum angle of 1:25.
4.3
Design proposals
The geometry suggestions are combined with the di’¼Ćerent design limitations from section 3 into four
di’¼Ćerent design proposals. In the end a conclusion is made where the proposals are evaluated and
the most optimal solution is chosen for the further work.
4.3.1
Proposal 1
For this proposal the cone shape is chosen for the northern structure while the arch vault is chosen
for the southern structure.
Page 21
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 4. INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSALS
For the northern end of the northern structure, the rise is set to the minimum regarding clearance
height when it stands on the wall that is already on site. This rise is 16 m, see section 3.3. The rise
in the southern end, at the existing bridge, is set to the height corresponding to the maximum slope.
This is 4.4 m lower than at the entrance, which gives a rise of 11.6 m.
For the southern end of the southern structure the rise is set to 10 m. A smaller rise is not chosen in
order not to make the di’¼Ćerence in height between the northern and southern structures too large.
The rise is not chosen larger, to comply with the local plan of Nordvej, in order to make a coherency
in the area, even though this local plan does not concern the very freeway, but only the areas around it.
For this solution the arch connection between the northern and southern structures is chosen. This
has the rise of 18 m and is supported directly on the existing bridge. This rise is set to allow tra’¼āc
passing underneath at the edges. At 0.2 m from the edge the height of the arch is 0.8 m. At 1.5 m
from the edge, which is approximately where the car lanes start, the height of the arch is 4.5 m.
Figure 4.4: Drawing of the ’¼ürst design proposal. The northern structure is seen on the left side of
the existing bride and the southern structure is seen on the right side.
4.3.2
Proposal 2
This proposal is similar to proposal 1. The only di’¼Ćerence is the connection between the northern and
southern structure. For this proposal a shell is used as the connection between the two structures.
The arch on the shell sides matches the arches of the two structures and is therefore supported along
these lines as well as on the four corners on the walls. The arch on the other side of the shell has
a rise of 16.5 m which is the minimum to obtain the clearance height of 4.5 m above the road lanes
when the shell is supported on the 1 m walls.
Figure 4.5: Drawing of the second design proposal. The northern structure is seen on the left side
of the existing bride and the southern structure is seen on the right side.
Page 22
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSALS
4.3.3
Proposal 3
For this solution the cone shape is chosen for the northern structure and the arch vault with constant
rise is chosen for the southern structure.
For the northern end of the northern structure the rise is set to 3.5 m, which is the maximum rise to
comply with the rise to span ratio of 1/10 at this location, see section 3.4. To have this rise and still
comply with the minimum clearance height, the structure needs to be on an additional wall of 1.5 m
height. The rise of the cone shape closest to the existing bridge is set to 2.6 m which corresponds
to the rise of a vertical cut through a cone with the given rise at the northern end and the given
side length due to the dimensions of the freeway. This rise is also complying with the maximum rise
to span of 1/10, which is 3 m at this end. The slope of the cone is 0.43┬░ which is smaller than the
advised maximum of 2.29┬░.
The rise of the southern structure is set to the same as the cone shape closest to the existing bridge,
2.6 m. With this rise a maximum rise to span ratio of 1/10 is obtained.
The connection between the northern and southern structure is an arch that rests on the edges of
the two structures. The height between the connection corners and the ground is 4.5 m which is in
compliance with the minimum clearance height. This way the rise of the arch can be any chosen
height. The rise in the middle of the arch is chosen to 6 m from the ground, which is only 1 m from
the top of the northern and southern structures at the end closest to the bridge.
Figure 4.6: Drawing of the third design proposal. The northern structure is seen on the left side of
the existing bride and the southern structure is seen on the right side.
4.3.4
Proposal 4
This proposal is similar to proposal 3. The same structures with the same rises is chosen to cover
the freeway. The di’¼Ćerence is the connection between the structures. The shape of the connection is
similar too and it starts at the same height, 4.5 m above the ground. A cut in the middle is though
Page 23
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSALS
taken out to form two more narrow pass ways across. This is done to reduce the dead load of the
connection.
Figure 4.7: Drawing of the fourth design proposal. The northern structure is seen on the left side of
the existing bride and the southern structure is seen on the right side.
4.3.5
Conclusion on design proposals
The advantage from proposal 1 and 2 compared to proposal 3 and 4 is the smaller horizontal reac-
tion forces due to the larger rise of the arches. The advantage from proposal 3 and 4 compared to
proposal 1 and 2 is the smaller bending moment caused by dead load due to the smaller rises.
Proposal 4 is chosen as a baseline for the design when moving forward. It is chosen over proposals
1 and 2 because of the smaller internal bending moment due to the maximum rise to span of 1/10.
This solution is chosen above solution 3 due to the smaller dead load of the connection.
Page 24
==PAGE:37==
5
Design speci’¼ücations for the initial
design proposal
In this chapter more detailed design speci’¼ücations of the structure are conducted. This is done by
’¼ünding the necessary cross-section of the SL-deck to withstand the moments and normal forces from
dead load and live loads. For the calculations, the structure is divided into smaller arch segments.
One arch segment has the width of one SL-deck. Numbering of segments can be seen in ’¼üg. 5.2.
These arch segments changes in span and rise to create the conical shape for the northern structure,
while the arch segments only changes in span for the southern structure. The calculations are made
for the arch segments emphasised with blue at ’¼ügure 5.1, which is segment N1, N46, S1 and S54.
Figure 5.1: The structure is divided into arch segments of width corresponding to one SL-deck
element. The segments that is used for calculations are emphasised with blue. These segments are
N1, N46, S1 and S54.
Page 25
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
Figure 5.2: The structure divided into arch segments of width corresponding to one SL-deck element.
The northern structure is divided into 46 segments, and the southern structure is divided into 54
segments.
Page 26
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
5.1
Deck width, length and height
First the width and length for the SL-decks is chosen. This is done by considering the parameters
given in chapter 3. An initial guess for the height of the deck is also chosen.
5.1.1
Deck width
In chapter 3 it has been found that the minimum deck width is 1.65 m. The width of an LAC block
is 375 mm and a minimum of 50 mm regular concrete is added on both ends of the SL-deck and
also between the two middle LAC blocks. If four LAC blocks is chosen, this gives a width of 1.65 m.
If six LAC blocks is chosen, this gives a width of 2.4 m. If eight or nine blocks are chosen, the
cross-section looks slightly di’¼Ćerent. The LAC blocks then have a width of 350 mm and a minimum
of 50 mm regular concrete is added in both ends of the SL-deck and also on the sides of the two
or three middle blocks. Therefore if eight LAC blocks are chosen, the deck width is 3 m and if nine
blocks are chosen the deck width is 3.6 m.
The bene’¼üt of larger elements is the fewer crane lifts as is the fewer joints. But since the SL-decks
are straight elements, smaller elements would ’¼üt the curved shape of a cone better. The solution
with six LAC blocks is chosen, which gives a deck width of 2.4 m.
5.1.2
Deck length
The length of an LAC block is 600 mm and it has been found in chapter 3 that a layer of at least
200 mm regular concrete should be added in each end of the cross-section. The longer the SL-deck
element is, the more edged the arch will be. But shorter elements requires extra joints to be created.
It is chosen to use a total of 12 SL-deck elements for an arch. Since each arch has di’¼Ćerent lengths,
the length of the SL-deck element will vary too for di’¼Ćerent arches. The length of the elements,
are the length of the arch divided by 12, which was the desired number of elements. This has been
calculated in appendix C.1, and the results can be seen in table 5.1. Since the arches N1 and S1
has the same span and rise, the arch length and thereby the deck length will be the same too.
Table 5.1: Results for SL-deck lengths and arch length along with concrete cover at the ends and
number of LAC blocks.
Arch element
N1/S1
N46
S54
Arch length, Larch
[m]
30.6
35.9
42.4
Length of SL-deck, LSL
[mm]
2550
2994
3536
Number of LAC blocks in the length, nLAC.L
[-]
3
4
5
Width of concrete cover in each end
[mm]
375
297
268
5.1.3
Deck height
The deck height is later iterated to create a cross-section that can resist the forces from the dead load
and live load. It has been found in chapter 3, that the minimum height of the SL-deck is 270 mm.
This height is therefore chosen for the initial calculations.
Page 27
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
5.2
Dead load
The dead load is calculated in order to calculate the moment and normal forces in the arches. The
dead load has been divided into dead load and superimposed dead load. The dead load is for the
SL-decks alone while the superimposed dead load is the load from back’¼ülling on top. Since the
arches N1 and S1 has the same rise and span, they will have the same dead load and superimposed
dead load, therefore they will be calculated as the same.
5.2.1
Dead load from the SL-decks
A MathCad program which can calculate SL-deck cross-sections is used to design the decks. The
self-weight of the designed SL-deck can be extracted from the Mathcad program.
For a 2.4 m
wide and 270 mm high deck with 50 mm regular concrete cover over the SL-decks, this self-weight
is 442 kg/m2. This is multiplied with the length of the arch, the width of the SL-deck and the
acceleration of gravity, g = 9.82 m/s. The total dead load is then divided by the span L to ’¼ünd the
load per meter of the span. The calculations can be seen in appendix C.2.1, and the results in table
5.2. Since a solution was chosen where the connection between the northern and southern structure
were resting on arch N1 and S1, the dead load of the connection were added to the arches. This
creates a large moment of 2457 kNm, in these arches, and this is not optimal. The calculations can
be seen in appendix C.3. It is suggested that another solution for the connection is found, where it
dos not rest on the arches of the northern and southern structure. The connection is therefore not
included in further calculations.
Table 5.2: Results for the dead load of the three arch segments
Arch element
N1/S1
N46
S54
Total dead load of SL-decks that make up an arch, gSL.tot
[kN]
318.7
374.2
442.0
Dead load of the arch pr. meter span, garch
[kN/m]
10.62
10.69
10.52
5.2.2
Superimposed dead load from the ’¼ülling
The dead load of the ’¼ülling depends on the distance x from the beginning of the arch. This function
g’¼üll(x), and the vertical distance to the centroid C’¼üll(x) is found in appendix C.2.2 as eq. C.28 and
C.26.
Figure 5.3: Dimensions of the ’¼ülling on top of the arch
Page 28
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
5.3
De’¼ünition of load combinations
First the load groups are shown, and then the load combinations for ULS and SLS are presented.
In load group 1 (LG 1) the dead load is the dominant action and the only acting force, see ’¼ügure
5.4. In load group 2 (LG 2) the dominant action is the live load. The service vehicle is working in
the 1/4 point and the crowd loading is working in the opposite side, see ’¼ügure 5.5. In load group 3
(LG 3) the dominant load is still the live load, but here only the service vehicle is acting, see ’¼ügure
5.6. In load group 4 (LG 4) it is again the live load that is the dominant action, but here only the
crowd loading is working on the arch, see ’¼ügure 5.7. The last load group (LG 5) is for the dead
load during construction. This scenario is when the arches have been erected and the ’¼ülling is being
constructed. The dead load of the arch is working on the entire span, while the ’¼ülling is only working
on one half, in case the construction workers ’¼üll up one half before the other, see ’¼ügure 5.8.
Figure 5.4: Drawing of load group 1 (LG 1).
Page 29
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
Figure 5.5: Drawing of load group 2 (LG 2).
Figure 5.6: Drawing of load group 3 (LG 3).
Page 30
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
Figure 5.7: Drawing of load group 4 (LG 4).
Figure 5.8: Drawing of load group 5 (LG 5).
5.3.1
Ultimate limit state design (ULS)
The load combinations are according to (Jensen, Hansen, & S├Ėrensen, 2014, Table 4.4) along with
an extra combination for the scenario where the ’¼ülling is constructed. The consequence class for
the structure is CC3, high consequence class. This is due to the structure being a larger structure
over a main tra’¼āc road and thereby the the risk of loss of human life is large. This consequence
class results in a factor KFI = 1.1. According to (Jensen et al., 2014, Table. 4.4) ╬▒ = 1. The load
combinations for ultimate limit state design can be seen in table 5.3.
Page 31
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
Table 5.3: Load combinations for ULS
Dead load
Live load
Combination:
garch + g’¼üll
Qserv
qfk
Load combination 1 from LG 1
1.2 ┬Ę KFI
-
-
Load combination 2 from LG 2
1.0 ┬Ę KFI
1.5 ┬Ę ╬▒ ┬Ę KFI
1.5 ┬Ę ╬▒ ┬Ę KFI
Load combination 3 from LG 3
1.0 ┬Ę KFI
1.5 ┬Ę ╬▒ ┬Ę KFI
-
Load combination 4 from LG 4
1.0 ┬Ę KFI
-
1.5 ┬Ę ╬▒ ┬Ę KFI
Load combination 5, Dead load during construction: 1.2 ┬Ę KFI ┬Ę (garch + g’¼üll)
5.3.2
Serviceability limit state design (SLS)
The load combinations are according to (Jensen et al., 2014, Table.
4.3) along with an extra
combination for the scenario where the ’¼ülling is created. The load combinations for serviceability
limit state design can be seen in table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Load combinations for SLS
Dead load
Live load
Combination:
garch + g’¼üll
Qserv
qfk
Load combination 2 from LG 2
1.0
1.0
1.0
Load combination 3 from LG 3
1.0
-
1.0
Load combination 4 from LG 4
1.0
1.0
-
Load combination 5, Dead load during construction: 1.0 ┬Ę (garch + g’¼üll)
5.4
Calculation of most critical load combination
The most critical load combination is found when the bending moment and the normal force is
combined. This is done by NavierŌĆÖs formula, see eq. 5.1.
╬Ą = N
AE ┬▒ M
EI ┬Ę y
(5.1)
The axial sti’¼Ćness, AE, and the distance to the centroid, y, is extracted from a MathCad pro-
gram used to calculate SL-deck cross-sections. The bending moment distribution, the normal force
distribution and the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness is calculated in the following sections 5.4.1 and 5.4.2.
5.4.1
Bending moment and normal forces
Calculations will be done using theory of three hinged arches, even though the structure might not
have any physical hinges in reality. If the structure is calculated to hold using three hinges, it is on the
safe side when there is no hinges. First the vertical and horizontal reactions at the abutments for all
load combinations are calculated with simple force- and moment equilibrium. The calculations and
results can be seen in appendix C.4. Hereafter the bending moment and normal forces are calculated.
The calculations and distributions can be seen in appendix C.5 and C.6. Since the arches N1 and
Page 32
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
S1 has the same rise, span and loads, they will have the same internal forces, therefore they will be
calculated as the same.
5.4.2
Flexural sti’¼Ćness
The northern structure is a cone shape which leads to the elements being tilted. To ’¼ünd the ’¼éexural
sti’¼Ćness for this tilted element, the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness is ’¼ürst found around the common center of
gravity for the SL-deck. This is for axis 1 and 2 which is in plane with the cross section, see ’¼üg 5.9.
Hereafter the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness is found for axis x and y which is in plane with the surroundings, see
’¼ügure 5.9.
Figure 5.9: Axes on the cross section for the calculation of the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness
The ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness for axis 1 is extracted from the MathCad program to EI1 = 72.5 MN ┬Ę m2. For
the second axis, the moment of inertia was found for the regular concrete and the LAC blocks for
this axis. The moments of inertia was multiplied with YoungŌĆÖs modulus of elasticity for each material
respectively. The results are added to ’¼ünd the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness of axis 2, EI2 = 6068.7 MN ┬Ę m2.
The calculations can be seen in appendix C.7.
The ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness for axes x and y, see ’¼üg. 5.9, is calculated from the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness of axes 1
and 2 along with the angle between the two set of axes, ŽĢ, see eq. C.64 and C.65 from appendix C.7.
The angle is the slope of the structure between the two ends, which is ŽĢ = 0.47┬░ for the northern
structure. The southern structure do not have a slope, and the angle is therefore ŽĢ = 0┬░ which
means that EIx = EI1 and EIy = EI2. The results of the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness can be seen in table 5.5
and the calculations can be seen in appendix C.7.
Table 5.5: Results for the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness
Northern structure
Southern structure
ŽĢ
[┬░]
0.467
0
EIx
[MN ┬Ę m2]
72.9
72.5
EIy
[MN ┬Ę m2]
6068.3
6068.7
Page 33
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
5.4.3
Most critical load cases
The strains in the cross section can now be found with NavierŌĆÖs formula, see eq. 5.1. To ’¼ünd the
stresses in the cross section, YoungŌĆÖs modulus is multiplied with the strains, see eq. 5.2.
Žā = ╬Ą ┬Ę E
(5.2)
The stresses has been calculated for the maximum positive and negative moments with the corre-
sponding normal force, along with the maximum and minimum normal force with the corresponding
moment. Calculations are made for the top of the cross-section with YoungŌĆÖs modulus of regular
concrete and the bottom of the cross section with YoungŌĆÖs modulus of both regular concrete and
light aggregate concrete. Furthermore the stresses are found at the position of the pre-tensioning
lines with YoungŌĆÖs modulus of regular concrete. All the results can be seen in appendix F.
The cross-section will be checked in the MathCad program at the positions of maximum positive
and negative stresses, maximum positive and negative moments along with maximum and minimum
normal forces. The maximum positive and negative moments with corresponding normal force, and
maximum and minimum normal forces with corresponding moment, along with the moment and
normal force for maximum stresses are shown in table 5.6 for arch S54 in ULS and in table 5.7 for
SLS. The results are shown for this arch, since it has the largest internal forces. Stresses, moments
and normal forces for all the arches in ULS can be seen in appendix C.8.1. The results for SLS can
be seen in appendix F.
Table 5.6: Internal forces at critical positions in arch S54 in ULS.
Critical position
Moment [kN ┬Ę m]
Normal force [kN]
Positive stress
1880.05
2227.98
Negative stress
1880.05
2227.98
Positive moment
1880.05
2227.98
Negative moment
-679.00
2214.36
Maximum normal force
0.00
4155.23
Minimum normal force
1018.56
2190.84
For this arch in ULS the maximum positive and negative stresses occurs at the maximum positive
moment. This is why the moments and normal forces are the same for these positions in table 5.6.
Table 5.7: Internal forces at critical positions in arch S54 in SLS.
Critical position
Moment [kN ┬Ę m]
Normal force [kN]
Positive stress
1424.28
1687.86
Negative stress
1424.28
1687.86
Positive moment
1424.28
1687.86
Negative moment
-514.40
1677.54
Maximum normal force
0.00
3386.54
Minimum normal force
771.64
1659.73
Page 34
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
For this arch in SLS the maximum positive and negative stresses again occurs at the maximum
positive moment. This is why the moments and normal forces are the same for these positions in
table 5.7.
5.5
Calculation of limit state design to verify the cross section
The maximum positive and negative moment resistance is calculated along with the normal force re-
sistance in the ultimate limit state (ULS). Furthermore the maximum positive and negative cracking
moment is calculated for serviceability limit state (SLS).
The calculations are done with the MathCad program. The program do not calculate with tilted
elements. The ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness EIx calculated in section 5.4.2 is therefore entered in the MathCad
program when calculating for the northern structure.
5.5.1
Moment and normal force resistance in ULS
The maximum positive and negative moment resistance of the cross-section along with maximum
normal force resistance is extracted from the MathCad program. The ultimate moment and normal
force resistance is not depending on the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness, and it is therefore the same for both the
northern and southern structure. The calculations have been made for all the critical positions stated
in section 5.4.3. The results for arch S54 which has the largest internal forces, can be seen in table
5.8.
Table 5.8: Moment and normal force resistance for arch S54
Moment
Normal force
Critical position
Resistance
Design load
Resistance
Design load
Positive stresses
432.3
1880.05
12503
2227.98
Negative stresses
432.3
1880.05
12503
2227.98
Positive moment
432.3
1880.05
12503
2227.98
Negative moment
-431.0
-679.00
12503
2214.36
Maximum normal force
600.7
0.00
12503
4155.23
Minimum normal force
428.7
1018.56
12503
2190.84
For this arch in ULS, the maximum positive and negative stresses are occurring at the maximum
positive moment, which is why the results are the same at these positions.
5.5.2
Moment resistance in SLS
The maximum positive and negative cracking moment of the cross-section is extracted from the
Mathcad program. The moment resistance depends on the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness, and it is therefore not
the same for both the northern and southern structure. The calculations have been made for all the
critical positions. The results for the arch S54 can be seen in table 5.9.
Page 35
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
Table 5.9: Moment resistance for arch S54
Corresponding design
Critical position
Resistance
Design load
normal force
Positive stresses
263.0
1424.28
1687.86
Negative stresses
263.0
1424.28
1687.86
Positive moment
263.0
1424.28
1687.86
Negative moment
-143.0
-514.40
1677.54
Maximum normal force
376.0
0.00
3386.54
Minimum normal force
261.1
771.64
1659.73
For this arch in ULS, the maximum positive and negative stresses are occurring at the maximum
positive moment, which is why the results are the same at these positions.
5.5.3
Conclusion on results and iteration of the cross section
It is seen in table 5.8 that the ultimate normal force resistance is larger than the maximum normal
force. But it is also seen that the ultimate moment resistance is smaller than the maximum resistance.
It is seen in table 5.9 that the cracking moment is smaller than the maximum design moment. The
cross section data chosen is therefore not su’¼ācient to withstand the internal moment. The ’¼ürst
assumed cross-section dimension is therefore not adequate. An iteration process to create a su’¼ācient
cross-section is therefore initiated. The parameters that can be changed are presented below.
ŌĆó Deck height, t
ŌĆó Deck width, WSL
ŌĆó Number of LAC blocks in cross section, nLAC.w
ŌĆó Pre-tensioning lines in layer 2, nbot2
ŌĆó Pre-tensioning lines in layer 3, nbot3
ŌĆó Pre-tensioning lines in top layer, ntop
ŌĆó Number of slack bars in top of the cross section, ns
ŌĆó Position of the slack bars, cs
ŌĆó Number of post-tensioning lines, np
ŌĆó Thickness of an in-situ cast concrete top, Htop
ŌĆó Thickness of cover layer above LAC blocks, cc
These eleven factors all have di’¼Ćerent e’¼Ćects on the moment and normal force resistances. What
cross-section data e’¼Ćects which internal forces is shown in table 5.10. When it is assessed if the
cross-section parameter has an e’¼Ćect, it is assumed that the parameter is changed to a higher value,
except for the number of LAC blocks nLAC.w, and the position of slack bars cs, which is assumed to
take lower values.
Page 36
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
Table 5.10: Table of which cross-section data that e’¼Ćects which resistance forces. "+" means a
positive e’¼Ćect in the resistance, and not necessary a larger value. "ŌłÆ" means a negative e’¼Ćect in the
resistance, and not necessary a smaller value. "O" means the cross-section parameter has no e’¼Ćect
on the resistance.
Mpos
Mneg
NLmax
Mcrack.pos
Mcrack.neg
t
+
+
+
+
+
WSL
+
+
+
+
+
nLAC.w
O
+
+
+
+
nbot2
+
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
+
-
nbot3
+
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
+
-
ntop
-
+
ŌłÆ
ŌłÆ
+
ns
O
+
+
O
O
cs
O
+
O
O
O
np
+
+/ŌłÆ*
O
+
+
Htop
+
+**
+
+
+
cc
O
-
+
+
+/ŌłÆ*
* At some point this will have a negative in’¼éuence.
** The extra top concrete makes it possible to reinforce with slack bars (by adding a negative cs)
which have a positive e’¼Ćect on Mneg.
The number of LAC blocks is kept at a maximum, which for an SL-deck width of 2.4 m is 6 blocks,
since the blocks are ’¼üre resistant and sound absorbing. The width of the cross-section is kept as
initially chosen. For this to be ful’¼ülled, the cross-section should have a thickness of 600 mm and
12 pre-tensioning lines in each of the layers 2, 3 and top but no slack bars. There is added 9 post-
tensioning lines with each a force of 167 kN, which gives a normal force of 1503 kN. No concrete top
layer is added and the cover layer of the LAC blocks is 50 mm. The moment and normal forces for
the critical positions is found along with the resistance. The calculations and results of the reactions,
moment and normal force distributions and stresses can be seen in appendix G. The results for arch
S54 can be seen in table 5.11 for ULS and in table 5.12 for SLS.
Page 37
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
Table 5.11: Moment and normal force resistance for arch S54 in ULS
Moment
Normal force
Critical position
Resistance
Design load
Resistance
Design load
Positive stresses
2896.7
1866.73
24094
3602.94
Negative stresses
2896.7
1866.73
24094
3602.94
Positive moment
2896.7
1866.73
24094
3602.94
Negative moment
-1173.8
-689.21
24094
3583.18
Maximum normal force
3160.5
0.00
24094
5319.87
Minimum normal force
2887.5
672.52
24094
3550.27
For this arch in ULS, the maximum positive and negative stresses occurs at the maximum positive
moment, which is why the results are the same at these positions.
Table 5.12: Moment resistance for arch S54 in SLS
Corresponding design
Critical position
Resistance
Design load
normal force
Positive stresses
1428.5
1414.19
2729.5
Negative stresses
1428.5
1414.19
2729.5
Positive moment
1428.5
1414.19
2729.5
Negative moment
-802.1
-522.13
2714.53
Maximum normal force
1841.8
0.00
4445.30
Minimum normal force
1602.4
509.48
2689.60
For this arch in SLS, the maximum positive and negative stresses are occurs at the maximum positive
moment, which is why the results are the same at these positions.
5.6
Conclusion on the cross section of the SL-deck
It is seen in table 5.11 and 5.12 that the resistance of the cross-section is larger than the design
loads. The cross-section can therefore now withstand the internal forces. The critical positions on
the arches N1, S1 and N46 has also been checked and is withstanding the internal forces too. The
calculations and results of the design loads for these arches can be seen in appendix G.
The properties of the cross-section to the iterated solution can be seen in table 5.13.
Table 5.13: Table of the cross-section parameters for the design proposal
t
WSL
nLAC.w
nbot2
nbot3
ntop
ns
cs
np
Htop
cc
600 mm
2400 mm
6
12
12
12
-
-
9
-
50 mm
A drawing of the iterated cross-section has been made and can be seen in ’¼ügure 5.10.
Page 38
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE INITIAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
Figure 5.10: Drawing of the cross-section for the ’¼ünal design proposal
The cross-section has the maximum number of pre-tensioning lines for this width, and a large thick-
ness in order to withstand the external forces. It is therefore suggested to make the width of the
cross-section larger in order to make the thickness smaller. With a wider cross-section it is possible
to add more pre-tensioning lines, and make the cross-section stronger this way.
Page 39
==PAGE:52==
==PAGE:53==
6
Final design proposal
In this chapter a ’¼ünal design proposal is conducted. This is done by suggesting di’¼Ćerent designs to
take the horizontal reaction forces. A conclusion on the optimised proposals will be given at the end
to ’¼ünd the most ideal solution from all the considerations given.
6.1
How to take the horizontal reaction forces
Three di’¼Ćerent designs are suggested to take the horizontal forces in the structure.
6.1.1
Change of circle radius at the ends
By decreasing the radius of the circle in the ends of the arch, the normal force and horizontal reaction
forces will be smaller but the moment in the arch and the vertical reaction forces will increase. The
moment and horizontal reaction forces are checked to see if it is bene’¼ücial to change the radius of
the circle.
Figure 6.1: Drawing of the arch with change in radius at the ends compared to without the change.
To have a smooth transition of the cable, the radius change is designed such that in the point of
change, the tangent of the two circles are the same. The small circle is wished to end with a vertical
tangent at the end of the span. With these two de’¼ünitions, the radius of the small circle i found, see
calculations in appendix D.1.1.
Page 41
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 6. FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
With the radius found, the equation for the small circle is found in the coordinate system for the
arch. This is done the same way as when the equation was found for the arch, with three known
points on the circle. The calculations of the equation for the small circle can be seen in appendix
D.1.2.
Due to the decrease in radius, the ’¼ülling over the ends will be larger than with the constant radius.
The equation for the ’¼ülling is found the same way as for the arch, as a function of the distance x
from the end. The new equation for the ’¼ülling at the ends can be seen in appendix D.1.3.
The reactions are now calculated for load combination 5 with only dead load of the arch and ’¼ülling in
one side up to the crown. They are compared with the reactions from the arch without the change in
radius, but with the same SL-deck. The horizontal reactions are 45 % smaller, whereas the vertical
reaction at the abutment with the ’¼ülling is 30 % larger and the vertical reaction at the abutment
without ’¼ülling is 20 % larger.
The moment is then calculated for this solution. It shows a very large negative bending moment
of ŌłÆ5609 kN ┬Ę m, and a maximum positive bending moment of 1166 kN ┬Ę m. The largest negative
bending moment is placed in the part of the arch that has a smaller radius at the side without ’¼ülling,
see ’¼ügure 6.2. The maximum negative moment is 800 % larger compared with the case without
radius change, whereas the maximum positive moment is 30 % smaller.
Figure 6.2: Moment distribution for the solution with change in radius.
6.1.2
An additional half arch on the sides
If an additional half arch were to be added on the sides of the structure, a tension tie could be placed
between the half arches on each side, see ’¼ügure 6.3.
Page 42
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6. FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
Figure 6.3: A tension tie between two additional half arches
For the geometry of the additional arches, a circle curve is used. The start of the arch is at support
of the main arch. A point on this circle curve should be the horizontal distance L2 and the vertical
distance h’¼üll from the supports. This point marks the ends of the additional arches. To de’¼üne the
equation for the circle a third point is needed. This third point will be placed at the horizontal
distance T and vertical distance 0 from the supports. Therefore if the distance T = 2 ┬Ę L2, the ad-
ditional half arch will end horizontally. This will make the rise to span ratio large, and will therefore
create large negative moments in the additional arches which is not desirable. The calculations can
be seen in appendix D.2.1.
The horizontal reaction force at the ends of the additional arches should be taken by the tension tie
between the two, while an anchor should be created to take the vertical reaction forces. This anchor
could be a concrete block which weight will resist the force or it could be an earth anchor, like used
for sheet piling.
6.1.3
A tension line dug under the freeway
A third possibility could be to have a tension tie dug under the freeway. For this solution the arch
should be extended down to a level where it is possible to dig under the freeway and attach a tension
tie at the ends. Since the arches are changing in dimensions, they will have di’¼Ćerent points of impact
with the ground. The most shallow arch are the arch S54. This will have an impact 8.2 m from
the freeway. This is just within Lyngbyvejen before the side walk. The middle arches S1 and N1
will impact the ground 5.7 m from the freeway. The arch with the largest rise to span ratio N46 will
have an impact 5 m from the freeway. With this solution, no additional wall will be needed since the
arches go directly in the ground.
Figure 6.4: Proposals for the connection of the northern and southern structure.
The arches will have to be prolonged down into the ground to a level under the freeway, which is 5 m
below Lyngbyvejen. It is possible to dig out all the earth and make the ground level start down at
the beginning of the arch. It is though not preferred to have a 5 m level di’¼Ćerence, and it is therefore
chosen that the arch should start down in the ground where earth is burring the ’¼ürst part. The ’¼ülling
on the arch will therefore ’¼ürst start at the point on the arch that is above ground. For this chapter,
the forces in the arch are calculated as the arch is starting from the point that is above ground. This
Page 43
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 6. FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
is to make a quick overview of the forces. The moment is calculated as for load combination 1 in
section 5.4.1 with only dead load. If the arches are not changed but only prolonged, they will get
larger rises and spans. These rises and spans have been calculated along with the moment and can
be seen in table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Span and rise for the prolonged arches along with moment in load combination 1
S1/S1
N46
S54
Rise
[m]
5.1
6
5.1
Span
[m]
41.4
45.2
58.4
Moment
[kN ┬Ę m]
2240
2592
4965
The moment of the prolonged arches in load combination 1 is larger due to the longer span and
larger rise. Especially the moment in arch S54 is twice as large as for the other arches. It would be
possible to alter the southern structure in both span and rise, since the minimum clearance height
is obtained because the freeway runs 5 m below Lyngbyvejen at this end. Smaller alterations is also
possible for the northern structure, but a minimum distance of 2.5 m between Lyngbyvejen and the
arch should be obtained at the edge of the freeway.
6.1.4
Discussion of how to take the normal forces
In the ’¼ürst solution with radius change, the moment is increasing much more than the horizontal
reaction force is decreasing. Therefore this solution is not ideal.
Both the second solution with extra half arches and the third solution with a tension line under
the freeway, would take up space of Lyngbyvejen. The extra half arches is relatively straight, which
makes it impossible for a large car to drive under it. It might be necessary to close this part of
Lyngbyvejen for cars and only allow pedestrians and possible bicycles. For solution three the main
arches is extended down to Lyngbyvejen and under to dig a tension tie under the freeway. With this
solution is would be necessary to close Lyngbyvejen for cars.
For the second solution, the main arch will be a’¼Ćected in the way that the ’¼ülling is now above the
crown and to the top of the additional arches. A new assessment of the cross-section is therefore
needed. The cross-section for the additional arches is also needed to be checked to see if it is moment
resistant. For solution three, a whole new assessment of the internal forces in the main arches is
needed and most likely an optimisation of the geometry necessary.
6.2
Connections between the northern and southern structure
It is not possible for the two main structures to carry the weight of the connections, therefore new
connection which stands on the ground is suggested. The suggestions is not investigated in this
report, but is recommended for further study.
A vault is suggested for the connection of the northern and the southern structure. The suggestions
can be seen in ’¼ügure 6.5. They both have two arches going across the existing bridge for tra’¼āc
Page 44
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6. FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
passage. Two arches is made instead of one to make the rise at the edges larger and thereby allowing
higher vehicles. The one on the left is closed in the direction of the freeway, so it is not possible
to look down and the tra’¼āc noise is stopped. The one on the right has an arch running along the
freeway so it is possible to look down and have a view of the freeway.
Figure 6.5: Proposals for the connection of the northern and southern structure.
6.3
Design proposals
Two solutions are suggested, one with additional arches and a tension tie on top and one with a
prolonged main arch to add a tension line under the free way.
6.3.1
Proposal 1
For this proposal the same dimensions for the main arch is used as for the initial design proposal
3 and 4. The di’¼Ćerence in the main arch is the extra ’¼ülling on top of the crown. Furthermore
additional arches are added at the sides with a tension tie between and an anchor. The dimensions
of the additional arches should be optimised for the internal moment. A drawing of the solution can
be seen in ’¼ügure 6.6.
Figure 6.6: Design proposal 1 with additional arches.
6.3.2
Proposal 2
The main arch is here prolonged down to the ground and 5 m below Lyngbyvejen which is where the
free way is. The edges of the arch is buried under ground and the ’¼ülling is starting at ground level.
The span and rise of the arch is now larger and should be optimised for the internal moment. A
tension tie is dug under the freeway to take the horizontal reaction forces. A drawing of the solution
can be seen in ’¼ügure 6.7.
Page 45
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 6. FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
Figure 6.7: Design proposal 2 with prolonged arches.
6.3.3
Conclusion on design proposals
Since proposal 2 is getting larger span and rises, the moment in the arches increases too. Because the
cross-section is already large for the initial proposal with smaller dimensions, the larger dimensions
of the ’¼ünal proposal 2 will only make the cross-section larger. Therefore, proposal 1 with additional
arches and tension tie on top is chosen instead.
Page 46
==PAGE:59==
7
Design speci’¼ücations for the ’¼ünal
design proposal
In this captor the rise and the span of the additional arches are found along with the ’¼ülling. The
rise and the span of the main arch will remain the same as for the initial proposal. The rise and the
span of the additional arches are chosen in order to lower the moment in the arches for load case
1 with only dead load. The moment and normal forces are therefore needed calculated. Afterwards
Navier is used to ’¼ünd the most critical load case and to determine a suitable cross-section. At last
a solution for an anchor of the additional arches is found.
In chapter 5 it was found that the cross-section of a 2.4 m wide element was ’¼ülled with pre-tensioning
lines and had a thickness of 600 mm. To make the cross-section slimmer, it is chosen to use 3 m
wide elements instead. When the elements get wider, the number of elements is decreasing when
keeping the same length. The northern structure is therefore divided into 37 segments, while the
southern structure is divided in to 43 segments, see ’¼ügure 7.2. Calculations are made for the arch
segments emphasised with blue at ’¼ügure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: New division of the structure with additional arches. The segments that are used for
calculations are emphasised with blue. These elements are N1, N37, S1 and S43.
Page 47
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 7. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
Figure 7.2: Drawing of the arch numbering. The northern structure is divided into 37 segments, and
the southern structure is divided into 43 segments.
Page 48
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
7.1
Calculation of dead load
Calculations of the self-weight of the SL-deck are done as in the initial proposal. The ’¼ülling on the
main arch is though now divided into two, one below the crown and one above the crown, see ’¼ügure
7.3.
Figure 7.3: Dimensions of the ’¼ülling on top of the main arch
The one below the crown is calculated with the same formulas as in section 5.2.2. The one above
the crown is a uniformly distributed load of height h’¼üll ŌłÆh and length L. This force can be calculated
by eq. 7.1.
g’¼üll.t = (h’¼üll ŌłÆh) ┬Ę L ┬Ę g’¼üll ┬Ę g
(7.1)
For the additional arches the ’¼ülling will reach the top in load case 1 to 4, see ’¼ügure 7.4. For load
case 5 it is assumed that the ’¼ülling is constructed, and only one side is ’¼ülled ’¼ürst up to the crown of
the main arch, see ’¼ügure 7.5.
Figure 7.4: Drawing of the ’¼ülling in load case 1 to 4.
Figure 7.5: Drawing of the ’¼ülling in load case 5.
Since the crown of the main arch is lower than the top of the additional arches, the ’¼ülling will start
at some point down the additional arch. The vertical distance of this starting point is the height of
the crown h, while the horizontal distance is found by solving for x in the equation for the additional
arch, yAD(x) = h. The equation for the additional arch has been found in appendix D.2.1 while
equations for the ’¼ülling is calculated in appendix E.1.
Page 49
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 7. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
7.2
Calculation of the additional archesŌĆÖ geometry
The additional archesŌĆÖ geometry is optimized in regards to the moment in the arches. Therefore the
reaction forces and the moment are calculated ’¼ürst.
7.2.1
Reaction forces
The reaction forces are calculated by simple force- and moment equilibrium. For easier calculations
the arch were divided into three pieces, the main arch, the additional arch from A to D and the
additional arch from B to E, see ’¼ügure 7.6.
Figure 7.6: Drawing of the divided arches for reactions calculations. The left is the additional arch
from A to D. In the middle is the main arch. On the right is the additional arch from B to E.
The reaction forces on the main arch were calculated as for the initial proposal, except now the ’¼ülling
is above the crown, and therefore an extra uniformly distributed load g’¼üll.t is added. Calculations
of the reaction forces on the main arch can be seen in appendix E.2.1. The reaction forces in the
additional arches are calculated with the weight of the SL-decks and the weight of the ’¼ülling. For
load case 5 the calculations are divided into two equations for the additional arch from A to D, one
before the ’¼ülling, and one after the ’¼ülling. The ’¼ülling on the additional arch from B to E is not yet
present and therefore this arch is not divided into several equations. The calculations can be seen in
appendix E.2.2.
The total horizontal and vertical reaction force at support A and B is then found as the sum of the
reactions from the main arch and the additional arches. The calculations can be seen in appendix
E.2.3 and E.2.4.
7.2.2
Bending moment and normal force
Both the bending moment and the normal forces are calculated as for the initial proposal, except
now two extra equations have been added, one for each of the additional arches and one for the extra
force for the extra ’¼ülling that is added to the main arch. The calculations can be seen in appendix
E.3 for the bending moment and appendix E.4 for the normal force.
Page 50
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
7.2.3
Optimization of the additional archesŌĆÖ geometry
Three factors are in’¼éuencing the geometry of the additional arches. These three factors are the
length L2, the height h’¼üll and the ’¼üctive point T. The equation for the additional arches can be seen
in appendix D.2.1. A variation of all three factors is chosen to make the moment in the additional
arches as close to 0 as possible for load case 1 with only dead load.
h’¼üll should as a minimum be as high as the crown to make room for the tension tie. With an increase
in h’¼üll there is a decrease in the moment. With the increase of h’¼üll the moment in the main arches
becomes lower because of the extra uniformly distributed load. Both the vertical and the horizontal
reaction forces at D and E become larger with an increase of h’¼üll.
L2 should as a start not get longer than 10 m since it then extends beyond Lyngbyvejen. For a shorter
length of L2, the moment gets smaller.
The ’¼üctional point T do not have any limitations on the length. As the point gets further away, the
moment in the additional arches gets larger.
The three factors are chosen to be L2 = 10 m, T = 70 m and h’¼üll = h + 0.5 m. The height of the
additional arches varies with the height of the crown of the three arches. This is done to insure that
the moment in arch S54 is not too small and that the moment in arch N46 is not too large.
7.3
Calculation of limit state design to verify the cross section
First the most critical load combination is found. Hereafter an iteration process is initiated to ’¼ünd
the most optimal cross-section. Resistance of the cross-section is found by the MathCad program.
The factors that is being changed in the program is the same as for the initial proposal, and this is
described in section 5.5.3. The results can be seen in section 7.3.3 for ULS and section 7.3.4 for SLS.
Results of reaction forces, moment distribution, normal force distribution and stress distributions for
all load cases for the ’¼ünal solution can be sen in appendix H.
7.3.1
Most critical load case
The same ’¼üve load combinations considered in the initial proposal will be considered here too. See
table 5.3 in section 5.3.1 and 5.4 in section 5.3.2 for ULS and SLS respectively. In the tables the g’¼üll
now describes the ’¼ülling of the the main arch with extra ’¼ülling above the crown g’¼üll.t, along with the
’¼ülling for the additional arches, g’¼üll.AD and g’¼üll.BE. The self-weight of the arches garch described in
the tables, now covers the self-weight of the main arch and the self-weight of the additional arches
garch.AD and garch.BE.
The most critical load combination is found the same way as for the initial proposal, with NavierŌĆÖs
formula for strains, see eq. 5.1 in section 5.4. Here after the stresses are found by multiplying with
YoungŌĆÖs modulus of the considered material, see eq. 5.2 in section 5.4.
Page 51
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 7. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
7.3.2
Optimization of the cross-section
An iteration process is initiated to ’¼ünd the most optimal cross-section. First the thinnest cross-section
possible is found. This is done by adding many pre-stressing lines and slack bars. To get room for all
this reinforcement, the cover layer of the LAC blocks is increased to 70 mm, which makes it possible
to add reinforcement over the whole width. It has been found that the two limiting factors is the
negative ultimate moment and the positive cracking moment. When optimising for one, the other is
worsen. The thinnest cross-section is found to be 460 mm. This contains 16 pre-tensioning lines in
layer 2 and 3 along with 12 lines in the top layer. It contains 35 slack bars and 31 post-tensioning
lines. The duct size for this amount of post-tensioning lines is ├ś105 mm, (ŌĆ£Post-tensioning systemsŌĆØ,
2017). A drawing of the cross-section can be seen in ’¼ügure 7.7. This cross-section has the self-weight
of 773 kg/m2
Figure 7.7: Drawing of the thinnest cross-section possibility.
A slightly higher cross-section is investigated to lower the amount of reinforcement. If the height is
increased to 480 mm, which is only 20 mm higher, the amount of reinforcement is much lower for
the top, but it is increased slightly at the bottom. 18 pre-tensioning lines is now placed in layer 2
and 3 while only 8 is placed in the top layer. Only 7 slack bars and 19 post-tensioning lines are
needed. A duct of ├ś85 mm is needed for this amount of post-tensioning lines, (ŌĆ£Post-tensioning
systemsŌĆØ, 2017). A drawing of the cross-section can be seen in ’¼ügure 7.8. The cover layer has the
same thickness of 70 mm and the cross-section now weights 804 kg/m2.
Figure 7.8: Drawing of the solution with smaller amount of reinforcement.
Page 52
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 7. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
The ’¼ürst cross-section in ’¼ügure 7.7 is both thinner and lighter than the second cross-section, therefore
this solution is chosen. The calculations for the cross-section check can be seen in section 7.3.3 for
ULS and 7.3.4 for SLS. The calculations of reaction forces, moment and normal forces can be seen
in appendix H for this solution.
7.3.3
Moment and normal force resistance in ULS
The maximum positive and negative moment resistance of the cross-section along with maximum
normal force resistance is extracted from the MathCad program. The ultimate moment and normal
force resistance is not depending on the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness, and it is therefore the same for both the
northern and southern structure.
The calculations have been made for all the critical positions.
These are the point of maximum positive and negative stresses, maximum positive and negative
moment and maximum and minimum normal force. The results for the main arch S43 can be seen
in table 7.1. This is the arch with the largest internal forces. The results of the design loads for all
the arches, both main and additional, can be seen in appendix H.
Table 7.1: Moment and normal force resistance for main arch S43
Moment
Normal force
Critical position
Resistance
Design load
Resistance
Design load
Positive stresses
2968.7
2339.23
32977.6
3903.31
Negative stresses
2968.7
2339.23
32977.6
3903.31
Positive moment
2968.7
2339.23
32977.6
3903.31
Negative moment
-861.8
-856.93
32977.6
3879.77
Maximum normal force
3129.1
0.00
32977.6
8589.50
Minimum normal force
3141.5
155.55
32977.6
7143.41
For this main arch S43 in ULS the maximum positive and negative stresses occurs at the position
of maximum positive moment. This is why the results are the same for this position.
7.3.4
Moment resistance in SLS
The maximum positive and negative cracking moment of the cross-section is extracted from the
MathCad program. The moment resistance depends on the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness, and it is therefore not
the same for both the northern and southern structure. The calculations have been made for all the
critical positions. These are the point of maximum positive and negative stresses, maximum positive
and negative moment and maximum and minimum normal force. The results for the arch with the
largest forces, which is main arch S43, can be seen in table 7.2. The results of the design loads for
all the arches, both main and additional, can be seen in appendix H.
Page 53
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 7. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL
Table 7.2: Moment resistance for main arch S43
Corresponding design
Critical position
Resistance
Design load
normal force
Positive stresses
2200.8
1543.99
6857.08
Negative stresses
1779.9
1772.14
2957.06
Positive moment
1779.9
1772.14
2957.06
Negative moment
-790.6
-649.19
2939.22
Maximum normal force
2254.0
0.00
7350.25
Minimum normal force
1774.9
717.81
2912.51
For this main arch S43 in ULS the maximum negative stresses occurs at the maximum positive
moment. This is why the results are the same at this position.
7.4
Anchor
The horizontal reaction force in D and E should be taken by the tension tie between the two, while
an anchor should be created to take the vertical reaction forces in D and E. This anchor could be
a concrete block which weight will resist the force or it could be an earth anchor, like used for sheet
piling.
The load combination with the largest vertical reaction force in D and E should be used to design
the anchor. This is load combination 2. The reaction force could be found for every arch, but to
make an overview of the approximated size, an anchor solution is found for the largest reaction force,
which is for arch S54, 2265 kN, see appendix H
The density of regular concrete is 2400 kg/m3. Therefore approximately 96 m3 of concrete is needed
to withstand this force. The other solution with an earth anchor is possible too. A tie bar solution for
the earth anchor can be seen in (ŌĆ£ASDO Product DataŌĆØ, n.d.). If the solution ASDO540-S of carbon
steel with the nominal thread size M85 is chosen, the tie bar will have a design resistance of 2494 kN.
Since the solution with a tie bar and earth anchor is more discreet, this option is found more optimal
from an aesthetic point of view.
Page 54
==PAGE:67==
8
Conclusion
A cover of the Elsinore freeway at the area of Ryparken-Lundehus has been suggested designed with
pearl-chain arches. These arches consists of pre-tensioned super light concrete deck elements, which
is post-tensioned on site into an arch. The bene’¼üts of this method are, easy transport of the elements
and easy erection across the freeway which do not disturb the tra’¼āc compared to other methods.
The bene’¼üts of super light concrete elements are ’¼üre and frost resistance and sound absorption.
The cover structure of the northern end has been designed as a cone and the southern end as an
arch vault without changing in rise. This has been chosen to comply with the given limitations of
the site. The rise to span ratio is relatively small. The smallest rise to span ratio is 0.06 while the
largest is 0.1. The small ratios have been chosen to lower the moment in the arches. Due to these
small rise to span ratios, large horizontal reaction forces are though created at the abutments. To
take these forces, additional half arches have been added, where a tension tie is placed between the
ends of the additional arches, and a tie rod anchor is placed between the ends and the ground. The
tie rod anchor is of type ASDO540-S of carbon steel with nominal thread size M85. The dimensions
of the half arches have been created to lower the moment in the arches under dead load.
The optimized cross-section from considerations of this thesis, to withstand the internal forces has
been found, and the properties can be seen in table 8.1. Here t is thickness, WSL is width of the SL
deck and nLAC.w is the numbers of LAC blocks in the width. nbot2, nbot3 and ntop are the numbers
of pre-tensioning lines in layer 2, 3 and top. ns is number of slack bars and cs is the position of the
slack bars from the top of the cross-section. np is the number of post-tensioning lines. htop is the
top layer of in-situ cast concrete and cc is the cover layer of regular concrete above the LAC blocks.
Table 8.1: Table of the cross-section parameters for the ’¼ünal design proposal
t
WSL
nLAC.w
nbot2
nbot3
ntop
ns
cs
np
Htop
cc
460 mm
3000 mm
8
16
16
12
35
35 mm
31
-
70 mm
Page 55
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSION
The internal forces of the arch has been found with simple force- and moment equilibrium of three
hinged arches and the resistance has been calculated with a MathCad Program for calculations of
super light concrete decks.
The calculations have been made for the four extreme arches, arch
N1, S1, N37 and S43 for both the main arch and the additional arches. The main arch S43 has
the largest internal forces. Therefore the cross-section is designed to withstand the forces of this
arch. The arches are also designed to withstand the internal forces formed by the case of ’¼ülling
being created unevenly on the arches, which has been investigated by load case 5. The smallest and
lightest cross-section to withstand the internal forces is seen in ’¼ügure 8.1.
Figure 8.1: Drawing of the cross-section for the ’¼ünal design proposal.
The most optimal solution for the cover of the freeway investigated by this thesis has been found to
be a pearl-chain arch cover of cone shape at the northern end of the area and vault shape at the
southern end, see ’¼ügure 8.2. The northern structure at the northern end, arch N37, has a rise of
3.5 m and a span of 35 m. The southern end of the northern structure, arch N1, and the northern
end of the southern structure, arch S1, has a rise of 2.6 m and a span of 30 m. The southern end of
the southern structure, arch S43, has a rise of 2.6 m and a span of 42 m. The additional half arches
have the length 10 m and a height depending on the rise of the belonging main arch rise of main
arch +0.5 m.
Figure 8.2: Drawing of the ’¼ünal design proposal.
Page 56
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
ASDO Product Data. (n.d.). (https://anker.de/’¼üles/anker/downloads/ASDO_Structural%
20Tie%20Bars_Design%20Cap.pdf). ASDO.
Bispebjerg Lokaludvalg v/ Tanja M├Ėller Jensen. (2019). Den gr├Ėnne port: Overd├”kning af helsing├Ėr-
motorvejen.
DS/EN 1991-2. (2003). Danish Standards.
DS/EN 1992-1-1. (2008). Danish Standards.
Gimsing, N. J., & Georgakis, C. T. (2012). Cable supported bridges. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Halding, P. S. (2016). Construction and design of post-tensioned pearl-chain bridges using sl-
technology (Doctoral dissertation, Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil En-
gineering).
Halding, P. S., Hertz, K. D., & Schmidt, J. W. (2015). Precast pearl-chain concrete arch bridges.
Engineering Structures, 103, 214ŌĆō227.
Hertz, K. D. (2009). Super-light concrete with pearl-chains. Magazine of Concrete Research, 61(8),
655ŌĆō663.
Jensen, B. C., Hansen, S. O., & S├Ėrensen, F. O. P. (2014). Teknisk st├źbi (23.). PRAXIS - Nyt
Teknisk Forlag.
Kharagpur, I. (2008). Structural analysis.
K├Ėbenhavns Kommune Planorientering. (1980). Lokalplan 14 rymarksvej.
K├Ėbenhavns Kommune Teknik- og Milj├Ėforvaltningen. (2010). Lokalplan 445 nordhavnsvej.
Post-tensioning systems. (2017). (https : / / www . cclscan . dk / uploads / PDFs / CCL _ Civils _
Brochure_LR.pdf). CCL.
Tra’¼ükministeriet. (1998). Cirkul├”re om vejregler for vejes geometri over og under broer. https:
//onlaw.dk/cirkul%C3%A6re/cir-nr-162-af-17-09-1998. (accessed: 10.03.2020).
Page 57
==PAGE:70==
==PAGE:71==
Appendix
Page I
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
A
Pre-analysis appendix
A.1
Parabola
The formula for a parabola is given in eq. A.1
y(x) = a ┬Ę x2 + b ┬Ę x + c
(A.1)
It is known that c is the intersection with the y-axis, which would be 0 since the arch is set to start
in (0;0).
The top point of the parabola can be expressed by eq. A.2
Tp(x, y) =
 b
2 ┬Ę a;
d
4 ┬Ę a

(A.2)
If the arch is set to be L wide and h high at the middle, the top point of the arch will be at the
coordinates Tp(x, y) =

L
2; h

. Isolation b and d in eq. A.2 results in eq. A.3.
b = L
2 ┬Ę 2 ┬Ę a
(A.3a)
d = h ┬Ę 4 ┬Ę a
(A.3b)
The discriminant can be expressed by eq. A.4 when knowing c = 0.
Page III
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX A. PRE-ANALYSIS APPENDIX
d = b2
(A.4)
Now three equations, eq. A.3a, A.3b, A.4, with three unknowns, a, b, d, can be solved. To express
the parabola, a, b and c is found, see eq. A.5.
a = ŌłÆh ┬Ę 4
L2
(A.5a)
b = h ┬Ę 4
L
(A.5b)
c = 0
(A.5c)
The equation for the height y of a parabola as a function of the distance x from the beginning of
the arch is therefore expressed by eq. A.6.
y(x) = ŌłÆh ┬Ę 4
L2 ┬Ę x2 + h ┬Ę 4
L
┬Ę x
(A.6)
Where h is the rise of the arch and L i the span of the arch.
A.2
Circle
The formula for a circle is given by eq. A.7.
x2 + y2 + D ┬Ę x + E ┬Ę y + F = 0
(A.7)
When three coordinates are known on the circle, the equation for the circle can be found. The three
coordinates known on the arch, is the start point P(0; 0), the top point Q

L
2; h

and the end point
R(L; 0). By inserting the known coordinates into the equation of for the circle gives three equations
with three unknowns, see eq. A.8.
02 + 02 + D ┬Ę 0 + E ┬Ę 0 + F = 0
(A.8a)
L
2
2
+ h2 + D ┬Ę L
2 + E ┬Ę h + F = 0
(A.8b)
L2 + 02 + D ┬Ę L + E ┬Ę 0 + F = 0
(A.8c)
Page IV
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX A. PRE-ANALYSIS APPENDIX
By solving the three equations, A.8a, A.8b, A.8c, with the three unknown, D, E and F, gives eq.
A.9.
D = ŌłÆL
(A.9a)
E = L2
4 ┬Ę h ŌłÆh
(A.9b)
F = 0
(A.9c)
Since an expression of the height is of interest, y is solved for in eq. A.7 and gives the positive
answer of eq. A.10.
y(x) =
p
ŌłÆ(4 ┬Ę x2) ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę D ┬Ę x + E2 + 4 ┬Ę F ŌłÆE
2
(A.10)
The equation for the height y of a circular arch as a function of the distance x from the beginning
of the arch is therefore expressed by eq. A.11.
y(x) =
q
ŌłÆ(4 ┬Ę x2) + 4 ┬Ę L ┬Ę x + ( L2
4┬Ęh ŌłÆh)2 ŌłÆ( L2
4┬Ęh ŌłÆh)
2
(A.11)
Where h is the rise of the arch and L is the span of the arch.
A.3
Calculation of the reaction forces, moment and normal forces
for an arch with uniformly distributed load
The calculations are made with the variables, arch span, L, rise of the arch, h, and uniformly
distributed load UDL, as shown in ’¼ügure A.1.
Figure A.1: Uniformly distributed load UDL over three hinged arches of rise h and span L, with
reaction forces.
Page V
==PAGE:76==
APPENDIX A. PRE-ANALYSIS APPENDIX
A.3.1
Reactions
Moment of the forces about hinge A:
RB ┬Ę L ŌłÆ(UDL ┬Ę L) ┬Ę L
2 = 0
ŌćĢ
RB = UDL ┬Ę L2
2
L
(A.12)
Moment of the forces about hinge B:
RA ┬Ę L ŌłÆ(UDL ┬Ę L) ┬Ę L
2 = 0
ŌćĢ
RA = UDL ┬Ę L2
2
L
(A.13)
Moment of the forces left of hinge C about hinge C:
Figure A.2: Left side of the arch in ’¼ügure A.1, from A to C.
HA ┬Ę h ŌłÆRA ┬Ę L
2 + UDL ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 = 0
ŌćĢ
HA = RA ┬Ę L
2 ŌłÆUDL ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4
h
(A.14)
Moment of the forces right of hinge C about hinge C:
Page VI
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A. PRE-ANALYSIS APPENDIX
Figure A.3: Right side of the arch in ’¼ügure A.1, from C to B.
HB ┬Ę h ŌłÆRB ┬Ę L
2 + UDL ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 = 0
ŌćĢ
HB = RB ┬Ę L
2 ŌłÆUDL ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4
h
(A.15)
A.3.2
Bending moment
The bending moment is calculated for the left side and for the right side as a function of the hori-
zontal distance x from the beginning of the arch.
Left side:
Figure A.4: Moment for the left side of the arch depending on the distance x
ML(x) = RA ┬Ę x ŌłÆHA ┬Ę y(x) ŌłÆUDL ┬Ę x2
2
(A.16)
Right side:
Page VII
==PAGE:78==
APPENDIX A. PRE-ANALYSIS APPENDIX
Figure A.5: Moment for the right side of the arch depending on the distance x
MR(x) = RB ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx) ŌłÆHB ┬Ę y (L ŌłÆx) ŌłÆUDL ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx)2
2
(A.17)
A.3.3
Normal force
The normal forces is also calculated for the left and for the right side. The general formula for the
normal force in the arch depending on the horizontal and vertical force at a position x is presented.
For the left side:
Figure A.6: Normal forces for the left side of the arch depending on the distance x
NL(x) = ŌłÆHL(x) ┬Ę cos(╬Ė(x)) ŌłÆVL(x) ┬Ę sin(╬Ė(x))
(A.18)
For the right side:
Page VIII
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A. PRE-ANALYSIS APPENDIX
Figure A.7: Normal forces for the right side of the arch depending on the distance x
NR(x) = ŌłÆHR(x) ┬Ę cos(╬Ė(x)) ŌłÆVR(x) ┬Ę sin(╬Ė(x))
(A.19)
Even if di’¼Ćerent load cases are used, the formulas A.18 and A.19 will be the same. Only the hori-
zontal and vertical force will be dependent on the load combination. For the uniformly distributed
load over the entire arch, this will be as follows.
The vertical and horizontal force for the left side:
VL(x) = UDL ┬Ę x ŌłÆRA
(A.20)
HL(x) = ŌłÆHA
(A.21)
The vertical and horizontal force for the right side:
VR(x) = UDL ┬Ę x ŌłÆRB
(A.22)
HR(x) = ŌłÆHB
(A.23)
Page IX
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
B
Design Limitations appendix
B.1
Clearance height
The minimum rise of the arch is calculated, when it is known that the arch must have a minimum
height of 1.5 m at 20 cm from the start. The span of the arch is the span of the freeway, L = 35 m.
The formula for a circle is used, see eq. 2.2. In this equation the span is inserted, the distance
x20 cm and y(20 cm) = 1.5 m is inserted. The rise is then isolated, see eq. B.1.
1.5 m =
q
ŌłÆ(4 ┬Ę (20 cm)2) + 4 ┬Ę L ┬Ę 20 cm + ( L2
4┬Ęh ŌłÆh)2 ŌłÆ( L2
4┬Ęh ŌłÆh)
2
ŌćĢ
h = 16 m
(B.1)
The minimum rise for the arch at this position with a span of 35 m is therefore 16 m.
Page XI
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
C
Design speci’¼ücations appendix
C.1
SL-deck lengths
It has been chosen to create the arches of 12 SL-deck elements. In order to ’¼ünd the length of each
element, the length of the arch itself should be found. The arch is circular, so the length corresponds
to the length of a section of the circumference. This length can be found by eq. C.1.
Larch = ╬Ėc ┬Ę R
(C.1)
The radius of the circle can be found when knowing three points on the circle. These three points
would be the start of the arch x1 = 0, y1 = 0, the middle of the arch x2 = L/2, y2 = h (rise of the
arch), and the end of the arch x3 = L, y3 = 0. The radius can now be found by eq. C.2.
R =
s
B2 + C2 ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę A ┬Ę D
4 ┬Ę A2
(C.2)
Where
A = x1 ┬Ę (y2 ŌłÆy3) ŌłÆy1 ┬Ę (x2 ŌłÆx3) + x2 ┬Ę y3 ŌłÆx3 ┬Ę y2
B = (x2
1 + y2
1) ┬Ę (y3 ŌłÆy2) + (x2
2 + y2
2) ┬Ę (y1 ŌłÆy3) + (x2
3 + y2
3) ┬Ę (y2 ŌłÆy1)
C = (x2
1 + y2
1) ┬Ę (x2 ŌłÆx3) + (x2
2 + y2
2) ┬Ę (x3 ŌłÆx1) + (x2
3 + y2
3) ┬Ę (x1 ŌłÆx2)
D = (x2
1 + y2
1) ┬Ę (x3 ┬Ę y2 ŌłÆx2 ┬Ę y3) + (x2
2 + y2
2) ┬Ę (x1 ┬Ę y3 ŌłÆx3 ┬Ę y1)
+ (x2
3 + y2
3) ┬Ę (x2 ┬Ę y1 ŌłÆx1y2)
(C.3)
The coordinates to the center of the circle can be calculated by eq. C.4 and C.5.
Page XIII
==PAGE:84==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
xc = ŌłÆB
2 ┬Ę A
(C.4)
yc = ŌłÆC
2 ┬Ę A
(C.5)
The angle between the start of the arch and the end of the arch from center can be found by eq.
C.6.
╬Ėc = 2 ┬Ę arcsin
 x3
2 ┬Ę R

(C.6)
The results for the three arches, N1/S1, N46 and S54 is shown in table C.1. Since the arch N1 and
S1 has the same span and rise, they will have the same arch length.
Table C.1: Results for the arch length
Arch element
N1/S1
N46
S54
Arch span, L
[m]
30
35
42
Arch rise, h
[m]
2.6
3.5
2.6
A
[m2]
-78
-122.5
-109.2
B
[m3]
2340
4287.5
4586.4
C
[m3]
-6547.2
-10290
-18238.1
D
[m3]
0
0
0
Radius, R
[m]
44.57
45.5
86.11
╬Ėc
[┬░]
39.3
45.2
28.2
Arch length, Larch
[m]
30.6
35.9
42.4
The length of each SL-deck element can now be found from eq. C.7, when knowing the number of
SL-decks used nSL = 12.
LSL = Larch
nSL
(C.7)
C.2
Dead load
The dead load is split into two categories, dead load of the arches and superimposed dead load of
the ’¼ülling.
C.2.1
Dead load of the arches
The following is known:
Width of the SL-deck, WSL = 2.4 m
Acceleration of the gravity, g = 9.82 m/s2.
Weight of one SL-deck of the wished dimensions, gSL = 442 kN
m2
Page XIV
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
The weight of one SL-deck of the wished dimensions are extracted from the Mathcad program, gSL.
This is then multiplied with the length of the arch, Larch, found in appendix section C.1, the width
of the deck and the acceleration of gravity, see eq. C.8.
gSL.tot = gSL ┬Ę Larch ┬Ę WSL ┬Ę g
(C.8)
To ’¼ünd the dead load as a uniformly distributed load over the arch span, the dead load of the arch
is divided by the span of the arch, L, see eq. C.9.
garch = gSL.total
L
(C.9)
C.2.2
Superimposed dead load of the ’¼ülling
The geometry of the dead load on the arch can be seen on ’¼ügure C.1.
Figure C.1: Dimensions of the ’¼ülling on top of the arch
A formula for the ’¼ülling is found by ’¼ünding, the area of the ’¼ülling depending on the length x along
the span and the centroid of this area also depending on the length x. This is done by splitting the
area into 3 shapes, a square, a circle cut and a triangle, see ’¼ügure C.2. The area and centroid of
each shape is needed to ’¼ünd the common centroid of the shape of the ’¼üllibg.
Page XV
==PAGE:86==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Figure C.2: Drawing of the shapes to calculate the area and centroid of the ’¼ülling.
The area and center of the square, from origin (start of the arch):
Asq(x) = h ┬Ę x
(C.10)
Csq.x(x) = x
2
(C.11)
Csq.y = h
2
(C.12)
The area and center of the triangle, from origin (start of the arch):
Atri(x) = 1
2 ┬Ę x ┬Ę y(x)
(C.13)
Ctri.x(x) = 2
3 ┬Ę x
(C.14)
Ctri.y(x) = 1
3 ┬Ę y(x)
(C.15)
The area and centroid of a circle section can be calculation from the radius of the circle, the angle
╬▒ and the length of the chord, Lchord, see ’¼ügure C.3.
Page XVI
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Figure C.3: Drawing of the circle section for calculation of centroid
The length of the chord, which is also the length of the hypotenuse of the triangle, can be calculated
with Pythagoras:
Lchord(x) =
q
x2 + y(x)2
(C.16)
The angle, ╬▒ci is calculated by eq. C.17, when knowing the radius of the circle found in eq. C.2
╬▒ci(x) = asin
 
Lchord(x)
2 ┬Ę R
!
(C.17)
The distance to the centroid from the center of the circle is calculated by eq. C.18, see length on
’¼ügure C.4.
xcir(x) =
4 ┬Ę R ┬Ę sin(╬▒(x))3
3 ┬Ę (2 ┬Ę ╬▒(x) ŌłÆsin(2 ┬Ę ╬▒(x))
(C.18)
Area of the circle section:
Acir(x) = 1
2 ┬Ę R2 ┬Ę (2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci(x) ŌłÆsin(2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci(x)))
(C.19)
To calculate the common centroid of the ’¼ülling, the distance to the centroid of the circle section is
needed from the start of the arch, Ccir.x and Ccir.y , see ’¼ügure C.4 and ’¼ügure C.5. Right now the
distance is known from the ceter of the circle, eq. C.18.
Page XVII
==PAGE:88==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Figure C.4: Drawing of the ’¼ülling, the center of the circle of the arch and the triangles for calculations.
The angle ╬▓ on ’¼ügure C.4, can be calculated from eq.C.20 when knowing two sides of the triangle
O, A, C. The one side is the coordinate of the center of the circle xc from eq. C.4 and the other
side is the radius of the circle R.
╬▓ = arccos
xc
R

(C.20)
Page XVIII
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Figure C.5: Close up of the start of the arch from ’¼ügure C.4.
To calculate the distances Cx.ci and Cy.ci the distances xBC and yBC, seen on ’¼ügure C.4, is needed.
These lengths are calculated with the law of sinus when knowing two angles and a side of a triangle.
The triangle is between the points B, C and centroid of the circle section in ’¼ügure C.4.The known
length is between C and the centroid of the circle section, see eq. C.18. One of the angles is the 90┬░
and the other angle is ╬▒ci + ╬▓. The law of sinus for this triangle can be seen in eq. C.21.
xcir(x)
sin(90┬░) =
yBC(x)
sin(╬▒ci + ╬▓) =
xBC(x)
sin(180┬░ ŌłÆ90┬░ ŌłÆ(╬▒ci + ╬▓))
(C.21)
The distances xBC and yBC is then isolated from eq. C.21 to:
xBC(x) = xcir(x) ┬Ę sin(180┬░ ŌłÆ90┬░ ŌłÆ(╬▒ci + ╬▓))
sin(90┬░)
(C.22)
yBC(x) = xcir(x) ┬Ę sin(╬▒ci + ╬▓)
sin(90┬░)
(C.23)
The coordinates for the center of the circle, xc and yc, has been calculated in eq. C.4 and C.5. The
distances to the centroid of the circle section from the beginning of the arch can now be calculated
by eq. C.24 and C.25.
Page XIX
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Cx.cir(x) = xc ŌłÆxBC(x)
(C.24)
Cy.cir(x) = yBC(x) ŌłÆ|yc|
(C.25)
Now all the areas and centroids of the three shapes shown in ’¼ügure C.2 are known as a function of x
from the coordinate system that starts at the beginning of the arch. The common centroid can now
be calculated by eq. C.26 for the x position and eq. C.27 for the y position. Since the calculations
are from the beginning of the arch, and it is wished to ’¼ünd the the centroid to the position x on the
arch, the distance from the beginning of the arch to the centroid is subtracted from the distance x.
C’¼üll.x(x) = x ŌłÆ
 
Asq(x) ┬Ę Csq.x(x) ŌłÆAcir(x) ┬Ę Csir.x(x) ŌłÆAtri(x) ┬Ę Ctri.x(x)
Asq(x) ŌłÆAcir(x) ŌłÆAtri(x)
!
(C.26)
C’¼üll.y(x) = x ŌłÆ
 
Asq(x) ┬Ę Csq.y(x) ŌłÆAcir(x) ┬Ę Csir.y(x) ŌłÆAtri(x) ┬Ę Ctri.y(x)
Asq(x) ŌłÆAcir(x) ŌłÆAtri(x)
!
(C.27)
The dead load of the ’¼ülling depending on the distance x can be calculated by eq. C.28.
g’¼üll(x) = (Asq(x) ŌłÆAcir(x) ŌłÆAtri(x)) ┬Ę WSL ┬Ę Žü’¼üll ┬Ę g
(C.28)
C.3
Calculations of connecting arches resting on the northern and
southern structure
The dead load of the connecting arches is calculated and added to the dead load of arch N1 and
S1. Hereafter the bending moment is found in the two arches.
C.3.1
Dead load of connecting arches
The connecting arches is placed in the middle of arch N1 and S1, which mean the span is 47.4 m.
The rise of the arch were chosen to 1 m. The width of the SL-deck is chosen to 3 m in order to be
able to walk on them, but still make them small. An initial thickness of the SL-deck is chosen to
370 mm. This cross section of the connection needs to be checked if it holds, but as initial calcula-
tions, the thickness is used to ’¼ünd the dead load and see if arch S1 and N1 can withstand the moment.
The self weight of one SL-deck with height 370 mm and width 3 m is found with the Mathcad pro-
gram to 602 kg
m2 . This is multiplied with the width of the cross section, the length of the span and
the gravity of acceleration. This creates a dead load of garch = 840.6 kN.
The weight of the ’¼ülling is then found. First the he volume of the ’¼ülling is calculated by eq. C.29.
V’¼üll = (h ┬Ę L ŌłÆAarch) ┬Ę WSL
(C.29)
Page XX
==PAGE:91==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Where h is the rise of the arch, L is the length of the span, Aarch is the area beneath the arch
circumference and WSL is the width of the SL-deck. The area beneath the arch circumference can
be found by integrating the formula for the circle that makes up the arch, eq. C.30.
Aarch =
Z L
0
y(x)dx
(C.30)
The dead load of the ’¼ülling can then be found by eq. C.31.
g’¼üll = V’¼üll ┬Ę Žü’¼üll ┬Ę g
(C.31)
Where the density of the ’¼ülling is 1800 kg
m3 . This creates a dead load of the ’¼ülling of g’¼üll = 837.2 kN.
The dead load of the ’¼ülling and the dead load of the arch is added and divided with two to ’¼ünd how
much each arch should take from each connecting structure. This is gconnect = 840 kN.
C.3.2
Reactions
The reactions of the arches N1 and S1 is calculated to ’¼ünd the moment. It is assumed that the
reactions and moment will be the same for the two arches which have same rise and span. The
calculations will be done with only dead load of the arches N1/S1, both from SL-decks and ’¼ülling,
along with the dead load from the connections. It is assumed that the connecting arch is a point
load, placed in the 1/4 point in each side. The equation for the ’¼ülling on the main arches is found
in appendix section C.2.2.
Moment of the forces about hinge A:
RB = garch ┬Ę L2
2 + gconnect ┬Ę L
4 + gconnect ┬Ę 3┬ĘL
4 + g’¼üll(L) ┬Ę L
2
L
(C.32)
Moment of the forces about hinge B:
RA = garch ┬Ę L2
2 + gconnect ┬Ę L
4 + gconnect ┬Ę 3┬ĘL
4 + g’¼üll(L) ┬Ę L
2
L
(C.33)
Moment of the forces left of hinge C about hinge C:
HA =
RA ┬Ę L
2 ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆgconnect ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆg’¼üll

L
2

┬Ę C’¼üll.x

L
2

h
(C.34)
Moment of the forces right of hinge C about hinge C:
HB =
RB ┬Ę L
2 ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆgconnect ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆg’¼üll

L
2

┬Ę C’¼üll.x

L
2

h
(C.35)
Page XXI
==PAGE:92==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
C.3.3
Bending moment
The bending moment can now be calculated. It is divided into four equations, from the start of the
arch to 1/4 point. From 1/4 point to mid span. From mid span to 3/4 point. From 3/4 point to
the end.
ML1(x) = RA ┬Ę x ŌłÆHA ┬Ę y(x) ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę x2
2 ŌłÆg’¼üll(x) ┬Ę C’¼üll.x(x)
(C.36)
ML2(x) = RA ┬Ę x ŌłÆHA ┬Ę y(x) ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę x2
2 ŌłÆg’¼üll(x) ┬Ę C’¼üll.x(x) ŌłÆgconnect ┬Ę

x ŌłÆL
4

(C.37)
MR1(x) = RB┬Ę(L ŌłÆx)ŌłÆHB┬Ęy (L ŌłÆx)ŌłÆgarch┬Ę
 
(L ŌłÆx)2
2
!
ŌłÆg’¼üll(LŌłÆx)┬ĘC’¼üll.x(LŌłÆx)ŌłÆgconnect┬Ę
3 ┬Ę L
4
ŌłÆx

(C.38)
MR2(x) = RB ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx) ŌłÆHB ┬Ę y (L ŌłÆx) ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę
 
(L ŌłÆx)2
2
!
ŌłÆg’¼üll(L ŌłÆx) ┬Ę C’¼üll.x(L ŌłÆx) (C.39)
The maximum moment is found in the 1/4 point and the 3/4 point, which is 2457 kN ┬Ę m
C.4
Reactions
The formulas for the reactions are made general and therefore depending on all the loads, which are
made variables. To calculate the reactions for each load combination, the values for variables of the
loads are needed to be known. These values can be seen in table C.2 for SLS design and in table
C.3 for ULS design. The equation for the ’¼ülling is not added since it is depending on the distance,
but is needed to be multiplied with the respective combination factor.
Table C.2: Loads depending on the load combination for SLS.
SLS
N1/S1
N46
S54
Load combination 3
1.0 ┬Ę (garch + g’¼üll) + 1.0 ┬Ę Qserv
Dead load from arch, garch
[kN/m]
10.6
10.7
10.5
Live load from service vehicle, Qserv
[kN]
120
120
120
Live load from crowded loading, qfk
[kN/m]
0
0
0
Load combination 4
1.0 ┬Ę (garch + g’¼üll) + 1.0 ┬Ę qfk
Dead load from arch, garch
[kN/m]
10.6
10.7
10.5
Live load from service vehicle, Qserv
[kN]
0
0
0
Live load from crowded loading, qfk
[kN/m]
12
12
12
Load combination 5
1.0 ┬Ę (garch + g’¼üll)
Dead load from arch, garch
[kN/m]
10.6
10.7
10.5
Live load from service vehicle, Qserv
[kN]
0
0
0
Live load from crowded loading, qfk
[kN/m]
0
0
0
Page XXII
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Table C.3: Loads depending on the load combination for ULS, where KFI = 1.1 and ╬▒ = 1.0.
ULS
N1/S1
N46
S54
Load combination 1
1.2 ┬Ę KFI ┬Ę (garch + g’¼üll)
Dead load from arch, garch
[kN/m]
14.0
14.1
13.9
Live load from service vehicle, Qserv
[kN]
0
0
0
Live load from crowded loading, qfk
[kN/m]
0
0
0
Load combination 2
1.0 ┬Ę KFI ┬Ę (garch + g’¼üll) + 1.5 ┬Ę ╬▒ ┬Ę KFI ┬Ę Qserv + 1.5 ┬Ę ╬▒ ┬Ę KFI ┬Ę qfk
Dead load from arch, garch
[kN/m]
11.7
11.8
11.6
Live load from service vehicle, Qserv
[kN]
198
198
198
Live load from crowded loading, qfk
[kN/m]
19.8
19.8
19.8
Load combination 3
1.0 ┬Ę KFI ┬Ę (garch + g’¼üll) + 1.5 ┬Ę ╬▒ ┬Ę KFI ┬Ę Qserv
Dead load from arch, garch
[kN/m]
11.7
11.8
11.6
Live load from service vehicle, Qserv
[kN]
198
198
198
Live load from crowded loading, qfk
[kN/m]
0
0
0
Load combination 4
1.0 ┬Ę KFI ┬Ę (garch + g’¼üll) + 1.5 ┬Ę ╬▒ ┬Ę KFI ┬Ę qfk
Dead load from arch, garch
[kN/m]
11.7
11.8
11.6
Live load from service vehicle, Qserv
[kN]
0
0
0
Live load from crowded loading, qfk
[kN/m]
19.8
19.8
19.8
Load combination 5
1.2 ┬Ę KFI ┬Ę (garch + g’¼üll)
Dead load, garch
[kN/m]
11.7
11.8
11.6
Live load from service vehicle, Qserv
[kN]
0
0
0
Live load from crowded loading, qfk
[kN/m]
0
0
0
Figure C.6: Drawing of the forces and hinges of the arch.
Page XXIII
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
The general formulas are made with all forces present, see ’¼ügure C.6, where after each load case can
be calculated with the forces given in table C.2 for SLS and C.3 for ULS.
Moment of the forces about hinge A:
RB ┬Ę L ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę L2
2 ŌłÆqfk ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę 3 ┬Ę L
4
ŌłÆQserv ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆg’¼üll(L) ┬Ę L
2 = 0
ŌćĢ
RB = garch ┬Ę L2
2 + qfk ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę 3┬ĘL
4 + Qserv ┬Ę L
4 + g’¼üll(L) ┬Ę L
2
L
(C.40)
Moment of the forces about hinge B:
RA ┬Ę L ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę L2
2 ŌłÆqfk ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆQserv ┬Ę 3 ┬Ę L
4
ŌłÆg’¼üll(L) ┬Ę L
2 = 0
ŌćĢ
RA = garch ┬Ę L2
2 + qfk ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 + Qserv ┬Ę 3┬ĘL
4 + g’¼üll(L) ┬Ę L
2
L
(C.41)
Moment of the forces left of hinge C about hinge C:
Figure C.7: Drawing of the reactions left of hinge C
HA ┬Ę h ŌłÆRA ┬Ę L
2 + garch ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 + Qserv ┬Ę L
4 + g’¼üll
L
2

┬Ę C’¼üll.x
L
2

= 0
ŌćĢ
HA =
RA ┬Ę L
2 ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆQserv ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆg’¼üll

L
2

┬Ę C’¼üll.x

L
2

h
(C.42)
Page XXIV
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Moment of the forces right of hinge C about hinge C:
Figure C.8: Drawing of the reactions right of of hinge C.
HB ┬Ę h ŌłÆRB ┬Ę L
2 + (garch + qfk) ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 + g’¼üll
L
2

┬Ę C’¼üll.x
L
2

= 0
ŌćĢ
HB =
RB ┬Ę L
2 ŌłÆ(garch + qfk) ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆg’¼üll

L
2

┬Ę C’¼üll.x

L
2

h
(C.43)
The calculations can be checked with horizontal and vertical equilibrium.
HA ŌłÆHB = 0
RB + RA ŌłÆgDL ┬Ę L ŌłÆqfk ┬Ę L
2 ŌłÆQserv ŌłÆg’¼üll(L) = 0
(C.44)
Since the arches N1 and S1 has the same span, rise and loads, they will also have the same reaction
forces. The reaction forces is largest for arch S54. The results for this arch for every load combination
at ULS is shown in table C.4. The results for the other arches and for SLS is shown in appendix F.
Table C.4: Reaction forces for arch S54 in ULS for the ’¼üve load cases
LC 1
LC 2
LC 3
LC 4
LC 5
Vertical reaction force in A, RA
1646.5
1624.5
1520.6
1776.0
1520.3
Vertical reaction force in B, RB
1646.5
1733.4
1421.6
1683.9
759.8
Horizontal reaction force in A, HA
4597.7
5070.9
4231.3
4671.0
3578.2
Horizontal reaction force in B, HB
4597.7
5070.9
4231.3
4671.0
3578.2
Page XXV
==PAGE:96==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
C.5
Bending moment
The bending moment is calculated for the left side before and after the concentrated force Qserv
from the service vehicle and for the right side.
The left side before the concentrated force

0 m to L
4

:
ML1(x) = RA ┬Ę x ŌłÆHA ┬Ę y(x) ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę x2
2 ŌłÆg’¼üll(x) ┬Ę (x ŌłÆC’¼üll.x(x))
(C.45)
The left side after the concentrated force

L
4 to L
2

:
ML2(x) = RA ┬Ę x ŌłÆHA ┬Ę y(x) ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę x2
2 ŌłÆg’¼üll(x) ┬Ę (x ŌłÆC’¼üll.x(x)) ŌłÆqserv ┬Ę

x ŌłÆL
4

(C.46)
The right side

L
2 to L

:
MR(x) = RB┬Ę(L ŌłÆx)ŌłÆHB┬Ęy (L ŌłÆx)ŌłÆ(garch+qserv)┬Ę
 
(L ŌłÆx)2
2
!
ŌłÆg’¼üll(LŌłÆx)┬Ę((LŌłÆx)ŌłÆC’¼üll.x(LŌłÆx))
(C.47)
The largest moments is created in arch S54. Therefore the results for the bending moment distri-
bution is shown for the ’¼üve load combinations for arch S54 in ULS. The rest of the results can be
seen in appendix F.
C.5.1
Results of bending moment distributions for arch S54 in ULS
Figure C.9: Moment distribution for arch S54 load combination 1
Maximum positive moment 1296.9 kN ┬Ę m, maximum negative moment 0.0 kN ┬Ę m.
Page XXVI
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Figure C.10: Moment distribution for arch S54 load combination 2
Maximum positive moment 1310.7 kN ┬Ę m, maximum negative moment ŌłÆ43.6 kN ┬Ę m.
Figure C.11: Moment distribution for arch S54 load combination 3
Maximum positive moment 1587.5 kN ┬Ę m, maximum negative moment ŌłÆ50.9 kN ┬Ę m.
Page XXVII
==PAGE:98==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Figure C.12: Moment distribution for arch S54 load combination 4
Maximum positive moment 1544.3 kN ┬Ę m, maximum negative moment ŌłÆ187.6 kN ┬Ę m.
Figure C.13: Moment distribution for arch S54 load combination 5
Maximum positive moment 1880.1 kN ┬Ę m, maximum negative moment ŌłÆ679.0 kN ┬Ę m.
C.6
Normal force
The normal force is calculated for the left side of the arch, see eq. C.49, and for the right side of
the arch, see eq. C.50. The calculations depends on the horizontal and vertical force for each point,
x, along the arch, see ’¼ügure C.14.
Page XXVIII
==PAGE:99==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Figure C.14: The left picture is a cut of the arch the distance x along the horizontal axis. The
right picture is a cut of the arch the distance L ŌłÆx along the horizontal axis. The normal force is
depending on the horizontal and vertical force in the point that is cut.
First, the angle between horizontal and normal on the arch is found by the derivative of the equation
of the circle, see eq. C.48.
╬Ė = d
dx y(x) = arctan
’Ż½
’ŻŁ
ŌłÆ(2 ┬Ę x) + L
q
ŌłÆ8┬ĘL2┬Ęh2ŌłÆL2
16┬Ęh2
+ 4 ┬Ę L ┬Ę x ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę x2 + h2
’ŻČ
’ŻĖ
(C.48)
Normal force for the left side of the arch:
NL(x) = ŌłÆHL(x) ┬Ę cos(╬Ė(x)) ŌłÆVL(x) ┬Ę sin(╬Ė(x))
(C.49)
Normal force for the right side of the arch:
NR(x) = ŌłÆHR(L ŌłÆx) ┬Ę cos(╬Ė(L ŌłÆx)) ŌłÆVR(L ŌłÆx) ┬Ę sin(╬Ė(L ŌłÆx))
(C.50)
For the left side, the normal force is calculated both before and after the concentrated force P from
the live load. This is done by using eq. C.49 with di’¼Ćerent vertical V(x) and horizontal forces H(x),
depending on whether the calculation is before or after the concentrated force. The vertical and
horizontal forces before the concentrated force can be seen in eq. C.51 and C.52, while the vertical
and horizontal forces after the concentrated force can be seen in eq. C.53 and C.54.
The left side before the concentrated force

0 m to L
4

:
VL1(x) = garch ┬Ę x + g’¼üll(x) ŌłÆRA
(C.51)
Page XXIX
==PAGE:100==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
HL1(x) = ŌłÆHA
(C.52)
The left side after the concentrated force

L
4 to L
2

:
VL2(x) = garch ┬Ę x + g’¼üll(x) + Qserv ŌłÆRA
(C.53)
HL2(x) = ŌłÆHA
(C.54)
The vertical V(x) and horizontal forces H(x) when calculating the normal force for the right side is
seen in eq. C.55 and C.56.
The right side

L
2 to L

:
VR(x) = (garch + qfk ┬Ę x + g’¼üll(x) ŌłÆRB
(C.55)
HR(x) = ŌłÆHB
(C.56)
The largest normal forces is created in arch S54. Therefore the results for the normal force distribution
is shown for the ’¼üve load combinations for arch S54 in ULS. The rest of the results can be seen in
appendix F.
C.6.1
Results of normal force distributions for arch S54 in ULS
Figure C.15: Normal force distribution for arch S54 load combination 1
Maximum normal force 3438.1 kN ┬Ę m, minimum normal force 3216.5 kN ┬Ę m.
Page XXX
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Figure C.16: Normal force distribution for arch S54 load combination 2
Maximum normal force 4155.2 kN ┬Ę m, minimum normal force 3919.4 kN ┬Ę m.
Figure C.17: Normal force distribution for arch S54 load combination 3
Maximum normal force 3289.1 kN ┬Ę m, minimum normal force 3075.6 kN ┬Ę m.
Page XXXI
==PAGE:102==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Figure C.18: Normal force distribution for arch S54 load combination 4
Maximum normal force 3755.4 kN ┬Ę m, minimum normal force 3518.0 kN ┬Ę m.
Figure C.19: Normal force distribution for arch S54 load combination 5
Maximum normal force 2418.6 kN ┬Ę m, minimum normal force 2190.8 kN ┬Ę m.
C.7
Flexural sti’¼Ćness
The following is known:
Thickness of the SL-deck, t = 270 mm
Width of the SL-deck, WSL = 2.4 m
The characteristic compressive strength of regular concrete, fck = 55 MPa
Cross section area of regular concrete Ac = 0.312 m2
Cross section area of LAC blocks ALAC = 0.336 m2
Page XXXII
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Elastic modulus for the LAC blocks, ELAC = 2.1 GPa
The mean compressive strength of the regular concrete can be calculated by eq. C.57, from (ŌĆ£DS/EN
1992-1-1ŌĆØ, 2008, table 3.1).
fcm = fck + 8 MPa
(C.57)
The secant modulus of elasticity of the regular concrete can be calculated by eq. C.58, from (ŌĆ£DS/EN
1992-1-1ŌĆØ, 2008, table 3.1).
Ecm =
 
22 ┬Ę
fcm[MPa]
10
0.3!
[GPa]
(C.58)
The moment of inertia and ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness is ’¼ürst found for axis 1 and 2, see ’¼ügure C.20.
Figure C.20: Axes on the cross section for the calculation of the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness
The ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness for axis 1 has been extracted from the Mathcad program which calculate SL-
deck cross-sections. The ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness of axis 1 is EI1 = 72.5 MN ┬Ę m2.
The moment of inertia for axis 2 is calculated with the approximation of a rectangular, where the
thickness of the regular concrete and the thickness of the LAC blocks is as described by eq. C.59
and C.60.
tc = t ┬Ę
Ac
Ac + ALAC
(C.59)
tLAC = t ┬Ę
ALAC
Ac + ALAC
(C.60)
The moment of inertia for axis 2 is then calculated for the regular concrete and for the LAC blocks
by eq. C.61.
Page XXXIII
==PAGE:104==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
I2.c = 1
12 ┬Ę tc ┬Ę W 2
SL
I2.LAC = 1
12 ┬Ę tLAC ┬Ę W 2
SL
(C.61)
The total ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness for axis 2 is calculated with eq. C.62, which become EI2 = 6068.7 MN ┬Ę m2.
EI2 = I2.c ┬Ę Ecm + I2.LAC ┬Ę ELAC
(C.62)
The ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness can then be found for axis x and y. Since the southern structure is not tilted,
and therefore have no angle ŽĢ, the ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness for axis x and y will be the same as for axis 1
and 2 respectively. This is not the case for the northern structure which do have a slope. This is
the slope of the cone which can be calculated by eq. C.63. The ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness of axis x and y can
then be calculated by eq. C.64 and C.65
ŽĢ = arctan
hN46 ŌłÆhN1
46 ┬Ę WSL

(C.63)
Where hN46 = 3.5 m is the rise of arch N46 and hN1 = 2.6 m is the rise of arch N1. The width of
the SL-deck is WSL = 2.4 m and the number of arches is 46.
EIx = 1
2 ┬Ę (EI1 + EI2) + 1
2 ┬Ę (EI1 ŌłÆEI2) ┬Ę cos(2 ┬Ę ŽĢ)
(C.64)
EIy = 1
2 ┬Ę (EI1 + EI2) ŌłÆ1
2 ┬Ę (EI1 ŌłÆEI2) ┬Ę cos(2 ┬Ę ŽĢ)
(C.65)
C.8
Most critical load case
The strains of the cross section is found with NavierŌĆÖs formula, see eq.
C.66.
Plus is used in
compression and is therefore used at the bottom of the cross-section where minus is used in tension
which is at the top of the cross-section.
╬Ą = N
AE ┬▒ M
EI ┬Ę y
(C.66)
Hereafter the stresses is found by multiplying with YoungŌĆÖs modulus for the material in question. For
the top of the cross section, this is YoungŌĆÖs modulus for regular concrete, Ecm = 38 214 MPa and for
the bottom of the cross-section it is YoungŌĆÖs modulus for light aggregate concrete ELAC = 2100 MPa.
The axial sti’¼Ćness is retracted from the Mathcad program and is, AE = 13 006 MN. The distance
from the top of the cross section to the centroid is also extracted from the Mathcad program,
yt = 104 mm. The distance to the bottom of the cross section is then the thickness of the cross
section minus the distance from the centroid to the top, yb = 166 mm. The ’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness used
Page XXXIV
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
for the southern structure is extracted from the Mathcad program too, EI = 72.5 MN ┬Ę m2. The
’¼éexural sti’¼Ćness for the northern structure is calculated in appendix C.7, EI = 72.9 MN ┬Ę m2.
C.8.1
Results for the ’¼ürst cross-section
Results for the initial cross section of width 2400 mm and thickness 270 mm. The maximum positive
and negative moment with corresponding normal force along with maximum positive and negative
normal force with corresponding moment has been found for every load case in both ULD and SLS.
Hereafter the stresses for maximum positive and negative moment and normal forces are calculated
in both ULS and SLS. The results for ULS is shown in the following ’¼üve tables, and the results for
SLS can be seen in appendix F.
Table C.5: Maximum positive and negative moment with corresponding normal force along with
maximum positive and negative normal force with corresponding moment for ULS
Moment
kN ┬Ę m
Corresponding
Normal force kN
Normal force
kN
Corresponding
Moment kN ┬Ę m
Max
Min
For max
For min
Max
Min
For max
For min
N1/S1
LG1
641.94
0.00
1684.21
1855.34
1855.34
1637.52
0.00
114.45
LG2
668.60
-8.74
2114.00
2079.24
2310.04
2077.62
0.00
320.91
LG3
953.22
-48.96
1679.25
1652.28
1865.02
1643.39
0.00
658.46
LG4
767.60
-98.58
1841.11
1796.77
2024.46
1790.96
0.00
234.93
LG5
941.82
-351.70
1152.55
1139.75
1339.72
1115.96
0.00
494.34
N46
LG1
1159.60
0.00
2095.21
2385.73
2385.74
2011.11
0.00
285.05
LG2
1079.19
-17.13
2443.34
2358.50
2735.37
2356.44
0.00
405.46
LG3
1372.01
-40.23
1970.74
1926.18
2273.69
1915.67
0.00
844.51
LG4
1276.20
-109.93
2184.65
2113.83
2487.87
2106.64
0.00
387.98
LG5
1711.45
-645.10
1357.86
1341.92
1688.08
1302.19
0.00
945.75
S54
LG1
1296.90
0.00
3268.23
3438.13
3438.13
3216.49
0.00
226.79
LG2
1310.73
-43.59
3978.35
3920.98
4155.22
3919.41
0.00
179.50
LG3
1587.50
-50.95
3106.12
3081.60
3289.06
3075.59
0.00
982.35
LG4
1544.32
-187.59
3568.65
3523.64
3755.41
3517.98
0.00
486.27
LG5
1880.05
-679.00
2227.96
2214.33
2418.59
2190.82
0.00
1018.56
Page XXXV
==PAGE:106==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Table C.6: Stresses for minimum moment at the top of the cross-section, at the bottom for light
aggregate concrete, at the bottom for regular concrete and at the pre-tensioning line in ULS [MPa]
Top
Bot LAC
Bot Reg
Layer 1
N1/S1
LG1
5.38
0.30
5.38
5.38
LG2
5.55
0.38
6.84
6.64
LG3
2.11
0.51
9.35
8.22
LG4
-0.18
0.79
14.38
12.11
LG5
-15.94
1.98
36.01
27.93
N46
LG1
6.92
0.38
6.92
6.92
LG2
5.90
0.46
8.43
8.04
LG3
3.38
0.51
9.33
8.40
LG4
0.12
0.90
16.35
13.83
LG5
-31.40
3.51
63.89
49.07
S54
LG1
9.97
0.55
9.97
9.97
LG2
8.99
0.85
15.42
14.42
LG3
6.15
0.75
13.67
12.50
LG4
-0.04
1.52
27.66
23.35
LG5
-30.73
3.82
69.57
53.97
Table C.7: Stresses for maximum moment at the top of the cross-section, at the bottom for light
aggregate concrete, at the bottom for regular concrete and at the pre-tensioning line in ULS [MPa]
Top
Bot LAC
Bot Reg
Layer 1
N1/S1
LG1
40.00
-3.01
-54.82
-40.07
LG2
42.71
-3.08
-56.05
-40.69
LG3
57.02
-4.60
-83.78
-61.88
LG4
47.33
-3.63
-66.05
-48.41
LG5
54.87
-4.63
-84.25
-62.61
N46
LG1
69.52
-5.59
-101.77
-75.13
LG2
66.13
-5.13
-93.28
-68.49
LG3
80.78
-6.70
-121.89
-90.36
LG4
76.15
-6.17
-112.36
-83.03
LG5
97.57
-8.53
-155.24
-115.91
S54
LG1
80.43
-6.11
-111.14
-81.34
LG2
83.25
-6.07
-110.37
-80.25
LG3
95.86
-7.62
-138.64
-102.16
LG4
94.84
-7.32
-133.28
-97.80
LG5
109.32
-9.25
-168.39
-125.19
Page XXXVI
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX C. DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Table C.8: Stresses for minimum normal forces at the top of the cross-section, at the bottom for
light aggregate concrete, at the bottom for regular concrete and at the pre-tensioning line in ULS
[MPa]
Top
Bot LAC
Bot Reg
Layer 1
N1/S1
LG1
11.01
-0.32
-5.90
-3.27
LG2
23.58
-1.31
-23.82
-16.45
LG3
40.79
-3.10
-56.47
-41.34
LG4
18.05
-0.92
-16.66
-11.26
LG5
30.28
-2.35
-42.74
-31.38
N46
LG1
21.43
-1.14
-20.68
-14.13
LG2
29.02
-1.70
-30.88
-21.56
LG3
51.76
-4.01
-72.99
-53.58
LG4
27.33
-1.65
-29.97
-21.06
LG5
55.52
-4.63
-84.18
-62.45
S54
LG1
21.73
-0.65
-11.76
-6.55
LG2
21.19
-0.29
-5.33
-1.20
LG3
62.66
-4.53
-82.44
-59.87
LG4
36.81
-1.92
-35.02
-23.85
LG5
62.08
-4.86
-88.38
-64.97
Table C.9: Stresses for maximum normal forces at the top of the cross-section, at the bottom for
light aggregate concrete, at the bottom for regular concrete and at the pre-tensioning line in ULS
[MPa]
Top
Bot LAC
Bot Reg
Layer 1
N1/S1
LG1
5.38
0.30
5.38
5.38
LG2
6.70
0.37
6.70
6.70
LG3
5.41
0.30
5.41
5.41
LG4
5.87
0.32
5.87
5.87
LG5
3.89
0.21
3.89
3.89
N46
LG1
6.92
0.38
6.92
6.92
LG2
7.93
0.44
7.93
7.93
LG3
6.59
0.36
6.59
6.59
LG4
7.21
0.40
7.21
7.21
LG5
4.90
0.27
4.90
4.90
S54
LG1
9.97
0.55
9.97
9.97
LG2
12.05
0.66
12.05
12.05
LG3
9.54
0.52
9.54
9.54
LG4
10.89
0.60
10.89
10.89
LG5
7.01
0.39
7.01
7.01
Page XXXVII
==PAGE:108==
==PAGE:109==
D
Final design proposal appendix
D.1
Change of circle radius at the ends
The last part of the arch is changing in radius, which can be seen on ’¼ügure D.1, along with the arch
if it had no radius change.
Figure D.1: Drawing of the arch with change in radius at the ends compared to without the change.
D.1.1
Calculation of the radius
The radius is calculated with the two assumptions that, the tangent of the two circles in the transition
should be the same and the tangent at the end of the arch should be vertical. A drawing of half the
arch and the circle with new radius can be seen in ’¼ügure D.2.
Page XXXIX
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIX D. FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL APPENDIX
Figure D.2: Drawing of the arch with change in radius at the ends compared to without the change.
First all the angles, ╬Ė2(x), ╬Ė3(x) and ╬Ė4(x) is found when knowing the angle ╬Ėci(x) that is the angle
to tangent from horizontal on the arch in the point x2. This angle has been found in eq. C.48 in
appendix C.6.
╬Ė2(x2) = 90┬░ ŌłÆ╬Ėci(x2)
(D.1)
╬Ė3(x2) = 180┬░ ŌłÆ╬Ė2(x2)
2
(D.2)
╬Ė4(x2) = 90┬░ ŌłÆ╬Ė3(x2)
(D.3)
The length b(x) is found by the using sinus in the right angled triangle of (LC(x) ŌłÆy(x); x; b(x)),
see eq. D.4.
b(x2) =
x
sin(╬Ė4(x2))
(D.4)
The radius of the new circle end can now be found from the law of sinus, see eq. D.5.
R2(x2)
sin(╬Ė3(x2)) =
b(x2)
sin(╬Ė2(x2)) ŌćÆR2(x2) = b(x2) ┬Ę sin(╬Ė3(x2))
sin(╬Ė2(x2))
(D.5)
The radius is depending on what distance x2 that is chosen to switch from the new circle to the old
arch.
D.1.2
Calculation of the circle equation
To calculate with this new circle at the ends, the equation is needed for it in the same coordinate-
system as for the rest of the arch. This coordinate-system has origin in the old arch beginning,
Page XL
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX D. FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL APPENDIX
marked O in ’¼ügure D.2.
The equation is found the same way as for the arch the ’¼ürst time, by having three points on the circle.
These three points are the beginning of the circle, A(0; ŌłÆ(LC(x2)ŌłÆy(x2))), the point where the arch
and circle meet, B(x2; y(x2)) and the point that makes up half a circle C(2 ┬Ę R2(x2); ŌłÆ(LC(x2) ŌłÆ
y(x2))). Where y(x) is the equation for the arch, 2.2, R2(x) is the equation for the new radius,
D.5, and LC(x) is the distance seen in ’¼ügure D.2, which is calculated by Pythagoras in the triangle
LC(x) ŌłÆy(x); x; b(x), see eq. D.6.
LC(x) =
q
b(x)2 ŌłÆx2
(D.6)
The three points is then inserted in eq. D.7.
x2 + y2 + D ┬Ę x + E ┬Ę y = F
(D.7)
This gives the three equations D.8, D.9 and D.10.
02 + (ŌłÆ(LC(x2) ŌłÆy(x2)))2 + D ┬Ę 0 + E ┬Ę (ŌłÆ(LC(x2) ŌłÆy(x2))) = F
(D.8)
x2
2 + y(x2)2 + D ┬Ę x2 + E ┬Ę y(x2) = F
(D.9)
(2 ┬Ę R2(x2))2 + (ŌłÆ(LC(x2) ŌłÆy(x2)))2 + D ┬Ę (2 ┬Ę R2(x2)) + E ┬Ę (ŌłÆ(LC(x2) ŌłÆy(x2))) = F
(D.10)
The three equations D.8, D.9 and D.10 are solved for the three un-known D, E and F, which gives
eq. D.11, D.12 and D.13.
D(x2) = ŌłÆ(2 ┬Ę R2(x2))
(D.11)
E(x2) = x2
2 + y(x2)2 ŌłÆ(2 ┬Ę R2(x2)) ┬Ę x2 ŌłÆ(ŌłÆ(LC(x2) ŌłÆy(x2)))2
ŌłÆLC(x2)
(D.12)
F(x2) = (ŌłÆ(LC(x2)ŌłÆy(x2)))2+
 
x2
2 + y(x2)2 ŌłÆ(2 ┬Ę R2(x2)) ┬Ę x ŌłÆ(ŌłÆ(LC(x2) ŌłÆy(x2)))2
ŌłÆLC(x2)
!
┬Ę(ŌłÆ(LC(x2)ŌłÆy(x2)))
(D.13)
The three equations D.11, D.12 and D.13 are depending on the distance x2 from the origin, that the
new circle are changing to the old arch.
y is now isolated in eq. D.7.
Page XLI
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX D. FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL APPENDIX
y2(x) =
p
ŌłÆ(4 ┬Ę x2) ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę D(x2) ┬Ę x + R(x2)2 + 4 ┬Ę F(x2) ŌłÆE(x2)
2
(D.14)
Equation D.14 is the equation for the new circle ends when inserting eq. D.11, D.12 and D.13,
depending on the distance x2 that the radius change.
D.1.3
Equations for the ’¼ülling
Because of the radius change, there will be more ’¼ülling on top, which will be calculate after the same
method as in appendix C.2.2.
Components for the square:
The area and horizontal center of the square from origin:
Asq(x) = (LC(x2) + h ŌłÆy(x2)) ┬Ę x
(D.15)
Csq.x = x
2
(D.16)
Components for the circle:
Lchord(x) =
q
x2 + (|y2(0)| + y2(x))2
(D.17)
╬▒ci(x) = arcsin
 
Lchord(x)
2 ┬Ę R2(x2)
!
(D.18)
xcir(x) =
4 ┬Ę R2(x2) ŌłŚsin(╬▒ci(x))3
3 ┬Ę (2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci(x) ŌłÆsin(2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci(x)))
(D.19)
cBC(x) = xcir(x) ┬Ę sin(180┬░ ŌłÆ90┬░ ŌłÆ╬▒cir(x))
sin(90┬░)
(D.20)
The area and horizontal center of the circle cut from origin:
Acir(x) = R2(x)2
2
┬Ę (2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci(x) ŌłÆsin(2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci(x)))
(D.21)
Ccir.x = |R2(x2)| ŌłÆxBC(x)]
(D.22)
Components for the triangle:
The area and horizontal center of the triangle from origin:
Page XLII
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX D. FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL APPENDIX
Atri(x) = 1
2 ┬Ę x ┬Ę (|y2(0)| + y2(x))
(D.23)
Ctri.x = 2
3 ┬Ę x
(D.24)
Common centroid:
The common centroid of the ’¼ülling for the new circle at the ends is now found by eq. D.25. This is
the distance from the point x and to the centroid.
C’¼üll2(x) = x ŌłÆ
 
Asq(x) ┬Ę Csq.x(x) ŌłÆAcir(x) ┬Ę Csir.x(x) ŌłÆAtri(x) ┬Ę Ctri.x(x)
Asq(x) ŌłÆAcir(x) ŌłÆAtri(x)
!
(D.25)
Dead load of the ’¼ülling:
The dead load of the ’¼ülling beneath the crown is then calculated by the total area times the width
of the SL-deck, de density of the ’¼ülling and the acceleration of gravity.
g’¼üll2(x) = (Asq(x) ŌłÆAcir(x) ŌłÆAtri(x)) ┬Ę WSL ┬Ę Žü’¼üll ┬Ę g
(D.26)
D.1.4
Reactions
A drawing of the forces working on the arch can be seen in ’¼ügure D.3.
Figure D.3: Drawing of the forces working on the arch.
Moment about hinge A:
RB =
garch ┬Ę L2
2 + g’¼üll

L
2 ŌłÆx2

┬Ę

L
2 ŌłÆC’¼üll.x

L
2 ŌłÆx2

+ g’¼üll2(x2) ┬Ę (x2 ŌłÆC’¼üll2(x2))
L
(D.27)
Moment about hinge B:
Page XLIII
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX D. FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL APPENDIX
RA =
garch ┬Ę L2
2 + g’¼üll

L
2 ŌłÆx2

┬Ę

L
2 + C’¼üll.x

L
2 ŌłÆx2

+ g’¼üll2(x2) ┬Ę (L ŌłÆ(x2 ŌłÆC’¼üll2(x2)))
L
(D.28)
Moment of the forces left of hinge C about hinge C:
Ha =
RA ┬Ę L
2 ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆg’¼üll

L
2 ŌłÆx2

┬Ę C’¼üll.x

L
2 ŌłÆx2

ŌłÆg’¼üll2(x2) ┬Ę

C’¼üll2(x2) +

L
2 ŌłÆx2

LC(x2) + h ŌłÆy(x2)
(D.29)
Moment of the forces right of hinge C about hinge C:
HB = RB ┬Ę L
2 ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4
LC(x2) + h ŌłÆy(x2)
(D.30)
D.1.5
Bending moment
Four equations for the bending moment is created, two for the the left side and two for the right
side. The two equations for each side is with radius R2 and radius R.
ML1(x) = RA ┬Ę x ŌłÆHA ┬Ę (|y2(0)| + y2(x)) ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę x2
2 ŌłÆg’¼üll2(x) ┬Ę C’¼üll2(x)
(D.31)
ML2(x) =RA ┬Ę x ŌłÆHA ┬Ę (y(x) + (LC(x2) ŌłÆy(x2))) ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę x2
2
ŌłÆg’¼üll.bot(x ŌłÆx2) ┬Ę C’¼üll.x(x ŌłÆx2) ŌłÆg’¼üll2(x2) ┬Ę (C’¼üll2(x2) + (x ŌłÆx2))
(D.32)
MR1(x) = RB ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx) ŌłÆHB ┬Ę y(L ŌłÆx) ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx)2
2
(D.33)
MR2(x) = RB ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx) ŌłÆHB ┬Ę (|y2(0)| + y2(L ŌłÆx)) ŌłÆgarch ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx)2
2
(D.34)
D.1.6
Normal forces
The normal forces is also calculated with four equations.
NL1 = ŌłÆHL1(x) ┬Ę cos(╬Ėci.2(x)) ŌłÆVL1(x) ┬Ę sin(╬Ėci.2(x))
(D.35)
NL2 = ŌłÆHL2(x) ┬Ę cos(╬Ėci(x)) ŌłÆVL2(x) ┬Ę sin(╬Ėci(x))
(D.36)
NR1 = ŌłÆHR1(L ŌłÆx) ┬Ę cos(╬Ėci(x)) ŌłÆVR1(x) ┬Ę sin(╬Ėci(x))
(D.37)
NR2 = ŌłÆHR2(L ŌłÆx) ┬Ę cos(╬Ėci.2(L ŌłÆx)) ŌłÆVR2(L ŌłÆx) ┬Ę sin(╬Ėci.2(L ŌłÆx))
(D.38)
Page XLIV
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX D. FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL APPENDIX
Where
VL1 = garch ┬Ę x + g’¼üll2(x) ŌłÆRA
HL1 = ŌłÆHA
(D.39)
VL2 = garch ┬Ę x + g’¼üll2(x2) + g’¼üll.bot(x ŌłÆx2) ŌłÆRA
HL2 = ŌłÆHA
(D.40)
VR1 = garch ┬Ę x ŌłÆRB
HR1 = ŌłÆHB
(D.41)
VR2 = garch ┬Ę x ŌłÆRB
HR2 = ŌłÆHB
(D.42)
D.2
Additional half arches with tension tie
Additional half arches is created to take the horizontal reaction forces at supports A and B.
D.2.1
De’¼ünition of the circle curve
The equation for the half arch from A to D is de’¼üned as a function of x. Then the half arch from
B to E can be de’¼üned as the same function but of L ŌłÆx, since they are symmetric.
To de’¼üne the circle equation, three points on the circle is needed. The ’¼ürst is the starting point,
which is at the support A: (x1; y1) = (0; 0). The second point on the circle is where the arch should
end at point D: (x2; y2) = (ŌłÆL2; h’¼üll). The last point is a ’¼üctional point the horizontal distance T
from the support (x3; y3) = (ŌłÆT; 0). If T = 2 ┬Ę L2 the half arch will end horizontally at D. This
created large bending moments in the additional arch since the rise to span ratio is high. Therefore
a rise to span ratio about 0.1 is wished. A drawing of the dimensions can be seen in ’¼ügure D.4.
Figure D.4: Drawing of the additional half arch with lengths.
The equation for the circle is given in eq. D.43.
Page XLV
==PAGE:116==
APPENDIX D. FINAL DESIGN PROPOSAL APPENDIX
x2 + y2 + D ┬Ę x + E ┬Ę y = F
(D.43)
The three points de’¼üned in inserted in the circle equation D.43, and the three equations with three
unknown, D, E and F is found, see eq. D.44, D.45 and D.46.
D = T
(D.44)
E = ŌłÆL22 ŌłÆL2 ┬Ę T + h2
’¼üll
h’¼üll
(D.45)
F = 0
(D.46)
Now y is isolated in eq. D.43 and eq. D.44, D.45 and D.46 are inserted. This gives the equation
for the half arch between A and D depending on x, see eq. D.47.
yAD(x) =
p
ŌłÆ(4 ┬Ę x2) ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę D ┬Ę x + E2 + 4 ┬Ę F ŌłÆE
2
(D.47)
The equation for the half arch from B to E is then eq. D.47 but of the distance LŌłÆx, see eq. D.48.
yAD(x) =
p
ŌłÆ(4 ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx)2) ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę D ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx) + E2 + 4 ┬Ę F ŌłÆE
2
(D.48)
The angle at an arbitrary point on the arch between the normal and horizontal is also found. This is
done by ’¼ünding the derivative of eq. D.47 and D.48 and setting it equal to the tangent of the angle,
d
dxy(x) = tan(╬Ė). The results can be seen in eq. D.49 and D.50.
╬ĖAD(x) = arctan
’Ż½
’ŻŁ
ŌłÆ2 ┬Ę x + L
q
ŌłÆ8┬ĘL2┬Ęh2ŌłÆL4
16┬Ęh2
+ 4 ┬Ę L ┬Ę x ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę x2 + h2
’ŻČ
’ŻĖ
(D.49)
╬ĖBE(x) = arctan
’Ż½
’ŻŁ
ŌłÆ2 ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx) + L
q
ŌłÆ8┬ĘL2┬Ęh2ŌłÆL4
16┬Ęh2
+ 4 ┬Ę L ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx) ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx)2 + h2
’ŻČ
’ŻĖ
(D.50)
Page XLVI
==PAGE:117==
E
Final design speci’¼ücations appendix
E.1
Calculation of the ’¼ülling on the additional arches
The equation for the ’¼ülling will be calculate after the same method as in appendix C.2.2.
First the radius and coordinates at center of the circle is needed of the half arches. This can be
found from the three known points on the circle de’¼üned in section D.2.1. The x distance to the
center can be found by eq. E.1, the y distance to the center can be found by eq E.2 and the radius
can be found by eq. E.3.
xcenter = ŌłÆB
2 ┬Ę A
(E.1)
ycenter = ŌłÆC
2 ┬Ę A
(E.2)
R =
s
B2 + C2 ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę A ┬Ę D
4 ┬Ę A2
(E.3)
Where
A = x1 ┬Ę (y2 ŌłÆy3) ŌłÆy1 ┬Ę (x2 ŌłÆx3) + x2 ┬Ę y3 ŌłÆx3 ┬Ę y2
B = (x2
1 + y2
1) ┬Ę (y3 ŌłÆy2) + (x2
2 + y2
2) ┬Ę (y1 ŌłÆy3) + (x2
3 + y2
3) ┬Ę (y2 ŌłÆy1)
C = (x2
1 + y2
1) ┬Ę (x2 ŌłÆx3) + (x2
2 + y2
2) ┬Ę (x3 ŌłÆx1) + (x2
3 + y2
3) ┬Ę (x1 ŌłÆx2)
D = (x2
1 + y2
1) ┬Ę (x3 ┬Ę y2 ŌłÆx2 ┬Ę y3) + (x2
2 + y2
2) ┬Ę (x1 ┬Ę y3 ŌłÆx3 ┬Ę y1)
+ (x2
3 + y2
3) ┬Ę (x2 ┬Ę y1 ŌłÆx1y2)
(E.4)
Page XLVII
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX E. FINAL DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Now the common centroid and the dead load of the ’¼ülling can be found from the di’¼Ćerent geomet-
rical components.
E.1.1
For the half arch between A and D
Components for the circle:
Lchord.AD(x) =
q
(L2 ŌłÆ|x|)2 + (h’¼üll ŌłÆyAD(x))2
(E.5)
╬▓AD(x) = arccos
|xcenter| ŌłÆ|x|
RAD

(E.6)
╬▒ci.AD(x) = arcsin
 
Lchord.AD(x)
2 ┬Ę RAD
!
(E.7)
xcir.AD(x) =
4 ┬Ę RAD ┬Ę sin(╬▒ci.AD(x))3
3 ┬Ę (2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci.AD(x) ŌłÆsin(2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci.AD(x)))
(E.8)
cBC.AD(x) = xcir.AD(x) ┬Ę sin(180┬░ ŌłÆ90┬░ ŌłÆ(╬▓AD(x) + ╬▒cir.AD(x)))
sin(90┬░)
(E.9)
The area and horizontal center of the circle cut from origin:
Acir.AD(x) = R2
AD
2
┬Ę (2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci.AD(x) ŌłÆsin(2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci.AD(x)))
(E.10)
Ccir.AD.x = (|xcenter| ŌłÆ|x|) ŌłÆxBC.AD(x)
(E.11)
Components for the triangle:
The area and horizontal center of the triangle from origin:
Atri.AD(x) = 1
2 ┬Ę (L2 ŌłÆ|x|) ┬Ę (h’¼üll ŌłÆyAD(x))
(E.12)
Ctri.AD.x = 1
3 ┬Ę (L2 ŌłÆ|x|)
(E.13)
Common centroid:
The common centroid of the ’¼ülling for the new circle at the ends is now found by eq. E.14. This is
the distance from the point x and to the centroid.
Page XLVIII
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX E. FINAL DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
C’¼üll.AD(x) = Atri.AD(x) ┬Ę Ctri.AD.x(x) ŌłÆAcir.AD(x) ┬Ę Ccir.AD.x(x)
Atri.AD(x) ŌłÆAcir.AD(x)
(E.14)
Dead load of the ’¼ülling:
The dead load of the ’¼ülling is calculated by the total area times the width of the SL-deck, the density
of the ’¼ülling and the acceleration of gravity.
g’¼üll.AD(x) = (Atri.AD(x) ŌłÆAcir.AD(x)) ┬Ę WSL ┬Ę Žü’¼üll ┬Ę g
(E.15)
E.1.2
For the half arch between B and E
Components for the circle:
Lchord.BE(x) =
q
((L + L2) ŌłÆx)2 + (h’¼üll ŌłÆyBE(x))2
(E.16)
╬▓BE(x) = arccos
xcenter ŌłÆx
RBE

(E.17)
╬▒ci.BE(x) = arcsin
 
Lchord.BE(x)
2 ┬Ę RBE
!
(E.18)
xcir.BE(x) =
4 ┬Ę RBE ┬Ę sin(╬▒ci.BE(x))3
3 ┬Ę (2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci.BE(x) ŌłÆsin(2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci.BE(x)))
(E.19)
cBC.BE(x) = xcir.BE(x) ┬Ę sin(180┬░ ŌłÆ90┬░ ŌłÆ(╬▓BE(x) + ╬▒cir.BE(x)))
sin(90┬░)
(E.20)
The area and horizontal center of the circle cut from origin:
Acir.BE(x) = R2
BE
2
┬Ę (2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci.BE(x) ŌłÆsin(2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci.BE(x)))
(E.21)
Ccir.BE.x = (xcenter ŌłÆx) ŌłÆxBC.BE(x)
(E.22)
Components for the triangle:
The area and horizontal center of the triangle from origin:
Atri.BE(x) = 1
2 ┬Ę ((L + L2) ŌłÆx) ┬Ę (h’¼üll ŌłÆyBE(x))
(E.23)
Page XLIX
==PAGE:120==
APPENDIX E. FINAL DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Ctri.BE.x = 1
3 ┬Ę ((L + L2) ŌłÆx)
(E.24)
Common centroid:
The common centroid of the ’¼ülling for the new circle at the ends is now found by eq. E.25. This is
the distance from the point x and to the centroid.
C’¼üll.BE(x) = Atri.BE(x) ┬Ę Ctri.BE.x(x) ŌłÆAcir.BE(x) ┬Ę Ccir.BE.x(x)
Atri.BE(x) ŌłÆAcir.BE(x)
(E.25)
Dead load of the ’¼ülling:
The dead load of the ’¼ülling is calculated by the total area times the width of the SL-deck, the density
of the ’¼ülling and the acceleration of gravity.
g’¼üll.BE(x) = (Atri.BE(x) ŌłÆAcir.BE(x)) ┬Ę WSL ┬Ę Žü’¼üll ┬Ę g
(E.26)
E.1.3
For the half arch between A and D for load group 5
For load group 5 the ’¼ülling is only in one side and only to the crown. Therefore another set of
equations is made for this scenario.
The horizontal distance on the additional arch from A to D that corresponds to the rise of the crown
on the main arch, h, should be known. This is the distance xAD, which can be found by solving
yAD(xAD) = h
xAD = D
2 +
ŌłÜ
D2 ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę E ┬Ę h ŌłÆ4 ┬Ę h2 + 4 ┬Ę F
2
(E.27)
Where D, E and F can be found by eq. D.44, D.45 and D.46.
Components for the circle:
Lchord.AD5(x) =
q
(|xAD| ŌłÆ|x|)2 + (h ŌłÆyAD(x))2
(E.28)
╬▓AD5(x) = arccos
|xcenter| ŌłÆ|x|
RAD

(E.29)
╬▒ci.AD5(x) = arcsin
 
Lchord.AD5(x)
2 ┬Ę RAD
!
(E.30)
xcir.AD5(x) =
4 ┬Ę RAD ┬Ę sin(╬▒ci.AD5(x))3
3 ┬Ę (2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci.AD5(x) ŌłÆsin(2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci.AD5(x)))
(E.31)
Page L
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX E. FINAL DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
cBC.AD5(x) = xcir.AD5(x) ┬Ę sin(180┬░ ŌłÆ90┬░ ŌłÆ(╬▓AD5(x) + ╬▒cir.AD5(x)))
sin(90┬░)
(E.32)
The area and horizontal center of the circle cut from origin:
Acir.AD5(x) = R2
AD
2
┬Ę (2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci.AD5(x) ŌłÆsin(2 ┬Ę ╬▒ci.AD5(x)))
(E.33)
Ccir.AD5.x = (|xcenter| ŌłÆ|x|) ŌłÆxBC.AD5(x)
(E.34)
Components for the triangle:
The area and horizontal center of the triangle from origin:
Atri.AD5(x) = 1
2 ┬Ę (|xAD| ŌłÆ|x|) ┬Ę (h ŌłÆyAD(x))
(E.35)
Ctri.AD5.x = 1
3 ┬Ę (|xAD| ŌłÆ|x|)
(E.36)
Common centroid:
The common centroid of the ’¼ülling for the new circle at the ends is now found by eq. E.37. This is
the distance from the point x and to the centroid.
C’¼üll.AD5(x) = Atri.AD5(x) ┬Ę Ctri.AD5.x(x) ŌłÆAcir.AD5(x) ┬Ę Ccir.AD.x(x)
Atri.AD5(x) ŌłÆAcir.AD5(x)
(E.37)
Dead load of the ’¼ülling:
The dead load of the ’¼ülling is calculated by the total area times the width of the SL-deck, the density
of the ’¼ülling and the acceleration of gravity.
g’¼üll.AD5(x) = (Atri.AD5(x) ŌłÆAcir.AD5(x)) ┬Ę WSL ┬Ę Žü’¼üll ┬Ę g
(E.38)
E.2
Calculation of the reaction forces
For the calculations of the reaction forces, the arch is divided into three pieces. The main arch, the
additional arch from A to D and the additional arch from B to E. The whole system can be seen
on ’¼ügure E.1.
Page LI
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX E. FINAL DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Figure E.1: Drawing of the reaction forces on the whole system.
Because the ’¼üll on the main arch now is above the crown, there will be a uniformly distributed load
from the ’¼üll above the crown in addition to the formula that were made for the ’¼üll to the crown.
This top ’¼ülling is added to the uniformly distributed load of the arch and is called gDL.
E.2.1
Main arch
First the reaction force contribution from the main arch is found.
Figure E.2: Drawing of the reaction forces on the main arch.
Moment of the forces between hinge A and B, about hinge A:
Page LII
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX E. FINAL DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
RB1 =
gDL ┬Ę L2
2 + qfk ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę 3┬ĘL
4 + Qserv ┬Ę L
4 + g’¼üll

L
2

┬Ę

L
2 ŌłÆC’¼üll.x

L
2

+ g’¼üll

L
2

┬Ę

L
2 + C’¼üll.x

L
2

L
(E.39)
Moment of the forces between hinge A and B about hinge B:
RA1 =
gDL ┬Ę L2
2 + qfk ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 + Qserv ┬Ę 3┬ĘL
4 + g’¼üll

L
2

┬Ę

L
2 ŌłÆC’¼üll.x

L
2

+ g’¼üll

L
2

┬Ę

L
2 + C’¼üll.x

L
2

L
(E.40)
Moment of the forces between hinge A and C, about hinge C:
HA1 =
RA1 ┬Ę L
2 ŌłÆgDL ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆQserv ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆg’¼üll

L
2

┬Ę C’¼üll.x

L
2

h
(E.41)
It is wished that there are no horizontal force at A:
HA2 = HA1
(E.42)
Moment of the forces between hinge C and B, about hinge C:
HB1 =
RB1 ┬Ę L
2 ŌłÆgDL ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆqfk ┬Ę L
2 ┬Ę L
4 ŌłÆg’¼üll

L
2

┬Ę C’¼üll.x

L
2

h
(E.43)
It is wished that there are no horizontal force at B:
HB2 = HB1
(E.44)
E.2.2
Additional arches
Second the reaction force contribution from the additional arches arch are found.
Figure E.3: Drawing of the reaction forces on the additional arches.
Page LIII
==PAGE:124==
APPENDIX E. FINAL DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Moment of the forces left of hinge A about hinge D:
RA2 = HA2 ┬Ę h’¼üll + garch.AD(0) ┬Ę L2
2 + g’¼üll.AD(0) ┬Ę (L2 ŌłÆC’¼üll.AD(0))
L2
(E.45)
Moment of the forces right of hinge B about hinge E:
RB2 = HB2 ┬Ę h’¼üll + garch.BE(L) ┬Ę L2
2 + g’¼üll.BE(L) ┬Ę (L2 ŌłÆC’¼üll.BE(L))
L2
(E.46)
Horizontal equilibrium left of hinge A:
RD = RA2 ŌłÆgarch.AD(0) ŌłÆg’¼üll.AD(0)
(E.47)
Horizontal equilibrium right of hinge B:
RE = RB2 ŌłÆgarch.BE(L) ŌłÆg’¼üll.BE(L)
(E.48)
Moment of the forces left of hinge A about hinge A:
HD = garch.AD(0) ┬Ę L2
2 + g’¼üll.AD(0) ┬Ę C’¼üll.AD(0) + RD ┬Ę L2
h’¼üll
(E.49)
Moment of the forces right of hinge B about hinge B:
HE = garch.BE(L) ┬Ę L2
2 + g’¼üll.BE(L) ┬Ę C’¼üll.BE(L) + RE ┬Ę L2
h’¼üll
(E.50)
E.2.3
Total reaction forces
The total vertical and horizontal reaction forces at A and B can then be calculated:
RA = RA1 + RA2
(E.51)
RB = RB1 + RB2
(E.52)
HA = HA1 ŌłÆHA2
(E.53)
Page LIV
==PAGE:125==
APPENDIX E. FINAL DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
HB = HB1 ŌłÆHB2
(E.54)
Check of the forces. Horizontal equilibrium:
HD + HA ŌłÆHB ŌłÆHE = 0
(E.55)
Vertical equilibrium:
RB +RAŌłÆgDL┬ĘLŌłÆqfk ┬Ę L
2 ŌłÆQserv ŌłÆg’¼üll
L
2

┬Ę2ŌłÆg’¼üll.AD(0)ŌłÆg’¼üll.BE(L)ŌłÆgarch.AD(0)ŌłÆgarch.BE(L)ŌłÆRD ŌłÆRE = 0
(E.56)
E.2.4
Reactions for load group 5
The reactions for load group 5 is calculated after same method as above, except the dead load is
only the dead load of the arches and the ’¼ülling up to the crown. The dead load of the ’¼ülling at the
additional arches is only on arch from A to D and is g’¼üll.AD5 given in section E.1.3.
E.3
Calculation of the moment distribution
The bending moment of the arch is devided into 5 section, one for the additional arch from D to A,
one for the left side of the main arch from A and to the force from the service vehicle Qserv, then
for the rest of the left side of the main arch from the service vehicle and to C. Then for the right
side of the main arch from C to B and last the additional arch from B to E.
Equation for the moment from D to A
MAD(x) = HD ┬Ę (h’¼üll ŌłÆyAD(x)) ŌłÆgarch.AD(x) ┬Ę
L2 ŌłÆ|x|
2

ŌłÆg’¼üll.AD(x) ┬Ę C’¼üll.AD(x) ŌłÆRD ┬Ę (L2 ŌłÆ|x|)
(E.57)
Equation for the moment from A to Qserv
ML1(x) = RA1 ┬Ę x ŌłÆHA1 ┬Ę y(x) ŌłÆgDL ┬Ę x2
2 ŌłÆg’¼üll(x) ┬Ę C’¼üll.x(x)
(E.58)
Equation for the moment from Qserv to C
ML2(x) = RA1 ┬Ę x ŌłÆHA1 ┬Ę y(x) ŌłÆgDL ┬Ę x2
2 ŌłÆg’¼üll(x) ┬Ę C’¼üll.x(x) ŌłÆQserv ┬Ę

x ŌłÆL
4

(E.59)
Equation for the moment from C to B
MR(x) = RB1 ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx) ŌłÆHB1 ┬Ę y(L ŌłÆx) ŌłÆ(gDL + qfk) ┬Ę (L ŌłÆx)2
2
ŌłÆg’¼üll(L ŌłÆx) ┬Ę C’¼üll.x(L ŌłÆx) (E.60)
Page LV
==PAGE:126==
APPENDIX E. FINAL DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
Equation for the moment from B to E
MBE(x) = HE┬Ę(h’¼üllŌłÆyBE(x))ŌłÆgarch.BE(x)┬Ę
L + L2 ŌłÆ|x|
2

ŌłÆg’¼üll.BE(x)┬ĘC’¼üll.BE(x)ŌłÆRE┬Ę(L+L2ŌłÆ|x|)
(E.61)
E.3.1
Moment for load group 5
Again for load group 5 the dead load is for the arch and only ’¼ülling on one side and to the crown. The
dead load of the ’¼ülling on the additional arch is given in section E.1.3. The ’¼ülling on the additional
arch is only to the crown of the main arch h, which correspond to the vertical distance xAD on the
additional arch. An extra equation is therefore made from D to xAD.
Equation for the moment from D to xAD
MAD1(x) = HD ┬Ę (h’¼üll ŌłÆyAD(x)) ŌłÆgarch.AD(x) ┬Ę
L2 ŌłÆ|x|
2

ŌłÆRD ┬Ę (L2 ŌłÆ|x|)
(E.62)
Equation for the moment from xAD to A
MAD2(x) = HD ┬Ę(h’¼üll ŌłÆyAD(x))ŌłÆgarch.AD(x)┬Ę
L2 ŌłÆ|x|
2

ŌłÆg’¼üll.AD5(x)┬ĘC’¼üll.AD5(x)ŌłÆRD ┬Ę(L2ŌłÆ|x|)
(E.63)
The rest of the equation is corresponding to the rest of the load cases.
E.4
Calculation of the Normal force distribution
The normal forces is divided into 5 equations like for the moment.
Normal force from D to A
NAD(x) = ŌłÆHAD(x) ┬Ę cos(╬Ė(x)) ŌłÆVAD(x) ┬Ę sin(╬Ė(x))
(E.64)
Where:
VAD(x) = ŌłÆgarch.AD(x) ┬Ę
L2 ŌłÆ|x|
2

ŌłÆg’¼üll.AD(x) ┬Ę C’¼üll.AD(x) + RD
(E.65)
HAD(x) = ŌłÆHD
(E.66)
Normal force from A to Qserv
NL1(x) = ŌłÆHL1(x) ┬Ę cos(╬Ė(x)) ŌłÆVL1(x) ┬Ę sin(╬Ė(x))
(E.67)
Where:
Page LVI
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX E. FINAL DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
VL1(x) = gDL ┬Ę x + g’¼üll(x) ŌłÆRA1
(E.68)
HL1(x) = ŌłÆHA1
(E.69)
Normal force from Qserv to C
NL2(x) = ŌłÆHL2(x) ┬Ę cos(╬Ė(x)) ŌłÆVL2(x) ┬Ę sin(╬Ė(x))
(E.70)
Where:
VL2(x) = gDL ┬Ę x + g’¼üll(x) + Qserv ŌłÆRA1
(E.71)
HL2(x) = ŌłÆHA1
(E.72)
Normal force from C to B
NR(x) = ŌłÆHR(x) ┬Ę cos(╬Ė(x)) ŌłÆVR(x) ┬Ę sin(╬Ė(x))
(E.73)
Where:
VR(x) = gDL ┬Ę x + g’¼üll(x) + qfk ┬Ę x ŌłÆRB1
(E.74)
HR(x) = ŌłÆHB1
(E.75)
Normal force from B to E
NBE(x) = ŌłÆHBE(L ŌłÆx) ┬Ę cos(╬Ė(L ŌłÆx)) ŌłÆVBE(L ŌłÆx) ┬Ę sin(╬Ė(L ŌłÆx))
(E.76)
Where:
VBE(x) = ŌłÆgarch.BE(x) ┬Ę
(L + L2) ŌłÆ|x|
2

ŌłÆg’¼üll.BE(x) ┬Ę C’¼üll.BE(x) + RE
(E.77)
HBE(x) = ŌłÆHE
(E.78)
Page LVII
==PAGE:128==
APPENDIX E. FINAL DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS APPENDIX
E.4.1
Normal forces for load group 5
Again for load group 5 the dead load is for the arch and only ’¼ülling on one side and to the crown. The
dead load of the ’¼ülling on the additional arch is given in section E.1.3. The ’¼ülling on the additional
arch is only to the crown of the main arch h, which correspond to the vertical distance xAD on the
additional arch. An extra equation is therefore made from D to xAD.
Equation for the moment from D to xAD
NAD1(x) = ŌłÆHAD1(x) ┬Ę cos(╬Ė(x)) ŌłÆVAD1(x) ┬Ę sin(╬Ė(x))
(E.79)
Where:
VAD1(x) = ŌłÆgarch.AD(x) ┬Ę
L2 ŌłÆ|x|
2

+ RD
(E.80)
HAD1(x) = ŌłÆHD
(E.81)
Equation for the moment from xAD to A
NAD2(x) = ŌłÆHAD2(x) ┬Ę cos(╬Ė(x)) ŌłÆVAD2(x) ┬Ę sin(╬Ė(x))
(E.82)
Where:
VAD2(x) = ŌłÆgarch.AD(x) ┬Ę
L2 ŌłÆ|x|
2

ŌłÆg’¼üll.AD5(x) ┬Ę C’¼üll.AD5(x) + RD
(E.83)
HAD2(x) = ŌłÆHD
(E.84)
The rest of the equation is corresponding to the rest of the load cases.
Page LVIII
==PAGE:129==
F
Results for the initial design
Results for the initial cross-section of width 2400 mm, thickness 270 mm and a cover layer of 50 mm
above the LAC blocks along with 6 post-tensioning lines with each a force of 167 kN, which gives a
normal force of 1002 kN.
This appendix is attached as an external Excel document called Appendix_F_Calculations_for_the_
initial_design. This document is containing 29 sheets, one for each arch, for each load case and in
both ultimate limit state and serviceability limit state. The last two sheets are stress calculation for
ULS and SLS.
Each sheet for the arches contains reaction calculations, moment calculations and normal force
calculations along with calculations that is needed to calculate these. This is the height of the arch
at any vertical position, the ’¼ülling of the arch, the angle between horizontal and normal, along with
vertical and horizontal forces at any place on the arch.
Page LIX
==PAGE:130==
==PAGE:131==
G
Results for the iterated design
Results for the optimised cross-section of width 2400 mm, thickness 600 mm, cover layer above the
LAC blocks of 50 mm, 12 pre-tensioning strands in each of the layers 2 and 3 along with 9 post-
tensioning lines with each a force of167 kN, which gives a normal force of 1503 kN.
This appendix is attached as an external Excel document called Appendix_G_Calculations_for_the_
iterated_design. This document is containing 29 sheets, one for each arch, for each load case and
in both ultimate limit state and serviceability limit state. The last two sheets are stress calculation
for ULS and SLS.
Each sheet for the arches contains reaction calculations, moment calculations and normal force cal-
culations along with calculations that is needed to calculate these. This is the height of the arch
at any vertical position, the ’¼ülling of the arch, the angle between horizontal and normal, along with
vertical and horizontal forces at any place on the arch.
The excel document is similar to appendix F, the di’¼Ćerence is the di’¼Ćerent cross-section data.
Page LXI
==PAGE:132==
==PAGE:133==
H
Results for the ’¼ünal design
Results for the optimised cross-section of width 3000 mm, thickness 460 mm, 16 pre-tensioning
strands in each of the layers 2 and 3 along with 12 stands at the top layer and 35 slack bars at
position 35 mm from the top. 31 post-tensioning lines is added, with each a force of 167 kN, which
gives a normal force of 5177 kN. The cover layer of the LAC blocks it 70 mm.
This appendix is attached as an external Excel document called Appendix_H_Calculations_for_the_
’¼ünal_design. This document is containing 34 sheets, one for each arch, for each load case and in
both ultimate limit state and serviceability limit state. Stress calculations for ULS design and SLS
design for the main arch and the additional arches AD and BE also has a sheet each. Stress calcu-
lations for arch BE are only made for load case 5, since all other load cases gives same results as for
arch AD. The last sheet is an overview of the reaction forces at D and E.
Each sheet for the arches contains reaction calculations, moment calculations and normal force
calculations along with calculations that is needed to calculate these. This is the height of the arch
at any vertical position, the ’¼ülling of the arch, the angle between horizontal and normal, along with
vertical and horizontal forces at any place on the arch.
Page LXIII
