==PAGE:1==
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters
using ROI
Master Thesis
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
Master Thesis
June, 2020
By
Jingshi Hu
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering, Brovej, Building 118,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the
requirements for acquiring a master’s degree in Electrical Engineering.
Jingshi Hu - s181387
Signature
Date
ii
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis was motivated by an unprecedented medical research for mouse
brains implemented by biologists from University of Copenhagen, where a lot of
medical video data was obtained. In order to study the changes in the blood
vessels near the precapillary sphincter, they drew ROI manually to determine the
position of precapillary sphincter. However, this method was both troublesome
and unable to deal with the problem of blood vessel displacement. In an attempt
to come up with a solution, the master thesis involved using a real-time Region
Of Interest (ROI) to track the precapillary sphincter in medical videos.
Our algorithm is based on a premise that precapillary sphincter should be located
at the gap or the thin connection between the two level blood vessels. Obviously
the two level blood vessels are the basis to successfully find the position of
precapillary sphincter.
Image binarization can effectively separate the blood
vessels from the background. The Radon transform is creatively applied to find
the rotation angle of the blood vessels and the midpoint position of the connection
between the two levels blood vessels, which is also the center point of precapillary
sphincter. The results demonstrate that this method can effectively detect and
track the precapillary sphincter in real time using a ROI. We also adopt the data
fitting method to exclude the outliers and correct some failed results.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all those who have contributed to this
thesis.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisor Dr. Yiqiu Dong for her
consistent support and guidance throughout the thesis work. Much of the work
in this thesis is based on her ideas. She also provides me with comments and
suggestion during my thesis work and preparation of my paper.
I would also like to thank to my co-supervidor Dr. Changsi Cai, who provided us
with relevant medical videos and pointed out the direction of our efforts.
At the end, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to my parents for
encouraging and supporting me throughout the study.
iv
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Precapillary sphincter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Corresponding experiment and data processing method . .
2
1.2
Aim of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Data overview
9
2.1
Data structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Comparison of different pressing methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Our algorithm
15
3.1
Image binarization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.2
Otsu’s method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Radon transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
Corresponding examples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.3
Radon vs Hough transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Design
27
4.1
Experiment design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Results and discussion
39
5.1
Case 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Case 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Case 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Case 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.5
Case 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Conclusion & future work
55
Bibliography
57
A 1 The main function of the thesis -“ROIsearch.m”
59
B 2 Find two local maximums in the frame - “findtwopeaksnew.m”
63
C 3 The function of finding theta and xprime - “searchbandtest.m”
66
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
v
==PAGE:8==
D 4 The function of getting Rcut and rescaling pixels - “findRpeak.m”
and “rescaling.m”
68
vi
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
Figure 1.1
The schematic of a penetrating arteriole with the precapillary
sphincter at proximal branch point. This illustration also explains
the composition of PAs and branched various orders capillaries.
.
2
Figure 1.2
The energy state transition of single-photon absorption and
two-photon absorption. S0,S1 and S2 represent the different energy
level of photons,respetively the ground state, the metastable state
and the excitation state. hω0 represents the energy of the photon,
where h means Planck’s constant, approximately equal 6.626 ×
10−34 and ω0 represents the frequency of the photon.
. . . . . . .
3
Figure 1.3
A. The Diagram of in vivo two-photon 3D imaging. B. The
diagram glass micropipette puffing. C. Representative images of
red fluorescent protein (RFP) and green fluorescent protein (GFP)
using epi-fluorescent illumination. They are used as ‘maps’ during
pipette insertion. Red circles mark locations of 1st order capillaries
with >5% vasodilation during whisker pad stimulation.
. . . . . . .
4
Figure 1.4
Some representative results and analysis. Explanations in
detail are shown in the body.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
Figure 2.1
This illustration shows the video frame with splitted channels
and merged channels. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
Figure 2.2
A schematic shows how to flatten one stack into one frame.
11
Figure 2.3
The two representative stacks in one video. . . . . . . . . .
12
Figure 2.4
The comparison of different flattening methods.
The
red line represents the blood vessel direction, the blue point
shows the center of the image and the red point represents the
approximate location of precapillary sphincters. These parameters
are calculated according to the algorithm explained in Chapter 3. .
13
Figure 3.1
Radon transform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
Figure 3.2
The corresponding example.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
Figure 3.3
The complete Radon transform of the line . . . . . . . . . .
21
Figure 3.4
The schematic to calculate the coordinates of point Pprojection. 21
Figure 3.5
The corresponding example 2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
Figure 3.6
Schematic diagram of the rotation angle of the two circles. .
23
Figure 3.7
Schematic diagram of the point Pprojection. . . . . . . . . . .
23
Figure 3.8
The representation of the line with ρ and θ and its
corresponding Hough space. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Figure 4.1
The compressed frame of one stack and its binarization result. 27
Figure 4.2
The cut frame and Icut. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
Figure 4.3
The Radon transform of Icut . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Figure 4.4
The marked black banded area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Figure 4.5
The result of Rcut.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
Figure 4.6
An example of rescaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
vii
==PAGE:10==
Figure 4.7
A illustration to show how to use threshold T to find the black
banded area if we assume T = 0.25. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
Figure 4.8
The schematic of θ and X′. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Figure 4.9
The two lines based on θ and X′ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Figure 4.10 The schematic of ROI. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
Figure 4.11 The schematic of ROI whose width is specified by the user.
37
Figure 5.1
Four representative videos in Case 1 and their results. . . .
40
Figure 5.2
Two representative frames in Case 2 and their result.
. . .
41
Figure 5.3
Four representative frames in the first video belonging to
case 3 and their results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
Figure 5.4
Four representative frames in the second video belonging
to case 3 and their results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Figure 5.5
Three representative frames in the first example of case 4
and their results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Figure 5.6
The comparison of three cut results. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Figure 5.7
Plots of rotation angle and center point coordinates.
. . . .
46
Figure 5.8
The schematic of the fitted line between x and y. . . . . . .
47
Figure 5.9
Fitting curves of three datasets in the first example of Case 4. 50
Figure 5.10 New results of the first example after correction.
. . . . . .
51
Figure 5.11 Two failure results in the second example of Case 4. . . . .
51
Figure 5.12 Fitting curves of three datasets in the second example of
Case 4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Figure 5.13 New results of the second example after correction.
. . . .
52
Figure 5.14 One frame in Case 5.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
Figure 5.15 Some failure results of Case 5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
viii
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This thesis is motivated by a medical research performed by biologists of the
Neuroscience Department in the University of Copenhagen. The purpose of the
medical research is to study an essential part of brain - precapillary sphincter -
using a novel tool which is called two-photon microscopy in order to do 3D imaging.
This method is an unprecedented way to image the precapillary sphincter and
study its response when applying different stimulus to it.
When studying its
response, they use the method of drawing a window including the precapillary
sphincter to study the reaction on it. However, this method has a big disadvantage.
When the stimulus is applied to the blood vessel, it will cause the displacement
of the blood vessel, and then the position of precapillary sphincter will deviate
from the window, resulting in inaccurate measurement. To solve this problem,
the thesis focuses on finishing real-time tracking of precapillary sphincter using
an automatic region of interest (ROI). In this chapter, we concentrate on the
background of the project, the original experiment and data processing methods,
the purpose of the project and the structure of the article.
1.1
Background
1.1.1
Precapillary sphincter
The brain is the most important and complex organ for humans and other higher
animals.
Many mysteries about brain remain to be explored.
It’s of great
significance for scientists to study it and know how to protect it. At present, brain
research has become the world’s most strategic research theme.
Nowadays, some biologists put their effort on studying the precapillary sphincter,
since this part maintain perfusion in the cerebral cortex, which is proposed by
Søren Grubb,Changsi Cai and etc [Grubb et al. 2020]. In this paper, they reveal
what is the precapillary sphincter and what is the important role of the precapillary
spincter in cerebral blood vessels.
The maintenance of brain function requires oxygen and vitamins by the
transmission of blood flows through cerebral blood vessels. The reason for the
increased blood flow in the cerebral blood vessels is due to the increased Ca2+
in neurons and astrocytes. The release of vasoactive compounds is triggered
by the increase of Ca2+ in neurons and astrocytes, and then capillaries and
penetrating small arteries (PAs) are expanded. This activity-induced flow increase
is based on coordinated changes in vessel diameters, which are regulated by Ca2+
fluctuations within the vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) that circumscibe
arteries and larger arterioles and the pericytes that ensheathe capillaries close to
the PA[Grubb et al. 2020]. The capillary networks which are branched from PAs
is capable of providing various nutrients, including glucose and oxygen, to each
cortical layer. This is a topological structure containing precapillary sphincter in
the brain.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
1
==PAGE:12==
Precapillary sphincter is characterized as a mural cell encircling an indenation of
the capillary where it emerges from the PA. It mainly exists at proximal bifurcations
of PAs, which is shown in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: The schematic of a penetrating arteriole with the precapillary sphincter at
proximal branch point. This illustration also explains the composition of PAs and branched
various orders capillaries.
In the paper [Grubb et al. 2020], Grubb Søren and Changsi Cai reveal the
important function of the precapillary sphincters in the brain. 1) The precapillary
sphincter regulates the blood flow in the cerebral blood vessels. 2) Its structural
elements support bottleneck function.
3) It can constrict in cortical spreading
depression and protect capillaries against high pressure. In summary, precapillary
sphincters act a pivotal part in regulating blood flow of blood vessels in brain,
so studying it is of great significance for overcoming human cerebrovascular
diseases.
1.1.2
Corresponding experiment and data processing method
In the paper [Cai et al. 2019], biologists from the University of Copenhagen
propose a unprecedented method to detect the conducted vascular responses by
local ATP1 ejection with a glass micro-pipette which occur in precapillary sphincter
and combine two-photon microscope and genetically-encoded fluorescent
indicators to investigate this part. This experiment is also the basis of this thesis
since the medical data collected by this method is the research object of this
project. It is very necessary to explain the brand new method of understanding
the precapillary sphincter and its surrounding structures in detail at the beginning.
First, the two-photon laser scanning microscopy (TPLSM) should be introduced
since it is an important and novel imaging tool in the experiments mentioned
above.
TPLSM is a tool for observing and do three-dimensional imaging of
1Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is a nucleotide used in cells as a coenzyme. Every cell uses ATP for
energy. In this experiment, ATP is a stimulus that gives blood vessels.
2
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:13==
the fluorescence emitted by a sample after two-photon excitation.
In 1961,
Kaiser W first observed the two-photon excitation phenomenon in the crystal of
CaF2:Eu2+ [Kaiser and Garrett 1961]. A molecule or atom can absorb two photons
at the same time in the same quantum process, from the ground state to the
excited state. Figure 1.2 shows the comparison of single-photon and two-photon
phenomenon.
It can be concluded that two-photon emission spectrum is as
same as single-photon emission spectrum. However, because of the elaxation
of two-photon in S0 and the progress from S2 to S1, the excited signal frequency is
less than 2ω0, where ω0 means the frequency of one of the two photons. According
to the equation about the relationship between wavelength λ and frequency ω
λ = v
ω,
v
means the speed of wave
(1.1)
, obviously the excited signal has wavelength larger than 2λ0.
Figure 1.2:
The energy state transition of single-photon absorption and two-photon
absorption. S0,S1 and S2 represent the different energy level of photons,respetively the
ground state, the metastable state and the excitation state. hω0 represents the energy of
the photon, where h means Planck’s constant, approximately equal 6.626 × 10−34 and ω0
represents the frequency of the photon.
Due to the long wavelength of the excited signal, TPLSM has a deep tomographic
penetration depth, up to 1 mm. Furthermore, TPLSM reduce photodamage and
photobleaching of dyes caused by out of focus since two-photon excitation energy
absorption is more concentrated[Shih et al. 2012]. The two critical advantages
make TPLSM the best imaging tool for experiments, and can creatively observe
neurovascular coupling in a 3D scope.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
3
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.3: A. The Diagram of in vivo two-photon 3D imaging. B. The diagram glass
micropipette puffing.
C. Representative images of red fluorescent protein (RFP) and
green fluorescent protein (GFP) using epi-fluorescent illumination.
They are used as
‘maps’ during pipette insertion. Red circles mark locations of 1st order capillaries with
>5% vasodilation during whisker pad stimulation.
Figure 1.3 (A) shows a clear diagram in vivo two-photon 3D imaging. A mouse
injected with some fluorescent proteins is placed on the stage of two-photon
microscope.
Biologists perform tracheotomy on the mouse in order to detect
its exposed cortex and insert a glass micro-pipette to puff some stimulus to the
destination of brain. In the mouse, there are two kinds of fluorescent proteins,
red fluorescent protein (RFP, Figure 1.3 C) and green fluorescent protein (GFP,
Figure 1.3 C). Under the two modes of epi-fluorescence, photos of the exposed
cortex are taken. The role of RFP figure is to provide guidance for the insertion
of glass micropipettes. Figure 1.3 (B) illustrates how the glass micro-pipette is
inserted and these stimulus are puffed into the mouse’s exposed cortex.
It is worth noting that in Figure 1.3 (A) there is a coordinate system definition
established on the stage plane. The stage plane constitutes an x-y plane, whose
origin is just the center point of the stage plane. However, in the following, it will
involve a so-called Z axis. The Z axis is actually a straight line perpendicular to
the x-y plane, which forms a three-dimensional x-y-z space with the x-y plane, and
the origin of the space is the origin of the x-y plane. In other words, this Z axis
determines the height of each part of the cerebral blood vessel corresponding to
the x-y plane, which is also their depth below the surface of the exposed cortex.
After the glass micro-pipette is injected in the destination of brain, the hyperstack
two-photon imaging is performed by producing a high-resolution Z-stack at the
region of interest including a penetrating arteriole, a 1st order capillary, a 2nd order
4
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:15==
capillary and surrounding fluorescent cells. The x×y×z volumn of hyperstack
imaging is determined by including 3D structures of blood vessels as much as
possible. In the imaging software, biologists set the image stack to consist of
8-10 planes with a inter-plane distance of 4-5 µm. One record usually contains
10 pre-puff image stacks and 150 post-puff image stacks. Figure 1.4 (A) shows
one image stack consisting of 10 planes of different depths or at different Z
coordinates.
After biologists obtain the medical video, where these stacks constitute an order
in time, they use image processing software to flatten each stack into one
image with maximum intensity projection along the Z-axis. The flattened stack
is shown in Figure 1.4 (B), which is placed in the x-y place.
Compared with
Figure 1.4 (A), Figure 1.4 (B) is easier to indicate the full blood vessels and
simultaneously convert the original 3D image to the brand new 2D image, which
is more convenient to process. Similarly, these compressed stacks will also be
arranged in chronological order to form a video.
Figure 1.4(C) illustrates that biologists manually place different rectangular ROIs
vertically on the entire blood vessel to detect the response in blood vessel
diameter after ATP expansion. The bolld vessel diameter was measured using the
Chan-vese segmentation method (Figure 1.4D) and the function of blood vessel
diameter with time is indicated in Figure 1.4 (D).
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.4: Some representative results and analysis. Explanations in detail are shown
in the body.
1.2
Aim of the thesis
The experimental method described above can capture images of PA (also can
be referred to zero-order blood vessel), first-order capillary, and second-order
capillary. Biologists manually draw a ROI to locate any part of the brain blood
vessel that they want to study using the software. Like Figure 1.4 (C), if biologists
have interests in precapillary sphincter, a fixed ROI is placed on the precise
location in a certain frame. Related calculations and detection are performed in
this area.
However, this method has a huge problem. From Figure 1.4D, there is dilation and
constriction of blood vessels when receiving stimulation of ATP. Since precapillary
sphincter is located at the branch of the blood vessels, the dilation and constriction
of blood vessels will drive it to cause movement.
In other words, during the
imaging progress, the location of precapillary sphincter is not stable and fixed.
Obviously, using a fixed ROI cannot always collect accurate information about this
part and meet the requirements of biologists. Moreover, this method is incapable
of detecting the position of precapillary sphincter in real time.
In an attempt to address the problem mentioned above, we put our effort to carry
out new approach to automatically tracking precapillary sphincter in real time.
6
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:17==
The new algorithm will be able to search for the position of precapillary sphincter
in each frame and always use a rectangular ROI to mark the position along the
video. Because the algorithm needs to meet the real-time requirement, we need to
abandon some complex and advanced algorithms and then implement relatively
simple algorithm to reduce the running speed. These are the two aims of the
thesis.
1.3
Structure of the thesis
Chapter 1 is the introduction of this project.
Chapter 2 gives an overview of the medical data used in this thesis and explains
how to process it in details. The original data is 4-dimensional, and the processed
data is lost depth information, which is 3-dimensional. A detailed description of
why and how to deal with the original data is in this chapter.
Chapter 3 explains our algorithm briefly and the theoretical knowledge it
uses.
Different image binarization methods are compared, while Otsu’s
method stands out among many methods because of its simple, efficient and
practical advantages. Then the definition of Radon transform is introduced and
corresponding examples describe why Radon transform can be applied to find the
precapillary sphincter. Besides, the relationships and differences between Radon
and Hough transform are clarified. Finally, the brief introduction of our algorithm
is shown.
Chapter 4 describes each step of our algorithm in details and explains it with
pseudo code and pictures.
Chapter 5 shows the effect and shortcomings of the algorithm with five cases, and
also proposed how to improve and optimize it. The data fitting method is adopted
to exclude the outliers and correct some failed result.
Chapter 6 concludes our thesis and proposes our future work for the project.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
7
==PAGE:18==
8
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Data overview
In this chapter, the structure of medical video used in this project is explained
in details. The reason why the stack needs to be flatten into one frame is also
clarified. In addition, there is a comparison of different flattening methods to show
the superiority of flattening each stack with the maximum intensity.
2.1
Data structure
In this project, the data refers to the video of blood vessel activity in the mouse
brain taken under a two-photon microscope. The data format is TIF, which is an
image file saved in high-quality graphics format. It is often used to store images
with multiple colors and multiple layers, which is commonly used in medical
imaging and geological imaging.
From the experiment introduced in Chapter 1, we have known that there are
two kinds of fluorescent proteins in the mouse - respectively in red and green.
Pericytes are labeled with a red fluorophore (NG2-DsRed) and the vessel lumen
is labeled with FITC-dextran (green), which is shown in Figure 1.4 (A) and Figure
2.1.
From Figure 2.1 (c), it is clear that precapillary sphincter is just the red area shown
in the merged figure.
However, if we look at the separated video in red, the
red part in Figure 2.1 (a) shows not only precapillary sphincter, but also some
surrounding cells.
Red fluorescent proteins mark pericytes of cerebral blood
vessels, which containing precapillary sphincters. Therefore, it is difficult to only
use the video in red to get the accurate location of precapillary sphincter. The
frame in green shown in 2.1 (c) completely shows the first-order capillary (left)
and the zero-order blood vessel (right), and the gap between them is the location
wrapped by precapillary sphincter. In summary, the video in green is the better
choice to locate the precapillary sphincter accurately.
Figure 1.4 (A) and (B) represent the whole planes of one stack and a frame
compressed from them in maximum intensity. To understand the purpose of this
step, the structure of the video needs to be explained in details.
Suppose there is an unprocessed medical video, it consists of M stacks, where
each stack is composed of N planes, and the image size of each plane is H×W.
Obviously, the total number of the pixels in the unprocessed video Vup can be
expressed by the following formula
NVup = M × N × H × W
(2.1)
From Figure 1.3 (A), we can know that the x-y plane lies on the microscopy stage.
The exposed cortex of mouse brain is placed on the stage, and then observed
and imaged through a microscopy. Obviously, this structure rich in blood vessels
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
9
==PAGE:20==
(a) The frame in red
(b) The frame in green
(c) The frame in red and green
Figure 2.1: This illustration shows the video frame with splitted channels and merged
channels.
is three-dimensional, which not only has length and width, but also depth. We
can think of it as a cuboid. Each layer in the cuboid consists of a plane, and
the distance between each plane is about 4-5 µm. These planes have different
z coordinates, that is, different depths where the plane is located. They form
a three-dimensional structure of a blood vessel model in the brain, which also
form a stack. Different stacks represent different time sequences. In other words,
different stacks represent the same brain vascular model at different times.
The three-dimensional structure of each stack is the same and the difference is
that the time of each stack is different. That is to say, these stacks are arranged
in chronological order. In fact, the video Vup records 4-dimensional information -
3D structure and time.
Next, we can flatten each stack into one frame like Figure 2.2. Although these
planes are at different depths or have different Z coordinates, they are always
parallel in x-y plane. Flattening them with maximum intensity is just to project them
into the same plane and keep their original information to the greatest extent. The
total number of pixels in the processed video Vp can be expressed by the following
formula
NVp = M × H × W
(2.2)
It is obvious that the depth information is abandoned and the processed video Vp
10
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.2: A schematic shows how to flatten one stack into one frame.
contains 3D information - size of plane and time, which is just what we need to
use in the project.
2.2
Comparison of different pressing methods
There are three ways of different pressing methods - with medium, average and
maximum intensity projection. The reason why the experiment mentioned above
chooses the maximum intensity is indicated in the following comparison example.
First, we select two representative stacks in a video, one of which is of good quality
and the blood vessels are clearly visible. The other one is of poor quality, where
capillaries are blurred. The two stacks are denoted by “good stack” and “bad
stack”, shown in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.4 illustrates a comparison of different pressing methods.
No matter which method is used for flattening, the results of the good stack are
very good and accurate. This is due to its good image quality. However, for bad
stack, the poor image quality will challenge the algorithm to accurately calculate
the precise position of precapillary sphincter. Compared with Figure 2.4 (b) and
Figure 2.4 (d), the contour of the first-order capillary in Figure 2.4 (f) is the clearest,
which ensures that the algorithm can accurately find the position of precapillary
sphincter and the rotation angle of the blood vessel. Therefore, flattening the
stack with maximum intensity can avoid the problem of unclear blood vessel walls
in some planes of the original stack, restore the original capillaries to the greatest
extent, and ensure the successful operation of the algorithm in Chapter 3.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
11
==PAGE:22==
(a) The good stack
(b) The bad stack
Figure 2.3: The two representative stacks in one video.
12
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:23==
(a) The good stack with average intensity
(b) The bad stack with average intensity
(c) The good stack with medium intensity
(d) The bad stack with medium intensity
(e) The good stack with maximum intensity
(f) The bad stack with maximum intensity
Figure 2.4: The comparison of different flattening methods. The red line represents the
blood vessel direction, the blue point shows the center of the image and the red point
represents the approximate location of precapillary sphincters. These parameters are
calculated according to the algorithm explained in Chapter 3.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
13
==PAGE:24==
14
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 3
Our algorithm
The basic idea about how to find precapillary sphincter in the video is based on
an assumption that there is a gap or a very thin connection between two level
blood vessels, which is the position of precapillary sphincter. What we need to
find finally is the rotation angle of blood vessels and its center point, which is
also the center point of ROI. From the data introduction in Chapter 2, we can
see that there is only one foreground part - the blood vessel in our video image.
Moreover, the blood vessel is what we are interested in in the video, because we
can accurately calculate the position of precapillary sphincter with blood vessels.
In order to better separate the blood vessels from the background, we decide to
adopt the image binarization method. Besides, compared to grayscale images,
the speed of image processing on binary images will be greatly reduced, which is
convenient for us to realize the real-time requirement of our algorithm.
We implement one-dimensional line integration at different angles to the image.
When a straight line passes through the gap or the thin connection at a
certain angle, the corresponding line integral must be the smallest. The angle
complementary to this angle is obviously the rotation angle of precapillary
sphincter. When other straight lines of the same angle pass through the maximum
diameters of two different capillaries, the corresponding two line integrals are
located on both sides of the minimum line integral on the integration diagram,
which are the local maximums on both sides. The center point of precapillary
sphincter can be obtained by using the triangle relationship between the original
center point of the frame and the offset calculated by the integration diagram. This
part refers to Radon transform.
3.1
Image binarization
3.1.1
Classification
Image binarization is the process of converting such an image with multiple gray
values into a binary image with only black (foreground part) and white (background
part) distribution. The essence of image binarization is reducing the information
contained within the image from 256 shades of gray to 2: black and white. The
purpose of image binarization is to complete the task of separating the foreground
part from the image.
The focus of the binarization algorithm is to find a threshold value T - a value that
effectively used to divide the histogram of the image into two parts, the object and
the background.
Generally speaking, the binarization methods can be divided into the global
threshold binarization and local threshold binarization[He et al. 2005] according
to different ways to get the threshold.
The global threshold binarization method determines a threshold based on the
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
15
==PAGE:26==
histogram of an image, and uses this threshold to binarize the entire image. The
classical methods of global threshold binarization are Otsu’s method, threshold
method based on entropy, etc[Athimethphat 2011]. This type of method has the
advantages of simple operation and good real-time performance. However, it only
considers the overall grayscale characteristics of the image when determining the
threshold, and often ignores some local information enough. These disadvantage
results in its scope of application being limited to images with a better distinction
between foreground and background.
The local threshold binarization method is usually divided into the local block
threshold method and the adaptive threshold method, where the threshold value
is calculated and binarized for different positions of the image[Lee et al. 2004].
The basic idea of the local block threshold method is to divide the original image
into blocks, and use a similar method which is used to obtain the global threshold
to obtain the threshold for each block, and then binarize the image block. The
local adaptive threshold method considers the local gray characteristics of pixels
in several domains centered on the current pixel, and binarizes the central pixel
according to the local gray characteristics. Classical local threshold binarization
algorithms include Niblack’s algorithm, Bernsen’s algorithm, White’s algorithm and
so on[Gatos, Pratikakis, and Perantonis 2006]. Local threshold binarization are
more suitable for complex situations, but it will consume more time than global
threshold binarization method because of the need to perform multiple threshold
calculations.
Obviously,
the global threshold binarizatin method can better meet the
requirement of real-time due to its simple calculations.
So a classical global
threshold binarization method - Otsu’s method is selected as the method of
medical image binarization in this thesis.
3.1.2
Otsu’s method
The Otsu’s method is named after Nobuyuki Otsu since he proposed a method
that performs automatic image thresholding in 1979 [Otsu 1979]. This algorithm
returns a single threshold which is determined by maximizing inter-class variance.
The premise of using the Otsu’s method is to know the histogram of the gray image
and the number of pixels in the given image. For an image I(x, y), the pixel value
is divided into L levels. If the number of pixels for the i-th level is called ni, the
total number of pixels in the image N is determined by
N =
L
∑
i=1
ni
(3.1)
The histogram h(i) of the gray image is calculated by
h(i) = ni
N
(3.2)
16
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:27==
The threshold which separates object and background is denoted by t, so that
these pixels can be divided into two class - object class and background class.
The class probability ω0,1(t) is determined by:
ω0(t) =
t
∑
i=1
p(i),
ω1(t) =
L
∑
i=t+1
p(i),
ω0(t) + ω1(t) = 1
(3.3)
where p(i) means the probability with level i in the image.
The inter-class variance σi(t) is determined by
σ2
i (t) = ω0(t)(µ0(t) −µT)2 + ω1(t)(µ1(t) −µT)2
(3.4)
which is expressed in terms of class probabilities ω and class means µ, where the
class means µ0(t),µ1(t) and µT are:
µ0(t) =
∑t
i=1 ip(i)
ω0(t)
,
µ1(t) =
∑L
i=t+1 ip(i)
ω1(t)
,
µT =
L
∑
i=1
ip(i)
(3.5)
The larger the inter-class variance of the image, the greater the contrast between
the foreground and background parts of the image, and the threshold at this time
is the optimal solution. When we get the Eq. (3.4), we need to find the pixel level i
and the threshold t that maximize the inter-class variance σi(t), and the obtained
threshold t is the calculated result.
The Otsu’s method algorithm are shown below.
Otsu’s method is sensitive to image noise since image noise is easy to cause
over-segmentation in this algorithm, making some foregrounds mistaken for
background pixels.
Another disadvantage of Otsu’s method is that it is just
suitable to segment a single target. However, the data used in this project will not
cause these disadvantages. Flattening stacks with maximum intensity projection
minimize the interference of noise on the image, and the blood vessel is the only
segmentation object in the image. What’s more, this method has the advantage
of simple and fast calculations, which is beneficial for our real-time algorithm
implementation. Therefore, we adopt the Otsu’s method as a way to binarize
the medical data.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
17
==PAGE:28==
Algorithm 1 Otsu’s method
Require: The histogram of the original grayscale image, h(i);
Ensure: The threshold for the image, T;
1: Calculate the total number of pixels in the image N;
2: Calculate the grayscale range of pixels, assuming the range between 0 and 255;
3: Calculate the probability with level i in the image p(i);
4: for i 0 to 255 by inter-class variance µ2
i (t) reaches the maximum value
5:
for t 0 to 255
6:
Calculate inter-class variance µ2
i (t);
7:
Compare all values to choose the maximum;
8:
record the corresponding threshold T;
9:
end
10: end
11: return T
3.2
Radon transform
3.2.1
Definition
The Radon transform is named after the Austrian mathematician Johann Karl
August Radon,since he established the radon transform of Euler space in 1917
[Radon 1917].
The main application of the Radon transform is CAT scans.
Besides, the Radon transform is also applied for detecting straight lines.
The definition of Radon transform on the two-dimensional space is the projection
of an image I(x, y) on a certain straight line L, which is just the line integral line
along L. The resulting projection is a new image R(ρ, θ). Mathematically, radon
transform is to perform line integration according to the projection direction. In the
image field, radon transform is to accumulate pixels according to the projection
direction.
Figure 3.1: Radon transform
18
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.1 shows the radon transform intuitively. The sensor and the source are
placed in parallel and rotated about the center of the image. For each angle θ, the
density of image pixels the light from the source passes through is accumulated at
the sensor. For a given set of angles, this operation is usually repeated. Usually,
θ ∈[0, 180). Angel 180 is not included because the result will be the same as angle
0.
Next, the mathematical expression of the radon transform will be introduced. First,
define the straight line L as Eq.(3.6).
ρ = x cos(θ) + y sin(θ)
(3.6)
Then, the Radon transform can be written as Eq.(3.7).
R(ρ, θ) =
∫∞
−∞
∫∞
−∞
I(x, y)δ(ρ −x cos(θ) −y sin(θ))dxdy
(3.7)
where δ(·) is the Dirac delta function, shown in Eq.(3.8).
δ(x) = 0, (x ̸= 0),
∫∞
−∞
δ(x)dx = 1
(3.8)
From Eq. (3.7), we can understand that the Radon transform is a mapping from
the Cartesian rectangular coordinates (x, y) to a distance and an angel (ρ, θ), also
known as polar coordinates.
3.2.2
Corresponding examples
There are some figures to show how Radon transform can characterize the slope
of a line segment in the image and the coordinates of the projected point. Apart
from it, we also use a simulation picture to demonstrate how Radon transfrom
helps us calculate the rotation angle of the blood vessel and the center point
coordinates of the precapillary sphincter.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
19
==PAGE:30==
(a) The first schematic
(b) The cumulative intensity function
(c) The second schematic
(d) The cumulative intensity function
Figure 3.2: The corresponding example.
Before starting to introduce this example, we need to explain some parameters or
graphics on the graph in details.
First, Figure 3.2(a) and (c) shows a line segment within a square that
perpendicularly projects on a line named ρ. This square actually represents a
picture. Each pixel value of the background on the picture is 0, and that of the
line segment is 1. Like Figure 3.1, there are many straight lines perpendicular
to ρ passing through the line segment in the square.
The green part is the
area that combines all the straight lines passing through this line segment, which
is also the line integral of the line segment along the direction perpendicular
to ρ.
Figure 3.2(b) and (d) indicates the corresponding line integral function.
Obviously, if the straight line ρ is perpendicular to the line segmentation, the
corresponding cumulative intensity function shows a definite peak, and the value
of the cumulative intensity peak is 55. If the straight line ρ is not in this special
situation, the corresponding line integral function shows ripples, and its maximum
value is much less than 55. It is worth noting that the oscillation in Figure 3.2(b)
should be due to discretization of the Radon transform.
In fact, this example specializes the Radon transform to a situation in which a line
segment projects only on a straight line ρ with the angle θ each time. When the
line ρ rotates at an angle of [0, 179], the line integral function has been changing.
When these line integration functions are combined into a chart, it is shown in
Figure 3.3.
20
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.3: The complete Radon transform of the line
Figure 3.3 illustrates the chart of the complete Radon transform. In the above
description, we can draw a conclusion that only when the line segment in the
figure is perpendicular to the projected straight line ρ, the one-dimensional line
integration function at this time has the maximum value. The vertical bar on the
right side of Figure 3.3 represents a colorbar, which displays the current colormap
and indicate the mapping of data values into the colormap. It is obvious that the
maximum value is represented by white. In the chart, there is a very obvious
white point, and the angle corresponding to this point is the angle of the projection
straight line ρ. In other words, we can get the slope of the line segment. The
parameter X′ represents the distance to the origin of the image. Here is a simple
illustration showing how to calculate the projected point in the straight line.
Figure 3.4: The schematic to calculate the coordinates of point Pprojection.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
21
==PAGE:32==
The coordinates of point Pprojection are obtained by the following formula:
(X′ cos θ, X′ sin θ)
(3.9)
Next, we use an example more similar to our video image to demonstrate the role
of Radon transform.
In the video data used in this thesis, usually only two level blood vessels with
a certain rotation angle appear and there should be a gap between them. We
can use two circles with a distance between them and a certain rotation angle to
simulate the frame in our video, like Figure 3.5(a). Our goal is to find the center
point of the distance between the two circles (just the center point of precapillary
sphincter) and the rotation angle of the two circles (just the rotation angle of the
blood vessels) through the Radon transform.
(a) Simulation of the frame in our video.(b) The corresponding complete Radon transform.
Figure 3.5: The corresponding example 2.
From Figure 3.5(a), We can get a priori knowledge that the rotation angle of the two
circles is roughly between 0 and 60 degrees. Therefore, Figure 3.5(b) records the
corresponding results of Radon transform between 0 and 60 degrees. There are
two colored banded area in Figure 3.5(b). From the colorbar on the right, we can
see that different colors correspond to different pixel values. The white banded
area below clearly corresponds to the circle with a larger area on the right, and
the red area above corresponds to another circle with a smaller area. The black
banded area between the two areas is the blank area between the two circles in
Figure 3.5(a).
After calculation, the angle corresponding to the widest part of the black banded
area is 24 degrees. Then, we draw a straight line with a rotation angle of 24
degrees at the center point in the original picture, which is shown in Figure 3.6.
The blue line represents the rotation angle of these circles.
22
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.6: Schematic diagram of the rotation angle of the two circles.
Then, the parameter X′ corresponding to the center point of the widest area in
the black banded area is −99. According to Figure 3.4, we can calculate the
coordinates of the point Pprojection and draw it in the original frame, which is shown
in Figure 3.7. The red point represents the center point of the distance between
the two circles.
Figure 3.7: Schematic diagram of the point Pprojection.
We successfully achieve our goal by using Radon transform, which is to calculate
the rotation angle of the two circles and the position of the center point of the
distance between them. Similarly, it can be seen that the rotation angle of the
blood vessel and the position of the precapillary sphincter’s center point can also
be obtained by the same method.
In summary, Radon transform can be used to calculate the rotation angle of a line
segment or a similar part of the foreground in the image (such as blood vessels
in this thesis). In addition, the parameter X′ provided by Radon transform can be
used to calculate the position of the projection point, which plays an important role
in our algorithm later.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
23
==PAGE:34==
3.2.3
Radon vs Hough transform
In the field of image analysis, there is another transform that is also applied
to detect the geometric features of straight lines in digital images, which is
called Hough transform. Usually, it is mentioned and applied more than Radon
transform. In fact, there is a strong similarity between these two transforms, but
they still have some significant differences.
The differences and connections
between them will be elaborated.
First, it is necessary to briefly introduce the hough transform.
The Hough
transform is an algorithm that Paul V.C. Hough applied for as a patent in 1962
[Hough 1962]. It was originally invented to identify complex lines in photographs.
With the invention of the algorithm, it has now been able to recognize other types
of shapes, such as circular and quadrilateral shapes.
Usually, straight line can be expressed with slope k and intercept b as y = kx + b.
Apart from this, we can use an angle θ and a distance ρ to represent a straight
line through a point. First make the vertical line of the straight line from the origin.
The distance from the origin to the straight line is expressed by ρ, and the angle
between the perpendicular and the x axis is expressed by θ, so that (θ, ρ) to
represent any straight line passing through a point.
In Figure 3.8(a), (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) lie on a straight line. The vertical distance
from the origin to the straight line is ρ0, and the angle between the vertical line
and the X-axis is θ0. At this time, we use ρ and θ to represent Hough space,
where the horizontal axis is θ and the vertical axis is ρ. When we map a certain
point on the line to Hough space, the point forms a cosine curve, expressed as
ρ = x cos θ + y sin θ. Obviously, when we map two points on the original line
to Hough space, we will get two cosine curves that intersect at the point (ρ0, θ0),
which shown in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: The representation of the line with ρ and θ and its corresponding Hough space.
Hough transform is to use this method to find straight lines in the graph. In addition,
it can be used to find other shapes in the figure, such as circles and ellipses.
Both Radon transform and Hough transform implement a mapping from the image
space to a parameter space of ρ and θ. In fact, Hough transform is inherently a
24
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:35==
discrete algorithm that detects straight lines in an image. Radon transform on the
other hand belongs to a kind of mathematical integral transform, which is defined
for continuous functions.
In terms of algorithm operation speed, Hough transform is slightly faster than
the radon transform. So in the field of computer vision, Hough transform has a
dominate position. However, in this thesis, we focus on finding the rotation angle
of the blood vessels instead of certain shapes. Radon transform is obviously more
suitable for finding the proper angle using the result of line integration.
In summary, our algorithm adopts Radon transform rather than Hough transform.
3.3
Algorithm
This is a brief description of the algorithm used in this thesis. Detailed descriptions
and steps of the algorithm will be presented in Chapter 4.
Algorithm 2 Our algorithm
Require: The medical video, I
Ensure: The rotation angle of the blood vessel, θ;The calculated center point of
precapillary sphincter and also the center point of ROI, (xp, yp);
1: Apply Otsu’s method to each frame of the video I for get the binarization result Ib;
2: Apply Radon transform to Ib, and the result is denoted by R;
3: Cut the boundary part of R to get Rcut in order to keep only the key parts
containing precapillary sphincter, which can eliminate unnecessary part and improve
the accuracy of the search;
4: Rescale pixels of Rcut to get NRcut so that all pixels have values between [0, 1];
5: Let NRcut enter a loop that chooses an appropriate threshold T, and use the threshold
T to get the black banded area;
6: Calculate the angle θ corresponding to the widest part of the black banded area and
the center coordinate X′ of the widest part;
7: Use θ and X’ to calculate the point coordinates (xp, yp);
8: return θ, xp, yp;
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
25
==PAGE:36==
26
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Design
In Chapter 3, the basic frame of our algorithm is introduced. In this chapter, the
algorithm steps and results will be explained in details.
4.1
Experiment design
Step one: Pre-process the original video data
A. Press all the planes in each stack into one frame with the maximum intensity.
B. Convert image type from double to unit8.
C. Use Otsu’s method to binarize the frame.
A video is composed of some stacks, one of which consists of a fixed number of
planes. If the algorithm works for each plane, the workload will become quite large.
So the method to compress one stack is taken into account. In order to reduce the
noise interference of the compressed video, the maximum intensity compression
method is selected. Figure 4.1(a) demonstrates a compressed frame of one stack
in maximum intensity.
The purpose of converting the image type is to be capable of binarizing
images. Figure 4.1(b) represents the binarization result of the compressed frame.
After image binarization, the blood vessel is successfully separated from the
background, which is helpful for our subsequent operations.
(a) The compressed frame
(b) The binarization result
Figure 4.1: The compressed frame of one stack and its binarization result.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
27
==PAGE:38==
Step two: Cut the image to obtain the necessary part containing precapillary
sphincter
A. Add image pixels in columns
B. Find the local maximum belonging to the zero-order blood vessel
C. Then find another local maximum belonging to the first-order capillary
Our algorithm is based on the assumption that there must be at least two level
blood vessels in the video, and there is a gap or a thin connection between the
two level blood vessels, which is the position of precapillary sphincter. In other
words, there must be a very obvious position between the two level blood vessels
that contains the precapillary sphincter we want to find. In order to implement a
fast and concise algorithm, we adopt a very simple method, that is to superimpose
the pixels of the image in columns to obtain a vector.
If the assumptions of
our algorithm are satisfied, the vector must own two local maximums (where
pixels belonging to two level blood vessels are most dense) and a trough (where
precapillary sphincter is located). The position of the two peaks is respectively
denoted by l1 and l2.
Normally, the diameter of the zero-order blood vessels is larger than that of the
first-order capillary.
Therefore, the maximum value of the vector is obviously
the local maximum of the zero-order blood vessel. However, the location of the
zero-order blood vessel distribution may not always be on the right side of the
video. The width of the frame in the video is defined by W. If the position of
the local maximum is less than 0.45 times W, it means that the zero-order blood
vessel is now located on the left side of the video.
In each frame, we denote the part representing the area which is not between
l1 and l2 by boundary part.
Boundary part usually includes the part of the
two level blood vessel far from the precapillary sphincter. Therefore, boundary
part has no great effect on finding the precise position and direction since it
is a redundant section that does not contain any information about precapillary
sphincter. Boundary part sometimes contains some complete background pixels,
and they are easily mistaken for the gap between the two level blood vessels,
causing false detection.
Therefore, it is essential to cut the image in advance aimed to extract the part
containing the precapillary sphincter for correct and accurate detection. Usually,
after we determine the local maximum position of the zero-order blood vessel, we
repeat the operation on the vector from 1 to this position or from this position to
W, so that we can find the local maximum value of the first-order capillary.
Figure 4.2 (a) represents the schematic of image capture, where the red line
means the location of l1 and the blue one represents the location of l2.
The
intercepted part is called Icut in our algorithm, which is shown in 4.2 (b). From
Figure 4.2, we can see that through the image cut, the boundary part is excluded
and the key part containing precapillary sphincter is preserved.
28
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:39==
(a) The cut frame.
(b) Icut.
Figure 4.2: The cut frame and Icut.
In the initial version of the algorithm, we searched for l1 and l2 for each frame.
With the deepening of the research, we found that the correlation between each
frame in the video is relatively high, except for a few frames with vascular
displacement.
Taking this characteristic of video into account, we determine
whether to search the frame by judging the correlation between it and the former
frame instead of searching each frame. The correlation between video frames
can be characterized by the location of the zero-level local maximum value of
each frame. If the difference between the local maximum location of a frame and
the previous frame is less than 0.08 times W, it means that there is no blood
vessel displacement in this frame, and the l1 and l2 of this frame can continue to
use the data of the previous frame. On the contrary, it shows that the blood vessel
displacement appears in this frame, so we can search for l1 and l2 in this frame.
Step three: Perform the Radon transform to Icut
This step is the most important part of the experiment and also the basic of our
algorithm. Using the Radon transform, we can calculate the rotation angle of the
blood vessel θ and the center point of precapillary sphincter from the colormap.
After performing the Radon transform, the result R will be recorded for later
analysis and the corresponding colormap is shown in Figure 4.3.
In Figure 4.2, it is obvious that the thin connection between two level blood vessels
is what we need to find. When we look at Figure 4.3, we can see that between the
red and white area (indicating that the pixel value in this area is relatively large),
there is a banded area whose color tends to be black. The color black means that
the pixels values of the black banded area are relatively small compared to the
surrounding pixels. The black banded area is marked in Figure 4.4.
This is very reasonable because the position of precapillary sphincter is between
two level blood vessels, and it is either a gap or a very thin connection. When
the parallel straight line sent by the source passes through precapillary sphincter
vertically, the line integration function collected on the sensor has a trough, which
is the position of precapillary sphincter (Figure 3.1).
From the last example in Section 3.2.2, the blacked banded area between the
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
29
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.3: The Radon transform of Icut
Figure 4.4: The marked black banded area
30
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:41==
colored areas in the Radon transform result can help us obtain the rotation angle
of the blood vessels and the center point of precapillary sphincter. The black
banded area represents the area between the two level blood vessels. In the
black banded area, which angle corresponds to the widest length means that at
this angle, the distance between the two level blood vessels is the largest. In
addition, the midpoint of the widest position of the black banded area is the center
point of precapillary sphincter.
Therefore, which angle in the black banded region corresponds to the largest
width indicates that at this time, the straight line perpendicular to the angle
passes through the region containing precapillray sphincter. The angle is just
the rotation angle of blood vessels. The center point of the widest black banded
area determines the approximate center point of precapillary sphincter. However,
this conclusion is observed by our eyes, not by the algorithm itself. The following
steps are to complete the task of making the algorithm automatically find this black
banded area.
Step four: Remove one of the black areas on the top and bottom of colormap.
A. Add R in rows to get a vector.
B. Find the position Lp of the peak in the vector.
C. Remove a black area using Lp.
From Figure 4.4, it is obvious that there are two black areas on the top and bottom
of colormap, which have an adverse effect on correctly finding the location of the
black banded area since they may be mistaken for the black banded area. So
we need to find a method to intercept these two black areas in order to eliminate
interference.
In this case, the zero-order blood vessel is located on the right side of the image.
If we add R in rows, obviously the peak of the vector Lp will occur on the bottom
area. Then we can get Rcut shown in Figure 4.5, without the black area at the
bottom. However, if the zero-order blood vessel is on the left, Lp will occur on the
top area that we can exclude the black area at the top.
Figure 4.5: The result of Rcut.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
31
==PAGE:42==
The reason why we cannot remove these two black areas at the same time is that
Lp can only lead us to find the location of one of the black areas, but the other
black area cannot be directly intercepted by looking for a suitable value. In Figure
4.5, above the black banded area, there is a red area, whose peak is difficult to
find directly. Therefore, we need to find the curve of the boundary between the
red and black areas to determine the location of another black area.
Step five: Rescale Rcut to make the pixel value between 0 and 1.
The rescaling formula is shown below.
R′
cut(i, j) = Rcut(i, j) −Min
Max −Min
(4.1)
where R
′
cut represents the rescaling result of Rcut, i and j mean the row and
column number of Rcut and Min and Max relatively represents the minimum and
the maximum of the matrix Rcut. Using Eq. (4.1), the pixel value of Rcut will be
converted to [0,1]. The purpose of rescaling pixel values is shown in the next step.
Figure 4.6 shows a rescaling example.
Figure 4.6: An example of rescaling
Step Six: Find the boundary curve between another black area and red area, set
up a loop and let the program automatically find the appropriate threshold T.
When we finish the rescaling, the pixels in the upper black area of the Rcut matrix
are basically converted to lots of consecutive 0s. We search each column in Rcut,
record the position of consecutive 0s in each column, and connect the position
of the last one in each column together to form a curve. The curve shows the
32
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:43==
accurate location of the black area at the top, which is also the boundary of the
black area in the top shown in Figure 4.7.
After we get the curve, the threshold T can be set and be used to search the area
between the curve and Lp. If the pixel value is smaller than T, the pixel will be
marked as 0, otherwise it will be 1. These pixels with label 0 constitute the the
black banded area. The purpose of rescaling is to determine the range of the
threshold T. The schematic of using threshold T to find the black banded area is
shown in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: A illustration to show how to use threshold T to find the black banded area if
we assume T = 0.25.
In the above, we only show how to find the black banded region for one frame,
where only a fixed threshold is used. But it is obvious that the threshold T varies
for different frames. So it is necessary to set up a loop and automatically find
the appropriate threshold T for each frame. If we find a suitable threshold, the
position of the black banded area can be successfully found, and then we can
find the angle corresponding to the widest width in this area and the coordinate of
its midpoint.
For ease of explanation, I will list the pseudo code first.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
33
==PAGE:44==
Algorithm 3 Algorithm for automatically searching for an appropriate threshold T to search
the black banded area
Input: R′
cut
Output: The angle corresponding to the widest part of the black banded area, θ;
The center point position of the widest part in the black banded area, X′;
1: for threshold T =: 0.1 to 0.5 by 0.05 do
2:
Copy the matrix R′
cut to get a new matrix Rcutc
3:
Use T to binarize Rcutc
4:
[h,w] =: size(Rcutc)
5:
Create a new matrix RECORD to record location of the black banded area
6:
for i =:1 to w do
7:
Retrieve consecutive 0s in each column of Rcut
8:
Record the position f of the last 0
9:
for j =:f to h do
10:
Retrieve all the pixels, and put the positions of these pixels into RECORD
11:
end for
12:
end for
13:
vector =: sum(Record)
14:
Find the angle theta corresponding to the column with the largest value
15:
for i =:1 to h do
16:
Record all pixels belonging to the black banded area
17:
end for
18:
Calculate the center point X′ of the black banded area
19:
if θ and X′ are not empty then
20:
return theta, X′
21:
break
22:
end if
23: end for
According to many experiment results, the range of threshold T is between 0.1
and 0.3. To ensure the accuracy of the results, the range of T is set between 0.1
and 0.5, with 0.05 as a gap. Until under a certain threshold, the results of θ and
X′ are reasonable and not empty, so the threshold is the appropriate threshold for
the frame. In the meantime, the result of θ and the location X′ will be output. The
schematic of θ and X′ is shown in Figure 4.8. The green line means the projection
line of the Radon transform with the angle θ passing the point Pc, which represents
the center point of Icut. Pps means the projection point of Icut on a line with rotation
angle θ and X′ represents the distance between Pps and Pc.
Step Seven: According to rotation angle of the blood vessel θ and the distance
X’, mathematical formulas can be used to calculate the position of precapillary
sphincter and ROI can be drawn on the original image.
The theta θ represents the direction of the blood vessel and also the inclination
angle of the ROI. However, calculating the position of precapillary sphincter from
X′ experiences some twists and turns.
34
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.8: The schematic of θ and X′.
As mentioned in chapter 3.1, the center of the image is just the center point of
the Radon transform. Assuming that the size of each frame is h × w, then if the
Radon transform is applied to the whole frame, the coordinate of the center point
should be
Pc = (floor((w + 1)/2), floor((h + 1)/2))
(4.2)
where floor() is the function that takes as input a real number x and gives as
output the greatest integer less than or equal to x. However, in fact the Radon
transform is performed on the intercepted frame, so the coordinate of the center
point which needs to consider the offset l1 should be
Pc = (floor((w + 1)/2) + l1, floor((h + 1)/2))
(4.3)
According to the center point and the theta θ, we can draw the line showing the
direction of blood vessel, just the red line in Figure 4.9. The blue point is the center
point of Icut.
Figure 4.9: The two lines based on θ and X′
X′ can help us to find the center point Pps of precapillary sphincter, shown in Figure
4.8. The coordinate of the point Pps is determined by
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
35
==PAGE:46==
Pps = (X′ cos ( θπ
180) + Pc(1), X′ sin ( θπ
180) + Pcenter(2))
(4.4)
The red point in Figure 4.9 is just Pps.
The blue line in Figure 4.9 is a line
perpendicular to the red line and passing through the point Pps.
Finally, we can draw the ROI according to the point Pps, rotation angle θ and
distance X′. ROI is a rectangle, of which point Pps is the center point. The width of
the rectangle can be determined by the user or by the relative distance of points
Pps to l1 or l2. If Pps is closer to l1, then the width is twice the distance, otherwise the
width is twice the distance from Pps to l2. The height of the rectangle is determined
by the blue line in Figure 4.9. Figure 4.10 represents the schematic of ROI in one
frame.
Figure 4.10: The schematic of ROI.
If the width of the ROI is specified by the user, the width will not depend on l1 or
l2. Compared with the former method, this method can better reflect the role of
the center point. As long as the appropriate width is selected, it will not cause the
problem that the ROI area is too large or too small.
36
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.11: The schematic of ROI whose width is specified by the user.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
37
==PAGE:48==
38
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 5
Results and discussion
After introducing our algorithm, the results of the algorithm application will be
shown in this section. In addition to showing the results of different videos, we
will also discuss and analyze the results. For some failed results, the cause of
failure and improvement methods will be analyzed and proposed. The data fitting
method can also be adopted to exclude some outliers in the calculated rotation
angle and center point coordinates so as to correct the wrong results.
Although there are lots of videos provided, for the sake of convenience, five
representative cases are selected.
5.1
Case 1
Case 1 shows some very typical and simple examples.
We choose some
representative videos and show the corresponding frames and results.
The characteristics of these videos belonging to Case 1 are as follows:
1. There are obvious two level blood vessels. The first-order blood vessel is
located in the left side while the zero-order blood vessel lies in the right side.
2. There is a gap or a thin connection between the two level blood vessels, which
makes it easier to find the position of precapillary sphincter.
3. In spite of some stimulation applied to the blood vessels, they do not have
significant movement.
4. The quality of these video from the beginning to the end is very stable.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
39
==PAGE:50==
(a) Frame of video 1
(b) Result of video 1
(c) Frame of Video 2
(d) Result of video 2
(e) Frame of Video 3
(f) Result of video 4
(g) Frame of Video 4
(h) Result of video 4
Figure 5.1: Four representative videos in Case 1 and their results.
Based on these characteristics mentioned above, we choose four representative
videos to show in Figure 5.1. Obviously these videos belonging to this case are
very simple and clear, so the corresponding results are great. ROI successfully
includes the precapillary sphincter and represents the rotation of precapillary
sphincter. The size of ROI in these videos is also very reasonable.
40
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:51==
5.2
Case 2
Case 2 is similar to Case 1 in that it has stable video quality throughout, clear
position of precapillary sphincter and no obvious vascular displacement.
The
biggest difference between them is that the zero-order blood vessel in Case 2
is located on the left side of the video instead of the right side.
(a) Frame 5
(b) Result of frame 5
(c) Frame 78
(d) Result of frame 78
Figure 5.2: Two representative frames in Case 2 and their result.
From Figure 5.2, we can see that the position of the zero-order blood vessel
cannot have an adverse impact on the correct operation of the algorithm. Our
algorithm can still find the correct position and angle of precapillary sphincter.
5.3
Case 3
In Case 3, we focus our attention on videos that contain significant vascular
displacements. In the previous two cases, there is no significant displacement
of the blood vessels in these videos. Even if the blood vessel is constricted or
diastolic, their displacement is not obvious, where there are only some changes
in brightness and blood vessel diameter.
However, in Case 3, we will see
some videos with obvious vascular displacements and analyze the results of the
algorithm running on it.
In this case, the width of all ROI is taken as 25 specified by the user. The method
of using the specified width is chosen because it can better reflect the accuracy
of the center point coordinates of precapillary sphincter. If the relative distance
between l1 or l2 and the center point of precapillary sphincter is selected as the
width, once the deviation occurs in the cut, even if the center point found is very
reasonable, it will cause the area of the ROI to be too large or too small.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
41
==PAGE:52==
(a) Frame 1
(b) Result of frame 1
(c) Frame 69
(d) Result of frame 69
(e) Frame 155
(f) Result of frame 155
(g) Frame 552
(h) Result of frame 552
Figure 5.3: Four representative frames in the first video belonging to case 3 and their
results.
42
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:53==
The characteristics of the first example in Case 3 are as follows:
1. In this video, there are still clear two level blood vessels and the zero-order
blood vessel located in the right side.
2. There is still a thin connection between the two level blood vessels. However,
the two center points of the two level blood vessels and the center point of
precapillary sphincter are obviously not in a straight line. This is a challenge for
our algorithm to find the right location.
3. When a certain stimulus is applied to the blood vessel, it can be seen from
Figure 5.3 that the blood vessel has a significant rightward displacement, and
then slowly returns to its original position with time. This is also a huge challenge.
The result of Figure 5.3 is relatively great. Although the angle formed by the
zero-order blood vessel and first-order capillary in the video may affect the
accuracy of the test result, the two level blood vessels are clearly separated
and do not stick to each other, so the algorithm can correctly find the position
of precapillary sphincter and obtain its angle. Moreover, when the displacement
of the blood vessel occurs, the algorithm successfully detects the position of
precapillary sphincter after the displacement.
The second example shown in Figure 5.4 is similar to the first example, of which
the result is still relatively great. In summary, It can be seen that our algorithm is
competent for the displacement of blood vessels.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
43
==PAGE:54==
(a) Frame 89
(b) Result of frame 89
(c) Frame 100
(d) Result of frame 100
(e) Frame 108
(f) Result of frame 108
(g) Frame 131
(h) Result of frame 131
Figure 5.4: Four representative frames in the second video belonging to case 3 and their
results.
5.4
Case 4
Case 4 collects some videos with strange mistakes caused by some obvious data
outliers. They have no obvious displacement of blood vessels, stable video quality
from beginning to end, and clear area difference between the two level blood
44
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:55==
vessels. However, among a large amount of data composed of rotation angles
and center point coordinates of precapillary sphincter, there are some obvious
outliers leading to failure results. In case 4, the width of all ROI is still taken as 25
specified by the user.
(a) Frame 9
(b) Result of frame 9
(c) Frame 20
(d) Result of frame 20
(e) Frame 29
(f) Result of frame 29
Figure 5.5: Three representative frames in the first example of case 4 and their results.
Figure 5.5 represents the first example of case 4 and its results. Although the
three original frames are very similar, their results are not consistent. From Figure
5.6, we can see that the reason for failures does not come from the wrong cut.
Obviously, the interception results of these three frames are basically similar,
so the reason for failures should be that the algorithm makes mistakes in the
judgment of the black banded area in the two frames. That is to say, in these
two frames, the rotation angle and the coordinates of the center point should be
outliers.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
45
==PAGE:56==
(a) Cut result 9
(b) Cut result 20
(C) Cut result 29
Figure 5.6: The comparison of three cut results.
In order to eliminate the interference of outliers on the data, we can adopt the
method of data fitting to fit a curve with the correct data, and then use the fitted
value to replace the original data. First, we plot the data of theta and center point
coordinates and observe the position of outliers from Figure 5.7. It’s obvious that
there are five outliers in these data.
(a) Plot of rotation angle θ
(b) Plot of center point coordinates (xps, yps)
Figure 5.7: Plots of rotation angle and center point coordinates.
In addition to the observation method, least squares regression can be adopted to
eliminate outliers and calculate fitting curves to replace outliers [Torr and Murray
1993]. In statistics, least squares method is to estimate unknown parameters
in linear regression models.
It is a set of formulations for solving statistical
problems involved in linear regression, including variants for ordinary, weighted,
and generalized residuals. In this thesis, we adopt ordinary least squares (OLS)
for data fitting[Hutcheson 2011].
Suppose there are two sets of data x = {x1, x2, ..., xn} and y = {y1, y2, ..., yn},
where x is the independent variable and y is the dependent variable. When these
data are depicted in the Cartesian coordinate system, if the sample points can be
fitted into a straight line shown in Figure 5.8 , we can perform certain analysis and
prediction.
In order to obtain this fitted straight line, we need to use the distance between
each sample point and the fitted straight line as the judgment basis. The smaller
the distance, the closer these sample points are to the fitted straight line. Since
the value of distance is positive or negative, we choose the sum of squares of
distance as the judgment criteria, which is called residual sum of squares. When
the residual sum of squares between the fitted straight line and the sample point
46
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.8: The schematic of the fitted line between x and y.
reaches the minimum, the straight line at this time is the most suitable regression
model.
We assume the function of the fitted straight line is f(x) = ax + b, where a and
b are the parameters we need to solve. The residual sum of squares ε can be
expressed by
ε =
n
∑
i=1
(f(xi) −yi)2 =
n
∑
i=1
(axi + b −yi)2
(5.1)
Since the expression of the sum of residuals is a quadratic function, the partial
derivatives of a and b should be equal to 0 to get the minimum value of ε.
∂ε
∂a = 2
n
∑
i=1
(axi + b −yi) = 0,
∂ε
∂b = 2
n
∑
i=1
(axi + b −yi) xi = 0
(5.2)
We can use the average value and the total number of samples to characterize
our samples, as shown in the following equation.
nx =
n
∑
i=1
xi,
ny =
n
∑
i=1
yi
(5.3)
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
47
==PAGE:58==
From Eq. (5.2) and (5.3), we can infer the following formulas
a = y −bx,
b =
n∑
i=1
(xi −x)(yi −y)
n∑
i=1
(xi −x)2
(5.4)
From now on, we can calculate two parameters a and b in the fitted straight line
equation. But if we generalize the fitting polynomial from the first order to the
higher order, the corresponding formulas will change.
The objective function of higher order polynomials can be expressed as
f(x) = a0 + a1x + a2x2 + . . . + akxk
(5.5)
The residual sum of squares can be dertermined by
ε =
n
∑
i=1
[
yi −
(
a0 + a1xi + a2x2
i + . . . + akxk
i
)]2
(5.6)
In order to make the objective function optimal, we will make the partial derivative
of each coefficient equal to be 0, shown in Eq. (5.7).
∂ε
∂a0 = −2
n∑
i=1
[
yi −
(
a0 + a1xi + a2x2
i + . . . + akxk
i
)]
= 0
∂ε
∂a1 = −2
n∑
i=1
[
yi −
(
a0 + a1xi + a2x2
i + . . . + akxk
i
)]
xi = 0
∂ε
∂a2 = −2
n∑
i=1
[
yi −
(
a0 + a1xi + a2x2
i + . . . + akxk
i
)]
x2
i = 0
. . . . . .
∂ε
∂ak = −2
n∑
i=1
[
yi −
(
a0 + a1xi + a2x2
i + . . . + akxk
i
)]
xk
i = 0
(5.7)
48
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:59==
We can get the following equation after simplifying Eq.(5.7).
na0 + a1
n∑
i=1
xi + a2
n∑
i=1
x2
i + . . . + ak
n∑
i=1
xk
i =
n∑
i=1
yi
a0
n∑
i=1
xi + a1
n∑
i=1
x2
i + a2
n∑
i=1
x3
i + . . . + ak
n∑
i=1
xk+1
i
=
n∑
i=1
xiyi
a0
n∑
i=1
x2
i + a1
n∑
i=1
x3
i + a2
n∑
i=1
x4
i + . . . + ak
n∑
i=1
xk+2
i
=
n∑
i=1
x2
i yi
. . . . . .
a0
n∑
i=1
xk
i + a1
n∑
i=1
xk+1
i
+ a2
n∑
i=1
xk+2
i
+ . . . + ak
n∑
i=1
x2k
i
=
n∑
i=1
xk
i yi
(5.8)
Then the matrix form of Eq.(5.8) can make it more convenient and easier to
calculate.


n
n∑
i=1
xi
n∑
i=1
x2
i
. . .
n∑
i=1
xk
i
n∑
i=1
xi
n∑
i=1
x2
i
n∑
i=1
x3
i
. . .
n∑
i=1
xk+1
i
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
n∑
i=1
xk
i
n∑
i=1
xk+1
i
n∑
i=1
xk+2
i
. . .
n∑
i=1
x2k
i




a0
a1
. . .
ak


=


n∑
i=1
yi
n∑
i=1
xiyi
. . .
n∑
i=1
xk
i yi


⃗X ⃗A = ⃗Y
(5.9)
From Eq.(5.9), the matrices ⃗X and ⃗Y are known, and ⃗A only contains all the
polynomial coefficients of f(x) to be solved, so the problem is transformed into the
solution of the linear equations. So far, we have introduced the relevant formulas
of the least square method. Next, we will explain its practical application in this
thesis.
This method is sensitive to outliers, so the premise of applying this method is
that there should not be too many outliers in the data, and the sample data size
should be large enough, at least greater than 150. Figure 5.9 shows the second
order curves fitted by least square method of the three datasets.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
49
==PAGE:60==
(a) θ and its fitting curve
(b) xps and its fitting curve
(c) yps and its fitting curve
Figure 5.9: Fitting curves of three datasets in the first example of Case 4.
What’s more, we can also use MAD (median absolute deviation) to judge outliers.
MAD is a robust statistic that handles outliers in the data set more elastically
than standard deviation, which can greatly reduce the impact of outliers on the
dataset[Howell 2005]. For an univariate datasets X = {X1, X2, X3, ..., Xn}, the
formula for MAD can be expressed as
MAD(X) = median(|Xi −median(X)|)
(5.10)
In this thesis, we define outliers as values that differ from the median by more
than three times the MAD. After calculation, the median of theta dataset is −23,
and the MAD value of this data set is 5, then the theta value belonging to the
outlier should be greater than −8. The location of outliers in the theta dataset is
[20, 29, 80, 85, 113]. Similarly, the discrete values in the xps and yps datasets are
also in the same position.
When we get the position of these outliers, we can replace the original values by
the data in the fitting curve, which makes the original wrong result into the correct
one, shown in Figure 5.10.
50
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:61==
(a) New result 20
(b) New result 29
(c) New result 80
(d) New result 85
(e) New result 113
Figure 5.10: New results of the first example after correction.
We can use a similar example to verify that the method can effectively exclude
outliers and take advantage of the fitted values to replace outliers. Figure 5.11
represents two failure results of the second example.
(a) Result of frame 33
(b) Result of frame 60
Figure 5.11: Two failure results in the second example of Case 4.
Similarly, we need to use the least squares method to fit the curves of the three
datasets and find outliers among them. The threedata sets in the second example
and their fitted second-order curves are shown in Figure 5.12.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
51
==PAGE:62==
(a) θ and its fitting curve
(b) xps and its fitting curve
(c) yps and its fitting curve
Figure 5.12: Fitting curves of three datasets in the second example of Case 4.
The location of outliers is obviously [33,60]. When we apply the fitted data to
replace the original data, the corrected results are shown in Figure 5.13.
(a) New result 33
(b) New result 60
Figure 5.13: New results of the second example after correction.
In summary, data fitting can be applied to exclude some failed results caused
by significant outliers.
The premise of using this method is that there is no
52
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:63==
obvious displacement of the blood vessels in the video, and the number of outliers
accounts for a relatively small proportion of the total data.
Once there is a
significant displacement of the blood vessel, then we need to use other methods
to consider the displacement points and outliers separately. The content of this
part will be discussed in the future work part.
5.5
Case 5
Case 5 is a very special example that its result is a complete failure. The video
has no obvious displacement of blood vessels from beginning to end, so only one
frame in the video shown in Figure 5.14 is used to represent Case 5.
Figure 5.14: One frame in Case 5.
As shown in the Figure 5.14, the first order blood vessel and the second order
blood vessels are always closely connected. So this violates our assumption when
designing our algorithm - there must be a gap or a thin connection between the
two level blood vessels. Therefore, many failure results appear in Case 5 shown
in Figure 5.15.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
53
==PAGE:64==
(a) Failure result 1
(b) Failure result 2
(c) Failure result 3
Figure 5.15: Some failure results of Case 5.
54
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 6
Conclusion & future work
In this chapter we will integrate all insights in the previous chapters to give the
final conclusion of the project in this article.
First, we start by introducing the experiments done by biologists from the
University of Copenhagen on mouse brains and subsequent image processing
work. Biologists have studied an unprecedented method, that is, using two-photon
microscopy to obtain 4-dimensional information on the brain structure of mouse.
In the brain, precapillary sphincter plays a critical role.
Therefore, accurately
finding its location is of great significance for studying its responses with stimulus.
However, the original method of manually drawing the ROI cannot be applied to
the video with the displacement of the blood vessel and implement the real-time
detection of its position. So we have to find a new approach to tracking precapillary
sphincter in real time using the ROI.
We show the video data used for the project and the method of processing the
video data. The novel method can obtain 4-dimensional information of brain blood
vessels, and we compress all the planes in each stack in the video. The processed
video image is discarded with depth information, leaving only 3D information.
Our algorithm and the theoretical knowledge - image binarization method Otsu’s
method and Radon transform - used by the algorithm are introduced in detail
in the third chapter. Considering the real-time and accuracy of the algorithm,
Otsu’s method has become our best choice for binary image. Considering the
real-time and accuracy of the algorithm, Otsu’s method has become our best
choice for binary image. Radon transform is very similar to Hough transform, but
the former is not as widely used in computer vision as the latter. After comparing
the difference between the two transforms, the accuracy of Radon transform is
better than Hough transform, and we have a priori knowledge about the rotation
angle of blood vessels, so Radon transform is a better choice.
Next, we elaborate on the steps of the algorithm and explain them with
corresponding diagrams and codes. The premise of our algorithm is that the two
level blood vessels in the video avoid to be closely connected, but have a gap or
a very thin connection. Because of the need to ensure the real-time requirement
of the algorithm, our algorithm can only avoid the use of complex methods. In
the algorithm, we use pixel rescaling to find corresponding reasonable threshold
for each frame, and find the black banded area in the result of Radon transform
so as to obtain the rotation angle of the blood vessel and the center position of
precapillary sphincter.
Finally, we choose five cases to test the running effect of the algorithm and the
completion of the project goals.
As long as the premise is not violated, the
algorithm can detect the position of precapillary sphincter in real time and mark it
in the video with a rectangle, regardless of whether the blood vessels in the video
have movement. For some failed results caused by some data outliers, we can
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
55
==PAGE:66==
adopt the method of data fitting to find out the outliers and use the fitted results to
correct theses errors.
Future work
Lots of interesting ideas came out while working on this thesis, some of which
could not be implemented due to time limitations.
In Chapter 4, we mention that the method of data fitting can be adopted to
exclude outliers in the data. However, the method mentioned in the thesis is only
suitable when there are few outliers and there are no obvious displacements of
blood vessels in the video. Once the blood vessel displacement appears in the
video, the rotation angle and the center point of precapillary sphincter will also
change, which is possible to be mistaken for outliers. Therefore, if we want to
apply data fitting to all videos, we need to first distinguish between displacement
points and true outliers. For example, the video in red can be used to find the
specific displacement points of each video. Then, when looking for outliers, the
corresponding displacement points are excluded from consideration, so that the
real outliers can be found. Finally, with the protection of the true displacement
points, curve fitting is performed.
In addition to the processing of data, we can also take image segmentation
technology into consideration to deal with some videos that do not meet the
premises of our algorithm.
With the help of image segmentation technology,
the outline of the blood vessel will be clearly extracted, which brings great
convenience to the subsequent processing of the position between the two level
blood vessels to find precapillary sphincter. However, this approach will affect
the real-time nature of the algorithm, because image segmentation algorithm is
usually very computationally intensive and complex.
Last but not least, we only use the 3D information from the original 4D data. If
we can reconstruct a 3d model of blood vessels in the brain and make a model of
its evolution over time, we can correctly find precapillary sphincter and study the
response when applying stimulus on it if blood vessels rotate in three-dimensional
space.
56
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
Grubb, Søren et al. (2020). “Precapillary sphincters maintain perfusion in the cerebral
cortex”. In: Nature Communications 11.1, pp. 1–12.
Cai, Changsi et al. (2019). “In Vivo Three-Dimensional Two-Photon Microscopy to Study
Conducted Vascular Responses by Local ATP Ejection Using a Glass Micro-Pipette”.
In: JoVE (Journal of Visualized Experiments) 148, e59286.
Kaiser, W and CGB Garrett (1961). “Two-photon excitation in Ca F 2: Eu 2+”. In: Physical
review letters 7.6, p. 229.
Shih, Andy Y et al. (2012). “Two-photon microscopy as a tool to study blood flow and
neurovascular coupling in the rodent brain”. In: Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &
Metabolism 32.7, pp. 1277–1309.
He, Jingyu et al. (2005). “A comparison of binarization methods for historical
archive documents”. In: Eighth International Conference on Document Analysis and
Recognition (ICDAR’05). IEEE, pp. 538–542.
Athimethphat, Maythapolnun (2011). “A review on global binarization algorithms for
degraded document images”. In:
Lee, Byeong Rae et al. (2004). “Adaptive local binarization method for recognition of
vehicle license plates”. In: International Workshop on Combinatorial Image Analysis.
Springer, pp. 646–655.
Gatos, Basilios, Ioannis Pratikakis, and Stavros J Perantonis (2006). “Adaptive degraded
document image binarization”. In: Pattern recognition 39.3, pp. 317–327.
Otsu, Nobuyuki (1979). “A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms”. In:
IEEE transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics 9.1, pp. 62–66.
Radon, Johann (1917). “About the determination of functions by their integral values
 slowly certain manifolds, Ber”. In: ratio Sachs. Akad. Wiss. Leipzig, Math Phys Klass
69.
Hough, Paul VC (Dec. 1962). Method and means for recognizing complex patterns. US
Patent 3,069,654.
Torr, Philip HS and David W Murray (1993). “Outlier detection and motion segmentation”.
In: Sensor Fusion VI. Vol. 2059. International Society for Optics and Photonics,
pp. 432–443.
Hutcheson, Graeme D (2011). “Ordinary least-squares regression”. In: L. Moutinho
and GD Hutcheson, The SAGE dictionary of quantitative management research,
pp. 224–228.
Howell, David C (2005). “Median absolute deviation”. In: Encyclopedia of statistics in
behavioral science.
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
57
==PAGE:68==
58
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:69==
Appendix A
1 The main function of the thesis -“ROIsearch.m”
1
2
function [xneed,yneed,th] = ROIsearch(filename ,width)
3
%ROISEARCH: To find the location [xneed,yneed] of the chosen point near
4
%the precapillary sphincter ,and the direction [th] of the two blood
5
%vessels , we take the video [filename] as the input variable. The
6
%variable [width] is optional ,which represents the width of the ROI
7
%area. If we don't give a specific value, it has a default value:
8
%choose the shortest distance between the point [xneed,yneed]
9
%and the two cut lines.
10
11
% Determine whether the width is specified by the user
12
if nargin==1
13
USER = 0;
14
else
15
USER = 1;
16
end
17
18
Info = imfinfo(filename);
19
Slice=size(Info ,1);% Get the number of z frames
20
21
xneed = zeros(1,Slice);
22
yneed = zeros(1,Slice);
23
th = zeros(1,Slice);
24
25
highestori = 0;
26
L1ori = 0;
27
L2ori = 0;
28
29
%----start to read the video frame by frame----
30
for i = 1:1:Slice
31
[X,~] = imread(filename ,i);
32
33
%----change the image format and apply Otsu's method to binarize the image
34
X = uint8(double(X)/65535*255);
35
X1 = X;
36
level=graythresh(X);
37
X=imbinarize(X,level);
38
39
%----Determine the local maximum position of the zero-order blood vessels
40
[H,W] = size(X);
41
vector = sum(X,1);
42
highest = find(vector==max(vector)); %calculate the peak in the figure
43
if length(highest)~=1
44
highest = round(mean(highest));
45
end
46
47
if highest >=0.45*W
48
flag = 1;% zero-order blood vessel is located on the right
49
else
50
flag = 0;% zero-order blood vessel is located on the left
51
end
52
53
%----Judge the correlation between frames ----
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
59
==PAGE:70==
54
if flag == 1
55
if highestori ~= 0
56
distance = highest -highestori;
57
if distance <= round(0.1*W) && distance >=0 %no displacement occurs
58
L1 = L1ori;
59
L2 = highestori;
60
else
61
[L1,L2,LOW] = findtwopeaksnew(X);
62
end
63
else
64
[L1,L2,LOW] = findtwopeaksnew(X);
65
end
66
else
67
if highestori ~= 0
68
distance = highest -highestori;
69
if distance <= round(0.1*W) && distance >=0 %no displacement occurs
70
L2 = L2ori;
71
L1 = highestori;
72
else
73
[L1,L2,LOW] = findtwopeaksnew(X);
74
end
75
else
76
[L1,L2,LOW] = findtwopeaksnew(X);
77
end
78
end
79
80
%----Cut the frame and apply the Radon tranform ----
81
Xcut = X(1:H,L1:L2);
82
theta = -30:1:30;
83
[R,xp] = radon(Xcut,theta);
84
[h,w] = size(R);
85
86
%----Cut the result of the Radon tranform ----
87
if flag == 1
88
l2 = findRpeak(R,flag);
89
Rcut = R(1:l2,1:w);
90
else
91
l1 = findRpeak(R,flag);
92
Rcut = R(l1:h,1:w);
93
end
94
95
96
NR = rescaling(Rcut);
97
98
[xprime ,th(1,i)] = searchbandtest(NR,flag); % Find the black babnded area
99
100
%----If the intercepted area is wrong, X' will be set to 888 for output ,
101
%then the image interception , Radon transform , and black belt area search
102
%will be restarted ----
103
if xprime == 888
104
if flag == 1
105
L1 = LOW-round(0.2*W);
106
Xcut = X(1:H,L1:L2);
107
[R,xp] = radon(Xcut,theta);
108
[~,w] = size(R);
109
l2 = findRpeak(R,flag);
110
Rcut = R(1:l2,1:w);
111
NR = rescaling(Rcut);
112
[xprime,th(1,i)] = searchbandtest(NR,flag);
113
else
114
L2 = LOW+round(0.2*W);
115
Xcut = X(1:H,L1:L2);
60
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:71==
116
[R,xp] = radon(Xcut,theta);
117
[h,w] = size(R);
118
l1 = findRpeak(R,flag);
119
Rcut = R(l1:h,1:w);
120
NR = rescaling(Rcut);
121
[xprime,th(1,i)] = searchbandtest(NR,flag);
122
end
123
end
124
125
if flag == 0
126
xprime = xprime+l1;
127
end
128
[origin ,~] = find(xp==0);
129
130
%----Use theta and xprime for calculation and drawing ----
131
th(1,i) = th(1,i)-30;
132
xprime = round(xprime)-origin;
133
centerx = floor((size(Xcut ,2)+1)/2)+L1;%130
134
centery = floor((size(Xcut ,1)+1)/2);%78
135
k = -tan(th(1,i)/180*pi);
136
k2 = -1/k;
137
138
xneed(1,i) = xprime*cos(th(1,i)/180*pi)+centerx;
139
yneed(1,i) = k*(xneed(1,i)-centerx)+centery;
140
141
x = [1 size(X,2)];
142
143
144
% When the input variable width is empty,we use the default value
145
switch nargin
146
case
1
147
sym1 = xneed(1,i)-L1;
148
sym2 = L2-xneed(1,i);
149
if sym1<=sym2
150
width = sym1*2;
151
else
152
width = sym2*2;
153
end
154
end
155
156
157
Q1 = k*(L1-centerx)+centery;
158
Q2 = k*(L2-centerx)+centery;
159
160
hei = 60;
161
162
163
if USER == 0
164
% If width is not specified by the user, judge the relative distance between
165
% the point (xneed,yneed) and l1 or l2----
166
sym1 = xneed(1,i)-L1;
167
sym2 = L2-xneed(1,i);
168
if sym1<=sym2
169
figure
170
imshow(X1,'InitialMagnification','fit');
171
hold on;
172
polyin = polyshape([L1 L1+width L1+width L1],
173
[Q1-hei Q1-hei Q1+hei Q1+hei]);
174
polyout = rotate(polyin ,-th(1,i),[xneed(1,i) yneed(1,i)]);
175
plot(polyout);
176
title(i);
177
else
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
61
==PAGE:72==
178
figure
179
imshow(X1,'InitialMagnification','fit');
180
hold on;
181
polyin = polyshape([L2-width L2 L2 L2-width],
182
[Q2-hei Q2-hei Q2+hei Q2+hei]);
183
polyout = rotate(polyin ,-th(1,i),[xneed(1,i) yneed(1,i)]);
184
plot(polyout);
185
title(i);
186
end
187
else
188
%----width is specified by the user----
189
figure
190
imshow(X1,'InitialMagnification','fit');
191
hold on;
192
polyin = polyshape([xneed(1,i)-width/2 xneed(1,i)+width/2
193
xneed(1,i)+width/2 xneed(1,i)-width/2],[yneed(1,i)-hei yneed(1,i)-hei
194
yneed(1,i)+hei yneed(1,i)+hei]);
195
polyout = rotate(polyin,-th(1,i),[xneed(1,i) yneed(1,i)]);
196
plot(polyout);
197
title(i);
198
end
199
200
pause(1);
201
close all;
202
&---Update reference variables ---
203
if flag ==1
204
highestori = L2;
205
else
206
highestori = L1;
207
end
208
L1ori = L1;
209
L2ori = L2;
210
211
end
212
213
end
62
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:73==
Appendix B
2 Find two local maximums in the frame - “findtwopeaksnew.m”
1
function [L1,L2,LOW] = findtwopeaksnew(X)
2
3
[~,W] = size(X);
4
vector = sum(X,1);% Add the matrix by column
5
highest = find(vector==max(vector));% the local maximum location of the
6
%zero-order blood vessel
7
if length(highest)~=1
8
highest = round(mean(highest));
9
end
10
11
if highest >=0.45*W
12
l1 = 1;
13
l2 = highest;
14
flag = 1;% the zero-order blood vessel is on the right
15
else
16
l1 = highest;
17
l2 = W;
18
flag = 0;% the zero-order blood vessel is on the left
19
end
20
21
record = zeros(1,l2-l1);
22
for i = l1+1:l2
23
if vector(1,i)>=vector(1,i-1)
24
record(1,i) = 0;
25
else
26
record(1,i) = 1;
27
end
28
end
29
30
%----looking for the valley ----
31
a = diff([0,record ,0]);
32
ind = find(a==1);
33
num = find(a==-1)-ind;
34
[b,L]=sort(num,'descend');
35
36
37
38
maxlocation = find(b==max(b));
39
maxmum = max(b);
40
lnum = length(maxlocation);
41
42
if lnum~=1
43
LOW = ind(1,L(1,lnum))+maxmum;
44
if abs(LOW-l2)<=10 || abs(LOW-l1)<=10
45
LOW = ind(1,L(1,lnum -1))+maxmum;
46
end
47
else
48
LOW = ind(1,L(1,1))+maxmum;
49
%
if abs(LOW-l2)<=5 || abs(LOW-l1)<=10
50
%
LOW = ind(1,L(1,2))+num(1,L(1,2));
51
%
end
52
end
53
LOW = round(mean(LOW)); % LOW means the location of the trough in the image
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
63
==PAGE:74==
54
55
%----Find the vector from the local maximum of the zero-order blood vessel
56
%to the trough ,and determine whether the value at the trough is the minimum
57
if flag==1
58
vectortest = vector(1,LOW:l2);
59
testLOW = find(vectortest==min(vectortest))+LOW;
60
if testLOW ~= LOW
61
LOW = round(mean(testLOW));
62
else
63
vectortest2 = vector(1,LOW -20:l2);
64
testLOW2 = find(vectortest2==min(vectortest2))+LOW -20;
65
if testLOW2 ~= LOW
66
LOW = round(mean(testLOW2));
67
end
68
end
69
else
70
vectortest = vector(1,l1:LOW);
71
testLOW = find(vectortest==min(vectortest))+l1;
72
if testLOW ~= LOW
73
LOW = round(mean(testLOW));
74
else
75
vectortest2 = vector(1,l1:LOW+20);
76
testLOW2 = find(vectortest2==min(vectortest2))+l1;
77
if testLOW2 ~= LOW
78
LOW = round(mean(testLOW2));
79
end
80
end
81
end
82
83
LOW = round(mean(LOW));
84
85
if LOW<= round(0.15*W) || LOW>=W-round(0.15*W)
86
if flag == 1
87
LOW = highest -round(0.15*W);
88
else
89
LOW = highest+round(0.15*W);
90
end
91
end
92
93
94
%----use experience to infer the local maximum position of the first-order
95
%capillary ----
96
if l2 == highest
97
L1 = LOW-round(0.15*W);
98
L2 = l2;
99
else
100
L1 = highest;
101
L2 = LOW+round(0.15*W);
102
end
103
104
105
%----Find the vector from the local maximum of the first-order capillary to
106
%the trough ,and determine whether the value at the trough is the minimum
107
if l2 == highest
108
vectortest2 = vector(1,L1:LOW);
109
testLOW2 = find(vectortest2==min(vectortest2))+L1;
110
testLOW2 = mean(testLOW2);
111
if testLOW2 ~= LOW
112
LOW = testLOW2;
113
L1 = LOW-round(0.12*W);
114
end
115
else
64
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:75==
116
vectortest2 = vector(1,LOW:L2);
117
testLOW2 = find(vectortest2==min(vectortest2))+LOW;
118
testLOW2 = mean(testLOW2);
119
if testLOW2 ~= LOW
120
LOW = testLOW2;
121
L2 = LOW+round(0.12*W);
122
end
123
end
124
125
L1 = round(L1);
126
L2 = round(L2);
127
LOW = round(LOW);
128
129
end
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
65
==PAGE:76==
Appendix C
3 The function of finding theta and xprime - “searchbandtest.m”
1
2
function [xp,th] = searchbandtest(R,flag)
3
4
for threshold = 0.1:0.05:0.5
5
6
[h,w] = size(R);
7
record = zeros(h,w);
8
% binarize Rcut
9
for i = 1:h
10
for j = 1:w
11
if R(i,j)<=threshold
12
record(i,j) = 0;
13
else
14
record(i,j) = 1;
15
end
16
end
17
end
18
19
20
test = zeros(h,w);
21
if flag == 1
22
for m = 1:w
23
temp = record(1:h,m);
24
a = diff([0;temp;0]);
25
ind = find(a==1);
26
f = ind(1);
%f records the last consecutive 0 cutoff position of
27
%each column
28
for n = f:h
29
if R(n,m)<=threshold
30
test(n,m)=1;
31
end
32
end
33
end
34
else
35
for m = 1:w
36
temp = record(1:h,m);
37
a = diff([0;temp;0]);
38
ind = find(a==1);
39
f = ind(end);
%f records the last consecutive 0 cutoff position
40
%of each column
41
for n = 1:f
42
if R(n,m)<=threshold
43
test(n,m)=1;
44
end
45
end
46
end
47
end
48
49
% test shows all consecutive 0 positions in the matrix Rcut
50
51
vector = sum(test);
52
[~,th] = find(vector==max(max(vector)));
53
if length(th)~=1
66
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:77==
54
th =round(mean(th));
55
th = th(end);
56
end
57
58
record2 = [];
59
for i = 1:h
60
if test(i,th)==1
61
record2 = [record2;i];
62
end
63
end
64
65
if length(record2) >= 2
66
xp = (record2(1,1)+record2(end,1))/2;
67
break; % Output these reasonable values
68
else
69
if length(record2)==1
70
xp = record2;
71
break; % Output these reasonable values
72
end
73
end
74
75
end
76
77
%---If after running all the loops, xprime is always unreasonable ,
78
%then output with the value of 888
79
if isempty(record2)==1
80
xp = 888;
81
end
82
83
end
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
67
==PAGE:78==
Appendix D
4
The
function
of
getting
Rcut
and
rescaling
pixels
-
“findRpeak.m” and “rescaling.m”
1
function l2 = findRpeak(R,flag)
2
if flag == 1
3
vector2 = sum(R,2);
4
[l2,~] = find(vector2==max(vector2));
5
boundary = round(size(R,1)/2);
6
if l2<=boundary
7
vector3 = vector2(boundary:end,1);
8
[l2,~] = find(vector3==max(vector3));
9
l2 = l2+boundary;
10
end
11
else
12
vector2 = sum(R,2);
13
[l2,~] = find(vector2==max(vector2));
14
end
15
end
1
function NR = rescaling(R)
2
% Rescale these pixels to [0, 1]
3
Max = max(max(R));
4
Min = min(min(R));
5
[h,w]=size(R);
6
NR = zeros(h,w);
7
for i = 1:h
8
for j = 1:w
9
NR(i,j) = (R(i,j)-Min)/(Max-Min);
10
end
11
end
12
end
68
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
==PAGE:79==
Real-time tracking of precapillary sphincters using ROI
69
==PAGE:80==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
