==PAGE:1==
 
Domesticating Technology:  
Innovations making sense within 
communities 
Master Thesis 
Martha Cecilia Fernandez Contreras 
s181302 
Supervisor: 
Carina Lomberg 
Denmark, June 2020
==PAGE:2==
Preface 
This thesis is the completion of a Master project developed at the Department of Management 
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project was initiated in February 2020 
and ﬁnalized in June 2020, which includes ﬁve months of research assignments.  
After completing my B.A. in industrial design in Mexico, I worked for a couple of years in 
Entrepreneurship programs and I was involved in a FemTech startup that developed my interest in this 
sector. But after these experiences, I decided to come back to the student life to study design and 
innovation at DTU and learn what lies behind product development. Along with my experience in DTU, 
I had the opportunity to be part of the DTU Skylab team where my interest in startups became bigger 
and provided the main perspective for this project.  
I am very thankful for all the people that have motivated and contributed to this project and the 
amazing time I had been a DTU student. Amongst these, I would like to give special recognition to: 
•
Mom, Dad, and Cristina thank you for walking by my side in this journey. If there is someone to 
be grateful for is deﬁnitely all of you. Thank you for making me believe that I can do anything 
and everything in life. 
•
The Technical University of Denmark, for believing in me and making this dream a reality. 
Without the tuition fee waiver to cover my whole study program Iâ€™m not sure I will be 
standing here. 
•
National Council for Science and Technology of Mexico - It will be impossible to not say thanks 
for the economical support for my daily living expenses so I could focus on my master's 
program. 
•
Carina, for supporting my project and answering each question even though the past months 
have been crazy for everyone. 
•
Roberto, for pushing me to take this experience and the encouragement along these 2 years, 
even in distance, in a just-graduated-foreigners and pandemic situation you made me feel 
held. 
•
Jacob, for suddenly appearing in this journey and making me reﬂect on each step I was taking. 
For proofreading, moral support, and patience in this process. 
•
To all the startups that decided to be part of this project, I cannot thank you enough for letting 
me learn how are you changing this world. This project will deﬁnitely not be the same without 
all your contributions. 
•
Skylab Team, thank you for allowing me to learn from you and make me part of this 
unimaginable ecosystem, you were part of most of my experience in DTU and it was deﬁnitely 
one of the most valuable ones. 
•
Friends, for the amazing moments along these 2 years and the support for the past months. 
Deﬁnitely sharing the adventure of writing a thesis in a lockdown is something that we will 
always cherish. 
Denmark, June 2020 
Cecilia Fernandez 
Domesticating Technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
1
==PAGE:3==
Abstract 
Startups are among the most innovative social structures on the planet. Their speed of change and 
level of innovation is often triggered by novel technological advances, which is also often their key 
path to success. However, the path from developing a new product to assuring its adoption among 
users comes with different challenges. As a consequence, many startups with great solutions miss 
the opportunity to reach their full potential, as their product is not adopted by the target market. 
To help support startups in their journey to facilitate users to adopt their products, this thesis aims to 
develop a domestication tool startups can use to improve their product adoption process. Speciﬁcally, 
a tool that helps startups identify the relationship between their product features and the adoption 
factors for their products when entering target markets, is developed.  
Relevant literature is reviewed to establish the theoretical foundation for the development of an 
applicable tool. Furthermore, a series of six case studies from two different countries were included to 
complement the theoretical foundation with real-world examples. The literature analysis and case 
studies provided meaningful insights into the conceptualization process for the tool.  
Finally, the newly developed tool is presented and evaluated by the case studies and perspectives are 
analyzed on how the tool can be implemented further and developed in the future in the startup 
ecosystem. 
Domesticating Technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
2
==PAGE:4==
Approval 
This thesis has been developed for the past ﬁve months at the program of  Design and Innovation in 
the Department of Management at the Technical University of Denmark, in partial fulﬁllment for the 
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. 
It is expected that the reader is familiar with the design ﬁeld. 
Martha Cecilia Fernandez Contreras - s181302 
_______________________________ 
Signature 
_______________________________ 
Date 
Domesticating Technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
3
26 June 2020
==PAGE:5==
Copyright 
Domesticating Technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
Domesticering af teknologier: Innovationer tilpasset til fællesskabe 
Master Thesis 
June 2020 
By Martha Cecilia Fernandez Contreras 
Copyright: Duplicate of this publication in total or in sections must incorporate the customary 
bibliographic citation. 
Domesticating Technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
4
==PAGE:6==
Content 
1. Introduction 
9 
1.1 Relevance of the project 
9 
1.2 Project aim, objective and research questions 
10 
1.3 Thesis structure 
11 
1.4 Key Terms 
11 
2. Research Methodology 
12 
2.1 Research Paradigm 
12 
2.2 Research methodology 
12 
2.3 Research Strategy 
13 
2.4 Research Quality 
15 
2.5 Summary 
15 
3. Literature Review 
16 
3.1 Theory Areas 
16 
3.2 Technological Innovation 
16 
3.3 Social Shaping of Technology 
19 
3.4 Startups 
24 
3.5 Summary 
30 
4. Case Studies 
32 
4.1 Case Study A: ServedOnSalt 
32 
4.2 Case Study B: Nature Boards 
33 
4.3 Case Study C: Ponik 
34 
4.4 Case Study D: OS City 
34 
4.5 Case Study E: Kabaan 
35 
4.6 Case Study F: Cultivo 
36 
4.7 Summary 
37 
5. Understanding the Synthesis of Domestication Models 
38 
5.1 Developing of theoretical frameworks 
38 
5.2 Fundamental dimensions of Domestication Models 
39 
5.3 Conceptual elements of Domestication Models 
40 
5.4 Behavior properties of Domestication Models 
41 
5.5 Summary 
42 
6. Domestication Model Conceptualization 
43 
6.1 Identiﬁcation of Conceptual Aspects 
43 
6.2 Modelling of Concepts 
44 
6.3 Evaluation Criteria 
46 
6.4 Proposed tool for Domestication of Technology 
47 
6.6. Summary 
49 
7. Domestication Model Application 
50 
7.1 Identiﬁcation of Perceived Value 
50 
7.2 Domestication Tool related to Startup perception 
50 
7.3 Summary 
53 
8. Discussion 
54 
8.1 Research validity 
54 
Domesticating Technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
5
==PAGE:7==
8.2 Findings in relation to existing knowledge 
56 
8.3 Other analysis for Domestication Models 
58 
8.4 Summary 
58 
9. Conclusion 
60 
9.1 Research ﬁndings 
60 
9.2 Core contributions 
61 
10. Perspectives 
62 
10.1 Reﬂections on the project 
62 
10.2 Suggestions for future work 
62 
11. Bibliography 
64 
12. Appendices 
69
Domesticating Technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
6
==PAGE:8==
List of Tables 
List of Figures 
Table 1 - This Thesis Structure 
11 
Table 2 - Design Research Methodology Overview 
13 
Table 3 - Summary of case studies 
14 
Table 4 - Adopter Categories 
21 
Table 5 - Perspectives of DOI 
21 
Table 6 - Domestication Theory dimensions 
22 
Table 7 - Perspectives of Domestication Theory 
22 
Table 8 - Perspectives of Technology Acceptance Model 
23 
Table 9 - Startup Development Phases Comparison 
24 
Table 10 - Behaviour properties of identiﬁes attributes for Domestication Model 
41 
Table 11 - Idea with and idea in concepts 
43 
Table 12 - Exploration Paradoxes 
44 
Table 13 - Morphology chart 
45 
Table 14 - Tool Parts 
48
Figure 1 - Design Research methodology 
12 
Figure 2 - Theory areas 
16 
Figure 3 - Research and Development Method 
17 
Figure 4 - Innovation Matrix 
18 
Figure 5 - Design and Development Process 
19 
Figure 6 - Diffusion of innovation model 
20 
Figure 7 - Technology Acceptance model 
23 
Figure 8 - The basic pillars of Design Thinking, IDEO 
26 
Figure 9 - Agile Methodology Model, LoginWorks 
27 
Figure 10 - The basic pillars of Effective Hyper-Collaboration (Kolk, Eagar, Boulton, & Mira, 2017) 
28 
Figure 11 - Business Model Canvas, Osterwalder 
29 
Figure 12 - Startup Ecosystem, Creative Commons 
30 
Figure 13 - ServedOnSalt functionality 
32 
Figure 14 - Nature Boards offer                             Figure 15 - Nature Boards material versions 
33 
Figure 16 - OS City Platform characteristics 
35 
Figure 17 - Cultivo clients value proposition 
36 
Figure 18 - Degree of abstraction - Buur & Andreasen, 1989 
39 
Figure 20 - Meta model for Domestication Models 
39 
Figure 19 - Exploration model, Hansen and Andreasen 2003 
40 
Figure 21 - Product idea framework , Hansen and Andreasen 2003 
46 
Figure 22 - Evaluation of proposed tool 
47 
Figure 23 - Proposed Domestication Tool 
48 
Figure 24 - Conceptualisation process 
49 
Figure 25 - Understand level of proposed tool 
51 
Domesticating Technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
7
==PAGE:9==
List of Abbreviations 
Figure 26 - Comfort level of proposed tool 
51 
Figure 27 - Meaningful resource answers 
52 
Figure 28 - Net Promoter Score 
52 
Figure 29 - Internal validity model 
55 
Figure 30 - The Chasm, Moore 2001 
58
R&D
Research and Development 
MVP
Minimum Viable Product
DSDM
Dynamic Systems Development Method 
XP
Extreme Programming 
BMC
Business Model Canvas
SST
Social Shaping of Technology
DOI
Diffusions of Innovations
TAM
Technology Acceptance Method
FDD
Feature-Driven Development
Domesticating Technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
8
==PAGE:10==
Introduction                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 1
1. Introduction 
Innovation. Technology. Startups. 
These words have been repeated at such a constant rate in recent years that they seem to have lost 
their value. This is unfortunate as startups are often considered to be among the most innovative 
agents of change in society. Almost all big companies start small, and often their growth is a result of 
a culture or innovative product that allows them to grown and increase their size. Google's search 
algorithm, Tesla’s electric vehicles, and Airbnb disrupting the hotel market. Evidently, startups have 
proven to be the front runners of disruptive innovation. 
Startups are among the most innovative social structures on the planet, their cutting edge technology 
aimlessly bounce into challenges determined to solve them (Varbanova, 2019). They ﬁnd and solve 
problems that no one else can seem to get right. These problems range from basic human needs to 
creating the perfect artiﬁcial need. The key is that there is a need that has not been fulﬁlled by existing 
products or services.  
Generally, startups aim to design superior solutions - allowing customers to access new opportunities 
through unique methods, or aim to offer similar solutions at a fraction of the price. Moreover, as ﬁrst 
world countries and private organizations seek opportunities to invest in new markets, startups have 
embraced the possibility of creating a social impact (Pilloton & Chochino, 2009). Sustainability, 
accessibility, and social value have increasingly become inﬂuential factors when developing new 
products. 
Developing products for any market is a complex task, especially when this is attempted by a small 
team, such as a startup. Often, this task ends up being based on assumptions about the user rather 
than based on ethnographic and user studies. As a result, these new products might not be adopted 
in the new market, impacting the business negatively.  
Furthermore, if initial negative perceptions and attitudes towards products are formed - for instance, 
because of a lack of understanding of the virtues of the products, this will limit its adoption, even 
though the product itself might be useful or desired. (Bagozzi, Davis, & Warshaw, 1992). Nevertheless, 
several social theories identify the process by which humans adopt new technologies (Silvestor & 
Hirsch, 2003).  
Taking these theories into account, one could argue that there is a space for a practical method or 
tool, that better allows startups to design their products so both the original values of the product, as 
well as the product perception, ﬁts into a new market. 
1.1 Relevance of the project 
Business experts and innovation specialists agree that the current technological revolution is simply 
outstanding (Prats, 2017). The general feasibility of innovation and the accessibility of capital has 
leveled the playing ﬁeld between established ﬁrms and startups. Besides, from creating value to their 
customers, startups have demonstrated to have social, economic, and technological beneﬁts 
(Barenblat, 2017).  
Technology can be the key to address the world’s biggest challenges (Brandt, 2019). From teaching 
AI how to solve problems to long term environmental goals, startups have been at the forefront of 
merging technology with social impact (Larry Fink, 2018). Innovative solutions are leveraging 
technology to reach new markets and reinventing economies across the globe (Barenblat, 2017). 
  
Taken into consideration, this project seeks to develop a domestication model, that helps startups 
identify adoption factors for their products when entering new markets. Which, when applied, will 
allow startups to improve their user’s adoption process, and thus contribute to the functional use of 
the technology.  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
9
==PAGE:11==
Introduction                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 1
The relevance of this project is split into two dimensions; the theoretical approach, and the practical 
approach. Concerning the theoretical approach, the development of a new model will contribute to 
the existing knowledge of domestication processes. Even more so, this model will provide insights 
into the relationship between sociology and innovation. On the practical side, startups can improve 
their innovation models by highlighting the role of users. Furthermore, communities will be beneﬁtted 
in short terms by the new implementation of new technologies. 
1.2 Project aim, objective and research questions 
Building upon the MSc. in Design and Innovation program, this Master Thesis aims to emphasize the 
socio-technical understanding of products and systems in their social and technical context. The 
objective of this research project is to gain insights into the research and development process of 
startups to suggest a new framework that can support the planning and implementation phases of 
entrepreneurship projects. This is done by identifying counter-intuitive new business opportunities 
based on socio-cultural and technological conditions and trends. Thus, the objective of this project is 
the following: 
To develop a domestication model that can be applied in the daily activities of startups. 
1.2.1 Research questions 
This thesis is led by three main questions focused on the innovation processes of startups. The ﬁrst 
question is related to current domestication models, establishing a theoretical foundation based on 
literature analysis and empirical data. The second question is focused on the conceptualization 
process of a domestication model. And ﬁnally, the third question focuses on the creation of a new 
domestication model for startup operations.  
Q1: How are the current technology adaptation models understood? 
Theoretical foundations and daily life appear to give proof to the understanding that users can 
participate in the product developments process. Although startups have demonstrated to listen to 
their users’ needs, they have not yet understood how their mindsets determine the acceptance and 
utilization of technology in daily life. As such, this section of the thesis includes a study regarding the 
theory areas involved in the domestication process and the conceptual elements which are identiﬁed 
through case studies.  
Q2: How may a technology adaptation model be conceptualized? 
Understanding the innovation practices that startups implement is just the departing point for this 
research. Rather, it is understanding the factors involved to make users integrate new technology in 
the desired way as it was thought for. For this, the conceptual elements of the theoretical foundation 
and empirical data are compared. With these results, a conceptual version of a domestication model 
is developed. 
Q3: How may a technology adaptation model be developed in Startups? 
This research question pertains to how startups can apply a domestication model into their daily tasks 
to their development as a sustainable business. This evaluation process is accomplished primarily 
through a perceived value study with the selected cases.  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
10
==PAGE:12==
Introduction                                                                                                                                                             Chapter 1
1.3 Thesis structure 
The documentation of the research project is structured in the following way: 
Table 1 - This Thesis Structure 
1.4 Key Terms 
This section a glossary with general deﬁnitions of the key terms employed in this thesis, to create an 
easier understanding of the writing in this thesis 
• Startup - recently founded small business operating with a handful of people, who provide 
innovative solutions through problem-solving approaches to an existing need in society.  
• Design Principle - tools for creating reliable experiences for the user. They are considered a guide 
that details the design decisions as developing a product or service.  
• Product - item made accessible for consumer use. It is anything that can be offered in the market 
to fulﬁl a detected need of a client.  
• Service - A way of delivering value through actions by encouraging customers to accomplish a 
result without the ownership of a tangible item.  
• Value - it is considered as to how important is something for the consumer.  
• Technology - the product or service that has been developed by a Startup. These products or 
services can come from identiﬁed needs or technology research.  
• Innovation - generation and application of a new idea that provides a measurable value for all the 
stakeholders involved.  
• Technological Innovation - involvement of new items and forms in huge innovative changes of 
items and procedures in the technological ﬁeld.  
• Domestication - the process in which technologies are developed and at the same time improved 
by the users' life. 
• Adaptation - the process in which the user becomes better suited to a new solution to fulﬁlll its 
needs.  
• Methodology - a system of methods used for a speciﬁc outcome.  
• Method - a speciﬁc procedure for accomplishing something in a systematic environment. 
Framework can be used as a synonym when it is understood as an approach to understanding a 
speciﬁc problem. 
• Concept - the general notion of collected meanings associated with a particular event, object, 
situations, or behavior. 
Chapter
Content
1
The objective and research questions are presented along the problem ﬁeld.
2
The research paradigm is stated to deﬁne the research strategy.
3
The theoretic foundations are explored through literature analysis.
4
Case studies are described and the correlation between them and domestication is presented.
5
The insights gathered in the case studies are compared to prepare material for the conceptualization 
process.
6
The results of the research is applied in a conceptualization process and a domestication model is 
developed.
7
The conceptualized model is evaluated by the  case studies to provide insights about its accuracy in 
the ﬁeld.
8
The research validity is stated and other interpretations for the Domestication Model are identiﬁed.
9 & 10
General conclusions and perspectives about the project are drawn.
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
11
==PAGE:13==
Research Methodology                                                                                                                                           Chapter 2
2. Research Methodology 
The purpose of this design research has one main objective, to enhance the practice of design by 
improving the actual processes. 
As stated in the ﬁrst chapter, this project relied on three research questions. The ﬁrst, “How are the 
current technology adaptation models understood?”. The second and third, “How may a 
technology adaptation model be conceptualized?” and “How may a technology adaptation 
model be developed in Startups?”.  
2.1 Research Paradigm 
This research looks to combine three speciﬁc areas within the domestication process literature, 
Technological Innovation, Social Shaping,  and  Startups Business. In the area of Technological 
Innovation, the understanding of developing new technologies processes and essential factors 
involved in this decisions. Related to this, the Social Shaping of Technology focuses on the 
relationship between society and technology as a mutual shaping.  Within these, the startup 
ecosystem and its adoption of models and activities as part of their daily routine in order to improve 
their success rate.  
The Technological Innovation area is based on product development which has scientiﬁc and 
technical bases. In the Social Shaping area, the aim is to include sociology and ethnography into the 
innovation processes to ensure the user plays a key role in the development of new technologies. The 
Startup Business area, analyze looks to detail how startups work and the environment they work with. 
Having a research project based on an engineering structure, social theories are considered as a 
good supplement to understand the human factor involved. This approach complemented the 
dominant understanding of the design processes. Moreover, social theories are used to understand 
the startup's organization and the social context of the activities where they operate. 
2.2 Research methodology 
To gain an in-depth analysis of the case, Design Research methodology is used as the investigation 
structure. As such, the methodology clears the path for the development of the adaptation model. 
The research clariﬁcation stage is identiﬁed in chapters 3 and 4,  with the literature analysis and case 
studies. Following this, the ﬁndings provide empirical data to support the synthesis phase in chapter 
5. After this, the conceptualization process in chapter 6 shows the development and selection of the 
proposed model. Finally, the application of the model in chapter 7 frames the evaluation of the 
potential solution in a real-life scenario. The proposed Design Research methodology can be seen in 
Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1 - Design Research methodology  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
12
==PAGE:14==
Research Methodology                                                                                                                                           Chapter 2
Based on the Design Research Methodology, the general overview of this project is explained in the 
following table: 
Table 2 - Design Research Methodology Overview 
The research mainly focuses on identifying the factors that inﬂuence the innovation processes of 
startups and develops a theoretical model for the adoption of technology within communities. As a 
result of the time limitation of this project, it was not possible to perform applied research in each case 
study to determine the viability of the proposed model. To mitigate this, the model was shared with 
the case studies and experts in the industry to receive their insights and feedback.  
2.3 Research Strategy 
Several research strategies can be applied to develop a new framework. For this project, different 
sources and methods were applied to gather data and understand the research object.  
Theoretical Approaches 
Literature Review 
It is considered that a literature review in innovation methods is fundamental when the research 
projects looks to understand, conceptualise and develop a model. It is assumed that the reader has 
an existing knowledge in the design ﬁeld and has an understanding of innovation methods and 
startup ecosystems, and so, the literature review focuses mainly on speciﬁc methods of each 
literature discipline. The literature background is divided into three areas to provide a better 
understanding of the academic areas needed to implement a domestication model, this will be 
explained in detail in Chapter 3 (Figure 2). 
The ﬁrst area to cover is  Technological Innovation. In this section, the most common methods for 
innovation and product development used by startups are listed. The comparison of these methods 
aids in a deeper understanding of the innovation processes and their effects on startups. The second 
area of analysis is  Social Shaping, detailing the framework for three domestication theories. The 
literature not only provides valuable insights about the relationship between humans and technology 
but also details the main challenges to understanding it. Finally, the third section is Startup Business, 
this literature was structured from the organizational structure to an ecosystem inﬂuence power. As 
such, this approach allowed for the identiﬁcation of internal and external factors for a startup's 
operation. 
Stage
Overview
Tools implemented
Research 
clariﬁcation
Based on the theoretical background literature the focus of 
the research was deﬁned (Chapter 3). The ﬁrst draft of the 
research questions was developed based on the literature 
main ﬁndings and the desired answers for the next stages. 
• Literature review
Descriptive 
Study I
This part of the project was in essence the application of 
research tools to the previously deﬁned sample group. 
(Chapter 4)
• Structured interview via an 
online survey
Prescriptive 
Study
A comparison between existing literature and empirical data 
provided an understanding of a Startup innovation process. 
The results analysis and conceptualization process (Chapter 5 
and 6) represents the second part of the design research 
methodology. 
• Semi-structured interview 
via video conference 
• Academic discussions 
• Literature review
Descriptive 
Study II
The developed model was then reﬂected upon to evaluate in 
real Startup ecosystems (Chapter 7).
• Semi-structured interview 
via an online survey
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
13
==PAGE:15==
Research Methodology                                                                                                                                           Chapter 2
Academic Discussions 
To promote objective rationalism, ﬁndings and insights were discussed with researchers and 
specialists in the industry. The next list is some of the spaces where the researcher chose to share 
and discuss her project with other colleagues in the area. 
• Conference - Designing for Society: Products and Services for a better world. Dr. Nynke Tromp. TU 
Delft and DTU, Denmark, 2019. 
• Workshop - Ethical Design & Technology Development. DTU Skylab and Copenhagen Business 
School. Denmark, 2020. 
• Workshop -  Working life in Denmark. International House Copenhagen and Danske Bank. 
Denmark, 2020. 
• Visit - Academy for Entrepreneurship. Monterrey, Mexico, 2019. 
• Visit - DTU Skylab. Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, 2019. 
• Visit - DTU Science Park, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, 2020. 
• Visit - Copenhagen Science City. Copenhagen, Denmark 2020. 
Empirical Approaches 
Case Study 
To accomplish the most helpful and pertinent information for the analysis, intentional sampling is 
applied (Patton 1990). Considering this, six startups ﬁll speciﬁc four-factor criteria; impact on 
emerging markets, operation from either in or outside the context to work with, experience talking 
with customers and users, and at least two iterations of prototypes. For this purpose, half of the case 
studies are based at Denmark Technical University in Denmark, and the other half at the Monterrey 
Institute of Technology and Higher Education in Mexico. The location of the startups is deﬁned as the 
role they play in and outside the impacted context. The author promised anonymity to all interview 
partners and ensured through the replacement of their names and their positions with the name of the 
company. However, direct information regarding the selected case are displayed in table 3. 
Table 3 - Summary of case studies 
Case study
Years 
Impact area (SDG)
Type of market
Size
Location
ServedOnSalt
1
7 - Aﬀordable and 
Clean Energy
B2C
2 persons
Kongens Lyngby, 
Denmark
Nature Boards
3
12 - Responsible 
Consumption and 
Production
B2B
2 persons
Copenhagen, 
Denmark
Ponik
2
2 - Zero hunger
B2B
Kongens Lyngby, 
Denmark
OS CIty
5
11 - Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities
B2G
13 persons
Monterrey, Mexico
KABAAAN, 
Reciclados para 
la Construcción
4
9 - Industry, 
Innovation, and 
Infrastructure
B2B
5 persons
Aguascalientes, 
Mexico
Cultivo
1
15 - Life On Land
B2B and B2C
5 persons
Monterrey, Mexico
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
14
==PAGE:16==
Research Methodology                                                                                                                                           Chapter 2
The strategy applied for the gathering of data was divided into three phases based on the Design 
Research methodology. The ﬁrst phase was a structured survey to obtain relevant dialogue points for 
an interview structure. The second phase was a 60 minutes of semi-structured interviews with each 
startup. Finally, a structured survey was applied in the third phase to gain insights regarding the 
perceived value of the proposed tool in the daily activities of the case studies.  
The surveys were composed of questions focusing on the innovation process and their development 
experiences. The ﬁrst survey was sent to each startup and answered by the team together. The 
quantitative results provided useful guidance as to how to best structure the semi-structured 
interview. The researcher conducted six interviews with identical guidelines. All interviews were held 
via videoconference and recorded for further analysis. The audio recordings were later transcribed in 
the electronic form to analyze them efﬁciently. The transcription of each interview can be found from 
Appendix 4 to 9.    
Data Analysis 
The data analysis was done after each round of interactions. To obtain functional data, qualitative 
approaches were considered as the most suitable research approach for this paper. Quantitative 
research was utilized to choose the direction of semi-structured interviews. Moreover, the data was 
collected at one point in time but with questions aimed to explore the undergone activities from the 
previous use of innovation models until now.  
2.4 Research Quality 
Design Research has more similarities in social studies than natural sciences. The applied research 
methodology has some imperfections as any other methodology about social studies in the 
engineering ﬁeld. It has been stated that contributions in Design Research are almost impossible to 
validate and be proven empirically, due to the number of variables that affect each study case that 
cannot be regulated (Buur 1990). However, there are ways to validate the contributions by qualitative 
means. There are four categories in which empirical data can be categorized and judged (Yin, 1994): 
• Construct validity, the degree in which concepts are understood and able to be measured 
• Internal validity, the extent to which the gathered evidence can support a cause and effect in the 
studied case. 
• External validity, the extent to which the gathered evidence can be applied outside of the context 
of the studied case. 
• Reliability, the degree in which the experiments can produce similar results in different contexts. 
2.5 Summary 
In this chapter, the research methodology and strategy are explained. As this project focuses on the 
innovation methodologies implemented by startups, the chosen methodology for this project is 
Design Research. Consequently, speciﬁc strategies and tools are applied to have an unbiased 
analysis and assured quality through the project. 
The research paradigm looks to combine two speciﬁc areas of design and research, Technological 
Innovation and Social Shaping of Technology. When combining these two areas, the focus goes into 
the relationship between society and technology as a mutual shaping. 
The research strategy looks to compare and conceptualize literature insights with empirical data 
related to the research questions following the selected methodology structure. Moreover, the strategy 
is outlined in three rounds of interviews, where two of them are structured interventions and one is a 
semi-structured interview.  
The research validity is evaluated through the categories of empirical data proposed by Yin. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
15
==PAGE:17==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
3. Literature Review 
In Chapter 1, the concept of domestication of technology is introduced and its relevance in the 
startup environment is detailed. According to Roger Silvestor, the domestication approach explains 
the relation between technologies in social contexts and structures (Davis, Bagozzi, & Warshaw, 
1989).  Thus, in order to establish a foundation upon which to develop a new tool that can help 
startups in the domestication process, this chapter will review the existing literature on 1) 
technological innovation, 2) social shaping of technology and 3) startups business. Each of the areas 
is deﬁned by three core principles. 
 
Figure 2 - Theory areas 
3.1 Theory Areas 
The ﬁrst area of approach is Technological Innovation.  In this section, three methodologies are 
detailed as a way to understand the most common processes for innovation in startups. Each 
methodology is detailed by an objective, its parts, and its process. The methodologies to analyze are 
1) Research and Development (R&D), 2) Innovation Matrix, and 3) Design and Development.  
The second area is Social Shaping, which aims to understand three social theories based on the link 
between users' behavior and technology. The theories analyzed concerning this are 1) Diffusion of 
Innovations (DOI), 2) Domestication Theory, and 3) Technology Acceptance Method (TAM). The 
theories are described with their objective, parts, and key features of their application.  
Concerning the third theory area, Startup Business, the dimensions of a startup will be identiﬁed. The 
ﬁrst dimension analyzed is the 1) Design Principles followed by startups to operate in their daily 
activities. In this section, three design principles are detailed to provide the reader with a perspective 
of the core values of Startups. As a second dimension, the 2) Business Model Canvas (BMC) is 
introduced by framing the operational activities needed to make a Startup sustain. Finally, a 
stakeholder analysis gives an overview of the 3) Startup Ecosystem and the stakeholders that take 
part in it.  
3.2 Technological Innovation 
It is widely acknowledged that all industries face challenges. Customer needs change, budgets are 
constrained, and organizations seek to keep their ideas conﬁdential (Inc, 1998). Although the 
solutions to these challenges are not clear, different tools and applications have managed to improve 
these dilemmas. Technology, for instance, represents the biggest opportunity. In essence, 
technological innovation can be fundamental to fulﬁll new customer needs (Dibner & Lemer, n.d.). 
In this section, three methods and methodologies for technological innovation will be presented as a 
way to understand the varying processes to develop new technology. The ﬁrst method is Research 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
16
==PAGE:18==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
and development (R&D), where the general journey of companies to develop a new product is 
described. The second method, Innovation Matrix, focuses on the four types of improvement on 
existing products and ﬁnally, the third method, Design and Development, describes how to build a 
product with iterative design speciﬁcations.  
3.2.1 Research and Development 
Companies tend to spend their resources on speciﬁc research to ﬁnd new opportunities to improve 
existing products or services. These activities are most commonly known as Research and 
Development (R&D). The National Science Foundation identiﬁes three main types of R&D, each one 
with a speciﬁc objective. 
• Basic Research - Research is aimed to create a better understood of a subject, building 
knowledge relating to it. This type of research is not intended to be practical or commercial, the 
results are often related to the company interests.  
• Applied Research - Applied research is more speciﬁc and directed towards an interest. This type 
of research focuses on identifying speciﬁc tools to address customers'/industries' needs or 
requirements. Applied research is always focused on commercial purposes.  
• Development - Development happens when the discoveries of an exploration are applied to the 
manufacturing process of any product. 
The R&D time is undeﬁned, it can span anywhere from months to years to ﬁnd successful outcomes. 
The manufacturing industry usually uses R&D for new product development and innovation. Even 
though each company has its R&D methodology, a basic process creates the framework, see ﬁgure 
3. 
                                           
 
Figure 3 - Research and Development Method 
The R&D framework's ﬁrst stage is to brainstorm, which is also known as Foster Ideas. At this point, 
there is an understanding and identiﬁcation of particular issues in the industry that can then be 
narrowed to core opportunity areas. After this, these ideas must be clustered into those that have a 
wider solution space. This stage is called Focus Ideas, as the need to compare the ideas with existing 
products and assess how the new ones can be developed. For the third stage, the idea has to be 
validated through market surveys and technical feasibility, this is commonly known as the Develop 
Ideas stage. When the idea has been validated, the researchers can work on prototyping to 
understand the process to take the idea into a practical product. Before launching the product, R&D 
revises the regulatory aspects and assess the criteria needed to be part of the market.  
R&D is mostly known for the following key features: 
•
Ideas can be abandoned or modiﬁed at any point in this process. 
•
Risks are prevented by previous technical feasibility and market validation. 
•
Resources are only used when there is a validated business idea 
•
Each idea is analyzed from an objective perspective on the organization's sustainability. 
•
The complete process gives high probabilities of a successful product in the market. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
17
==PAGE:19==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
3.2.2 Innovation Matrix 
Creativity is thinking of something new; innovation is the implementation of something new (Skillicorn, 
2016). That being said, organizations tend to adopt the term Innovation to their mission to reﬂect their 
core value. Moreover, innovation is based on two dimensions or the merge of both. These are either a 
new market opportunity or the improvement of a technical invention (Kylliäinen, 2019). Although it has 
been stated that innovation has different deﬁnitions, most of them share the same three 
characteristics: generation of value, application of ideas, and measurable impact. Therefore, the 
deﬁnition of innovation in this project will be the generation and application of a new idea that provides 
a measurable value for all the stakeholders involved.  
The Innovation Matrix is a visualization that incorporates the two aspects of innovation, technology 
improvement and market opportunity, see ﬁgure 4 (Kristof, n.d.). In the horizontal axis, the increase in 
technology newness is measured. This axis includes the relevance of the innovation, including the 
core value, earmarking time, and resources used in the innovation. In the vertical axis, the impact on 
the market is identiﬁed. This is determined by market share and brand awareness.  
Figure 4 - Innovation Matrix 
Based on the Innovation Matrix four types of innovation can be identiﬁed. These categories are 
Incremental innovation, Disruptive innovation, Sustaining Innovation, and Radical innovation. Each of 
these can be deﬁned as followed: 
• Incremental innovation - Most of the innovations are gradual and continuous improvements to 
existing products in the market. Incremental innovations have slight variations allowing them to be 
better than past editions.  
• Disruptive innovation - They are referred to as a new value network for a concept, product, or 
service. This can be created by positioning and an existing market or creating a new one. 
• Sustaining innovation - This type of innovation is the opposite of disruptive innovation. This 
innovation occurs in existing markets, widening the value networks by satisfying the needs of the 
current customer. 
• Radical innovation - Radical innovations aim to solve global problems with completely new 
approaches that users were not aware of or solving problems users did not even consider. This type 
of innovation causes an impact on the market and sometime in the entire economy.  
As demonstrated, innovations can be classiﬁed in various ways. The main point of categorizing the 
types of innovations is to understand the existing opportunities and how they can be applied within 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
18
==PAGE:20==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
the organizational context. Taking this into consideration, the approach each organization takes 
towards innovation should depend on the capability and strategic goals of each (Nieminen, 2020). 
The key features of the Innovation Matrix: 
• Understand the current state of the organization. 
• Prioritizes the organization's needs. 
• Provides enough data for the planning and the implementation of projects. 
• Identify the strategic goals as key activities. 
• Allows organizations to develop strategic market plans in short and long terms. 
3.2.3 Design and Development 
The design and development methodology aims to identify the potential risks in taking an idea into a 
proﬁtable solution in the market. It considers the speciﬁcation and design of the solution through 
prototyping (NIBusiness, 2000). The design issue regards the maintainability of the solution, while 
speciﬁcation focuses on the selection of materials and generation of developing blueprints (ThePD, 
2015). It is worth considering that this methodology is mostly used by external ﬁrms providing 
established organizations a new perspective of their current portfolio (Valvano & Yerraballi, 2014). 
This methodology follows a ﬁve-step approach (Figure 5), allowing the design team to collaborate with 
the client while developing the ﬁnal product Process (Konenko, 2018). The ﬁrst step is to 
communicate with the customer to discuss the important details to understand the project's purpose. 
Next, research is conducted to generate insights about the target market, competitors, and style of 
the ﬁnal product. Third, once the insights have been approved by the customer, the skeleton of the 
ﬁnal product is designed. The fourth step is to mockup the project, allowing the team to develop the 
conceptual stage of the project. Finally, when approved by the customer, the team prepares the 
resources needed after the product is launched.   
 
Figure 5 - Design and Development Process 
Software development companies have been the primary adopters of Design and Development 
(Blanchard, 2010). Moreover, web and mobile applications are considered the best type of project for 
this methodology due to its development process and the resources needed.  
The key features of Design and Development are: 
• Acquiring the capability to meet a user need thought a customer perspective. 
• Prototyping/experimentation effort. 
• Based on the vendor's design criteria. 
• Requires a skilled team to convert ideas into wireframes. 
• The design team sharpens their abilities within each task. 
3.3 Social Shaping of Technology 
Technological outcomes have various implications for society and speciﬁc social groups (Jayden, 
2009). Social shaping theorists agree that the relationship between society and technology is a mutual 
shaping. Williams and Edge mention that the concept of Social Shaping of Technology (SST) is based 
on the idea that each person's choices will affect itself and the trajectory of innovation programs 
(Williams & Edge, 1996). Some authors mention that SST has a direct effect on economic and social 
areas (Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warshaw, P. R.,1989).  
In this section, the link between society and technology is presented through three social theories. 
The ﬁrst model references the rate in which new ideas are spread by the Diffusion of Innovation theory. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
19
==PAGE:21==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
After this, the Domestication theory details how artifacts interplay in cultural values. Finally, the 
Technology Acceptance Model explains the process by which social groups interact with new 
products. 
3.3.1 Diffusion of Innovations 
The adoption of a new idea or product does not occur in the same manner for all. Certainly, some 
individuals are more poised for adoption than others (Leif, 2019). Everett Rogers supports that the 
diffusion of innovation is affected by different social and cultural factors (Rogers, 2003). Rogers is 
responsible for the popularity of the Diffusion of innovations theory (DOI). The theory combines 
multiple disciplines that provide a combination of results that allow researches to understand the 
impact of a new product in any system. Further, DOI aims to explain how new ideas and technology 
are being spread by focusing on the methods, stakeholders, and indicators (Rogers, 2003).   
The key elements in DOI are innovation, adopters, communication channels, time, and social system 
(Pemberton, 1936). Innovation refers to any idea, practice, or object that seems new to the potential 
customer. Adopters are considered to be the minimal unit of analysis; in most cases, they refer to 
individuals, but companies can also be considered. Communication channels refer to the minimum 
capabilities for diffusion to happen. Further, the time differs for each individual and every customer will 
adopt an innovation at their own pace. Finally, a social system is a combination of internal and 
external factors, such as values and thoughts, mass media, and cultural perceptions.  
Researchers have found that adoption categories have a proportional relation to the market share 
(Easley, 2010). Each adopter category has different needs and shares a percentage of the target 
market, this is explained in ﬁgure 6. 
 
Figure 6 - Diffusion of innovation model 
To achieve a high market share, organizations should consider different strategies based on the 
adopter categories (Roger & Shoemaker, 1971). Although the majority of the general population tends 
to fall in the middle categories, it is still necessary to understand the characteristics of the target 
population which may fall outside of the middlemost categories. The ﬁve adopter categories and the 
best approach for each can be found in table 4. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
20
==PAGE:22==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
Table 4 - Adopter Categories  
The progression of the stages one cycles through when adopting an innovation typically begins with 
an  awareness  of the need, followed by the decision to  adopt or reject the proposition, and then 
the initial use of the innovation to validate their decision, ﬁnally the continued use of the innovation will 
assure a complete adoption process. There are main ﬁve factors that inﬂuence the adoption of any 
type of innovation that organizations should consider for their marketing strategies (Meyer & Goes, 
1988).  
•
Relative Advantage - The perception of an added value an innovation has on existing solutions. 
•
Compatibility - How compatible the new idea is to the needs of potential adopters. 
•
Complexity - the degree of difﬁculty in understanding and using the innovation compared to 
existing solutions.  
•
Triability - The opportunity to try the new idea before committing to buy the solution. 
•
Observability - The extent to which the innovation provides optimal results for the customer. 
The DOI theory can be applied to many disciplines and has been applied to a multitude of projects. 
Thus, the theory has been molded and shaped in various settings (Easley, 2010). Although each 
discipline applies the theory differently, the lack of cohesion has provoked different perspectives about 
its validity. The next table displays the different perspectives related to the Diffusion of Innovation. 
Table 5 - Perspectives of DOI  
Category
Description
Strategy
Innovators
The small group who want to be the 
ﬁrst one to try the innovation. 
Characterized by taking risks.
Strategies for this group are none due to their genuine 
interest to try the new solution 
Early Adopters
People who will give an opinion and 
will be followed by others. They are 
aware of the change and don't 
have problems with it.
The best strategy for this group consists of giving clear 
information about use. 
Early Majority
The group that usually follows other 
people opinion, they need to see 
concrete evidence before making 
any change.
Strategies for this group are success stories and 
evidence of the use results.  
Late Majority
People that tend to question any 
type of change and will not make a 
change unless most of the people 
have done it.
The strategy is the same as the Early Majority but 
should be focused on the speciﬁc needs of the 
customers identiﬁed along the launch process.
Laggards
People-based by traditions. They 
are the last ones and the hardest 
group to gain.
Strategies to appeal to them should be focused on 
statistics and peer pressure. 
Positive
Negative
Organizations develop strategies based on research 
determining the factors that aﬀect a customer to make 
a buying decision (Easley, 2010).
Humans and human networks are complex and diﬃcult 
to quantify (Meyer & Goes, 1988).
It allows companies to develop customer journeys to 
improve the adoption process (Leif, 2019).
It is diﬃcult to account for all the possible variables, 
therefore some critical factors might be missed  
(Rogers, 2003).
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
21
==PAGE:23==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
3.3.2 Domestication theory 
It has been clear that users can inﬂuence the "technology in the making", as an example, they have 
the power on future design speciﬁcations (Weber, 2015). With a rising society, the gap between 
producers and users has increased. Domestication theory is the approach in which science and 
technology describe the process in which new technologies and adopted by its users (Pantzar, 1997). 
The Domestication theory aims to highlight the role of users in innovations. It is expected that the 
work done by communities and individuals creates enough inﬂuence to make innovations make sense 
within communities (Hynes, 2009). This process commits users to a long-term innovation journey 
(Williams et al. 2004). 
This process is described in four dimensions. First, new technologies are integrated into daily 
activities. After this, the user will adapt to it, as so, the environment might change. As a third 
dimension, users start to provide reviews about the technology which are considered for the following 
generation of products. Finally, technology has enough positioning to reﬂect the culture of its users 
(Lohan, 1998).  
Table 6 - Domestication Theory dimensions 
Some of the principal perspectives of the Domestication Theory rely on the involvement of humans 
and the continued evolution of needs (Habib, 1998). This perspective can be visualized using the 
following table.  
Table 7 - Perspectives of Domestication Theory 
Provides qualitative data for market insights (Leif, 
2019).
The variety of variables can lead to inconsistent and 
non-ending results (Pemberton, 1936).
Positive
Negative
Dimension
Description
Potential scenarios of the dimension
Appropiation
Process of possession of the 
artifact.
• Motivation for a buying decision. 
• Customer journey before the purchase.
Objectiﬁcation
Process of determining which roles 
the artifact will play in daily life.
• Purpose of technology. 
• Function and placement in the user life.
Incorporation
Process where the individual 
interacts with the artifact.
• Usability challenges 
• Learning curve
Conversion
Process of converting the 
technology into an intended 
interaction.
• Unintended use of user interaction. 
• Wishlist for future generations of the artifact.
Positive
Negative
This approach enables to understand the complex 
process in which artifact play a role in cultural values 
(Bagozzi, Davis, & Warshaw, 1992).
The reliance on qualitative data on speciﬁc case 
studies nulls the validity of the research (Charness & 
Boot, 2015).
Because it is a theory based on human behavior, the 
learnings will keep evolving with them (Habib, 1998).
It is diﬃcult to consider the assumptions for business or 
policymakers (Charness & Boot, 2015). 
The use of qualitative methods allows the researcher 
to analyze context that would normally not be 
accessible by quantitative methods (Hynes, 2009).
The descriptive approach is diﬃcult to change into 
fundamental lessons (Ellcessor, n.d.). 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
22
==PAGE:24==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
3.3.2 Technology Acceptance Method 
The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) is a simple framework that has been applied to outline the 
acceptance process between users and technology and is the most commonly applied technology 
acceptance model (Davis, 1989; Davis, Bagozzi, & Warshaw, 1989). Moreover, the purpose of this 
method is to predict the adoption rate of a new artifact in the user's life, and identify which variables 
should be considered to make it acceptable for them (Charness & Boot, 2015).   
This model focuses on two technology acceptance measures; ease of use and usefulness. Perceived 
usefulness (PU) is considered as the degree in which an individual believes the new technology will 
improve the current results. Perceived ease-of-use (PEOU) refers to the degree in which an individual 
considers the amount of effort that will be required to be used. Being a model based on behavioral 
elements, it is assumed that when an individual decides to act, they will be free to do so without any 
limitation. In reality, this is a scenario affected by the limited freedom to act (Bagozzi, Davis & Warshaw 
1992).  
In ﬁgure 7, the model shows how the actual system use is the goal where everyone can interact with 
technology; the behavioral intention to use is considered the lead factor to use it. Before this, the 
behavioral intention will be inﬂuenced by the personal attitude towards change, which is mainly based 
on a ﬁrst perception of the technology. 
 
Figure 7 - Technology Acceptance model 
Although it is not part of the model, external variables such as social inﬂuences become a powerful 
reason to determine an individual attitude. TAM provides the attitude and intention to use the 
technology, however, this might variate depending on demographic characteristics.  
This model has been both criticized and engaged by social experts. TAM tends to work with the 
concept of perception which gives a broad range of thoughts in each applied scenario. In the 
following table, the perspectives of the model are detailed. 
Table 8 - Perspectives of Technology Acceptance Model 
Positive
Negative
Several types of research have used the model and 
gathered viable empirical data for their projects 
(Adams, Nelson & Todd 1992; Davis 1989; 
Hendrickson, Massey & Cronan 1993; Segars & 
Grover 1993; Subramanian 1994; Szajna 1994)
Questionable heuristic value, limited qualitative results, and 
predictive power (Chuttur 2009).
It can be extended to diﬀerent settings, using 
diﬀerent samples and prove consistency (Adams 
1992).
Ignores the essential process of research and 
development (Benbasat & Barki 2007).
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
23
==PAGE:25==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
3.4 Startups 
From digital initiatives backed by large investors, venture capitalists, and technology entrepreneurs, 
startups have taken on an increasingly signiﬁcant role in the innovation industry (Schwarzkopf, 2016). 
These changes are so big that the European tech landscape is expanding rapidly beyond the 
continent's established hubs (Schorge, 2019). Analytics supports this claim by showing Denmark as 
one of the ﬁve countries with the biggest increase in venture capitals followed by countries such as 
Spain, Italy, and Belgium (Dealroom, 2019). 
In this section, the startup ecosystem is presented through three dimensions. The ﬁrst outline is the 
deﬁnition and design principles of a startup. Then, the Business Model Canvas references the logic of 
the business operations by its operational pillars. And ﬁnally, the stakeholder analysis focuses on the 
startup ecosystem and the potential inﬂuence of each actor involved. 
What is a Startup? 
The term startup has been deﬁned in various ways depending on the historical context. The ﬁrst time 
the term  startup  was published, it was by Forbes who described the term with being an 
"unfashionable business of investing in the electronic data processing ﬁeld” (Forbes, 1976), 
referencing the entrance of the Digital Revolution with the adoption of digital records. Nowadays, the 
term startup has been reconsidered. Jawahar & Mclaughlin state that the term references the ﬁrst 
development phase of any business (Jawahar & Mclaughlin, 2001). Meanwhile, Stubner, Wulf, & 
Hungenberg see it as a new business trying to position themselves into existing and non-existing 
markets with the use of innovations (Stubner, Wulf, & Hungenberg, 2007).  
The most updated deﬁnition comes from startup guru Steve Blank, who states that "a startup is a 
temporary structure that is created to seek for a replicable and scalable business 
model" (Renderforest, 2019). For this project, a startup is deﬁned as a recently founded small 
business operating with a handful of people, who provide innovative solutions through problem-
solving approaches to an existing need in society.  
Journey 
Early-stage entrepreneurs have a complex, long path with the goal to fulﬁl their venture goals (Carter, 
Gartner, & Reynolds, 1996). Startups usually begin with a founder or co-founders who found a way to 
fulﬁll a need in the market (Cohan, 2019). After this, they conduct a market validation study based on 
constant feedback from their users using a minimum viable product (MVP). Studies show that startup 
journeys last, on average, three years before they become a solidiﬁed enterprise (Shaun, 2016). The 
following table shows the comparison between different startup consulting ﬁrms and their perspective 
of development phases. 
Table 9 - Startup Development Phases Comparison 
On the test-retest reliability of perceived usefulness 
and perceived ease of use scales, the model has 
proven high reliability of results.(Hendrickson, 
Massey & Cronan 1993) 
Focus on individual perceptions rather than a group, 
resulting in a lack of quantitative data to make decisions 
based on facts.(Pikkarainen 2004).
Positive
Negative
Resource
Angular Venture ©
Linkilaw ©
Startup Commons ©
Stage 1
Early Venture 
• Prototyping testing 
• Deploying product with early 
customers 
• Look for a market ﬁt 
• Plan for sales dynamics 
Ideation 
• Research the market and the 
opportunities for growth. 
• Validate idea 
• Continue in the same direction 
or pivot 
Formation 
• Idea and team formation 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
24
==PAGE:26==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
As shown in table 9 the three consultant ﬁrms agree that market validation activity seems to be the 
key element to a successful venture. Besides, the validation through measurement of customer 
response will create a larger opportunity for potential investors. Angular Ventures assures that 
prototype testing should be made at the ﬁrst stage. This is opposed to Linkilaw and Startup 
Commons, who mention this activity should occur at the second stage. Meanwhile, Linkilaw and 
Startup Commons identify the need to validate a market opportunity before using any material 
resources to reduce potential economic risks. Moreover, Angular Venture starts its perspective by 
prototyping testing. 
Resources in each stage are an opportunity for successful implementation (Manolova, Edelman, 
Brush, & Rotefoss, 2012). It has been widely documented that startups suffer from limited resources 
and therefore are constrained in the potential of tasks that they can achieve (Bruton & Rubanik, 2002). 
Considering this, it can be concluded that although startups seemingly have the same development 
journey, the development period for each startup differs from one to another. 
3.4.1 Design Principles  
The design process should be a key activity of any startup and should be included in the planning and 
budgeting of the business (Joshi, 2017). Designing for a startup is not a normal process compared to 
other design teams (Pinheiro, 2014). Teams are composed of small groups, and everybody takes part 
in the decision-making process. Limited resources imply that startups do not usually have a 
committed designer when needed. Moreover, the pace of progress inside most startups is based on 
speed, ﬂuency, and comprehension of how great structure triggers any business (Bruton & Rubanik, 
2002). Based on the literature, the three methodologies that startups seem to take as their design 
principles are Design Thinking, Agile, and Hyper-collaboration. 
Design thinking 
Validating ideas in the right moment with the right users is fundamental for any startup. Design 
Thinking merges the desire of the customer with the technological and economic feasibility of a 
company. Design Thinking is based on ﬁnding an issue that is worth solving; It is a systematic way to 
deal with the design process while taking care of user perceptions. One of the main characteristics of 
this model is the non-linear process, allowing interdisciplinary groups to collaborate and pivot their 
ideas until the desired outcome is found. The repeated practice of this creative process comes with 
design challenges that can be based on real-life scenarios. In other words, this simulation can be 
adjusted to different ﬁelds that need to be fulﬁlled (Inti, 2019). 
Design Thinking has been characterized by six stages with the possibility to go in a non-linear order. 
These stages are commonly known as Empathize, Deﬁne, Ideate, Prototype, and Test. The ﬁrst stage 
looks to empathize through a deep understanding of the users' needs. Moreover, it is expected that 
the designer puts themselves in the shoes of users to create feasible solutions for them. In the second 
stage, the deﬁnition of data gathered in the ﬁrst phase leads to a new perspective and identify speciﬁc 
Stage 2
The Series A 
• Investors are convinced that 
the company can scale 
• Deﬁne product 
• Establish customers 
• Prove ROI and evidence of 
sales cycles 
Minimum Viable Product 
• Build MVP 
• Protect ideas 
• Start operating / selling 
• Measure customer or user 
response and learn from it
Validation  
• Build MVP 
• Validate/Iterate
Stage 3
Growth Stage 
• Continuous sales 
• Deployment and team is in 
order
Seed Stage 
• Attract investment 
• Build a workforce and working 
space
Growth 
• Establish and Strenght 
• Processes and KPI’s
Resource
Angular Venture ©
Linkilaw ©
Startup Commons ©
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
25
==PAGE:27==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
problems to be solved. The third stage looks to generate as many ideas as possible, in this phase, 
there is no space for value prejudices. Consequently, the fourth phase is translated into prototyping a 
MVP which will be the key for the last stage of testing it and receiving users' feedback for 
improvement. This model can be visualized in ﬁgure 8.  
 
Figure 8 - The basic pillars of Design Thinking, IDEO 
The key features of Design Thinking are: 
• Solution-based approach to solving complex problems. 
• Re-framing the problem in human-centric ways. 
• Allowing the team to approach the problem from different perspectives. 
• An iterative approach to keep improving the identiﬁed solution. 
• A collaborative process that provides diverse perspectives when working in a team. 
• Creation of a tangible representation that allows for better testing and therefore insights to improve. 
Agile Design 
Even though "Agile" has become a trend word, this methodology is known as a smart way to do 
business. By practicing this methodology, the main focus of all the activities of a design team is on 
delivering a high standard of the MVP (StashAway Product & Design, 2018). Startups usually employ 
small teams that can focus on these projects. They can deliver the solution and improve continuously 
with the correct feedback (Miller, 2018). The most popular Agile management methods are Scrum, 
Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM), Extreme Programming (XP), Feature-Driven 
Development (FDD), and Lean Development. These methods encourage the self-organization in a 
cross-functional team and the appropriation of departmental functions.  
By being a startup, micromanagement is required to complete any project. The time of internal 
projects is usually short compared to the impact of the followed tasks. As shown in ﬁgure 9, Agile 
methodology consists of a ﬁve-stage cycle. Evaluation and feedback are part of the ﬁrst stage of each 
cycle, making this outcome fundamental to optimize with the correct application of technologies. After 
this, the design is applied within the client to have their insights and evaluate the feasibility of 
implementation. Finally, the evaluation and monitoring provide data to understand the ﬁnal state. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
26
==PAGE:28==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
 
Figure 9 - Agile Methodology Model, LoginWorks 
The key features of Agile methodology are:  
• Fulﬁlling the client’s need through constant deliverables. 
• Tackling constant changes for the value proposition. 
• Improving teamwork and maintain a strategic distance from each other functions. 
• Concentrating on a shorter timescale. 
• Passing on data to remote groups . 
• Promoting feasible improvement and keeping up a consistent pace. 
Hyper-collaboration 
It is considered that a group is more intelligent as a unit than even the most brilliant individual alone 
(Kolk, 2017). As mentioned before, team members in a startup have a broad range of activities, and 
because of this, creative and innovative solutions are more feasible to come to reality. In a fast-
growing ecosystem, fast decision-making is crucial to accomplish the impossible (Bruton & Rubanik, 
2002).  
Hyper-collaboration contends that novel solutions are a product of an ecosystem rather than an 
individual (Kolk, 2017). Knowing that ecosystems are full of opportunities and simultaneously a 
competitive race, hyper-collaborations aims to ﬁnd the perfect balance to impulse an organization in 
different dimensions. Partners, technologies, and networks can add value to any startup (Shaun, 
2016). 
The hyper-collaboration model relies on ﬁve pillars that look to trigger the potential of any ecosystem: 
Vision, Strategy, Navigation, Engagement, and Fulﬁllment. The ﬁrst pillar looks to establish a clear 
vision to prevent risks when dealing with changes. After this, developing a strategy of what is needed 
and who is part of the ecosystem allows startups to focus on their resources. Recognizing this, a 
navigation system needs to monitor the best opportunities based on the previously stated vision. 
When an opportunity is detected, the use of the right techniques is instrumental to engage this need 
to achieve a win-win situation (Kolk, 2017). Finally, and probably the key to make this model work is to 
transform the company mindset into an ecosystem rather than partnerships. Figure 10 represents 
this.    
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
27
==PAGE:29==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
 
Figure 10 - The basic pillars of Effective Hyper-Collaboration (Kolk, Eagar, Boulton, & Mira, 2017) 
The most important factor in having a successful hyper-collaboration ecosystem is to encourage 
startup employees to engage in continuous learning. Teams have to be aware that knowledge comes 
from different sources, such as networking inside and outside their team environment. The 
development of these skills makes it easier for employees to have a problem-solving mindset 
(Varbanova, 2019). 
Hyper-collaboration is characterized by the following features: 
• Collaboration can happen between “non-obvious” partners. 
• There are more potential partners than what you can consider. 
• Rapid collaborations are enabled by digital technologies.  
• There are different types of collaborations, from strategic alliances to intrapreneurship agreements. 
• Agents and intentions evolve fast and everyone needs to be aware of this. 
• The culture of open source and sharing data is the base for solid collaborations. 
3.4.2 Business Model Canvas 
With the key learnings emerging from the market validation in the design process, startups can start 
working on a business model. However, the most important task is to ﬁrst create a value proposition 
that people want. The Business Model Canvas (BMC) is a strategic management tool for developing 
or building upon existing business models (Schaller, Vatananan-Thesenvitz, & Stefania, 2018). BMC 
aims to visualize the logic of the business emphasizing the value proposition, infrastructure, and 
ﬁnances to the organization and externals (Osterwalder, 2009). 
The order of BMC elements creates a clear perspective to detect potential risks or opportunities in the 
business. The Business Model Canvas identiﬁes the three major lenses of any business; desirability, 
feasibility, and viability see ﬁgure 11 (Jeffries, 2017). Desirability refers to understanding what 
motivates the customer in making a purchase decision. Feasibility aims to understand how the 
operational setup will work. Lastly, viability pertains to the ﬁnancial state and how much is ﬂowing in 
and out of the organization.  
In addition, the BMC is build up by nice separate boxes, each of them identifying a part of the value 
creation system. The nine boxes are named and explained below ﬁgure 11. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
28
==PAGE:30==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
 
Figure 11 - Business Model Canvas, Osterwalder 
• Customer Segments - Type of market satisfactory to current and future client needs 
• Value Propositions - The creation of value provided to customers compared to other businesses 
• Channels - How the value proposition is communicated to the customers 
• Customer Relationships - Type of communication with customers 
• Revenue Streams - How the company gets their customer segments to buy their product or service 
• Key Resources - The assets of the organization as to how it provides value to its customers 
• Key Activities - Activities that are key to producing the company’s value proposition 
• Key Partnerships - The network of suppliers and partners who complement each other 
• Cost structure - The cost of running a business according to a particular mode 
The key features of the Business Model Canvas are: 
• That it allows the creation and assessment of business ideas. 
• It is a visual representation of business logic and gives clarity to internal and external stakeholders. 
• It helps ﬁnd strengths, weaknesses, and potential opportunities or risks. 
• That it provides a holistic view of the idea, making it feasible to question its potential. 
• It is fast, free, and disposable. 
• Ideas can be created, validated, and ﬁxed on the same canvas. 
3.4.3 Startup Ecosystem 
Good startup ecosystems have proven to improve the innovation's cycle time, technology 
exploitation, and enhances developing new business models way faster than established corporations 
(Kolk, 2017). For this project, a stakeholder analysis was developed to provide insights regarding the 
actors in the startup Ecosystem.  
A startup's ecosystem is usually formed around innovation centers, such as universities or the 
concentration of technology development (Aalto University, 2019). This ecosystem consists of 
individuals, startups, and different types of organizations that interact as a system where the aim to 
develop new startups. The organizations in this ecosystem are usually categorized as universities, 
funding, support (such as accelerators), and big corporations. (Creative Commons Attribution 3.0, 
n.d.). Additionally, skills, money, and time are fundamental elements of a startup's ecosystem (Spigel, 
2017). Networking amongst different organizations and individuals plays a key role, the resources tend 
to be shared when this action is well implemented (Mermer, 2012). Based on ﬁgure 12, a startup 
ecosystem is divided by the elements of the ecosystem and the types of actors in it.  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
29
==PAGE:31==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
 
Figure 12 - Startup Ecosystem, Creative Commons 
Startup ecosystems in different locations have varied outcomes simply due to their differences in 
culture and people. People’s behavior directly affects the ecosystem processes as it is controlled by 
them.  
The key features of a startup ecosystem are: 
• Startups have a higher probability of being successful when developing in the right ecosystem 
• The availability of capital is more present than in other ecosystems 
• The job creation is higher than in established organizations 
• Pivoting happens easier, giving startups the chance to validate ideas before launching to market 
• The competitive landscape creates healthy competition to keep innovating 
• Mentorship is easier to ﬁnd and follow 
3.5 Summary 
In this chapter, the literature related to adoption models was reviewed. The three theory areas covered 
were Technological Innovation, Social Shaping, and Startups Business. The following section 
summarizes the main ﬁndings of the review.   
Technological Innovation 
• A general deﬁnition of innovation is the introduction of a new idea. Technological Innovation refers to 
the process where the new idea is applied in the product, services, or tools, and resembles an 
addition of value to society. 
• There are three main types of R&D: Basic Research, Applied Research, and Development. The R&D 
time is undeﬁned, as it can range from a few months to years to ﬁnd successful outcomes. The 
manufacturing industry usually uses this process for new product development and innovation. 
• Innovation is divided into four categories: Incremental innovation, Disruptive innovation, Sustaining 
innovation, and Radical innovation. The main point of these categories is to understand the existing 
opportunities and how can they be applied to the organizational context. Therefore, the approach of 
innovation in each organization should depend on the capability and strategic goals of each. 
• Design and Development aim to develop a solution for the user based on the customer design 
criteria. Web and mobile applications are considered the best type of project for this methodology. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
30
==PAGE:32==
Literature Review                                                                                                                                                    Chapter 3
Social Shaping 
• Social shaping theorists agree that the relationship between society and technology is a mutual 
shaping. Social Shaping of Technology is based on the variable of each person to have choices that 
will affect itself and the trajectory of innovation programs. Technological outcomes have different 
implications for society and speciﬁc social groups. Economic and Social effects are the ﬁrst notable 
aspects after the adoption of new technology.  
• The adoption of a new idea or product does not happen in the same rhythm for everyone, this is 
referred to as the diffusion of innovation. It is a process where some individuals are more open to 
adoption than others. They are classiﬁed into ﬁve categories: Innovators, Early Adopters, Early 
Majority, Late Majority, and Laggards. All groups require different strategies to adopt new 
technologies and the time will be variable on the product and their demographic characteristics. 
• Domestication theory is the approach in which science and technology describe the process in 
which new technologies are adopted by its users. This process is described in four dimensions: 
New technologies are integrated into daily activities, Users adapt to it, Users start to give reviews, 
The technology has enough positioning. 
• TAM is the most common and applied technology acceptance model. It aims to have everyone 
interact with technology where the behavioral intention to use is considered the lead factor. This 
model focuses on two technology acceptance measures; ease of use and usefulness. Although it is 
not part of the model, external variables such as social inﬂuences become a powerful determinate of 
an individual's attitude. 
Startups 
• Startups are changing the world by creating an environment for fast-learning with a safe opportunity 
for failure in a dynamic business that moves at lightning speed. For this project, a startup is deﬁned 
as a recently founded small business operating with a handful of people, who provide innovative 
solutions through problem-solving approaches to an existing need in society.  
• The ﬁrst challenge for a startup is to prove the validity of their concept to potential lenders and 
investors. Validation can be achieved through the measurement of customer response and doing so 
will create a bigger opportunity for the involvement of potential investors. 
• In a startup, teamwork is small, and everybody takes part in the decision-making process. The pace 
of progress inside most startups is based on speed, ﬂuency, and the comprehension of how great 
structure triggers any business. Three core design principles of startups were identiﬁed: 
- Design Thinking 
- Agile 
- Hyper-collaboration 
• Business Model Canvas allows the organization and potential investors to understand the logic of 
the business emphasizing the value proposition, infrastructure, and ﬁnances. The order of these 
elements creates a better perspective to detect potential risks and investment opportunities. 
• A valuable Startup ecosystem improves the innovation cycle time, technology exploitation, and 
enhances and develops new business models at a faster pace than established corporations.  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
31
==PAGE:33==
Case Studies                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 4
4. Case Studies 
The chapter presents an overview of each case study. Then, the following sections will address the 
case studies in detail to provide relevant information to the project. For each case study the following 
information is detailed: 
• Background of the startups 
• Description of products or services 
• Description of the business model 
• Description of internal activities 
• Innovation processes in their operation activities 
• Explanation of how it relates to domesticating technology 
4.1 Case Study A: ServedOnSalt 
This case study seeks to improve the energy storage for cooking in refugee camps. ServedOnSalt is 
formed by two engineering students, located in Copenhagen, Denmark, and works directly with a 
refugee camp in Nairobi, Kenya. 
ServedOnSalt started in the HardTech course at the Technical University in Denmark (DTU) in Spring 
2019. The course is aimed at students in their masters and involves students from various academic 
ﬁelds. The course ecosystem creates a technology-based incubator were student teams are matched 
to existing technology and challenged to ﬁnd a different small-scale application and make a business 
out of it (DTU Entrepreneurship, 2020). 
The students in this course were asked to develop a small-scale application of the SaltX technology 
and encouraged to not only identify the changes in the product but to consider the potential to 
change the current consumption system. Focusing on energy storage, ServedOnSalt created a 
business model that could improve cooking conditions in refugee camps. The focus of their product is 
to target the Affordable and Clean Energy Sustainable Development Goal (SDG). To make this a 
reality, the technical feasibility of their solution relies on the exothermic reaction of salts after being 
heated increasing the temperature inside a heat battery and creating a safe cooking system (see 
ﬁgure 13). 
 
Figure 13 - ServedOnSalt functionality  
In addition to this, ServedOnSalt has created a sustainable business model that seeks to provide a 
desirable and affordable solution to communities that simultaneously maintain the sustainability of the 
company. The business model is composed of a single-use purchase of 4DKK per heat battery. When 
this battery is used, it is exchanged for a new one, creating a circular system that allows 
ServedOnSalt the rentability of their services. To make this possible, they have partnered with UNHCR 
to obtain insights about their customers and users and to validate their conceptual processes.  
Their internal activities are shared between both members of the team, allowing for the discussion of 
each decision taken. When a member of the team is not in Copenhagen, they focus on the theoretical 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
32
==PAGE:34==
Case Studies                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 4
side while the other member focuses on prototyping. Over the past year, ServedOnSalt received more 
than 300,000 DKK through grants and fundraising and has had the opportunity to visit the refugee 
camp in November 2019.  
The innovation methods that ServedOnSalt identiﬁed as part of their product development process 
are brainstorming and morphological chart. The startup is aware of other methodologies as both 
members are Design and Innovation students, but they rather follow a personalized plan than a 
method. They mentioned that the onlyÂ  formalÂ  methods they aware they had followed are the 
Double Diamond, as they are currently working in their dissertation with the startup as the study case, 
and System Thinking, which was applied for the course purpose when the project started.Â  
ServedOnSalt is considered to be a study case because it is located in a physically different location 
where they look to create an impact. Besides, ServedOnSalt provides insights about their 
development process both before and after, this provides the researcher enough material to create a 
comparison of their mindsets between development stages.  
4.2 Case Study B: Nature Boards 
Nature Boards was initiated to redesign surfboards with sustainable materials. Although they are still in 
the process of deﬁning their target market, Nature Boards that aims to create awareness by using 
affordable and eco-friendly materials for the building industry. They are located in Denmark, with a 
three-person team, they have been developing eco-friendly materials for the past two years and 
starting to reach costumers. 
Along this process both students from Design and Innovation Eng. at Denmark Technical University 
found a sustainable solution to substitute the current materials of these products. With a mix of waste 
of mushroom roots, they created a strong and resistant material that could be used in different 
industries (see ﬁgures 14 and 15).  
    
 
           Figure 14 - Nature Boards offer                             Figure 15 - Nature Boards material versions 
After three years of developing the material, Nature Boards decided to approach the building industry 
to substitute non-sustainable materials with sustainable ones. They have considered a B2B approach 
but they remain in the customer validation stage. With a team of two members and a third one 
initiating in fall 2020, they share most of the tasks and gather between three to ﬁve times per week to 
keep active communication. 
The informants mentioned that the only method they have followed is the bio-inspired design cards. 
They rather restructure everything in their plane so they can decide which is the best approach to 
keep improving their product. They believe that as customers tend to change also the product should 
be able to pivot every time is needed, and by using an established method this might not be as 
adaptable to the ﬁrst iteration they were working it.  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
33
==PAGE:35==
Case Studies                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 4
Nature Boards has been selected as a study case as a result of its impact in an existing market with 
diverse competitors. Moreover, they have approached different markets which allowed the researcher 
to identify their process of client validation and user acceptance of the technology.  
4.3 Case Study C: Ponik 
This study case specializes in innovative indoor lighting for growing plants. Ponik accomplishes this by 
using different frequency spectrums and they have even managed to create new paradigms for local 
agricultural production. Started as a research project with two members, they have worked with local 
schools in Denmark over the past year to work on their proof of concept. Although the startup has 
two main technologies, they see more business potential in the grobots industry.  
Ponik started in 2019 as a research project and began by building hydroponic farms for public 
schools so they could learn about biology and data capture. With these insights, they found two 
potential business cases. First, to distribute grobots to restaurants and retailers and second to sell 
vegetable growth in a protected environment.  
At the moment, Ponik has contacted potential customers related to the grobots proposition, making 
them a B2C business model. Although they have not formalized any contracts as a result of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, they have taken their potential customer’s needs into account regarding the 
improvement of the product.  
The startup ensured that they have not used any formal method along their journey. As they have 
focused on improving the technology, they believe the scientiﬁc process could be the outline of their 
work, but as they were mostly informal at the beginning of the startup they didn’t felt the need to 
document every stage of their process as it was very iterative. Besides, they mentioned that the 
decisions along their journey have been based on accumulated knowledge rather than following a 
structure. 
This startup was considered as a study case due to their constant contact with potential customers in 
various markets. This information allowed the researcher to understand their process of approach and 
their understanding of the needs of the users. Moreover, both members of the team prefer to work on 
development tasks, making this information more detailed and easy to follow.   
4.4 Case Study D: OS City 
This startup purpose is to improve the government’s efﬁciency and trust by reducing the struggle of 
government professionals who operate within a limited budget and plenty of tech-driven offers (OS 
City, 2019). OS City was founded in Monterrey, Mexico, and has ofﬁces in Mexico City, Argentina, and 
San Francisco. This expansion has largely taken place over the past year, growing their team to 13 
people. Moreover, their main clients are situated in Mexico and some Latin American countries.  
OS City initially began as a two-person team under the name Smart City, which outsourced data 
analytics and IT consulting for their ﬁrst six months of operations. After being selected to be in 
Singularity University Startup Accelerator, the co-founders decided to merge with their outsourcing 
partners, Data 4 and Prins Consulting, creating OS City in 2019. Using edge technology, OS City 
develops personalised digital platforms for government services. Through Artiﬁcial Intelligence and 
Blockchain, they have created a modular platform allowing the government to choose modules based 
on their priorities and improve decision making based on secured, controlled, and monitored critical 
data of their cities (see ﬁgure 16).  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
34
==PAGE:36==
Case Studies                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 4
 
Figure 16 - OS City Platform characteristics 
With a B2G business model, OS City relies on three values; Reliability, through fostering city-
innovation transfer through the integration of technological solutions that have already demonstrated a 
positive impact on a safer government modernization. Affordability, ﬂexible pricing based on modular 
technology creations and implementation costs. And Novelty, pioneering AI & Blockchain using 
government’s unique data to speed-up the next generation of smart cities and governance models.  
OS City mentions the importance of ﬁnding a good tool that provides updated information for different 
stages of startups. They believe circumstances are always changing, and as a startup, they have 
adapted, so following just one methodology or method will be the worst decision they could take. 
Thus, the only methodology they have used is Moonshots. They argue that this methodology allows 
them to keep working to a goal rather than follow a path. Besides, they mention the importance of 
keep reading and understanding different ways to solve the same problem as this will give more 
resourceful information to the startup on how to solve the problem they are addressing.  
This startups was considered a study case due to the relationship they have with their clients and 
end-users. In addition to developing new technology, this startup relies on the large-scale adoption of 
the technology by citizens to create viable data for the client, who, in this case, is the government. 
Moreover, their position in different contexts provided enough material to create a comparison 
between understanding users and clients with the same technology. 
4.5 Case Study E: Kabaan 
The ﬁfth study case covers startup Kabaan. They are a company dedicated to sustainable 
construction, by converting rubble into high-quality materials. The startup’s name comes from the 
merge between two Mayan words, care, and the world. With a ﬁve-person team, Kabaan operates in 
Mexico, Colombia, and Ecuador.  
The initial idea was conceived in November 2016, during an evening talk where both founding 
members had an idea of turning the rubble into new materials in Mexico. The members also knew 
that there were business success stories in Colombia who had similar thought processes. In March 
2017, the possibility of entering a university contest EMPRENDE UAA, in the Autonomous University 
of Aguascalientes arose. The idea was incubated, and the initial business model was developed and 
presented to a jury, obtaining ﬁrst place in the category of Social and Environmental Impact. 
Subsequently, it was incubated at the Tecnológico de Monterrey in 2017. Kabaan is currently in the 
ﬁnal stage of the National Entrepreneur Award for the Innovative Idea category and stood out among 
the 500 best socio-environmental projects in Latin America and the Caribbean at the Latin America 
Green Awards in the ﬁeld of Solid Waste. 
Kabaan proposes to mitigate, reduce, and recycle the rubble from the construction industry to avoid 
waste (Chavez, 2020). In their ﬁrst stage, base and sub-base products for streets and highways are 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
35
==PAGE:37==
Case Studies                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 4
being developed. The second stage will see that 100% of the waste will be recycled and 
subsequently re-enter the production chain.  
Although they confront different regulations in each country, Kabaan has a strong B2C business 
model. Regulations in Colombia and Ecuador demand that a recycling process for the rubble be 
present, making it easier for Kabaan to approach clients. Meanwhile, Mexico does not have such 
regulations, making the construction industry a difﬁcult target to approach. On another side, Kabaan 
has found a small window where international companies look to build with environmental 
certiﬁcations making them the best service to acquire.  
This startup mentioned that the tool they can recall is the Business Model Canvas. Nevertheless, this 
was only applied when they were part of an accelerator program. Even though this methodology 
helps them to create a concrete ﬁrst draft for a business model they felt that this perspective was 
making to only see their startup in a speciﬁc way and they kept to feel inside the box. For them is 
highly important to see what is outside the canvas and how can they pivot ideas rather than just ﬁlling 
some blank spaces. 
Kabaan was considered as a study case due to their implementation of new environmental 
techniques in the same context where they operate. With team members in each country, this 
provided enough material to create a comparison between understanding users and clients in 
different contexts with the same technology. Besides, the buying decision for Kabaan technology has 
the political variable as the main changing factor in each context.  
4.6 Case Study F: Cultivo 
Cultivo Land PBC aims to capture one billion tons of carbon dioxide through large-scale land 
restoration. Conformed by a team of ﬁve members and located in Monterrey Mexico, they have an 
impact in the US, Mexico, and the UK.  
Cultivo started by merging the vision of the co-founders to create an important change at the 
environmental level. They looked to use the DNA of a startup and the knowledge of ﬁnancial 
technology to change practice in the use of the land industry. Their mission is to unlock investment at 
scale to restore nature and generate ecosystem services. For example, capturing carbon, protecting 
biodiversity, providing fresh water, and supporting local communities (Cultivo, 2019). 
Their business model works in a B2B structure, where the sale process is the main activity to match 
both value propositions for investors and potential impact (see ﬁgure 17). At the moment, Cultivo is 
soon to ﬁnalise a national deal after a year of pursuit. Moreover, they have had an impact of 626,000 
tCO₂ sequestered and 15,000 ha land restored in Chihuahua, Mexico in past projects.  
 
Figure 17 - Cultivo clients value proposition 
As cultivo works in different countries they don’t follow any methodology but have a shared space for 
all the information each part works with. They mentioned that the difference between approaches in 
each countries doesn’t facilitate the use of a same methodology, speciﬁcally when the users have so 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
36
==PAGE:38==
Case Studies                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 4
much cultural differences. Besides, each team in the startups work separately and then decide to 
share their insights in a moment of the week.  
This startup was considered as a study case because it demonstrates a situation in which both 
parties needed to change their mindsets to make the process feasible.  Apart from developing new 
technology, the startup relies on the large-scale adoption of its technology by landowners and 
investors. In addition, their position in different contexts provided enough material to create a 
comparison between understanding users and clients with the same technology. 
4.7 Summary 
• A general introduction of each case was presented to provide background and draw a relation to 
domestication processes. In the following chapters, the insights of each case will provide material 
for the conceptualization of the proposed model.  
• The six case studies were selected based on four-factor criteria: impact on emerging markets, 
operate from either in or outside the context to work with, experience talking with customers and 
users, at least two iterations of prototypes. As this project aimed to understand how startups 
understand different contexts, the fourth factor was the operative location. For this purpose, half of 
the cases are located in Denmark, while the other half are located in Mexico. As such, the 
comparison between the methodologies and their impact can be made when the startup is a part of 
or an outsider to the impacted context.   
• Case study A: ServedOnSalt, challenged to use existing technology they aim to improve the energy 
storage for cooking in refugee camps by using exothermic reactions of salts to increase or decrease 
the temperature inside a heat battery and creating a safe cooking system. ServedOnSalt is formed 
by two engineering students, located in Copenhagen, Denmark, and work directly with a refugee 
camp in Nairobi, Kenya. 
• Case study B: Nature Boards, initiated as the redesign of surfboards, they create a material based 
on the waste of mushroom roots that can be adopted by different industries. They aim to create 
awareness by using affordable and eco-friendly materials. Located in Denmark, with a three-person 
team, they are still deﬁning their target market. 
• Case study C: Ponik developed a grobot with new indoor lighting specialized for growing plants, 
with different frequency spectrums for a local and protected environment. With a two-person team, 
Ponik has developed two potential business cases that aim to improve responsible consumption 
and production in the local economy. 
• Case study D: OS City transforms governments into a platform of digital services for their citizens. 
Through Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Blockchain, OS City has created a modular platform for improved 
decision making based on secured, controlled, and monitored critical data of their cities. OS City is 
located in Mexico, Argentina, and the US with a team of 13 persons. Their main clients are situated 
in Mexico with a few also scattered in the Latin American countries.  
• Case study E: Kabaan is dedicated to sustainable construction and promotes the mitigation, 
reduction, and recycling of rubble from the construction industry. The company favors nature and 
wishes to avoid its exploitation. With a ﬁve-person team, Kabaan is located and operates in Mexico, 
Colombia, and Ecuador.  
• Case study F: Cultivo by matching value propositions for investors and potential impact land, Cultivo 
aims to capture one billion tons of carbon dioxide through large-scale land restoration. Composed 
of a ﬁve-person team, this startup is located in Monterrey Mexico, and has an impact in the USA, 
Mexico, and the UK.  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
37
==PAGE:39==
Understanding the Synthesis of Domestication Models                                                                                         Chapter 5
5. Understanding the Synthesis of Domestication Models 
As a supplement to Chapter 3, this chapter seeks to fulﬁll the ﬁrst research question, How are the 
current technology adaptation models understood?, by establishing a theoretical foundation for 
the synthesis of Domestication models. Based on theoretical frameworks in the Engineering Design 
ﬁeld, the design of models and identiﬁcation of their fundamental aspects will be detailed. 
This chapter starts by outlining the properties of design models and the requirements they should 
contain in order to provide quality results. After this, the conceptual elements for the Domestication 
Models are described, identifying the fundamental parts for the development of a new model.  
5.1 Developing of theoretical frameworks 
Theories and models are used to describe empirical phenomena (Tan, 2010). As before mentioned, 
this project seeks to develop a tool for domestication models that can be applied in the daily activities 
of startups. 
To make this possible, the Design Research model is identiﬁed as the research structure for this 
project. Therefore, the approach to propose this new model is to identify the fundamental elements for 
a domestication process through literature and empirical data and correlate them. 
As this project intends to improve a startup’s potential, it has been noted through the case studies 
that the performance of its members seems to be a key factor for success. Taking this into account, 
the development of the domestication model should be based on activities that team members can 
achieve through individual or team efforts. An important requirement for this model is to consider the 
difference of resources each startup has and the viability of adopting this strategy as a new way to 
work.  
5.1.1. Design models 
Models allow researchers to study the design process at an early stage. They help in the knowledge 
of the design parameters and deﬁne the course in which the development should occur (Tan, 2010). 
Design models are a representation to communicate their larger physical characteristics and help to 
analyze and evaluate simulations of potential behavior in speciﬁc contexts (M., 1995).  
Buur and Andreasen identiﬁed that information can only exist in a medium. This medium is often a 
graphical form to send a message, for instance, human language, symbols, drafting standards, and/
or projections. Even though the information might be sent in the most optimal form, a correct 
reception might be interrupted by external factors (Buur & Myrup Andreasen, 1989). For this, they 
identiﬁed two dimensions in which design models can be understood: abstraction and detailing, see 
ﬁgure 18 (Buur & Myrup Andreasen, 1989). 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
38
==PAGE:40==
Understanding the Synthesis of Domestication Models                                                                                         Chapter 5
 
Figure 18 - Degree of abstraction - Buur & Andreasen, 1989 
Taking into account the literature review and case studies ﬁndings, it is understood that the proposed 
model should consider a level for detailed information and a medium level for abstraction, as this will 
allow the users reﬂect on their interactions with the model. 
5.2 Fundamental dimensions of Domestication Models 
In Chapter 3 the common understanding in the literature about domestication models is described. As 
mentioned by Roger Silvestor, the domestication approach explains the relation between technologies 
in social contexts and structures (Davis, Bagozzi, & Warshaw, 1989). Therefore, three theory areas 
were identiﬁed as the main dimensions of the domestication process. 1) Technological Innovation, 2) 
Social Shaping, and 3) Startup Business. 
 
Figure 20 - Meta model for Domestication Models 
The ﬁrst dimension to consider is the Technological Innovation which pertains to identifying current 
methodologies as a way to understand the most common processes for innovation within startups. In 
this dimension, the planning of activities is a crucial factor that will allow the intervention of a new 
model into established decisions. 
The second dimension is  Social Shaping. The focus of this dimension is the relationship between 
human behavior and technology. The theories presented in Chapter 2 let the researcher understand 
the established process where the focus is on customer activities.  
Finally, the third dimension, Startup Business, considers the internal and external activities that take 
place in the startup ecosystem. Incorporating the Design Principles, startups can operate in their daily 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
39
==PAGE:41==
Understanding the Synthesis of Domestication Models                                                                                         Chapter 5
activities and make their BMC a reality to the network potential. As such, understanding this 
dimension allows the researcher to understand the available resources and the potential of each 
startup.  
Combing these dimensions makes it feasible to approach the domestication process from different 
perspectives. It allows for the understanding of the economic and social impacts of the startup 
ecosystem. Moreover, these dimensions create a holistic intervention when applying methodologies 
for developing technologies, and interact with the customers and users.  
5.3 Conceptual elements of Domestication Models 
In past chapters, a broad range of literature research and ﬁeldwork on startups R&D processes is 
conducted. This included research within Technology Innovation, Social Shaping, and Startup 
Business. Further, the case studies aim to understand the history of the context, stakeholders 
involved, and the accessibility and application of new technologies developed by the startups. 
The literature in Chapter 3 is focused on exploring different models related to study areas in the 
domestication process. Technology Innovation focuses on the innovation processes and the spread of 
technology, and Social Shaping, provides insights about technology acceptance behavior. Moreover, 
Startups Business produce information for the development phases of the teams and internal 
activities. 
Case studies in chapter 4 provides empirical data about the startups domestication models and 
operations. From internal activities to a speciﬁc use of methods, insights about their interpretation of 
customer needs and technology elements were uncovered. 
Applying Hansen and Andreasen's exploration model (ﬁgure 19), the principal ﬁndings of the literature 
review and case studies are correlated to the ﬁve main feed chains and use as the beginning point for 
the concept synthesis process (Andreasen, 2015). The feed chains provide the following structure: 
•
For the need interpretation the case studies shown multiple perspectives of the research 
paradigm.  
•
In the task perception and formulation paradoxes statements based on the literature review 
and case studies are developed 
•
For the perception of preferences a sample group was selected to have multiple perspectives. 
•
The technology and ideas are based on the literature review of domestication process and 
case studies. 
•
The problem statement is based on the second research question: How may a technology 
adaptation model be conceptualized? 
 
Figure 19 - Exploration model, Hansen and Andreasen 2003 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
40
==PAGE:42==
Understanding the Synthesis of Domestication Models                                                                                         Chapter 5
Using the insights in the literature review and case studies on the exploration model of Hansen and 
Andreasen, the following attributes are considered for the conceptualization of the domestication 
model: 
•
Business strategy - Startups rely on their value proposition to be economically sustainable.  
•
Technological  potential -  The degree in which the solution can produce similar results in 
different contexts. 
•
Customer activity focus - Value and fulﬁllment of needs can only be understood by analyzing 
customer and user behavior with and without the solution. 
•
System  Thinking  - By realizing systems are made of different factors that will affect the 
perspective of each technology.  
•
Life  cycle consideration -  Considering the production and consumption of the solution in a 
different context. 
•
Network potential - Understanding the potential of different stakeholders in different industries. 
5.4 Behavior properties of Domestication Models 
A usual characteristic of any model developed is the behavioral properties of its attributes. As 
previously mentioned, the dimensions selected for the development of this model provide a varied 
perspective, aiming to provoke a change within speciﬁcs areas. The use of any model is determined 
by their perception of the use and value of the attributes. Based upon the identiﬁcation of the 
conceptual elements of domestication models and the fundamental dimensions, an identiﬁcation of 
the important value in each relation between attributes and dimensions are presented in the following 
table 10.  
These behavioral properties are identiﬁed through the literature review and case studies. With six 
attributes and three dimensions, 24 properties were recognized as a value relation for the 
development of the domestication model. 
Table 10 - Behaviour properties of identiﬁes attributes for Domestication Model 
Startup Business
Technological 
Innovation
Social Shaping
• Business strategy - 
Startups rely on their 
value proposition to be 
economically sustainable 
The value proposition to 
be economically 
sustainable 
Development of Intellectual 
property can position the 
startup as a pioneer in the 
industry. 
The value proposition can 
provide a growth in the 
community they work with.
• Technological potential - 
The degree in which the 
solution can produce 
similar results in diﬀerent 
contexts.
The degree in which 
the MVP allows the 
startup to be scalable 
and replicable in 
diﬀerent markets.
The potential to create a 
new ﬁeld of technology.
The degree in which the 
solution can produce 
changes in the users 
behaviour.
• Customer activity focus - 
Value and fulﬁllment of 
needs can only by 
understood by analyzing 
customer and user 
behavior with and without 
the solution.
The main users are 
usually the customers 
with the buying 
decision.
The customer activity 
process, in which degree 
has the new solution 
improved the past 
experiences. 
The customer activity 
process, in which degree it 
has been accepted and 
adapted in the daily life of 
the user.
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
41
==PAGE:43==
Understanding the Synthesis of Domestication Models                                                                                         Chapter 5
5.5 Summary 
This chapter presents the theoretical framework in order to provide an understanding of the synthesis 
of Domestication Models. The reviewed framework provides a theoretical foundation for the ﬁrst 
research question, How are the current technology adaptation models understood?.  
The dimensions of the domestication model are identiﬁed as the main theory areas of the 
domestication process: (1) Technological Innovation (2) Social Shaping and (3) Startup Business. 
Based on the literature presented, the insights derived from the case studies, and the literature review, 
the models' attributes are selected.  
•
Business strategy - Startups rely on their value proposition to be economically sustainable.  
•
Technological  potential -The degree in which the solution can produce similar results in 
different contexts. 
•
Customer activity focus - Value and fulﬁllment of needs can only be understood by analyzing 
customer and user behavior with and without the solution. 
•
System Thinking - By realizing systems are composed of different factors that will affect the 
perspective of each technology.  
•
Life  cycle consideration -  Considering the production and consumption of the solution in a 
different context. 
Finally, the dimensions and the attributes of the model, allows for the the identiﬁcation of potential 
behavior properties in the model. The model’s base has been explained, but its applicability has yet to 
be fully validated. This process will be done in chapter 6, with the conceptualization of the model, and 
in chapter 7, with the application in the startup activities.  
• System Thinking - By 
realizing complex 
systems are composed 
of diﬀerent factors that 
will aﬀect the perspective 
of each technology. 
The system values to 
work with, 
expectations, resources 
and limitations.
Understanding the 
resources needed to 
manufacture and apply the 
technology in diﬀerent 
contexts.
The work space to 
consider, traditions, 
cultural values, social 
agreements.
• Life cycle consideration - 
Considering the 
production and 
consumption of the 
solution in a diﬀerent 
context.
The production and 
consumption model 
can allow the startup to 
reduce costs and add 
value into the solution.  
The potential for adoption 
can be based on 
facilitating the production 
or consumption for the 
consumers.
The addition of value can 
be based on customer 
touchpoint such as, 
purchase, installation, 
maintenance and disposal.
• Network potential - 
Understanding the 
potential of diﬀerent 
stakeholders in diﬀerent 
industries.
The startup can create 
new collaborations and 
improve their value 
proposition through 
business relationships. 
Working in a hyper 
collaboration system can 
provide resources to 
improve the innovation 
potential.
How can stakeholders 
improve the perception of 
customer towards the new 
technology.
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
42
==PAGE:44==
Domestication Model Conceptualization                                                                                                                Chapter 6
6. Domestication Model Conceptualization 
In this chapter, the second research question is addressed:  How may a technology adaptation 
model be conceptualized?. To answer this question, a level of coherence is necessary amongst the 
design concepts. Hansen and Andreasen (2003) mention three aspects that should be considered in 
regards to this process: 
•
Identiﬁcation of conceptual aspects 
•
Modeling of concepts 
•
Evaluation criteria 
The following sections elaborate on the development of each aspect and provides material for the 
following one. In the identiﬁcation of conceptual aspects, the-idea-with-and-idea-in for each attribute 
is listed and paradoxes of the domestication models are created based on the literature review and 
case studies. After this, in the modeling of concepts section, the main ﬁndings of the research are 
clustered into essential characteristics of the domestication model should contain. Finally, the 
evaluation criteria based on the  difference that matters and raison d’être  identiﬁes the most 
meaningful parts and coherent ways to select the concept with more potential to become the 
proposed model. 
6.1 Identiﬁcation of Conceptual Aspects 
To identify in what course this project is running, the design task is outlined. It is fundamental to 
consider what is the objective, who will use the concept, and what does it need to work out. To shape 
the task, the idea with and idea in of each attribute is detailed in the following table, resulting as a 
deeper understanding of conceptual aspects. The  idea with expresses the need aspects, and 
the idea in explains the implementation of the need (Hansen and Andreasen, 2003). This allows the 
design of paradoxes and identiﬁcation of the task formulation on the further part of this process. The 
task looks to incorporate as many of the paradoxes as is possible and coherent. 
Table 11 - Idea with and idea in concepts 
Idea with
Idea in
Business Strategy
Correct solution for the context
Concepts are validated with local people
Match between company and user
Balance between company and customer need
Technology potential
Technology is based on users needs
Prioritise users ﬁrst and seconds needs
Technology should be innovative
The solution should 
Customer activity focus
Value in the user life
The solution improves the current situation of the user
Catalogue of approach strategies
Create diﬀerent strategies to approach customers
System Thinking
Everything is connected
Have a mapping of the ecosystem
Giving the right help over long distance
Prioritise customer needs
Life Cycle consideration
Saves resources
Resources are eﬁﬁcient
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
43
==PAGE:45==
Domestication Model Conceptualization                                                                                                                Chapter 6
10 paradoxes related to the previously mentioned attribute are developed and shown in table 12. The 
table prioritizes the paradoxes by its relevance to the research project. The most relevant ones 
consider technology innovation and customer focus. Contrastingly, the least relevant focus on the life 
cycle attribute. As this project focuses more heavily on the innovation process rather than the 
manufacturing perspective, paradoxes 1-5 will be used. 
Table 12 - Exploration Paradoxes 
The following task formulation is provided to explain how the conceptual model should be created 
and under which conditions.  
The domestication model seeks to improve the adoption of new technologies by highlighting the 
role of users. The model will improve the understanding of users perceptions when experts 
develop solutions for a diﬀerent location to the one they are. As a result of the model, Startups will 
understand the system to work with and create a balance between the customer and the company 
needs.  
6.2 Modelling of Concepts 
For modeling the aspects of the concept, the solution space is expanded by following the Morphology 
method. Attributes are described as different actions, resulting in different ideas solving the same task. 
Good quality of products
Safe and trustworthy materials
Network potential
Stakeholders as a factor for understanding contexts
Create a dialogue to share context knolwedge
Improvement of stakeholder relationships
Create collaborations
1
Technology should be developed by 
experts
On the other hand,
Technological advances should be 
developed by considering the users 
needs
2
The more innovative the technology the 
more valuable will be to the market
On the other hand,
Customer have a hard time adopting new 
technologies into their life
3
Startups should prioritise their clients
On the other hand,
They should look for a balance between 
company and client
4
Startups should have diﬀerent 
strategies
On the other hand,
Startups have lack of resources
5
Startups can analyse similar contexts in 
order to have insights
On the other hand,
Every context is diﬀerent even though 
they might look the same
6
Everything is connected 
On the other hand,
As a startup you are not able to 
understand everything 
7
Startups need to validate their value 
proposition in order to become 
sustainable
On the other hand,
Due lack of resources assumptions 
tends to be a done.
8
Teamworks are small, and everybody 
takes parts of the decisions
On the other hand,
Everyone has diﬀerent tasks to 
accomplish in the same period of time.
9
Products should be manufactured in 
the user context
On the other hand,
The manufacturing process should be 
followed in detail by the startup
10
Products should consider local 
materials
On the other hand,
Startups will increase their cost by 
adding a manufacturing site
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
44
==PAGE:46==
Domestication Model Conceptualization                                                                                                                Chapter 6
To expand the solution space, the classiﬁcation of main ﬁndings in the case studies is done. Since the 
interviews focused on the innovation processes, a clear start is deﬁned. The analysis of how to cluster 
them led to a new perception of the different functions which the model should accomplish. These 
functions are based on case studies and the fundamental dimensions for domestication models. The 
ﬁndings are divided into the three dimensions and then categorized as Language, Actions, Emotions 
or Stakeholders. With these categories, each ﬁnding was correlated between a dimension and a 
function (see appendix 7). The ﬁnal categories of the ﬁndings are as followed:  
1.
Business strategy 
2.
Technological Innovation 
3.
Domestication process 
4.
Communication  
5.
Actions/Strategies 
6.
Emotions 
7.
Stakeholders 
With six case studies, the number of insights broads out the solution space. To get an overview of the 
insights, and create a resourceful model, the insights are set up a in morphology chart, see table 13. 
As some insights are not perceived to be fundamental components for the model, they are placed in a 
different category which is named “Additional features/function”. Thus, the morphology categories 
were revised into the essential characteristics the model should contain:  
1.
Visual aids 
2.
Iterative process 
3.
Adaptable in Startups ecosystems 
4.
Process understanding 
5.
Validation of technology 
6.
Value for everyone 
7.
Efﬁcient process 
8.
Network potential 
9.
Additional features/functions 
To create a strong model consisting of varied characteristics, each of the insights is marked with a 
color code to appreciate its potential impact. Nine focus titles are deﬁned and assigned to each color. 
It is understood, that the concept with more focus areas will provide be more resourceful for the 
startup when this is applied. 
 
Table 13 - Morphology chart 
 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
45
==PAGE:47==
Domestication Model Conceptualization                                                                                                                Chapter 6
The Morphology chart prompted three promising concepts. Each of them is developed and detailed 
into a concept catalog. This can be found in appendix 11.  
Every concept is described in a brief way, detailing the main characteristics and its function. Each of 
them has an illustration and the difference that matters and strengths and weaknesses are listed. 
6.3 Evaluation Criteria 
Design concepts are developed ideas that have a speciﬁc degree of tangibility. Hansen and 
Andreasen (2005) discuss eight dimensions that make a concept strong; strategy, business, need, 
user and customer, technology, product, task, goal speciﬁcation (ﬁgure 21). Nonetheless, the authors 
emphasize that is not required to fulﬁl all these dimensions, rather, one should recognize and work on 
the difference that matters. 
 
Figure 21 - Product idea framework , Hansen and Andreasen 2003 
Considering the framework for a product idea, an analysis of each concept is conducted to achieve 
an objective evaluation (see appendix 12). Each concept is separated by its components and 
identiﬁed to which dimension each part impacts. Besides the product idea framework, each concept 
is also validated with the product's raison d’être (Hansen and Andreasen, 2005). Two arguments are 
developed for each of the characteristics, as a result, the concept vulnerability can be interpreted. 
Recognizing the main objective of the proposed model, concept #3 was identiﬁed as the best option.  
For concept #3 it is considered that the following dimensions in the product idea framework are 
impacted. These are described as the following: 
•
Strategy, the model will allow the startup to create a plan to achieve its mission and vision 
while having a balance between user and company. 
•
Need, this concept proposes a relationship between customers and product attributes.  
•
User, and  customer, this concept shows the relation between the adoption factors that are 
relevant for the user and customer in order to accept the product. 
•
Goal speciﬁcation, by applying this concept the properties and performance of the product are 
validated before user testing. 
•
Product,  the form and appearance of a product, as well as the technical solutions are 
correlated to the adoption factors. 
•
Technology, the product principles are outlined and detailed in technical and user perception. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
46
==PAGE:48==
Domestication Model Conceptualization                                                                                                                Chapter 6
 
Figure 22 - Evaluation of proposed tool 
In addition, the arguments for Product’s raison d’être are detailed as the following: 
Possible 
    + With an iterative tool is feasible to adopt it in the startups' scenarios 
    - Each startup will have a different way to use it (e.g. teams, individual, whole company) 
Profitable 
    + Reduces the workforce creating bigger opportunities to improve current solutions. 
    - It will require time to draft the ﬁrst version of the canvas, taking the time of other tasks.  
Desirable 
    + The outcomes makes it more appealing compared to current solutions. 
    - Some startups might consider it as not needed in their operations. 
Sensible 
    + The product beneﬁts the end-user and the customer by improving current solutions  
-The product has to be improved in graphical design to make it more attractive.  
6.4 Proposed tool for Domestication of Technology  
Considering the comprehensive knowledge obtained in the literature review and the case studies, the 
conceptualization process gave a promising conceptual model. In order to demonstrate the proposed 
model, a description is provided, followed by the identiﬁcation of the most crucial aspects and how 
they behave, this is supported by an illustration. Finally, the key features conclude with the description 
of the tool. 
The Mainstream Market Canvas is a strategic tool to quickly and easily deﬁne and communicate to 
which extend a technology meets the adoption process factors. The canvas is a one-page document 
that works through the fundamental stages of the adoption process and the main characteristics of 
the selling product, structuring an overview of the adoption and technology ﬁt, this can be seen in 
ﬁgure 23.  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
47
==PAGE:49==
Domestication Model Conceptualization                                                                                                                Chapter 6
 
Figure 23 - Proposed Domestication Tool 
With a non-linear, iterative process, the Mainstream Market Canvas seeks to understand users, 
challenge assumptions, and create innovative solutions to test. The top portion of the tool focuses on 
the adoption factors necessary for a user to adopt a product while the left side emphasizes the 
product characteristics. The relation between each factor is considered as the value between the 
product and the adoption factors, consequently a variable for the product to be adopted into the 
user’s life.  
As a ﬁrst interaction with the tool, the four stages of the adoption process are details with their 
speciﬁc factors underneath. To provide a clearer understanding, each stage, factor, and key questions 
are deﬁned as the following: 
Table 14 - Tool Parts 
Adoption stage
Adoption Factor
Key questions
Acquisition 
Process for motivation for 
a buying decision.
Functionality: 
The degree to which the user considers the product to 
solve the problem they posses
• What product function is solving the user problem? 
• Does the product have extra functions to make it stand out from 
competitors? 
• What is the underlying motivator for this problem? Are we solving 
it?
Familiarity:  
the degree in which the user considers to be 
comfortable and unlikely to cause harm. This does not 
just apply to visual interactions, but functional 
characteristics.
• Does the user already use something like this? 
• What are the functions the user is familiar to? 
• What are the new functions the user is facing?
Functionality 
Process of determine 
which roles the artifact will 
play in daily life.
Usefulness:  
The degree to which the products improves the current 
experience of the user.
• What functions will improve the current experience? 
• What activities are diﬀerent from the current experience? 
• What actions does it take the user to achieve the expected value?
Placement in user life: 
The degree to which the product has become a part of 
the user’s daily routine.
• In which activity of the users routine the product takes part of? 
• How frequent does the user utilize the product? 
• Is the product promoting and interaction with other users?
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
48
==PAGE:50==
Domestication Model Conceptualization                                                                                                                Chapter 6
The key features of the Customer-Tech Canvas are: 
• Creation of a tangible representation. 
• Ideas can be created, validated and ﬁxed. 
• Promote feasible improvement and consistent pace. 
• Find the balance between client perception and company values. 
• Helps ﬁnd opportunities or risks. 
6.6. Summary 
Related to the second research question, How may a technology adaptation model be 
conceptualised?, this thesis proposes a domestication tool to be used in the daily activities of 
startups. In response to this, three potential models are developed following the conceptualization 
process outlined by Hansen and Andreasen (see ﬁgure 24). The analysis of the literature review and 
case studies demonstrates that the fundamental dimensions detailed in Chapter 5 are necessary. 
 
Figure 24 - Conceptualisation process 
The conceptualization process is divided into three phases,  Identiﬁcation of conceptual aspects, 
modeling of concepts, and evaluation criteria. For the identiﬁcation of conceptual aspects, the Idea 
with-and-Idea-in method is applied to the attributes for domestication models. With these, it was 
possible to create paradoxes that were used to deﬁne the task for the proposed tool.  
After this, the insights from the literature review and the case studies are categorized and 
subsequently clustered into the chosen characteristics which are then arranged in a morphology 
chart. By clustering different characteristics, three conceptual models are developed.  
Finally, each of the concepts is evaluated through the product idea framework and the raison d’être 
method, which allowed for the identiﬁcation of the strongest concept. Thus, the concept chosen was 
#3 - Mainstream Market Canvas. 
Nonetheless, like any other contribution to the Design Research ﬁeld, there are always chances that 
the proposed tool will not be adopted by startups.. 
Usability 
Process where the 
individual interacts with the 
artifact.
Ease of use: 
The degree to which the user understands the amount 
of eﬀort needed to take advantage of the product. 
• What are the steps that the user has to do in order to achieve the 
expected value? 
• What are the most challenging steps?
Learning curve: 
How comfortable the user becomes using the product, 
it takes less time to use and the experience improves
• What are the usability challenges? 
• How does the product interact with the user? (e.g. lights, words, 
sounds)
Loyalty 
Process of converting the 
technology into an 
intended interaction.
Motivation to keep using: 
The reasons why the user will keep utilizing the product 
compared to current solutions.
• What are the reasons the user will keep using the product? 
• What strategy should be employed to make the user keep using 
the product?
Motivation to recommend: 
The reasons the user will consider sharing their 
experience with the product. These can be directly 
related to the functionality or the experience feelings.
• What are the reasons the user will recommend the product? 
• How has the product improved the user’s life? 
• What characteristics does the user share with potential 
customers?
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
49
==PAGE:51==
Domestication Model Application                                                                                                                           Chapter 7
7. Domestication Model Application 
This chapter seeks to answer the third research question,  How may a technology adaptation 
model be developed in Startups?. This is done by establishing the proposed tool in the context of 
the design and development processes of startups. As there was a limited time period, this was 
completed by conducting a perception value questionnaire with the case studies.  
7.1 Identiﬁcation of Perceived Value 
To analyze the potential of the tool, the questionnaire aims to identify the perceived value and potential 
of the tool by the case studies. Perceived value is the client's assessment of the quality of an item 
based on their personal experiences (Kopp, 1970). The perceived value for this research project is 
constituted by action, barriers and motivation factors. These factors are analyzed through how 
positive or negative the user’s perception of the tool is.  
For each case study, an interactive board detailing the tool and a basic guideline are sent together 
with the questionnaire to the case studies. The structure of the questionnaire is as following (The 
interactive board and questionnaire can also be found in appendix 13). 
Action 
These questions strive to distinguish the emotions related to the model, and the effect they have to 
adopt the model. 
• Scale question: On a scale of 1-10, how easy was it to understand the tool? 
• Scale question: On a scale of 1-10, how comfortable will you feel using the tool? 
• Open-ended question: Which three words would you use to describe the tool? 
Barriers 
These questions focus on how users internalize and understand the tool. 
• Open-ended question: Please share a few things that can be improved in the tool. 
• Open-ended question: In your perception, what is the biggest challenge to using this tool? 
• Open-ended question: In your perception, will this tool provide meaningful information to the 
startup? 
Motivation 
These questions answer how positive or negative the user perception has been with the tool. 
• Scale question: On a scale of 1-10, how likely are you to use it in your startup? 
• Scale question: On a scale of 1-10, how likely are you to recommend to another startup or 
colleague? 
• Open-ended question: Why would you use it in your daily operations? 
• Open-ended question: Please share a few things that you liked about the tool. 
7.2 Domestication Tool related to Startup perception 
The proposed design is evaluated concerning the perceived value by the case studies. As previously 
mentioned, the questionnaire is divided into three sections to identify the level of understandability, the 
ease of use, and the perception of the model. For this evaluation, scale and open-ended questions 
are applied to provide qualitative and quantitative data. It is considered that a seven out of ten is a 
pass grade for the scale questions.  
In the ﬁrst section of the questionnaire, Action, the aim is to identify the feelings connected to the 
model. Two scale questions and one open ended question provides the ﬁndings for this section. The 
ﬁrst outcome is that ﬁve of the six case studies approves the proposed tool as easy to understand 
and use (see ﬁgure 25 and 26). The sixth case mentions it is difﬁcult to ﬁll each cell without a guide, 
leading the researcher to assume the key questions for the tool have not been noticed, as the other 
case studies make an emphasis of how this questions help them to understand the way of use. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
50
==PAGE:52==
Domestication Model Application                                                                                                                           Chapter 7
 
Figure 25 - Understand level of proposed tool 
 
Figure 26 - Comfort level of proposed tool 
In the Barriers section, the focus is on how users internalize and understand the tool. For this, ﬁve out 
of the six cases determine the proposed tool is a meaningful resource for data gathering (See ﬁgure 
27). Once again, the sixth case ﬁnds the tool irrelevant by arguing that the canvas by itself was just an 
outline of product characteristics rather than a representative visualization. Meanwhile, the other case 
studies cite a reﬂection of the outcomes and appropriate these ﬁndings into a reﬂection process while 
ﬁlling the canvas.  
The second section has a more qualitative focus so the researcher can analyze the challenges and 
opportunities of the tool perceived by the startups. The two main challenges uncovered in the results 
are the mental work that startups have to put into working all the sections of the tool at once and the 
need for a reﬂection guide to making the teams be aware of the relation of the outcomes in their 
canvas. Additionally, the identiﬁed opportunities include low complexity visuals, which allowed those 
with key questions to ﬁll the canvas and consider how it can be applied to services.  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
51
==PAGE:53==
Domestication Model Application                                                                                                                           Chapter 7
 
Figure 27 - Meaningful resource answers 
Lastly, in the third section, Motivation, the aim is to analyze the user's perception of the tool. A net 
promoter score is identiﬁed along with the reasoning behind using the tool in the daily operations of 
the startup (see ﬁgure 28). The net promoter score is 34, generally, a score between 0 and 30 is a 
good indication of where the tool is situated but there is still room to improve (Retently, 2020). Thus, a 
score above 30 indicates the tool is exceptional and users are fulﬁlled.  
Reasons to use the tool included the fact that the tool creates team awareness of where are they 
standing with product development and the easy identiﬁcation of risk and opportunities before user 
validation. Further, the reasons to recommend the tool are analyzed and it is found that it relies on the 
focus in the product life when it is with the user and the visual aid making team members relate their 
tasks to product improvement.  
 
Figure 28 - Net Promoter Score 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
52
==PAGE:54==
Domestication Model Application                                                                                                                           Chapter 7
7.3 Summary 
This chapter explores the third research question, How may a domestication model be developed 
in Startups?.  To do this,  a presentation with an illustration of the tool and a basic guideline is 
distributed together with the questionnaire to the case studies, in order to to gauge their perception of 
the proposed tool. In each of the case studies, the relationship between actions, barriers, and 
motivations are analyzed. The main ﬁndings in this evaluation are the following: 
•
Five out of the six case studies indicated that the proposed tool is easy to understand and 
use. For the sixth case there is an assumption that the guideline of the tool is not noticed, as 
the other results emphasize how that this guide helped them to understand the tool. 
•
Five out of the six cases ﬁnd the proposed tool as a meaningful resource for data gathering. 
The sixth case ﬁnds the tool as irrelevant by arguing that the canvas by itself was only an 
outline of the product characteristics without any extra information. 
•
The two main challenges to using the tool are identiﬁed as mental exhaustion and the use of a 
guide for reﬂection on the outcomes.  
•
The Net Promoter Score of the tool is 34, meaning that it is doing well and has more happy 
users than unhappy ones.  
•
The reasons to keep using and recommend the tool rely on the focus in the product life when it 
is with the user and the visual aid making team members relate their tasks to product 
improvement.  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
53
==PAGE:55==
Discussion                                                                                                                                                               Chapter 8
8. Discussion 
The chapter discusses the main ﬁndings concerning its validity and current knowledge in the design 
area. The research in this project focused on the conceptualization of a domestication tool through 
the design research methodology. So far, the domestication process has been investigated in relation 
to the interaction of a product when it is already owned by the user, but not applying a tool in the 
development process to improve this relationship between user-product. 
For each validity category, the research quality is approached in the same order as the research 
methodology is applied through the project. Following, the ﬁndings regarding existing knowledge in 
the ﬁeld are discussed.  
8.1 Research validity 
As stated by Yin in Chapter 3, there are four categories were empirical data can be classiﬁed to 
assess the validity of research results. The four categories are    Construct validity, Internal validity, 
External validity, and Reliability (Yin, 2009). Each of the categories is explained in the same order as 
the research was happening.  
8.1.1 Construct validity 
As mentioned by Yin (1994), to ensure construct validity, the research questions and theoretical 
foundations should be clearly deﬁned before starting any process (Chapters 1 and 2). Besides, to 
support this validity, Yin recommends using varying types of sources to create a chain of evidence 
that has different actors reviewing the draft project.  
Following this reasoning, for the literature review, different sources were analyzed for each 
methodology described. These resources varied from digital to printed and from academic courses to 
podcasts, with the intention to create a resourceful amount of data from different experts. For every 
case study, different people were involved in providing a different perspective to the semi-structured 
interview questionnaire. The same structure was used for all the cases while the responses were 
cross-examined assuring the information converged.  
All the interviewees in the case studies were provided with a brief explanation of the research 
objective and the type of questions that would be asked in each interaction. Although the informants 
in each case study were aware of the nature of the questions, they were ﬁrst presented during the 
interactions to promote a natural answer. This posed a risk to how informants will not answer 
expectedly and make the interview diverse in the information collected. This was noted by the 
researcher as in some cases the informants guided their answers into different topics, even when they 
were not asked to do so. Even so, it is complicated to identify if this happened due to cultural 
differences or the interviewer’s language could have provided a different perspective for understanding 
the questionnaire.  
In each study case description, the theoretical constructs of validity should be clear. All case study 
participants had the opportunity to review their answers and provide comments on their ﬁrst and last 
interactions, as these were structured as online surveys. The second interaction took the form of a 
semi constructed interview, where the interactions were recorded and transcripted, providing the 
opportunity to discuss and reﬂect upon each case with others. Moreover, all the informants had the 
chance to review and comment on their case data once this was transcripted and the survey results 
were done.  
8.1.2 Internal validity 
Internal validity describes the extent that the gathered evidence can support the studies. Since the 
foundation to prove internal validity is to establish a causal relationship (Trochim, 2020), the evidence 
gathered throughout the project is detailed. As mentioned in Chapter 3, for the Design Research 
methodology each phase of the research is needed in order to do the next one (see ﬁgure 29). The 
literature analysis in Chapter 2 provides the necessary information to construct the study case 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
54
==PAGE:56==
Discussion                                                                                                                                                               Chapter 8
questionnaires, focusing on their nature and design methods. Followed by this, the answers in the 
interviews offer the information needed to begin a conceptualization process (see chapters 5 and 6). 
Finally, the proposed tool is a result of the previous ﬁndings and by being evaluated by speciﬁc 
stakeholders, provides the validity of the tool (see chapter 7). 
 
Figure 29 - Internal validity model 
Moreover, the informants were asked to reﬂect on their answers in each interaction. In order to make 
these interactions as unbiased as possible, the perception survey remained anonymous. Again, this 
effect cannot be completely assured as the relationship between the informants and the researcher 
could have provoked an effect on their answers.  
8.1.3 External validity 
External validity relates to the way in which the gathered evidence can be applied outside the context 
of the studied case. Usually, case studies tend to be diminished due to their lack of generalisability. 
Even though the number of case studies for this project is considered poor for statistical purposes, 
they provide material for an analytical approach. Moreover, it is possible to apply the design research 
methodology in each case and use it to analyze each startup context. Therefore, it can be claimed a 
generalization of the theoretical framework for technology adoption models.  
The risks of arguing for external validation relies on the possibility that the ﬁndings might be only 
speciﬁc to the case studies. As mentioned in Chapter 3, the selection of case studies was not 
random as they follow speciﬁc criteria to be part of this research project; 1) impact on emerging 
markets, 2) operate from either in or outside the context to work with, 3) experience talking with 
customers and users, and 4) at least two iterations of prototypes. However, the number of team 
members and the type of technology was not a decisive factor but a characteristic of the maturity of 
each project. All case studies volunteered to be part of the research, leading to the belief that the 
startups intentions were aligned to the purpose of this project.  
The ﬁrst three case studies, ServedOnSalt, Nature Boards, and Ponik are selected as a result of their 
direct impact on sustainability in emerging markets. ServedOnSalt is the only study case in Denmark 
that already has established clients and investors network which gives the researcher a view of a 
proven development process. On the other hand, Nature Boards and Ponik provide the insights of a 
non-reﬂected process for developing innovation in an existing market. Also, all of the Danish cases 
represent a unique example of this research. Firstly, they all represent an early-stage startup (no more 
than two years after foundation). Secondly, they are all composed of two persons, providing the 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
55
==PAGE:57==
Discussion                                                                                                                                                               Chapter 8
characteristics of multitasking team members and horizontal decision making. Finally, as they have 
developed a new technology, they confront entering an existing market with disruptive innovation.  
The Mexican case studies, OS City, Cultivo, and Kabaan are selected as a result of their impact and 
closeness to their target market. Considering that these three case studies are part of the ecosystem 
to work with, they share characteristics that aided in arguing the external validity of the research. As a 
ﬁrst instance, they all have developed their technology to improve current systems. Although OS City 
focuses on digital systems, Cultivo and Kabaan have a more physical outcome when executed, 
making the user interact with the results faster. On the other hand, as OS City works with 
governmental strategies, the replicable characteristic is more feasible in different contexts due to 
political systems. In addition to this, the three cases have a generalization of common opportunity 
areas in emerging markets (Government, Sustainability and Technology).  
8.1.4 Reliability 
Reliability relates to the degree to which the experiments can produce similar results in different 
contexts. However, the use of Design Research implies that the case studies will not be found in the 
same status at any other point, this due to the fast pace they work and the learning it comes with. 
Although, Checkland and Holwell (1998) highlight the principle of recoverability rather than 
repeatability in research. This means that anyone interested in the research can be able to recover the 
process and trace its method, and therefore, understand where the ﬁndings come from.  
Chapter 3 describes the process in an intended way towards transparency for all readers. As such, 
the appendixes present all the information gathered but personal notes and conversations, if 
requested, the researcher would share this information. 
8.2 Findings in relation to existing knowledge 
In this section, the ﬁndings in relation to domestication processes in startups to the existing 
knowledge will be described. To discuss these concerns, the ﬁndings have been listed as the order of 
the research questions. 1) Understanding of domestication models  , 2) Conceptualization of 
domestication models, and 3) Development of domestication tools. 
The ﬁndings are considered causal as explained in the internal validity section. However, each section 
is considered to be distinct ﬁndings due to the adaptability of knowledge in different settings. It is not 
only assumed that the ﬁndings of this research can lead to speciﬁc input for future research but also 
can contribute as general knowledge of domestication processes in startups. 
8.2.1 Understanding of domestication models 
Concerning the ﬁrst research question, this project had three main ﬁndings through literature review 
and empirical data about existing knowledge. As a ﬁrst, the understanding of models by startups 
relies uniquely on upon as a communication tool inside the operating system rather than a process to 
follow. The second ﬁnding relates to the adopted meaning of user experience instead of the 
domestication process. And thirdly, hyper-collaborations activities are recognized as a way to enrich 
product development but by being an open-source startups feel a risk of becoming copied by 
someone who has more resources and has a better positioning in the market. 
Along with the literature review for social shaping theories, researchers discuss the importance of 
understanding how customers interact with products throughout life cycles (Buttle, 2009). A 
continuous point of these theories was the low reliability of the data due to the focus on individual 
perceptions as opposed to group perceptions. This results, in a lack of quantitative data, to make 
decisions based on facts (Pikkarainen 2004). The ﬁrst ﬁnding of this thesis was that startups consider 
models and frameworks as an internal language to identify their processes, rather than as guidance. 
This is because startups believe using models solely based on questionable values produces a limited 
predictive power to potential investors. To support this, the limited power perspective was mentioned 
by Chuttur in relation to the Technology Acceptance Model (Chuttur 2009).   
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
56
==PAGE:58==
Discussion                                                                                                                                                               Chapter 8
The second ﬁnding related to the understanding of technology adoption models correlates to the 
identiﬁed term of user experience as an adoption process. Although both terms share similar 
characteristics, adoption models look for a balance between technology and user, while user 
experience focuses on the development of products based on the user’s interests (Marcus, 2019). 
Furthermore, the case studies have a demographic of 23 to 32 years old between all the informants, 
meaning they tend to learn from recent models that are better positioned in digital resources. The only 
member above 30 years old was the only informant that mentioned resources from 1980 in 
comparison to the other ones. Referencing Kotsch, the ideal age of a startup founder is between 30 
and 50 due to their experience (Kotsch, 2017). For this speciﬁc case, this can be validated as this 
startup is the largest of the case studies in relation to team members, impact, and income.  
The third ﬁnding details that startups are aware of the potential of using hyper collaboration strategies 
to enrich their product development and adoption potential (Kolk, Eagar, Boulton, & Mira, 2017). 
However, their context and past relationships play a key role in implementing this decision (Bryan, 
2017). Danish startups shared a mutual interest in sharing their information with relevant stakeholders, 
while Mexican startups believe sharing their information will result in the creation of a new competitor. 
Based on Ordoñez’s research, it was considered that these beliefs are related to the economic and 
political context each startup has overcome (Ordoñez, 2013). 
8.2.2 Conceptualisation of domestication models 
Concerning the second research question, a domestication tool was developed so startups can 
quickly and easily deﬁne and communicate to which extend a technology meets the adoption process 
factors. The proposed tool was based on two main ﬁndings uncovered in the conceptualization 
process.  
The ﬁrst ﬁnding for this research question was the use of tools rather than models in the startup 
ecosystem. While some research articles emphasize the need for fast pace routines in startups 
(Bhargava, 2020), others contrast this point and cite the importance of a constant pace within the 
startup environment (Harlan, 2017). The case studies highlighted a lack of interest in applying models 
to their development processes but an interest in learning them. This ﬁnding came from two main 
quotes that then were validated by other informants, “We absorb the methodology rather than follow 
it” (Appendix 8 - Transcript Kabaan Interview) and “Methodologies are part of our DNA” (Appendix 9 - 
Transcript Cultivo Land PBC Interview). Additionally, when inquiring about the reasoning for their 
arguments, the informants mentioned the amount of time needed to follow a model was a barrier, 
especially when they were not certain if the model was appropriate for their business model. Keeping 
this in mind, this thesis prioritized the development of a tool that could provide an iterative process 
without a considerable time investment.  
The second ﬁnding in the conceptualization process was the need for a visual tool for feasible 
improvement and consistent pace. It was discovered that startups tend to divide tasks and create 
agendas for teamwork moments, however, members will be in constant, short discussions due to the 
relation between tasks and the rapid work pace needed (Bhargava, 2020). Along the morphological 
chart process, it became a priority to understand the current state of the given startup and identify 
areas of opportunity and risks. 
The proposed tool is similar to the customer journey map proposed by IDEO in 1999 (Stephanidis, 
2014), however, instead of attempting to create strategies for each touchpoint, the tool visualizes the 
technology features as the main component to entering an emerging market. As such, the tool is a 
graphical representation likewise IDEO and Strategyzer have done in the past, positioning iterative and 
graphical tools into the startup ecosystem (AG, n.d.) (IDEO,n.d.) 
8.2.3 Development of domestication tools 
To answer the third research question, a tool was introduced and evaluated by the case studies. Each 
study case received an interactive board and a perceived value survey to evaluate the development of 
the tool in the internal startup ecosystem (Chapter 7). 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
57
==PAGE:59==
Discussion                                                                                                                                                               Chapter 8
Although the survey consisted of qualitative and quantitative data, the main ﬁndings for this research 
question came from the open-ended questions. The ﬁrst ﬁnding was that the tool provided a window 
to ﬁnd discrepancies of product views among the teams (i.e. compare Head of Product vs Head of 
Sales canvas), making sure that the features in the product create value for the user. As mentioned by 
the case studies, the tool worked as a centralized command for the activities related to product 
development to sale channels, without the need of discussing each feature. As stated by Willink's 
research, that has led enormous companies to take action plans and make them a success story, 
action rather than the discussion is crucial (Willink, 2017).  
Moreover, the second ﬁnding was that the tool ﬁts in the opportunity to move from early adopters to 
early majority, resulting in a growth opportunity for the company. As Moore mentions, the chasm is the 
point where cutting-edge products can progressively enter larger markets (Moore, 2001). It was 
determined that startups can use this tool to cultivate strategies based on the customer categories 
identiﬁed by Easely (2010) and provoke a better adoption of the product in their target market.  
 
Figure 30 - The Chasm, Moore 2001 
8.3 Other analysis for Domestication Models 
This thesis focuses on the Engineering Design perspective of domestication models in startups. This 
project is suitable for startups and industry experts as this understanding of design and research are 
most widely used. Nevertheless, if the author had based the research paradigm, different 
interpretations could have been made. 
During the process, the researcher had a big amount of contextual insights, while at the same time, 
the aim of the project objective was the main focus. Determinants such as cultural factors, political 
circumstances, gender behavior, and contextual forces were ﬁltered out as they were not fundamental 
factors for this research. It could be interesting to complement this research with social studies, as it 
might result in a different interpretation of the ﬁnding or help validate them.   
8.4 Summary 
In this chapter, the main ﬁndings of the project are discussed. Following the methodology described in 
Chapter 3, the validity of the research was argued with the following arguments: 
•
Construct validity  is assured with various types of sources creating a chain of evidence 
throughout the project. For the literature review, different sources provided space for a broader 
analysis. Additionally, various individuals were involved in the reviewing of the study case 
guidelines to provide a diverse perspective in the empirical data. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
58
==PAGE:60==
Discussion                                                                                                                                                               Chapter 8
•
Internal validity is guaranteed by presenting the causal relation between the gathered data in 
the project. Through a model, it was exhibited how the information was necessary to achieve 
all the phases of the selected methodology in Chapter 3. 
•
The external validity of this project is not ensured completely. Even though the selected case 
studies followed speciﬁc criteria, due to the time-maturity factor, it will be complicated to use 
the same case studies for future research.  
•
The reliability factor is based on the transparency of the researcher's work and the availability 
of data on this project.  
Furthermore, the ﬁndings of the research are discussed concerning the existing knowledge in the 
ﬁeld. 
•
The understanding of domestication models research comes with similar conclusions to 
existing ﬁndings. The ﬁrst ﬁnding is how startups consider models as an internal language to 
identify their processes, rather than guidance. Secondly, the understanding of technology 
adoption models is inclined to the term of user experience as an adoption process. Finally, 
context and past relationships play a key role in implementing hyper-collaboration strategies. 
•
The appropriate approach for the conceptualization of domestication models comes with two 
main ﬁndings. First, startups prefer the use of tools rather than models due to the amount of 
time that has to be invested. As the second ﬁnding, there is a need to understand the current 
state of startups and identify opportunity areas that could be taken one by one. 
•
The tool development identiﬁes two ﬁndings. First, the tool provides a window to ﬁnd 
discrepancies of product views among the teams and assure value for the customer. Second, 
this is an opportunity to ensure a path from early adopters to early majority, making it a growth 
opportunity for the company. 
 
To conclude the chapter, external factors of the research were mentioned as an alternative 
perspective to create a broader knowledge of the research results. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
59
==PAGE:61==
Conclusion                                                                                                                                                              Chapter 9
 9. Conclusion 
This master thesis has researched the understanding, conceptualization and development of 
domestication models in the startup ecosystem. This chapter reviews the main ﬁndings concerning 
the research questions and recognizes the core contributions to the domestication ﬁeld. 
9.1 Research ﬁndings 
Three study areas and six case studies located in two countries provided insights and evidence for 
answering the research questions. To address the concluding remarks for this project, each question 
will be answered in the research order.  
Q1: How are the current domestication models understood? 
Q2: How may a domestication model be conceptualized? 
Q3: How may a domestication model be developed in Startups? 
These questions guided the process for establishing the theoretical foundation and identifying the 
focal areas for the case studies. A combination of literature review and empirical data is applied to 
provide reliable frameworks for each research question.  
9.1.1 Q1: How are the current domestication models understood? 
Social shaping models are theories that show how users come to accept and use technology in their 
daily life. These theories focus on how each person has a choice on product use and therefore, how it 
will affect the trajectory of innovation in that area. Domestication models, in comparison, are focused 
on the balance between technical features and customer needs. In this way, both supply and demand 
needs are represented in a mediation process. 
The research in this project shows three dimensions of the domestication process: (1) Technological 
Innovation, (2) Social Shaping and (3) Startup Business. Following the research ﬁndings, six attributes 
are considered as the support of the domestication process models. 
  
• Business strategy - Startups rely on their value proposition to be economically sustainable.  
• Technological potential - The degree in which the solution can produce similar results in different 
contexts. 
• Customer activity focus -  Value and fulﬁllment of needs can only be understood by analyzing 
customer and user behavior with and without the solution. 
• System Thinking - By realizing systems are made of different factors that will affect the perspective 
of each technology.  
• Life cycle consideration - Considering the production and consumption of the solution in a different 
context. 
• Network potential - Understanding the potential of different stakeholders in different industries. 
The case studies show the relationship between each attribute and the effect it has on the decision-
making process. These attributes are fundamental to understand how a domestication tool might be 
conceptualized, as it is recognized that the base for a domestication model is a system dynamic 
behavior.  
9.1.2 Q2: How may a domestication model be conceptualised? 
Domestication models focus on the characteristics that inﬂuence the relationship between the 
customer and the technology. The conceptualization process presents the modeling of the solution 
according to the previously stated attributes. These perspectives support the development of the 
conceptualization process through paradoxes, creating categories for the literature and study case 
ﬁndings. 
 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
60
==PAGE:62==
Conclusion                                                                                                                                                              Chapter 9
Further, in the conceptualization process, the ﬁndings are set up a in morphology chart, manifesting 
the essential characteristics that the domestication model should have. Here are the characteristics 
that are identiﬁed as strategic to conceptualize the proposed tool: 
• Creation of a tangible representation of the current state. 
• Ideas can be created, validated, and ﬁxed at any point. 
• Promote feasible improvement and consistent pace. 
• Find the balance between client perception and company values. 
• Help identify opportunities and risks. 
Even though this tool creates a respectable approach for a domestication tool that startups can 
adopt, it was not tested in a real-life scenario.  
9.1.3 Q3: How may a domestication model be developed in Startups? 
The development of a domestication model in the context of a startup is more than just the task of 
adopting a new framework into the daily activities. Rather, developing a domestication model needs to 
consider team dynamics and patterns of product planning to create the most beneﬁts. For a 
domestication model in the startup context, the main assumption is that the tool or model can 
capitalize the products Minimus Viable Product and create an offer that will make the startup stand 
out from competitors in the market.  
The proposed tool is introduced to the case studies to validate its development potential within the 
startup context. Based on the empirical data, the biggest challenges to adopt the tool are identifying 
the right product features, reﬂecting on the current state of the startup, and deﬁning the customer 
preferences. On the other hand, the case studies perceive the tool as a meaningful information 
resource and a way to evaluate the beneﬁt of the product features.  
Considering these ﬁndings, to develop a domestication model in a startup, this should be concise and 
focused on one thing (i.e, product improvement), provide clarity to any member who views the results, 
and allow making changes at any point.  
9.2 Core contributions 
As this master thesis seeks to develop more knowledge in domestication models in startups, it seems 
logical to list the main contributions following the objectives of this project. 
• An exploration of the domestication processes between startups that are part of their impact 
context and the ones that operate from a different one. 
• The identiﬁcation of attributes of Domestication models for a systematic development; Business 
strategy, Technological potential, Customer activity focus, System Thinking, Life cycle consideration 
and Network potential.  
• The mapping of domestication characteristics in a conceptualization process. 
• A visual tool that allows startups to ensure their path from early adopters to early majority based on 
their technology features.  
Finally, this project contributes to the current product development processes and the customer 
validation strategies.  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
61
==PAGE:63==
Perspectives                                                                                                                                                         Chapter 10
10. Perspectives 
In this chapter, the objective set for this thesis, To develop a domestication tool that can be 
applied in daily activities of startups, is reﬂected upon in relation to the research process and main 
ﬁndings. Moreover, the chapter considers the areas where it can be involved in and ﬁndings worth 
exploring for deeper research. 
10.1 Reﬂections on the project 
This project identiﬁes opportunities related to how startups can improve their positioning in the 
market, moving towards a more customer conscious way. Still, it is understandable that in real life, the 
adoption of this tool comes with challenges and limits for implementing in a daily routine. Moreover, 
due to limited time, veriﬁcation of the tool was not carried out and a value perception analysis was 
made. It is acknowledged that the results of this project are not absolute, but they do lead to new 
research in different areas.  
10.1.1 Industry 
Understanding the domestication process represents a fundamental opportunity for startups. Even 
though there is a need to verify the credibility of the proposed tool, this thesis gives a set of design 
attributes; Business strategy, Technological potential, Customer activity focus, System Thinking, Life 
cycle consideration, and Network potential. In addition to these, a morphological chart that can be 
applied for any startup needs in the domestication process. These ﬁndings can also be relevant to 
study how product development affects business development.  
10.1.2 Research 
This project considers the most recognized theories and models about the domestication process 
from three different study areas to provide a systematic understanding and development of a new 
tool. The identiﬁcation of these study areas provides insights regarding the relevance of the balance 
between customer and company.  
The proposed tool can be used as a guide to understand the relationship between customer and the 
technology from a domestication perspective. If the tool was used by a sample group, this could 
provide empirical data to validate the relevance in the startup ecosystem. 
Besides, this thesis extends the knowledge regarding the startups needs for positioning in new 
markets. Future research in this area will support in understanding the evolution of needs in each 
development stage. 
10.1.3 Education 
Social Shaping of Technology theories are already part of Design and Innovation programs in different 
academic organizations. However, these theories should be applied in real life scenarios to create the 
necessary skills to shape conscious engineers. Domestication is about ﬁnding the balance between 
customer-company, focusing in understanding the role that technology has in daily life. Products are 
not only problem-solving artifacts, they represent a small part of the user, and as engineers it should 
be conscious of how they form people with what we develop.   
10.2 Suggestions for future work 
As before mentioned, this thesis is a step towards new research either in the engineering ﬁeld or 
social studies. This project provided meaningful insights about innovation processes in startups and 
has helped build a conceptual tool in the ﬁeld. To create different perspectives on how startups can 
adopt domestication strategies, more research is required to support these conclusions. A list of 
possible future work suggestion is presented: 
•
A domestication model to approach the relationship between customer and company needs - 
a methodological approach for product development considering the domestication factors 
and customer and company characteristics.  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
62
==PAGE:64==
Perspectives                                                                                                                                                         Chapter 10
•
Collaboration with early stage startups to validate the proposal tool - capturing empirical data 
that can be actively monitored in the development of the proposed tool. 
•
Management of consumer needs - considering a domestication approach, research how 
consumers can increase their loyalty to the brand while reducing their consumption. 
•
Evolution of needs in startups development stages - capturing empirical data from past and 
current stages of startups and monitor their identiﬁcation of needs as an internal and external 
perspective. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
63
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography                                                                                                                                                          Chapter 10
11. Bibliography 
Aalto University. (2019). The Startup Ecosystem. Retrieved March 20, 2020, from https://starting-up.org/en/starting-up/
explaining-startups/the-startup-ecosystem/ 
AG, S. (n.d.). Strategyzer | Corporate Innovation Strategy, Tools & Training. Retrieved June 5, 2020, from https://
www.strategyzer.com 
Angular Venues. (2018, November 24). There Are Only Three Startup Stages. Medium. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from 
https://medium.com/angularventures/there-are-only-three-stages-for-startups-b8783d6b0f1 
Bagozzi, R. P., Davis, F. D., & Warshaw, P. R. (1992). Development and Test of a Theory of Technological Learning and 
Usage. Human Relations, 45(7), 659–686. Retrieved February 14, 2020, from 10.1177/001872679204500702 
Barenblat, K. (2017, July 6). How Tech Can Maximize Social Impact (SSIR). Stanford Social Innovation Report. Retrieved 
March 18, 2020, from https://ssir.org/articles/entry/how_tech_can_maximize_social_impact 
Bhargava, R. (2020). The Startup Playbook. Wiley. 
Blanchard, B. S. (2010). Systems engineering and analysis. Pearson College Division. 
Brandt, K. (2019, November 5). Supporting Social Impact Startups. Google. Retrieved March 18, 2020, from https://
www.blog.google/around-the-globe/google-europe/supporting-social-impact-startups/ 
Brikman, Y. (2015). Hello, Startup. 
Bruton, G. D., & Rubanik, Y. (2002). Resources of the ﬁrm, Russian high-technology startups, and ﬁrm growth. Journal of 
Business Venturing, 17(6), 553–576. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from 10.1016/s0883-9026(01)00079-9 
Bryan, C. (2017). Handbook of Research on Organizational Culture and Diversity in the Modern Workforce. IGI Global. 
Buttle, F. (2009). Customer relationship management: concepts and technologies. Oxford: Routledge. 
Buur, J., & Myrup Andreasen, M. (1989). Design models in mechatronic product development. Design Studies, 10(3), 155–
162. Retrieved April 23, 2020, from 10.1016/0142-694x(89)90033-1 
Carter, N. M., Gartner, W. B., & Reynolds, P. D. (1996). Exploring start-up event sequences. Journal of Business Venturing, 
11(3), 151–166. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from 10.1016/0883-9026(95)00129-8 
CB Insights. (2019, November 6). Why Startups Fail: Top 20 Reasons L . CB Insights Research . CB Insights. Retrieved 
February 14, 2020, from https://www.cbinsights.com/research/startup-failure-reasons-top/ 
Charness, N., & Boot, W. R. (2015). Handbook of the Psychology of Aging (pp. 389–407). Academic Press. 
Chavez, J. (2020, January 7). Se Reciclarán Los Residuos De Obra. El Sol Del Centro. Retrieved April 8, 2020, from https://
www.elsoldelcentro.com.mx/doble-via/ecologia/se-reciclaran-los-residuos-de-obra-4668759.html?
fbclid=IwAR0h6aoK2JuczCX_LM8iWh9U8_rlWWcP5HuZMSm74scB6s8W_yAsNURGWDc 
Checkland, P., & Holwell, S. (1998). Action Research: Its Nature and Validity. Systemic Practice and Action Research. 
Cohan, S. (2019). Scaling Your Startup: Mastering the Four Stages from Idea to $10 Billion 
Corl, E. (2019, July 29). How Startups Drive The Economy. Medium. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from https://
medium.com/@ericcorl/how-startups-drive-the-economy-69b73cfbae1 
Creative Commons. (2018, March). Startup Development Phases. Startup Commons. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from 
https://www.startupcommons.org/startup-development-phases.html 
Creative Commons Attribution 3.0. (n.d.). Startup Ecosystem. Retrieved March 20, 2020, from https://
www.startupcommons.org/uploads/2/1/0/9/21090978/whitepaperstartupsecosystems.pdf 
Cultivo. (2019). Cultivo. Retrieved April 8, 2020, from https://cultivo.land 
Danske Bank. (2019). The State of Nordic Impact Startups. Danske Bank. Retrieved March 18, 2020, from https://
danskebank.com/-/media/danske-bank-com/ﬁle-cloud/2019/5/state-of-nordic-impact-start-ups.pdf 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
64
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography                                                                                                                                                          Chapter 10
Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warshaw, P. R. (1989). User Acceptance of Computer Technology: A Comparison of Two 
Theoretical Models. Management Science, 35(8), 982–1003. Retrieved February 18, 2020, from 10.1287/mnsc.35.8.982 
Dealroom. (2019). 2018 full year report Annual European Venture Capital Repor. (Y. Wijngaarde, I.  
Draganov, & L. Belych, Eds.) (p. 14). Dealroom. Retrieved February 19, 2020, from https://blog.dealroom.co/wp-content/
uploads/2019/02/Dealroom-2018-vFINAL.pdf 
Dibner, D. R., & Lemer, A. C. (n.d.). Appendix B: Processes Of Technological Innovation | The Role Of Public Agencies In 
Fostering New Technology And Innovation In Building | The National Academies Press. The National Academie of Sciences, 
Engineering and Medicine. Retrieved February 27, 2020, from https://www.nap.edu/read/2070/chapter/9#74 
DTU Entrepreneurship. (2020, March 13). Student start-ups. Https://www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk. Retrieved April 7, 2020, 
from https://www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk/start-ups 
Easley, D. (2010). Networks, Crowds, and Markets. Cambridge University Press. 
Ellcessor, E. (n.d.). ‹em›Personal connections in the digital age,‹/em› by Nancy K. Baym. TWC, 7. Retrieved March 18, 2020, 
from 10.3983/twc.2011.0279 
Fahim, A. (2016). Role Of Startups In Economic Prosperity | Startup Grind. Startup Grind. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from 
https://www.startupgrind.com/blog/role-of-startups-in-economic-prosperity/ 
Forbes. (1976, August 15). Unknown, (Forbes Entrepeneurial). 
Global Entrepeneurship Monitor. (2016). GEM 2015 REPORT ON SOCIAL ENTREPRENEURSHIPDOWNLOAD (3.86 MB). 
(N. Bosma, T. Schett, S. Terjesen, & P. Kew, Eds.). Global Entrepreneurship Research Association. 
Global Impact Investing Network. (2019). Sizing the Impact Investing Market. (A. Mudaliar & H. Ditrich, Eds.) (pp. 5–7). 
Groom, B. (2018, June 15). A Third Of Start-ups Aim For Social Good. Financial Times. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from 
https://www.ft.com/content/d8b6d9fa-4eb8-11e8-ac41-759eee1efb74 
Habib, L. (1998). Domesticating learning technologies in a higher education institution: a tale of two virtual learning 
environments, 2005, 79–87. New Teaching and Learning Practices: Experiences with e-Learning Projects at Oslo University 
College. 
Harlan, B. (2017). Navigating Your Way to Startup Success. Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG. 
Hynes, D. (2009). Users as Designers: The Internet in Everyday Life in Irish Households in Anthropology in Action (Vol. 16, 
pp. 18–29). 
IDEO. (n.d.). IDEO. Retrieved from https://www.ideo.com/eu 
Inc, M.-W. (1998). Merriam-Webster’s collegiate dictionary. Springﬁeld, Mass: Merriam Webster. 
INCO. (2016). The Leading Impact Investing Fund. INCO. Retrieved March 18, 2020, from https://www.inco-group.co/
venture-capital?lang=en 
Inti. (2019, October 1). Design Thinking for Startups. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from https://intitechnology.com/design-
thinking-for-startups/ 
Jawahar, I. M., & Mclaughlin, G. L. (2001). Toward a Descriptive Stakeholder Theory: an Organizational Life Cycle Approach. 
AMR, 26(3), 397–414. Retrieved February 14, 2020, from 10.5465/amr.2001.4845803 
Jayden, Z. (2009, April 6). Social Shaping Of Technology. Retrieved March 3, 2020, from https://www.slideshare.net/Zulto/
social-shaping-of-technology 
Jeffries, I. (2017, March 3). BMC Part One: How To Use The Business Model Canvas — Isaac Jeffries. Isaac Jeffries. 
Retrieved March 16, 2020, from https://isaacjeffries.com/blog/2017/3/3/bmc-part-one-how-to-use-the-business-model-
canvas 
Joshi, N. (2017, November 24). Design Thinking For Startups. Hackernoon. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from https://
hackernoon.com/design-thinking-for-startups-by-nitin-sethi-of-quikr-fe01a259c9bf 
Kola, V. (2014, November 17). Impact Of Startups And The Importance Of Their Socio-economic Contributions. 
YourStory.com. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from https://yourstory.com/2014/11/impact-of-startups 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
65
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography                                                                                                                                                          Chapter 10
Kolk, M., Eagar, R., Boulton, C., & Mira, C. (2017, November 16). The Growth Of Hyper-collaboration In An Innovation-driven 
World. Consultancy.uk. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from https://www.consultancy.uk/news/14577/the-growth-of-hyper-
collaboration-in-an-innovation-driven-world 
Konenko. (2018, August 2). The Design Development Process In 6 Steps. Retrieved March 23, 2020, from https://
steelkiwi.com/blog/design-development-process-6-steps/ 
Kopp, C. (1970, January 1). Understanding Perceived Value.  Investopedia . Retrieved May 18, 2020, from https://
www.investopedia.com/terms/p/perceived-value.asp 
Kotsch, C. (2017). Which Factors Determine the Success or Failure of Startup Companies? A Startup Ecosystem Analysis of 
Hungary, Germany and the US. diplom.de. 
Kristóf, P. (n.d.). How established companies can master disruptive innovation like startups? Achieving innovation excellence 
and disruptive ability. Retrieved March 3, 2020, from 10.14267/phd.2016037 
Kylliäinen, J. (2019, October 4). Types Of Innovation – The Ultimate Guide With Deﬁnitions And Examples. Retrieved March 
3, 2020, from https://www.viima.com/blog/types-of-innovation 
Larry Fink. (2018, January 23). BlackRock’s Push For ‘social Responsibility’ Highlights This Major Shift Among Corporations. 
CNBC.com. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/23/blackrocks-push-for-social-
responsibility-shows-shift-in-companies.html 
Leif, S. (2019, September 9). Diffusion Of Innovation Theory. Boston University School of Public Health. Retrieved March 3, 
2020, from http://sphweb.bumc.bu.edu/otlt/MPH-Modules/SB/BehavioralChangeTheories/BehavioralChangeTheories4.html 
Linkilaw. (n.d.). Startup Journey: Stages Of Startup Development. Linkilaw. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from https://
linkilaw.com/startup-journey/ 
Lohan, E. M. (1998). Book Reviews : Making Technology Our Own? Domesticating Technology into Everyday Life, edited by 
Merete Lie and Knut H. Sørensen. Oslo, Oxford, and Boston: Scandinavian University Press, 1996, vii + 223 pp. $36/£26. 
Science, Technology, & Human Values, 23(2), 249–251. Retrieved March 3, 2020, from 10.1177/016224399802300207 
Luenendonk, M. (2014, July 22). Research And Development (R&D) | Overview & Process.  Cleverism . Retrieved February 
27, 2020, from https://www.cleverism.com/rd-research-and-development-overview-process/ 
Luenendonk, M. (2015, February 9). Business Model Canvas: A Complete Guide. Cleverism. Retrieved February 24, 2020, 
from https://www.cleverism.com/business-model-canvas-complete-guide/ 
M., N. F. (1995). Product design. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons Inc. 
MacKenzie, D. A. (1999). The Social Shaping of Technology. Open Univ Pr. Manolova, T. S., Edelman, L. F., Brush, C. G., & 
Rotefoss, B. (2012). Properties of emerging organizations: empirical evidence from Norway. Small Bus Econ, 39(3), 763–
781. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from 10.1007/s11187-011-9360-5 
Marcus, A. (2019). Design, User Experience, and Usability. Practice and Case Studies. Springer. 
Mermer, M. (2012, April 23). Transformational Entrepreneurship: Where Technology Meets Societal Impact.     Harvard 
Business Review   . Retrieved March 22, 2020, from https://hbr.org/2012/04/transformational-entrepreneurs 
Meyer, A. D., & Goes, J. B. (1988). Organizational Assimilation of Innovations: A Multilevel Contextual Analysis. AMJ, 31(4), 
897–923. Retrieved March 18, 2020, from 10.5465/256344 
Miller, D. (2018, October 2). Is Agile The Way To Go For A Fast-Growing Startup? - DZone Agile. Dzone.com. Retrieved 
February 24, 2020, from https://dzone.com/articles/is-agile-the-way-to-go-for-a-fast-growing-startup 
MODIS. (2014). Why Startups are going to change the world? Sundown Rundown. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from 
https://sundownrundown.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/why-start-ups-change-the-world.jpg 
Moore, G. A. (2001). Crossing the Chasm. New York: Harper Collins. 
NIBusiness. (2000, January 1). What Is Research, Design And Development? Nibusinessinfo.co.uk. Retrieved March 22, 
2020, from https://www.nibusinessinfo.co.uk/content/what-research-design-and-development 
Nieminen, J. (2020, January 3). Breakthrough Innovation – What Are They, And How Do You Create One? Retrieved March 
3, 2020, from https://www.viima.com/blog/breakthrough-innovation 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
66
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography                                                                                                                                                          Chapter 10
Ordoñez, P. (2013). International Business Strategy and Entrepreneurship: An Information Technology Perspective. IGI 
Global. 
OS City. (2019). OS City. OS City. Retrieved April 7, 2020, from https://os.city 
Osterwalder, A. (2009). Business Model Generation. OSF. 
Pantzar, M. (1997). Domestication of Everyday Life Technology: Dynamic Views on the Social Histories of Artifacts. Design 
Issues, 13(3), 52. Retrieved March 6, 2020, from 10.2307/1511941 
Pemberton, H. E. (1936). The Curve of Culture Diffusion Rate. American Sociological Review, 1(4), 547. Retrieved March 18, 
2020, from 10.2307/2084831 
Pilloton, E., & Chochino, A. (2009). Design revolution: 100 products that are changing people’s lives. 
Pinheiro, T. (2014). The Service Startup: Design Thinking Gets Lean 
Prats, J. (2017, March 23). Why Corporations Need To Collaborate With Startups? | Entrepreneurship. IESE Business School 
of Navarra. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from https://blog.iese.edu/entrepreneurship/2017/03/23/why-corporations-need-
to-collaborate-with-startups/ 
Renderforest. (2019, July 20). What is a Startup? Renderforest. Retrieved February 14, 2020, from https://
www.renderforest.com/blog/startup-deﬁnitio 
Ritchie, B., & Swisher, N. (2018, July 26). The Big Small: Startups, The Engine Of Innovation. IDEA Center // University Of 
Notre Dame. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from https://ideacenter.nd.edu/news-events/news/the-big-small-startups-the-
engine-of-innovation/ 
Roger, E. M., & Shoemaker, F. (1971). Communication of innovations: a cross-cultural approach. 
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of Innovations, 5th Edition. Simon and Schuster. 
Schwarzkopf, C.(2016) Fostering Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial Ecosystem and Entrepreneurial 
Fundamentals in the USA and Germany 
Schaller, A.-A., Vatananan-Thesenvitz, R., & Stefania, M. (2018). Business Model Innovation Roadmapping: A Structured 
Approach to a New Business Model. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from 10.23919/picmet.2018.8481976 
Schorge, J. (2019, December 11). The Next Silicon Valley Won’t Be In The US. Quartz. Retrieved February 19, 2020, from 
https://qz.com/1764868/the-next-silicon-valley-is-in-europe/ 
Shaun, S. (2016, April 20). How Long Does It Take To Develop A Startup? Launch Lab. Retrieved March 16, 2020, from 
https://launchlab.com.au/how-long-to-build-a-startup 
Silvestor, R., & Hirsch, E. (2003). Consuming Technologies. Routledge. 
Skillicorn, N. (2016, March 18). What Is Innovation? 15 Experts Share Their Innovation Deﬁnition - Idea To Value. Idea To 
Value. Retrieved March 3, 2020, from https://www.ideatovalue.com/inno/nickskillicorn/2016/03/innovation-15-experts-
share-innovation-deﬁnition/ 
Spigel, B. (2017). The Relational Organization of Entrepreneurial Ecosystems. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 41(1), 
49–72. Retrieved March 22, 2020, from 10.1111/etap.12167 
StartingUpGood. (2019, May 1). What’s New With Impact Investing And Startups — Q1 2019. Medium. Retrieved March 18, 
2020, from https://medium.com/startingupgood/whats-new-with-impact-investing-and-startups-q1-2019-a36658992362 
Startup Career. (n.d.). The Impact Of Startup On Global Economy - StartUpJobs Asia Blog. StartUpJobs Asia Blog. 
Retrieved February 24, 2020, from http://blog.startupjobs.asia/impact-startup-global-economy/#sthash.UUzYJKxw.dpbs 
StashAway Product & Design . (2018, May 14). 10 Principles To Guide Designers At Early-stage Startups.  Medium . 
Retrieved February 24, 2020, from https://medium.com/stashaway-product/10-principles-to-guide-designers-at-early-
stage-startups-c96b46e66311 
Stubner, S., Wulf, T., & Hungenberg, H. (2007). Management Support and the Performance of Entrepreneurial Start-ups. 
Schmalenbach Bus Rev, 59(2), 138–159. Retrieved February 14, 2020, from 10.1007/bf03396745 
Tan, A. (2010). Service-oriented product development strategies (p. 161). Lyngby: Denmark Technical University. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
67
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography                                                                                                                                                          Chapter 10
ThePD. (2015, November 7). Design Development - The Project Deﬁnition. The Project Deﬁnition. Retrieved March 22, 2020, 
from https://www.theprojectdeﬁnition.com/design-development/ 
Trochim, W. M. K. (2020, March 10). Research Methods Knowledge Base. Conjoint.ly. Retrieved June 1, 2020, from https://
conjointly.com/kb/internal-validity/ 
Valvano, J., & Yerraballi, R. (2014). Chapter 7: Design And Development. Embedded Systems: Introduction to ARM Cortex-
M Microcontrollers. Retrieved March 22, 2020, from http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~valvano/Volume1/E-Book/
C7_DesignDevelopment.htm 
Varbanova, S. (2019, June 20). How Resourceful Startups Are Changing The World. Valuer. Retrieved February 19, 2020, 
from https://valuer.ai/blog/how-resourceful-startups-are-changing-the-world/ 
Weber, H. (2015). On “DOMESTICATION” or: Who is domesticating what or whom? Munich Centre for the History of Science 
and Technology. 
Williams, R., & Edge, D. (1996). The social shaping of technology. Research Policy, 25(6), 865–899. Retrieved March 3, 
2020, from 10.1016/0048-7333(96)00885-2 
Willink, J. (2017). Extreme Ownership. St. Martin’s Press. 
Wright, M. (2018, September 3). Using Technology For Real Social Impact. Retrieved March 18, 2020, from https://
dif.vic.gov.au/editorial/642-a/using-technology-for-real-social-impact 
Ye, Q. (2018). New-Born Startups Performance: Inﬂuences of Resources and Entrepreneurial Team Experiences. IBR, 11(2), 
2–3. Retrieved February 24, 2020, from 10.5539/ibr.v11n2p1 
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Sage Publisher. 
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case Study Research: Design and Methods Volume 5 of Applied Social Research Methods. Thousand 
Oaks, Calif: SAGE. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
68
==PAGE:70==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
12. Appendices 
Appendix 1 - 1st Interaction with Case studies Questionnaire 
1st Questionnaire guideline for case studies in the thesis project  
”Domestication of Technology: Innovations making sense within communities” 
Researcher: Martha Cecilia Fernandez Contreras 
Technical University of Denmark 
Contact: ceciliafdz.94@gmail.com  
This interview guideline has two parts: 
• Demographics of Startup - These questions attempt to identify characteristics as foundation, 
location, team member characteristics 
• Use of methods and reﬂection - These questions focus in the identiﬁcation and use of methods in 
daily activities  
Demographics of Startup  
• Open-ended question: What is the name of the Startup? 
• Open-ended question: Where are you located? 
• Open-ended question: How many people operate in the Startup? 
• Option question: Does the team members have different nationalities? 
• Option question: Does the team members have different study lines? 
• Open-ended question: In which year did the operation of the Startup begun? (if started in a course, 
write down the year you took it) 
• Option question: Which Sustainable Development Goal do you target? 
• Option question: Check all the programs or activities you have been part of 
Use of methods 
• Option question: Have you use any of the following design methodologies or method? 
• Scale question: How many times did you or have you modiﬁed your prototype 
• Open-ended question: How did you get insights from your user? 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
69
==PAGE:71==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Appendix 2 - 1st Interaction with Case studies Answers 
 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
70
==PAGE:72==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
71
==PAGE:73==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
72
==PAGE:74==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
 
 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
73
==PAGE:75==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Appendix 3 -2nd Interaction with Case studies Interview 
Structure 
Interview guideline for case studies in the thesis project 
”Domestication of Technology: Innovations making sense within 
communities” 
Researcher: Martha Cecilia Fernandez Contreras 
Technical University of Denmark 
Contact: ceciliafdz.94@gmail.com  
This interview guideline has three parts:  
• Demographics of Startup - These questions attempt to understand the foundation of the startup and the 
internal activities  
• Use of methods and reﬂection - These questions focus in the understanding of application of methods in daily 
activities 
• Personal, good and bad, experiences with methods and reﬂection - These questions attempt to understand 
the reﬂection process of using speciﬁc design methods 
Demographics of Startup 
• Can you tell me about your project? 
• How and why did the project start? 
• What is your mission and vision?  
• Where are you located and who are you targeting? 
• What are the main roles in operations? 
• Do you work in teams or individual tasks? 
• How do you manage the communication within the team? 
• From which nationalities and study lines is each member of the team? 
• How do you think this has affected the team dynamic? 
Use of methods and reﬂection  
• I saw that you were part of ____, ____ and ____. What was the biggest learning along this experiences? 
•  Do you remember some tools from those experiences that you have taken into your activities or 
mindset? 
• I saw that you have use ____, ____ and ____. How have you applied it in the daily activities of the Startups? 
• How do you make a strategy for developing or improving a prototype? 
• I saw that you have done _________ and __________ to get insights about your customer or user, can you tell 
me more about this?  
• How did you decide the approach 
• How long did it took? 
• Did you involve a third party? 
• How did you make it possible 
• Which hard and soft skills do you consider fundamental for developing a product? 
Personal, good and bad, experiences with methods and reﬂection 
• Do you think these methods have helped or limited you in any way? 
• What has been the biggest insight about this process, what is a key task you have found is fundamental for 
this process? 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
74
==PAGE:76==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
 
Appendix 4 - Transcript ServedonSalt Interview 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:00:00] So, it started in HardTech spring 2019 and we were given a case with this salt storage 
technology where you can dry the salts, and then later when you make it wet, it gets very warm. And there was a cool 
company in Sweden that had a technology with some nano coding. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:00:22] And then they said to us, what can you ﬁnd a cool way of using this? They were using it for 
storing excess energy from windmills to stabilise the energy grid. And they were looking, they were asking us, 
challenging us to ﬁnd small scale application where we could create a startup that used that technology so that we 
would become their customers in the future. It's a really cool startup or a starting conditions. And then we had the 
course. And after the costs, it was only me from the group who wanted to continue. But then I was lucky to have 
Nicklas taking on board. And then we did a special course with Thomas Howard afterwards, which was in the autumn 
2019 where we were trying to say, okay, after HardTech, we had a rough idea about what it is that we want to do this 
team cooking in refugee camps or. Yeah. Now, it's later turned into a slum areas that we're focusing on, where we will 
store solar energy to use for cooking. And then we plan that this half year after HardTech should be taught to 
developing a prototype and to see if we can make it work. And now we're writing our thesis, which is the same stuﬀ 
which didn't come that far yet. But everything is more complicated than we thought. But we are learning a lot and we're 
coming closer. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:01:46] And then Nicolas and I knew each other from high school, and we also studying together., 
and we kind of had a plan to already write our thesis together, but we didn't know about what. So this was a mortgage. 
Everything was very matching so that he could jump on board and join the startup and then we could write our thesis 
on it. And then we had a lot of time to actually pursue this.  
Researcher: [00:02:16] Well, then you both on design and innovation?  
ServedOnSalt1: [00:02:19] Yeah. Yeah. 
Researcher: [00:02:20] Okay. And which is kind of the main role each one of you have? Have you talk about it or 
somewhere in between? 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:02:31] I think I'm CEO, and Nicklas is more CTO, but it's more like to have something on the 
business canvas.  
ServedOnSalt2: [00:02:42] It's very equal, it's a nicer thing. What we do and at what tasks we full. Because it's just nice 
to have sparring with one another all the time and. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:02:57] But it could be that it's a good idea to actually talk more about roles right now. Until now, 
it's been pretty seamless to ﬁgure out like who does what. And I don't know. Yeah, right now I'm in Germany visiting my 
girlfriend because now the borders are close. So I had to get out into Germany before it was too late. So Nicklas is very 
much doing all the practical building and. Yeah.I don't have a workshop or all the tools here. So I think I'm more, right 
now at least I'm more focusing on all of the things that can be done from a computer and Nicklas is our hands. 
Researcher: [00:03:47] Ok. And where are you working on? Because you said that is a slum areas. When? Where? And 
I also saw that you went to Africa. Right. Where? Which part did you work in? 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:04:04] Kenya. They keep beyrer slum. We're focusing on now. And it's also very I think it's a very 
good match, but it's also very coincident because they say we were just invited to this clean cooking forum in 
Nairobi.And then we said, OK, let's try to make the most of it. And try to go out there. And then we went into the slum 
and so that. OK. This could actually be a good match for us.But it could also be a slum anywhere else. But now we just 
started there. And then. Yeah, that could be a good start. 
Researcher: [00:04:39] Ok. And how did you got there? Was they had like an invitation or your apply? 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:04:51] Yes. No. It was, sir. Oh, yeah. What you call it Funder's. We've been funded by something 
called Mix, which is said a British. The group at the university where the defeat is ﬁnancing 40 million pounds to them to 
distribute to startups like us doing something with the teen cooking. And then they invited us to Nairobi. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
75
==PAGE:77==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Researcher: [00:05:25] Yeah. Good. Yeah, because I saw that you clicked, most of the boxes of incubator, mentoring 
with experts and such. I was going to ask you about that. If you remember any tool or experience or something in 
particular that you actually took from it and run, now you like really taking into the daily operations? 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:05:52] Yeah. From the trip to Kenya?  
Researcher: [00:05:53] Think it more than the trip basically all day. The mentoring, the incubator, they accelerator, the 
process you were. Maybe some tool or just an advice that was given by someone. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:06:10] Yeah. I think we have a long presentation actually that we can also send you.We did it in 
HardTech a couple of weeks ago where we have actually collected a lot of diﬀerent, particularly recommendations or 
advice. Yeah. Things.You have Nicklas while I think. 
ServedOnSalt2: [00:06:39] Advisers from here are takeaways from the accelerator. 
Researcher: [00:06:44] Yeah. Or maybe at tool that you seem like to be actually using when you are daily operations. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:06:54] I know from the Ignite program, initially, Christoﬀer told us about this, too. We've been 
gathering data up on that and that's actually help this ﬁght and that along the way. So we didn't have to make so much 
work gathering a lot of info for. For example, for these mixed people in England and other funds, anyway, they go out to 
meetings with maxs, to innovation and others. It's just nice to have a quick.Quick line and the description and 
everything that we have. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:07:31] Ok, so it's like a tool kit. It's just a document where it's like a one liner. What is our one liner 
description of the sort of in 50 words and 20 words and one hundred words. So that's very nice to have and to explain 
what it was to OK. 
Researcher: [00:07:50] It's ﬁne. And I was asking also about. Now that you present the project by. It's a really 
complicated pathway. Maybe how have you found the best way to actually explain your project to people? Because I 
think you have a really good technology, but sometimes people may have a diﬀerent or a harsh moment understanding 
how it works. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:08:28] We've been pitching so many times now on reining it so many times and trying to listen to 
what is it that like from the questions we did afterwards. It's often very clear if they understood it or if they think it's 
something completely diﬀerent. So, for example, if you're a little bit into this ﬁeld, there's also a lot of energy storage 
projects with salt where you it's another salt, but you heat up so you melt it instead. It's a container with salt, a new 
heat it up and then you store energy and then you can get it out afterwards. And it's very easy to think that it's the other 
one. So often we get questions like, yeah, okay, but they will not do just to go with the heat, not just be lost after some 
hours when the soul is so solid again. And then we can say, OK, it's very, very important for us to to be very clear on 
that. It's something that you try and make with. And it's not something you build. So in that way, I think we kind of tried 
to adjust so that we make sure that we don't get these questions that are indicating that they misunderstood something 
or. 
ServedOnSalt2: [00:09:45] Yeah, I think we tried to make it as simple as possible along the way because initially we 
were used to the exact explanation of what we are doing getting salt, hydration and thermal chemical energy storage, 
exothermic reaction.And when it comes along this. And just saying these words after one another. it gets complicated 
for most people. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:10:10] Also for us, if we also. 
ServedOnSalt2: [00:10:11] Also for us, I think when we're pitching for people. More now we have a tendency to seem 
to think about who is it? Actually, we're pitching forward because, as Christopher said, some some in this understands 
what we're actually doing and that most most engineers, I think because they think it's this it's this salt hydrate that 
actually melts, but it's not where we are.This body, we pitch to business people. It's just saying the simple thing. Yeah. 
So sold in a container. Heat it up. It dries, make it wet, It gets hot. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:10:52] But it's not only. Yeah. Who are we pitching to in terms of what they can understand, but 
also what is it that they need to know? Know exactly what we need to talk about. So if it may not be necessary that 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
76
==PAGE:78==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
they know that this is an exothermic reaction, for example. So let's just give it and then do with the super simple to 
understand the basic mechanisms of this technology. And then we can move on to talk more detailed about. 
Researcher: [00:11:19] Yeah. Yeah. Are there some words that you. Because sometimes when you keep pitching, you 
kind of ﬁnd yourself always repeating these these keywords. Can you remember some of them? They're usually part of 
the speech. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:11:38] Yeah. About like the entire pitch? 
Researcher: [00:11:41] I will say about the technology when when you explain how it works. Specially people who 
doesn't understand why. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:11:52] We dry salt and we made it wet again, And then the heat comes out. 
ServedOnSalt2: [00:12:09] For now, we have divided into ﬁve steps for people to make. It's for people to understand it 
better. So one thing is just drying, so if you boarder out and then we say when it's dry, it has energy in it. So the energy 
is stored in the soil. And then we make it wet, and that generates heat, which we can cook with. It's taking it's really 
taken steps. Because when we look at it, it's just two steps. It's it's drying and it's hydrating. Yeah. 
Researcher: [00:12:46] Ok. And when you went to Kenya, did you explain that technology to the users? How was that 
experience? 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:12:57] We did. Oh, it was actually unfortunate. It was only me because these people, they could 
only invite one of us. But ﬁrst of all, I tried to not talk about that one because it was more like it wasn't so developed. So 
it was more of an experience to go and try to understand their lives and the problem. But sometimes after really talking 
a lot about how it is now. I tried to talk a little bit about, OK, but I have this idea and then then we had made previously 
just like a small ﬂyer, small leaﬂet with an illustration about it. I can then we can send it to you. 
Researcher: [00:13:41] Yeah, it would be super nice. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:13:43] Maybe you've seen it in a pitch in Skylab. But it is like very simple. Like three steps. You 
place your pot and then you cook it and then like an illustration with very, very few words on it. And most like pictures 
and symbols to show that you have to then go to this charging station and hand it in the battery and then you pay a 
little bit and then you get a new one and then you take that one home. So I think it was pretty well functioning, actually, 
this illustration. 
Researcher: [00:14:19] These had some words or was it only symbols? 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:14:21] It had some words and numbers, of the diﬀerent steps, like one like a swap or something 
and then carry home and then add water, place pot. 
Researcher: [00:14:37]  A really simple way. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:14:40] Yeah. Like that. And it was actually, I think when we made it. It was it was for the conference 
to just quickly be able to show something to people. But then some of the people, they went to the hall and this is really 
good communication for like people that can't speak English. So like very few words. Okay. Yeah. They actually works 
pretty well for showing it to. Yeah. More like slum dwellers. So rule people. So. But it wasn't actually what I had in mind 
when we made it. No. 
Researcher: [00:15:16] Ok. And the both of you went to Kenya? 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:15:21] No, unfortunately just Chris. 
Researcher: [00:15:24] Ok. And I'm also interested on this part because you said like you had around between one and 
ﬁve prototypes by now. How many did you have before and after actually buying? How long you been asking? 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:15:51] You know, it's a little weird because during HardTech we started with something and we 
thought we knew how the whole thing worked. And we make some prototypes on some of it. But then we found out 
that it worked in a diﬀerent way than we thought. And then we kind of had to like we almost stopped the whole project 
and started over. But then we found out that maybe we can do it in another way. It could still work. And then we started 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
77
==PAGE:79==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
again. So I don't know if we should count the ﬁrst prototypes. But maybe that would be one prototype from HardTech. 
And then one where it's just a visual prototype with people working on it was just something for people to look at. So 
that was two. And then how much did we make Nicklas before going to Nigori? 
ServedOnSalt2: [00:16:42] It's diﬃcult to say, because I think we made one prototype and then we made some 
experiments, I would say 10 plus, 20 plus maybe because initially we were just trying and beakers to see. Okay. How 
much energy actually how much temperature can we get out of this reaction and how much water can we boil away in a 
given amount of time in a 'cept temperature in the oven. So before we even built the prototype to see how much water 
can we heat up with this temperature, with this energy from the salt, we were just testing the conditions of the salt 
because we got a lot of diﬀerent raided the salts from various companies seem more both than like you. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:17:36] Yeah, but they they square box. Did we have that before? 
ServedOnSalt2: [00:17:44] Yes, I do remember we had the square box. Maybe we had it in November when he went to 
Kenya. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:18:00] No, I don't think we had because then like both of us. Yeah. Yeah. 
ServedOnSalt2: [00:18:05] Afterwards we made the square box so we didn't have to square oﬀ with just that 
experimentations.  
ServedOnSalt1: [00:18:12] So we could call the one before the square box because I call that a prototype. I think in the 
wooden box with the ruckel inside right there, there's three prototypes before and then we made the square box and 
now we're building. The ﬁfth one now. 
Researcher: [00:18:35] Ok, so good. And besides that technical part. What does it actually take for you to improve the 
prototype? Maybe, maybe you get a feedback from someone or you say just team reﬂection of it. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:19:02] Well, yeah, of course, there's the technical part. And then I think that's also a lot about 
adoption that we need to think about. And we are thinking a lot about. I spent the whole day yesterday trying to to 
collect from literature because one thing, when we pitch, one thing, we always get told it's like how do you make sure 
that they will use it? I've just met so many articles about stoves that are not being used and there are so many reasons. 
So how do you know that yours will be? And it's super relevant to be able to answer that. So I think the next will be OK. 
Once we understand the signal integral enough and we can actually control it as we want to and we can make it good 
enough technically, then we need to ﬁgure out how can we match it with all these local requirements and using what we 
are told. The feedback we get from some locals that we are e-mailing with, and the literature like reasons for why they 
are not being used or various for adoption and then tried to take it in and say, OK, all these risk factors, how can we 
mitigate them? That's basically what I'm doing like today and yesterday. But it's just I guess I see it second priority, if 
we cannot get the technology to work, that it doesn't matter. But this is also very important. So now we need to try to 
use that. OK. Makes sense? 
Researcher: [00:20:49] Yeah, deﬁnitely. So I wanted to ask you also about the how. I mean, besides going to Kenya 
now, you you told me right now that you'd really know a lot of literature and talking with more people. Is there 
something you did actually before going? I mean, how were you getting this insight? 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:23:14] Limit was talking to NGO'S and people working in NGO'S in Denmark,UNHCR. I think 
during HardTech, we spent a lot of time doing that and meeting as many as we could, which was also pretty good 
because they like just talking to someone who had been in a refugee camp was much better than what we could 
imagine. And then, what we did was try and true to make a description of our idea, like in some slides, even though it 
was very immature and then saying we are imagining something like this, how do you think, honestly, how does this 
sound with your experience in that? So I think if we would have done that in Kenya, it would have we would have been 
very prone to then just saying that's perfect, because that's what we want to hear. They think or at least that's my 
impression. But but here I think it was OK to do it because we were saying to people in Denmark saying, OK, be critical. 
What is what is wrong and what is good about what we're saying. And so it gave like a whole diﬀerent level of 
understanding to be in Kenya. But as a start, I think it was pretty good what we got from it. 
Researcher: [00:24:41] Good. And along this process of basically talking away as much people as you can, taking this 
inside and actually converting them into the improvals of your prototype. What are some hard or soft skills that you 
have seen that you need  on this process? 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
78
==PAGE:80==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
ServedOnSalt1: [00:25:08] Can you give examples of how. 
Researcher: [00:25:11] I don't know, maybe that you have to know how to empathize with people or that you have to 
be really organized or. Something in between or two actually sometimes. I mean, some people told me, like, you need 
to understand. Their words into your technical language. So I don't know if you have developed or you have noticed 
that after all this, we actually do these or we improve on these part? 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:25:45] You can also say something if you can Nicklas, but I think maybe it's maybe a little bit the 
same at the moment we are more talking to, you know, technical people who we want to like ask, OK. What kind of 
heating element can we use or these O-rings? What should we use of these ones in there? I think it's. I think it's pretty 
helpful to be able to talk with the technical words because like on the one side, I think it's super helpful to lay all the 
cards on the table and say, I don't know anything about this, but I need to know, you know a lot about it, I think you can 
help me. I think that opens is a lot of these people's minds a lot. And they really want to help you if you say you have a 
cool project and that they can create value for you. It really opens a lot up in the conversation and that you're honest 
and not try to to pretend like you're an expert in this new ﬁeld that you know nothing about. I think it's much more 
eﬃcient if from to just say, I want to do this. I think I have a really good idea. Can you help me validate it? Can you help 
me optimize this or this or something? But then if you then, you know, present some insights still. So you use this good 
word to all have this. Yeah. But I've also read this at this so that it still shows that you put a lot of eﬀort into it. I think for 
me that's working pretty good to get people talking and spending a lot of their time on helping you. 
ServedOnSalt2: [00:27:35] I agree with Christopher. I think it's really nice when we go out to meet people because and 
along the way when we have. Gotten this meetings with UNHCR people and other NGOs. We didn't really have 
anything, any background to come from. It was just us and an idea and talking to people with much more experience 
and a lot longer in the way. For example, Solar PSEC, when we are compared to them, they have a product in there. 
They have a lot of IP from talking to the customers. They know exactly what their failure modes of the product is. How 
should they? Designed their way out of this. That it's just nice to come and say we have this idea. It's cool, we think we 
don't know a lot of things about how it actually should be used by the user and how it should be designed for the user. 
So do you have any insights that we can just take away from this? And maybe it's about business model. Maybe it's 
about their behavior in the kitchen or something and completely diﬀerent. But it's just nice to be open. And the. Make 
them a part of the process. I think that's actually what makes people overlook the other members. 
ServedOnSalt1: [00:29:11] Yes, I think no, just talking about. Because I think we are actually pretty good at getting 
people to spend a lot of their free time on that. And second thoughts. Yeah, that's going pretty good. And I think 
something that's also good is to say something that's working for us is to say we don't want to push this. It's not like 
this is the solution to this big problem. But we think that's such a good match. So we're just like, it's a shame if we 
don't explore it more. So trying to invite the people you're talking to into like this creative thinking that. OK. OK. Is this 
does it make sense? What are the good and the bad instead of just trying to sell something to them and push? This is 
going to solve this and this and this way. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
79
==PAGE:81==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Appendix 5 - Transcript  Nature Boards Interview 
Researcher: [00:00:01] You can start by telling me about this startup. Like, when did it start? What was the mission 
oﬀered? If you're still following in or has it changed? 
Nature Boards 1: [00:00:20] Yeah, I think like basically we started like three years ago. Originally it was like an idea to 
redesign a surfboard and we looked into like diﬀerent ways to redesign the surfboard that at that time we stoppable 
with this way that you could grow materials or something close to that. And then we start thinking about if we could 
kind of like grow a surfboard.And then it became our bachelor thesis. And after that, we just continued working with the 
technology to build with other companies as well. 
Nature Boards 2: [00:01:01] Yeah. Well, when you started the company also or some.So I think, like, if you're looking at 
it, some people would say that we did a few pivot points and at the moment we all were we're kind of like, you know, 
what direction are we're supposed to go in. We just decided a few months ago to try to open up again. Open up once 
again. OK. We'll get to all the diﬀerent kind of directions that we can go in and see if we forgot anything about the 
technology or how it can be used. So, of course, we are we are in Ignite, which is what we call nature boards. That's the 
direction like the building industry direction. We think that we might be going in because it makes a lot sense when we 
just want to be sure that we have oh look something. So that's actually what we're working at at the moment. We're 
spending a lot of time just to go get to diﬀerent kinds of industries. 
Researcher: [00:02:03] So it does start that just as an idea of yours. Or was it like a school project or how was it?  
Nature Boards 1: [00:02:13] Was once a school project was a special course. Well, the idea of making her a more 
sustainable surfboard. OK. Because then surfs and that was an interesting thing. 
Researcher: [00:02:29] Ok. That's quite nice. Do you have a mission or vision right now? 
Nature Boards 1: [00:02:37] We do have something on paper, but it all depends on what kind of direction that we're 
going in. I think in general it's about that we want to be more. We want to make people aware of this and we want to 
make cheaper, you know, to enable a plan to build all or to use more sustainable materials like we talked about when 
when we were at the surfboard stage. A lot of people are confused about like what is actually sustainable. And at the 
moment, it seems like that many companies can say that sustainable, even if they're just changing, just like one percent 
of that material or something else. And that's what at least that's what we've been ﬁghting through a bit with our 
material because it's so sustainable compared to a lot of potatoes.So it could be nice if depending on what direction 
we're going it it could be nice if people actually understood more about sustainability. 
Researcher: [00:03:41] And have you found exactly who to a target? Are you still on that debate? 
Nature Boards 1: [00:03:51] Yes and no.  
Nature Boards 2: [00:03:51] When it comes to the nature boards, we know who to talk. But again, we're still exploring 
the future. Customers could decide the building industry. 
Researcher: [00:04:12] Ok. That's OK. But are you planning to stay? I mean, at least with nature boards on Denmark. 
Nordic. European. Market, yeah. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:04:25] Yeah. 
Researcher: [00:04:25] Okay, well, good to know that. Do you have some main roles in your operations? Have you 
decided that I like this one? 
Nature Boards 2: [00:04:36] Well, actually, just. So Dan became the CEO. Yeah. And I became the CTO. OK. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:04:46] Then again, to be quite honest, we don't like titles or stuﬀ like us. No. But the only reason 
we did it or the only reason we talk about it is like the two reasons it's one of them is that we're bringing other people's 
true to the sort of like laid on. And already now want to be sure who's like responsible of diﬃcult parts? That's like the 
main reason we actually did it, because we've been working together for like three years. Even though we haven't 
talked about it, we kind of know like advances is a disadvantage for both of us. So it becomes quite natural trusting. 
But if we're bringing in like one or two other persons, it would be a good idea. Yeah. All right. 
Researcher: [00:05:30] That's right. And when when is these new people starting with you? 
Nature Boards 1: [00:05:38] Oh, yeah. Yeah. So, you know, when their souls will be gone, one with the team. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
80
==PAGE:82==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Researcher: [00:05:48] Ok. And he's already working with you. Yeah. OK. And usually, how do you manage that 
communication? I would like everyone's like advances. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:06:02] Basically, it's like basically we're meeting up here, so, so when we got like a meeting or if 
we're working together, we just meeting of the places that we are at the moments of fulﬁlling other courses. So, so we 
could do it like certain days a week. So we're meeting up two, three, four times a week depending on how it works out. 
And then we're not really working together for like a whole day together. OK. The point is that it's the guy Lasse who 
joined the project. Now, he used to be a part of it, like the surfboard part back in the day. And we're gonna like write our 
thesis of us together in this well. So it just makes sense. And we know that because what you are. So that's quite 
another guy probably coming into the into the startup in like a month or three or four, depending on the situation with 
the other company itself. 
Researcher: [00:06:57] Ok. That's really, really nice. Well, I know that you have been on Ignite and of course, a lot of 
programs have, Skylab. But I wanted to ask you about like the biggest learnings that you have and this experience. Is 
there something that you actually remember that you have taken? And then apply it into your daily operations. 
Regarding to Skylab or basically the programs that you have been. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:07:43] Ok. I think we have only just one program like it. So it's all we join one program where we 
will like the head in the accelerator program. I think like. We talked to Jacob about Ya'akov, his own mentor, and ignited 
and we talked to him about that. He was a bit confused about what we were actually doing. And he was a bit confused 
about if, if that we have a product which is like really sustainable, if that's enough of us, that's who it actually makes us 
think a lot about it. And we kind of knew that it wasn't, but we didn't realize it at that point. So I think when after after 
the ﬁrst conversation we have with him actually make us have even more focus on that. And then we still have that and 
we still haven't solved the problem. So what we know now is that no matter if we're doing like nature boards or some 
sort or the applications that we can do with this material, then we can not just survive on talking about it, but it's 
sustainable. And it needs to it needs to save time. It needs to save costs and needs to to do something speciﬁc for the 
customer. Other than that. So so if if we like designing a table for our client or for a shop, then we know that the table 
needs to be strong. We know that a table needs to be good. Looking at that and just like a good story that it's 
sustainable. That's probably one of the biggest I can remember. 
Researcher: [00:09:17]  I know you had like really small presential workshops, but if you remember any tool, maybe. 
Nature Boards 2: [00:09:44] Maybe the all view of the customer validation. OK. Well, we group all the customers 
potential customers. 
Researcher: [00:09:53] Yeah. 
Nature Boards 2: [00:09:55] Oh, and that I can't remember any tools that I think you use. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:10:02] I'm a bit against the thought, but I think like the whole team tool that we weren't true or 
kind of like, how are you? How does your team stacked together? Yeah. And my point of view is kind of like other you 
you think it's a good idea to look into all this, although it's not. I think it still make us think about. Like how how are we 
like together? We already knew that a lot of people when they see me and Christine and they know that we're starting 
the same line design and innovation. And they say that they were working together for so long. They think that we're 
kind of like the same. But the reality is that we're not at all. So so like a span of like almost ﬁfteen, twenty years between 
us and we got coming. So, I mean, every every time I got one opinion, Kristen got the other one on the opposite end 
that just came out so bright. When when we walked through all these like tests in the O. They like this theme. Yeah. She 
theories. So for me personally it made me think more about like who are we dragging into the team? What else? 
Nature Boards 2: [00:11:19] A lot a lot of the other stuﬀ that we went through, we had a lot of it when when I when I 
had like some of the top of this ship, because it's I think a lot of it is it's like pretty close. If it's not the same to you, kind 
of like design and innovation or design thinking. So I think like routine was the most. New for me, yeah. 
Researcher: [00:11:51] Yeah. Yeah, because I I was also seeing that you said you have used design thinking, agile, user 
centred design, Lean Startup and well, of course you have bio inspired design. Just wanted to know if you follow this 
methodologies just by the book, or is it something that you have like kind of taken into you and you just love? 
Nature Boards 1: [00:12:21] Strictly followed no, just the way that we were taught to the scientists from more from our 
background in design and innovation so we don't follow anything strictly good. 
Researcher: [00:12:36] But have you maybe use something as a structure? I mean, I assume that maybe for they are 
for the special course you had to follow. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:12:48] But we basically like our specials cause we basically did everything, like restructured 
everything on our own plane in the ﬁrst one to use kind of like the redesign redesigned way of thinking of a way of 
selection and selecting diﬀerent kinds in The Bachelor. We did like a bio inspired by a cartel ﬁnanced by way of thinking. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
81
==PAGE:83==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
At the moment, we are kind of like using the agile way of thinking because we're trying to force it to be like a startup. 
That's right. Way of thinking in design make good sense with the startup because your customer needs to be able to 
move like you might have one good idea on the next day, it might be another good one or you might need to change 
like pivot points or something. Yeah. But we haven't set down but just followed one digerati message to me. Well, sorry. 
You're probably sure to be better. 
Researcher: [00:14:07] I wanted to ask you, how do you make strategies for developing the prototypes?How does that 
I mean, of course, there is this technical part, but maybe besides that. I mean, you got the feedback of someone. Is it 
just like a reﬂection or a discussion between both of you? Meaning. Which is a point that said, like, we need to make us 
get the following. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:14:47] Well, right now we have like all the materials and our technology and we call in and talk to 
potential customers and ask them what they will do. And the plan is to to design that and iterate with the customers. 
When we happened one both times, I was one of those that's like divided into like two to pieces, like the ﬁrst. The ﬁrst 
two and half, three years that we that we spent on this material was actually just to develop the technology behind it 
and to understand it. And we didn't talk to that much that many customers saw something at that point. But. We're 
doing that now because now we know the technology. Now we know the material. 
Nature Boards 2: [00:15:36] Now we know how to change stuﬀ like that. And now for the ﬁrst time, we actually need to 
do some something with design of the technology. I cut like building up. That's the hard way to get close. It's really 
tricky. And then we're going to use like a user feedback for that. But when that is set the ﬁrst three years, we will still 
need other programs. And we've been talking to know, like what, 30, 40 people in the building industry, which is like on 
on another level than us, like bosses for diﬀerent kinds of companies. So people in the high court like that. Yeah. 
Researcher: [00:16:24] Yes. OK. Super. Yes. And well, actually, now that you mention the customers, how it has been 
the approach. I mean, how do you contact them? How is basically the strategy to actually knowing what they want? 
Nature Boards 2: [00:16:48] Well, in this period, we just now it like 50 industries, potential industries down to eight.And 
then we're going to conﬁrm form like ﬁve interviews for each industry. And I would just phoning and e-mailing out to to 
set up meetings with them. Yeah. And you just. What was it yesterday you talked with? Well, ﬁne. Five or ﬁve diﬀerent 
customers. Just went out there. Talk to them directly. Well, you. 
Researcher: [00:17:27] Ok. You get in contact with them. And how did you get this contact? Was it just like a Google 
search? Someone told you about the companies. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:17:40] We knew a few other companies, like in the architectural in the building industry. We 
already got connections like once. I used to work there. Another one. What we did for the last three years, we wanted 
another program. So we're kind of like the building industry. But the rest of the industry that research and for like it was 
stolen or skateboard or funeral, funeral or all those. We don't have any.Direct contracts besides, like maybe a few 
friends.  
Nature Boards 2: [00:18:09] Yeah. So that's a lot of this. Just this. What? Yeah. Yeah. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:18:16] And that, of course, if you want to talk to architects, it might be a bit more diﬃcult to get in 
contact with them compared to if you want to talk to people whose shading or it's just to go to the state board. Yeah. 
Researcher: [00:18:31] Okay, that's good. I saw that you got some insights because you make interviews, which were 
very good. Told me how they did they did some research. Maybe if you can tell me more about the comparison to other 
brand. I mean, I know it's kind of diﬃcult because as you said, you're actually deﬁning the market. Oh. How you made 
this this comparison?. What is it like the main factors you take when seeing diﬀerent brands? I know it's a tough 
question because it's like an overall perspective of when you see a brand, but if there is something that you usually 
check. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:19:20] I think I was at the stage where I've now that's exactly what we're supposed to do in the 
next week or two when we get all the interest group into use in the book. But it bearing with like nature voice, what we 
did was that we knew that there were certain standards you need to live up to to to go into the building industry. So you 
need to know about like ﬁre assistant, you need to know about like how sustainable it is. You need to know about how 
strong it is, like tensile and all that compression. And of course, like in one of the biggest one is always price. Or at least 
you need to know what that price or price strategy is an anomaly or what we have been doing until now. It's just you 
look at like some of the biggest competitors at the moment. Well. 
Researcher: [00:20:12] And do you make some assumptions on this process? Or is it just completely. Like based on 
facts? 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
82
==PAGE:84==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Nature Boards 1: [00:20:25] I think like when we're looking into a market, the biggest assumption is always like how 
how much of this market can you get an idea? Turns oﬀ the shares of presentence. And another thing is, how big is the 
competition in there? It's kind of like the same. 
Nature Boards 2: [00:20:46] Yeah, I think in general we make a lot of assumptions. Yeah. No. Some should maybe be 
based on knowledge. Them belief. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:20:58] Yeah. Sometimes it's diﬃcult life. Of course it's it's quite easy to make assumptions if 
you're talking about like how big of a shaft through one competitor. If they bring it all good for like 5, 10 years. Yeah, but 
that also means that you're going it's a market which which is not new. What we probably want to do is go into like a 
new market. And if you're going into new markets, you need to make big assumptions. 
Researcher: [00:21:30] Ok. And do you validate some of the assumptions? how do you validate this? 
Nature Boards 1: [00:21:52] It depends on the speciﬁc assumption under contacting experts. 
Nature Boards 2: [00:21:59] Yeah, a lot in the building industry. Actually, nuther, just say so. Hubb doing Bobe like 
these experts in materials in your process. I mean, I just like Joe Holliday, these assumptions with experts in the 
industry. Have you also, like, interview them or have some research with them too? Actually, you'd like follow up on 
what you are doing. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:22:39] No, not really. But it's honest also because this is this. We actually talked to Jacobin about 
that. A good idea might be to to if if we if we're building the nature boards and we want to compete with the regular 
oughts like plywood, all possible boards. IDF, then we should maybe take contacts, then talk about how they see 
aliments, sales and stuﬀ like that and get more knowledge from them. But we haven't done that yet. So what? Until now 
it's basically. Only been working with Oliver, too. And that means we're talking to other people. We are the experts and 
probably in Denmark we are the two presence would know most about much needed materials. So so it's only when 
we're talking to like other persons experts. It's it's normally experts in like ﬁra systems or experts in how do you 
measure the strength of your material? Stuﬀ like that. Just to be sure that we are following the following the same 
standards as everyone else. Yeah. Oh, it's it's like experts or you know, like architects will know how. Nobody wants to 
build a. But other than that, we really haven't. 
Researcher: [00:24:01] Yeah. OK. And I don't know if you have also I mean, because you have to with customers. But 
have you may like maybe a survey of our perception of the product. 
Nature Boards 2: [00:24:14] No, no, no. OK. Just just one on one, but boy. 
Researcher: [00:24:25] Just let me check because you answer some of my questions before, so. Yeah. Now. Because 
you said you've been on this process for almost three years. So based on that, which is skills that you think you actually 
need to understand your customer. What skills? Yeah. Like hard skills or soft skills that you have seen. They are 
required. 
Researcher: [00:25:38] I don't know if you are, at least in these three years, like you see yourself like, hey, I actually got 
better at pitching or I got more organized like austerity's or now I'm more critical of all the thoughts that we have. Or I 
have actually like learning to talk easier with people. Something that has. A change that you have noticed along. You 
don't have to be like humble in this part. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:26:32] I don't know, like sometimes I think you're get blind sometimes. If you if you're working 
with something for like three years. I don't think or at least we're never talking about what we do to like in that way. 
We're mostly talking about like what we're not good at and we know that we can be way better pitch, signal or wave it 
out at going out. I mean, I'm talking to people and really at all already talked about who's going to be the selling person. 
Nature Boards 2: [00:27:01] And I'll tell you what, we need to bring in the in person because none of us have like really 
build for it. But then on the other hand, it's like a chalice. And it's it's always like it might be a bit easier if you go like it's 
just a customer. I don't know if you know business to business. And even if you go business-to-business in the building 
industry, because the building industry, it's it's mostly about numbers. And then the personality is like coming oﬀ the 
words. So of course, you need to have like an out of which is like saying to other people blabs that they should believe 
me, you're a Christian, but they want everything on a so. So if you're introducing like. Building materials. They they just 
want all the numbers to be there. And then maybe it's about your personality. I think the most important skill we need 
right now is to be able to convince investors. And how would love do that? No idea. So why we ignite? 
Researcher: [00:28:22] Yeah, basically the last one is a little bit linked to just to what I just ask you is what's your 
biggest learning along this three years? You're any. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:28:44] I think talk- talking about design and innovation, one of the biggest learning for me is that 
so I have a problem and ﬁnd a solution. There's way more Aecio that have about technology. Try to ﬁnd a problem. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
83
==PAGE:85==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Yeah, because there's so much work in it. It's so much more fun just to think about. I need to design a better surfboard. 
And then you could have fabulous uses for that. But you have a technology and slides reﬁned constitutional search for 
solution. The work eﬀort and the app is like way bigger. Yeah. 
Researcher: [00:29:16] Ok. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:29:21] Personally. 
Researcher: [00:29:27] And it's been three years. I'm pretty sure you covered a lot of things. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:29:33] But I didn't ﬁnd out. I always knew that I was a guy, was kind of elected by the water. So 
so people like me could deal with me simply because you learn a lot about them. No, but yes, I do that. So I get more. I 
might be more focused, but not. 
Nature Boards 2: [00:29:58] I know. Yeah. 
Nature Boards 1: [00:30:07] I'll come back to you if I ﬁgure something out. 
Researcher: [00:30:13] Yeah, OK. No. I'll just get get into that. And also, I mean, based on what you told me on some 
answers before, I can deduct some of those learnings, maybe then I will double check with you if if it's actually that you 
know what I saw. But yeah, that was basically it. It was quite fast. But you just get a start. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
84
==PAGE:86==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Appendix 6 - Transcript  Ponik Interview 
Researcher: [00:00:00] Recording. And if you win, you can start just by telling me a little bit about the project. When did 
it started? Why? I mean, how was just the initiating the process? 
Ponik1: [00:00:17] Sure. You're welcome. Yeah. It's really struggle. Uh. Like a year ago when we worked on a research 
project together, we never lie. Growing a building some some what's called grobots, some small hydroponic farms for 
public schools, which they can learn. Cross-link pursuing ﬁelds, learn about programming like learning about the 
biology and data. Capture the know if I'm going to talk about robots or something. I mean. Yeah, but that's the thing. 
We just mean we're still trying to ﬁgure out how exactly. Back during the. I mean, we have a we have the technology 
and with still developing like a business model and a case, and that's also why we are politicked night basically. So, I 
mean, we can you can choose any of them as an example. I mean. 
Ponik2: [00:01:41] Yeah. Right now we are looking to commercialize either the quotes or trying to grow some exotic 
crops like Suﬀern. Jason, to. Being able to grow locally in Denmark slipped past him in the. 
Researcher: [00:02:02] You know, which is your target market? 
Ponik1: [00:02:07] Well, that depends on the actual case. Right. But let's say let's leave the robots for now, because 
that's. That's like no issue with that. We have a market for that. And also interested buyers. It's just that we want to do 
both basically for the. For the genius suﬀering we are. Looking at like restaurants and maybe retailers. 
Researcher: [00:02:44] Good. That's it. Are you planning to only make it to selling then make then? 
Ponik1: [00:02:50] I mean. First oﬀ, I mean. I mean, if if it takes oﬀ, then. I mean, we're not we're not limiting ourselves 
to the night, but I mean our focus system for the foreseeable future because we're just starting out. So. 
Researcher: [00:03:08] Ok, good. I was going to ask you also what if you go explain me a little bit of the technology 
that is behind. 
Ponik2: [00:03:19] We are using a lot of the things, the technologies from tech farms, so we use new indoor lighting 
with specialized for growing plants, with diﬀerent frequency spectrums and then roasting. Also using what's called a 
grobotics. And they were putting this where you grow plants by mistake. The Roots zooms in. Yeah. Solution of fertilizer. 
Water, which just promotes healthy and faster growth of the plants, are not growing. The soil growing. And Mr.. OK, 
good. 
Researcher: [00:04:02] Club, you establish a mission or ambition for the for the company. 
Ponik1: [00:04:11] Not really. We don't have a clear vision written down.   
Ponik2: [00:04:15] Yeah, I think our primary goal right now is to develop and promote panic's. But we don't got a totally 
clear mission. We're really classic, horrible engineers. We just want to play around with the technology that we like and 
then we ﬁnd the use case and the case after puts. It's and out on this process. 
Researcher: [00:04:43] Have you taken any other main roles? Each of you.  
Ponik1: [00:04:55] Well, kind of. But we have eﬃciently mean. We advise. I got stuck with the. Melissa called the 
budgeting and like our. Think stuﬀ. Yeah. We came naturally, but it's not set in stone. And to you have become the 
salesman. Yeah, I've made a lot of inquiries to diﬀerent kind of retailers. 
Researcher: [00:05:37] And have you talked with some potential customers once? 
Ponik1: [00:05:45] We haven't talked. We have like two parallel projects. We have the robots and then the. Yeah, the 
critique, the products show. And with the robots, we have talked with a lot of a lot of retailers. Got a few. Medford's 
tensen got like phone calls where I have collaborated in and discussed possibilities in our product. So we have with 
robots. We have a lot of communication with retailers. And they are generally positive. Okay. 
Ponik2: [00:06:22] Yeah. Yeah. 
Researcher: [00:06:27] I ask you, how do you usually take the communication in the team? I know right now it's a 
diﬀerent situation than normal, but usually how do you, like, share the information? Or maybe like the brokers? 
Ponik1: [00:06:43] Between each other? 
Researcher: [00:06:44] Yes. I mean, yes, they do to each other. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
85
==PAGE:87==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Ponik1: [00:06:47] You know, we have tried to establish some some things would have ﬂag ships, one drive, and that's 
the communication platforms like. Then we'll try to make it work, but we haven't got enough of running like do some 
project amendments management notably. But I mean, before the Corona virus, but we just met like there were every 
every time. Yeah, so. And I mean, that's doable. Why we are two people, right. So just we just took. 
Researcher: [00:07:23] Ok. Did you have, like any formal meeting along the weeks, or was it just like whenever you had 
the time in actually much before? 
Ponik1: [00:07:35] Yes. I mean, we had we were both, uh, we made a lot of time for for the project. So, I mean, we met 
like. Four times. We got something. Yeah. And then inside those. Yeah, when we when we made a agreement meeting, 
then we made a ﬂight. Now we're going to have a meeting about this fund. Oh, this project goes to each one. 
Researcher: [00:08:09] I saw that on the server. You, Mike, that you've been part of. Absolutely. Sorry, my accent 
doesn't feel within one as narrator program. So I wanted to know if that if this is ignites or any other program. And do 
you remember or have you taken any tool like from the puzzle worships.There's something that you might remember 
like they told you and you actually wrote it. So you're saying. 
Ponik1: [00:08:45] What's the most important things? What's the exercise in using that word? Like getting to know how 
or why to X we can get within the local network and they've got a network. Who knows some people who can help you. 
Ponik1: [00:09:06] Let's get you up to speed. Yeah, and and like the focus on the customer as well. That's like the point 
of ignite, right? That's to teach the engineers to like. That they are our customers and they are kind of important if you 
want to have a business. So, I mean, I think we both had the realization that. That that was a much larger part than we 
had anticipated. 
Researcher: [00:09:35] It's quite nice. Yeah. I mean, I'm not taking like if you remember something from ignite. Is is a 
no no. No experiences. But it just happened that it was on this case. And I don't know if maybe from another course it's 
because from which is three lines. Is that each of you. 
Ponik1: [00:10:00] And I'm with electrical engineering, I have, like, temo. No. Yeah. That's the closest I get. 
Ponik2: [00:10:16] Yeah. And I'm doing processing innovation, which is like this is to learn to design innovation. So. I've 
had a lot of like precommitment and a lot of those late development tools that we've been using. But. We haven't been 
overwhelmed with our project management tools or our business case development tools. So. 
Researcher: [00:10:48] Do you feel like it's mostly like some accumulated knowledge that you're applying rather than 
following the book? 
Ponik1: [00:10:58] For me, it's because I don't have that much fear, radical experience. It's just what you pick up on the 
way. 
Ponik2: [00:11:11] I mean, for weeks, we've been pretty consistent with the prior development. Like following like a 
basic what is it called, like iterative development, exciting. So, yeah, I mean, just like a few of them and the same, 
basically. Right. So in. 
Researcher: [00:11:43] Ok. And how did you decide? Because I said that, Joe, check that you have changed the 
prototype between one and ﬁve times.I just wanted to know, like, what was the decisive point? To improve the 
prototype that you had before. 
Ponik2: [00:12:23] We have. OK. So for the two projects we have, we have the grobot, which we have continuously 
improved. And the other one is still a theoretical experience or theoretical thing, so. So what was the question again? 
We have changed something. Yeah, we have. We have improved under designed and. 
Researcher: [00:12:56] Yeah, I mean, I'm not basically like having a changed, but both eyes are more related into like, 
what was the decision factor to make? 
Ponik2: [00:13:07] Oh, we've been very lucky because we have a research project. We have had a an actual test. The 
prototypes are running on some schools. So we've had we've gotten a lot of feedback, which just has allowed us to like 
identify some some areas where a prototype is weak. So there are feedback. 
Researcher: [00:13:35] And how did you go to those schools? 
Ponik2: [00:13:39] That was, sir, through the research budget. It wasn't really. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
86
==PAGE:88==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Ponik2: [00:13:46] I mean, did you just call them, e-mail them? I mean, how was their approach socially, say, like, can 
we try this? 
Ponik1: [00:13:55] It was a part of. We saw structures project as a whole. It was the whole concept was to build these 
machines and them as a of lives.Students. Yeah. Students took action. 
Researcher: [00:14:10] Ok. So do it. OK. Like I'm a little bit confused in here. Just start the project by your own ideas. 
Or was it someone that was looking for like everybody engineers. To do this research project. 
Ponik1: [00:14:28] It was not us ourself who created the project, we were hired in the middle of the project to do the 
hard with the building. Are we going for with the help with the bill? Okay, good. 
Researcher: [00:14:44] And as you said, like, you're still kind of deﬁning the customer. 
Ponik1: [00:14:50] Yeah. Like we have it's confusing because we got the two parallel projects.But in the robots, we are 
pretty clear about our customer proﬁles. But in the yeah. The product ﬁles. So Krupp's we kind of we still a big part of 
our work is not the help with the robot. When I was small business model and the customer segmentation. So yeah, 
that's completely clear. 
Researcher: [00:15:24] And how have you approach these customers? All right. Basically, how how would you validate 
this? This business model. 
Ponik1: [00:15:35] Brad, no, we have not worked that much into it. We are looking for funding and then we got a 
student who writes a ﬁve six assignment on diﬀerent Facebook. Mogensen second, Megan, some segments of them. 
So it's not going that fast. But we think we ﬁrst got to look at diﬀerent segments that has a possible barrier of entry and 
timeline. And then we're going to try to work on some business models in customer segmentation in that. 
Researcher: [00:16:18] Have you managed to talk with someone along this long? 
Ponik1: [00:16:26] I get a lot of e-mail, constant communication and a lot of phone calls that were greater than people 
who respond fast. So it's it's quite easy to get to people if you want to. 
Researcher: [00:16:45] I think we're gonna go to a little bit more of an experience kind of thing. I just wanted to ask 
you, you just had like you started last year. So this is more of father kind of reﬂection part. So basically, if you help 
develop certain skills along this process that you have noticed. Your question to be either repeal or soft. 
Ponik1: [00:17:20] Q In the last year of this. I think for me, I've developed not understanding how hard it is to get a 
good. Great business plan and get a get all the soft things in my lot of world's sliced hot with the Boatman's mostly, so 
it's yeah, I think it's steadily getting a understanding and some choose to do these things like business, creating a 
business model and yeah. Asking customers customer sensations, which is the backbone of a startup. 
Ponik2: [00:18:14] I think I've gained an appreciation of how important the. Like the. Was like the key the key value 
proposition of what I mean, what what does it mean? What is the minimum viable product? Like having a focus on 
achieving, like the thing the thing has to do. Does that make sense?  
Researcher: [00:18:43] Yeah, I mean, if you could rephrase it. 
Ponik2: [00:18:54] Like it says, probably. Having an overview of what is like it's forest management, basically, so how 
what what is the most important thing that we should be doing now and why is that the most important thing? So I think 
that's. That's what I've learnt the most, I think. It's like having a. And I took it. 
Researcher: [00:19:26] Going back to the customers, which which is the biggest insight that you feel that you have a 
good. 
Ponik1: [00:19:41] I feel like the biggest insight is that. It doesn't really matter what we do if we haven't validated our 
idea with the customers, so. I mean, that might sound banal, but to me, it was like I mean, and you'd rationally. But now 
I think we understand it. I think that's pretty important to do. Probably meditation, like most people say, yes. If you ask. 
It's kind of a diﬃcult job. 
Researcher: [00:20:20] Yeah, because I saw that you have done some research, some comparison to other brands and 
some assumptions. So I wanted to ask you about when you make the comparison to other brands. What is something 
that you actually, like, care or look at their all their products or solutions? 
Ponik2: [00:20:43] I think when I look at it, it's like how innovative ideas how? Because we are trying to get into a new 
ﬁeld that got a lot of competitors, but everyone is trying to do a little little diﬀerent from shows. Just who got the radical 
new idea that could could make it a breakthrough. Yeah, I think I think you both looked at the technology. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
87
==PAGE:89==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Researcher: [00:21:17] Ok? And also from the assumptions, like a really big assumption that you remember you have 
done. 
Ponik1: [00:21:31] For our products. Yes. That we are able to like mass produce this in a fashion that makes sense. Is 
this a realistic assumption? Because a lot of people try, but not very well. It's the assumption that we can do better than 
that because we've got a diﬀerent insight that we're basically assuming that it's liable to get. 
Researcher: [00:22:07] And yeah, this one is going to be, I think, diﬃcult in this case because there's just I didn't really 
follow I meant to the LAGHI. But I think for your case, we could say, like if. Is there any methodology or method? The 
view hubs like that, you can remember that if will actually work for you. 
Ponik2: [00:22:41] The I mean, I I'm a big proponent of the double diamond model. I think the thing you need to have 
that when you're deﬁning your product. And otherwise, you risk the risk, too, like. Risk moving too fast and making bad 
decisions. And I mean, I think you need to deﬁne the goal of what you're developing before you start. So what is it you 
want to achieve? What is what is the purpose of the thing? 
Researcher: [00:23:26] Good. Yes. So actually, the last one. It's which is skills. Do you think people need to be in a 
Startup? 
Ponik1: [00:23:49] I think you need to be. A bit naive. Cesar. Yeah. I think you have to have a tribe that works long term, 
just not I have a short enthusiasm for a technology project, but being able to know that it's going to take crossable 
years. Doing maybe not the things that you love with technology, but still working with. 
Researcher: [00:24:36] I mean, if you feel like there's something else I don't know about, like maybe a hard skill that 
you can identify. 
Ponik2: [00:24:46] Think. If he had been able to software code, so high school is like most startups can use this.It's 
really a great school. But the thing is you. I mean, we're doing everything right. So. I mean, you have to you have to be 
willing to become a generalist in some sense because everything needs to be done and. In the larger company, that's 
like four or ﬁve positions and people are specialized. But I mean, we just have to like pick up tips and tricks you can 
from all those ﬁelds and then apply them as best we can. 
Researcher: [00:25:38] Is is there something that you really like to do? Like, is there an activity that you especially like 
to work with? 
Ponik2: [00:25:49] Developing, we love it.  
Researcher: [00:25:56] Let's let's take a beating. Perfect. Then I'm going to stop recording. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
88
==PAGE:90==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Appendix 7 - Transcript OS City Interview (Original - Spanish) 
Researcher: [00:00:00] Si quieres puedes empezar contándome un poquito sobre el proyecto cuando lo iniciaron. Qué 
razón,y hacia qué ciudades o en qué zonas están trabajando? 
OS City: [00:00:15] El proyecto o la empresa es OS City y OS City es una evolución en realidad. Empezamos por allá 
del 2010 con temas bastante cívicos, muy, muy dedicados hacia el hacia la ciudadanía en general y muy enfocados en 
el área metropolitana de Monterrey. Yo no sé si estabas tu acá en esos años, pero fueron los peorcito del tema 
inseguridad. Entonces yo estaba ﬁnalizando el doctorado, estaban regresando de Brasil y mi doctorado era coordinar 
múltiples robots. Una de las premisas de coordinación de los robots era que se supieran mandar mensajes de manera 
oportuna. Entonces cuando perdían comunicación y los encontraban, que se contaran de manera oportuna que he 
vivido cada uno y pudiera uno, sin tener que haber vivido la experiencia del otro, poder ahorrarse los errores. Es la 
manera de hacerlo eﬁciente y en algún momento, en ese tiempo de inseguridad, pues empezaron las premisas de oye 
lo que nos está pasando, ya no puedes ir a esperar el camión o pedirte un taxi, o pararte en una esquina y no estar 
seguro de qué está pasando, si va a haber un bloqueo o si van a matar a otros estudiantes en la otra esquina. Ese tipo 
de cosas si venían a la cabeza y ahí empezamos a organizar la conversación en Twitter hacíamos bots que generaban 
hashtags más o menos organizaban ahí. Cuando nace el MTY follow y cuando empiezan los hashtags que después le 
dieron forma a la cuenta de una asociación civil que hoy tiene muchos followers que estan alla en Monterrey y se 
quedó como parte de una, hace que en algún momento creáramos toda la parte de tecnología de ellos y luego nos 
salimos y empezamos a llevar esa voz a las manos de quienes actuaban. Entonces de ver al usuario principal como el 
ciudadano. Ahora veíamos al usuario principal como el servidor público y entonces ahí empezamos a migrar premisas y 
hacer herramientas y sobre todo, ser muchísimo más empáticos con gobierno, éramos bastante optimistas e idealistas 
y empezamos como con un toque de realidad. En realidad no es tanto que el Gobierno no quiera actuar, es que tiene 
reglas de 200 años que no pueden cambiar tan fácil y entonces tienen que operar de esta manera. 
OS City: [00:02:45] Vendimos a la primer ciudad con la empresa de un tío, porque también venderle al gobierno, al ﬁnal 
de cuentas a nuestro usuario. Ah, pues esto es como un huevo y gallina imposible. Necesitas tener una empresa con 
más de dos años comprobados que le proveía el gobierno para poder vender el gobierno. Es decir, es una startup que 
quiere vender por primera vez, no puedes hacerlo, entonces es estar totalmente blindado para ﬁnes del loving y otras 
cosas que también tienes que ir aprendiendo a doblar. Lo que hicimos en su momento fue usar la constructiva de un tío 
que ya venía con varios años de experiencia y ahí nos abrieron la puerta para un primer caso real en la ciudad de 
Guadalupe, en el área metropolitana. Y lo mejor de eso fue que nos abrieron la puerta fue meternos a ver los procesos 
de gobierno, ver dónde, si, donde no, sin que les diera pena el esto es un mugrero, no es que sea la realidad que te 
impresiona porque te das cuenta que hacia afuera pareciera que más o menos funciona una ciudad, pero hacia adentro 
parece que está todo en llamas. Entonces, ahí aprendimos mucho de los procesos de gobierno, cómo pegarnos a las 
reglas, cómo Aunque nosotros queríamos ofrecer tecnología que se reﬂejara en ambos lugares, o sea hacia adentro de 
gobierno como eﬁciencia, pero hacia afuera, con los ciudadanos como transparencia o conﬁanza. Entonces, cómo 
poder darle gusto a ambos? Porque si le da 100 por ciento gusto al ciudadano, pues no necesariamente se va a ver 
bien el político, porque después pueden haber un montón de y la típica. Y siempre lo que se ve como gobierno federal 
diciendo no es que no fui yo, fue la administración anterior. Eso pasa en todos los niveles de gobierno. Entonces 
muchas veces es cierto. Si estoy tomando malas decisiones, pero en realidad estoy tomando las mejores con el 
presupuesto que tengo y los contratos que vengo arrastrando de tres o cuatro administraciones anteriores. Entonces 
ahí hay que caminar mucho hand in hand con el cliente, con el usuario, ponernos empáticos, aprender sus reglas del 
juego. Cuestiones que decía Suárez, que todo esto que está súper eﬁciente en la plataforma lo tengo que quitar porque 
no cumple con la ley o con la reglamentación. Entonces, ahí, ahí empezamos a hacer un balance entre adaptarlo a los 
procesos, pero al mismo tiempo ayuda a los estirarlos a que actualicen políticas públicas, etcétera, para que reformen 
sus procesos. Y después de eso tuvimos la suerte de trabajar con otra ciudad en el centro del país, con Tlalnepantla, 
en el estado de México, y a partir de ahí vencimos dos mitos interesantes. Primero, que para vender el gobierno no se 
necesitan contactos. Como todo mundo piensa, si llegamos a Tlalnepantla y vendimos y no conocíamos a nadie. 
Estábamos en Monterrey. Entonces ahí, desmitiﬁcando muchas cosas, hubo cero corrupción. Nadie nos pidió moches, 
no dimos moche a nadie y entonces desmitiﬁcan tanto que dijimos que éramos dos personas haciendo todo un 
montón de bots, pero nada más dos personas, seres humanos que entonces con dos clientes era suﬁciente. Imagínate 
tener 10 clientes, esto sería una súper empresa y dos personas comunes atender a 10 clientes. Entonces ahí 
empezamos con ciertas premisas explorar el mercado global y ahí cambiamos otra vez de la sensación que de inicio 
era usuario principal, ciudadano, ahora usuario principal, gobiernos o servidores públicos. Y ahora empezamos a dirigir 
la conversación hacia aliados o partners. Posicionarnos en el Foro Económico con Shaper es hoy con Wii yields a 
través de KAB, que es el Banco de Desarrollo América Latina, de UNICEF, de ONU-Hábitat en general cuerpos 
diferentes de la ONU. También está PNUD ahí con la OCD, con el Banco Interamericano. Y entonces, qué pasa? Ahora 
que cuando dirigen la conversación estos multilaterales dejas de hablar individualmente uno a uno con los municipios o 
con los gobiernos, y ahí la posibilidad de incidir es, tengo un cliente que es UNICEF y a través de Unicef estoy llegando 
a 10 gobiernos, varias implementaciones con diferentes personas. Es ahí la herramienta. Al ﬁnal es operada por los 
servidores públicos por Secretaría de Gobierno en inglés Government Villacís y a veces son direcciones o ministerios o 
cambian en español. Tenemos mil maneras de llamarlo y los gobiernos se organizan en diferentes zonas o secretarías, 
otras direcciones, otros institutos, otros ministerios. Hay de todo. En inglés siempre es globalmente. Entonces esos son 
nuestros operadores de la plataforma. A quién le dirigimos la conversación en los municipios típicamente es alguien de 
planeación estratégica, o el alcalde, o el gobernador, o alguien de nivel presidencial o nacional, dependiendo de por 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
89
==PAGE:91==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
dónde vayamos y en general las conversaciones son ven, te voy a dar esta tecnología que te va a ayudar, que conoce 
tus procesos. Pero además, por caminar conmigo vas a caminar cerquita de ﬁnanciamientos, de credenciales 
importantes y de foros importantes. Por ejemplo, ahora indirectamente, en realidad, pero uno de nuestros clientes, 
digamos el cliente más cercano que hoy tenemos y quien nos está dejando entrar a más profundidades, más 
profundidades es San Nicolás, aqui en el area metropolitana Monterrey, y con ello llevamos dos años trabajando, 
aunque un año realmente no operaciones. Y con suerte este es el año en donde sale la plataforma digital ya en forma. 
Mucho trabajo como In House, más que más que hacia afuera. Pero con ellos, por la ﬁlosofía que tienen, muy 
compartida con nosotros. Ellos están muy cerca, también con ONU-Hábitat. Ellos tienen un contrato importante con 
ONU-Hábitat para hacer planeación de desarrollo y más bien para que su plan de desarrollo urbano esté muy en línea 
con los Objetivos de Desarrollo Sostenible. Entonces ahí entendimos que hablábamos el mismo idioma y luego, ahora 
en febrero, es el foro urbano, el WUF. Le llaman World Urban Forum en Abu Dabi y ONU-Hábitat invita a San Nicolás 
para que cuente su historia y aparte, por proyectos que yo tengo con ellos en Bolivia, pero me invitan a mí también. 
Entonces ahí se vuelve una experiencia muy buena, muy cercana al usuario, porque, literal, estábamos en una sala 
sentados en donde yo estaba presentando con mi cliente a un lado que había llegado indirectamente y por el otro lado 
con mi partner, que es  ONUHabitat. Entonces es ese ese acercamiento lo que más ha valido para nosotros y estamos 
hablando de Latinoamérica en Abu Dabi y pareciera como que no tiene sentido una cosa con la otra. Pero 
representaba muy bien el trabajo que hemos estado haciendo, el acercamiento que hemos estado haciendo con 
diferentes users, Al que le hablo, que es el visionario, que es el multilateral, que se puede acercar a muchos gobiernos, 
pero el que al ﬁnal es el beneﬁciario o el usuario principal, que es el cliente, que es la municipalidad o la ciudad. Así es 
como hemos ido más a cómo llegamos al día de hoy. Con quienes trabajamos, que es la otra parte de la pregunta. 
Bueno, San Nicolás es uno de ellos. Hay un montón de conversaciones avanzando en muchos sentidos. Hemos 
servido blockchain para municipios en Costa Rica, certiﬁcados y preparados para incluso Academia, para empresas 
que venden vinos, para artesanos. Comunidades vulnerables, sobre todo en el norte de Argentina y en el sur de 
México. Entonces, bueno, ahí hay un poco, se ha empezado a dispersar o a diversiﬁcar más que expresar el portafolio 
de quienes habíamos tecnología. Empezamos como un poco medio a quien se deje. Sobre todo porque en tiempos de 
coronavirus y pensando que estamos en México de base en Argentina, tenemos equipo a México el próximo año es 
electoral. No es este un montón de incertidumbre, dos años de incertidumbre electoral, otro virus. 
Researcher: [00:10:40] Me decías que son dos personas, es tu partner y tú, pero tienes a alguien en cada municipio o 
cada proyecto?, por así decirlo 
OS City: [00:11:04] Empezamos muy en forma que era el segundo año, en realidad el primer año de la empresa, 
cuando todavía éramos dos. Ahí empezamos a trabajar muy de cerca con otras dos empresas, uno de Argentina que 
se llama Pings Consulting y otra de la Ciudad México, que se llama Data 4. Entonces Data 4 nos ayudaba con 
desarrollo, con análisis de datos, básicamente con Manpower. Como se dice, con recurso humano para las cosas que 
no nos alcanzaba el ancho de banda a mi socio y a mí, y la parte de argentina nos ayudaba con la parte política. Todo 
el equipo hoy en Argentina son doctorados en Ciencias Políticas y en Economía. Nosotros somos tecnólogos entonces, 
como dicen "brains and muscles in politic and technology". Entonces nos reunimos y empezamos a trabajar mucho. 
Tuve un cliente, otro cliente, otro cliente, al punto que todos los clientes que teníamos nosotros eran los mismos que 
tenía Data 4, los mismos que tenía Prins Consulting. Entonces era como estamos descentralizando el valor de una 
empresa en tres. A lo mejor hacemos una sola cosa que valga más y ya somos un solo equipo y ahí nosotros nos 
llamamos Smart City y ahí es donde viene el cambio a OS City donde hacemos. El martes nos volvemos cuatro socios, 
que era el director de Data 4, el director de Prins Consulting y los dos es Smart. Y ya tenemos un equipo de otras dos 
personas en Argentina. Allá son tres en Buenos Aires. En Ciudad de México tenemos siete. Y acá en Monterrey somos 
dos. Somos 12. 
Researcher: [00:12:41] Y cómo llevan la comunicación entonces entre todos ustedes, interno del equipo? 
OS City: [00:12:48] Sí. Eso también ha sido o ha sido una súper oportunidad? Porque al ser siete en la Ciudad de 
México y en donde hay oﬁcinas, entonces es el equipo que ya se conocía hasta cuatro más tres personas que 
agregamos en su momento y otras que se fueron. Y aunque todos nos conocemos y nos llevamos muy bien y todo, se 
genera una división muy chistosa de los presenciales y remotos. No era difícil ver a un equipo, pero ahorita, a raíz de lo 
del tema del virus y quedarte en casa, decidimos por ﬁn full remote y eso espero que actualice o reviva de una manera 
más formal, más viva cómo nos comunicamos? Por qué? Tipicamente lo que pasaba es se hablan en persona en la 
oﬁcina, se hablan en un grupo de Telegram y nos hablamos en las herramientas oﬁciales de Google su año? Nunca nos 
mandamos mails. Es rarísimo. Ahora entre los socios sí, pero entre el equipo y empleados todos. No es más directo en 
chat un hangout en Google? Básicamente es así como así es como lo hacemos a través del Google suit para esas 
herramientas. Y eso es lo que hemos estado utilizando para videollamadas, para chat, etc.. Aunque los que estaban en 
la oﬁcina presencial y uno de los socios estaban muy acostumbrados a usar Telegram, entonces todavía no lo 
abandona. Entonces hay un grupo de Telegram donde están todos ellos. No estamos ni los de Argentina ni los de 
Monterrey. Soy medio Fear Missing Out, pero en sí es Hangout, Hangout Chat y con los socios también tenemos un 
grupo de WhatsApp. Básicamente entre Telegram, las herramientas del Google Suit y WhatsApp, como lo vamos 
haciendo. 
Researcher: [00:14:40] Entonces me decías que son 3 areas, por así decirlo. Qué son las tres empresas que se inician 
este merge. Se siguen dividiendo las actividades de esa manera o si ha sido con un poco más de mezclar? 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
90
==PAGE:92==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
OS City: [00:14:55] Sí, aunque estábamos muy marcados al principio, las tres empresas en realidad son dos cosas. 
Básicamente son una que lideran dos de los socios y otras que lideramos a todos los socios. La parte de la parte del 
expertise, el posicionamiento de la venta, del hablar con el cliente, de educar al cliente de toda la parte de marketing y 
ventas, por así decirlo, y el posicionamiento de la marca o el vernos como expertos en todo esto. Lo que pasó de WUF 
hace dos semanas. Todo ese tipo de posicionamiento de individuos de la empresa. Hacemos el socio de argentina y yo 
entonces yo soy como el tecnólogo inﬁltrado en la parte de política y gobierno y él es el politólogo que conoce muy 
bien de tecnología. Entonces hemos sabido a hablar y acompañarnos muy bien en las reuniones de venta y en todo 
ese frente que es más administrativo y venta. Y la otra parte es más innovación y desarrollo continuo y project 
management. Entre los otros dos socios, uno está muy en forma con Project Management en ciertos temas, en ciertos 
módulos de la plataforma, con dos personas del equipo, y el otro está con otras dos personas del equipo. Entonces, en 
un medio descentralizado hay un libro muy chino que se llama Extreme Ownership. Yōko se llama el autor. Es es muy 
bueno como habla del centralized command, son exmilitares. Entonces cuentan unas historias lindas de cómo hacer 
ese tema de liderazgo. Para ﬁnes de dividir al equipo de una manera que no se genere como dispersión, sino más bien 
acción descentralizada. Y así es como nos hemos organizando en desarrollo. Hay como dos grupos grandes. Tenemos 
un diseñador que es como el que aglutina todos los mundos, no digamos para todos. Usamos los que vendemos, lo 
usan los que están en un modelo, o sea, los del otro modelo de tantas partes de diseñadores. Hay un analista de datos 
que también se mete a todas las canchas. Hay un programador con un montón de expertise que también se mete un 
poco a todas las canchas y luego los otros tres están como más de base, como caballito de batalla. Entonces ellos se 
enfocan muchísimo más en sacar el trabajo del día a día y sacar las funcionalidades pendientes de tecnologia. 
Researcher: [00:17:26] Cuál es tu puesto Chuy? Es fundador y ... 
OS City: [00:17:30] Yo funciono como el CEO de la empresa. La realidad es que todas las decisiones que votó el 
trabajo en si del CEO lo hacemos más entre los cuatro socios. Y como yo fui el que junto a todos y el que puso sobre la 
mesa como yo soy, como el eje de conﬁanza entre ellos, también me ubicó como el CEO, y después las mismas 
credenciales. El gobernador y esto y el otro que hicieron que hacia fuera se viera mejor. 
Researcher: [00:18:06] Sobre los programas y actividades que marcaste ayer en la encuesta como Incubadora, 
Aceleradora, Funding por parte privada, integrado por expertos y networking. Me puedes contar un poquito más de las 
experiencias si fue antes, tal vez de que se juntaran o en qué punto fue que tuvieron estas experiencias. 
OS City: [00:18:37] Si mira la parte de incubación, tuvimos mucha suerte de tener la oportunidad. Incubar en Silicon 
Valley, al mismo tiempo que fue muy positivo, fue muy negativo porque nada más estaba yo. Toda la jugada me la puse 
yo solito y era aprovechar en realidad lo que podía haber sido o haber sido mucho mejor. Era una cuestión monetaria. 
No invitaban todo pagado a uno solo. Entonces por el macillo fue con lo de Singularity University, Singularity University 
Ventures.  Vamos ahí veníamos cocinando las ideas y ahí todavía éramos tres empresas. Ya empezaba a tener caras 
2017. Justamente ya empezaba a tener cara de nos vamos a centrar en mi cabeza y ya empezaba a medio 
maquiavélico a cómo los convenzo a los 4 de entonces, porque en realidad era decirle al de México y al de Buenos 
Aires dejen sus empresas y hagamos una sola, y al de Monterrey decirle tener ﬁfty- ﬁfty Vamos a tener 25:4. No sé si 
será bien interesante pasar por esa fase, nos vamos y luego la incubación nos sirvió mucho para saber en realidad 
cómo sé qué estamos haciendo, qué queremos hacer, que nazca, qué estamos sembrando. Hay mercado, no hay 
mercado. Estamos locos porque le vendimos a 2 a los clientes o realmente si existen muchísimos más clientes. Venían 
preguntas como de verdad herramientas anti-corrupción al sector birregional de Latinoamérica, que es corrupto por 
naturaleza? Entonces, cómo se hace esto, es una falacia, entonces ahí nos ayudaba mucho a pensar en ese tipo de 
cosas, a entender mucho la dinámica de Silicon Valley y también saber si realmente lo que queríamos era levantar 
capital o buscar algo por ventas. Ahí decidimos que realmente no al venture capital para una empresa de Wall Street. 
No hace sentido por que normalmente el venture capital busca atracción, buscar revenido, busca qué recurrentes 
busca y son cosas que no tienes en gobiernos adentrada. Una mente con gobierno tarda de 10 a 12 meses al 
inversionista que quiere ver qué has hecho en un año y le dices a hacer una venta grande. Nuestra acción entonces es 
bien diferente. El mundo de Wall Street al mismo tiempo? No sé. Por ejemplo, ahorita uno de los socios tiene injerencia 
en una empresa de una escuela para desarrolladores y entonces él dice lo que 650 clientes en la escuela de 
desarrolladores dan es lo que un cliente da en ese sitio. Entonces es muy diferente, tiene sus pros y sus contras. 
Entonces, bueno, ahí fue cuando empezamos a ver toda esa parte como hacia donde estábamos caminando y 2018 
empezamos a apuntarnos. 2019 pasamos por una aceleradora que es la de un Classic, que más allá realmente de 
darnos un contenido de aceleración y todo, nos trajo un crimen capital privado muy ﬂexible, básicamente como fondo 
perdido casi, casi a poquito. No es tanto público. También fueron 150,000 dólares, pero la realidad es que nos 
posicionó muy bien, porque una es una iniciativa que habla de Blockchain for good. Entonces eso nos posicionaba 
muy bien. Veníamos de varios premios por las cosas que habíamos hecho con Blockchain. Veníamos de una cancha 
que nos había dado premios por tecnología, con gobierno por otro, pero nadie, nunca un bakker tecnológico. 
Entonces, si acaso Google for Startups era el único que nos ayudaba, pero es muy online. No es como ver YouTube, 
aprender. Entonces, cuando vienen ellos nos dan oﬁcinas en Silicon Valley y nos invitan a lo otro. Nos dan, nos 
acercan, nos conectan con mentores. Entonces eso se empieza a poner más serio. Entonces, como ahora tenemos 
oﬁcinas en Ciudad de México, en Buenos Aires y en Silicon Valley. Qué pasó entonces? Realmente se sentía acelerada 
acelerar? Pues ahí viene. Viene muy buen momento y luego parte apalancado bastante bien con cuestiones como ir a 
Davos con el Foro Económico en 2018. Estuve allá y nos damos. Es el ejemplo de base o de facto de olimpiadas, de 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
91
==PAGE:93==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
networking. Entonces, para pajero entiéndase el nivel del networking de Davos. Son cuatro días en los que por decisión 
propia sólo tomaba jugo de zanahoria y agua sin comer para estar súper eﬁciente, dormir lo menos que puedas y vivir 
así. Evidentemente no es sostenible, pero solo son cuatro días. Entonces es agotador, pero andas como en una 
máquina robot, entonces ahí aprendes muy bien. Hacer networking. Hacia dónde va? Empiezas a entender que los 
negocios, más allá de decir al gobierno, se venden por contactos. Empieza a entender que no estás vendiendo nunca 
un gobierno, sino estás hablando con personas siempre, y ahí es donde empieza el día. En realidad, lo que estoy 
haciendo es venderme a través de la conﬁanza que generó con quien sea, con el multilateral, con la persona, con el 
mentor, con el member, con el que tú quieras. Y después de eso empezaron a pasar cosas súper románticas en donde, 
por ejemplo, hace poco hubo un tweet que lo tenemos todavía en la cuenta de arroba. A veces se estila más que una 
de las cabezas más importantes de la ONU, dice. Alerta. Hay un potencial game changer en temas de gobierno y no sé 
de qué sirve entonces eso. Eso nos empieza a acercar más y más personas. Seguimos sin board formal de la empresa, 
ni de advisors ni orden general, pero tenemos una red vial paisos súper potente. La combinación que tenemos del Foro 
Económico a la Organización de los Estados Americanos OEA y Singularity University. Son tres cosas súper, súper 
potentes en política, en cancha humanitaria, desarrollo económico y social en general y ambiental y aparte súper 
tecnólogos con singular. Entonces fue en Cuba este aceleradas y te pongo en la cancha con todas estas personas. Por 
ejemplo, ahora quedamos cursos de repente de blockchain para poner un poco mejor el contexto de que se trata. Pues 
ahí dice hoy Spyker, quien tai chi ha estado con Tim Berners-Lee, que traía esta iniciativa y que fundó la web, y Chui ha 
estado con Brayan BG, uno de los que es quien está con Jay Pledge. Entonces asegúrate que te da toda la película 
completa porque ya no eres cualquiera haciendo blockchain si no eres tú el que estuvo sentado brillo en vez de un 
dólar. Hablando de esto y playones, esta persona y eso se vuelve muchísimo más humano y potente, que es un poco 
como el resumen de todos sus programas de incubación, aceleración, mentores, networking. 
Researcher: [00:25:21] Entre todas estas experiencias, es obvio que te toca hacer mucho pitching empresarial, qué 
palabras son las que tú recuerdas que más repites?  
OS City: [00:25:42] Ah, pues ahora es eﬁciencia y conﬁanza. No es como nosotros o la organización en general puede 
ser más eﬁciente y generar más conﬁanza. Pero además es el valor que más agregamos a Gobierno el hacerte más 
ágil, más rápido, más digital, más remoto y al mismo tiempo más transparente, más conﬁable. Entonces, por un lado, 
también si lo veo desde el punto de tecnología, pues además de la normal, que es la nube o la base, que es la nube, 
pues usamos siempre dos tecnologías para todo inteligencia artiﬁcial blockchain y con inteligencia artiﬁcial. Hablamos 
de rapidez, de mejores tomas, de decisiones, es decir, ser más eﬁciente. Y con blockchain hablamos de la no manipula 
habilidad de información, la transparencia, el histórico, la trazabilidad y resumen la conﬁanza. Entonces eﬁciencia y 
conﬁanza es donde aprendimos a evolucionar y, por ejemplo, también algo importante que tiene que ver mucho con el 
cliente ﬁnal. La semana pasada me invitaban a una cosa que le están llamando el Kloster Anticorrupción y entonces 
quieren educar y generar contenidos. Y todo con un Consejo Anticorrupción acá en Nuevo León. Yo decía era yo el 
centro, pero llamémosle el Kloster de la conﬁanza o algo así. Entonces, porque ya no me gusta verme asociado a la 
palabra anticorrupción, porque la gente no escucha anticorrupción, escucha corrupción. Entonces al ﬁnal, si tú te 
acercas con un político con una bandera anticorrupción, hueles feo. Un tema más de persecución, de evidenciarse 
como si fueras un periodista y un medio amarillista. Entonces, al hablar de conﬁanza todo cambia, no todo, todo 
cambia. Entonces son las dos palabras que más más aventamos, además de la incubadora que te decía ahorita. Eso 
fue un ejercicio muy chingón. Fueron seis semanas con la gente de Singularity y ahí, a las nueve de la mañana, todos 
los días te ponían un spot. Entonces, pinchadas desde el frente que te dijeran llevaban grupos de inversionistas de 
manera rando. No te avisaban de repente oigan, pakistán., súbanse elescenario. Pucha, no tengo presentación, no es 
lo que quieras. Tienes 20 minutos o 10 minutos, o 20 o tres minutos o después te ayudaban a construir materiales para 
20 minutos de pitching con la típica estrategia de de 16 bits y todo este tipo de cosas layfon 30, 20 minutos, máximo, 
etcétera. Lo preparaban lo pulidas te hartas de tanto que ensayadas y lo tenía ya listo. Aquí iba a ser el delivery, pero el 
delivery iba a ser en cuatro minutos. Ahí aprendimos a ser muy puntuales y también a que siempre los piquetes son un 
material vivo. No se nunca vas a tener un piquete deﬁnitivo. Es más, el que crees que es el deﬁnitivo. Siempre le 
cambias tres o cuatro cosas, dependiendo de quién se lo vas a pinchar. 
[00:28:33] Y cuando te toca explicar tecnología a alguien que normalmente no entiende o no forma parte de quien toma 
las decisiones en esa parte, como explican el proceso. 
[00:28:48] Nuestra realidad es que es bastante cómodo y chiﬂado en eso, porque el Lucas tiene 10 años siendo 
profesor en la Universidad de Buenos Aires, ya entonces sus dotes pedagógicos, su rol académico, su rol de 
politólogo, su vacunando politólogo y el conocimiento que él tiene de tecnología, eso facilita todo. Así, hasta hace unas 
semanas estábamos en Uruguay enseñando a lo que fuera que en México la CFE Comisión de Energía no es del 
Gobierno. Es un sector de una división de gobiernos y la UTEC se llama y estábamos ahí enseñando. Y yo veo a Lucas 
explicar blockchain y te quedas con una sensación de qué bueno que se quedó en mi equipo, porque normalmente 
como tecnólogo, aunque quieras, terminas muy técnico o diciendo cosas que terminan siendo muy técnicas. Entonces 
ahí, a través de Lucas, yo he aprendido mucho a mediar, a hablar el idioma político en idioma más, más humano y 
menos técnico, menos ingenieril. Y al mismo tiempo hemos aprendido también, digamos a veces, limitarnos, porque 
luego Lucas, cuando vende algo, lo vende con sus palabras. Pero tecnológicamente también se vuelve un reto crearlo. 
No quieres ser como un bacán, fuerte, interesante, que hemos ido puliendo en la dinámica. Somos o ya hemos 
funcionado muy bien, como una mancuerna de traducción de lo ingenieril a lo digital o digestiva, digerible y al mismo 
tiempo, pues hablar técnico si se necesita. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
92
==PAGE:94==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Researcher: [00:30:23] Entonces, pasando un poquito a la parte de metodologías que escribiste que se han usado 
Moonshots, me puedes compartir de esto? 
OS City: [00:30:35] Esto es, esto también es un aprendizaje constante. Desde hace dos años he querido crear con. 
Qué plan que plantea? Bien, los métodos y los procesos de la empresa. Sin embargo, siempre evolucionan, siempre 
cambia algo, siempre nos adaptamos a otra cosa y estamos actuando medio en contingencias, pero esas 
contingencias no tienen que ser nada más de corto plazo, sino que tienen que tener sentido a largo plazo. Si no es 
tiempo invertido al aumento, entonces eso ha hecho que los métodos nunca se respeten como me gustaría. Entonces, 
quizás también como ingeniero que dijera quisiera que fuera una maquinita que hiciera todo el tiempo agregando valor, 
vendiendo y produciendo, y nadie falla. No hay todxs desleal. Al ﬁnal siempre hay una persona detrás y esos 
problemas. Siempre hay un libro que se llama Lume Shots con l.h y que van muy de la mano de estas ideas de 
chupetín. Entonces es como haber haber equipo, queremos ir a donde no? Entonces ahí es cuando nos vimos como 
no sé qué tanto Bagram tengás de Singularity University, que tanto más o menos conozcas. Pero ves cómo han 
vendido esta idea de futuro en general? No en la industria, en la academia, en esto. Entonces ya se cuenta que 
nosotros entendimos que somos o que queremos jugar un rol de Singularity para gobiernos. No sé, yo te estoy 
haciendo ese futuro del gobierno, le estoy dando herramientas, te estoy dando conocimiento, te estoy ayudando a 
construir visión. Y entonces, qué estamos haciendo? Estamos haciendo las nuevas formas de gobierno. Eso es lo que 
estamos vendiendo una vez. Es una experiencia muy chistosa porque llegamos y dice estaban en Uruguay justamente 
a unos tipos. Ahí intentaba santera, potencia el negocio y todo, pero estaban medio borrachos. Y si ustedes que 
venden y yo dije no quiero empezar a explicar que plataforma, que el gobierno digital, que blogging, entonces les digo 
vendemos un sueño. Entonces desde empezadas de. Pero en realidad ese es un poco la idea detrás de los 
muchachos. No sé cuál es el sueño. Cómo te gustaría actuar con Gobierno Digital? Todo sencillo que no aparezca si no 
lo necesito, pero que esté cuando si lo necesito. Es un poco medio la relación que tenemos con nuestro banco. 
Confías que este el dinero? No quieres pensar en el banco, pero quieres que tu tarjeta pase y que la app funcione y 
que puedas moverte dinero. Entonces, ok, hacia allá queremos unir. Hay que cambiar estas reglas y esto no se va a 
poder. Y es que hay una ley que dice que gobierno no puede contratar en línea. Entonces empiezas a ver todos los 
retos, pero ya sabes a dónde quieres llegar, no, ya sabes ese mundo. Luego, para llegar allá empiezas a encontrar 
pequeños proyectos que pueden que puedan integrarse para ese camino, que te lleven en pequeños pasos en esa 
escalera hasta la luna y dividiendo el equipo en dos. La parte de los soñadores, la parte de visión, la parte de todo se 
puede y no pasa nada más como artística, más como si fuera la parte derecha del cerebro y luego los los soldiers. El 
concepto del libro no me gusta tanto porque es como decir que tenemos soldaditos y artistas. Después no sabes si el 
equipo se siente contentos, pero más o menos así pasa. Ahí hay gente que está en la línea de batalla, como un 
soldado, y hay gente que está en la línea de creación como un artista. Entonces ahí los llevas, los vas combinando, los 
vas ganando y entonces todo esto resultaba en diferentes productos tecnológicos, sobre todo. Entonces al ﬁnal dijimos 
Oye, lo que estamos haciendo es darle al gobierno un montón de ingredientes, pero nunca le doy la receta completa. 
Nunca le voy bien servido. Entonces ahí fue cuando aprendimos que el sueño que estamos haciendo es esta manera 
de interactuar con gobierno ideal. La estamos asistiendo pedacitos, pedacitos y entonces los módulos y todos los 
servicios desacoplado que teníamos los integramos en una plataforma y es muy parecido a lo que hacemos nosotros 
como individuos, que si tú tienes un iPhone tienes acceso al AppStore y entonces siempre tienes apps que te hacen 
más eﬁciente. Así empezamos con la idea de hoy. Entonces todos estos servicios que estamos haciendo, si los 
integramos en un solo lugar y les damos la oportunidad de que ellos prendan y apaguen, ni instalen ni se instalen cada 
módulo según sus necesidades. Cada uno de estos instala cada una de estas apps o módulos que están. Es un 
escaloncito en esa escalera hacia la luna, pero ya estamos todos en un mismo lugar y entonces les estamos haciendo 
este Stork, que es el gran sueño, el gran ideal en donde haya cosas donde tú digas oye, yo soy alcalde de Monterrey y 
resulta que Monterrey me dice mi plataforma que se parece mucho a Melbourne, Australia, en 2010. Entonces, dónde? 
Qué hizo Melbourne en 2010 y que usó APP? Tener la tecnología y tener las soluciones y las experiencias, así como 
muchas sinergias o cual acción sin fricción, por decirlo así, empezó a ser así. Así es como, en general, el método es 
tratar de apuntarle o perseguir ese gran ideal. Es alumna a dispararle hacia ella y tratar de ir construyendo un pedacito 
del camino hacia allá. 
Researcher: [00:35:38] Y consideras que lo hacen de acuerdo al libro o ha sido algo más que por instinto lo has ido 
construyendo y luego te diste cuenta que realmente se seguía una metodología? 
OS City: [00:35:52] Sí, pues al principio sí creamos mucho enforcement, no del libro esto de extreme ownership de 
Lungshoots, de Measure What Matters, que es cuando hablan de cómo te vas midiendo el performance con que 
OKR's. Eso lo hacemos todos los días, vamos viendo dónde vamos. Ahora que estamos full remote, también hacemos 
cositas muy simples que ayudan bastante. Qué hiciste ayer? Qué vas a hacer hoy? Dónde estás apuntando al ﬁnal de 
la semana y quién te está estorbando? Entonces te vas viendo, te vas viendo y en esa discusión vamos aprendiendo 
también otras cosas. Ayer vi una cosa que le llaman water coolers. Hay empresas que son completamente remotas, 
que ponen monumentos en el calendario, que es el workaholic. Entonces ponen llega esta hora, vamos a bailar, 
reglamentarse a la clase de baile, se mete a esta hora, es café. A esta hora de cervezas, a esta hora hay pilates y 
entonces el que quiera se mete la videollamada y lo hace. Entonces water coolers comenzó entonces todo ese tipo de 
cosas que vienen de los libros. Hay muchas que yo siento que funcionan muy bien, pero la verdad es que leo tanto, 
aunque ahorita no hemos estado en contingencia. Ya estaba detenido, pero leo un montón. El año pasado y como 70 
libros, entonces soy un problema en ese sentido para el equipo? No, porque ese día estoy ahí. Nos tardamos dos 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
93
==PAGE:95==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
meses en implementarlo y luego Chuy ya leyó tres cosas más y te dice mira, mejor unos por acá no. Entonces nunca, 
nunca hemos podido implementar y quizás es bueno. Tal como lo dicen los libros, no siempre terminas haciendo un 
libro en donde orgánicamente el equipo te fue llevando tiras, tiras las reglas del juego y luego dejas que el equipo solo 
vaya agarrando su forma. Y en otro. Claro, siempre muy orgánico también, porque eso les da sentido de pertenencia, 
no como vieron. El jefe nos impuso este método, sino más bien es todos juntos nos dimos cuenta de que así 
funcionamos mejor. 
Researcher: [00:37:44] Tienen bastante sentido. Que vaya si me lo han dicho en diferentes palabras. Creo que la 
fórmulaste muy bien. 
OS City: [00:37:59] Es juntarme con el político, con el politólogo. 
Researcher: [00:38:03] Siempre ayuda. Como parte del ﬁnal de la entrevista. Me contestabas por WhatsApp sobre el 
tipo de entrevistas que habían hecho. La última pregunta que te hice en la encuesta. Cómo conseguir insights de tus 
usuarios? Y me contestaste, les dimos la herramienta. Hoy digitalmente monitoreamos el uso. No sé si me puedes 
contar de ese proceso. 
[00:38:43] Pues mira la manera inicial de saber si la plataforma que estábamos haciendo era usable y fácil. Tenía buen 
Ux. Si era intuitiva en general era ver que mi mamá la usara, de entrada asi fue y fue el municipio de Guadalupe. 
Contrató mi mamá porque mi mamá era la que realmente les abría la puerta. Así llegaron a ese punto, entonces literal. 
Empezamos con pláticas con mamá para ver si funcionaba y si era útil, y si era entendible, si estaba fácil. Mi mamá es 
una persona que tiene 60 años, va a cumplir 60 este años, entonces eso fue como el primer acercamiento al primer 
usuario y después, ya que lo usaban los operadores, nosotros veíamos varias cosas desde Google Analytics para ver 
en dónde están entrando Macon. Dedican más tiempo esto o lo otro, hasta mapas de calor que usábamos ya no los 
usamos porque fuimos aprendiendo y lo que hemos dejando y vamos evolucionando cosas, pero usábamos mapas de 
calor que veías donde se mantenía el mouse, donde te clavan más hacia dónde se dirigían. Todo este tipo de cositas 
como Optimist se llama la empresa usando sus servicios y luego fuimos migrando más a nuevas herramientas que nos 
ayudan no solo desde el punto de vista de usabilidad, sino aparte para descubrir y organizar blogs. Entonces, errores 
en el código. Entonces ahí, por ejemplo, usamos una cosa que se llama Lock Rocket. Te va guardando videos de lo 
que vas haciendo, entonces a un usuario le está moviendo esto, el otro te cuida. Privacidad, ves y todo, pero ves 
dónde se está moviendo, ves, ves donde cometió el error, ves qué le dijo el sistema, entonces eso ayuda muchísimo. 
Para cuando un cliente te habla y te dice oye, tuve un problema, a ver a qué horas a esta hora te vas a los rocket, te 
vas al lugar y lo agarras y lo llevas a jetlag. La es donde nos organizamos desde lo técnico para. Aquí está el problema, 
no hay quien resuelva, ya lo asignas y todo no se mete en la cadenita de producción de software de calidad. Entonces 
esa era la manera como más discreta de estar cerquita el cliente. Porque también pensábamos y le pregunto, pues me 
siempre me dice todo bien. Si alguien que sabe que existe, sirve y que no. Entonces este es lo más discreto y criollo, lo 
más, lo más útil. Pero también hemos hecho otras cosas, como encuestas tipo Tipton. No mandamos un tip forum y es 
como la sentido. La recomendarías? Te ha funcionado? Sientes que trabajarás mejor con herramientas de antes o 
conesta? Qué le falta? Qué le sobra? Qué le quitarías que te haría más fácil tu trabajo? Preguntas de ese tipo que nos 
han nos han traído feedback para. Ideas que teníamos, pues saber si realmente se usan o no hace mucho, por 
ejemplo, una de las cosas más más básicas es que siempre te dicen lo bueno es que tus herramientas funcionan muy 
bien, siempre y cuando la gente tenga Internet. Deberían de integrarse. Mesén. Esa es la típica cosa que nos dicen 
integrase. SMS Y de cien mil cosas que se comunican en la plataforma, cero o uno son SMS. La gente, la gente no lo 
hace, no habla por teléfono, sí tiene celular. Va a mandar exámenes. Entonces a ese tipo de funcionalidades las vas 
descubriendo conforme vas teniendo la herramienta más prendiéndole. 
Researcher: [00:42:00] Y para ﬁnalizar, algunas habilidades, soft skills que consideres fundamentales en este proceso 
de entender a tu cliente y a tu usuario? 
OS City: [00:42:16] Ah, pues pues creo que tiene mucho que ver con la empatía o con las maneras más básicas de ser 
humano. No es porque típicamente sea el real los memes que hay de usuarios tomándole el vaso de agua si por abajo. 
Eso pasa que dice suikotsu, como sí ocurrió hacer esto porque vivo aquí. Por qué hace esto? Entonces a él, si el estar 
bien abierto a cualquier escenario es importante? Aprendimos mucho que a los clientes no les interesa igual que el 
ciudadano, tanto que le resuelvan el problema como que lo escuches. Y es más importante escuchar que resolver. Eso 
es una realidad. Normalmente el ciudadano dice es que no me han resuelto nada, pero no, no es cierto, se queja. El 
que explota es porque, dicen, no me han contestado. No sé, no sé qué están haciendo. Si no me contestas, para mí no 
estás trabajando, pero si me contestas me hablas todos los días, aunque yo te pido que repare un bache. El bache 
tenga dos años. No pasa nada porque todos los días estás aquí escuchando. Entonces esa parte de escuchar, de estar 
ahí, nos pasa igual con los clientes. Así que estoy en un canal de WhatsApp siempre abierto. Responder lo más rápido 
que se pueda. Eso es vital, super, super vital. Y hacia adentro pasa parecido. O sea, yo al ﬁnal de cuentas yo sé 
programar las primeras cosas derrochen, las hice yo. Entonces, aunque tenemos el tipo de developers, yo conozco 
bien la plataforma. Yo sé desarrollarla. Yo soy el que habla, yo soy el que habla con el cliente. Entonces no tengo un 
gap entre lo que tú y me dijo que debía ser. Y el cliente y la manera de yo sí estoy en las dos canchas siempre. Maryse 
Y estoy con el cliente. Ya sé lo que el cliente quiere en su trabajo y lo súper fácil es cada dos meses. Tengo crisis de 
allá, yo lo hago todo. Entonces me pasa muchísimo. Entonces ya llevamos tres quarters en las que no me meto a 
programar y eso es bueno para eticos, dije. Para el equipo también, porque porque luego también es OShea, es un 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
94
==PAGE:96==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
poco desmotivante, al mismo tiempo que sienten bonito los programadores de que atruena más estable, sino también 
saber hacer las cosas. Conseguir eso les gusta, pero al mismo tiempo es ay, qué pena que tuvimos que hacer que Chui 
se metiera a hacer nuestra chamba y entonces eso es su pega. Ahorita yo espero que sea muy positivo también en el 
sentido de que a veces hay coronavirus y en lugar de que no quiero que no me corra en mi. Y ya sabemos que todos 
los socios de tres de los cuatro socios sabemos programar, a los empleados también les pone un poquito de presión? 
El sí, sí, sí tiró hueva. Lo van a hacer ellos. Es parecido con el cliente entonces tratarlo. Y ojo, que no suena, que sé 
hacer todo, pero siempre, como como he dicho, ese mexicano de que quien quiere entienda que la tienda. Pues tú 
estás ahí, tú te metes porque sabes que es la empresa, porque sabes cuánto dinero queda, porque saben las presiones 
que hay que hacer, porque sabes lo que gastas que tienes y el empleado no necesariamente lo ve. Entonces hay una 
ciudad donde hay un cierto hueco de empatía, que es el mismo con esa parte de nuevo de escucha, de estar ahí 
abierto, a provocar, provocar conversación. Y también es complejo, porque el cliente tiene agendas de político, de 
rockstar, de que atiende una vez cada tres meses y adentro pasa igual. Tener programadores que a veces son muy 
introvertidos y no les sacas que siempre puedes hablar si pones esto y lo otro y escribirlo. Y un whatsapp en una 
llamada. Y bueno, tú y yo solos caminando y pásale. Entonces, saber entender a las personas más allá del diálogo, en 
el sentido empático, es para mí lo más importante. 
Researcher: [00:46:07]  Y ya como última pregunta, dentro de todos tus años de experiencias. Cuál crees que es el 
aprendizaje más importante para realmente entender a tu cliente? 
OS City: [00:46:30] Yo creo que gran parte de las cosas que se hacen se hacen. Empiezas tú con una idea y la baja es 
el usuario y esperas ver cómo la use y muchas veces esperas adaptarte a las necesidades del cliente para que adopte. 
Y eso es lo traiciona muchas veces la causa original. O sea, por ejemplo, si si en la plataforma adaptaran los procesos 
de corrupción para que todos los clientes hubieran mas fácil, a lo mejor tendría más clientes si les facilitará la 
corrupción. Pero ese no es el valor de la empresa. No vendemos, no vendemos facilidad para robar dinero. Entonces? 
Aún escuchando el cliente, tienes que saber respetar el valor que tú quieres agregar y lo que tú quieres construir, 
entonces creo que lo más importante es al cliente lo que pida. No, no es cierto. Al cliente hacia donde lo quieras llevar. 
Eso es lo más valioso, porque si te dejas llevar por el cliente, lo que pida se prostituye la casa, se prostituye la cultura y 
la empresa se prostituye a los valores. Se prostituye tu sueño con el que empezaste a emprender, se prostituye todo. 
Le estás dando gusto a alguien más que construyendo ese futuro que tú querías construir? Si tienes clientes. Si está 
bien es porque encontraste un problema, porque hay una solución, porque hay un valor agregado. Pero en realidad 
siempre estabas emprendiendo, persiguiendo algo. Entonces, si después te dedicaste a darle gusto, qué estás 
haciendo? Es como cuando una relación de pareja te dicen Bueno, pues yo te voy a amar si haces esto y dejas de 
tomar y dejas de hacer esto y déjate caer. Y el fútbol no? Desde cuando empezamos con esas condiciones, que es 
muy natural. Ya como tema de pareja decir oye, no me quieres como soy o no me quieres. Entonces parecidos con el 
cliente es a ver, esto es la empresa, este es el producto, su valor que estoy agregando. Me encantaría encontrar ese 
balance en donde lo que a ti te gusta, pero que camina hacia el sueño que yo estoy creando, porque si no, entonces no 
me estás sumando. Y eso es bien complejo, es bien, bien complejo, sobre todo cuando no hay buenas ﬁnanzas. A qué 
estamos? Sacáis a la prostitución a que un ser humano individual. Podría caer entonces constituir la casa, prostituye el 
servicio, prostituyen los precios, entonces eso es lo más valioso, saber que aún cuando el cliente es lo más importante 
para la empresa. Sobre eso está el sueño, la visión y la razón por la que estás construyendo todo esto. Y ahí hay que 
saber que siempre sume y que siempre sume hacia ella. Quizás lo más importante también es saber que dinero va a 
haber y luego no va a haber. Eso es una realidad. Siempre te quedas sin dinero porque hay un montón de dinero. 
Siempre pasa siempre, siempre pasa algo. No sé cuántas personas. Claro, somos privilegiados por el trabajo, por lo 
que por las credenciales por donde estamos. Pero bueno, por esto mismo es rarísima la persona que emprendió y se 
murió de hambre. A nadie le pasa, a nadie le pasó el mismo networking. Vas encontrando ese valor? Hay una frase que 
me gusta mucho que dice que la fuente de energía más renovable son las conexiones humanas. Entonces ahí aprendes 
mucho y pierdes el miedo. Dejas de planear conforme el dinero y cuando haces, cuando estás en ese mundo, estás 
más empoderado para balancear el interés del cliente con el interés de tu propio usuario. Eso para mí lo más valioso. 
OS City: [00:49:51] Creo que gran parte de haber empezado ChuyCepada.com, además de lo de OS City, es porque 
en mi cabeza decía puedo vivir 200 años y no voy a acabar. Es lo que hay que hacer es compartir las historias y tratar 
de inspirar a que otros se pongan a chambear. Y con suerte, cuando me muera mucho se está actuando y habrá 
alcanzado más a través de los demás. 
Transcript OS City Interview (Traduction - English) 
Researcher: [00:00:00] If you want you can start by telling me a little bit about the project when it was started. What 
reason, and to what cities or in what areas are they working? 
OS City: [00:00:15] The project or the company is OS City and OS City is an evolution in reality. We started around 2010 
with quite civic issues, very, very dedicated towards citizenship in general and very focused on the Monterrey 
metropolitan area. I don't know if you were here in those years, but they were the worst of the issue of insecurity. So I 
was ﬁnishing the PhD, they were returning from Brazil and my PhD was to coordinate multiple robots. One of the 
coordination premises of the robots was that they knew how to send messages in a timely manner. So when they lost 
communication and found them, they would tell themselves in a timely manner that I have lived each one and one 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
95
==PAGE:97==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
could, without having had to experience the other, to be able to save mistakes. It is the way to do it eﬃciently and at 
some point, in that time of insecurity, because the premises of hear what is happening to us began, you can no longer 
go and wait for the truck or ask for a taxi, or stand on a corner and not be sure what is going on, if there is going to be a 
blockade or if they are going to kill other students in the other corner. Those kinds of things if they came to mind and 
there we began to organize the conversation on Twitter we made bots that generated hashtags more or less organized 
there. When the MTY follow is born and when the hashtags that later shaped the account of a civil association that 
today has many followers who are there in Monterrey and stayed as part of one, makes us at some point create the 
entire part of technology from them and then we got out and started bringing that voice into the hands of those who 
acted. So to see the main user as the citizen. Now we saw the main user as the public servant and then there we began 
to migrate premises and make tools and above all, to be much more empathetic with government, we were quite 
optimistic and idealistic and we started with a touch of reality. In reality it is not so much that the Government does not 
want to act, it is that it has 200-year rules that cannot change so easily and so they have to operate in this way. 
OS City: [00:02:45] We sold to the ﬁrst city with an uncle's company, because we also sold to the government, 
ultimately to our user. Ah, well this is like an impossible chicken and egg. You need to have a company with more than 
two proven years that the government provided to be able to sell the government. In other words, it is a startup that 
wants to sell for the ﬁrst time, you cannot do it, so it is to be fully shielded for the purposes of loving and other things 
that you also have to learn how to double. What we did at the time was to use the constructive concept of an uncle who 
already had several years of experience, and there they opened the door for us for a ﬁrst real case in the city of 
Guadalupe, in the metropolitan area. And the best thing about that was that they opened the door for us was to go see 
the government processes, see where, yes, where not, without feeling sorry this is a dump, not that it is the reality that 
impresses you because you you realize that outwards it seems that a city works more or less, but inwards it seems that 
everything is on ﬁre. So, there we learned a lot about the government processes, how to stick to the rules, how 
Although we wanted to oﬀer technology that was reﬂected in both places, that is, inside the government as eﬃciency, 
but outside, with citizens as transparency or trust . So how can we please both? Because if the citizen is 100 percent 
pleased, then the politician is not necessarily going to look good, because afterwards there can be a lot of and typical. 
And always what you see as a federal government saying is not that it was not me, it was the previous administration. 
That happens at all levels of government. So many times it's true. If I am making bad decisions, but in reality I am 
making the best ones with the budget that I have and the contracts that I have been drawing from three or four previous 
administrations. So there you have to walk a lot hand in hand with the client, with the user, get empathetic, learn their 
rules of the game. Issues that Suárez said, that all this that is super eﬃcient on the platform I have to remove because it 
does not comply with the law or regulation. So, there, there we began to make a balance between adapting it to the 
processes, but at the same time it helps to stretch them to update public policies, etc., so that they reform their 
processes. And after that we were lucky to work with another city in the center of the country, with Tlalnepantla, in the 
state of Mexico, and from there we overcame two interesting myths. First, that to sell the government you don't need 
contacts. As everyone thinks, if we arrived in Tlalnepantla and we sold and we didn't know anyone. We were in 
Monterrey. So there, demystifying many things, there was zero corruption. Nobody asked us for moches, we did not 
moche anyone and then they demystiﬁed so much that we said that we were two people doing a lot of bots, but 
nothing more than two people, human beings who then with two clients was enough. Imagine having 10 clients, this 
would be a super company and two ordinary people serve 10 clients. So there we started with certain premises to 
explore the global market and there we changed again from the feeling that at ﬁrst it was a main user, citizen, now a 
main user, governments or public servants. And now we begin to direct the conversation towards allies or partners. 
Positioning ourselves in the Economic Forum with Shaper is today with Wii yields through KAB, which is the 
Development Bank of Latin America, of UNICEF, of UN-Habitat in general diﬀerent bodies of the Un UNDP is also there 
with the OCD, with the Inter-American Bank. And then what happens? Now that when they lead the conversation these 
multilaterals stop talking individually one by one with the municipalities or with the governments, and there the 
possibility of inﬂuencing is, I have a client that is UNICEF and through Unicef I am reaching 10 governments, several 
implementations with diﬀerent people. There is the tool. In the end it is operated by public servants by the Government 
Secretariat in English Government Villacís and sometimes they are directorates or ministries or they change in Spanish. 
We have a thousand ways to call him and governments are organized in diﬀerent areas or secretariats, other 
directorates, other institutes, other ministries. There is everything. In English it is always global. So those are our 
platform operators. To whom we direct the conversation in the municipalities is typically someone of strategic planning, 
or the mayor, or the governor, or someone at the presidential or national level, depending on where we go and in 
general the talks are come, I will give you this technology that will help you, that knows your processes. But also, by 
walking with me you will walk close to ﬁnancing, important credentials and important forums. For example, now 
indirectly, actually, but one of our clients, let's say the closest client that we have today and who is letting us enter 
deeper, deeper is San Nicolás, here in the Monterrey metropolitan area, and with it we have two years working, 
although one year really no operations. And hopefully this is the year that the digital platform is already in shape. Much 
work as In House, more than more than outside. But with them, for the philosophy they have, very shared with us. They 
are very close, also with UN-Habitat. They have an important contract with UN-Habitat to do development planning and 
rather so that their urban development plan is very much in line with the Sustainable Development Goals. So there we 
understood that we spoke the same language and then, now in February, it is the urban forum, the WUF. They call it the 
World Urban Forum in Abu Dhabi and UN-Habitat invites Saint Nicholas to tell his story and apart, for projects that I 
have with them in Bolivia, but they invite me too. So there it becomes a very good experience, very close to the user, 
because, literally, we were in a sitting room where I was presenting with my client on one side who had arrived indirectly 
and on the other side with my partner, which is UNHabitat . So it is this approach that has been most valuable to us and 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
96
==PAGE:98==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
we are talking about Latin America in Abu Dhabi and it seems as if one thing does not make sense with the other. But it 
represented very well the work that we have been doing, the approach that we have been doing with diﬀerent users, to 
whom I speak, who is the visionary, who is the multilateral, who can approach many governments, but who in the end is 
the beneﬁciary or the main user, which is the client, which is the municipality or the city. This is how we have gone more 
to how we got to today. Who we work with, which is the other part of the question. Well, Saint Nicholas is one of them. 
There are a lot of conversations going on in many ways. We have served blockchain for municipalities in Costa Rica, 
certiﬁed and prepared for even Academia, for companies that sell wines, for artisans. Vulnerable communities, 
especially in northern Argentina and southern Mexico. So, well, there is a little, it has begun to disperse or diversify 
rather than express the portfolio of those of us who had technology. We start out as a little middle to whoever is left. 
Especially since in times of coronavirus and thinking that we are based in Mexico in Argentina, we have a team in 
Mexico next year is an election. This is not a lot of uncertainty, two years of electoral uncertainty, another virus. 
Researcher: [00:10:40] You told me there are two people, it is you and your partner, but do you have someone in each 
municipality or each project ?, so to speak 
OS City: [00:11:04] We started very well, it was the second year, actually the ﬁrst year of the company, when there were 
still two of us. There we began to work very closely with two other companies, one from Argentina called Pings 
Consulting and another from Mexico City, called Data 4. So Data 4 helped us with development, with data analysis, 
basically with Manpower. As it is said, with human resources for the things that the bandwidth did not reach my partner 
and me, and the part of Argentina helped us with the political part. The entire team today in Argentina has doctorates in 
Political Science and Economics. We are technologists then, as they say "brains and muscles in politics and 
technology". So we got together and started working hard. I had a client, another client, another client, to the point that 
all the clients that we had were the same that Data 4 had, the same that Prins Consulting had. So it was like we are 
decentralizing the value of one company into three. Maybe we do one thing that is worth more and we are already a 
single team and there we are called Smart City and that is where the change comes to OS City where we do. On 
Tuesday we became four partners, who was the director of Data 4, the director of Prins Consulting and both are Smart. 
And we already have a team of two other people in Argentina. There are three in Buenos Aires. In Mexico City we have 
seven. And here in Monterrey we are two. We are 12. 
Researcher: [00:12:41] And how do you carry the communication then between all of you, team intern? 
OS City: [00:12:48] Yes. Was that, or was it, a super opportunity? Because being seven in Mexico City and where there 
are oﬃces, then it is the team that already knew up to four plus three people that we added at the time and others who 
left. And although we all know each other and we get along very well and everything, a very funny division of the face-
to-face and remote is generated. It was not diﬃcult to see a team, but right now, as a result of the virus issue and 
staying at home, we ﬁnally decided full remote and I hope that it updates or revives in a more formal way, more alive 
how we communicate? Why? Typically what happened is they talk in person at the oﬃce, they talk in a group on 
Telegram and we talk to each other in the oﬃcial Google tools your year? We never send emails. It is very rare. Now 
among the partners yes, but between the team and all employees. Isn't a Google hangout more direct in chat? 
Basically, this is how we do it through the Google suit for those tools. And that is what we have been using for video 
calls, for chat, etc. Although those who were in the face-to-face oﬃce and one of the partners were very used to using 
Telegram, then they still have not abandoned it. So there is a Telegram group where all of them are. We are neither in 
Argentina nor in Monterrey. I am half Fear Missing Out, but it is itself Hangout, Hangout Chat and with the partners we 
also have a WhatsApp group. Basically between Telegram, the Google Suit tools and WhatsApp, as we are doing. 
Researcher: [00:14:40] So you were telling me there are 3 areas, so to speak. What are the three companies that start 
this merge? Do you keep dividing the activities that way or has it been with a little more mixing? 
OS City: [00:14:55] Yes, although we were very marked at the beginning, the three companies are actually two things. 
Basically they are one led by two of the partners and others that we lead all partners. The part of the part of expertise, 
the positioning of the sale, of talking to the client, of educating the client of the whole part of marketing and sales, so to 
speak, and the positioning of the brand or seeing ourselves as experts in everything this. What happened from WUF 
two weeks ago. All that type of positioning of individuals in the company. We become the partner of Argentina and I 
then I am like the technologist inﬁltrated in the part of politics and government and he is the political scientist who 
knows technology very well. So we have known how to speak and accompany each other very well in the sales 
meetings and in all that front that is more administrative and sales. And the other part is more innovation and 
continuous development and project management. Among the other two partners, one is very ﬁt with Project 
Management on certain issues, on certain modules of the platform, with two people from the team, and the other is with 
two other people from the team. So in a decentralized medium there is a very Chinese book called Extreme Ownership. 
Yōko is called the author. It is very good as it speaks of the centralized command, they are ex-military. So they tell some 
nice stories about how to make that leadership theme. For the purpose of dividing the team in a way that is not 
generated as dispersion, but rather decentralized action. And this is how we have organized ourselves in development. 
There are like two large groups. We have a designer who is like the one who brings together all the worlds, not to 
mention for everyone. We use those that we sell, those that are in one model use it, that is, those of the other model 
from so many designer parts. There is a data analyst who also goes to all courts. There is a programmer with a lot of 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
97
==PAGE:99==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
expertise who also gets a little into all the courts and then the other three are more like a base, like a workhorse. So 
they focus much more on taking out the day-to-day work and taking out the pending functionalities of technology. 
Researcher: [00:17:26] What is your position, Chuy? He is founder and ... 
OS City: [00:17:30] I function as the CEO of the company. The reality is that all the decisions that voted on the CEO's 
job we do more among the four partners. And since I was the one who together with everyone and the one who put on 
the table as I am, as the axis of trust between them, he also placed me as the CEO, and later the same credentials. The 
Governor and this and the other one that made him look better out. 
Researcher: [00:18:06] About the programs and activities that you marked yesterday in the survey such as Incubator, 
Accelerator, Funding by private parties, made up of experts and networking. Can you tell me a little more about the 
experiences if it was before, maybe they got together or at what point did you have these experiences? 
OS City: [00:18:37] If you look at the hatching part, we were very lucky to have the opportunity. Incubating in Silicon 
Valley, while it was very positive, was very negative because I was there. I put the whole play on my own and it was 
actually taking advantage of what could have been or had been much better. It was a monetary issue. They did not 
invite all paid to one. So the hammer went with Singularity University, Singularity University Ventures. We go there we 
came cooking ideas and there were still three companies. I was already starting to have faces 2017. I was already 
starting to have the face of we are going to focus on my head and I was already beginning to be half Machiavellian to 
how I convince them at 4 then, because it was actually telling Mexico and Buenos Aires leave their companies and let's 
do one, and Monterrey tell them to be ﬁfty-ﬁfty. We're going to have 25: 4. I do not know if it will be very interesting to 
go through that phase, we leave and then the incubation helped us a lot to really know how I know what we are doing, 
what we want to do, that it be born, what we are sowing. There is a market, there is no market. We are crazy because 
we sold to 2 customers or really if there are many more customers. Questions came as really anti-corruption tools to the 
bi-regional sector in Latin America, which is corrupt by nature? So how this is done is a fallacy, so there it helped us a 
lot to think about those kinds of things, to understand a lot the dynamics of Silicon Valley and also to know if what we 
really wanted was to raise capital or look for something for sales. There we decided not to really venture capital for a 
Wall Street company. It doesn't make sense because venture capital usually looks for attraction, searches for temper, 
looks for what recurrences it looks for and they are things that you don't have in deep governments. A govt mind takes 
10-12 months to the investor who wants to see what you've done in a year and tell him to make a big sale. Our action 
then is quite diﬀerent. The world of Wall Street at the same time? I dont know. For example, right now one of the 
partners has a stake in a developer school company and then he says what 650 clients at the developer school give is 
what a client gives on that site. So it is very diﬀerent, it has its pros and cons. So, well, that's when we started to see all 
that part as where we were walking and 2018 we started to sign up. 2019 we went through an accelerator that is that of 
a Classic, which beyond really giving us an acceleration content and everything, brought us a very ﬂexible private 
capital crime, basically as a lost fund almost, almost little by little. It is not so public. It was also $ 150,000, but the 
reality is that it positioned us very well, because one is an initiative that speaks of Blockchain for good. So that 
positioned us very well. We came from various awards for the things we had done with Blockchain. We came from a 
ﬁeld that had given us prizes for technology, with government by another, but nobody, never a technological bakker. So, 
if Google for Startups was the only one that helped us, but it is very online. It is not like watching YouTube, learning. So 
when they come they give us oﬃces in Silicon Valley and invite us to the other. They give us, they bring us closer, they 
connect us with mentors. So that starts to get more serious. So, as now we have oﬃces in Mexico City, Buenos Aires 
and Silicon Valley. What happened then? Did it really feel accelerated speed up? Well here it comes. The moment is 
very good and then part is leveraged quite well with issues such as going to Davos with the Economic Forum in 2018. I 
was there and we gave up. It is the basic or de facto example of the Olympics, of networking. So for pajero understand 
the level of Davos networking. These are four days in which, by my own decision, I only took carrot juice and water 
without eating to be super eﬃcient, sleep as little as possible and live like this. Obviously it is not sustainable, but it is 
only four days. So it is exhausting, but you walk like a robot machine, so you learn very well there. Networking. Where it 
goes? You begin to understand that businesses, beyond saying to the government, are sold by contacts. Start to 
understand that you are never selling a government, but you are always talking to people, and that is where the day 
begins. Actually, what I am doing is selling myself through the trust that I generated with whoever, with the multilateral, 
with the person, with the mentor, with the member, with whom you want. And after that, super romantic things began to 
happen where, for example, recently there was a tweet that we still have in the arroba account. Sometimes he styles 
more than one of the most important heads of the UN, he says. Alert. There is a potential game changer on government 
issues and I don't know what that is for then. That begins to bring us closer and more people. We still do not have a 
formal company board, advisors or general order, but we have a super powerful pays road network. The combination 
that we have from the Economic Forum to the Organization of American States OAS and Singularity University. They are 
three super things, super powerful in politics, in humanitarian ﬁelds, economic and social development in general and 
environmental, and apart from them, super technologists with singularities. So it was accelerated in Cuba and I put you 
on the court with all these people. For example, now we are suddenly left with blockchain courses to put the context in 
question a little better. Well there says today Spyker, who tai chi has been with Tim Berners-Lee, who brought this 
initiative and who founded the web, and Chui has He has been with Brayan BG, one of whom is who is with Jay Pledge. 
So make sure it gives you the whole movie because you're not just anybody doing blockchain anymore if it's not you 
who sat glitter instead of a dollar. Speaking of this and playones, this person and that becomes much more human and 
powerful, which is a bit like the summary of all his incubation, acceleration, mentoring, networking programs. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
98
==PAGE:100==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Researcher: [00:25:21] Among all these experiences, it is obvious that you have to do a lot of business pitching, what 
words do you remember the most? 
OS City: [00:25:42] Ah, well now it's eﬃciency and conﬁdence. It is not like us or the organization in general can be 
more eﬃcient and generate more conﬁdence. But it is also the value that we add the most to Government to make you 
more agile, faster, more digital, more remote and at the same time more transparent, more reliable. So, on the one hand, 
also if I see it from the technology point of view, because in addition to the normal one, which is the cloud or the base, 
which is the cloud, we always use two technologies for all blockchain artiﬁcial intelligence and artiﬁcial intelligence. We 
are talking about speed, better decisions, decisions, that is, being more eﬃcient. And with blockchain we talk about not 
manipulating information ability, transparency, history, traceability and summarize trust. So eﬃciency and trust is where 
we learned to evolve and, for example, also something important that has a lot to do with the end customer. Last week 
they invited me to something that they are calling the Anti-Corruption Kloster and so they want to educate and generate 
content. And all with an Anticorruption Council here in Nuevo León. I said I was the center, but let's call it the Kloster of 
trust or something. So, because I no longer like to see myself associated with the word anti-corruption, because people 
don't listen to anti-corruption, they hear corruption. So in the end, if you approach a politician with an anti-corruption 
ﬂag, you smell ugly. One more subject of persecution, of showing yourself as if you were a journalist and a yellow 
media. So, when talking about trust, everything changes, not everything, everything changes. So these are the two 
words that we fan the most, in addition to the incubator that I was saying right now. That was a really cool exercise. It 
was six weeks with the people from Singularity and there, at nine in the morning, they put a spot on you every day. So, 
pricked from the front they told you they were carrying groups of investors in a weird way. They didn't warn you 
suddenly, hey, pakistan, get on the stage. Pucha, I have no introduction, it is not what you want. You have 20 minutes or 
10 minutes, or 20 or three minutes or later, they helped you to build materials for 20 minutes of pitching with the typical 
16-bit strategy and all these kinds of things, layfon 30, 20 minutes, maximum, etc. They prepared it so polished you got 
so tired of being rehearsed and I had it ready. Here was going to be the delivery, but the delivery was going to be in four 
minutes. There we learned to be very punctual and also that pickets are always a living material. I don't know you're 
ever going to have a deﬁnitive picket line. What's more, the one you think is the deﬁnitive one. You always change three 
or four things, depending on who you are going to prick. 
Researcher: [00:25:21] Among all these experiences, it is obvious that you have to do a lot of business pitching, what 
words do you remember the most? 
OS City: [00:25:42] Ah, well now it's eﬃciency and conﬁdence. It is not like us or the organization in general can be 
more eﬃcient and generate more conﬁdence. But it is also the value that we add the most to Government to make you 
more agile, faster, more digital, more remote and at the same time more transparent, more reliable. So, on the one hand, 
also if I see it from the technology point of view, because in addition to the normal one, which is the cloud or the base, 
which is the cloud, we always use two technologies for all blockchain artiﬁcial intelligence and artiﬁcial intelligence. We 
are talking about speed, better decisions, decisions, that is, being more eﬃcient. And with blockchain we talk about not 
manipulating information ability, transparency, history, traceability and summarize trust. So eﬃciency and trust is where 
we learned to evolve and, for example, also something important that has a lot to do with the end customer. Last week 
they invited me to something that they are calling the Anti-Corruption Kloster and so they want to educate and generate 
content. And all with an Anticorruption Council here in Nuevo León. I said I was the center, but let's call it the Kloster of 
trust or something. So, because I no longer like to see myself associated with the word anti-corruption, because people 
don't listen to anti-corruption, they hear corruption. So in the end, if you approach a politician with an anti-corruption 
ﬂag, you smell ugly. One more subject of persecution, of showing yourself as if you were a journalist and a yellow 
media. So, when talking about trust, everything changes, not everything, everything changes. So these are the two 
words that we fan the most, in addition to the incubator that I was saying right now. That was a really cool exercise. It 
was six weeks with the people from Singularity and there, at nine in the morning, they put a spot on you every day. So, 
pricked from the front they told you they were carrying groups of investors in a weird way. They didn't warn you 
suddenly, hey, pakistan, get on the stage. Pucha, I have no introduction, it is not what you want. You have 20 minutes or 
10 minutes, or 20 or three minutes or later, they helped you to build materials for 20 minutes of pitching with the typical 
16-bit strategy and all these kinds of things, layfon 30, 20 minutes, maximum, etc. They prepared it so polished you got 
so tired of being rehearsed and I had it ready. Here was going to be the delivery, but the delivery was going to be in four 
minutes. There we learned to be very punctual and also that pickets are always a living material. I don't know you're 
ever going to have a deﬁnitive picket line. What's more, the one you think is the deﬁnitive one. You always change three 
or four things, depending on who you are going to prick. 
Researcher: [00:28:33] And when it's your turn to explain technology to someone who normally doesn't understand or 
is not part of the decision maker in that part, as they explain the process. 
OS City: [00:28:48] Our reality is that he is quite comfortable and crazy about that, because Lucas has been teaching at 
the University of Buenos Aires for 10 years, and then his pedagogical skills, his academic role, his role as political 
scientist, his vaccinating political scientist and the knowledge that he has of technology, that facilitates everything. 
Thus, until a few weeks ago we were in Uruguay teaching whatever it was that in Mexico the CFE Energy Commission 
is not from the Government. It is a sector of a government division and the UTEC is called and we were teaching there. 
And I see Lucas explain blockchain and you are left with a feeling of how good he stayed in my team, because normally 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
99
==PAGE:101==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
as a technologist, even if you want, you end up being very technical or saying things that end up being very technical. 
So there, through Lucas, I have learned a lot to mediate, to speak the political language in a more, more humane and 
less technical, less engineering language. And at the same time we have also learned, let's say sometimes, to limit 
ourselves, because later Lucas, when he sells something, sells it with his words. But technologically it also becomes a 
challenge to create it. You don't want to be like a strong, interesting bacan, which we have been polishing in the 
dynamics. We are or have already worked very well, as a translation cuﬄink from the engineering to the digital or 
digestive, digestible and at the same time, well, technical speaking if needed. 
Researcher: [00:30:23] So, going a little bit to the part of methodologies you wrote that Moonshots have been used, 
can you share with me about this? 
OS City: [00:30:35] This is, this is also constant learning. For two years I have wanted to create with. What plan do you 
propose? Well, the methods and processes of the company. However, they always evolve, something always changes, 
we always adapt to something else and we are acting half in contingencies, but those contingencies do not have to be 
anything more short term, they have to make sense in the long term. If it is not time invested to the increase, then that 
has caused that the methods never respect as I would like. So, perhaps also as an engineer who said I wanted it to be a 
little machine that did all the time adding value, selling and producing, and nobody fails. There are no disloyal todxs. In 
the end there is always a person behind and those problems. There is always a book called Lume Shots with l.h that 
goes hand in hand with these lollipop ideas. So it's like having a team, we want to go where not? So that's when we 
saw how I don't know how much Bagram you have of Singularity University, that you more or less know. But do you see 
how they have sold this idea of the future in general? Not in industry, in academia, in this. Then it is said that we 
understood that we are or that we want to play a role of Singularity for governments. I don't know, I'm making you that 
government future, I'm giving you tools, I'm giving you knowledge, I'm helping you build vision. And then what are we 
doing? We are making new forms of government. That is what we are selling once. It is a very funny experience 
because we arrived and says they were in Uruguay just some guys. There he tried santera, strengthens the business 
and everything, but they were half drunk. And if you who sell and I said I don't want to start explaining what platform, 
what digital government, what blogging, then I tell you we sell a dream. So since started of. But actually that's kind of 
the idea behind the boys. I don't know what the dream is. How would you like to act with Digital Government? 
Everything simple that does not appear if I do not need it, but that is when I do need it. The relationship we have with 
our bank is a bit medium. Do you trust this money? You don't want to think about the bank, but you want your card to 
pass and the app works and you can move money. So, ok, that's where we want to unite. You have to change these 
rules and this is not going to be able. And there is a law that says that the government cannot hire online. So you start 
to see all the challenges, but you know where you want to go, no, you know that world. Then, to get there you start to 
ﬁnd small projects that may be integrated for that path, that take you in small steps on that stairway to the moon and 
dividing the team in two. The part of the dreamers, the part of vision, the part of everything is possible and nothing else 
happens as artistic, more as if it were the right part of the brain and then the soldiers. I don't like the concept of the 
book so much because it's like saying that we have soldiers and artists. Afterwards you don't know if the team is 
happy, but more or less it happens. There are people who are on the battle line, like a soldier, and there are people who 
are on the line of creation like an artist. So there you take them, you combine them, you earn them and then all this 
resulted in diﬀerent technological products, especially. So in the end we said hey, what we're doing is giving the 
government a bunch of ingredients, but I never give you the full recipe. I never serve him well. So that's when we 
learned that the dream we are making is this way of interacting with ideal government. We are assisting her bits and 
pieces and then the modules and all the decoupled services that we had are integrated into a platform and it is very 
similar to what we as individuals do, that if you have an iPhone you have access to the AppStore and then you always 
have apps that make you more eﬃcient. So we started with today's idea. So all these services that we are doing, if we 
integrate them in one place and give them the opportunity to turn them on and oﬀ, neither install nor install each 
module according to their needs. Each of these installs each of these apps or modules that are. It is a little step on that 
stairway to the moon, but we are all in the same place and then we are making this Stork, which is the great dream, the 
great ideal where there are things where you say hey, I am the mayor of Monterrey and As it turns out, Monterrey tells 
me my platform that looks a lot like Melbourne, Australia, in 2010. So where? What did Melbourne do in 2010 and who 
used APP? Having the technology and having the solutions and the experiences. This is how, in general, the method is 
to try to target or pursue that great ideal. She is a student to shoot at her and try to build a bit of the way there. 
Researcher: [00:35:38] And do you consider that they do it according to the book or was it something else that 
instinctively you have been building and then you realized that a methodology was really followed? 
OS City: [00:35:52] Yes, because at the beginning we did create a lot of enforcement, not from the extremely ownership 
book of Lungshoots, from Measure What Matters, which is when they talk about how you are measuring the 
performance with which OKR's. We do that every day, we see where we are going. Now that we are full remote, we also 
do very simple things that help a lot. What did you do yesterday? What are you going to do today? Where are you 
aiming at the end of the week and who is hindering you? So you see yourself, you see yourself and in that discussion 
we also learn other things. Yesterday I saw a thing called water coolers. There are companies that are completely 
remote, that put monuments on the calendar, which is the workaholic. Then they put this time, we are going to dance, 
regulate the dance class, get into this hour, it is coﬀee. At this hour of beers, at this hour there is Pilates and then 
whoever wants gets in the video call and does it. So water coolers then started all those kinds of things that come from 
books. There are many that I feel work very well, but the truth is that I read so much, although we have not been in 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
100
==PAGE:102==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
contingency right now. I was already arrested, but I read a lot. Last year and like 70 books, then am I a problem in that 
regard for the team? No, because that day I am there. It took us two months to implement it, and then Chuy already 
read three more things and says to you, look, better some around here, no. So we have never, never been able to 
implement and perhaps it is good. As the books say, you don't always end up making a book where the team 
organically brought you strips, you throw the rules of the game and then you let the team just grab its shape. And in 
another. Of course, always very organic too, because that gives them a sense of belonging, not as they saw. The boss 
imposed this method on us, but rather it is all together that we realized that this is how we work better. 
Researcher: [00:37:44] They make a lot of sense. That goes if they have told me in diﬀerent words. I think you 
formulated it very well. 
OS City: [00:37:59] It is to get together with the politician, with the political scientist. 
Researcher: [00:38:03] It always helps. As part of the end of the interview. You answered me on WhatsApp about the 
type of interviews they had done. The last question I asked you in the survey. How to get insights from your users? And 
you answered me, we gave them the tool. Today we digitally monitor usage. I don't know if you can tell me about that 
process. 
[00:38:43] Well look at the initial way of knowing if the platform we were making was usable and easy. He had good Ux. 
If it was intuitive in general it was to see that my mother used it, from the start it was and was the municipality of 
Guadalupe. My mom hired because my mom was the one who really opened the door for them. So they got to that 
point, then literal. We started talking to mom to see if it worked and if it was useful, and if it was understandable, if it 
was easy. My mom is a person who is 60 years old, she will turn 60 this year, so that was like the ﬁrst approach to the 
ﬁrst user and then, since the operators used it, we saw several things from Google Analytics to see where they are 
entering Macon. They spend more time this or that, even heat maps that we used, we no longer use them because we 
were learning and what we have left and we are evolving things, but we used heat maps that you saw where the mouse 
kept, where they nail you more to where were heading. All this type of little things like Optimist is called the company 
using its services and then we were migrating more to new tools that help us not only from the point of view of usability, 
but also to discover and organize blogs. So, errors in the code. So there, for example, we use a thing called Lock 
Rocket. It keeps you videos of what you are doing, so one user is moving this, the other takes care of you. Privacy, you 
see and everything, but you see where it is moving, you see, you see where it made the mistake, you see what the 
system told it, so that helps a lot. For when a client talks to you and says hey, I had a problem, to see what time at this 
time you go to the rocket, you go to the place and you grab it and take it to jetlag. The is where we organize ourselves 
from the technical to. Here is the problem, there is no one to solve, you already assign it and everything does not get 
into the chain of production of quality software. So that was the most discreet way of being close to the client. Because 
we also thought and I ask him, because he always tells me everything right. If someone who knows that exists, serves 
and does not. So this is the most discreet and Creole, the most, the most useful. But we have also done other things, 
like Tipton-type surveys. We do not send a tip forum and it is like the sense. Would you recommend it? Has it worked 
for you? Do you feel that you will work better with tools from before or with this one? What is missing? What is left 
over? What would you take away that would make your job easier? Questions of that type that have brought us 
feedback for. Ideas we had, well, knowing if they were really used or not long ago, for example, one of the most basic 
things is that they always tell you how good it is that your tools work very well, as long as people have the Internet. 
They should be integrated. Mesén. That is the typical thing that we are told to integrate. SMS And of a hundred 
thousand things communicated on the platform, zero or one is SMS. People, people don't, they don't talk on the 
phone, they do have a cell phone. He's going to send tests. So you discover these types of functionalities as you have 
the most important tool. 
Researcher: [00:42:00] And ﬁnally, some skills, soft skills that you consider fundamental in this process of 
understanding your client and your user? 
OS City: [00:42:16] Ah, well I think it has a lot to do with empathy or with the most basic ways of being human. It is not 
because it is typically the real memes that there are of users taking the glass of water from below. That happens that 
suikotsu says, as if this happened because I live here. Why do this? So to him, if being open to any stage is important? 
We learned a lot that customers are not interested in the same way as the citizen, both to solve the problem and to 
listen to it. And it is more important to listen than to solve. That is a reality. Normally the citizen says that they have not 
solved anything for me, but no, it is not true, he complains. The one that explodes is because, they say, they haven't 
answered me. I don't know, I don't know what they're doing. If you do not answer me, you are not working for me, but if 
you answer me you speak to me every day, although I ask you to repair a pothole. The pothole is two years old. Nothing 
happens because every day you are here listening. So that part of listening, of being there, happens to us the same with 
clients. So I am on a WhatsApp channel always open. Respond as quickly as possible. That is vital, super, super vital. 
And similar happens inside. I mean, at the end of the day I know how to program the ﬁrst things to waste, I did them 
myself. So, although we have the type of developers, I know the platform well. I know how to develop it. I am the one 
who talks, I am the one who talks to the client. So I don't have a gap between what you and he said it should be. And 
the client and the way I am always on both courts. Maryse And I'm with the client. I already know what the client wants 
in his work and the super easy thing is every two months. I have crisis there, I do everything. Then a lot happens to me. 
So we already have three quarters in which I don't get into programming and that's good for ethicists, I said. For the 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
101
==PAGE:103==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
team too, because then it is also OShea, it is a little demotivating, at the same time that the programmers feel that it is 
thundering more stable, but also knowing how to do things. They like to achieve that, but at the same time it is ay, what 
a shame we had to make Chui get into doing our job and then that is their fault. Right now I hope that it will be very 
positive also in the sense that there are sometimes coronaviruses and instead of that I don't want it not to come on me. 
And we already know that all the partners of three of the four partners know how to program, does the employees also 
put a little pressure? Yes, yes, yes he threw a roe. They are going to do it. It is similar to the client then to treat it. And 
beware, it doesn't sound, I know how to do everything, but always, as I said, that Mexican who wants to understand 
that the store. Well, you are there, you get in because you know what the company is, because you know how much 
money is left, because they know the pressures that have to be done, because you know what you spend and the 
employee does not necessarily see it. So there is a city where there is a certain gap of empathy, which is the same with 
that part of listening again, of being there open, to provoke, provoke conversation. And it is also complex, because the 
client has a politician's agenda, that of a rockstar, that he attends once every three months and the same happens 
inside. Having programmers who are sometimes very introverted and you do not take them out that you can always talk 
if you put this and that and write it. And a whatsapp in a call. And well, you and I just walk by and pass him. So knowing 
how to understand people beyond dialogue, in the empathic sense, is the most important thing for me. 
Researcher: [00:46:07] And as a last question, within all your years of experience. What do you think is the most 
important learning to really understand your client? 
OS City: [00:46:30] I think a lot of the things that are done are done. You start with an idea and the low is the user and 
you expect to see how I use it and many times you hope to adapt to the needs of the client so that it adopts. And that is 
what the original cause betrays many times. In other words, if, on the platform, they adapted the corruption processes 
so that all the clients had an easier time, perhaps they would have more clients if the corruption would facilitate them. 
But that is not the value of the company. We do not sell, we do not sell facilities to steal money. So? Even listening to 
the client, you have to know how to respect the value that you want to add and what you want to build, so I think that 
the most important thing is what the client asks for. No it's not true. The client where you want to take it. That is the 
most valuable thing, because if you let yourself be carried away by the client, what you ask for, the house is prostituted, 
the culture is prostituted and the company is prostituted to values. Your dream with which you started, is prostituted, 
everything is prostituted. Are you giving someone more pleasure than building that future that you wanted to build? If 
you have clients. If it's okay, it's because you found a problem, because there is a solution, because there is added 
value. But in reality you were always starting, chasing something. So, if afterwards you dedicated yourself to pleasing 
him, what are you doing? It's like when a couple says, Well, I'm going to love you if you do this and stop drinking and 
stop doing this and let yourself fall. And football isn't it? Since when we started with those conditions, which is very 
natural. As a couple issue, say hey, you don't love me the way I am or you don't love me. So similar to the customer is 
to see, this is the company, this is the product, its value that I am adding. I would love to ﬁnd that balance where what 
you like, but that walks towards the dream that I am creating, because if not, then you are not adding me. And that is 
very complex, it is well, very complex, especially when there are no good ﬁnances. What are we You bring prostitution 
to be an individual human being. It could then fall to constitute the house, prostitute the service, prostitute the prices, 
then that is the most valuable thing, knowing that even when the client is the most important thing for the company. On 
top of that is the dream, the vision and the reason why you are building all this. And there you have to know that it 
always adds and always adds to it. Perhaps the most important thing is also to know what money there will be and then 
there will not be. That is a reality. You always run out of money because there is a lot of money. Something always 
happens, something always happens. I don't know how many people. Sure, we are privileged for the job, so for the 
credentials where we are. But hey, for this very reason the person who started and died of hunger is very rare. It doesn't 
happen to anyone, the same networking happened to no one. Are you ﬁnding that value? There is a phrase that I really 
like that says the most renewable energy source is human connections. So there you learn a lot and lose your fear. You 
stop planning according to money and when you do, when you are in that world, you are more empowered to balance 
the interest of the client with the interest of your own user. That for me the most valuable. 
OS City: [00:49:51] I think much of having started ChuyCepada.com, in addition to the OS City thing, is because in my 
head I said I can live 200 years and I will not ﬁnish. It is what you have to do is share the stories and try to inspire others 
to start dancing. And hopefully, when I die a lot you are acting and will have achieved more through others. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
102
==PAGE:104==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Appendix 8 - Transcript Kabaan Interview (Original - Spanish) 
Researcher: [00:00:00] Bueno, si quieres empezar contándome un poquito de la startup, de cuándo inició.  Si tienen 
alguna misión o visión ya deﬁnida. 
Kabaan: [00:00:43] Sí, bueno, básicamente un poquito la historia, porque es un previo. Cuando empezó todo no es así. 
Yo durante la universidad no hubo intercambio académico en Brasil, en Rebañando del sur, conozco a Lojana 
Montañez, es mi socia. Ella estudia, estudia Ingeniería Ambiental y Sanitaria y por el grupo de intercambio te empiezas 
a llevar con todo el mundo y así no mexicanos, con la colombiana y muy padre. Entonces, en 2016 se casa una amiga 
de nosotros del intercambio y ella viene a la boda y a conocer México y todo el rollo. Acá se queda en mi casa y yo le 
digo pues sí que estamos platicando una noche así, literalmente nocturnas. Sentíamos y la situación que yo vivía en 
ese momento de trabajo no era placentera, veía que no crecía, veía que por ser mujer, como ese sector de la 
construcción, me pagaban menos. Lo veía como que no me visualizaban estar ahí mas y creciendo porque no había la 
manera de crecer tanto. Si me gustaba y aprendí, pero no me llenaba. Y congeniamos muchísimo porque ella estaba 
pasando por la situación similar, y me dice ahorita que ya estoy con la tesis ﬁnal de reciclaje del asfalto. Lo hice súper 
interesante. A ver, cuéntame más. Ya platicaremos y quelle y guardados como con la visión de es que no queramos ser 
empleadas, queremos poner nuestro negocio. Así cañón que nunca pensamos que íbamos a tener porque no, ella 
venia a una boda, nada que ver. Acaba la plática. Y muchachones que sabes qué? Me encanta la idea. Yo soy súper 
amante del medio ambiente, me encanta el reciclarlo. Cómo puedo cuidar el agua y la luz y más porque es el sector 
que yo manejo. Le dije oye, sabes que hay que hacerlo en México y será muy bien, pero con mi maestro de la tesis así 
quedó. Y al viajar a México yo viajo en mi web de viaje porque amenizaban esa crisis. Y qué más quería hacer mi 
trabajo. No voy a viajar eso y lo primero es que desde que y ahora que vas a trabajar, ya vamos a empezar. Y estando 
así, mi papa, trabajando en la universidad, me dice Oye, acaba de salir una convocatoria de Emprende, metan el 
proyecto que me contaste. Y yo, obviamente no va a pasar porque fue una plática anoche y no, no veía nada profundo. 
Y me dijo, no, es que sea muy interesante, metelo total, vamos. En cuanto mi socio habló con su maestra Tesis, dijimos 
que sí y empezamos a transnochar. Ella en Colombia, to en México y así. Aplicamos, quedamos, pasamos a la 
siguiente etapa, la siguiente etapa y la etapa ﬁnal era montar un stand, dar un pitch de tres minutos. Luego ya ya se 
lleva a la gente montando estar con mi familia, porque yo estaba lejos y todo se llevaba por tener pitch, con la novedad 
que ganamos en primer lugar medioambiental. Entonces fue así como que no manches, pues si   va por buen camino, 
claro. Estuvimos investigando y en México no hacen nada, destacó. Aprovechamiento. Solamente una empresa, pero 
eso sí, como su. Si usted no es como muy llamada la atención de esa empresa, pues aunque digan otras cosas y 
también lo hacen ok ya. Bueno, total, entonces empezamos con eso. Con ese dinero que ganamos no sabíamos que 
íbamos a ganar dinero o que íbamos a incubar el proyecto en la incubadora de la universidad. El momento no había 
plazos, tenía que ser hasta el año siguiente y traemos un ritmo súper acelerado para quedarnos con ese dinero. Yo voy 
a una conferencia en Monterrey y casualidades azares del destino, no sé. O pues era el director de la incubadora del 
Tec de León. Al ﬁnal de la conferencia que me interesa mucho que nos apoye como podemos hacer mi proyecto y 
estás adentro, mándame estos datos y obviamente estaba la incubadora. Dinero que ganamos lo reinvertimos cinco 
años íbamos y veníamos. Yo iba y venía algo más para las clases y la incubación. No sé si fue un desgaste, pues de 
todo no hay desmadre. Pero aprobó un divertido verdad. Mi socia renunció a su trabajo. Ahora será cuatro meses. Yo 
los dos primeros meses me la aventé sola y casi una instancia renuncia a juicio. Viene a México a los últimos dos 
meses de la incubación y seguimos innovando. Tuvimos la oportunidad de al mismo tiempo incubados desarrollo 
económico, instituciones que se llama de Shem, que si desarrollamos emprendedores, aunque. Este era esa, 
justamente la convocatoria la sacaron de municipio para las mujeres exclusivamente. Nos íbamos a la par, pero más 
atrasadas porque era un montón de gente, éramos como 50 o más por clase o gente súper personalizado y muy 
diferente. Ya estando en eso decían, nos dicen oigan, esta la convocatoria de Premio Nacional del Emprendedor Max 
CLOC que se cierra en tres días. Vengan a Carlos Ciudad si lo hacemos. Bueno, pues ándale, ñam, me voy a hacer la 
convocatoria, así que los tiempos que estábamos en total acabábamos la incubación en el Tec. Con posibilidad de 
tener inversionistas, porque si nos tocó ya lo hicieron como un tipo sartán. 60 Con inversionistas que habían llevado a 
orillas de TACC y sí, varios los mandaron buques y ahora con nosotros y nos enfocamos especialmente solamente a 
una empresa que hiciera del giro de la construcción, porque nosotros eran como inversionistas, pero eran zapateros o 
eran así de que Inacap a veces no creemos que es importante que se conozca el sector. Claro, complicado, pues. 
Entonces, bueno, ya nos enfocamos a la. Estamos en gestiones con ellos súper, súper, súper, súper bien y ya casi a 
punto de ﬁrmar de que si Atlas. O no? Así fue como nuestro primer golpe, bajo o no, esa vez no llorando y desmadres 
medio. Pues muy sí, sí nos gustó, la verdad, pero yo le dije a mañana cierra una puerta, se abren dos, no pasa nada. Y 
entonces ya digamos que la opción de quedarnos en León ya no era una posibilidad. Nos regresamos a la y yo 
empiezo aquí a gestionar. 
Kabaan: [00:08:19] Somos tres socios, mi socia, ingeniera ambiental y sanitaria, yo como arquitecta, su profesor de 
tesis que es ingeniero civil, doctor. Somos mucha diferencia de edad, pero digamos que el conocimiento técnico y 
especialidad de la pistola y nosotros somos como las células multidisciplinares. Un día me llamaron, así de estamos en 
Ciudad de México, que nos da un pitch porque quedaste de ﬁnalista en el Premio Nacional de Emprendedor. Yo 
arranqué gritando, pues mi socio ya estaba de regreso en Colombia porque lo queremos hacer. No se acababa el 
dinero y en ese acto porque fue difícil, porque ella se quedaba en mi casa, imagínate dos mesas pegadas como 
siamesas. Así que la cuestión psicológica también a veces de estar invadiendo nuestro espacio vital, si empezó a 
afectar también dentro de todo lo que estábamos haciendo, porque yo soy muy hiperactiva, me gusta hablar con la 
gente y mi socia, es más tranquila, como que ve más una lista y empezo a haber muchos problemas. Bueno, ya me voy 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
103
==PAGE:105==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
a México. La entrevista. Bueno, resulta que como 10 categorías y publicamos a la primera categoría de ahí de 5000 
proyectos que aplicaba a nivel nacional, quedamos dentro de los cuatro que a nivel nacional éramos, que eran un 
auditorio enorme. Naﬁnsa En Ciudad de México se traspasa el Pichi. Todo estaba súper nerviosa. Fue la tercera. La 
tercera o el pitch. Y bueno, ya de ahí nos entrevistaban. Así que los demás superbién. Y ya se supone que se 
entregaba el premio en la Semana del Emprendedor. Nos invitan como. Como VIPS para el debate con Peña Nieto y 
así. Pues sí estuvimos, estábamos bien emocionadas porque parte vamos a dar una conferencia y en una salita, y si no 
se queda, pues con ni;as chiquitas, porque apenas estábamos agarrando vuelo y estábamos bien nerviosas porque a 
veces nos toca el premio, así que obviamente ya los ganadores ya sabían quién ganaba. Y Casual sabe que la chica 
que ganó muy buen proyecto, igual. Pero lo que me llamó la atención a varios es que casi todos los ganadores fueron 
casualmente del Estado de México. Entonces ya estaba como súper arreglado. Dijimos Bueno, pues es una 
experiencia contar ahí, entonces pues bueno, ande ahí, pero al haber quedado dentro de los mejores a nivel nacional, 
dijimos ya. Entonces termina eso. O no, y en ese inter ya hicimos la constitución de la empresa, marca y ahorita 
tenemos ya completo el plan de negocio, lo fuimos formando desde el inicio, desde el. Los de emprende de la 
universidad no empezamos a ver problemas, pues ha habido muchos cambios como mencionaba y se la cuesta, pues 
ahorita estamos en la etapa de que ya todo esto hace que nos metimos a unos premios latinoamericanos. Eso ya lo 
conversamos el año pasado, a ver qué pasa y si quedamos dentro de los mejores 500, mi sociedad que es de 
Colombia, Ecuador, porque era ahi la competencia y hay manera de poder ﬁnanciar una vida como rondas? No lo sé 
todo. Y sí, nos fue muy bien. Y lo padre es que el embajador de los PLB en México, su proyecto. Me interesa trabajar 
con ustedes para generar entre nosotros, otro Chavo y él un centro integral de residuos. Yo con las llantas Udes con los 
escombros y El Chavo este con electrónicos ya va perfecto y él es el que más no ayuda ahorita con la gestión del 
ﬁnanciamiento, porque el plan de negocios se ha ampliado muchísimo para la capacidad. Ahora que buscamos, así 
como en perfecta y comunicaremos bien fregonas, mucho dinero. Obviamente si no se logra, la idea es bajar la escala 
y empezar con un poco de eso. De entrada no creo que me excedí demasiado. 
Researcher: [00:13:24] No, no, no me diste entrada a muchas preguntas que también tengo este. Me mencionaste que 
está el profesor de tu socia, que está tu papá, estás tú, tu socia y alguien amás nada más. 
Kabaan: [00:13:39] Andrés y mi socia, mi socio, que era su jefe. Bueno, y yo nada más. OK, ok, ok, ok, entendí que él 
también les apoyaba, así como que insistió o sea que si no sigo tanto no hubiera ido muy bien. 
Researcher: [00:13:57] Está bien, pero él no es parte del equipo operativo tal cual o qué. Y normalmente trabajan 
ustedes como. Actividades individuales o trabajan juntos o cuál es la manera en que normalmente hacen la operación. 
Kabaan: [00:14:15] Mira, básicamente como lo hemos estado manejando, la encabezamos. El proyecto es muy 
sencillo. En conjunto hacemos muchísimas cosas, pero por ejemplo, la cuestión de la gestión y como hizo la única 
persona que está físicamente en México, me toca hacer muchos contactos y entregar oﬁcios, tener reuniones, bla, bla, 
bla. Cuando ella está acá, obviamente nos acompañamos y siempre estamos juntas como lo manejamos ahorita, pues 
son como las tres áreas principales. En cierto sentido yo soy como la cuestión de relaciones públicas gestió. Mi socio 
todo lo cuestión que tiene que ver con ambiental, métricas, impacto y todo esto hecho un poco más guiándome y algo 
técnico y socio como las cosas cociné mezcladas. De qué materiales? Sí, materiales? No miento. En teoría debería de 
ser así y dividimos las tres áreas. No lo hemos estado haciendo manuales de procesos y estamos justamente atorados 
en el manual de proceso de producción. Pero si nosotros no acarreamos en cierto sentido a mi socio es que 
necesitamos que nos mandes esto y estoy con él, aunque nos da largas porque obviamente ocupado tienen más cosas 
que hace tres meses atrás. Entonces podíamos usarlos para que si alguien o ganéis que acuérdense de esto o piensen 
en esto, sí que trabajamos. Creo yo que es bueno y no es lo que practicaba ayer, justamente porque. Siento yo que no 
me compete a mí saber una cosa técnica porque no es nada que yo voy a desarrollar. Lo que sí es bueno, porque para 
saber cómo se maneja toda la generalidad del proceso tragaldabas del conocimiento. Pero ya están a detalle de estar 
ahí con ellos. Oigan, es que también está mal. O piensen en esto bossa nova. Y siento que me desgasto cuando puedo 
estar haciendo otras cosas por hacer, por estar acá apoyándonos. 
Researcher: [00:16:19] Claro, y no solamente la comunicación, como la llevan a cabo, sobre todo ustedes, que están 
cada quien en un país diferente,  
Kabaan: [00:16:19] súper complicado, de verdad, súper complicado. Nomínimo les ha costado mucho. De hecho, 
cuando se vino ella era mucho más fácil quedarnos aquí. Madrugadas y ello. Yo como quiera soy desempleada, no soy 
desempleada, trabajo por mi cuenta y a la obra que yo traía, la construcción. Ya terminé, cómo supera la veintena más 
en mi casa trabajando. Entonces yo tengo tiempo muerto porque no hay reciprocidad, pues como se va perdiendo no 
sólo se está trabajando y mi socio también. Entonces tengo que acoplarme a los horarios que tengan ellos. Por 
ejemplo, hoy tuve Renana a las seis y media de la mañana porque ellos y media podían madrugar tatu para estar ahí 
trabajando. Es muy complicado luego que es más accesible. Es mi socia. Las dos somos como las que más estamos 
impulsando y así ando a nuestro juicio. Y es entendible, pues una persona mayor es profesor. Es trabajo, tal vez. Pero 
sí es muy desgastante y la cuestión aquí es que los tiempos son súper importante. Por ejemplo, ahorita sin este manual 
de procesos llevamos como dos, tres meses y no hemos podido acabar porque el ingeniero no se da el tiempo o nos 
dejan solos. Y echó una bronca, pero si le llaman le llamamos la atención porque hay que mentalizamos que te 
comprometas, no nos pongamos acarreando la gente en su compromiso, hay que sacarlo a tiempo y forma como se 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
104
==PAGE:106==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
tiene que hacer. La gestión que tuvimos que hacer para llegar a donde estamos, ya lo hicimos. Ahora tú es lo técnico. 
Boyens. Sí, sí, entendió, pero también es como David. 
Researcher: [00:18:15] Si te entiendo, te voy a preguntar más o menos si como era, pues la dinámica del equipo, 
considerando que tenían diferentes nacionalidades y contextos. Pero ya me contestaste básicamente también. 
Kabaan: [00:18:27] También esa parte de la ventaja o desventaja. 11. Mi socia fue su alumna nombre. Entre ellos no 
muy bien, a trabajar juntos y es un tipazo. Lo queremos mucho al ingeniero. El problema es que sus tiempos no nos 
priorizan y eso nos haría yo. Así que a ver, no nos acarrearán nadie. Estamos o no interesados y hay que sacarlo juntos. 
Y vamos a ver cómo está la cosa dentro, no? Sí, no sé qué complicado. La parte de situaciones también personales 
que quedan se nota. Por ejemplo, mi socia es otro costado, pero vivo en Bogotá. Tuvo que ser dolça. Vio a otro nuevo 
trabajo moverse de lugar. Ocho relatos. No tenía tiempo. Mi socio se acaba de separar de su esposa. Entonces es 
como volver a vivir solo y quejándose de que no es que tengo que lavarme, cocinar. Me echaba la charla cuando tengo 
tiempo, o sea, independiente de la situación personal que vivamos cada uno. Claro, pero sí, sí es muy complicado. 
Researcher: [00:19:43] Como cuánto tiempo dirias? Que cada quien invierte en la semana en el proyecto, porque 
vamos a por la que tú me dices. Siento que tú invierto y tus hijos invierten más horas. 
Kabaan: [00:19:57] Hemos invertido muchísimo más horas. Creo que el que hacer encuestas, ir a campo, ver a las 
gradas y buscar. Hemos gastado tiempo, gasolina, todo lo que tu imaginación. Osea, no te puedes ir como un tiempo, 
como AC o al aire, está muy irregular o en promedio yo creo que si nos aventamos unas 5, 4 y 5 horas, yo creo. Al día 
empezamos con Lomax más intenso, con un ojo clínico Allon que era de estar trabajando, hacer entrevistas y 
Conchobar a charlar, sí, sí, entre 5 y 7 horas, yo creo que si nos aventados, que era ser todo el día alguien realmente 
importante para ti y para ella, es como full time. O sea, los dos decimos como sea de lugar. Vamos a poner esa 
empresa de comenzar a repartir el porcentaje de la empresa. Ella y yo tenemos cada quien 40 y el niño tiene 20, 
aunque ya tiene su empresa de consultoría, todo y nada va mal. Pero como un apoyo externo, aunque sí es que fuese 
totalmente. VI que habías puesto que aparte de bien estado en la incubadora que posee el fondo privado y público, y 
ahora entiendo por qué es este la parte de mentoría de expertos. Te reﬁeres al socio? El socio y dentro de la incubación 
del Tequila Monterrey, todos nuestros mejores chemin. 
Researcher: [00:21:37] De casualidad acordaras de alguna herramienta o alguna experiencia que les haya dejado 
como un aprendizaje para seguir creciendo. O algo o algo que hayan visto dentro de estas experiencias que diga sabes 
que esto si lo tomamos y lo seguimos usando dentro de nuestra operación.  
Kabaan: [00:22:03] Como metodología nos pusieron al K+ y de hecho en las dos incubadoras de vivienda del TEC. 
Pero la herramienta yo que la manejan más padres en el Tec porque empiezan a desglosar por materias, o sea por un 
blog, mercadotecnia, ﬁnanzas. No se prototipado y así se y. Y si la seguimos usando? Fíjate que a mí no me como muy 
guapo hecho confunda, porque nosotros ya le vimos tantas veces que a veces como que nos encasillamos con la 
misma información y no vemos fuera de la caja. Porque para mí es importante ver más allá de lo que estábamos tan 
viciados con lo mismo. No veíamos niños en ellos, pero a ver, y tenemos que pedirle a compañeros de incubadas que 
ustedes que piensan o no sé si fue un poco muy complicado o qué sería lo que rescatas nuestro mentor, que nuestro 
como nuestro guía de nuestro proyecto. Si el sí nos supo guiar era súper ordenado y nos daba todo tipo de 
herramientas para hacer, como el diagrama de. Como nos decía. Como las actividades, picarlo es un programa con un 
tipo. Para hacer diagramas de ﬂujo. Cosas así. Tipo. Pero el orden de las manos más o menos poder tenerlas como 
todo en orden que seguí a todos yo. Pero la cosa es que a veces con Gustás ya estaba bien. Padrissa Súper ordenado, 
pero siento que, como en la práctica no es tan claro que a veces es bueno. El emprendimiento es así, no es como que 
sigas una línea. Tienes que ir buscando, picando y viendo por dónde, porque no hay más y es algo que no se ha 
llevado a cabo. Nosotros tenemos como base algunas empresas en Colombia. Por eso mi socio también conoce muy 
bien el tema, porque ya hay empresas allá, los hacen. De hecho, mis socios hicieron la ley en conjunto y socarrón 
fueron los que apoyaron para generar la ley. Se lleva a cabo en Colombia. Entonces muy bien el sistema, pero lo que 
nos pasó, por ejemplo, fue ya sabemos lo que hay en Colombia. Lo que hicimos, tropicalizar a México. Nos dimos 
cuenta que no iba a aplicar igual porque hicimos entonces que no, que sí se puede, porque no se logró hacer la venta o 
al cobrar por que dispongan tu camión en un centro y no aquí en México. Ya con la investigación, con las encuestas, 
das cuenta que por más que seamos latinoamericanos, o sea la mentalidad sí varía. Sí, sí, cambia totalmente. Qué 
dices? Oye, no nos esperaba o si los esperaba, entonces sí nos ha costado. Por esa parte de esa nación y no nos sirve 
de nada bueno que nos sirva. Se nos complica mucho más que no haya un apoyo del Gobierno para que se haga ese 
tipo de extenderse. 
Researcher: [00:25:17] Bueno, ustedes han tenido más apoyo por privados, verdad? 
Kabaan: [00:25:21] Sí, de hecho, justamente en la incubadora, el Tec, nuestro socio, nuestro socio, nuestro mentor, un 
amigo que es amigo del otro amigo, que tenía una máquina que puede hacer todo el proceso de trituración para hacer 
el prototipado. Vamos así por puros combates, por ángeles de la guarda. Cómo te ves? Agarras la emoción e interés 
porque hacer un cambio. Y aquí en agosto también logramos con un empresario que tiene una máquina de hacer lo 
mismo que yo porque les mueve o dicen sus actividades estas niñas aguantarlos. No sé si que cómo, que se 
emocionan con uno. Lo digo sin nada a cambio, porque realmente digo que igual al ﬁnal si buscan algo, pero bueno, 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
105
==PAGE:107==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
hasta que quede bien el resultado o no? Claro que este había ido al mercado que habían usado en Thinking y Lines 
aquí en el TEC. 
Researcher: [00:26:21] Si este saliera más o menos. Qué fue lo que más tomaron? 
Kabaan: [00:26:29] La verdad es que al ﬁnal, como todo, todo se simpliﬁcan cosa. Siento que a veces que la 
metodología es. Hace que el proceso sea un poco más fácil de digerir o de poder usarlo, pero que al ﬁnal no se te 
olvida realmente la metodología. Se estima progreso en más de un acuerdo, como se hace si se efectúa, rocé el 
resultado. Entonces este, No, no, no me acuerdo muy bien. No sé como va. De hecho lo tengo, si quieres te lo puedo 
pasar. Así las cosas, si quieres dar unas hojas donde Banesto y su mercado y que entonces empezábamos a bajarlo, 
pero a veces. Siento también que las metodologías on line son el punto de vista es que se vuelven tan simples que. 
Caes al olvido, pero no le das la profundidad necesaria para conocer a tu mercado, por ejemplo.No se me vuelve un 
poco, a veces estas son confusas, la verdad,.  
Researcher: [00:28:03] Te va a preguntar cómo hacen ustedes la estrategia para mejorar los prototipos? Todo lo que 
me habías contado. 
Kabaan: [00:28:31] La estrategia cuyo gustarles prueba y error, aunque chapos tenemos conocimiento de cómo se 
hace, por ejemplo, en España, como se hace en Colombia y aquí en México, que nos hemos topado con barreras, 
porque dentro del concepto que tenemos acá es que la gente súper puerca, la gente, no sabe separar la basura, o sea, 
inventar yo. Yo, por ejemplo, que trabajo con albañiles de intentar implementar drones, que por favor, esto va, se toca. 
Cada cuestión cultural en la región es un tema. Entonces desde ahí, sobre la fusión cultural, luego que pues las leyes 
no nos apoyan, el sector de la construcción súper contaminante y súper negligé intercambio, o sea, realmente nos ha 
costado mucho trabajo a nosotros dos representantes hemos ido con ingenieros, nos han dicho hay niñitas, ustedes 
no, no saben lo que están haciendo. Eso no sirve. El Gobierno no nos va ayudar, eso no va a pasar. 2:5 Y Podemos 
veni. Pues es que son mujeres ustedes que saben o se ven muy jóvenes. O sea, comentaron nos ha tocado y no digan 
qué les pasa. Claro que si tú lo haces con toda la intención de que se mejore el proceso y salen esas y sabes que tan 
bien como el sector es muy competitivo y candaya, en cierto sentido, sí. El hecho de que nosotros somos una 
competencia directa porque es directa a los materiales, que son los que son de maderas, explota, explota al ver el 
cerro y sacando los arenas y las grabaciones. Entonces lo que estamos evitando nosotros es que se explote. Entonces 
todos esos son monstruos que obviamente nos quieren y que os animáis que una niñita le van a mandar. Entonces la 
cuestión de que dicen que los mexicanos que estamos canga lejitos y jalan que anda así coil y si nos ha costado 
atentar o romper muchos aparatos. Y digo más que nada porque somos mujeres. Imagínate que dos niñas están ahí y 
no somos niñas. Pero si nos ven como niña, ah, sí, eso sí ha sido muy rudo. La verdad es que saben que estamos 
todos ahí, entre la Tierra y Bogotá, y ahí con los escombros. Pero lo que buscamos es demostrar eso, no que no por 
ser mujer no podamos hacerlo un esa entrada de eso el sector y el gobierno, osea vamos. No sé cuántas reuniones 
con municipio, con gobierno del estado. El gobernador lo hemos dicho. Sí, sí, sí las apoya. Está padrísimo, pero lo 
mismo le da atole con el dedo y no sabes, es muy cansado también para nosotros. Hicimos a ver si no le ven un 
beneﬁcio para nuestra ciudad o nuestro. Nos vamos a otro lado en Colombia, montados ya nada más buscar 
ﬁnanciamiento y irnos para allá. 
Researcher: [00:31:34] Exacto. Si te entiendo para aparte, este te va a preguntar cómo? Cómo hicieron ustedes esta 
parte de entender a tu cliente? O sabes lo que me dices que lograron entrar y andaban ahí con botas, con casco, todo 
sea realmente para ver cómo va el proceso, o sea, cómo llegaron a ese punto, quién las introdujo al ambiente o como 
me pasó a mí, me encanta siempre. 
Kabaan: [00:32:03] Siempre me ha encantado muchisimo la obra. Soy un profe encabezarla, Fundora, diseñando yo 
vamos a empezar así yo y mi socia igual yo también es que se mete mucho y así nos gustan. Sellanes de Colombia lo y 
yo también. Lo que mucho fue gestionar aquí en municipio y logramos entradas. Escombreras. Ella se fue con los de 
Medio Ambiente y con los residuos o algún sidekick del municipio y la llevaron a diferentes bancos. Tenían la 
separación de algunos de los material. Tuvimos que cargar camiones allá por el prototipado, rentamos camiones y 
fuimos a que recogieran los escombros, pero ciertos escombros mezclados no servían y ser muy raros las piezas. 
Teníamos que romper las manos. Rentamos un roto martillo quienes ahí moliendo el concreto o de que fotos está todo 
ahí documentado que conocemos y que si nos aventamos hacer las cosas no es así. Si nos gusta mucho el polvo. Es 
así como se empanizado y maltratas el cabello y la parte baja, pero nos gusta mucho y creo que eso es lo que nos 
mueve, que lo estamos haciendo y lo que hemos hecho lo hicimos basados en encuestas, arquitectos y de hecho las 
tengo. Están ahí hace 2 años y hemos hecho todo nuestro proceso ahí registrado. Nos han hecho entrevistas o 
sacraliza mucho, como el Premio Nacional. Todo este rollo obtuvo devengado ultraligeros en El Universal. Salimos 
periódicos de aquí de Aguascalientes en la televisión, luego también un premio de Grupo Salinas. Descuidarnos 
escuchó de querernos equivocarnos. Yo pertenezco al grupo Activarnos, pero antes no pertenecía. El premio era para 
el valor ciudadano. El año pasado y este concursé y sí nos dieron el premio. Entonces nos vamos a Ciudad de México 
con Salinas, Charalá. Pero lo que hago que? Me preocupó un poco si es que está bien padre, que te reconozcan, 
porque yo nunca. Que me reconocieran que publicaran no, pero el hecho que me frustra es no tener la planta física ya 
para decir ella por sumarme otra vez. De hecho, me dicen a veces mis amigos que está bien padre, pero no tienes 
nada. Yo sigo a quienes sí tienen razón, porque físicamente no lo hay, pero lo dice que es tan fácil bajar más de 10 
millones de pesos. A ver, dime cómo lo hago. Quién te los da? Quien me los da a quien me presta, que es interéses o 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
106
==PAGE:108==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Xaro? Y quieras o no, el hecho de que nos publiquen necesita padre, pero sí cierta frustración de nuestra parte. Si 
decimos que. Te quiero, quieren el reconocimiento exacto. Es, como no estamos viendo, tampoco chocante y por eso 
si seguimos buscando injustamente con el empresario que te digo de los p.-le de Monterrey y a medio ayudarnos a 
gestionar. Por su parte, mientras los estamos gestionando por nuestra parte para.Pues donde sea que primero se oye y 
en toda esta processo experiencia de años. 
Researcher: [00:35:41]  Qué habilidades tú consideras que son necesarias para para estar en la startup, tanto tanto 
como técnicas como soft skills con personal sencillo? 
Kabaan: [00:35:56] Pues mira. Yo creo que uno muy importante, la paciencia. Aseguró que nada pacientes me 
desesperaba muchísimo y decís que por qué no se qué, pero que el proyecto te impulsa o te mantienes y que la 
esperanza y la esperanza de la esperanza. Y hay una frase que siempre mi socia y yo decimos que si fuera fácil, todo 
mundo lo haría. No podemos dar por vencido y tirar la toalla. No hay manera. Ya llevábamos caminado tres años para 
que de repente tirarlo y no se mueva la cara de cuanto acaba algo personal. Allí tenía mi novio italiano. Pasado mi 
juventud, vente a vivir conmigo a Italia. Yo le dije OK, está padre. El problema es que tengo una empresa que quiero 
hacer. Me he chingado, no? Claro, todo sudor, lágrimas y todo lo que tú. Queda dinero para dejar todo por irme 
contigo. Dije no lo fue. Suena muy lacho y muy dramático lo que tú quieras, pero realmente es algo que realmente 
quiero, que no voy a dejar mi sueño por un hombre que se empieza a ver. Entonces digo no. Entonces, bueno, de 
entrada eso, disciplina, orden, que la verdad es que a veces el orden y la verdad a veces somos un poco servants. 
Otros. Las ventanas, que me parece súper ordenada. Entonces eso es lo padre que nos complementamos de las ideas 
en sí y ellas como mas te nika con más detalle. Sé si también concenso. Eso es bueno, más disciplina, orden. Pasión 
así, porque si no te gusta, pues vale. Si no! Fíjate que luego lo hice una vez que puse los escombros basura, pero 
realmente hay gente millonaria por la basura, o sea, independientemente del dinero o si lo estás apoyando al medio 
ambiente, el cambio climático. Y creo que también es algo que nos mueve mucho nosotros y que tenemos como. 
Como background, digamos, dentro de la empresa es eso poder ayudar al medioambiente, de hecho, por eso nuestra 
nuestro nombre de la empresa se llama Acaban bien, porque fusionamos dos palabras mayas es cuidado y mundo 
implorarle como esa entonación, digamos, de que cuidar el mundo, Cavali, cuidar. Desde nuestra trinchera. Pues algo 
así como la Cusiana mentales, así nos preocupó muchísimo, lo que busca ser super sustentables en todos los 
sentidos. De hecho, estamos viendo la manera de que el momento de que ya estemos físicamente. Ser parte de lo 
estaban comentando, que hay un certiﬁcado de B-Corp no es empresa en Latinoamérica, así que desconozco. 
Entonces si buscamos eso también, no solo la parte ambiental, sino también la parte social, porque supone aportar a la 
sociedad con todo lo que estamos viendo, el coronavirus. Yo sé que espero que detone un cambio realmente 
psicológico y positivo en las personas para todo este tipo de proyectos o proyectos. He cuidado a medio ambiente de 
las personas de la pobreza. Realmente se impulsan como deben ser? Ojalá, ojalá, Dios les hablo. No sé qué más. Que 
más que más. Hoy no? Creo que también es decisión laboral si es muy difícil, o sea tomar una decisión, dejar el 
trabajo, pero también que si no te llena. Y para qué estar tampoco ahí, la verdad. Yo trabajo por mi cuenta y al mismo 
tiempo dedicarme a Cavanna, esta perfectísimo, pero si me hubiera quedado, no estaba nada claro la posibilidad de 
que mis papás me puedan apoyar. Qué puedo hacer con ellos si no hay bronca? Y eso también lo es también que la 
familia si es un buen motor. Te apoyan? Ya se. Totalmente nítidamente es liderar, es esto que me contabas que ya lo 
están implementando en Colombia. Pero en México sí ha sido siempre es más complicado. 
Researcher: [00:40:17] A ti te tocó estar en México cuando se estaba implementando o se estaba desarrollando la 
implementación en Colombia? 
Kabaan: [00:40:29] No mira, mis socios trabajaron desde el sector público. La parte social, la parte mental. Ella iba y 
habitaba a la empresa. Ese tipo de reciclados llega a tener todos los formatos gzip y al mismo tiempo. Ella, junto con 
mi socio, generaron la ley. Aunque la normativa conoce el proceso, conocen todo. De hecho, justamente es un detalle 
que conocemos al dueño de esta empresa. Nosotros ya platicamos que queríamos hacerlo en México, así que 
injustamente, dijo saben que yo soy su socio. Yo les pasa todo. El cómo se llama el. La llave y la clave top que se 
chago desde que empezó a los 24 se aventó Juan de Dios. Cemento de no sé cuánto dinero y empezó solito. Ingresó 
con pérdidas, pérdidas perdidas en la ley en Colombia y pum! Se dispara. Y Hortas, pionero de todo esto de reciclaje. 
Entonces pusimos sillas en la experiencia y el conocimiento para poder así lo perfecto a México, como ya se ve que 
después de agarrar mucho colmillo y se ven super gandallas. Sí. Por tanto, todo y todo lo que queda por tanto 
porcentaje. Pero mi porcentaje es inamovible. Y es que siempre cualquier otro socio yoshihiko tener el mismo 
porcentaje. Así como que sin soberbia. Bien, bien gandalla. Qué hicimos? O sea, podemos hacerlo sin él y hacerlo. Y 
conocemos que también en España está un grupo, una asociación civil exclusivamente de los que reciclan escombros. 
Son empresas, son monstruos. Entonces no hay. No necesitamos vallas, desde muchos desconocen esa parte y tienen 
amigos en el sector que también se mueven hoy y están dentro de las empresas, y ya se pudo ir a esta empresa con el 
dueño y el lanzamiento de Desmadra y la verdad. Además de la cuestión técnica de la parte pública. Saben entonces? 
Pues todo eso está ahí. 
Researcher: [00:42:44] Con razón. También te queria a preguntar, dentro de todo esto, qué es lo que tú consideras lo 
más importante para realmente entender a tu cliente o a tu usuario? Digo dentro de todo lo que les ha tocado vivir 
Kabaan: [00:43:29] Es que está complicado. Se tocó una variante muy grande, por lo menos yo entrevisto a chavos y 
están súper preocupados y me encanta, así que para ayudarles es lo que te digo negligente al cambio porque 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
107
==PAGE:109==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
realmente ellos están súper casados. A las técnicas viejas digo no están mal, pero hay que ver ese tipo de cosas y para 
entender cómo el cliente es muy complicado. Hay clientes que como son muy abiertos, que no tanto. Yo creo que algo 
importante de nuestro cliente es reducir costos. Si me ahorras, ya estamos del otro lado y lo que buscan realmente es 
el dinero. No les preocupa el medio ambiente, les vale madres, eso la verdad. Ellos quieren ahorrar dinero, ganar más. 
Researcher: [00:44:24] O sea, siempre el interés personal antes que cualquier otra? 
Kabaan: [00:44:28] Si, por ejemplo, no creemos que. Realmente siempre hay un interés de por medio, y yo veo que, el 
volumen de las obras en escombros, es un estorbo porque te quita espacio. Lo que buscamos es que visualmente dar 
a entender la idea de que oye, pues no te preocupes, por eso nada más contratarnos a nosotros y nosotros nos 
ocupamos del escombro. Es un poco complicado realmente entender a nuestro cliente y más que en México. Muchos 
líderes y. La noticia ha sido muy complicado, pero hay que agarrándonos emocional a uno o a dos ya se empieza a 
hacer una idea 
Transcript Kabaan Interview (Traduction - English) 
Researcher: [00:00:00] Well, if you want to start by telling me a little bit about the startup, when it started. If they have a 
mission or vision already deﬁned. 
Kabaan: [00:00:43] Yes, well, basically a little bit of the story, because it's a preview. When it all started it is not like that. 
During the university there was no academic exchange in Brazil, in Rebañando del sur, I know Lojana Montañez, she is 
my partner. She studies, studies Environmental and Sanitary Engineering and through the exchange group you start to 
get along with everyone and thus not Mexicans, with the Colombian and very father. So, in 2016 a friend of us from the 
exchange gets married and she comes to the wedding and to know Mexico and all the vibes. Here he stays at my 
house and I tell him that we are talking about a night like this, literally nocturnal. We felt and the situation that I was 
living at that time of work was not pleasant, I saw that it did not grow, I saw that being a woman, like that sector of 
construction, they paid me less. I saw it as they did not visualize me being there anymore and growing because there 
was no way to grow as much. If I liked and learned, but it did not ﬁll me. And we were very close because she was 
going through the similar situation, and she tells me right now that I am already with the ﬁnal thesis on asphalt 
recycling. I made it super interesting. Let's see, tell me more. We will talk and complain and saved as with the vision of 
is that we do not want to be employed, we want to put our business. So cannon that we never thought we were going 
to have because no, she was coming to a wedding, nothing to see. End the talk. And guys you know what? I love the 
idea. I am a super lover of the environment, I love recycling it. How can I take care of water and electricity and more 
because it is the sector that I manage. I said to him hey, you know that you have to do it in Mexico and it will be very 
good, but with my master of the thesis it was like that. And when traveling to Mexico, I travel on my travel website 
because they made this crisis easier. And what else did I want to do my job. I am not going to travel that and the ﬁrst 
thing is that since and now that you go to work, we are going to start. And being like this, my dad, working at the 
university, he says, Hey, an Emprende call has just come out, put the project you told me about. And I, obviously, will 
not happen because it was a talk last night and no, I did not see anything profound. And he said to me, no, it is very 
interesting, put it totally, come on. As soon as my partner spoke to his teacher Thesis, we said yes and we started to 
stay up late. She in Colombia, to Mexico and so on. We apply, we stay, we go to the next stage, the next stage and the 
ﬁnal stage was to set up a stand, give a pitch of three minutes. Then already it takes people riding to be with my family, 
because I was away and everything was carried out by having pitch, with the novelty that we won in the ﬁrst place 
environmental. So it was like that you do not stain, because if you are on the right track, of course. We were 
investigating and in Mexico they do nothing, he stressed. Exploitation. Only one company, but yes, like his. If you are 
not very attracted to the attention of that company, well even if they say other things and they also do it ok now. Well, 
total, so we start with that. With that money we earned we did not know that we were going to earn money or that we 
were going to incubate the project in the incubator of the university. The time was not deadlines, it had to be until the 
following year and we bring a super fast pace to keep that money. I go to a conference in Monterrey and random 
coincidences of fate, I don't know. Or because he was the director of the Tec de León incubator. At the end of the 
conference I am very interested in your support as we can do my project and you are inside, send me this information 
and obviously there was the incubator. Money we earned we reinvested ﬁve years we came and went. I came and went 
a little more for classes and incubation. I do not know if it was a waste, because there is no mess of everything. But he 
approved of a funny truth. My partner quit her job. Now it will be four months. The ﬁrst two months I threw it alone and 
almost one instance waives trial. It comes to Mexico in the last two months of incubation and we continue to innovate. 
We had the opportunity to simultaneously incubated economic development, institutions called Shem's, that if we 
develop entrepreneurs, though. This was that, precisely the call was taken from the municipality for women exclusively. 
We were on a par, but more behind because it was a lot of people, we were like 50 or more per class or super 
personalized and very diﬀerent people. Already being in that they said, they tell us hey, this is the call for the National 
Entrepreneur Max CLOC Award that closes in three days. Come to Carlos Ciudad if we do. Well, come on, yum, I'm 
going to make the call, so the times we were in total we ﬁnished the incubation at the Tec. With the possibility of having 
investors, because if we had it they already did it as a sartan guy. 60 With in With investors who had taken to the banks 
of TACC and yes, several sent them ships and now with us and we focused especially only on a company that made 
the construction turn, because we were as investors, but they were shoemakers or they were so Inacap sometimes we 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
108
==PAGE:110==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
do not believe that it is important that the sector is known. Sure, complicated, then. So, well, we are already focused 
on. We are in negotiations with them super, super, super, super good and almost ready to sign that Atlas is. Or not? This 
was how our ﬁrst hit, low or not, this time not crying and half heart riot. Well, yes, we did like it, to be honest, but I told 
him to close a door tomorrow, two open, nothing happens. And then let's say that the option of staying in León was no 
longer a possibility. We return to the and I start here to manage. 
Kabaan: [00:08:19] We are three partners, my partner, environmental and sanitary engineer, me as an architect, her 
thesis professor who is a civil engineer, doctor. We are a lot of age diﬀerence, but let's say that the technical knowledge 
and specialty of the gun and we are like multidisciplinary cells. One day they called me, that's how we are in Mexico 
City, which gives us a pitch because you were a ﬁnalist in the National Entrepreneur Award. I started screaming, 
because my partner was already back in Colombia because we want to do it. The money was not running out and in 
that act because it was diﬃcult, because she stayed in my house, imagine two tables stuck together like Siamese girls. 
So the psychological issue also sometimes of invading our living space, if it started to aﬀect also everything we were 
doing, because I am very hyperactive, I like to talk to people and my partner, it is calmer, like see more a list and there 
started to be a lot of problems. Well, I'm going to Mexico. The interview. Well, it turns out that like 10 categories and we 
published the ﬁrst category of there of 5000 projects that it applied at the national level, we were among the four that 
we were at the national level, which were a huge audience. Naﬁnsa In Mexico City the Pichi is transferred. Everything 
was super nervous. It was the third. The third or the pitch. And well, from there they interviewed us. So the others are 
great. And it is already supposed that the award was delivered in the Week of the Entrepreneur. They invite us as. As 
VIPS for the debate with Peña Nieto and so on. Well we were, we were very excited because we are going to give a 
conference and in a small room, and if he does not stay, well, little girls, because we were just taking ﬂight and we were 
very nervous because sometimes we get the prize, so that obviously the winners already knew who was winning. And 
Casual knows that the girl who won a very good project, anyway. But what caught my attention was that almost all the 
winners were by chance from the State of Mexico. So it was already super arranged. We said Well, it is an experience to 
count there, so well, go there, but having been among the best at the national level, we said already. Then that ends. Or 
not, and in that inter we already made the constitution of the company, brand and right now we have already completed 
the business plan, we were forming it from the beginning, from the. Those of entrepreneurs from the university did not 
begin to see problems, because there have been many changes as mentioned and it is diﬃcult, because right now we 
are in the stage that all this has already led us to some Latin American awards. We discussed that last year, to see what 
happens and if we are among the best 500, my society that is from Colombia, Ecuador, because there was competition 
and is there a way to ﬁnance a life like rounds? I don't know everything. And yes, it went very well for us. And the father 
is that the ambassador of the PLB in Mexico, his project. I am interested in working with you to create between us, 
another Chavo and him a comprehensive waste center. I with the Udes tires with the rubble and El Chavo this with 
electronics is already perfect and he is the one who no longer helps now with the management of ﬁnancing, because 
the business plan has been greatly expanded for capacity. Now that we are looking for, as well as in perfect and well 
communicated mops, a lot of money. Obviously if it doesn't, the idea is to go down the scale and start with a little bit of 
that. From the start I don't think I went too far. 
Researcher: [00:13:24] No, no, you didn't give me many questions that I also have this one. You mentioned to me that 
there is your partner's teacher, that there is your dad, there are you, your partner and someone else you love. 
Kabaan: [00:13:39] Andrés and my partner, my partner, who was his boss. Well, and nothing else. OK, ok, ok, ok, I 
understood that he also supported them, as well as that he insisted that if I don't follow so much it wouldn't have gone 
very well. 
Researcher: [00:13:57] Okay, but he's not part of the operating team as is or what. And normally you work as. 
Individual activities or work together or what is the way they normally do the operation. 
Kabaan: [00:14:15] Look, basically as we've been handling it, we headed it up. The project is very simple. Together we 
do a lot of things, but for example, the question of management and as the only person who is physically in Mexico did, 
I have to make many contacts and deliver oﬃces, have meetings, blah, blah, blah. When she is here, obviously we 
accompany each other and we are always together as we handle it right now, because they are like the three main 
areas. In a sense I am like the question of public relations managed. My partner has everything that has to do with 
environmental, metrics, impact and all this done a little more guiding me and something technical and partner like 
things I cooked mixed. What materials? Yes, materials? I do not lie. In theory it should be like this and we divide the 
three areas. We have not been doing process manuals and we are just stuck in the production process manual. But if 
we do not carry my partner in a certain sense, it is that we need you to send us this and I am with him, although it takes 
us long because obviously they have more things than they did three months ago. So we could use them so that if 
someone or you win that they remember this or think about this, we do work. I think it is good and it is not what I 
practiced yesterday, precisely because. I feel that it is not for me to know a technical thing because it is nothing that I 
am going to develop. What is good, because to know how to handle all the generality of the tragaldabas process of 
knowledge. But they are already in detail to be there with them. Hey, it's also wrong. Or think about this bossa nova. 
And I feel that I wear myself out when I can be doing other things to do, for being here supporting us. 
Researcher: [00:16:19] Sure, and not only communication, as they carry it out, especially you, who are each in a 
diﬀerent country, 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
109
==PAGE:111==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Kabaan: [00:16:19] super complicated, really, super complicated. Nominal has cost them a lot. In fact, when she came 
it was much easier to stay here. Early mornings and it. However I am unemployed, I am not unemployed, I work for 
myself and the work that I brought, construction. I'm done, how do you get over twenty at home working? So I have 
downtime because there is no reciprocity, because as it is being lost, not only is it working and my partner too. So I 
have to adapt to the schedules that they have. For example, today I had Renana at half past six in the morning because 
they and a half could get up early to be there to work. It is very complicated then it is more accessible. She is my 
partner. The two of us are like the ones that we are promoting the most and so I walk in our judgment. And it is 
understandable, because an older person is a teacher. It is work, perhaps. But it is very exhausting and the question 
here is that the times are super important. For example, right now without this process manual we have been like two, 
three months and we could not ﬁnish because the engineer does not take the time or leave us alone. And he got into a 
row, but if they call him, we will attract his attention because we have to make you commit yourself, let's not start 
carrying people in their commitment, we have to get it out on time and how it has to be done. The management we had 
to do to get to where we are, we already did. Now you are the technical one. Boyens. Yes, yes, he understood, but he's 
also like David. 
Researcher: [00:18:15] If I understand you, I'm going to ask you more or less what it was like, because of the team 
dynamics, considering that they had diﬀerent nationalities and contexts. But you basically already answered me too. 
Kabaan: [00:18:27] Also that part of the advantage or disadvantage. 11. My partner was her student name. Between 
them not very well, to work together and he is a great guy. We love the engineer very much. The problem is that their 
times do not prioritize us and that would do me. So let's see, nobody will carry us. We are interested or not and we 
have to get it together. And let's see how the thing is inside, right? Yes, I don't know how complicated. The part of 
personal situations that remain are noticeable. For example, my partner is another side, but I live in Bogotá. It had to be 
dolça. He saw another new job move. Eight stories. I did not have time. My partner has just separated from his wife. So 
it's like going back to living alone and complaining that it's not like I have to wash, cook. He would talk to me when I 
have time, that is, regardless of the personal situation that each of us lives. Sure, but yes, it is very complicated. 
Researcher: [00:19:43] Like how long would you say? That everyone invests in the project in the week, because we are 
going for the one you tell me. I feel that you invest and your children invest more hours. 
Kabaan: [00:19:57] We have invested a lot more hours. I think the one to do surveys, go to the ﬁeld, see the stands and 
look. We have spent time, gasoline, everything your imagination. I mean, you can't go like a while, like AC or air, it is 
very irregular or on average I think that if we win about 5, 4 and 5 hours, I think. The day we started with Lomax more 
intense, with a clinical eye Allon who was to be working, doing interviews and Conchobar to chat, yes, yes, between 5 
and 7 hours, I think if we were thrown away, that was to be someone all day really important to you and her, it's like full 
time. In other words, we both say how we can. We are going to put that company to begin to distribute the percentage 
of the company. She and I each have 40 and the boy is 20, although he already has his consulting company, everything 
and nothing goes wrong. But as an external support, although it was totally. I saw that you had put that apart from good 
condition in the incubator that has the private and public fund, and now I understand why this is the part of expert 
mentoring. You mean the partner? The partner and within the incubation of Tequila Monterrey, all our best chemin. 
Researcher: [00:21:37] By chance you will remember some tool or some experience that has left them as a learning to 
continue growing. Or something or something that they have seen within these experiences that says you know that if 
we take it and continue using it within our operation. 
Kabaan: [00:22:03] As a methodology they put us in K + and in fact in the two TEC housing incubators. But the tool 
that most parents use at Tec because they begin to break down by subject, that is, by a blog, marketing, ﬁnance. I was 
not prototyped and so I know and. What if we continue to use it? Note that I do not think that I am very handsome, 
because I have seen him so many times that sometimes we typecast with the same information and do not see outside 
the box. Because for me it is important to see beyond what we were so ﬂawed with the same. We did not see children 
in them, but let's see, and we have to ask fellow incubators that you think or do not know if it was a bit very 
complicated or what it would be that you rescue our mentor, that we as our guide of our project. If the yes knew how to 
guide us, it was super tidy and gave us all kinds of tools to do, like the diagram. As he told us. Like activities, snack is a 
program with a type. To make ﬂow charts. Things like that. Type. But the order of the hands more or less to have them 
like everything in order that I followed all of me. But the thing is that sometimes with Gustás he was already well. 
Padrissa Super tidy, but I feel that, as in practice it is not so clear that sometimes it is good. Entrepreneurship is like 
that, it's not like you follow a line. You have to go looking, digging and seeing where, because there is no more and it is 
something that has not been carried out. We are based on some companies in Colombia. That is why my partner also 
knows the subject very well, because there are already companies there, they do them. In fact, my partners jointly made 
the law and slyly they supported to generate the law. It takes place in Colombia. So the system is ﬁne, but what 
happened to us, for example, was we already know what there is in Colombia. What we did, tropicalize Mexico. We 
realized that it was not going to apply the same because we then did not, that it can, because the sale could not be 
made or by charging to have your truck available in a center and not here in Mexico. Already with the research, with the 
surveys, you realize that as much as we are Latin American, that is, the mentality does vary. Yes, yes, it totally changes. 
What do you say? Hey, you weren't expecting us or if you were expecting them, then it did cost us. For that part of that 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
110
==PAGE:112==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
nation and it does us no good to serve us. It is much more complicated for us that there is no government support to 
make this type of spread. 
Researcher: [00:25:17] Well, you have had more private support, right? 
Kabaan: [00:25:21] Yes, in fact, right in the incubator, the Tec, our partner, our partner, our mentor, a friend who is 
friends with the other friend, who had a machine that can do the whole process crushing to prototyping. We go like this 
for pure ﬁghting, for guardian angels. As you look? You grab excitement and interest because making a change. And 
here in August we also achieved with a businessman who has a machine to do the same as me because these girls 
move them or say their activities put up with them. I do not know if that how, that they get excited with one. I say it 
without anything in return, because I really say that the same in the end if you are looking for something, but well, until 
the result is good or not? Of course, this had gone to the market that they had used in Thinking and Lines here at TEC. 
Researcher: [00:26:21] If this came out more or less. What did they take the most? 
Kabaan: [00:26:29] The truth is that in the end, like everything, everything is simpliﬁed. I feel that sometimes the 
methodology is. It makes the process a little easier to digest or to be able to use it, but in the end you don't really forget 
the methodology. Progress is estimated in more than one agreement, as is done if it is done, I brushed the result. So 
this, No, no, I don't remember very well. I do not know how it goes. In fact I have it, if you want I can pass it on to you. 
This being the case, if you want to give a few pages to Banesto and its market and then we would start to download it, 
but sometimes. I also feel that online methodologies are the point of view is that they become so simple that. You fall 
into oblivion, but you do not give it the necessary depth to know your market, for example. It does not turn a little, 
sometimes these are confusing, the truth. 
Researcher: [00:28:03] Is he going to ask you how you do the strategy to improve the prototypes? Everything you had 
told me. 
Kabaan: [00:28:31] The strategy of which you like trial and error, although guys have knowledge of how it is done, for 
example, in Spain, as it is done in Colombia and here in Mexico, that we have encountered barriers, because within the 
concept that we have here is that the super pig people, the people, do not know how to separate the garbage, that is, 
invent myself. I, for example, who work with bricklayers trying to implement drones, please, this is going. Every cultural 
issue in the region is a theme. So from there, on the cultural fusion, after that because the laws do not support us, the 
super polluting construction sector and super negligence exchange, that is, it really has cost us a lot of work, we two 
representatives have gone with engineers, they have said there are little girls, you don't, you don't know what you are 
doing. That does not work. The Government is not going to help us, that is not going to happen. 2: 5 And we can come. 
Well, you are women who know or look very young. In other words, they commented it has touched us and do not say 
what happens to them. Of course, if you do it with all the intention of improving the process and those come out and 
you know that as well as the sector is very competitive and Candaya, in a certain sense, yes. The fact that we are a 
direct competition because it is direct to the materials, which are the ones made of wood, explodes, explodes when 
seeing the hill and taking out the sand and the recordings. So what we are avoiding is that it explodes. So all those are 
monsters that obviously love us and that you cheer up that a little girl is going to send you. Then the question of what 
the Mexicans that we are canga lejitos and pull that it goes like this coil and if it has cost us to attempt or break many 
devices. And I say more than anything because we are women. Imagine that two girls are there and we are not girls. But 
if they see us as a girl, ah, yes, that has been very rude. The truth is that they know that we are all there, between Earth 
and Bogotá, and there with the rubble. But what we are looking for is to demonstrate that, not that not because we are 
a woman we cannot make it an entry of that, the sector and the government, I mean. I don't know how many meetings 
with the municipality, with the state government. The governor we have said. Yes, yes, yes it supports them. It is very 
cool, but the same gives him atole with his ﬁnger and you do not know, it is very tired for us too. We did see if they 
don't see a beneﬁt for our city or ours. We go elsewhere in Colombia, mounted and just look for ﬁnancing and go there. 
Researcher: [00:31:34] Exactly. If I understand you separately, this one will ask you how? How did you do this part of 
understanding your client? Or you know what you tell me that they managed to get in and they were there in boots, with 
a helmet, everything is really to see how the process is going, that is, how they got to that point, who introduced them 
to the environment or how it happened to me, I always love. 
Kabaan: [00:32:03] I've always loved the play so much. I am a teacher to lead it, Fundora, designing I am going to start 
like this me and my partner just like me is that she gets into a lot and that's how we like them. Sellanes from Colombia 
and me too. What a lot it was to manage here in municipality and we got tickets. Dumps. She went with the 
Environment and waste or a sidekick from the municipality and took her to diﬀerent banks. They had the separation of 
some of the material. We had to load trucks there for the prototyping, we rented trucks and went to collect the rubble, 
but certain mixed rubble did not work and the pieces were very rare. We had to break our hands. We rented a broken 
hammer who, there, grinding the concrete or from which photos, is all documented there that we know and that if we 
dare to do things, it is not like that. If we really like dust. This is how you breaded and mistreat the hair and the bottom, 
but we like it a lot and I think that is what moves us, that we are doing it and what we have done we did based on 
surveys, architects and in fact I have them. They have been there for 2 years and we have done all our process 
registered there. We have been interviewed or sacralized a lot, such as the National Prize. All this roll earned accrual 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
111
==PAGE:113==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
ultralight at El Universal. Newspapers leave here from Aguascalientes on television, then also an award from Grupo 
Salinas. Neglecting us heard of wanting us to be wrong. I belong to the Activate group, but I didn't belong before. The 
award was for citizen value. Last year and this one I competed and they did give us the prize. So we go to Mexico City 
with Salinas, Charalá. But what do I do? I was a little worried if it was okay, father, to be recognized, because I never 
was. That they recognized me that they published no, but the fact that frustrates me is not having the physical plant 
anymore to say she for joining me again. In fact, my friends sometimes tell me that it's okay, father, but you have 
nothing. I follow those who are right, because physically there is not, but it says that it is so easy to lose more than 10 
million pesos. Let's see, tell me how I do it. Who gives them to you? Who gives them to whoever lends me, what is 
interest or Xaro? And whether you like it or not, the fact that they publish us needs a father, but it does have some 
frustration on our part. If we say that. I love you, they want the exact recognition. It is, as we are not seeing, neither 
shocking and that is why if we continue to look unfairly with the businessman that I tell you about the p.-le of Monterrey 
and half help us manage. For their part, while we are managing them for us, for wherever it is ﬁrst heard and in all this 
process, years of experience. 
Researcher: [00:35:41] What skills do you consider necessary to be in the startup, both as techniques and soft skills 
with simple staﬀ? 
Kabaan: [00:35:56] Well look. I think a very important one, patience. He assured me that nothing patients made me very 
desperate and you say why I don't know what, but that the project drives you or you stay and that hope and hope of 
hope. And there is a phrase that my partner and I always say that if it were easy, everyone would. We cannot give up 
and throw in the towel. There is no way. We had been walking for three years now so that suddenly throw it away and 
not move the face of when something personal ends. There was my Italian boyfriend. After my youth, come live with me 
in Italy. I said OK, this is father. The problem is that I have a company that I want to do. I'm screwed, right? Sure, all 
sweat, tears and everything you do. There is money left to leave everything to go with you. I said it wasn't. It sounds 
very lazy and very dramatic what you want, but it really is something I really want, that I will not leave my dream for a 
man who begins to see himself. So I say no. So, well, from the start, discipline, order, that the truth is that sometimes 
the order and the truth sometimes we are a bit servants. Others. The windows, which seems super tidy to me. So that is 
the father that we complement each other with the ideas themselves and they like more nika in more detail. I know if I 
also agree. That is good, more discipline, order. Passion like that, because if you don't like it, well. If not! Notice that 
then I did it once I put the rubbish rubbish, but there really are millionaire people for the rubbish, that is, regardless of 
the money or if you are supporting the environment, climate change. And I think it is also something that moves us a lot 
and that we have like. As a background, let's say, within the company it is that to be able to help the environment, in 
fact, that is why our our company name is called Finish well, because we merge two Mayan words it is taken care of 
and the world implore you as that intonation, say, that take care of the world, Cavali, take care. From our trench. Well, 
something like the mental Cusiana, that's how it worried us a lot, which seeks to be super sustainable in every way. In 
fact, we are looking at the way that the moment we are already physically. Being part of what they were commenting, 
that there is a certiﬁcate from B-Corp is not a company in Latin America, so I do not know. So if we look for that too, 
not only the environmental part, but also the social part, because it means contributing to society with everything we 
are seeing, the coronavirus. I know that I hope it will trigger a really positive and psychological change in people for all 
these types of projects or projects. I have taken care of the environment of the people of poverty. Are they really driven 
as they should be? Hopefully, hopefully, God spoke to them. I don't know what else. That more than more. Not today? I 
think it is also a job decision if it is very diﬃcult, that is, making a decision, leaving the job, but also if it does not ﬁll you. 
And why not be there, really? I work on my own and at the same time dedicate myself to Cavanna, this is perfect, but if 
I had stayed, it was not at all clear the possibility that my parents could support me. What can I do with them if there is 
no anger? And that is also true that the family is a good engine. They support you? Already. Totally clearly it is to lead, it 
is this that you told me that they are already implementing in Colombia. But in Mexico it has always been more 
complicated. 
Researcher: [00:40:17] Did you have to be in Mexico when the implementation was being implemented or was being 
developed in Colombia? 
Kabaan: [00:40:29] Look, my partners worked from the public sector. The social part, the mental part. She went and 
lived in the company. This type of recycling comes to have all the gzip formats and at the same time. She, along with 
my partner, generated the law. Although the regulations know the process, they know everything. In fact, it is precisely a 
detail that we know the owner of this company. We already discussed that we wanted to do it in Mexico, so unfairly, he 
said they know that I am his partner. Everything happens to them. The what is called the. The key and the top key that 
was chago since he started at 24 was thrown by Juan de Dios. I don't know how much money cement and started 
alone. He entered with losses, losses lost in the law in Colombia and boom! It ﬁres. And Hortas, pioneer of all this 
recycling. So we put chairs in the experience and knowledge to be able to do the perfect thing to Mexico, as you can 
see that after grabbing a lot of tusk and looking super gandallas. Yes. Therefore, everything and everything that remains 
for a percentage. But my percentage is immovable. And it is that any other yoshihiko partner always have the same 
percentage. As well as without pride. Well, well gandalla. We did? I mean, we can do it without him and do it. And we 
know that in Spain there is also a group, a civil association exclusively of those who recycle rubble. They are 
companies, they are monsters. Then there is not. We do not need fences, since many do not know that part and have 
friends in the sector who also move today and are within companies, and it was possible to go to this company with the 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
112
==PAGE:114==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
owner and the launch of Desmadra and the truth. In addition to the technical issue of the public part. Do you know 
then? Well, that's all there. 
Researcher: [00:42:44] Rightly so. I also wanted to ask you, within all this, what do you consider most important to 
really understand your client or your user? I say within everything that you have had to live 
Kabaan: [00:43:29] It's just that it's complicated. A very large variant was played, at least I interviewed guys and they 
are super worried and I love it, so to help them is what I say negligently to the change because they are really super 
married. To the old techniques I say they are not bad, but you have to see that kind of thing and to understand how the 
client is very complicated. There are clients who are very open, not so much. I believe that something important for our 
client is to reduce costs. If you save me, we are already on the other side and what they are really looking for is money. 
They do not care about the environment, they are good mothers, that is true. They want to save money, earn more. 
Researcher: [00:44:24] I mean, always self-interest before any other? 
Kabaan: [00:44:28] Yes, for example, we don't believe that. There really is always an interest involved, and I see that the 
volume of the works in rubble is a hindrance because it takes away your space. What we are looking for is to visually 
imply the idea that he hears, well don't worry, that's why just hiring us and we take care of the rubble. It is a bit 
complicated to really understand our client and more than in Mexico. Many leaders and. The news has been very 
complicated, but you have to hold onto one or two emotionally and you start to get an idea 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
113
==PAGE:115==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Appendix 9 - Transcript Cultivo Interview (Original - Spanish) 
Researcher: [00:00:01] Si quieres empezar contándome un rato del proyecto cuando lo empezaron como fue este. Y 
sí, bueno, ahorita en dónde están trabajando y dónde está impactando el proyecto, si es que es en México o si es en 
otra, en otra comunidad o alguna traza? 
Cultivo: [00:00:22] Claro, gracias a este entonces yo soy Rafael Alonso, cofundador de Cultivo Land. Comenzamos 
como idea, hace aproximadamente 18 meses, la empieza Manuel, mi cofundador, y siguió Yo me uno al equipo de 
cofundadores. En agosto de 2010 mi socio y yo la constituimos. En diciembre la empresa esta. Trabajamos aquí en 
Ciudad de México y en Londres. Ha estado constituida en Estados Unidos. Y el impacto que tiene hasta la fecha? En 
tema de impacto social y ambiental en México y en distintos estados de México este, pero vamos, todo está hecho 
para que crezca el impacto, las ventas, todo a nivel global. 
Researcher: [00:01:20] Tienen alguna misión o visión ya establecida? 
Cultivo: [00:01:26] Si queremos, capturaron 1000 millones de toneladas de carbono a través de la restauración de 
tierras a gran escala. 
Researcher: [00:01:38] Y por qué? Porque inició el proyecto. 
Cultivo: [00:01:45] Por la visión de todos los socios en conjunto, que cada quien por separado y después coincidimos 
de hacer un cambio importante a nivel ambiental, en el cual pudiéramos usar el ADN de una startup y el conocimiento 
que traemos tecnológico ﬁnanciero para cambiar todo a esa práctica, esa industria. Y pues bueno, para hacer impacto 
ambiental exploramos solar, exploramos este y otros otros modelos dentro de solar, otros modelos dentro de 
conservación o restauración de tierras. Y resulta que en restauración de tierras hay mucho, mucho que hacer. Este 37 
por ciento de las emisiones que podemos desde lo que podríamos hacer para prevenir que llegue la temperatura a 2 
grados centígrados en 2030 se puede hacer con restaurar tierras y aún así muy poco dinero entra a este a este 
espacio, comparado por ejemplo, con inversión en eólico e inversión en solar. Entonces no Breitner fue ir a donde 
puedo hacer un gran impacto y que también se pueda hacer una gran oportunidad de conocer lo económico. También 
socio. Yo conocí a Pablo porque él empezó otra empresa antes de paneles solares distribuidos, es referente aquí en 
México y yo antes hacía programas de aceleración y dado ﬁnanciamiento a estar Toks ambientales. Entonces siempre 
quise que Pablo metiera su empresa en mi programa. Nunca pasó. éL estaba muy enfocado a éste y de ahí nos 
hicimos amigos. También tenemos amigos en común. Pablo conoce a Manuel desde desde la preparatoria, me parece. 
Estudiaron juntos aquí en Ciudad de México. Mando después se fue por muchos lados, primero a Houston, luego a 
Londres. Esa empresa fue exitoso. La sacó a Bolsa y uno de sus colaboradores, que en esa otra empresa también se 
volvió cofundador, James. Y ﬁnalmente Adolfo trabajó con Pablo en su empresa Solar. 
Researcher: [00:04:20] Ya y cómo fue que se? Terminaron juntando porque que cada quien tenía su propia perspectiva 
y pues sí, cosas combinaron, se unieron en esta parte. Pero cómo fue el proceso, si es que te acuerdas? 
Cultivo: [00:04:42] No hay que preguntarle a Manuel, hay veces que empieza, va rebotando contra Pablo. Para ambos 
tiene mucho sentido. Y cuando yo hablo con Pablo justo para decirme. Porque él me busca con esta empresa para 
levantar dinero de una ronda inicial alta y con mucho riesgo y preventas que no iba a volar. En mi previo trabajo 
entonces y justo ya estaba saliendo, ya está pensando yo, desarrollaron un Venture Studio. Te puedo decir como entre 
ellos, no? Pues sí, que justo yo dije a ver, de todo lo social, ambiental que puede tener un modelo de negocio después 
de haber visto muchas empresas ver cuáles son más rentables, cuáles son más escalables en. Fui decidiendo a ver 
solar si con tecnología, agricultura y tierra, así es. Ya ni recuerdo agua. Agua por completo es algo que no conozco 
tanto, pero que veo que hay un gran potencial. Y este empoderamiento educación a mujeres como que estaba dentro 
de mi tesis de la inversión imposible en estudio. Salí a buscar empresas, no pipeline, y al mismo tiempo he a tocar 
puertas para buscar dinero. Lo que me di cuenta es que. Iba a ser un proceso de dos, tres años levantar este dinero y 
en este momento yo quería accionar cuando estaba hablando con Pablo para decirle oye, pues esto es en este centro 
estudio. Sigamos colaborando en mi estado, instando a alguien que. Cada vez se ven todo eso me contó lo que 
estaban haciendo. Ellos están mucho más avanzados y aterrizando cosas muy técnicas. Y para serte sincero, yo sólo 
pensaba en ese primer café. Entendí dos cosas. Uno es un tema con mucho impacto ambiental, muy escalable, que no 
hay prácticamente otros actores en el mundo viendo dónde y dos. Es un equipo súper, súper capaz. O sea, un 
emprendedor es genial, es una de esas compresa bolsa. Otro levantó rondas tontas, ya sabes. O se fueron a Hawai 
Combinator con esta otra empresa. Entonces para mí fue un no breiner y ya poquito a poco a quién le fue? Como le 
fuimos agregando nuestro expertise, pero todos muy alineados en que a través de restaurar tierras podremos restaurar 
ecosistemas. A través de hacer eso podemos realmente ayudar a bajar el calentamiento global. Y ha ido 
evolucionando? No, ahorita justo nuestros modelos ya está, ya estamos incorporando. Cómo hacer para vender bonos 
de biodiversidad con incluir temas de agua? No, porque el trabajo que se hace en la Tierra genera todo eso. Si yo 
puedo. Medirlo con las TIC, con las herramientas tecnológicas que Pablo desarrolla, lo puede ir a vender a mis clientes 
y eso tiene un mayor valor para los beneﬁciarios ﬁnales y para nosotros y para el planeta. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
114
==PAGE:116==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Researcher: [00:08:00] Obviamente entonces esta parte había igual, puesto que bueno, no todos, pero hay diferentes 
nacionalidades, verdad? 
Cultivo: [00:08:13] Si somos cuatro mexicanos y un inglés, ok. 
Researcher: [00:08:17] Y eso cómo funciona? Entre ustedes? 
Cultivo: [00:08:21] Bastante bien. Este no sirve mucho tener una presencia en Londres. Manuel estaba viviendo allá. 
Entonces este también se acaba de mudar a Mexico hace unos meses, justo antes de esta situación, y la idea es que él 
se fuera a San Francisco. Hay que esperar, obviamente, pero nos sirve muy bien. Creo que todos estamos muy 
acostumbrados a trabajar internacionalmente y. Y a ver. Afortunadamente no, ya venimos trabajando en remoto desde 
antes este. Y nos sirve también mucho para temas culturales. Por ejemplo, cuando hablamos con un cliente de allá o 
metemos una propuesta para alguna alianza estratégica. Es bien distinto la manera de pensar, no de la agencia 
espacial del Reino Unido. Sé que puede Saidi, entonces quizás yo tengo más conocimiento que hablando con los 
civiles. James ayuda mucho con el tono y la estructura para el gobierno de Youkai y así nos vamos.  
Researcher: [00:09:29] Y dentro de esta parte en que están remotos, básicamente digo fuera de estas circunstancias 
es normalmente cómo manejan la comunicación en el equipo o las actividades las dividen y en cierto punto ven cómo. 
Cultivo: [00:09:44] Como dato curioso, formamos la empresa, ﬁrmamos una constitutiva y todavía no había estrechado 
manos con Manuel o con James. Dato curioso también. Yo todavía no conozco a James en persona. Lo los conozco 
muy bien porque hablamos todas las semanas, pero no sé si es muy alto, si es muy chaparro, o sea, a ese punto sólo 
lo veo aquí. Ahora la ubicación es constante. Todos los días que hablamos usamos el slack muchísimo. Usamos Shum. 
Y creo que ayudan, ayudan mucho, mucho, mucho, que todos ya tenemos experiencia. De hecho, yo soy Adolfo y yo 
somos los más jóvenes, estamos por cumplir 30 este año. Entonces creo que ya también sabemos que si nos funciona, 
que no nos funciona, cómo manejar personalidades, decisiones y de lo que hablabas, de cómo justo, cómo tomamos 
decisiones. Cada quien tiene un área, es como Domain Dictator Schip, casi no se hacían ventas. Yo tomó la última 
decisión. Si esa estrategia la toma James es fundraising mi equipo y no esta administración le toca a Manuel y es 
producto, es Pablo. 
Researcher: [00:11:08] Entonces ya se decide para mucho las áreas. Entonces? 
Researcher: [00:11:14] O sea, en la cantabile equipar el área así el trabajo, pues en este momento no hay cómo 
separarlo. Osea. Y digo ya hay cosas que se trabajan sin que todos tomemos decisiones y creen que vale la pena 
mandar este material a un cliente? No, yo lo mando, involucró Manuel. No soy cliente, viene de él y ya nuestro nuestro 
Zink semanal, por ejemplo. Ya le digo a Pablo y Adolfo que está más lejos en temas de producto y de proyectos. 
Oigan, mandamos esto a la tal cliente. 
Researcher: [00:11:52] Súper bien. Bueno, entonces si quieres, bastando un poquito a la parte de métodos y temas 
más extensa, este begué había marcado que estuvieron bueno, que estuvieron founding por una parte por el sector 
privado y que también tuvieron mentorías por parte de expertos. No sé si me quieres contar sobre estas dos dos 
experiencias. 
Cultivo: [00:12:17] Claro, es que levantamos una ronda inicial, nos propusimos demostrar nuestra lanita. Después 
levantamos una ronda Ziv, un familiar que ya había invertido en la empresa de Manuel, un inversionista que 
conseguimos a través de una red de inversionistas de impacto y otros friends family. No queremos o no hemos querido 
hasta ahora levantar el paro de bici Bizi. Pero si ha sido todo sector privado, todos esperan retornos y mentorías como 
tal. Lo. No porque haya pasado por un programa de mentoría formal, sino porque tenemos en nuestro trabajo un 
borrador de director's. Y si son personas de alto nivel que nos nos ayudan a rebotar ideas muy, muy ya a gran escala. 
Researcher: [00:13:18] Dentro de estas experiencias o pláticas, o tal vez retroalimentación que les da la clase o 
subway. Algo que Uds. hayan tomado y que normados a que diga, sabes que se volvió algo diario o algo rutinario a 
partir de. Feedback tal vez. 
Cultivo: [00:13:56] Nos forzamos a dividir los segmentos de mercado muy bien, no los tenemos todos dentro de 
nuestras cabezas, pero si te lo pide alguien de fuera te forzó a crear algo que se quede ahí como es nuestro 
segmentos, y a indagar más en cada uno de ellos. Era un poco lo que nos agregan mucho valor a ellos. Es 
conocimiento muy especíﬁco de temas tanto ﬁnancieros como de medición de biodiversidad que nos ayudan a 
acortada. Incluso incluso tenemos uno también que nos apoyamos en el borde. Pero también es consejero informal y 
nos apoya con temas de tierra, de mucha, mucha experiencia, trabajando con tejidos, con el campo en México, con un 
sector del sector público, de gobierno, en el agro. No sé si era algo muy particular tipo Sheila o hacemos una tontería 
diez horas de meditación a la semana, pero sí nos ayudan a pensar en cosas generales y poderlo aterrizar, aunque no 
saber causalidad alguno de ellos que les haya dicho como cada cual, cada que vayan a tomar una decisión, intenten 
hacer esto o que vayan a hacer X cosa, consideren otras cosas o realmente es algo, sabrán muy especíﬁco quién les 
Daniel, es más cómo o que dentro de tus clientes a crédito de investors. Cuáles son sus tripas? Creemos saber, pero 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
115
==PAGE:117==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
no nos obliga a decir OK ya notion página de drivers para Tales Marquet Segment. En cuanto a la dinámica del equipo, 
creo que lo hacemos muy. A nuestra manera muy Montessori, aunque bien.  
Researcher: [00:16:03] Este hecho me llamó mucho la atención que en la encuesta pusiste que para esta staccato no 
habían usado ninguna metodología. Pero me acuerdo que me dijiste que estaba en muchos proyectos sociales y 
ambientales. Entonces, alguna metodología que tú recuerdes o que tal vez de alguna manera hayas tomado como 
parte de tu de tu mindset? 
Cultivo: [00:16:33] A veces hago cosas muy inconcientemente, muy, muy dentro de nuestro ADN, mucho diferente que 
en mucho linnet startup. Mucho de manual del manual le encanta el sistema izzi innovate lo al año, pero entonces el 
libro de lema chica también lo enseñaba cuando daba clases de emprendimiento de disciplina entrepreneurship. Si 
tado Desert Beach mar que desde entonces los viure personas. Por ejemplo, si he hecho yo por Clarity, SAIC una o 
varias personas, si no es algo como que digamos a ver esta selva de persona de cultivo y lo subamos al drift, o sea 
que nos ayuda. Es como un borrador muy, pero si todo es muy inconcientemente no me digan no este. 
Researcher: [00:17:32] Ya no lo siguen por libro, sino que ya ya es parte de ustedes. 
Cultivo: [00:17:36] Básicamente nunca hemos tenido en el calendario una sesión de Lyceum Thinking. Pero 
inconscientemente sí siguen de cierta manera la metodología. C. C. S.. Bien y de casualidad, recordará algún proyecto 
o experiencia donde realmente una metodología les haya hecho. Cómo decirlo? Pues que les haya dado la oportunidad 
de realmente construir algo o de causar una diferencia en el proyecto. De nuevo está tan, tan, tan interrelacionado que 
todo el proyecto, toda la empresa, depende de este tipo de pensamiento, de esta mentalidad de start opera. Por 
ejemplo, va a venderle a una empresa, aunque bueno, ya brillaban dos que no dicen ay, yo tengo este HP, no toda esta 
tierra este que necesita regenerarse por distintas razones, no para una Alestra sino un costo y para otra. Es un 
gobierno de una isla que necesita hacer temas de resiliencia. No hay cómo le hago para con la naturaleza. En mi isla se 
llama Resilient carambas, son distintos que nuestro primer cliente, pero los clientes no tienen nada más. Quiere 
comprar, invertir en futuros de bonos de carbono y si le doy diversidad, mejor no decirlo de agua. Pero es muy distinto 
estos dos. Requerían un tipo de proceso de venta distinto porque nos decían mira, yo tengo esta tierra, tengo el dinero, 
nada más. No sé qué hacer, entonces las mismas herramientas que tenemos de ser engañadas para para nosotros 
hacer el match entre tierra y quien sólo quiere los bonos no nos ayuda a calcular cuánta es el potencial de restauración 
de tierra y qué se podría restaurar, etcétera. Usando imágenes satelitales tal. Eso mismo lo podemos usar para estos 
dos clientes donde innovamos. En dónde fue mucha interacción? Mucho Linn? No vamos a hacer medir, aprender y 
regresar al laboratorio. Fue en el proceso de venta porque entonces primero les dijimos claro, si se puede hacer nada 
más datos. Entonces regresamos. Vamos a hacer eso que hacemos en el paso 3, una mini versión ahorita y cómo 
aterrizamos a un documento que uno no nos dé mucho del producto, pero dos sean muy sencillos para ellos ver 
mapas de antes y después, no potencial y se les iluminan los ojos y nos llaman y si ﬁrmen un día? Y si vayamos hacia 
adelante, no? Y quién lo presenta entonces? Nos lo presenta Adolfo, que lleva proyectos o los presenta Rafa, que 
entonces, como hemos ido integrando ese proceso y nos dice sí, es muy particular, nos permitió darnos cuenta. Que 
ahí se volvió uno de nuestros creadores para este trimestre. Que necesitamos una manera interna de que cualquier 
persona pueda hacer esos primeros análisis sin tener que ir con el producto.Puedes hacer un análisis porque se ha 
vuelto ya una herramienta de venta para otro tipo de clientes, ya que.  
Researcher: [00:21:05] Normalmente ustedes buscan a los clientes o es alguien interesado ya en el producto? 
Cultivo: [00:21:11] Hasta ahorita han sido contactos que tenemos un. Y que se interesan los que escuchen lo que 
estamos haciendo o escuche. Hay que hablar con fulanito de esta gran empresa de energía.Normalmente son 
personas que ya están acostumbrados al lenguaje técnico. Hay de todo. Yo diría en general, en general están 
acostumbrados al lenguaje técnico ﬁnanciero. No conocen el lenguaje técnico de restauración de tierras. 
Researcher: [00:21:42] Hay ahí quien se encarga. Como baja en esa? Esa información. 
Cultivo: [00:21:49] Va hablando con ellos en este. Y ese ha sido otro proceso de integración. La primera gran 
corporativo que fuimos a venderles, les tiramos a IPAC este todos los conceptos Sustainable Ruslan Management. Y 
fue justo nuestro champion interno como persona, introspecciones dentro del corporativo que entiende y tiene el 
interés de trabajar con nosotros y nos ayuda a hacer la venta hacia arriba. El director de hoy, el CFO de no sé cual 
puede estar, pero es que nos dijo. Sí, pero a mi jefe tienes que ponerle una deﬁnición de qué es eso. Entonces también 
mucho. El proceso de integración ahí de escuchar al. Al mercado la diferencia lo hacemos ya mientras estamos 
vendiendo lo que se va a preguntar porque estás en ventas, verdad? 
Researcher: [00:22:45] Me comentabas. Algunas palabras que normalmente tú sientes que son más repetitivas o que 
son como clave en el momento en el que explicas un proyecto. 
Cultivo: [00:23:02] Naturaleza o sea, como dicen estas palabras, que suena, aunque entienden ellos bien, mucho más 
que restauración de tierras y restaurar la naturaleza, aunque. Futuros futuros de bonos de carbono. Si yo no sé la 
verdad, si palabras como tal tendrían que revisar todos los materiales o si simplemente como frases o palabras que tú 
digas, es que cuando voy a explicarlo o cuando lo haremos. No conocemos el tema a escala. Vamos a hacer proyectos 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
116
==PAGE:118==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
a escala. Bastará un portafolio desde el 2000 y eso viene. Dorio Todas tus palabras sobran porque viven de sus 
necesidades muy particulares, que les tengo que cumplir con la regulación. Tengo todas estas toneladas de carbono 
que compensar para llevar a 0. Hay proyectos que me den ni una décima parte de eso. Cuando yo les digo en un tú 
puedes construir tu portafolio de proyectos, tenemos escala, brillan los ojos. 
Researcher: [00:24:09] No tiene mucho sentido este vivo en esta parte también. Igual me marcaste que normalmente 
ustedes consiguen los insights del usuario mediante, asumen.Cómo es? Esa es la parte como tú mesesde que es 
conocer y es también. Tal vez preguntara a quien esté o en este caso de quien estaba dentro de la empresa, que te dijo 
cómo hacerlo, pero en caso de que no. No los tengo. O sea, no haya alguien. Cómo hace Cesar? Cómo sabes qué es 
lo que busca tu usuario? Tu cliente? 
Cultivo: [00:24:55] De nuevo asumes. Vas, hablas con ellos y en la misma llamada vas calibrando, no vas entendiendo. 
De qué cosas empiezan a resonar? Ellos te van diciendo y también cómo es venta? VI VI de cierta manera, creo, 
podemos hacerlo mucho más. Como Extrem Lynch, porque ya no es que en una llamada te digan no, aquí está mi 
tarjeta y pagan el pago en línea. Entonces en la primera te van diciendo hay otra cosas, se los das este sí, normalmente 
cuánto se tarda ese proceso? 
Researcher: [00:25:33] Porque no es nada más una llamada, pero supongo que también varía mucho, varía mucho y 
estamos muy temprano. 
Cultivo: [00:25:40] Constituimos la empresa en diciembre. Ahorita tenemos ya la primera carta de intención. Estamos 
esperando el primer contrato de esta empresa grande, la que te comentaba este mexicana, y con ellos empezamos a 
tocar puertas en octubre. La carta se ﬁrmó en marzo y estuvimos como tres, tres interacciones o cuatro feis tu feis y 
algunos otros llamadita. 
Researcher: [00:26:09] Aunque tiene bastante sentido y dentro de todo este tiempo sé qué habilidades crees que son 
como las más necesarias, tanto como soft skills como isquios, para realmente hacer que el cliente o el usuario avala la 
compra. 
Cultivo: [00:26:29] Soft skills persuasión, empatía y hard skills. Conocimiento, día mínimo ﬁnanciero y la profundidad. 
Del problema que han tenido o nos hemos hecho expertos en la regulación que esta empresa tiene que cumplir, 
siempre y cuando mucho más allá que cómo plantar un árbol o de cómo medir imágenes satelitales. Eso ellos asumen 
que tú ya sabes hacer eso, pero en el tema de regulación, como ellos también se la han estudiado de arriba abajo. Para 
mí esta es una suposición, para ellos tomarte en serio para saber que si vas a cumplirles con un proyecto ﬁnanciado 
por tantos años, se basan en lo que ellos conocen bien, que es esa regulación. Nos han hecho un montón de 
preguntas y de hecho, cuando puedas agregar valor, admiran. Vimos que se aprobaron tales estándares apenas sin 
que ellos nos pidan. Eso crea conﬁanza. Entonces, conﬁanza, con empatía con la persuasión, ya se traduce en ventas 
y normalmente nada más. 
Researcher: [00:27:45] Es una persona quien hace este diálogo o son entre varios que hacen el trabajo? 
Cultivo: [00:27:51] Este es una que lo lidera, entonces yo soy como soy, soy su punto de contacto, mi WhatsApp está 
sonando cada vez que ellos quieren y mandan, pero justo trae jugamos distintos roles. Entonces Adolfo es que conoce 
a profundidad corchea, al menos ante sus ojos. Entonces, si ellos traen a las personas técnicas de regulación, nosotros 
también. Manuel funge más como si ya sabes como big ﬁgure. Entonces, cuando teníamos que conseguir la ﬁrma del 
leelo hey hey porfa este. Aﬁne para que para que cuando haya la ﬁrme y le podamos ir a los inversionistas. Los 
inversionistas entran dentro de esa narrativa que por supuesto no nos piden una carta de intención, pero que así yo. 
Juego esas dinámicas, empatizo con otras personas como claro, si yo también he estado cuando mi jefe o mis 
inversionistas me piden eso, se mueven las cosas más rápido. Bastante, bastante, pero no nos hemos puesto creativos 
así con este primer cliente, conociendo mucho la cultura mexicana corporativa. Hay que ver, puede que con un cliente 
holandés nos mandara la compra. Claro, esas son cosas muy diferentes. De entrada está dentro de esta parte este 
arete que vaisnavas a esta parte de la cultura. Cuando les toca estar con diferentes clientes, por ejemplo, que tiene San 
James en Londres. Este. 
Researcher: [00:29:35] Aún y que él se encarga de ventas, no? 
Cultivo: [00:29:39] James lleva estrategia en particular se aterriza mucho a temas de comunicación y marketing. Pero 
él también tiene contacto directo con clientes. Estrés? Sí, sí, sí, sí. Espetos a los que están por allá, es como su suquet 
chucha no oﬁcial. Es oﬁcina en Inglaterra. Montánchez ok. Cuando hemos hablado con gente de allá o Río juntos allá. 
Researcher: [00:30:12] Pues sí, el Astola, aunque normalmente él también sigue con el mismo proceso que tú. Sigues 
con empresas mexicanas? Si alguien adentro, que tal vez ya te da un insight y ya sobre eso hacen la estrategia. 
Cultivo: [00:30:31] Exacto, exacto. Y no solo Lynsey, sino también como. Empuje para llegar a otros niveles dentro de 
la empresa. Esa ha sido nuestra manera. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
117
==PAGE:119==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Researcher: [00:30:47] Ok, este si te afrontarã. Otra cosa, pero va muy de la mano con con quien está dentro de la 
empresa, pero han tenido casos en que no tengan algún contacto o alguien directamente relacionado? 
Cultivo: [00:31:02] Todavía no, Eventualmente, si vas a empezar a hacer Conklin, yo creo o ver como tenemos una 
excusa para conocer a alguien que nos abra la puerta o que ellos ya nos busquen.Pero hasta ahorita ha sido a través 
de alguien que conocemos.  
Researcher: [00:31:17] Que me habían dicho también que he estado en varios proyectos antes de. Del estrato ahorita. 
En qué proyectos estuviste? 
Cultivo: [00:31:29] De emprendimiento a esto yo estoy haciendo un estudio creativo que es más una pyme. Por eso no 
lo no es una consultoría que con un socio que es súper creativo. Vamos haciendo temas de concientización sobre 
cambio climático. Ya entonces vendiendo igual misma al mismo espacio misma, al primer cliente ya le mandamos 
todos nuestros exasperada ﬁrma al contrato o en eje grande que hace mucho impacto, comunica muy mal. Entonces, 
cómo podemos ayudarte a hacer más creativo? Ya antes de eso y esas dos, si tengo yo una marten empresa, no este 
antes ayude a crear y después me hice general manager de una ﬁnanciera que da préstamos a pymes con impacto 
social o ambiental. Ya. Es igual de cero conseguir algo gratis, conseguir contratar un equipo, hacer lo que te vas a 
tardar y venderle. Ahí le vendíamos a empresas, a pymes con impacto social, ambiental. No a ir, pues todas esas 
pymes que les vendíamos ya teníamos la red y la conﬁanza, porque antes de eso, con ellos mismos, con Rodrigo y mis 
ex y Yorick, yo hacía programas de aceleración de los programas como tal. No fueron una empresa, eran dentro de 
dentro de la aceleradora. Igual es esta ﬁnanciera. Si se hizo una entidad aparte, levantó su dinero, contrató su gente 
aparte y ahorita ya tiene una general manager que lo está llevando al siguiente nivel. Este que si quiere. A mí me gusta 
crear y voy a estar llevando algo que tenga impacto bien, bien directo. Antes de eso los programas de aceleración, 
pues hubieron varios. Hubo uno que hicimos para empresas de biodiversidad en Perú, otro para empresas de energía 
renovable y movilidad en México. Antes de eso puse una marca de mezcal que cuesta. Sí, empujas mucho y me salí. 
Sea justo, la creamos, la desarrollamos tal, pero de ahí me fui a trabajar con empleadores sociales. Entonces? Vender 
alcohol y ayudas a empresas sociales me hace mucho, me desmotiva de la verdad y este le vendí mi parte de vuelta a 
mis ex socios y amigos y ya ellos. La verdad es que La Rompido hasta ahorita le está yendo muy bien. Muchos años 
después. 
Researcher: [00:34:07] Qué cool! Qué bueno por esa parte. Voto si es que nos reímos bastante rápido porque muchas 
de las preguntas me contestaste en lo que ibas respondiendo a otras. Entonces eso me ayuda bastante. Este Yo creo 
que dentro de todas experiencias, lo más importante para cerrar es cuál crees. Qué es lo más fundamental para 
entender a tu cliente? 
Cultivo: [00:34:41] Empatizar nos da conocer cuáles son sus dolores de cabeza. Y ojo, aun cuando es bisturíes, nunca 
me he dado cuenta ahora. Tanto el dolor de cabeza de la empresa, por ejemplo, una regulación que me va a costar 
mucho dinero, como era el dolor de cabeza de la persona que te está dando la entrada con la que estás hablando, que 
puede ser. No tengo tiempo para hacer todo esto. Yo sola necesito que venga gente y me ayude. O mi bono está ligado 
a. Tal y tal cosa. Entonces por. Poder entender eso y darle lo que tú estás vendiendo en esos términos. 
Researcher: [00:35:25] Muy bien. Pues sí, creo que esa era la última y creo que realmente es lo más importante. 
Transcript Cultivo Interview (Traduction - English) 
Researcher: [00:00:01] If you want to start by telling me about the project when they started it like this. And yes, well, 
right now where are you working and where is the project impacting, if it is in Mexico or if it is in another, in another 
community or some trace? 
Cultivo: [00:00:22] Sure, thanks to this then I am Rafael Alonso, co-founder of Cultivo Land. We started as an idea, 
about 18 months ago, it was started by Manuel, my co-founder, and it continued. I join the team of co-founders. In 
August 2010, my partner and I formed it. In December the company is. We work here in Mexico City and in London. It 
has been incorporated in the United States. And the impact it has to date? In terms of social and environmental impact 
in Mexico and in diﬀerent states of eastern Mexico, but come on, everything is done so that the impact grows, sales, 
everything globally. 
Researcher: [00:01:20] Do you have an established mission or vision? 
Cultivo: [00:01:26] If we want, they captured 1 billion tons of carbon through large-scale land restoration. 
Researcher: [00:01:38] And why? Because it started the project. 
Cultivo: [00:01:45] For the vision of all the partners together, that each one separately and then we agreed to make an 
important change at the environmental level, in which we could use the DNA of a startup and the knowledge that We 
bring ﬁnancial technology to change everything to that practice, that industry. And well, to make an environmental 
impact we explore solar, we explore this and other models within solar, other models within land conservation or 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
118
==PAGE:120==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
restoration. And it turns out that in land restoration there is much, much to do. This 37 percent of the emissions that we 
can from what we could do to prevent the temperature from reaching 2 degrees Celsius in 2030 can be done by 
restoring land and still very little money enters this space, compared for example, with investment in wind and 
investment in solar. So Breitner was not going where I can make a great impact and that it can also be a great 
opportunity to learn about the economy. Also partner. I met Pablo because he started another company before 
distributed solar panels, he is a reference here in Mexico and I used to do acceleration programs and given ﬁnancing to 
be environmental Toks. So I always wanted Pablo to put his company in my program. It never happen. He was very 
focused on this one and from there we became friends. We also have mutual friends. Pablo has known Manuel since 
high school, it seems to me. They studied together here in Mexico City. Mando then went many ways, ﬁrst to Houston, 
then to London. That company was successful. He listed it and one of his collaborators, who also became a co-founder 
in that other company, James. And ﬁnally Adolfo worked with Pablo in his Solar company. 
Researcher: [00:04:20] Already and how did I know? They ended up joining because each one had their own 
perspective and yes, things combined, they came together in this part. But how was the process, if you remember? 
Cultivo: [00:04:42] You don't have to ask Manuel, there are times when it starts, it bounces oﬀ Pablo. For both of them 
it makes a lot of sense. And when I speak to Pablo just to tell me. Because he is looking for me with this company to 
raise money from a high initial round and with a lot of risk and presales that he was not going to ﬂy. In my previous work 
then and I was just dating, I'm already thinking, they developed a Venture Studio. I can tell you how among them, right? 
Well yes, I just said to see, of all the social, environmental that a business model can have after having seen many 
companies see which are more proﬁtable, which are more scalable in. I was deciding to see solar if with technology, 
agriculture and land, that's right. I don't even remember water. Water completely is something that I do not know so 
much, but I see that there is great potential. And this empowerment educates women as it was within my thesis of the 
impossible investment in study. I went out to look for companies, not pipeline, and at the same time I have to knock on 
doors to look for money. What I realized is that. It was going to be a two, three year process to raise this money and at 
this moment I wanted to act when I was talking to Pablo to say hey, well this is in this study center. Let's continue 
collaborating in my state, urging someone to. Every time they see each other, he told me what they were doing. They 
are much more advanced and landing very technical things. And to be honest, I only thought about that ﬁrst coﬀee. I 
understood two things. One is a topic with a lot of environmental impact, very scalable, that there are practically no 
other actors in the world seeing where and two. It is a super, super capable team. I mean, an entrepreneur is great, he's 
one of those compress bags. Another did silly rounds, you know. Or they went to Hawaii Combinator with this other 
company. So for me it was a no breiner and little by little who did it go to? As we were adding our expertise, but all very 
aligned in that through restoring lands we can restore ecosystems. Through doing that we can really help lower global 
warming. And has it evolved? No, right now our models are already, we are already incorporating. How to sell 
biodiversity bonds with include water issues? No, because the work that is done on Earth generates all that. If I can. 
Measuring it with ICT, with the technological tools that Pablo develops, can be sold to my clients and that has a greater 
value for the ﬁnal beneﬁciaries and for us and for the planet. 
Researcher: [00:08:00] Obviously then this part was the same, since well, not all, but there are diﬀerent nationalities, 
right? 
Cultivo: [00:08:13] If we are four Mexicans and one English, ok. 
Researcher: [00:08:17] And how does that work? Between you? 
Cultivo: [00:08:21] Pretty good. This doesn't do much good to have a presence in London. Manuel was living there. So 
he also just moved to Mexico a few months ago, just before this situation, and the idea is that he went to San 
Francisco. We have to wait, obviously, but it serves us very well. I think we are all very used to working internationally 
and. And let's see. Fortunately no, we have been working remotely since before this. And it is also very useful for 
cultural issues. For example, when we talk to a customer there or put in a proposal for a strategic alliance. The way of 
thinking is quite diﬀerent, not from the UK space agency. I know Saidi can, so perhaps I have more knowledge than 
talking to civilians. James helps a lot with the tone and structure for the Youkai government and so we go. 
Researcher: [00:09:29] And within this part where they're remote, basically I say outside of these circumstances it's 
usually how they handle communication on the team or the activities divide them up and at a certain point they see 
how. 
Cultivo: [00:09:44] As a curious fact, we formed the company, signed a constituent company and had not yet shaken 
hands with Manuel or James. Fun fact too. I still don't know James in person. I know him very well because we talk 
every week, but I don't know if he's very tall, if he's very short, that is, at that point I only see him here. Now the location 
is constant. Every day we talk we use slack a lot. We use Shum. And I think they help, they help a lot, a lot, a lot, that 
we all have experience. In fact, I am Adolfo and I am the youngest, we are about to turn 30 this year. So I think we 
already know that if it works for us, it doesn't work for us, how to handle personalities, decisions and what you were 
talking about, how fair, how we make decisions. Everyone has an area, it's like Domain Dictator Schip, almost no sales 
were made. I made the last decision. If that strategy is taken by James, my team is fundraising and this administration 
is not up to Manuel and he is a product, it is Pablo. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
119
==PAGE:121==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Researcher: [00:11:08] So the areas are already decided a lot. So? 
Cultivo: [00:11:14] I mean, in the cantilever equip the area so the work, because at this moment there is no way to 
separate it. That is. And I say there are things that are worked on without all of us making decisions and do you think it 
is worth sending this material to a client? No, I'm in charge, Manuel involved. I am not a customer, it comes from him 
and already our weekly Zink, for example. I already told Pablo and Adolfo that he is further away in terms of products 
and projects. Hey, we sent this to that client. 
Researcher: [00:11:52] Super good. Well, then, if you want, a little more than the most extensive part of methods and 
topics, this begué had marked that they were good, that they were founding on the one hand by the private sector and 
that they also had mentoring by experts. I don't know if you want to tell me about these two experiences. 
Cultivo [00:12:17] Sure, we raised an initial round, we decided to demonstrate our wool. Then we did a Ziv round, a 
relative who had already invested in Manuel's company, an investor we got through a network of impact investors and 
other family friends. We do not want or have not wanted until now to lift the Bizi bike stop. But if it has been all private 
sector, all expect returns and mentoring as such. The. Not because I have gone through a formal mentoring program, 
but because we have a draft of our directors in our work. And if they are high-level people who help us to bounce ideas 
very, very, and on a large scale. 
Researcher: [00:13:18] Within these experiences or talks, or maybe feedback from the class or subway. Something that 
you have taken and that normed to say, you know that it became something daily or something routine from. Feedback 
maybe. 
Cultivo: [00:13:56] We force ourselves to divide the market segments very well, we don't have all of them inside our 
heads, but if someone from outside asks you, they forced you to create something that stays there, such as our 
segments , and to investigate more in each one of them. It was a little bit that added a lot of value to them. It is very 
speciﬁc knowledge of both ﬁnancial and biodiversity measurement issues that help us shortened. We even even have 
one too that we lean on the edge. But he is also an informal counselor and supports us with land issues, with a lot of 
experience, working with textiles, with the countryside in Mexico, with a sector of the public sector, government, in 
agriculture. I do not know if it was something very particular type Sheila or we do silly ten hours of meditation a week, 
but they do help us think about general things and be able to land it, although we do not know any causality of them 
that has told them like everyone, every that they are going to make a decision, try to do this or that they are going to do 
X thing, consider other things or it is really something, they will know very speciﬁcally who Daniel is, it is more how or 
that within your clients on the credit of investors. What are your guts? We think we know, but it doesn't force us to say 
OK and notion the drivers page for Tales Marquet Segment. As for the team dynamics, I think we do it very well. In our 
very Montessori way, albeit ﬁne. 
Researcher: [00:16:03] This fact really caught my attention that in the survey you stated that they had not used any 
methodology for this staccato. But I remember that you told me that I was in many social and environmental projects. 
So, any methodology that you remember or that maybe you have somehow taken as part of your mindset? 
Cultivo: [00:16:33] Sometimes I do things very unconsciously, very, very deep in our DNA, much diﬀerent than in many 
linnet startups. Many of the manual's manual loves the izzi system innovate it a year, but then the small slogan book 
also taught it when I gave entrepreneurship classes. If all Desert Beach sea that since then I saw them people. For 
example, if I have done one or more people for Clarity, SAIC, if it is not something like we say to see this jungle of 
cultivation person and we upload it to the drift, that is, it helps us. It's like a very rough draft, but if everything is very 
unconsciously don't tell me not this. 
Researcher: [00:17:32] They no longer follow you by book, but are already part of you. 
Cultivo: [00:17:36] We've basically never had a Lyceum Thinking session on the calendar. But unconsciously they do 
follow the methodology in a certain way. C. C. S .. Well and by chance, you will remember a project or experience 
where a methodology has really made you. How to say it? Well, it gave them the opportunity to really build something or 
make a diﬀerence in the project. Again it is so, so, so interrelated that the entire project, the entire company, depends 
on this type of thinking, on this start opera mentality. For example, you are going to sell to a company, although well, 
two were already shining that do not say oh, I have this HP, not all this land that needs to be regenerated for diﬀerent 
reasons, not for one Alestra but a cost and for another. It is an island government that needs to raise resilience issues. 
There is no way I can do with nature. On my island it is called Resilient carambas, they are diﬀerent from our ﬁrst client, 
but the clients have nothing else. He wants to buy, invest in carbon bond futures and if I give him diversity, better not to 
say about water. But these two are very diﬀerent. They required a diﬀerent type of sales process because they told us 
look, I have this land, I have the money, nothing else. I do not know what to do, so the same tools that we have to be 
deceived for us to make the match between land and who only wants the bonds does not help us calculate how much 
is the potential for land restoration and what could be restored, etc. Using satellite imagery such. We can use the same 
for these two clients where we innovate. Where was a lot of interaction? Much Linn? We will not be measuring, learning, 
and returning to the laboratory. It was in the sale process because then we ﬁrst told them clearly, if you can do nothing 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
120
==PAGE:122==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
else. Then we go back. We are going to do what we do in step 3, a mini version right now and how we landed on a 
document that one does not give us much of the product, but two are very simple for them to see before and after 
maps, not potential and they light up eyes and call us and if they sign one day? And if we go forward, right? And who 
presents it then? Adolfo presents it to us, who carries out projects or Rafa presents them, who then, as we have been 
integrating that process and says yes, it is very particular, it allowed us to realize it. That there became one of our 
creators for this quarter. That we need an internal way that anyone can do those ﬁrst analyzes without having to go with 
the product. You can do an analysis because it has already become a sales tool for other types of clients, since. 
Researcher: [00:21:05] Do you usually look for customers or is someone already interested in the product? 
Cultivo: [00:21:11] Until now there have been contacts that we have. And those who listen to what we are doing or hear 
are interested. You have to talk to this great energy company so-and-so. They are usually people who are already used 
to technical language. There is everything. I would say in general, in general they are used to technical ﬁnancial 
language. They do not know the technical language of land restoration. 
Researcher: [00:21:42] There is someone in charge. How do you get down there? That information. 
Cultivo: [00:21:49] He's talking to them on this one. And that has been another integration process. The ﬁrst big 
corporate that we went to sell to them, we threw to IPAC this all the Sustainable Ruslan Management concepts. And it 
was just our internal champion as a person, introspections within the corporate that understands and has the interest to 
work with us and help us make the sale upwards. The director of today, the CFO of I do not know which one can be, 
but it is that he told us. Yes, but you have to give my boss a deﬁnition of what that is. So too much. The integration 
process there of listening to the. We make the diﬀerence to the market already while we are selling what is going to be 
asked because you are in sales, right? 
Researcher: [00:22:45] You were telling me. Some words that you normally feel are more repetitive or that are key when 
you explain a project. 
Cultivo: [00:23:02] Nature, that is, as these words say, it sounds, although they understand it well, much more than 
restoring land and restoring nature, though. Carbon bond futures futures. If I do not know the truth, if words as such 
should review all the materials or if simply as phrases or words that you say, it is that when I am going to explain it or 
when we will do it. We do not know the subject at scale. We are going to do projects at scale. A portfolio from 2000 will 
suﬃce and that comes. Dorio All your words are superﬂuous because they live on their very particular needs, that I have 
to comply with the regulation. I have all these tons of carbon to oﬀset to get to 0. There are projects that give me not a 
tenth of that. When I say to you, you can build your project portfolio, we have scale, our eyes shine. 
Researcher: [00:24:09] It doesn't make much sense to be alive in this part too. The same you marked me that normally 
you get the user's insights through, they assume. What is it like? That is the part like you months of which is to know 
and it is also. Maybe he would ask who is or, in this case, who was inside the company, who told you how to do it, but if 
not. I do not have it. I mean, there is no one. How does Cesar do it? How do you know what your user is looking for? 
Your client? 
Cultivo: [00:24:55] Again you assume. You go, you talk to them and in the same call you calibrate, you don't 
understand. What things start to resonate? They are telling you and also how is it selling? VI VI in a certain way, I think, 
we can do much more. Like Extrem Lynch, because it is no longer that in a call they say no, here is my card and they 
pay the payment online. So in the ﬁrst they tell you there are other things, do you give them this yes, normally how long 
does that process take? 
Researcher: [00:25:33] Because it's not just a call, but I guess it also varies a lot, it varies a lot and we are very early. 
Cultivo [00:25:40] We formed the company in December. Right now we have the ﬁrst letter of intent. We are waiting for 
the ﬁrst contract of this large company, the one that this Mexican told you about, and with them we started knocking on 
doors in October. The letter was signed in March and we were like three, three interactions or four feis tu feis and some 
other calls. 
Researcher: [00:26:09] Although it makes a lot of sense and within all this time I know what skills you think are the 
most necessary, both as soft skills and ischia, to really make the customer or the user endorse the purchase. 
Researcher: [00:22:45] You were telling me. Some words that you normally feel are more repetitive or that are key when 
you explain a project. 
Cultivo: [00:23:02] Nature, that is, as these words say, it sounds, although they understand it well, much more than 
restoring land and restoring nature, though. Carbon bond futures futures. If I do not know the truth, if words as such 
should review all the materials or if simply as phrases or words that you say, it is that when I am going to explain it or 
when we will do it. We do not know the subject at scale. We are going to do projects at scale. A portfolio from 2000 will 
suﬃce and that comes. Dorio All your words are superﬂuous because they live on their very particular needs, that I have 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
121
==PAGE:123==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
to comply with the regulation. I have all these tons of carbon to oﬀset to get to 0. There are projects that give me not a 
tenth of that. When I say to you, you can build your project portfolio, we have scale, our eyes shine. 
Researcher: [00:24:09] It doesn't make much sense to be alive in this part too. The same you marked me that normally 
you get the user's insights through, they assume. What is it like? That is the part like you months of which is to know 
and it is also. Maybe he would ask who is or, in this case, who was inside the company, who told you how to do it, but if 
not. I do not have it. I mean, there is no one. How does Cesar do it? How do you know what your user is looking for? 
Your client? 
Cultivo: [00:24:55] Again you assume. You go, you talk to them and in the same call you calibrate, you don't 
understand. What things start to resonate? They are telling you and also how is it selling? VI VI in a certain way, I think, 
we can do much more. Like Extrem Lynch, because it is no longer that in a call they say no, here is my card and they 
pay the payment online. So in the ﬁrst they tell you there are other things, do you give them this yes, normally how long 
does that process take? 
Researcher: [00:25:33] Because it's not just a call, but I guess it also varies a lot, it varies a lot and we are very early. 
Cultivo: [00:25:40] We formed the company in December. Right now we have the ﬁrst letter of intent. We are waiting for 
the ﬁrst contract of this large company, the one that this Mexican told you about, and with them we started knocking on 
doors in October. The letter was signed in March and we were like three, three interactions or four feis tu feis and some 
other calls. 
Researcher: [00:26:09] Although it makes a lot of sense and within all this time I know what skills you think are the 
most necessary, both as soft skills and ischia, to really make the customer or the user endorse the purchase. 
Cultivo: [00:26:29] Soft skills persuasion, empathy and hard skills. Knowledge, minimum ﬁnancial day and depth. The 
problem that the company has had or has become experts in the regulation that it has to fulﬁll, as long as it goes far 
beyond how to plant a tree or how to measure satellite images. That they assume that you already know how to do that, 
but on the issue of regulation, as they have also studied it from top to bottom. For me this is an assumption, for them to 
take you seriously to know that if you are going to fulﬁll a project ﬁnanced for so many years, they are based on what 
they know well, which is that regulation. We have been asked a lot of questions and in fact, when you can add value, 
they admire. We saw that such standards were passed just without their asking. That builds trust. So trust, with 
empathy for persuasion, already translates into sales and usually nothing else. 
Researcher: [00:27:45] Is it one person who does this dialogue or are they among several who do the work? 
Cultivo: [00:27:51] This is one that leads it, so I am the way I am, I am their point of contact, my WhatsApp is ringing 
whenever they want and send, but it just brings us diﬀerent roles. So Adolfo knows deep eighth notes, at least before 
his eyes. So if they bring regulatory techniques to the people, so do we. Manuel acts more like you already know as a 
big ﬁgure. So when we had to get the signature on the read hey hey please this. Fine tune so that when there is a 
signature and we can go to investors. Investors fall within that narrative that of course they don't ask us for a letter of 
intent, but so do I. I play those dynamics, I empathize with other people as of course, if I have also been when my boss 
or my investors ask me that, things move faster. Enough, enough, but we haven't gotten creative like this with this ﬁrst 
client, knowing a lot about the corporate Mexican culture. You have to see, maybe with a Dutch client he sent us the 
purchase. Sure, those are very diﬀerent things. From the outset, this earring is part of this part, which is part of the 
culture. When they have to be with diﬀerent clients, for example, that Saint James has in London. This. 
Researcher: [00:29:35] Still and he's in charge of sales, right? 
Cultivo: [00:29:39] James leads strategy in particular he lands a lot on communication and marketing issues. But he 
also has direct contact with clients. Stress? Yes Yes Yes Yes. Espetos to those who are there, it is like their unoﬃcial 
suquet chucha. It is oﬃce in England. Montánchez ok. When we have talked to people from there or Rio together there. 
Researcher: [00:30:12] Yes, the Astola, although normally he also follows the same process as you. Are you still with 
Mexican companies? If someone inside, maybe they already give you an insight and they already do the strategy on 
that. 
Cultivo: [00:30:31] Exactly, exactly. And not only Lynsey, but also like. Push to reach other levels within the company. 
That has been our way. 
Researcher: [00:30:47] Ok, this one will confront you. Another thing, but it goes hand in hand with whoever is within the 
company, but have they had cases in which they do not have any contact or someone directly related? 
Cultivo: [00:31:02] Not yet, eventually, if you are going to start doing Conklin, I believe or see how we have an excuse 
to meet someone who opens the door for us or that they are already looking for us. been through someone we know. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
122
==PAGE:124==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Researcher: [00:31:17] They had also told me that I've been on several projects before. From the stratum right now. 
What projects were you on? 
Cultivo: [00:31:29] From entrepreneurship to this I am doing a creative studio that is more an SME. That is why it is not 
a consultancy that with a partner who is super creative. We are raising awareness about climate change. Already then, 
selling the same to the same space, to the ﬁrst client we already send all our exasperated signature to the contract or in 
a large axis that makes a lot of impact, communicates very poorly. So how can we help you become more creative? 
Even before that and those two, if I have a marten company, I did not help create this before and later I became general 
manager of a ﬁnancial company that gives loans to SMEs with social or environmental impact. Already. It is equal to 
zero to get something for free, get to hire a team, do what you are going to take and sell to him. There we sold to 
companies, to SMEs with social and environmental impact. Not to go, because all those SMEs that we sold them 
already had the network and the conﬁdence, because before that, with themselves, with Rodrigo and my exes and 
Yorick, I did acceleration programs as such. They were not a company, they were inside the accelerator. The same is 
this ﬁnancial. If he became a separate entity, he raised his money, hired his separate people and right now he already 
has a general manager who is taking him to the next level. This if you want. I like to create and I'm going to be carrying 
something that has a good, direct impact. Before that the acceleration programs, because there were several. There 
was one we did for biodiversity companies in Peru, another one for renewable energy and mobility companies in 
Mexico. Before that I put up a brand of mezcal that costs. Yes, you push a lot and I got out. Be fair, we created it, we 
developed it as such, but from there I went to work with social employers. So? Selling alcohol and aid to social 
enterprises makes me long, it demotivates me from the truth and this I sold my share back to my former partners and 
friends and to them. The truth is that La Rompido so far is doing very well. Many years later. 
Researcher: [00:34:07] How cool! How nice of that part. I vote if we laugh very quickly because many of the questions 
you answered me as you were answering others. So that helps me a lot. This I believe that within all experiences, the 
most important thing to close is which one you believe. What is the most fundamental thing to understand your client? 
Cultivo: [00:34:41] Empathizing gives us to know what your headaches are. And beware, even when it is a scalpel, I 
have never realized it now. Both the headache of the company, for example, a regulation that is going to cost me a lot 
of money, as well as the headache of the person who is giving you the entrance with which you are talking, which can 
be. I don't have time to do all this. I just need people to come and help me. Or my voucher is tied to. Such and such. 
Then why. To be able to understand that and give you what you are selling in those terms. 
Researcher: [00:35:25] Very well. Yes, I think that was the last one and I think it really is the most important thing. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
123
==PAGE:125==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Appendix 10 - Insights Cluster 
 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
124
==PAGE:126==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Appendix 11 - Concept Catalogue 
Concept 1 
The concept aims to show how the iterative process happens between validating with the customer 
and working inside the company. With a pivoting movement the model intends to illustrates the 
relationship between user validation testing and improvements done by the startup. It was considered 
that the arrow can have as many pivoting as necessary, as long as it keeps going forward resulting in 
a positive outcome.  
 
The difference that matters 
In product development, user validation is fundamental. Having a model that allows to document each 
step of the process gives the startup the chance to understand their whole journey.  
This concept is relatively easy to implement as it is seeing more as a document tool that makes visual 
the outcomes of each step in the product development process. Startups will have the complete 
information and everyone in the team can look at it and understand what is the next step to take.  
Strengths
Weaknesses
• Documents every step of the process
• Depends on the user on the amount and detail 
of information they decide to document.
• Easy to understand what was the 
outcome in each step and with which 
actor (startup or user)
• Might become to crowded 
• Need to deﬁne key words 
• Everyone can assume diﬀerent things from the 
same information if its not well explained
• Easy to be applied
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
125
==PAGE:127==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Concept 2 
This concept looks to show the relation between decisions done by startups, users and stakeholders. 
The arrows in the model looks to symbolise a dynamic system behaviour between the three agents 
and how does each other affect between them. It was considered that the proportions of the model 
could vary depending on the power level in the ecosystem in a way to make visible who is the 
stakeholder that should be considered for a decision.  
 
The difference that matters 
In a startup ecosystem understanding how each stakeholder affects the other is crucial. It was 
understood by the hyper-collaboration and startup ecosystem analysis the potential of working 
together and improving the product development process in a startup.  
The dynamic of the system is visualised and the model can vary in different times. Over time the 
startup will have a documented map of the power inﬂuence. 
Strengths
Weaknesses
• Shows the dynamic system behaviour
• It might be perceived as complex and too 
general to give concrete information
• Complete overview of the inﬂuence power
• Factors to decide the stakeholder power will 
need to be deﬁned
• Allows to take decisions based on the 
stakeholders power
• Decisions might be taken based on 
assumption rather than concrete information
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
126
==PAGE:128==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Concept 3  
Concept three aims to create a “radiography” on the relation between a product features and 
adoption factors. It is considered that if a product ﬁts most of all the adoption factors this will be 
accepted in an emerging market easily. By detailing the product functions the startup is aware of the 
value that they perceive they are giving to the user. If each of the functions has a reason to ﬁll each 
adoption factor it will be easier for the startup to understand the opportunities or risks they are facing.  
 
The difference that matters 
This concept proposes a radiography between the technical part and the human part of a product. By 
acknowledging this startups can be aware of the needs to improve the product and enter the market 
in an easier form. 
It is considered that this concept relatively easy to implement as it doesn’t require a lot of time to get 
ﬁll and it can be modifying along time.  
When using color code post its to write each relation, startups can identify opportunities or risks in a 
near future.  
Strengths
Weaknesses
• Shows a relation between product features 
and adoption factors
• Needs key questions to answer each factor
• Identiﬁes opportunities and risks before user 
validation or market entrance
• Requires a reﬂection after ﬁlling the tool to 
understand the outcomes of the information.
• Has the possibility to be modiﬁed at any point
• Provides information to diﬀerent departments 
of the startup (product development, sales, 
marketing, etc.)
• Can be modiﬁed by a single person or a team
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
127
==PAGE:129==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Appendix 12 - Concept Evaluation 
Concept 1 
With concept one it was considered that the following dimensions will be impacted: 
• Strategy, the model will allow the startup to create a plan to achieve their mission and vision. 
• Need, this concept proposes a relation between customers and the products attributes.  
• User, customer, this concept shows how the user behaviour and responses to the product 
changes the development process. 
• Technology, the concept relates the user behaviour into the product principles. 
 
Product’s raison d’être: 
Possible 
    + With an iterative tool is easy for the startups to use it in their daily activities. 
    - Each startup will have a different way to use it (e.g. teams, individual, whole company) 
Profitable 
    + Documents information for possible investors. 
    - Requires time to document all the information, hours of work will have to be invested in the 
model. 
Desirable 
    + The outcomes makes easier for the startups to document and look at their process. 
    - Some startups might consider it as not needed in their operations. 
Sensible 
    + The concept gives the startup a visual aid of their development process.  
- It is needed to deﬁne the criteria of how to deﬁne power in the model 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
128
==PAGE:130==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Concept 2 
With concept two it was considered that the following dimensions will be impacted: 
• Need, one of the parts of the concept involves the understanding of the customers problems and 
how does this affect the startup ecosystem. 
• User, customer, the concept considers the user behaviour and response to the decisions made by 
the startups ecosystem 
• Technology, concept 2 involves the production agents, who are considered part of the 
stakeholders in the ecosystem. 
 
Product’s raison d’être: 
Possible 
    + All startups are aware of the basic stakeholders in their ecosystem so they can create the model 
    - Each startup will have a different perspective of power of each stakeholder in the ecosystem. 
Profitable 
    + Allows identify power stakeholders who could invest in the company. 
    - It will require time to draft the ﬁrst version of the canvas, taking the time of other tasks.  
Desirable 
    + The outcomes gives the startup a panorama for potential collaborations. 
    - Some startups might feel is not needed at a certain point of their development. 
Sensible 
    + The product beneﬁts the user by providing an overview of the dynamic system behaviour they 
pertain.  
-The concept might be too complicate and need to make it more accesible. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
129
==PAGE:131==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Concept 3 
With concept three it was considered that the following dimensions will be impacted: 
• Strategy, the model will allow the startup to create a plan to achieve their mission and vision while 
having a balance between user and company. 
• Need, this concept proposes a relation between customers and the products attributes.  
• User, customer, this concept shows the relation between the adoption factors that are relevant for 
the user and customer in order to accept the product. 
• Goal specification, by applying this concept the properties and performance of the product is 
validated before user testing. 
• Product, the form and appearance of a product, as well as the technical solutions are correlated to 
the adoption factors. 
• Technology, the product principles are outlined and detailed in a technical and user perception. 
 
Product’s raison d’être: 
Possible 
    + With an iterative tool is feasible to adopt it in the startups' scenarios 
    - Each startup will have a different way to use it (e.g. teams, individual, whole company) 
Proﬁtable 
    + Reduces the workforce creating bigger opportunities to improve current solutions. 
    - It will require time to draft the ﬁrst version of the canvas, taking the time of other tasks.  
Desirable 
    + The outcomes makes it more appealing compared to current solutions. 
    - Some startups might consider it as not needed in their operations. 
Sensible 
    + The product beneﬁts the end-user and the customer by improving current solutions  
- The product has to be improved in graphical design to make it more attractive.  
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
130
==PAGE:132==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Appendix 13 - Interactive Board and Perceived Value 
Questionnaire 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
131
==PAGE:133==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Perceived Value Questionnaire guideline for case studies in the thesis project  
”Domestication of Technology: Innovations making sense within 
communities” 
Researcher: Martha Cecilia Fernandez Contreras 
Technical University of Denmark 
Contact: ceciliafdz.94@gmail.com  
This interview guideline has three parts: 
• Action - These questions attempt to identify the feelings connected to the model, and if those draw 
them closer or pull them away. 
• Barriers - These questions focus on how users internalise and understand the tool. 
• Motivation - These questions answer how positive or negative the user perception has been with the 
tool. 
Action 
• Scale question: On a scale of 1-10, how easy was to understand the tool? 
• Scale question: On a scale of 1-10, how comfortable will you feel using the tool? 
• Open-ended question: Which three words would you use to describe the tool? 
Barriers 
• Open-ended question: Please share a few things that can be improved in the tool. 
• Open-ended question: In your perception, what is the biggest challenge to use this tool? 
• Open-ended question: In your perception, will this tool provide meaningful information to the 
Startup? 
Motivation 
• Scale question: On a scale of 1-10, how likely are you to use it in your Startup? 
• Scale question: On a scale of 1-10, how likely are you to recommend to a friend or colleague? 
• Open-ended question: Why would you use it in your daily operations? 
• Open-ended question: Please share a few things that you liked about the tool. 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
132
==PAGE:134==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
Appendix 14 - Perceived Value Answers 
 
 
 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
133
==PAGE:135==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
 
 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
134
==PAGE:136==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
 
 
 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
135
==PAGE:137==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
 
 
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
136
==PAGE:138==
Appendices                                                                                                                                                           Chapter 10
 
Perceived Value by Startups
Timestamp
On a scale 
of 1-10, 
how easy 
was to 
understan
On a scale of 
1-10, how 
comfortable 
will you feel 
using the 
Which 
three 
words 
would you 
use to 
Please share a few 
things that can be 
improved in the 
tool.
In your perception, 
what is the biggest 
challenge to use this 
tool?
In your 
perception
, will this 
tool 
provide 
On a scale 
of 1-10, 
how likely 
are you to 
use it in 
On a scale 
of 1-10, 
how likely 
are you to 
recommen
Why would 
you use it 
in your 
daily 
operations
Please 
share a 
few things 
that you 
liked about 
5/28/2020 23:22:
6
6 canvas, 
technology 
and 
customer
Clearer definitions 
of what a factor is 
and what needs to 
be written in a cell. 
It is not clear to me 
how the things 
written on the post-
its relates to the 
feature in that row.
Placement + ease of 
use + Interaction: I do 
not understand how the 
feature relates to this 
category. E.g. I don’t 
understand what cord-
free and “Sound of 
vacuum” has to do with 
each other. 
Also, it is a bit difficut 
for me to grasp what it 
means that a feature 
fulfils a factor. Is it 
meant to be a 
requirement? 
Lastly, I think it is a bit 
hard to get a 
meaningful outcome 
from the canvas, apart 
from writing down ideas 
of improving the product 
based on my own 
perception of the user's 
problems.
Maybe
4
4 To make 
sure that 
the features 
in the 
product 
creates a 
value for 
the user
The matrix 
built-up is 
nice, but 
needs more 
clarity to 
function 
well, I think
6/2/2020 1:38:59
8
8 opportunitie
s, product, 
overview
Naming: Product 
engagement, 
product stickiness, 
product something 
canvas.  
Put "Key" Product 
Features.  
State that not all 
places must have a 
post it (i.e. some 
products might not 
add on Usefulness, 
but have a lot of 
added value on 
other areas) 
Is it intended to be 
for services too? I-d 
a) run it for a 
service, then b) 
change language so 
it is inclusive to 
service 
entrepreneurs 
Small detail: add 
Company or 
Startup: ___ field 
(everyone likes to 
see their name, also 
useful if it is part of 
a workshop with 
many startups)
too many categories to 
fill out (eight times five), 
hence the key feature of 
saying "not all places 
must have a post it". 
Silence is key for sound 
to create patterns. 
Yes
8
8 To visualize 
where I can 
improve my 
product. To 
find 
discrepanci
es of 
product 
views 
among my 
team (i.e. 
compare 
Head of 
Product vs 
Head of 
Sales 
canvas), to 
prioritize 
features to 
market or 
build
Few text, 
one page 
long, 
concise 
and very 
focused on 
one thing 
(product 
improveme
nt)
6/2/2020 12:12:2
8
9 Complete 
product 
lifecycle,
Less complex 
visuals
Defining the right 
product features
Yes
7
9 To evaluate 
product 
features in 
a 
developme
nt phase
The 
account of 
the 
complete 
product life 
cycle 
6/5/2020 11:32:2
9
9 Consumer 
Tech 
Canvas, or 
Consumer 
Interaction 
Canvas
Maybe the graphics 
could be fine-tuned 
a bit?
I do not see any big 
challenges to use this 
tool. It seems pretty 
straight forward and it 
seems to give an easy 
understanding of the 
intersection between 
the product and the 
user.
Yes
8
8 It is an 
easy way to 
get a 
overview
specially 
the 
explanation 
on each 
category, it 
makes it 
significantly 
easier to 
understand 
/ fill each 
field
6/5/2020 16:32:2
9
9 interactive, 
user 
friendly
normally you will 
also have the 
barriers or 
complications to a 
products, to see 
where the issues 
lies, so will be nice 
to have a space for 
that
it seems quite easy to 
use, the biggest 
challenge might be to 
understand the factors, 
but with the questions it 
was really easy
Yes
8
9 all the team 
can be 
aware of 
the relation 
between 
customer 
and product 
(marketing, 
r&d, sales)
the key 
questions 
made 
everything 
super easy
6/7/2020 8:35:31
8
9 canvas, 
matrix, 
product
if this tool is not for 
selling (only), so I 
would in a subtle 
manner mention 
some of the cons to 
the product. Could 
be pricing, capacity 
etc. Otherwise 
understand the relation 
between factors and 
features
Yes
9
9 is easy to 
identify 
details of 
the product 
and 
improve 
them 
before 
validating 
with the 
user
it is a one 
page and 
can be 
printed in 
A0 and 
work with 
the team
Domesticating technology: Innovations making sense within communities 
 
137
