==PAGE:1==
Optical Velocity Sensor by Image Processing
Master’s Thesis in Electrical Engineering, 30 ECTS
Technical University of Denmark - DTU
Kacper Marcin Lukowiak
Supervisor: Michael Linde Jakobsen
Master of Science in Electrical Engineering
June 23, 2020
1
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Drones and robots are constantly increasing their presence on the mar-
ket but lack a precise velocity measurement method. Navigation of drones
on ground depends mostly on access to GPS signals. When GPS signals
fall out, alternative velocity measurements are required, and rotation of
wheels calculation is not suﬃciently precise due to sloped terrain and
slip. This thesis provides a surface velocity measurement method, using
the dynamics of laser generated speckles. Speckle images are processed
and velocity as well as direction are evaluated.
2
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Literature Review
6
3
Theory
7
3.1
Laser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.1
Gaussian Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Speckle Dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.1
Possible Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Cross-Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Peak Finding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4.1
Maximum Value Peak . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4.2
Noise Cancellation - Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Optical System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5.1
Snell’s Law and Paraxial Approximation . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5.2
Ray Transfer Matrices (ABCD matrix analysis)
. . . . .
19
3.5.3
ABCD Matrix Model of the Sensor System
. . . . . . . .
22
3.6
Hardware Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Method
25
4.1
Template Matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Peak Finding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Displacement Finding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Filter/Ignore Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.5
Performance Tweaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5.1
Video Port
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5.2
RAM usage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5.3
Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5.4
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.6
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.6.1
Testing Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.6.2
Template Matching Test on Images . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6.3
Accuracy Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.6.4
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Results
42
6
Discussion
43
7
Future Work
44
8
Summary
45
3
==PAGE:4==
A Appendix - Code used for displacement, accuracy and perfor-
mance testing
48
4
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
Nowadays, drones and robots velocity measurements are usually based on GPS
signals. These are usually not very precise and GPS signal can fall out or just
give uncertain measurements.
According to the oﬃcial GPS website ran by
the US government, speed measurements accuracy based on the GPS signal
strength depends on many factors such as "satellite geometry, signal blockage,
atmospheric conditions, and receiver design features/quality"[4]. On the other
hand, the optical velocity sensor will work independently of these factors. Thus,
the sensor will provide supplementary velocity and displacement information
with more reliable and precise navigation expected.
1.1
Objective
The objective of this thesis is to develop and test a working optical velocity
sensor by image processing of the reﬂected speckle images. Furthermore, pre-
sentation of ideas and concepts behind the image processing using cross correla-
tion will be given. Moreover, a working system with its results, limitations and
testing procedures will be presented.
1.2
Thesis Outline
The thesis is organised in the following way:
• The ﬁrst part describes the motivation, objective and methods of this
thesis.
• The second part focuses on the literature review and sources of the con-
cepts used in this work.
• The third part describes the theory that is behind the optical velocity
sensor including cross correlation, speckle dynamics and the optical system
used.
• The fourth part describes the method and means by which the working
system was achieved, including the algorithm and techniques used.
• The ﬁfth part presents the results of the whole work and the system.
• It is then followed by discussion, summary and a proposed future work
that can be done.
5
==PAGE:6==
2
Literature Review
The paper which is an inspiration for this thesis, is presented in the research
done by M. Bahrawi, N. Farid, and M. Abdel-Hady from Optical Metrology De-
partment at National Institute for Standards in Egypt. They have used speckle
images to determine the deformations of the materials under stress or tempera-
ture without the direct contact which is required by other methods. According
to the study, "The variation of speckle patterns position and interference fringes’
visibility indicate the direction and the strength of the deformation that the ob-
ject encountered."[13] The cross-correlation method was used to determine the
displacement and it is said in the work that the method developed is reliable in
indicating the displacement.
Displacement calculations based on the speckle images dynamics and cross cor-
relation between images taken at diﬀerent time seem like a relevant idea that
can be used in robots and drones to calculate velocity and the direction of move-
ment in a reliable manner.
The actual accuracy of electronic speckle photography (ESP) is discussed in
the paper "Accuracy in electronic speckle photography" by M. Sjödahl.[20] It
is clearly stated that ESP is the simplest method for analysis of in-plane de-
formation ﬁelds, which refers to numerous applications such as measurements
of hygroexpansion in paper or velocity ﬁeld in ﬂuids.
It seems natural that
another application can be in fact, the optical velocity sensor. However, Sjö-
dahl thinks that the major disadvantage of the EPS is the performance of the
cross-correlation for which calculations take a considerable amount of time. On
the other hand the performance can be improved by applying the correlation in
the frequency domain with fast Fourier transform algorithms.
6
==PAGE:7==
3
Theory
In this section, several theoretical aspects of the work will be presented and
discussed.
3.1
Laser
The word LASER is an acronym of Light Ampliﬁcation by Stimulated Emission
of Radiation where radiation refers to a stream of photons.[17] Continuous-
wave lasers, which are used in this work, are light sources that emit coherent
monochromatic light and are employed in order to produce laser speckles de-
scribed in 3.2 subsection. The measurement method presented in this thesis is
based on laser speckles and their dynamics.
3.1.1
Gaussian Field
Laser beam is assumed to be Gaussian with irradiance that follows an ideal
Gaussian distribution, according to Rüdiger Paschotta.[19] Gaussian distribu-
tion of a beam means that its irradiance is symmetric around the centre and it
decreases on as distance from the centre of the beam increases. This relation is
clearly represented in Figure 1:
Figure 1: Laser with its beam distribution [16]
7
==PAGE:8==
The Gaussian beam is a fundamental mode for a wave, that is centered on
the z-axis and propagates along the z-axis. Therefore, the k-vector is parallel
to the z-axis, and its numerical value, the wave number is inverse proportional
to the wavelength of the wave such that k =
2π
lambda. The electric and magnetic
ﬁelds are mutually orthogonal, and both are orthogonal to the z-axis. Further,
we assume that both ﬁelds are rotational symmetric with respect to the z-axis.
In this case, the ﬁeld strengths can be described by a radial coordinate only as
r =
p
(x2 + y2). The Gaussian beam is illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Gaussian Field [10]
The Gaussian beam and its distribution with a naked eye look as in Figure
3:
Figure 3: Gaussian Field Distribution and Intensity[10]
The mathematical expression which describes the distribution of amplitude
of the electrical ﬁeld looks as follows:
8
==PAGE:9==
¯E = ¯e⊥E0
w0
w(z) exp

−
r2
w2(z)

exp

i(kz −ωt −ϕ) + i kr2
2R(z)

(1)
where r is the radial distance from the centre of the beam
The ﬁrst exponential factor of Eq. 1 describes the transverse distribution of
the ﬁeld strengths, and has given the wave its name. The ﬁelds distributions
can be described as a Gaussian function of the radial coordinate relative to the
z-axis. The Gaussian distribution has its maximum value at the center on the
z-axis, and the ﬁeld strengths decline constantly as the radial distance increases
(see Fig. 1). The width (w(z)) of the distribution describes the radial position
where the ﬁelds has decreased to 1
e = 0.368 of the ﬁeld peak values on the z-axis.
The width depends on the z-position. The minimum width of a Gaussian ﬁeld
is called its waist ω0, see Fig. 2. This is also the point where the ﬁeld strengths
are at their highest value, and e.g. the electrical ﬁelds takes the value E0.
The second exponential factor describes the propagation of the wave in time
and space. In the ﬁrst term, the product of kz describes the variation of the
wave along the z-axis, while the product of ωt describes the variation of the
wave in time. The constant φ is used to set the phase of the wave to a certain
value in a point in space and time. The second term describes the curvature of
the phase fronts as a function of r, thus R(z) is the radius of curvature of the
phase fronts at any given point z. In Fig. 2, near the waist (z →0), the radius
of curvature approaches inﬁnity, and the phase fronts become a plane. However,
at z values diﬀerent from zero, the curvature becomes apparent again, and it
takes either a convex or concave shape, which can be marked by a sign.
Typical, frequencies of the optical waves are in the order of several hundreds
THz, therefore, the relevant measure of optical wave is its irradiance/intensity
(I). It can be shown that I = EE∗, thus we ﬁnd that intensity of the Gaussian
wave is expressed in Eq. 2.
I = ¯e⊥
n
2c0µ0
E2
0
 w0
w(z)
2
exp

−2r2
w2(z)

(2)
3.2
Speckle Dynamics
Laser speckles are a statistical optical phenomenon. However, the dynamics of
the speckle pattern as a whole can be described deterministically [24], and this
will be used throughout this work to calculate velocity of the vehicle. Speckles
are initiated at a diﬀuse reﬂection of the ﬁeld at a rough surface when illuminat-
ing it with a coherent monochromatic light - such as light from a laser. [3] Fig.
4 illustrates a reﬂection form a rough surface. Even reﬂections from a surface
9
==PAGE:10==
with rms-values for the surface roughness of few tens of nanometers will initiate
speckles. The speckles occur after propagating of the ﬁeld and at some distance
inserting a screen.
Figure 4: An example of a diﬀuse reﬂection oﬀa rough surface [21]
The pattern itself has a granular appearance as is illustrated in Fig. 5:
Figure 5: An example of a speckle pattern taken using Raspberry Pi noIR v2
camera
The picture was taken by the Raspberry camera after removing a camera
lens. The camera points towards a rough metal plate which is illuminated with
a coherent, monochromatic laser beam. The speckle pattern is developed as the
10
==PAGE:11==
reﬂected ﬁeld propagates from the metal plate directly to the bare camera chip.
The speckle pattern looks chaotic but according to Goodman [3], the wave
reﬂected from a surface consists of all the contributions from a large amount
of independent scattering elements, so called scatters.
The scatters are dis-
tributed throughout the illuminated surface, thus the surface roughness will
shift the phase of the individual scatters. The resulting ﬁeld at the camera chip
adds up the contribution from all the scatters considering both their phase and
amplitude.
Huygens-Frensel principle is a method that can propagate such a scattered wave
from the rough surface to a screen or an observation plane located a certain dis-
tance away. The principle assumes that each scatter emits spherical wave and
that their ﬁeld amplitude declines inversely proportional with the distance of
propagation. At the screen the resulting ﬁeld is converted into the intensity,
and then the speckles will occur.
In Fig. 6, we consider an object with a rough surface and an incident plane
wave. First we consider that just one of the scatters is active. A single spherical
wave from a scatter is illustrated as well as the corresponding intensity of the
ﬁeld incident onto the screen:
Figure 6: Single spherical scatter with its intensity ﬁeld [8]
While a single spherical scatter creates a well distributed intensity ﬁeld, the
matter looks diﬀerent with 100 of them as we can see on Fig. 7. The intensity
ﬁeld looks random without any speciﬁc order. The intensity pattern represents
the speckles pattern.
11
==PAGE:12==
Figure 7: A hundred spherical scatter with their intensity ﬁeld [8]
Diﬀerent optical paths from each of the scatters to any given point that lays
on the camera chip is evaluated in terms of its optical phase which is usually in
range of few hundred nanometers. Thus, the interference of these contributions
is highly sensitive to the positions of the scatters. The resulting optical ﬁeld is
observed as the irradiance/intensity of the ﬁeld at the camera. This is shown
by the granular/speckled intensity pattern in Fig. 5. Brighter spots represents
the areas where the interference was mostly constructive and the darker spots
represent destructive interference. In Fig. 8 diﬀerent optical paths from each
of the scatters on the reﬂecting surface to a single point on the camera chip is
illustrated.
12
==PAGE:13==
Figure 8: Speckle formation [3]
The observation point represents a camera in this project.
The dynamics of a speckle that are used in this work to obtain the velocity
measurements are relatively simple. If the sensor and the laser are mounted
on the vehicle, which is static relative to the surface, the speckle pattern will
be observed as static as well in the ideal environment. On the other hand, by
moving the vehicle, and thus the laser and the camera, the speckles pattern will
move along with the surface as seen from the vehicle. This is called speckle
translation.
As new parts of the surface are illuminated by the laser beam,
new scatters replace those that are leaving the illuminated area.
Therefore,
the speckle pattern will change shape at the same time. This is called speckle
decorrelation or speckle boiling. In our case, we intend to measure the speckle
translation, while in the process of designing the setup, we intend to limit the
speckle decorrelation as far as we can. It is crucial to note that it is possible
to counter-balance the decorrelation rate by increasing the area of speckles ob-
served. Rate of new appearing scatters is then lower due to larger area and
thus, the decorrelation rate decreases.
3.2.1
Possible Applications
One of the other aspects of a speckle dynamics is that it is possible to detect
the change of tilt/slope but it can only happen when certain conditions are met
13
==PAGE:14==
for the speckle observing system. When, observing the speckles through a lens,
where the focal length is the same as the distance between the lens and the image
plane, a measurement of tilting motion can be observed as a speckle transla-
tion, while any translation causes speckle boiling. Again, the cross-correlation
function can be used to characterize this motion. And with diﬀerent dedicated
speckle sensing devices all kinds of motion can be characterized
3.3
Cross-Correlation
In this work, the cross-correlation function is used as a main tool to measure a
similarity between speckle patterns acquired with a small time lag. The basic
formula for the cross-correlation applied to two images, T() and I(), looks as
follows: [14]
R(x, y) =
X
x′,y′
(T (x′, y′) · I (x + x′, y + y′))
(3)
Where T is a so called template image, I is the original image and x and y
parameters are the actual pixel values.
The corresponding result is a image/matrix of values where the highest value
indicates the point/pixel of the highest similarity between template and original
images. Due to the fact that these values can reach very high or low values, the
formula is transformed to give normalised values only, which looks as follows:
[14]
R(x, y) =
P
x′,y′ (T (x′, y′) · I (x + x′, y + y′))
qP
x′,y′ T (x′, y′)2 · P
x′,y′ I (x + x′, y + y′)2
(4)
In this case the value of the cross-correlation function will vary between 0 and
1. This makes the analysis of such operation easier. Moreover, the normalized
method provides better accuracy because it is not so much dependant on the
intensity of the image.
To obtain a full cross correlation of two images, all of the pixel values are entered
one by one and calculated. An easy way of understanding how cross-correlation
works is to imagine two images of identical squares as in Fig. 9.
14
==PAGE:15==
Figure 9: Cross-correlation example - zero correlation
Each square is treated as a single image. If squares are distant from each
other, the resulting cross-correlation is 0.
The matter changes if one of the
squares is partially covering the other then cross-correlation between the images
is undoubtedly higher than 0 as seen in Fig. 10.
Figure 10: Cross-correlation example - correlation higher than zero
Most notably, the cross-correlation reaches its highest value when the squares
cover each other completely (in normalized cross-correlation calculations the
value would be equal to 1) as in Fig. 11.
15
==PAGE:16==
Figure 11: Cross-correlation example - maximum correlation
In this work, instead of cross correlating two full sized speckle images, a
method of template matching using cross-correlation is used.
Consider two
speckle images taken in a short period of time where part of the ﬁrst image is
still visible in the second one which makes it possible to calculate displacement.
Next, the small template image is cut from the ﬁrst image, then compared with
the second one using normalized cross correlation.
The template is scanned
throughout the entire image, while matching the template with the image in
each position. By ﬁnding the correct peak value in the resulting matrix, it in-
dicates the template’s position on the second image in relation to the ﬁrst image.
Cross-correlation by deﬁnition is a measure of similarity of two series as a func-
tion of the displacement of one relative to the other. According to A. Papoulis,
cross-correlation is deﬁned by the following equation [18]:
C12(t) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
F ∗
1 (ω)F2(ω)ejωtdω
(5)
Where the integral is the inverse Fourier transform, the dataseries are f1(t)
and f2(t) and their corresponding Fourier integrals F1(ω), F2(ω). The above
equation is mostly used in signal processing. It is possible to reduce this equation
by applying a notation of F −1 for a inverse Fourier transform. We can represent
the equation as follows:[22]
C12(t) = F −1[F ∗
1 (v)F2(v)]
(6)
Furthermore, if F = F1 = F2 the cross-correlation theorem reduces to the
Wiener-Khinchin theorem which simply states that the autocorrelation is given
by the Fourier transform of the absolute square of F: [23]
16
==PAGE:17==
R(t) = F
h
|F|2i
(t)
(7)
where R(t) is autocorrelation function of a function F1(t) while the modulus of
F is the product of F times the complex conjugate of F.
3.4
Peak Finding
Peak ﬁnding is applied to the cross correlation function. Its purpose is to ﬁnd
the highest correlation value and its position in the resulting cross correlation
matrix. Diﬀerent methods can be used to achieve diﬀerent levels of peak ﬁnding
accuracies, at costs of computational resources and generality.
3.4.1
Maximum Value Peak
One of the easiest methods is to just ﬁnd a maximum value in the whole cross
correlation matrix. It is easily proven that it is the fastest method available
because the time complexity of running such algorithm is just
O(r ∗c)
(8)
where r are the rows and c are the columns of the matrix. It is obvious that
the speed of the algorithm directly depends on the resolution of the image taken.
However, the method is susceptible to any noise that can occur at any stages of
the image taking and processing.
3.4.2
Noise Cancellation - Filtering
There are many processing methods that can be applied ﬁrst, before jumping
right into cross correlation and peak ﬁnding. One of them is ﬁltering the images
with Gaussian blur.
Gaussian blur according to Robert M. Haralick and Linda G. Shapiro [6] is
a linear spatial smoothing ﬁlter whose kernel is given by the following two-
dimensional Gaussian:
k(r, c) = 1
2πe−1
2
r2
ρ2 + c2
ρ2
(9)
Kernel is just a function that is deﬁned on the domain of the spatial pattern of
the ﬁlter and its value at each pixel is a weighting function, which deﬁnes the
shape of the ﬁlter itself.
17
==PAGE:18==
By using a Gaussian ﬁlter on a image, it gets rid of high frequency noise and
makes the ﬁnding of the peak less susceptible to it. The images below represent
the laser speckle pattern before and after Gaussian ﬁlter.
Figure 12: Laser speckles before applying Gaussian ﬁlter
Figure 13: Laser speckles image after applying Gaussian ﬁlter
18
==PAGE:19==
Although the diﬀerences are not easily seen in the pictures above, they are
mostly visible in the left and right end of the pictures where laser light is less
intense and colorful (possibly due to camera structure or the angle at which the
light from the laser was reﬂected) it is vivid that the Gaussian blur took place
and evened out the noise visible in the previous picture.
3.5
Optical System
In this section, a description of the optical system used in this work will be
presented, including Snell’s law, paraxial approximation as well as ABCD optical
matrices analysis.
3.5.1
Snell’s Law and Paraxial Approximation
Snell’s law is used to describe the relation between angles of refraction as well
as angles of incidence in the case of a light wave passing through an interface
between two diﬀerent media. The relation is equivalent to a ratio of the sines of
the angles which is equivalent to the ratio of phase velocities in the media and
it is ﬁnally equivalent to the ratio between indices of refraction as follows:
sin θ2
sin θ1
= v2
v1
= n1
n2
(10)
While Snell’s law is a highly nonlinear equation to work with, if we want to
analyse the optical system, the paraxial approximation can be used to simplify
the operation. In order to use the paraxial approximation, we assume that the
angles are provided in radians and that they are suﬃciently small (< 20 deg.)
In that case, we ﬁnd as follows: [5]
sin θ ≈θ,
tan θ ≈θ
and
cos θ ≈1
(11)
In practice it means that there are only small apertures in front of the lens.
3.5.2
Ray Transfer Matrices (ABCD matrix analysis)
In the paraxial approximation the ABCD ray transfer matrices analysis can be
used to describe even large and complex optical systems. Ray tracing software
can be used to design and model non-paraxial optical systems.
However, it
was not necessary in this case, because the Gaussian rays and the concept of
Huygen-Fresnel are well positioned inside the paraxial approximation.
Ray transfer matrices analysis will be used to model the system used in this
work, as it is suﬃciently accurate to describe the geometric formation of images
and ray propagation given here. Further, these traditional ray matrices will be
used to approach the complex ray matrices used to describe the propagation of
19
==PAGE:20==
Gaussian beams and ﬁelds scattered from the surface.[12] In Fig. 14 the concept
of the ABCD matrix is introduced by illustrating a simple optical system.
Figure 14: An optical system represented by the ABCD matrix [1]
In the Fig.
14, each ray (input and output) is represented by its height
(X1) and angle (X
′
1) in reference to the optical axis. These parameters can be
represented as the column vector. Moreover, the ﬁrst and last component of the
matrix deﬁnes the input/output planes of the system.
ABCD matrix refers to the following relation where speciﬁc elements of a 2
x 2 matrix are called A, B, C and D [1]:
X2
X
′
2

=
A B
C D
 X1
X
′
1

(12)
where column vector on the right side represents height and angle of the in-
put ray; and column vector on the left side represent height and angle of the
output ray.
There are many diﬀerent types of ray matrices that can be used to build a
system. In this work, the following ray matrices are going to be used:
• Translation matrix
• Refraction matrix
20
==PAGE:21==
Translation matrix describes how a ray behaves in free space or travelling
through a medium from point 1 to point 2 in Fig. 15 below:
Figure 15: A travelling ray through free space/medium [11]
The ray matrix describing it is as follows:
 X2
X
′
2

=
 1 L
0 1
  X1
X
′
1

= T12
 X1
X
′
1

(13)
where L is a distance between point 1 and point 2 parallel to the optical axis.
Refraction matrix describes how a ray refracts when incident onto a surface
between two media with diﬀerent refractive index (entering the interface from
left to right):
Figure 16: A travelling ray through two diﬀerent media [11]
21
==PAGE:22==
The ray matrix describing it is as follows:
 X2
X
′
2

=

1
0
n−n′
n′r
n
n′
  X1
X
′
1

= R
 X1
X
′
1

(14)
where r is the radius of curvature of the refractive interface and n , n
′ are
corresponding refractive indices.
3.5.3
ABCD Matrix Model of the Sensor System
The sensor system that was used in this work is designed from the following
components:
• Camera
• Laser as source
• Surface from which the laser beam is reﬂected and forms laser speckles
If we take into consideration the testing system that was used in the lab,
which consisted of just a camera without a lens and a scattering surface, then a
translation matrix can be introduced to describe a ray travelling through a free
space:
x2
x
′
2

=
1 L
0 1
 x1
x
′
1

(15)
The transformation matrix in Eq. 15 is simply a translation matrix that rep-
resents how rays behave between the camera chip and a scattering surface in a
free space, where L is distance travelled through the medium. This matrix is
adequate when using a parallel ray beam where R (radius of curvature of the
Gaussian beam) tends to inﬁnity and is constant as a function of the distance,
considered here. However, it is possible to include the Gaussian beam curvature
into the complex matrix, described in [8] by modifying the A component as
follows:
A
′ = A + L
R = 1 + L
R
(16)
Where L is the distance travelled in the free space and R - the radius of cur-
vature of the laser beam. By adding L to the A element we include the laser
22
==PAGE:23==
beam divergence.
Which then results in:
x2
x
′
2

=
1 + L
R L
0
1
 x1
x
′
1

(17)
Eq. 17 describes the optical system we intend to implement in the lab. Al-
though in the future, a lens might be added to the camera. In this case, we
need to multiply the existing matrix with two translation matrices; one for the
free space from the surface to the lens, and one from the lens to the camera chip.
Usually, these three matrices describes an imaging system, and in general it
becomes as follows:
Mt
0
−1
f
Mv

(18)
Where Mt is the transverse magniﬁcation, f is the focal length and Mv is the
angular magniﬁcation which is equal to
1
Mt
3.6
Hardware Selection
The optical velocity system consists of the following hardware:
• Raspberry Pi 4 Model B computer
• NoIR Raspberry Pi camera
• Laser (Helium-Neon laser)
The Raspberry computer is a perfect platform for this project as it is easy to
setup and can be controlled through SSH communication protocol on its Rasp-
bian system in order to run algorithms or collect data. 4th version Model B was
chosen as it oﬀers a good amount of computing power that could be used to
develop an early stage prototype of the sensor, and most importantly, develop
a software.
NoIR Raspberry Pi camera was chosen and seems like a natural choice as it
is ready to plug in into the Raspberry Pi computer. Moreover, it has a con-
trollable shutter and capable of at least 30 frames per second video recording
23
==PAGE:24==
with full high deﬁnition resolution. This high resolution is not needed in this
project, but lowering the resolution increases the framerate which is extremely
crucial and is discussed in 4.5.3 subsection.
Laser choice is not as important as almost any laser can be employed with
a relatively small divergence so the speckles are easily visible from about 10
centimetres distance.
24
==PAGE:25==
4
Method
In this chapter, a method of calculating velocity based on the speckle images
will be presented including tools, tests and limitations of the system.
With
hardware already presented in the previous sections of this thesis, this part will
most importantly focus on the software which represents most of the work done.
Software was written in Python on a Rasbian OS on which Raspberry Pi 4
Model B is operating.
4.1
Template Matching
Firstly, a cross-correlating algorithm must be developed so the similarities be-
tween two speckle images can be calculated. OpenCV is well known open source
computer vision and machine learning software library which is used in this
project for most of the operations.
Cross-correlation (3.3) between two images is easy to calculate with formula
provided.
However, it is not useful to cross-correlate the whole two images
because of the processing time needed for such operation. Using a template
instead, decreases the processing time although it raises a number of issues.
First of all, size of a template cannot be too small nor too large. Too small
template may contain a small amount of speckles which can result in smaller
accuracy of cross correlation. On the other hand, too large template may re-
sult in higher computational cost. There is a trade oﬀbetween possible speckle
number (accuracy) and computational cost. In this work, a size of 80 x 80 pix-
els was used and the template was cropped from the middle of a speckle pattern.
Template matching means that a small piece of image is cropped from the ﬁrst
speckle image and then is compared to the second one. It can be visualised like
on the Fig. 17.
Figure 17: Template Matching
25
==PAGE:26==
Template is taken from the middle of the image and thus, the coordinates
of it are already known. Next, this cropped piece of an image is cross corre-
lated with the second image using a template matching method available within
OpenCV - cv2.matchTemplate.
cv2.matchTemplate method takes a template (cropped piece of a ﬁrst image)
and slides it through the pixels of the second image to compare pixel values us-
ing a normalized cross correlation formula mentioned in chapter 3.3. By sliding
it means moving the template over the original image by one pixel at the time
starting from left to right and up to down and then calculating the correlation
value at each individual location. [15]
The result of using this method on the images will result in cross correlation
map (image) where the pixel with the highest value indicates the most probable
correlation match. On the actual image it will be represented as the brightest
spot which is usually easy to ﬁnd and identify manually.
The whole process is visualised on Figures 18 and 19 below.
The ﬁrst two
images are laser speckle images transformed into gray scale with a resolution of
1920 x 1080 (then resized for purposes of presentation). This high resolution
will only be used for presentation purposes. The images are a laser speckles cre-
ated oﬀa metal plate surface. The plate was moved exactly by 500 micrometers
between ﬁrst and second image.
Figure 18: Speckle Image 1
26
==PAGE:27==
Figure 19: Speckle Image 2
It is not clear for a human eye by how much the speckles have moved as there
are just too many details. However, when the template matching algorithm is
applied here, the following cross-correlation images appear in Fig 20 and Fig 21.
Figure 20: Cross correlation result matrix for every individual pixel value -
between template and the original image
27
==PAGE:28==
Figure 21: Cross correlation result matrix for every individual pixel value -
between template and the speckle pattern moved by 500 microns
While the peak (brightest spot) is simply distinguishable on the Figure 20.
It is due to the fact that template is cross correlated with the original image so
it is natural it will ﬁnd a perfect match. Nonetheless, the peak is not so evident
for the naked eye on the second image (Figure 21), but it is easily achieved with
a peak ﬁnding algorithm.
4.2
Peak Finding
Peak ﬁnding was previously described in the theory part of this work. In practice
there are couple of ways of ﬁnding a correct peak but the simplest one is ﬁnding
the highest value in the resulting cross-correlation matrix. Using the example
images from above, the maximum pixel values were found and marked with
black rectangles shown in Fig 22 and Fig. 23.
28
==PAGE:29==
Figure 22: Cross Correlation Visualisation Result - Peak
Figure 23: Cross Correlation Visualisation Result - Peak
4.3
Displacement Finding
Real displacement between these two images is 500 micrometers and that small
distance is already clearly visible.
After ﬁnding the peaks, ﬁnding this dis-
placement is trivial, by subtracting the absolute value of coordinates of the ﬁrst
image peak and second image peak. It is crucial to notice that displacement in
this case is just a diﬀerence in pixel coordinates of the image and is not real
displacement in terms of real distance travelled. Peak ﬁnding and displacement
algorithm output reveals the displacement in pixel values as well as direction in
29
==PAGE:30==
the terminal output below:
Output 1:
Max value of the cross-correlation matrix:
1.0000001
Coordinates of the max value:
[392] [728]
Direction:
0.0
degrees
Displacement:
[0] [0]
0.1445634
-----------------------------------------
Output 2:
Max value of the cross-correlation matrix:
0.93743014
Coordinates of the max value:
[377] [493]
Direction:
3.6522227803063356
degrees
Displacement:
[15] [235]
0.22749510000000006
First output describes a cross correlation between template on its source
template image that is why the maximum possible value of similarity is found
and is equal to 1, where displacement is equal to (0, 0) as the speckles haven’t
been displaced. On the second output the algorithm has found the maximum
correlation point with value at around 0.9374. Diﬀerence in position of these
two peaks is calculated at 15 rows and 235 columns which translates into 15
pixels and 235 pixels in vertical and horizontal orientation respectively.
4.4
Filter/Ignore Algorithm
It is highly possible that during peak ﬁnding process, wrong peak will be identi-
ﬁed due to accidental high correlation value to the template and thus, will result
in wrong displacement and velocity. Due to this fact, a ﬁltering algorithm is
applied in order to decrease probability of choosing a wrong peak.
The algorithm checks if the newly found peak is a probable or improbable choice.
This is done by predicting the next possible location of the peak. If displace-
ment from the previous images showed that the object is moving forward at a
steady velocity, a sudden peak in the cross correlating matrix indicating that the
object is moving backwards would be ignored and the the next peak would be
checked. Providing that next peak is ﬂagged as correct, displacement in relation
to that peak would be calculated and the program would continue normally. On
the other hand, if second peak is showing the same vehicle displacement as the
ﬁrst one, then both of them are ﬂagged as correct and the program continues
working normally.
The algorithm was not used in the ﬁnal version of the project as it increases
the computational cost. It was not useful in laboratory tests where the envi-
ronment is close to ideal, without vibrations that aﬀect the system coming from
the movement of the vehicle on non-ideal surfaces. It could prove itself useful
in the real environment.
30
==PAGE:31==
4.5
Performance Tweaking
Performance of the camera and software that calculates displacement is one of a
fundamental part of this project. There are several steps that were taken during
the development in order to increase the capabilities of the whole system. In
this section performance tweaking techniques will be presented as well as their
impact on the eﬃciency on image capturing and processing.
4.5.1
Video Port
Raspberry PI camera takes pictures really slowly during normal operation. In
initial tests it took around 0.4 seconds for one picture to be taken. It is too slow
for any purposeful processing for velocity calculations. This process is connected
to what the Pi Camera is doing when various methods are called in the code. [9]
Pi Camera has three diﬀerent ports for camera data acquisition
• The Still Port
• The Video Port
• The Preview Port
The still port is used by default and it forces the camera to use one of the still
modes (hence name still) and capture the image with the full area of the sen-
sor. Moreover, it uses an anti noise algorithm which considerably increase the
time needed to take an image and is a main reason why this port cannot be used.
The video port does not change the camera mode and does not use a strong anti
noise algorithm. This port can be used by various methods within the picamera
library simply by setting a
use_video_port = True
in any capture method. Pictures taken through this port usually have a more
grainy quality but it is not crucial for speckle cross correlation analysis.
The preview port opens a clear view from a camera on any screen connected to
Raspberry Pi which is useful for analysis and setting up the system properly,
but it is not used in any case for processing or capturing.
By using the video port, a huge jump in performance was observed and is
shown in Fig. 24, with just 2.51 frames per second for still port but as many as
26.27 fps on average including processing: cross correlation algorithm on RGB
pictures. It is crucial to note here that all of the pictures are taken in RGB and
they are later converted into grayscale for performance reasons (discussed later
in Section 4.5.3).
31
==PAGE:32==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
FPS
Video Port
Still Port
Figure 24: Camera Ports Performance Comparison
4.5.2
RAM usage
Firstly, Raspberry Pi is not equipped with HDD nor SSD, but with an SD card
which writing/reading speed is signiﬁcantly slower. Due to this, Raspberry’s
SD card is not used at all. Instead, part of a RAM was specially reserved for
the purposes of quick writing, reading, processing and deleting speckle images
while the system is running.
According to the speciﬁcation of the SD card provided (Raspberry Pi NOOBS
16GB) is a class 6 SD card which means it can sustain minimum write speed
of 6 MB/s. Moreover, the speciﬁcation also states that the maximum write
and read speeds are 40 MB/s and 80 MB/s respectively.
It seems like it is
enough, although performance is very crucial and by using internal Raspberry
PI’s RAM as the primary memory used by the program. RAM in the Raspberry
Pi 4 Model B which is of LPDDR4 type has write and read speeds up to 3200
and 4267 Mbps which translate into 400 and 533 MBps write and read speed
respectively.[2]
Tests were carried out (taking 1000 frames) using the same algorithm as in
32
==PAGE:33==
Section 4.5.1 on both SD card and RAM storage and the results are visible in
Fig. 25.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
FPS
RAM
SD Card
Figure 25: Camera RAM vs SD Card Performance Comparison
The diﬀerence in average FPS performance between RAM and SD Card is
small and is equal to about 1.2 fps as it can be seen in Fig. 25.
4.5.3
Resolution
Resolution is one of the most important parameters to choose in this project.
It deﬁnes how accurately the system will work, but most of all, how fast it will
process the images. The point is to choose an optimal resolution and achieve
a perfect trade oﬀbetween accuracy and performance. Accuracy of the system
will be discussed in Section 4.6.3, while the diﬀerences in performance depending
on the resolution as well as color format used in signal will be presented in Fig.
26.
33
==PAGE:34==
320x240
480x270
640x480
800x600 1024x786 1440x900 1920x1080
0
10
20
30
40
50
Resolution
FPS
RGB
GRAYSCALE
Figure 26: Camera Resolution Performance Comparison
From Fig. 26, a clear correlation between resolution and frames per second
processed can be seen. Moreover, using converted into gray scale images only,
for cross correlation calculations, gives a signiﬁcant boost in FPS, in most of the
cases even doubling it. It is caused by the fact that template matching algorithm
works only on pixel values between 0 and 255 making it less computationally
expensive.
4.5.4
Software
Code optimization and proper use of the programming language are equally
essential to achieve the performance desired. To accomplish higher frame rate,
a rapid capture method was used from picamera library:
capture_sequence()
This method enables the fastest image capture by Raspberry Pi camera, because
it does not reinitialize an encoder before every capture. [7]
34
==PAGE:35==
However, it is not enough to simply apply this method.
A speciﬁc genera-
tor expression was created in Python to provide program with ﬁlenames and
most of all, give a possibility to apply image processing algorithms between ev-
ery image capture. On the other hand, it can lead to a problem associated with
encoder stalling which will be discussed in the Section 4.6.4.
4.6
Testing
In this chapter, every testing procedure including introductory test on the ready
speckle images, accuracy test and system’s limitations will be presented and
their results shown and discussed.
4.6.1
Testing Setup
The testing setup was constructed on the optical table with a rough surface
metallic plate attached vertically at about 20 centimeters from the Raspberry
Pi NoIR v2 camera without a lens. Behind a camera, at a distance of 2 meters,
He-Ne laser was positioned, pointing at the centre of the metallic plate. The
setup can be seen on the following ﬁgures.
Figure 27: Lab Testing System
35
==PAGE:36==
Figure 28: He-Ne Laser
While the camera and laser were steadily positioned, the surface was moved
instead, using a mechanical translation stage with a micrometer screw. The
stage could be positioned with a accuracy of 10 micrometers.
4.6.2
Template Matching Test on Images
In order to get a grip on what the algorithm can do, the ﬁrst tests were carried
out on ready speckle images. There were two testing scenarios:
• Images with 100 microns displacement
• Images with 500 microns displacement
In each scenario 10 images were analysed and the corresponding displacements
between them calculated. Images were taken in 1920x1080 resolution.
In the 100 microns displacement images, the algorithm found the displacement
in pixel values with relatively small error. The results can be seen in Fig. 29.
36
==PAGE:37==
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
X axis displacement
Y axis displacement
Figure 29: X and Y axis displacement calculations in pixel values for a 100
microns speckle images
The displacement is represented by X and Y axis pixel displacements on
the resulting cross correlation matrices. As seen in Fig. 29, the X axis dis-
placement (moving a metallic plate in horizontal direction) for 100 microns is
between 51 and 69 pixels with the majority of values below 60. The value of
69 might be treated as outlier due to its unusual value. Moreover, the values
for Y axis displacement (vertical) are 3 at most times. They are not equal to
0 as apparently the plate was also moved slightly in vertical direction possibly
due to imperfectly balanced table on which the plate was positioned or other
unidentiﬁed reasons. The cross correlation was calculated using a normalized
formula and for these tests, very high values of above 0.99 were achieved.
The same method was used for speckle images with 500 microns displacement
and the following values in Fig. 30 were achieved:
37
==PAGE:38==
280
282
284
286
288
290
292
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
X axis displacement
Y axis displacement
Figure 30: X and Y axis displacement calculations in pixel values for a 500
microns speckle images
Horizontal displacement values are in range of 282 and 292 pixels without
any obvious outliers. Vertical displacement is usually at level of 15 pixels. When
it comes to cross correlation values, peaks were detected at levels of ranging from
0.915 to 0.938 which are considerably lower than in the previous case with 100
microns displacements.
With both these tests presented, we can see that the displacements are accurate
in relation to each other. Average pixel values for horizontal displacement are
58 and 286 for 100 and 500 microns respectively. If we multiply 58 by ( 500
100) we
get a value of 290 which is very close to the average pixel displacement value for
500 microns images. Exactly the same relation applies for vertical displacement
values.
Using this data a pixel size can be calculated. By dividing an average of 58
pixels by 100 microns we get the value of 1,7241 micrometers per pixel. When
taking into the account the values from 500 micrometer displacement test we
get 1,7483 micrometers per pixel. By averaging these two values the ﬁnal pixel
size is equal to 1,7362 micrometers.
If we take into consideration all of the above data, a simple graph showing
38
==PAGE:39==
X axis pixel displacement vs physical distance can be created using ﬁtted data
in between 100 and 500 microns measurements. This results in the following
graph shown in Fig. 31.
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
50
100
150
200
250
300
Physical distance
Measured displacement in pixels
Figure 31: X axis pixel displacement vs physical distance graph
4.6.3
Accuracy Test
While the previous test was also run to establish the accuracy of the system,
it was only software-wise as it was carried out on ready images in the isolated
environment. The accuracy test presented here is run on a working prototype
in the lab as presented in Figure 27.
The test involves moving a plate by 1 millimeter manually at diﬀerent unspeci-
ﬁed speeds and getting the resulting displacement calculations from the running
algorithm. The displacement was summed up between every frame automat-
ically. 480x270 resolution was used for this test to increase the performance.
20 trials were carried out in total which gave the following pixel displacement
values:
39
==PAGE:40==
160
165
170
175
180
185
190
195
200
205
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X axis displacement
Y axis displacement
Figure 32: X and Y axis displacement calculations in pixel values for a 1 mil-
limeter test
The average pixel displacement for 1 millimeter is 180 pixels with the max-
imum of 202 and minimum of 160 pixels. The highest possible error in dis-
placement calculations would be equal to 0.1mm which is 10%. Although error
like that is rarely introduced and based on the tests an average error value is
equal to 7 pixels which translates into 3.8% average error for 1mm displacement
calculations in real time.
4.6.4
Limitations
Main limitations of the system include:
• Camera framerate
• Camera performance including encoders and drivers performance
• Cross-correlation algorithm performance
Camera framerate is the by far, the most important limitation of the system.
In the lower end resolutions, using RAM as the main memory buﬀer for images,
framerates of up to 80 were achieved without the image processing. The reason
why the framerate is crucial is that it is the main factor that limits the velocity
at which the vehicle can travel. If the vehicle, to which the sensor is attached, is
40
==PAGE:41==
travelling at a higher rate than the rate at which the system can process fram-
erates, then it will not be possible to ﬁnd cross-correlation between the frames.
That means that decorrelation rate is too high and thus, cross-correlation and
displacement calculations cannot be carried out. Moreover, the prototype which
was presented in this work was developed to assess the accuracy of such mea-
surements. That is why at current setup, the maximum distance that can be
travelled in between frames is just 1.23 millimeters which would result in maxi-
mum velocity of a vehicle to be 0.213 km/h. That could easily be improved by,
for example, changing the area at which the camera looks at with a diﬀerent
optical system.
Another limiting factor is camera’s performance. Camera which is used in this
project is a regular speed camera for taking maximum of 30 fps at 1920x1080
resolution images. Methods discussed in Performance Tweaking Section (4.5)
took full advantage of all available resources including rapid picture capture
techniques as well as RAM usage for image buﬀer. However, even with these
tweaks, the camera’s encoder could stall as it was too slow to encode the images
into a wanted format. This could be altered by changing the encoder, or by
working on raw pixel data. However, by changing the camera to a high framer-
ate one, which would enable much faster picture taking, the performance of the
whole system could be boosted signiﬁcantly.
Furthermore, next limiting factor is the performance of the cross-correlation
/ template matching algorithm. The time it takes for one image to be cross
correlated with a template from the previous image is limiting the frame per
second output of the whole system.
While small optimisations are possible
software wise, by predicting the direction of movement which would allow to
decrease the amount of pixels through which the algorithm has to go through,
even higher performance boost could be achieved with a faster CPU. The same
algorithm run on a laptop takes around 5 times less time to execute. It would
not be beneﬁcial in any way for the sensor to work with the laptop as it would
defeat the purpose of creating such system because of its size, but a higher
performing single-board computer is recommended.
41
==PAGE:42==
5
Results
A fully working prototype of the sensor was developed on the Raspberry Pi 4
with a Raspberry Pi NoIR Camera v2 using a He-Ne laser for speckle genera-
tion. The system was tested in a laboratory within a controlled environment
for accuracy and performance which gave the following results.
The highest performance was achieved within the lowest resolutions, working
only on grayscale images. By lowering the resolution to 320 x 240 the system
could sustain average framerate of 47.94 fps with RAM as an image buﬀer. Per-
formance was limited mainly by the camera speciﬁcations and the computing
power of the Raspberry Pi 4.
Lowering the resolution means a rise in decorrelation rate which then means
a lower accuracy of the system. 320 x 240 was chosen as a good and optimal
trade-oﬀbetween accuracy and performance as well as fully using hardware ca-
pabilities.
The system is not ready to be deployed onto a vehicle/drone/robot without
building a proper attachment which has to be stable and limit the camera’s
turbulence during driving. Moreover, the system with the current hardware is
not capable of fast enough image capturing and processing for it to be used in
the real environment.
42
==PAGE:43==
6
Discussion
In this work, the use of laser speckle phenomenon for velocity measurements
was explored. While laser speckles were used in numerous applications before
such as deformation calculations of the materials under stress or temperature,
it was not thought of as a way that could improve the accuracy of velocity and
displacement measurements for vehicles and robots.
The working prototype was developed, although it still leaves a space for im-
provement, it already shows that a great deal of accuracy can be achieved just
by cross-correlating the laser speckle images. The sensor can detect extremely
small changes in displacement which suggests that it can be used in small scale
applications as mentioned before. On the other hand, it creates a problem of
sensitivity of the sensor system. Even the smallest vibration of the system might
lead to incorrect calculations and signiﬁcant loss in the accuracy. That suggests
that there would have to be a specialist noise/vibration counteract system in
place. High sensitivity also means that any change in the orientation of the
observation plane might change the relation between real displacement and dis-
placement on the images in terms of pixel values resulting in loss of accuracy.
The idea of measuring displacement and velocity of moving objects by cross
correlating laser speckle images is worth exploring as it might certainly help
drones to establish their real velocity. On the other hand, it can be a too com-
plicated system to be developed and employed on the drone due to its movement
in many diﬀerent planes, vibrations and most notably, ability to rapidly change
its altitude. The latter makes the measurements even more complicated and
requiring a lot of computational power.
Furthermore, decorrelation rate is directly proportional to the distance travelled
between each frame of speckle patterns. It limits the possibility of achieving a
fast, reliable and robust system because the distance travelled between each
frame cannot be higher than some certain value (value depends on the speciﬁ-
cation of the system such as camera performance). It is a hard limit that cannot
be bypassed because of how speckle pattern translation work. If the distance is
too high, the cross-correlation value drops to such low levels that displacement
calculations are not possible.
43
==PAGE:44==
7
Future Work
This section outlines what future work can be carried out for the system pre-
sented in this thesis.
Firstly, in order for the system to work in real environment, a new hardware
needs to be purchased. High framerate camera and a faster single-board com-
puter would increase the performance of the algorithm (most notably, higher
frames per second rates) and enable the carrier of the sensor (vehicle, robot,
drone) to achieve higher velocities while maintaining high accuracy of the cal-
culations.
Secondly, the optical system could be positioned diﬀerently, such that speckle
images acquired would cover a larger area and thus, decrease the decorrelation
rate that limits the performance of the system. It can be done by adding lenses
to the camera, or by increasing the distance between the surface and the camera.
Lastly, there could be some improvements introduced to the code. While the
software was developed in Python programming language, translating it to C++
could boost the performance. Moreover, a direction prediction algorithm can
be developed which would change the coordinates of template crop (for cross
correlation purposes as described in Section 4.1) according to the direction of
movement. It would essentially increase the area from which the displacement
could be calculated and thus, decrease the amount of processed frames per sec-
ond needed for higher velocities calculations.
44
==PAGE:45==
8
Summary
The objectives of this work included developing and testing a working optical
velocity sensor by image processing of the reﬂected speckle images, presenting
concepts behind the image processing algorithm and the theory associated with
it, as well as presenting results and limitations of the system.
All of the objectives were met to some extent. A working prototype was devel-
oped in the laboratory environment, although, it is not suitable for deployment
in the real environment.
The theory behind speckle creation, its dynamics,
Gaussian ﬁeld, cross correlation, ABCD matrix model of the optical system,
was described. Moreover, the whole method of achieving accurate and reliable
displacement calculations, based on the theory described before, was presented.
Test results were outlined and overall performance of the system was deﬁned.
Lastly, future work ideas were demonstrated.
45
==PAGE:46==
References
[1] Javier Alda, Laser and gaussian beam propagation and transformation,
(2015) (eng).
[2] VIP Experts, Lpddr4:
What makes it faster and reduces power con-
sumption,
https://blogs.synopsys.com/vip-central/2017/09/05/
lpddr4-what-makes-it-faster-and-reduces-power-consumption/
Accessed 2020-06-10.
[3] JW GOODMAN, Some fundamental properties of speckle, Journal of the
Optical Society of America 66 (1976), no. 11, 1145–1150 (eng).
[4] US Government, Gps accuracy,
https://www.gps.gov/systems/gps/
performance/accuracy/ Accessed: 2020-04-01.
[5] John E. Greivenkamp, Field guide to geometrical optics, SPIE Press, 2004
(eng).
[6] RM HARALICK and LG SHAPIRO, Glossary of computer vision terms,
Pattern Recognition 24 (1991), no. 1, 69–93 (eng).
[7] Dave Hughes, Picamera documentation, chapter 5, advanced recipes,
https://picamera.readthedocs.io/en/release-1.8/recipes2.html#
rapid-capture-and-processing Accessed 2020-06-11.
[8] Hanson S. G. Jakobsen M. L., Speckles and related applications.
[9] Dave Jones,
Picamera documentation,
chapter 7,
camera hardware,
https://picamera.readthedocs.io/en/release-1.10/fov.html#
camera-hardware Accessed 2020-06-10.
[10] Jakobsen M. L. Linden, J; Broeng J, Introduction to optics and photonics
- lecture 4.
[11]
, Introduction to optics and photonics - lecture 7.
[12] Gerrard A.; Burch J. M., Introduction to matrix methods in optics, Dover
Publications, 1975 (eng).
[13] N. Farid M. Bahrawi and M. Abdel-Hady, Speckle cross-correlationmethod
in measuring ﬁne surface displacements,
https://www.hindawi.com/
journals/jamp/2012/976376/ Accessed: 2020-04-01.
[14] OpenCV, Opencv - template matching, https://docs.opencv.org/3.4/
de/da9/tutorial_template_matching.html Accessed 2020-05-27.
[15]
, Opencv - template matching tutorial, https://docs.opencv.
org/2.4/doc/tutorials/imgproc/histograms/template_matching/
template_matching.html Accessed 2020-06-08.
46
==PAGE:47==
[16] Edmund’s Optics, Gaussian beam propagation (eng).
[17] Andreas Ostendorf and Holger Hundertmark, Laser, Technology Guide:
Principles - Applications - Trends (2009), 104–109 (eng).
[18] A. Papoulis, The fourier integral and its applications, McGraw-Hill„ 1962
(eng).
[19] Rudiger Paschotta, Encyclopedia of laser physics and technology, (2006)
(eng).
[20] M. Sjödahl, Accuracy in electronic speckle photography.
[21] PhD
Thomas
J
Taylor,
Advantages
of
long-life
roof-
ing
for
bifacial
solar
panels,
https://blog.gaf.com/
advantages-of-long-life-roofing-for-bifacial-solar-panels/
Accessed 2020-06-03.
[22] Eric
W.
Weisstein,
Cross-correlation
theorem,
https://mathworld.
wolfram.com/Cross-CorrelationTheorem.html Accessed: 2020-06-20.
[23]
,
Wiener-khinchin theorem,
https://mathworld.wolfram.com/
Wiener-KhinchinTheorem.html Accessed: 2020-06-20.
[24] H. T. Yura, B. Rose, and S. G. Hanson, Dynamic laser speckle in complex
abcd optical systems, Journal of the Optical Society of America a 15 (1998),
no. 5, 1160 (eng).
47
==PAGE:48==
A
Appendix - Code used for displacement, accu-
racy and performance testing
1
import time
2
import sys
3
import os
4
import picamera
5
import cv2
6
import numpy as np
7
import math
8
import glob
9
10
11
files = glob.glob('/var/tmp1/*')
12
for f in files:
13
os.remove(f)
14
15
frames = 1000
16
17
def initializeTemplateData():
18
global y, x, h, w, angle_initial
19
y = int(camera.resolution[0]/2) - 40
20
x = int(camera.resolution[1]/2) - 40
21
h = 80
22
w = 80
23
angle_initial = 0
24
camera.start_preview()
25
26
27
def filenames():
28
frame = 0
29
final_displacement_x = 0
30
final_displacement_y = 0
31
while frame < frames:
32
yield '/var/tmp1/image%02d.jpg' % frame
33
if frame > 1:
34
print('%d with %d' % (frame, frame-1))
35
print('-----')
36
# load images
37
templatefullimage =
cv2.imread('/var/tmp1/image%02d.jpg' % (frame-1),
0)
,→
,→
38
image = cv2.imread('/var/tmp1/image%02d.jpg' %
(frame), 0)
,→
39
# create a template
48
==PAGE:49==
40
template = templatefullimage[y:y + h, x:x + w].copy()
41
# match the template with newer image
42
cross_correlation_map = cv2.matchTemplate(image,
template, cv2.TM_CCORR_NORMED)
,→
43
# calculate max value of the cross-correlation map
44
print('Max value of the cross-correlation matrix:
%.12f' % (np.amax(cross_correlation_map)))
,→
45
# get coordinates of the max value
46
max_coordinates = np.where(cross_correlation_map ==
np.amax(cross_correlation_map))
,→
47
print('Coordinates of the max value: %d , %d' %
(max_coordinates[0], max_coordinates[1]))
,→
48
# calculate displacement
49
displacement = [abs(y - max_coordinates[0]), abs(x -
max_coordinates[1])]
,→
50
final_displacement_x = final_displacement_x +
displacement[0]
,→
51
final_displacement_y = final_displacement_y +
displacement[1]
,→
52
# calculate angle
53
angle = angle_initial + math.atan2(y -
max_coordinates[0], x - max_coordinates[1]) * 180
/ np.pi
,→
,→
54
print('Direction: %f degrees' % angle)
55
print('Displacement: %d , %d' % (displacement[0],
displacement[1]))
,→
56
57
if frame > 2:
58
os.remove('/var/tmp1/image%02d.jpg' % (frame-2))
59
frame += 1
60
61
print('Final displacement: x:%d
y:%d' %
(final_displacement_x, final_displacement_y))
,→
62
63
64
with picamera.PiCamera() as camera:
65
66
camera.resolution = (320, 240)
67
initializeTemplateData()
68
camera.framerate = 120
69
time.sleep(4)
70
start = time.time()
71
camera.capture_sequence(filenames(), use_video_port=True)
72
finish = time.time()
73
print('Captured %d frames at %.2ffps' % (
74
frames,
49
==PAGE:50==
75
frames / (finish - start)))
76
print('with time per one frame: %.12f' %
((finish-start)/frames))
,→
77
camera.stop_preview()
78
camera.close()
50
