==PAGE:1==
Development of feature-based smart virtual
sensors
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Institute of mathematics and computer science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
Master Thesis
July, 2020
By
Jaume Alavedra Mas
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Institute of mathematics and computer science, Brovej, Building
118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
This thesis deals with the implementation of deep feature extraction as smart virtual sen-
sors.
Jaume Alavedra Mas - s190699
Signature
July 2, 2020
Date
ii
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis proposes an application of convolutional feature points as smart virtual sen-
sors. The feature descriptors are formed using the feature maps of one of the layers of a
VGG-16 network pre-trained on Imagenet. From the extracted and matched features, in-
formation is obtained from each of them to create a data-set that describes the sequence
of frames under consideration. Different sets of information are extracted from the fea-
ture correspondences such as their coordinates with respect to the image or their local
displacement between frames. Moreover, to compare the robustness of the implemented
convolutional features, the same information is obtained using SIFT-based features and
a brute-force matching technique.
The collected information from the matched feature points is used to train a set of machine
learning models that predict some physical properties of the environment or body under
consideration. To test the generability of the presented methodology two very diverse ap-
plications are devised. First, used mainly for development purposes and as a simplified
way to present the implementation, both multi-variable linear regression and LSTM mod-
els are devised to predict the volume of a sphere based on its variation in size in-between
frames. To explore the behavior of these models with different input features, three sets
are tested. The second application, explored further as a case study, presents and com-
pares a number of LSTM models to predict the camera displacement in both the abscissa
and ordinate axis. To do so, the KITTI vision benchmark suite is used to obtain the real-
world camera displacement, sequences of frames, and depth information through a city.
With this suite, an accuracy of 91.3% is reached on the validation set whilst it remains
unable to predict unseen ones.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Søren K. S. Gregersen, Assistant Professor, Institut for Matematik og Computer Science.
Frederik Warburg, Ph.D. student, Institut for Matematik og Computer Science.
To my family for their support.
iv
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objectives and hypotheses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Software requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Feature extraction and matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Machine learning basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Regression models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Related works
15
4
Feature detection and matching
19
4.1
Feature description and key-point detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Feature matching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Comparison between convolutional features and SIFT-based features . . . 29
5
Machine learning model
31
5.1
The input features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
Multi-variable linear regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3
Regression with LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.4
Training the models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.5
Predictive models applied on the sphere data-sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6
Case study. Visual odometry
41
6.1
The KITII vision benchmark suite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
Feature extraction and matching on the KITTI suite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.3
Displacement prediction results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
7
Conclusion
55
8
Future work
57
Bibliography
59
A Appendice A
63
A.1 Revised plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.2 Multi-variable volume regression with feature point displacement and coor-
dinates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
This project revolves around the placement and tracking of smart virtual sensors over a
sequence of frames. These sensors report information that is stored and then used to
predict physical properties of the body or environment that is under consideration.
To be able to trace the sensors, they are put in the locations of the matched image feature
points. Features are used in a large number of applications such as image registration,
image alignment, object recognition, indexing and content-based retrieval, motion track-
ing, or robot navigation. The majority of these applications rely on local descriptors based
on orientation histograms such as SIFT [1] or its improved versions due to its outstanding
invariance against scaling and rotation [2].
In this project, a methodology is developed that leverages from the availability of deeply
trained convolutional neural networks. This is done by using the weight information of one
of the layers to generate the local feature descriptors. This methodology is tested against
SIFT-based features to observe their behavior in different environments.
Figure 1.1: Placement and tracking of a sensor in a pair of consecutive frames.
Given the number of sensors that can be placed in an image, and to take advantage of
their reported information, two very diverse applications are devised. The intuition is that
this technique shall be the most efficient in making sense of the collected data.
The first one discusses the capabilities of the model in predicting the volume of a sphere
that changes size in each frame of a sequence. This application of the proposed pipeline
is used throughout this report as a way to clarify the different steps and utilized extensively
during the development phase. This is because the object and environment are simulated
and the target property set to be easily obtainable from the observed body.
The second and main application is based on visual odometry and uses the KITTI Vision
Benchmark Suite [3] to obtain the real-world camera displacement, sequences of frames,
and depth information through a city. It explores the capabilities of the model in predicting
the vehicle displacement at each frame. This utilization is discussed as a separate case
study.
1.1
Motivation
The main motivation of this project is to be a proof of concept of some of the capabilities
of the proposed pipeline. The combination of using the points found by a feature extractor
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
1
==PAGE:10==
and using these points of interest as sensors that report data for a machine learning model
has great possibilities.
One of the main aspects that this project tries to prove is that features be regarded as
virtual sensors over a surface of interest. Given the introduction of novel computer vision
techniques, the accuracy and capabilities of locating points of interest have increased
together with the accuracy of image classification networks and their democratization.
The availability of deeply pre-trained networks, and more precisely their weight matrices,
gives a full range of capabilities worth exploring.
1.2
Scope
To limit the project to the constraints of a master thesis, the utilization of the mentioned
pipeline is limited to two applications that are chosen to work as a showcase of such
combination.
The original focus of the project was to concentrate the efforts of the models to assume
that the camera module responsible for obtaining the set of frames would be static and
the object under consideration wouldn’t. Nevertheless, this original constraint proved to
be very limiting given the reduced amount of data available with which the intended ex-
periments could be performed. This is because the data-sets needed to have a time
series of frames together with a physical property to be regarded as a target that should
be closely related to the frames themselves. To overcome this challenge, the perspective
from having a dynamic world environment and a static camera position was reversed to
having a static world environment and a dynamic camera position. This scope allowed for
a greater amount of availability of benchmarks without compromising the intended proof
of concept.
As it can be deemed from the applications where this pipeline is applied, the target values
that are taken into consideration are measurable properties directly related to the points
of interest from each of the frames. The prediction of further information that could be
derived from the measurable data itself but that isn’t directly obtained from it isn’t taken
into consideration and left as out of the scope of this project.
For the argumentation above, the following conditions of the system functionality are
stated:
• Define the configuration of the camera for a given test run. For a given applica-
tion of the system, the data the models are fed with must have been obtained using
the same camera configuration through-out the whole test run.
• Establish what models are devised. Through-out this thesis, two applications
are proposed. They both have different camera configurations but are to share a
common model configuration using the same kind of input features to prove the
versatility of the proposed pipeline.
1.3
Objectives and hypotheses
The main objective of this project is to develop a system based on computer vision ca-
pable of keeping track of certain points of interest and use them as virtual sensors over
the sensed surface. Using their reported information, actionable information has to be
obtained from the environment or object under consideration. To do so, the following
objectives are devised:
• Devise a feature extractor. With the intent of collecting non-redundant data that
describes characteristic points of the image under consideration.
2
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:11==
• Devise a feature matcher. It is necessary to keep track of the features between
consecutive frames to determine their sensed variation.
• Use the reported information to obtain actionable data from the observed
frame. Different information is to be obtained from the matched features and tested
as the input set for the machine learning models.
Additionally, there are two main hypotheses directly related to the connection of the ma-
chine learning models to the feature extraction and matching methodologies. First, it is
presumed that the information reported from the sensors will describe the variation that the
object or environment under consideration experiences. Secondly, it is expected that the
models should be able to benefit from a large number of independent variables reported
from the sensors.
1.4
Software requirements
For the development of this project, the following libraries have been extensively used:
• OpenCV. The Open Source Computer Vision Library, more commonly known as
OpenCV [4], is used to compare the desired results with widely accessible computer
vision algorithms such as the scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) [5]. Moreover,
it is also utilized in numerous cases for its image treatment functions.
• Pytorch. The chosen deep learning framework for this project has been Pytorch.
Since Pytorch came out in 2017, it has become the fastest-growing deep learning
library and it is already used for most research papers at top conferences [6]. This
is generally a good indicator of industry usage, given that the application for the
papers ends up getting utilized in products and services commercially. Pytorch is
used for both the feature extraction as well as for the machine learning models.
The code of this project is developed fully in the Python programming language. Moreover,
Jupyter Notebook is the main programming experimentation platform that is used.
The implemented code as well as the collected data-sets are fully available at https://
github.com/jamalavedra/Development_of_feature_based_smart_virtual_sensors.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
In this section, the reader will find an explanation of the main concepts and jargon that is
used throughout this project.
2.1
Feature extraction and matching
2.1.1
What is a feature?
A feature is defined as a piece of information that is relevant for solving a computational
task. In computer vision, features are generally hard to understand and correlate by hu-
mans and are of much lower dimension than the image under consideration. It’s relevant
that they are of lower dimension given that reducing the dimensionality decreases the
overhead of processing them compared to processing the whole image.
Two kinds of features can be extracted from an image: Global features describe the
image as a whole.
They include descriptors of shape, texture features, and contour
representations. Their main applications are in image retrieval and object recognition.
Some examples of global descriptors are shape matrices and histogram oriented gradi-
ents (HOG).
Local features on the other hand describe the image in patches. These patches are
mainly key points in the objects of an image. Some examples of local descriptors are
the scale-invariant feature description (SIFT), sped up robust features(SURF), and local
binary patterns (LBP). They can be used for low-level applications such as object detection
and classification.
Local and global features can be combined, which has proven to be beneficial in an appli-
cation where rough segmentation of objects is available in object recognition [7] with the
side-effect of computational overheads.
As previously mentioned, the implemented feature extractor is compared with a classic
feature extraction approach. The chosen classical approach is the scale-invariant feature
description (SIFT) [1] as it is the most extensive method used for the purpose. Given
that one of the goals of the project is to prove that features can act as virtual sensors,
the focus of the explanations below is in local features. Moreover, the locality of features
implies that they are more robust to occlusion and clutter. They are also better for when
they need to be distinct in a large database of objects and there can be hundreds or even
thousands of features in a single image.
One key point that remains to be answered is what makes a good feature. The concept
of defining a good feature will be recurrent in both the exposed classic feature-based
approach as well as in the proposed deep learning one. A feature is deemed to be good,
i.e. to have good quality, if it leads to unambiguous matches on other matches.
2.1.2
Classic Feature-based approach
As mentioned in chapter 1, OpenCV is used to obtain the results from applying classic
feature-based approaches without the need of implementing them. Feature-based ap-
proaches base their functionality in three steps. These are key-point detection and feature
extraction, feature matching, and image wrapping. For the scope of this project, key-point
detection, feature extraction, and feature matching are considered.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
5
==PAGE:14==
2.1.3
Feature description and key-point detection
For years, local descriptors based on orientation histograms such as SIFT [1], have dom-
inated most domains of computer vision [8]. Given that the comparisons of the imple-
mented feature detector are done with SIFT, the explanations of the features description
and feature-point detection are based on it.
Feature detection is based on finding locations such that minimum change caused by
shifting the window in any direction causes large value variation. There exist three differ-
ent kinds of window changes in the shift:
• ”Flat” region when there is no change in all directions.
• ”Edge” region when there is no change along the edge direction.
• ”Corner” region when there is a significant change in all directions.
This is achieved by shifting the window W by (u,v). Having defined the window, each
pixel in it is compared between consecutive shifts using the sum of squared differences
(SSD). This measure of SSD is deemed as the error E(u,v) between shifts and used to
capture the smallest and largest changes. Then, a small motion assumption is used to
find directions that will result in the largest and smallest error values. This combination
of the square differences and motion assumption is used to populate a matrix over all the
points of the image.
The eigenvalues of this matrix are then computed and the ones with the largest amount
of increase in the direction of the smallest increase of the E(u,v) are selected. Between
these points, the ones that correspond to a local maximum are chosen as interest points.
Figure 2.1: Feature detection in window changes [9].
The most popular among all detectors is called the Harris corner detector, which is a
similar implementation to the one explained above but less expensive given that it doesn’t
compute the eigenvalues of the matrix.
Because the features that are to be found need to be invariant to transformations (both ge-
ometric and photometric), classic feature approaches make use of scale-invariant interest
point detection methods.
6
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:15==
The key idea behind detecting scale invariant interest points is to find a scale of the image
under consideration where it gives the local maximum of the feature detector. This is done
by generating copies of the image in multiple scales and then finding the local maxima
points and comparing them to neighbor points at current adjacent scales. A common
approach to this is to detect features at many scales using a Gaussian pyramid such as
multi-scale oriented patches (MOPS).
Feature descriptors are generated to match the detected feature points. There exist
many approaches to match features, SIFT being one of the most common ones.
After ensuring invariance in the feature detector, it is necessary to design an invariant
feature descriptor. A descriptor has to capture the intensity information in a region around
the detected feature point.
The scale-invariant feature transform descriptor will take a square window around a de-
tected interest point and will compute the edge orientation for each pixel. After applying
a threshold gradient to clear out weak edges it will create a histogram of the edge orien-
tations that will formulate the feature descriptor.
2.1.4
Feature matching
After having acquired the feature points and the feature descriptors, point feature match-
ing is applied to find correspondences between the feature descriptors of two images. As
it has been already exposed through-out this section, given that the main classical feature
descriptor is SIFT, the explanations on the topic are based on it when necessary.
The main properties of SIFT-based matching are the following:
• Can handle changes in viewpoint.
• It is fast and efficient and can run in real-time.
• Can handle significant changes in illumination.
To similarity between two features is defined by the feature distance calculated with the
SSD. That is, the SSD between the insertions of the two descriptors. It does not provide a
way to discard ambiguous matches. To do so, a ratio of SSDs is defined which describes
the difference between the two features. With this ratio it is possible to state that those
possible matches that have a value close to 1 are ambiguous, implying that those with a
low ratio are the ones that are unique.
Having stated that low values of the ratio of SSD are preferred, it is required to define how
low this value needs to be in order to be considered a match. To do so, a threshold is
applied to accept only the matches with a ratio be smaller than it.
The effects of choosing a large threshold result in accepting matches which can be false
positive (matches that are accepted which aren’t actually representing the same feature).
On the other hand, choosing a smaller threshold value will result in a more restrictive
amount of accepted matches and therefore a higher amount of true negatives (matches
that aren’t accepted and that aren’t actually a match).
Brute-force matcher is the method used in this project in order to match the feature
descriptors obtained with SIFT. This simple matcher takes the descriptor of one feature in
the first set and compares it to all descriptors in the second set using only a distance of
calculation as a metric. It is an extremely expensive one and, as any brute-force algorithm,
doesn’t guarantee to get an optimal solution.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
7
==PAGE:16==
To avoid the implementation of this matcher, OpenCV is used. There are several con-
figurations that can be set when calling the OpenCV function which settle the way the
matching is performed between descriptors. There are two main variables that are used
by default when using the functions shown in listing 2.1 which are worth mentioning for the
scope of this project. The specification of the distance measurement and the guarantee
of bijection.
The former is set by default to cv2.NORM_L2, which is the implementation of the euclidean
distance. The later is the crossCheck variable which is set by default to the positive state,
indicating that bijection is guaranteed between matches.
1
kp1, des1 = sift.detectAndCompute(img1, None)
2
kp2, des2 = sift.detectAndCompute(img2, None)
3
bf = cv.BFMatcher()
4
match = bf.match(des1, des2)
5
matches = sorted(match, key=lambda x: x.distance)
Listing 2.1: Feature description with SIFT and key point detection with brute-force matcher
implemented on OpenCV.
From listing 2.1 and whenever the matches from this approach are compared with the
matches obtained with the convolutional features, it is important to note that they are
always sorted to select the ones that represent a better measurement of being an unam-
biguous match.
2.2
Machine learning basics
Machine learning is a technique that consists of developing an algorithm that learns how
to solve a specific problem from data. The algorithm responsible for solving the problem
that is proposed is called model. This model has a set of variables, namely parameters,
on which it depends. There exists a mechanism for altering the parameter assignment to
maximize the performance concerning a problem instance. The performance is regarded
as how well a certain assignment solves the problem under consideration. The basic
training loop can be observed in fig. 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Diagram of the basic training loop [10].
In fig. 2.2, several key concepts that are used throughout this project are mentioned:
• The architecture is the functional form of the model.
• The features are the independent variables that are used to calculate the predictions.
• The predictions are the results of the model.
• The measurement of the performance is called loss.
8
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:17==
• The targets (also called labels) are used together with the predictions to calculate
the loss.
• The variance is the amount by which the estimate of the target functions changes if
different training data were used.
• The bias can be described as the tendency of the model to learn the wrong infor-
mation from the training set, not taking into account all the information in the data.
As the variance, for a model to be considered accurate, the bias needs to be small.
From fig. 2.2, some of the fundamental points from deep learning can be observed. These
key concepts also apply all along this project given that different architectures are used
continuously. It is important to note that the model is only capable of learning to operate
on the patterns seen in the input data that is used to train it.
Another critical insight comes from how the models interact with their environment. The
machine learning models that are proposed in this project are predictive policing models
that are created based on past features and targets.
Another key concept that is mentioned numerous times throughout this project is the re-
gression model. A regression model is one that attempts to predict one or more numeric
quantities.
2.2.1
Neural networks
Neural networks can be regarded as a function that is flexible enough so that it can be
used to describe any given mathematical function by varying its parameters. The process
of finding a good parameter assignment for a problem is known as training.
The architecture of neural networks is formed by layers of neurons. Neural network mod-
els are usually trained in large data-sets and are used to predict an outcome given some
input data. This machine learning technique is inspired by biological neural networks that
constitute animal brains [11]. Just like in animal’s brains, they need to learn information
and shouldn’t be programmed directly for each task. There are three well-established
learning techniques that neural networks use: supervised learning, unsupervised learn-
ing, and reinforcement learning. This project focuses solely on the former.
The perception nodes in the neural networks are called neurons. Neurons are the basic
computational unit and are structured in layers. These layers are made up of a number
of interconnected neurons.
Figure 2.3: Schematic of a neuron [12].
As it can be observed in fig. 2.3, for an input vector I of elements I1, I2, ..., In, each element
had a corresponding weight that all together form the weight vector.
n = wI + b
(2.1)
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
9
==PAGE:18==
output = f(n)
(2.2)
After the weighted sum is performed eq. (2.1), the bias b is added. The bias is a constant
that is used as an extra parameter to tune to improve the fit. The obtained result is then
used to compute the output with the neuron’s activation function.
Activation functions
They are used at the end of a hidden unit to introduce non-linear behavior to the model.
The three most commonly used functions are the sigmoid function, tanh, and ReLu. Their
goal is to normalize the output to a given range to ensure that the model has stable con-
vergence.
Loss function
The purpose of the loss function is to define a measure of performance. It can be regarded
as a function that measures the quality of the model’s predictions. It is therefore a function
that takes as inputs the predicted value corresponding to the real data and outputs how
different they are.
The most common cost function for regression problems is the Mean Squared Error (MSE)
[13]. As it can be observed in eq. (2.3), it is the average squared difference between the
prediction and the actual value.
l(w, b) = 1
N
N
∑
n=1
(yn −xnw −b)2
(2.3)
Hyperparameters
Given that the architecture itself can be regarded as a template for a mathematical func-
tion, it is necessary to provide the values of the parameters it contains. Despite there
are different available techniques for updating the weights during backpropagation, in this
project they are updated after every run over the whole training set, also called epoch.
Moreover, the pace at which the weights get updated can also be tuned by modifying the
learning rate.
Backpropagation
Using backpropagation it is possible to compute how much the final output values are
affected by each of the weights. By calculating the partial derivative, it goes back to the
neuron that carried a specific weight. It performs a highly efficient search for the optimal
weight values using the gradient descent technique. They are updated following three
steps.
First, it computes the loss the current parameter assignment has with respect to targets.
Then, the gradients are calculated using backpropagation. Based on the computed gra-
dients, the parameter assignment is changed. The most simplistic methods do so by
multiplicating those gradients by a specific number called the learning rate.
In this project, the adaptive moment estimation or Adam is used. The Adam optimizer
is a variation from the just presented gradient descent procedure to update the network
weights. Whilst gradient descent keeps the same learning rate for all weight updates,
Adam’s learning rate is maintained for each parameter and separately adapted as the
learning unfolds. This characteristic allows it to achieve good results fast.
2.3
Regression models
In this section, the main characteristics of the models used for the predictions are ex-
plained. Models are defined by their dependent and independent variables, along with
10
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:19==
the loss function. Some of these independent variables are distinct for the application
whilst others are common to all models trained using the information devised from the
feature points. For each specific use case presented in this project, the input features are
thoroughly described.
First, the linear regression model is explained to establish an initial ground from which
to obtain the first results from the feature point’s information. Then, a more elaborate
architecture is presented.
2.3.1
Linear regression
Linear regression is most suitable when there are linear relationships between the fea-
tures. It is the most simple kind of regression and is therefore tested out as a base model
to be used as a comparison to the models that are developed further along in this project.
This approach is unable to learn complex relationships but is quick to compute and easy
to update with new data.
Figure 2.4: Directed graph representing the multiple linear regression scheme.
In the nodes of fig. 2.4, the features of the model can be observed. Moreover, in the edges
lie the parameters of the model. The dependent variable y describes the outcome of the
model where the weights and the bias are parameters the model learns in the training
phase.
2.3.2
Recurrent neural network
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) provide a method for neural networks to have persis-
tence of previously learned information. They are the most adequate option for predic-
tions based on time series data, given that a recurrent neural network has its decisions
influenced by what it has learned from the past.
Figure 2.5: Recurrent neural network unrolled schema [14].
As can be observed in fig. 2.5, RNNs are networks with loops. Here, xt is some input to
the neural network A that outputs ht. It is remarkable to note that they are not a completely
new architecture change but rather a refactoring of a multi-layer neural network using a
loop. This is shown in the same fig. 2.5 where it is also implicit that they aren’t all that
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
11
==PAGE:20==
different from a sequence and lists of neural networks. They can be thought of as multiple
copies of the same network each passing a message to a successor.
Throughout this report, there are several mentions about the hidden state of this kind of
model. These are the activations that are updated after each loop iteration. This hidden
state is responsible for retaining memory of everything that happens in a sequence and
of having the right information for the output layer. As it will be explained further along in
this chapter, these theoretical capabilities turn out to be bad at retaining memory of what
happened early in the input sequence.
In the structure of the RNN cell from fig. 2.6 it can be seen that it takes both the output
of the last hidden state and the observation time as inputs. This implies that there is no
information about the past to remember besides the hidden state.
Figure 2.6: Recurrent neural network cell [15].
The problem with RNN comes with long-term dependencies. If the gap between where
the relevant information is given and where it would be needed to make an appropriate
prediction is small, RNNs can learn to use such past information. If, on the other hand,
the gap is significantly larger (a long term dependency), RNNs become unable to learn to
connect the information. Despite in theory being able to do so, and as it was explored in
depth in [16], in practice they aren’t.
Because a deep neural network is mainly a set of matrix multiplications and additions
where at each layer a multiplication is performed, it is very easy for it to end up with ex-
tremely small or extremely large numbers. This issue is called the vanishing gradients
and exploding gradients problem respectively, as it is the gradient that exponentially de-
cays as it is backpropagated. This is an issue because the floating points become less
accurate the further away they get from zero.
The fact that the sensitivity decays exponentially over time is due to the two main factors
that affect the magnitude of the gradients: the derivatives of the activation functions and
the weights. When either of these two values is higher than 1 the gradients might explode
in time; oppositely, when they are smaller than 1 vanishing may happen.
It is a priority that the model is capable to tell, regardless of the gap between the relevant
information and where it is needed, if the body that is being sensed is behaving in a
fundamentally different way with respect to the beginning of the sensing. To overcome
these issues, two main types of layers were developed: gated recurrent units (GRUs) and
long short-term memory (LSTMs) layers. This project focuses on the utilization of LSTMs.
Long short term neural network
Long short-term memory is an architecture whose main difference in design with respect
to RNNs is that there are two hidden states instead of one being used. The clarification
on how they are connected and what is their intention in the design of this architecture
follows.
12
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.7: LSTM cell [15].
As can be observed in fig. 2.7 an LSTM module, opposed to the single layer in an RNN
model, is made of four neural networks (called gates) that interact in a special way be-
tween each other.
A new hidden state called the cell state, usually called long-term memory in RNNs, is
added to retain the memory of what happened early in the sequence. This state goes
straight through the whole module with some minor linear interactions, which is precisely
why it can carry out a longer-term state. Removing or adding information from the cell state
is done by carefully regulating the gates. On the other hand, the hidden state focuses on
the next prediction.
There are a total of three gates that protect and control the cell state in regular LSTMs.
These gates are formed of a sigmoid neural network layer and a pointwise multiplication
operation. With this architecture, it can be regulated how much each gate should let
through. This is because the sigmoid operation outputs a value between zero and one
where zero values are discarded and values closer to one are kept.
It is important to note that, as observed in the figure that is under consideration, the arrows
of the input xt and the old state ht−1 are joined together forming a tensor. This is the reason
the dimensions of xt can be different from the dimensions of the hidden state. Moreover,
this addition of the old state and the input describes the size of the input to the neural
network (|xt| + |ht−1|) with an output size of |ht−1|.
Starting from the left of fig. 2.7, the first gate (called the forget gate) appears. This gate
decides which information to be omitted from the cell in a particular time-stamp.
The second and third gate also called the input gate and cell gate respectively, decide
how much of the current unit will be used to update the cell state. They are essential for
when it is necessary to include information that the forget gate removed. While the input
gate will use values from 0 to 1 to decide what elements to update, the cell gate output
values range from -1 to 1 thanks to the tanh function.
As can be seen in fig. 2.7, the hidden state ht, also called working memory in RNN,
constitutes the output of the module. This is based in a filtered version of the cell state
obtained from the output of the last gate (called output gate). This gate determines what
information from the cell state will be used to generate the output.
It is important to mention that recurrent neural networks are in general very hard to train
because of the presented problems of the vanishing and exploding gradients. On the
other hand, the main problem with LSTM is that they are very prone to overfitting. This
is a challenge that is treated extensively when presenting the results of the case study
and also mentioned and treated when working with the volume prediction of the sphere
example.
There exist several regularization techniques that can be used to reduce overfitting with
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
13
==PAGE:22==
LSTM [17]. Some regularization techniques that have been proven to be effective against
this issue are dropout, temporal activation regularization, and activation regularization in
beating state-of-the-art results.
14
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:23==
3
Related works
In this section, some of the most relevant applications and their approaches are explored.
There exist several different applications from getting convolutional features. This results
in that their state of the art is diverse in the endpoint applications. Nevertheless, they use
a similar approach in the underneath methodology of the feature extraction.
In this direction, a lot of work has been done in the fields of feature-based image registra-
tion. These methods typically consist of four stages and two of those are directly related
to the scope of this project. The first one is on detecting a sufficiently large number of
feature points in a pair of images using a feature descriptor and the second one is on esti-
mating the correspondences by finding the nearest neighbors in a feature space (usually
called feature pre-matching).
Most of the feature-based methods rely on the scale-invariant feature transform algorithm
(SIFT) or its improved variations for the detection of feature points. Despite that, compar-
isons have been made [8] that show that extracting feature representations from various
layers of convolutional neural networks that were trained on ImageNet and others that
were trained without supervision clearly outperformed SIFT on descriptor matching when
using the Euclidean distance as matching metric.
A variety of SIFT based methods have been developed over the last few years which
introduce different techniques to enhance feature point matching, which is essential for
image registration to establish a correspondence between a number of especially distinct
points in images. Some state-of-the-art methods that use SIFT in image registration are:
PRGLS [18] and CPD [19].
Other approaches like [20] focus on training a convolutional neural network to predict the
similarity of image patches. Approaches like this one and [21], which explores remote
sensing based on deep convolutional networks, focus on the correspondence points as-
suming that they are matched if they have similar surrounding structures.
Despite this project uses an exhaustive search technique such as brute-force because
of its similarity to the developed method, other methods have shown to outperform it in
speed. The Fast Library for Approximate Nearest Neighbors or FLANN, for instance, will
be much faster than the brute-force technique at the cost of decreasing the precision of
the matches. This is because its functionality is based on finding an approximate nearest
neighbor which is a good match but not necessarily the best. Another approach that has
been proven to improve the quality of matches is by applying the Random Sample Con-
sensus algorithm (RANSAC) after the matches have been found. This algorithm is used
after finding the correspondences between features to robustly estimate the parameter
set and detect outliers with it.
Effective convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been developed based on methods
for extracting features [22]. Unsupervised methods like this one explore techniques for
devising a feature learning methods to learn a set of feature extractors which are robust
and efficient without the need of using elaborately designed descriptors such as SIFT.
Moreover, as exposed in [23], SIFT only uses local low-level information and loses much
middle- or high- level information. Image features extracted by CNNs have achieved state-
of-the-art performance for image classification and retrieval problems and can provide
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
15
==PAGE:24==
the middle and high-level information that standard orientation histograms based local
descriptors don’t have.
On the other hand, [24] presents an approach based on a deep convolutional network
that extracts features from patches and a network of three fully connected layers that
computes the similarity between the extracted features.
Convolutional features have recently also been used in models called FlowNet in order
to learn optical flow [25]. The relevant take in this application is the way it treats feature
vectors at different image locations. This involves learning the image feature representa-
tions and learning to match them at different locations in the two images. This approach
and similarly in this project, the idea is to exploit the ability of convolutional networks to
learn strong features at different levels of scale and abstractions and help it with finding
the actual correspondences based on them.
There are also a number of papers that tackle the field of feature descriptors, which gave
critical insights into the capabilities of the method implemented in this project. For in-
stance, this paper by Razavian et al[26] tacked an OverFeat deep neural network pre-
trained on ImageNet and re-purposed as a feature extractor. In this paper, one can ob-
serve that the proposed feature extractor is anything that takes in data and returns a set
of numbers that describe the parts it has encoded as believed to be important. Using this
feature extractor, a support-vector-machine uses the resulting features to model the input
images.
Deep feature extractors have lately been referred to as embeddings. An embedding is a
far broader concept that includes anything that maps an object in space to point in vector
space. Given that the feature extractor in the scope of this project takes an image and
returns a vector of floats (the descriptor), it can clearly be regarded as an embedding.
In the approach that this project takes, similarly as proposed in [27], CNN is only used for
feature extraction, and then they are matched using the Euclidean distance as in [8].
Giving a special focus on the case study presented in this report, visual odometry puts
its spotlight in constructing the six degrees of freedom trajectory of a camera (or camera
array) that is attached to a moving object using the video sequence obtained from it.
Despite the implemented method uses only one camera, also called monocular visual
odometry, other methodologies that use more than one camera, also called stereo visual
odometry, are taken into account when reviewing research papers on the field.
Visual odometry being a popular field of study, there are numerous studies that use a wide
range of approaches. Namely, there are two main sub-fields in motion estimation: direct
methods and feature-based methods. Because of the nature of this project, this section
focuses on the later.
Approaches like [28] use feature selection and tracking in frames to describe the trajectory
of a robot. From their implemented approach, it is remarkable the use of an IMU-aided
algorithm to resolve wrong correspondences. In this approach, the sum of absolute dif-
ferences between fixed-size windows is used to match the features. Another interesting
implementation they present is the use of circular matching. This is, each feature must
be matched between the stereo cameras and their consecutive counter-parts before be-
ing considered a correspondence. Similarly, [29] follows the previous implementation but
uses Kanade–Lucas–Tomasi (KLT) feature tracker to follow sparse features in cases of
small motion. Using this approach provides faster than traditional techniques for potential
matches.
16
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:25==
A different relevant approach by [30] presents a method that uses both feature points and
line features for multi-scene visual SLAM based on RGB-D information. The introduction
of line features that describe the contours present in the frame proves to be very effective
when used in indoor environments where there are abundant matches. Moreover, the
combination with a feature point-based method provides a significant improvement with
respect to methods that are solely based on feature points. Similarly, [31] combines the
use of feature points and feature lines putting its spotlight in the challenges that appear
when there are scene light variations, when the videos under consideration are poorly-
textured, or feature points disappear. Their framework is based on the award-winning
[32], which presents a feature-based monocular SLAM capable of operating in real-time
in a wide range of environments but that is likely to fail in the situations that [31] tackles.
In [33], an approach is presented that doesn’t perform visual odometry in consecutive
frames. Consecutive frames have the main disadvantage which is also perceived in the
development of this project. This is, errors accumulate inevitably between frames when
computing the trajectory. This paper proposes selecting a reference frame by tracing back
as far as possible on the image that shares stable features with the current frame. Then,
visual odometry is performed between these two.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:27==
4
Feature detection and matching
In this section, the goal is to explain the implemented methodology to obtain deep convo-
lutional features and match them between consecutive frames.
4.1
Feature description and key-point detection
The feature descriptors for each key point are constructed from the output of a certain
layer of a pre-trained VGG-16 [34] network. VGG-16 is a model that achieves 92.7% top-
5 test accuracy in ImageNet, which consists of over 14 million images that belong to 1000
classes.
From this last statement, there are two main clarifications to be made. The first one on
why a pre-trained network is used and the second one on why specifically the VGG ar-
chitecture. Much empirical research such as [35] confirms that the error rate of a neural
network improves sub-linearly with the amount of data used to train it. This is increasingly
worrying given that the data needed to improve or reach the accuracy of the state of the
art models which are extremely deep trained in enormous data sets isn’t usually publicly
available. Moreover, it also confirms another unfortunate fact which is that most archi-
tectural improvements don’t change the shape of the accuracy curves noticeably. After a
certain point, the amount of data needed to make a meaningful improvement to the results
is considerable.
The main reasons on why the used architecture is VGG are exposed hereunder.
1. It is trained in a considerably sized and diversified data-set. This translates into that
the filters search for universal patterns that generalize well.
2. As it can be observed in fig. 4.1, it has a concise structure that doesn’t make use of
branches or shortcut connections. Moreover, it is constructed by stacking convolu-
tion, pooling, and fully connected layers.
3. As exposed above, it has remarkable performance in image classification tasks.
Figure 4.1: VGG-16 network architecture [34].
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
19
==PAGE:28==
The main drawbacks of the selected architecture are slowness on its training and the size
of the network architecture weights. Given that the presented applications are intended
to be a proof of concept, they are acceptable inconveniences that don’t undermine the
results of the project.
From the layers observed in fig. 4.1, several of them can be selected to build the feature
descriptor. The main principle that has been used to choose a layer is its generalizability
of convolution filters and receptive field size. Nevertheless, it is necessary first to clarify
what constitutes a convolution layer.
In neural networks, a convolution layer contains several filters (also called kernels) where
each of them searches for a specific pattern in the image. The decision on which of the
layers are to be used is based upon the visualization of the convolution filters and several
iterations using each of the outputs as features. To display the decision process that leads
to choosing the specific layer utilized throughout the report, fig. 4.2 is used.
Figure 4.2: Image from OpenCV [36] used to show the output of the layers of interest.
Using a package [37] for the visualization of the kernels at each pooling layer, they are
compared to observe the way they generalize and find universal patterns. As it can be
observed in fig. 4.3, with the output of deeper layers the kernels become more sophisti-
cated. This can be recognized by comparing the output of pool2 in fig. 4.3a and the output
of pool5 fig. 4.3d.
After comparing the outputs of the layers, the third max-pooling layer (pool3 from now on)
is the one used to build the feature descriptors. Figure 4.3b shows how the output of this
layer is a midpoint between the yield of more shallow layers such as pool2 or much deeper
ones like pool5 where the convolution filters search for much larger scale patterns. This
chosen layer has 256 filters that have a size of 28x28. This is relevant when noting the
precision of the implemented system, as it is going to be explained further along in this
project.
Like in [27], it would have been possible to use more than one layer, given that then they
would well cover different receptive fields. This is considered as a feature that can be
added in a future version of this implementation and is discussed in chapter 8.
20
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:29==
(a) Four of the kernels from the output of
pool2. This layer is formed of 128 kernels
of size 56x56.
(b) Four of the kernels from the output of
pool3. This layer is formed of 256 kernels
of size 28x28.
(c) Four of the kernels from the output of
pool4. This layer is formed of 512 kernels
of size 14x14.
(d) Four of the kernels from the output of
pool5. This layer is formed of 512 kernels
of size 7x7.
Figure 4.3: Four kernels of pool2, pool3, pool4 and pool5 in that order from top to bottom
and left to right with fig. 4.2 as input image.
The pre-trained model is obtained through the repository available from Pytorch. These
models expect the images to be loaded in a range between [0,1], to be at least 224 in width
and height, and of shape (3 x H x W). Additionally, each of the channels (red, green, and
blue) are also normalized with their mean and standard deviation. This implementation
can be observed for a single image in listing 4.1.
1
IX_path= "path-to-image"
2
normalize = transforms.Normalize(
3
mean=[0.485, 0.456, 0.406],
4
std=[0.229, 0.224, 0.225])
5
preprocess = transforms.Compose([
6
transforms.Resize([224, 224]),
7
transforms.ToTensor(),
8
normalize])
9
IX_trand = preprocess(PImage.open(IX_path))
Listing 4.1: Preprocessing of the images before fed into the VGG-16 network.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
21
==PAGE:30==
As it can be observed in listing 4.1, before the images are propagated through the pre-
trained network, they are resized to 224x224. Note that the shape of the image influences
the receptive field of each descriptor and that larger inputs require more computation.
The intuition on how the image descriptors are created can be observed in fig. 4.4. By
stacking each of the resulting feature maps, the pixel value is taken for each feature map
at the same position. This operation is repeated for every pixel coordinates of the feature
map, namely 784.
Figure 4.4: Creating the feature descriptors from the feature map. The red line represents
a single vector that takes the value of the same pixel position of each of the resulting
feature maps.
The full implementation from feeding the image to obtaining the feature descriptors is
shared in listing 4.2. Note the model is directly imported from the Torchvision model sub-
package and that the propagation of the images through the network is done with GPU
acceleration (when available).
As it was presented in fig. 4.3, the output shape of the selected layer is [256,28,28]. Each
feature map is flattened, resulting in a matrix of shape [256,784]. The rows of this matrix
hold each of the feature maps of the selected layer. To create the feature descriptors, it is
only needed to take each of the columns of the mentioned matrix. This is precisely what
is implemented in listing 4.2.
1
model = models.vgg16(pretrained=True).to(device)
2
device = torch.device("cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu")
3
vis = VisualizeLayers(model,layers='all')
4
output = model(IX_trand.to(device))
5
interm_output = vis.get_interm_output()
6
pool3 = interm_output['features.16_pooling_MaxPool2d'].cpu()
7
featureDescriptor = []
8
DX1 = np.zeros(shape=(784,256))
9
pool3_flat = np.reshape(pool3, [-1, 784]).numpy()
10
for i in range(pool3_flat.shape[1]):
11
for kernel in pool3_flat:
12
featureDescriptor.append(kernel[i])
13
DX1[i] = featureDescriptor
14
featureDescriptor = []
Listing 4.2: Obtaining the feature descriptors of an image.
22
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:31==
4.2
Feature matching
The next step after having created the feature descriptors is to calculate their correspon-
dences in a consecutive frame.
First, the distance matrix is created to state the difference that exists between the values
of every pixel in each of the filters with respect to all pixels of the filters of the consecutive
frame. This is done using listing 4.3, where both inputs X and Y are the normalized
feature descriptors corresponding to the consecutive frames that are under study.
The matrix from eq. (4.1) is constructed row-wise from left to right. Each element pdi,j
corresponds to the euclidean distance from a specific feature descriptor of a frame to an-
other of the previous frame. Therefore, each row m of this matrix describes the euclidean
distance from a certain point of the frame.
PDm,n =


pd1,1
pd1,2
· · ·
pd1,n
pd2,1
pd2,2
· · ·
pd2,n
...
...
...
...
pdm,1
pdm,2
· · ·
pdm,n


(4.1)
1
def pairwise_distance(X, Y):
2
assert len(X.shape) == len(Y.shape)
3
N = X.shape[0]
4
M = Y.shape[0]
5
res = np.zeros([M, N])
6
for i in range(M):
7
for j in range(N):
8
res[i][j] = np.linalg.norm(X[j] - Y[i])
9
return res
Listing 4.3: Function used to create the distance matrix. This implementation is inspired
in [27].
After having created the distance matrix, listing 4.4 is used to find the best matches for
each pixel of the frame under consideration. As it can be observed, the smallest dis-
tance is chosen from each row. Given that each element from the distance matrix is the
euclidean distance from a certain feature descriptor to another, the smallest distance de-
scribes the most similar ones. In the first column, eq. (4.2) includes a count of the total
number of pixels to keep track of the origin of each pixel.
Cm,n =


1
c1,2
2
c2,2
...
...
784
cm,2


(4.2)
A quality ratio is created between the two smallest distances of each row. A higher ratio
will denote a higher quality of the match, meaning there is be a bigger distance between
the two best matches. The quality list will, therefore, have an element for each pixel of the
frame and will be used to choose the best matches. From this explanation, it is important
to note that bijection isn’t enforced, but rather the best match is selected per feature.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
23
==PAGE:32==
1
def match(PD):
2
seq = np.arange(PD.shape[0])
3
amin1 = np.argmin(PD, axis=1)
4
C = np.array([seq, amin1]).transpose()
5
min1 = PD[seq, amin1] # array of the minimum distances
6
mask = np.zeros_like(PD)
7
mask[seq, amin1] = 1
8
masked = np.ma.masked_array(PD, mask)
9
min2 = np.amin(masked, axis=1)
10
quality = np.array(min2/min1)
11
return C, quality
Listing 4.4: Function used to find the best matches. This implementation is inspired in
[27].
The ratio list created in listing 4.4 is used to select the matches with the highest quality.
To do so, a variable τmax is created to equal the maximum quality ratio available. Then, at
each iteration of the loop, it will decrease τmax by 0.01 until the minimum desired number
of matches are selected. The resulting τmax is used to select the matches from eq. (4.2).
Note that it is possible that after having decreased the value of τmax in one iteration, more
than one matches pass the quality filter. Therefore, this constitutes only a lower bound
on the number of matches.
It is important to mention that the best matches are always found between two frames.
This implies that, when using a sequence of frames, the location of the features won’t
necessarily be preserved. This is an important characteristic of the application because
it implies that sensors might change position dynamically between consecutive frames.
1
tau_max = np.max(quality)
2
while np.where(quality >= tau_max)[0].shape[0] <= 128:
3
tau_max -= 0.01
4
C = C[np.where(quality >= theta_max)]
Listing 4.5: Select matches with the best quality until there are at least 128 matches. This
implementation follows the nomenclature introduced by [27].
When the features have been selected and matched, the last step is to correlate them to
the coordinate points in the image. This is done with the code presented in listing 4.6.
In this implementation, an matrix is created such that each element describes a pixel of
the filter (seq in the listing). This matrix is then used to correlate the extracted features to
coordinates in the frame. This is done by selecting the intended points of the mentioned
matrix using the resulting C matrix of the previous step.
1
seq = np.array([[i, j] for i in range(28)
2
for j in range(28)], dtype='int32')
3
4
X = np.array(seq, dtype='float32') * 8.0 + 4.0
5
Y = np.array(seq, dtype='float32') * 8.0 + 4.0
6
X, Y = X[C[:, 1]], Y[C[:, 0]]
Listing 4.6:
Placing of the selected features as coordinates of the frame.
This
implementation is inspired in [27].
24
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:33==
After having obtained the coordinates of the features, the last step needed is to re-scale
the coordinates. This is necessary because, as exposed in listing 4.1, all images are re-
sized before being propagated through the network. After the re-scale of the coordinates,
the process of the feature extraction and matching is complete.
Note that the generated descriptors occur every 8x8 square, where the center of the patch
is regarded as the feature point. The size of the descriptor is computed by taking the input
size of the image (224x224) and the kernel size of the selected layer (28x28) and mapping
the resulting matches to the input image. In fig. 4.5 one can find the representation of the
descriptor and the feature point marked as a red circle in a squared patch of an image.
Figure 4.5: Distribution of the descriptors in a 32x32 squared region. The red dots denote
the pool3 descriptors which are generated every 8x8 region.
The process of creating the feature descriptor and matching it can be observed as a
progress diagram in fig. 4.6. In it, the VGG-16 network has been modified from the pre-
sented in fig. 4.1 to display only the layers that are used. Note that in fig. 4.6, the steps
describe how to find matches between two consecutive frames. Nevertheless, this same
process is used when a sequence of frames is under consideration. This is done by
re-assigning the consecutive frame and initial frame variables from fig. 4.6 after each it-
eration. Consecutive frame becomes initial frame and consecutive frame becomes its
consecutive frame.
.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.6: Progress diagram of the implemented method for creating the feature descrip-
tor and matching it.
26
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:35==
To demonstrate the exposed functionalities of key-point extraction of both SIFT-based
features and convolutional features, an initial use case is proposed to be used as an
early proof of concept of the implementation. Because of the simplicity of the inspected
frames, they have been used extensively for the fine-tuning of the implemented methods
as well as to explore how viable was the implementation of the original concept exposed
in chapter 1.
Figure 4.7: The sphere used to obtain the input features for the models.
By applying the methodology summarized in fig. 4.6, fig. 4.7 is used to find matches with
its same scaled-down figure. Both in fig. 4.8 and fig. 4.9, only the best 120 matches are
displayed. Therefore, in both cases, these matches correspond to the ones with higher
quality.
Figure 4.8: Feature matching with brute-force technique of the best 120 features using
SIFT as feature descriptor. A color scheme is applied to ease the identification of distinct
correspondences.
Figure 4.8 showcases the result of applying the SIFT feature descriptor with a scaled-
down version of fig. 4.7. Given that the resize operation is applied uniformly over the
whole sphere, the lines of the correspondences that are shown are expected to be parallel.
Therefore, the matching lines that cross over others are of false positive matches, feature
points that the brute-force technique hasn’t been able to match correctly based on the
generated descriptor. The quality of the correspondences is deemed by sorting by the
euclidean distance between descriptors, where the shorter the distance the better the
match [38].
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.9: Feature matching of the best 120 convolutional features. A color scheme is
applied to ease the identification of distinct correspondences.
On fig. 4.9 it can be seen how most of the features seem to correspond correctly to their
consecutive counterparts. A couple of matches appear to be false correspondences. This
is believed to be because the body that is under inspection has extremely similar regions
that, when the quality threshold lowers, are hard to filter out. Nevertheless, this issue
appears to be uncommon given the number of correct matches that are devised.
After having discussed the implementations that enable the detection and matching of
features, the main goal is to create a data-set with which it is possible to obtain actionable
input features for the machine learning models. To do so, a loop is created where at each
iteration, the sphere from fig. 4.7 is scaled down with a certain scaling ratio. The sphere
is scaled down 98 times, where at every resize step the scaled-down ball is compared
with the original unaltered football ball and the feature extraction and matching methods
are applied. This is done both with the implemented methodology and with SIFT-based
features using brute-force matching to serve as a base of comparison.
From the matched feature points, several sets of information can be extracted. In this
project, the following are obtained from both mentioned methodologies:
• Coordinates of the feature points in both images. They are normalized with respect
to the size of the input image.
• Displacement in the abscissa and ordinate axis of each feature point with respect
to its correspondence position.
• Euclidean distance between matched feature points.
At each step when applied to a sequence of frames, the values mentioned above consti-
tute the samples of the data-set. They are later on treated and explored in chapter 5 to
inspect which are the better performing in the devised test cases. The key point is that
each sample of the data-set will have an array of values for each column, where each
element of the array is the information extracted from one feature point. The length of
these lists is defined by the total number of sensors that are being used.
28
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:37==
4.3
Comparison between convolutional features and
SIFT-based features
Having explored both of the feature point extraction and matching implementations that
are used in this project, in this section they are compared. This is done with the intention
of making clear the most noted differences between them.
The used images that to compare the two techniques are from a multi-temporal satellite
image data-set acquired from Google Earth. They were previously chosen as an image
registration test-bench [27].
The first observation that can be made from observing at fig. 4.10 and after applying
the implemented feature detection and matching methodology is that fig. 4.10b has the
feature points distributed more evenly over the image. As aforementioned in the previous
convolutional features explanation, this is because the implemented method guarantees
that there will only one feature every 8x8 square region.
(a) Features detected with SIFT and matched
with the brute-force technique.
(b) Features detected with the convolutional fea-
tures approach.
Figure 4.10: Feature matching precision test results of the best 90 matches on a multi-
temporal satellite image data-set. True positive are denoted by blue lines; false positives
are denoted by yellow lines.
From fig. 4.10 it can be observed that the implemented method is better for multi-sensor
feature correspondence where there exists a certain extent of appearance difference be-
tween the two images.
Figure 4.10a presents the features that are detected using SIFT and matched with the
brute-force technique. It can be observed that, despite there exist several true positive
matches, the vast majority are false positive. The main reason for this number of incorrect
correspondences is that, as exposed previously in this chapter, SIFT finds the locations
such that the minimum window shift results in the greatest change. In the image under
consideration, this happens most of the time in the shore of the lake. Because that’s
precisely where the multi-temporal image changes, many false positives are established.
On the other hand, fig. 4.10 reveals how the implemented method finds correspondences
between the same two multi-temporal images. It can be observed how this method finds
more true positive correspondences than the previous one. Moreover, it is worth men-
tioning that because the method isn’t based on the points of the image with the greatest
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
29
==PAGE:38==
change, it is capable of finding more robust matches, significantly avoiding selecting any
point that corresponds to the shore of the lake.
30
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:39==
5
Machine learning model
After having established how the feature points are extracted and matched for both the
SIFT-based and convolution-based features, the models responsible for delivering ac-
tionable predictions are devised. This chapter, therefore, explores the capabilities of how
a function can describe the relationship between the input features and the proposed
targets. Because there are two main implementations in this project (volume and dis-
placement prediction), the specifications and technicalities of the implementation slightly
differ for each implementation. As in chapter 4, the volume prediction example will be
used when necessary to clarify the used concepts.
For the sake of exploring the capabilities of the models gradually, linear regression is
discussed before taking a deep dive into the proposed model for the final case study.
Given that the described test cases all imply data conformed of continuous numerical
values without any target labels, the models focus on regression approaches.
Regression is usually defined as determining relationships between two or more variables
[39] and can be used to predict numeric quantities. Given that a the data-set created in
chapter 4 includes only the input features, to use a supervised learning technique it is
necessary to define the target values. Labels are specific to the application and to the
information that is to be obtained from the models. Therefore, they are specified when
the applications are explained further along in this report.
It is relevant to note that when using the data-sets, features and targets are centered.
Centering data implies that they have zero mean and unit standard error. This is done by
subtracting the mean and then dividing by the standard deviation. Normalizing the inputs
helps to accommodate the range difference between the input data, given that the input
features can be in different ranges. This is to avoid that the learning algorithm keeps
oscillating due to an uneven distribution of weights. Because the inputs are on the same
scale so are the weights associated with them.
Note that, through these next sections, sensor is used extensively as a synonym for the
feature points. This is because, in the definition of the word sensor, it is simply regarded
as a subsystem whose purpose is to detect events or changes in its environment and
report them. Given that that is precisely how the feature point is used once detected and
matched, this correlation is deemed accurate.
5.1
The input features
One characteristic that is common two all presented models is that, after a model has
been trained with a certain input size, that size needs to be respected when using that
same model to obtain results again. This implies that the number of sensors is essentially
fixed in the training phase. This is a great disadvantage in cases where the number of
sensors needs to be padded or trimmed, given that in both cases either a substantial
amount of information is lost or noise is introduced.
As it is introduced in chapter 4, there are three main sets of information that produce each
of the samples. Because of this, three different models are devised per feature extraction
method. These three feature input sets are exposed below.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
31
==PAGE:40==
5.1.1
Using filtered input features
The first set of input features that are used corresponds to a dimensionality reduction
from the total number of detected sensors. Given the reduced data-set that is under
consideration in the sphere example, this set of features intends to reduce the complexity
of relations between features by feeding only three independent variables.
These three variables are obtained from the information that is available from the sen-
sors stored in the data-set. Given that each sample has a list of sensors per captured
information set, these lists of sensors can be used to extrapolate a certain variable from
several sensors to a single variable. The features that are used to undergo this process
and create this new features are the displacements in both the ordinates, abscissa axis
as well as their euclidean displacement.
For the newly devised features to faithfully represent the list of sensors each describe, a
set of filters are applied to get rid of outliers before getting the average of the list. These
filters are applied depending on the feature that is under consideration and they are specif-
ically tuned to describe each of the displacement properties.
Three filters are applied:
1. The first of these filters and for each of the values of the lists, the outliers are com-
puted using eq. (5.1). An outlier is a data point that is distant from all other observa-
tions and that lies outside the overall distribution of the data-set [40]. This outliers
are detected when a data point falls outside of three standard deviations.
Score = (Observation −Mean)
Standard_deviation
(5.1)
2. The second filter is the maximum distance by which it is deemed possible that each
of the feature points can be displaced between consecutive frames. The numerical
limit of this threshold is set after iterating on a range of feasible displacements each
of the features could experience. Accordingly, each of the features has its specific
value that comes accordingly to the range that is expected of it.
3. The third and last filter is applied to the abscissa and ordinate sensors and it cleans
out those values that don’t detect any displacement between consecutive frames.
After having applied these three filters to the ordinates, abscissa axis, and the euclidean
displacement sensor lists their average value is taken. The resulting average values
conform the three independent variables used to train the model.
5.1.2
Using coordinates as input features
The second set of input features used corresponds to the normalized initial and final co-
ordinates of each of the feature points in each frame. As aforementioned in chapter 4, the
number of used matched features is set by a lower bound and is unique for each pair of
frames. Because the models must have a constant number of independent variables, the
number of sensors between samples is standardized. This is accomplished, as shown
in listing 5.1, by trimming or padding the list of features under consideration to a length
equal to four times the average number of sensors that that specific input feature uses
throughout the time series.
32
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:41==
1
def standardizeSensors(list_sensors , average):
2
while len(list_sensors) != average:
3
if len(list_sensors) < average:
4
list_sensors.append(0.0)
5
elif len(list_sensors) > average:
6
list_sensors = list_sensors[:average]
7
return list_sensors
Listing 5.1: Standardize the number of used sensors.
Because the coordinates of the feature points in the image correspond to a 2-dimensional
image, there are both abscissa and ordinate coordinates. These values are stored con-
secutively together in a list that encompasses each of the sensors detected in an image.
Because features are correlated in consecutive frames, the end feature point coordinates
are concatenated.
By defining that n is the length of the input features, the shape will be defined by:
[x(0,0), y(0,0), x(0,1), y(0,1), ..., x(n,n−1), y(n,n−1), x(n,n), y(n,n)] where x(0,0) and y(0,0) are re-
spectively the abscissa and ordinate coordinates of all the feature points in one frame
and x(0,1) and y(0,1) are the coordinates of their matches in the consecutive frame.
5.1.3
Using displacement as input features
This last set of input features is conformed of the distance in both the abscissa and or-
dinate axis as well as the euclidean distance. Similarly to using the coordinates of the
sensors, each of the three displacement lists are padded or trimmed based on the aver-
age number of sensors present in each of the frames for the time series. This is also done
using listing 5.1.
By defining that n is the length of the input features, the shape will be defined by:
[∆x0 ∆y0, xy0, ..., ∆xn, ∆yn, xyn] where ∆x0 and ∆y0 respectively describe the abscissa
and ordinate displacement of each of the feature points between two consecutive frames
and xy0 describes the euclidean distance between the matched feature points.
5.2
Multi-variable linear regression
This is the first model devised for predicting the targets of the presented applications.
As it is presented in chapter 2, this model is multi-variable because of the different input
features presented. Taking the simplest of them as an example, section 5.1.1, the model
will be trained with three independent variables, which will result in eq. (5.2).
y = b0 + w1x1 + w2x2 + w3x3
(5.2)
This scales with the obvious changes for when larger input feature sizes are used.
Listing 5.2 shows the definition of the model in the deep learning framework, Pytorch. Note
that, in the constructor method, the model gets two arguments. The first one, input_dim,
corresponds to the number of features from the data-set. As it can be observed in the
linear regression eq. (5.2), that is equal three. On the other hand, the second argument
output_dim, represents the shape of the output vector that results from the dot product of
the features and weights plus the bias. This is common for both this model and the LSTM
model definition.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
33
==PAGE:42==
1
class LinearRegressionModel(torch.nn.Module):
2
def __init__(self, input_dim , output_dim):
3
super(LinearRegressionModel , self).__init__()
4
self.linear = torch.nn.Linear(input_dim , output_dim)
5
def forward(self, x):
6
y_pred = self.linear(x)
7
return y_pred
Listing 5.2: Multi-variable linear regression model implemented in Pytorch.
5.3
Regression with LSTM
To explore how a more elaborate model will perform when fed with the information ob-
tained from the feature points, an LSTM model is implemented. By using a deeper model,
one that uses more layers to make the predictions, it is expected that they will be able to
extract more complex information between the independent variables and therefore the
quality of the predictions will increase.
In listing 5.3 it can be observed how the cell state is cleared at each epoch iteration.
This corresponds to a stateless configuration of the LSTM internal state. If, in the other
hand, the LSTM is set in a stateful configuration, the internal state is persistent and only
reset when specifically specified. The selection of the stateless configuration is made on
the grounds of studies such as [41], where it is suggested that when using a large batch
size, the performance of stateful and stateless LSTM configurations is near identical. This
is, despite the assumption that stateful configurations should outperform stateless ones.
Because stateful configurations don’t reset their cell state automatically, their are more
prone to overfitting. Because of the limited number of samples, a stateless configuration
is used.
1
class LSTM(nn.Module):
2
3
def __init__(self, output_size , input_size , hidde1n_size , num_layers):
4
super(LSTM, self).__init__()
5
6
self.num_layers = num_layers
7
self.input_size = input_size
8
self.hidden_size = hidden_size
9
self.lstm = nn.LSTM(input_size=input_size , hidden_size=hidden_size ,
10
num_layers=num_layers , batch_first=True)
11
self.fc = nn.Linear(hidden_size , output_size)
12
13
def forward(self, x):
14
h_0 = Variable(torch.zeros(
15
self.num_layers , x.size(0), self.hidden_size))
16
c_0 = Variable(torch.zeros(
17
self.num_layers , x.size(0), self.hidden_size))
18
19
ula, (h_out, _) = self.lstm(x, (h_0, c_0))
20
h_out = h_out.view(-1, self.hidden_size)
21
out = self.fc(h_out)
22
23
return out
Listing 5.3: LSTM RNN model implemented in Pytorch.
A time window called the sequential input is defined to establish how many samples the
prediction is going to be based on. For this purpose, listing 5.4 is implemented to create
34
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:43==
the sequences from the input training set (data in the function). Because a sequence
length bigger than one takes into account more than one sample to make a prediction,
its important to note that the ordering within each sequence shall not be shuffled but the
sequences themselves may.
1
def scaling_window(data, seq_length):
2
x = []
3
for i in range(len(data)-seq_length -1):
4
_x = data[i:(i+seq_length)]
5
x.append(_x)
6
return x
Listing 5.4: Creating the sequences to train the LSTM.
5.4
Training the models
Both of the implemented models are trained using the same standard Pytorch loop shown
in listing 5.5. As it can be observed in it, this implementation follows the steps described
in chapter 2.
From chapter 1 it is known that the models need to solve a regression problem. The loss
function is given by the Mean Square Error (MSE), which evaluates how close a fitted line
is to data points. That is, taking every data point and computing its distance vertically to
the corresponding value in the prediction, and squaring it. It is also important to note that
the batch size that is used to train the models is conformed of the size of the total number
of samples of the data-set.
As it is mentioned in chapter 2, the used optimizer is the adaptive moment estimation
(Adam). In Pytorch, the gradients are calculated using backpropagation (backward() in
the loop).
1
for epoch in range(epochs):
2
outputs = model(trainX)
3
optimizer.zero_grad() # sets the gradients to zero
4
loss = criterion(outputs , trainY) # obtain the loss function
5
loss.backward() # computes the gradients
6
optimizer.step() #updates the weights
7
if epoch % 100 == 0:
8
print("Epoch: %d, loss: %1.5f" % (epoch, loss.item()))
Listing 5.5: Training loops for the models.
5.4.1
Training considerations
The biggest challenge when training the presented models, and machine learning models
in general, is the balance between overfitting and underfitting. Overfitting happens when
the trained model starts to memorize the training set instead of finding generalizable pat-
terns. On the other hand, it is said that the model is underfitting when there is still room
for improvement in finding the underlying patterns of the training set.
These concepts are especially relevant in this project given that the models are trained
with data-sets that are limited in size. Because it is easy to create a model that describes
the data it has been trained on very well but is very poor at generalizing, several metrics
are provided to explore the behavior of the models.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
35
==PAGE:44==
The data-set is split into three different sets. One is the training set (trainX), which is
set to 70% of the whole data-set. The validation set (trainY ) is what it is used to assess
the model’s performance and it uses 30% of the data-set. Last, and this is only true for
the case study, a validation set conformed of unseen data is created to check the model
performance in generalizing the application under consideration.
To assess whether the trained models are underfitting, overfitting or they have just the
right balance, the training loss is compared with the validation loss. The training loss is
supposed to be slightly lower than the validation loss for the models to have the right
balance. The fine-tuning of the hyperparameters such as the learning rate, the number
of epochs is clarified further in each of the obtained results in chapter 6 and section 5.5.
The last important consideration to be taken into account is that the models are evaluated
using the root mean squared error (RMSE). This is because, given that the MSE is already
used for computing the loss of the model, it is the simplest metric that can be directly
interpreted in terms of measurement units. It is important noting that it will have the same
units as the vertical axis and is equivalent to the distance, on average, of the data point
from the fitted line that is measured along the vertical axis.
5.5
Predictive models applied on the sphere data-sets
Two different data-sets are created. One for the implemented methodology and one for
SIFT-based features. They include the information sets obtained from the feature points.
The goal of the models presented in this section is to prove the first of the hypothesis.
That is, given a feature extraction model capable of obtaining actionable data from a
moving body, it is possible to train a machine learning model from which one can obtain
information on the physical properties of such object under consideration.
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, the devised models follow a supervised
learning approach to the problem. Therefore, it is necessary to obtain the labels that the
models are going to predict.
5.5.1
Define the target value
Having all the necessary training features, the next step is to devise a way to get the output
target values. Because the goal of this example is to be able to describe the volume of
the body, the sphere from fig. 4.7 is resized several times. At each step, the diameter of
the sphere is detected and from it, the volume is computed.
Following an OpenCV implementation for measuring objects in an image [42], in order
to get the correct measurements of the ball, an object of known size is used in order
to calibrate the ratio that describes the number of pixels that describe a centimeter. An
average is then performed between the two euclidean distances that measure the sides
of the rectangle that encloses the body under inspection. The normalized diameter of a
football ball is used as a reference fig. 5.1.
36
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:45==
Figure 5.1: Measurement of the size of the ball.
By performing this measurement at every re-scaling step of the original ball, the diameter
is obtained and the volume of the sphere computed with eq. (5.3). With this, the data-set
is completed with both input features and target.
V = 4
3 · π · (Diameter
2
)3
(5.3)
5.5.2
Volume prediction results and discussion
With the intention of comparing the feasibility of using the sensors obtained with the two
feature extraction and matching approaches, the data-sets and different feature sets are
compared with regards to their performance in predicting the volume of the sphere.
Moreover, the previously mentioned feature sets are compared based on their behavior
when training a model with such a limited data-set. One important consideration is that
the data-sets are initially shuffled before being divided between training and validation set.
This is done to avoid that the models learn patterns in the order of the sequence. Some
hyperparameters that are common to the models exposed in this section are:
• Learning rate: 0.001.
• Number of used feature points with SIFT: 50.
• Number of used feature points with convolutional features: 51.
• Train/Validation size: 70/30 %.
Note that the rest of the model specific hyperparameters are fine-tuned specifically to
represent the capabilities of the model to its best-explored capabilities whilst preventing
overfitting.
The experimentation begins with the most simple combination using multi-variable linear
regression and the filtered input features. Because the sphere re-scaling is done uniformly
over the whole body, the sensors that are placed on the sphere will change their value
proportionally to the scaling factor. Because of this, it is expected that if the feature points
describe the body under consideration accurately, the prediction should fit the expected
volume precisely. From the outcome of this model in fig. 5.2a it can be seen how both of
the feature extraction and matching methodologies don’t accurately represent the target
value. This is also represented in the resulting RMSE in table 5.1. Note that the loss is
computed with respect to the normalized values and therefore it ranges from 0 to 1. It
is believed that the reason the model doesn’t fit the target value accurately is because
the simplicity of the linear regression model privates it from learning the relation between
the fed independent features. By using the same filtered input features in the LSTM, the
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
37
==PAGE:46==
model is able to significantly improve its fit to the target value, as it is shown in fig. 5.2b.
By the results of the RMSE on table 5.1, it is remarkable to indicate that the convolutional
features outperform the SIFT-based ones in all four models.
(a) Volume prediction with linear regression us-
ing the filtered input features.
(b) Volume prediction with LSTM using the fil-
tered input features.
Figure 5.2: Comparison of the volume predictions using linear regression and LSTM. The
training details are shared in table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Results and hyperparameters of the training and validation phase of the models
using filtered input features. (CF: Convolutional features).
Linear regression
LSTM
SIFT
CF
SIFT
CF
Train RMSE
0.163
0.147
0.085
0.051
Validation RMSE
0.205
0.184
0.106
0.07
Hidden layers
5
5
Epochs
1500
2000
2500
2500
By observing at fig. 5.2b, which is unarguably the better performing of the two, it can be
noted how regardless of the feature extraction method, the predictions appear to oscillate
around the target value significantly. The reason for this oscillations is thought to be due
to the limited information given by the filtered independent variables. This is expected
because, whilst with the application of the filters many outliers are disregarded, valuable
information may be lost. The next step in the experimentation is then to include all the
information of the feature point displacement directly. As explained early in this chapter,
each sensor will then report three information sets.
The results of this iteration for both convolutional and SIFT-based features can be ob-
served in fig. 5.3 (the outcome of the linear regression models for the remaining input
sets is added in appendix A.2). It can be noted how the predictions do fit the target value
and describe the expected regression shape accurately. Again, from table 5.2 it is remark-
able that the convolutional features outperform the SIFT-based ones by a slight margin.
By directly feeding the information the sensor reports to the machine learning model, a
much larger information set is used. Nevertheless, and judging by the outcome of the
predictions, it is able to disregard the values that are outliers.
38
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.3: Volume prediction with LSTM using the displacement of feature points be-
tween consecutive frames.
Table 5.2: Results and hyperparameters of the training and validation phase of the models
using feature point displacement.
SIFT
Convolutional features
Train RMSE
0.041
0.039
Validation RMSE
0.083
0.071
Hidden layers
5
2
Epochs
500
500
The results showcased in fig. 5.3 are extremely relevant to the scope of the project be-
cause they validate one of the initial hypothesis exposed in chapter 1. That is, machine
learning models can leverage from using an untreated set of information directly reported
from a feature extraction method. The results from table 5.2 indicate that feature corre-
spondences obtained using the convolutional features methodology have a slight upper
hand with respect to ones based on the SIFT.
Because of the narrow performance results between the two feature extraction tech-
niques, it can be stated that both methodologies produce accurate enough results for the
machine learning model to produce a valuable prediction. Moreover, these results drove
this project into researching an implementation and a case study that could leverage from
getting a large number of information points from which to report the stated data.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.4: Volume prediction with LSTM using the coordinates of feature points in both
consecutive frames.
Table 5.3: Results and hyperparameters of the training and validation phase of the models
using feature point coordinates.
SIFT
Convolutional features
Train RMSE
0.036
0.135
Validation RMSE
0.054
0.152
Hidden layers
3
2
Epochs
400
500
It is believed that the location of the feature points in both consecutive images encloses
more information about the environment and the body under consideration. Nevertheless,
because of the limited number of samples in this example, the models can’t leverage
from them. This is especially true in the case of the convolutional features. While in
the previously presented results it outperformed the SIFT-based features, when using
the feature point coordinates as independent variables the results aren’t as satisfactory.
Moreover, it is remarkable that the RMSE of the features based on SIFT obtains the lowest
loss of all the models tested. As it was shown in fig. 4.8, SIFT-based feature points are
concentrated over the sphere whilst the convolutional features have the feature points
distributed over the image. This indicates that SIFT-based features perform better in
situations where there is only a body under consideration rather than a whole environment.
This reduced information appears to have a more pronounced impact when the sphere is
at its largest re-scaling factor.
The results obtained up to this point indicate that the model that has better performance
is the LSTM using coordinates as input features. This specific configuration is therefore
the one used in the presented case study from chapter 6.
40
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:49==
6
Case study. Visual odometry
To apply the implemented methodology in a real-world environment, relevant data had to
be gathered. The limitations of the project dictated that the scope would be set to an en-
vironment where the camera would stay still and the object under consideration would be
undergoing the transformations. Because of the limited amount of labeled data that could
accurately fit these intentions, that initial constraint was re-scoped. The expanded ambit
of application would allow for a mobile camera and scope the environment to being static.
Note that this is interchanging the limitations between the camera and the environment
that is under consideration.
With this broader consideration of the applications, the KITTI vision suite [3] is selected.
For this case study, the goal is to be able to predict the local displacement of the camera
that occurs between consecutive frames. Additionally, because the depth information is
accessible from the KITTI suite using a LiDaR scan, the results of the trained models with
and without depth information are compared.
6.1
The KITII vision benchmark suite
As it is described in [43], the data-sets from this suite are captured using the vehicle from
fig. 6.1a and with the setup of sensors that is shown in fig. 6.1b.
It is important to note that the KITTI suite provides several categories in which the se-
quences are organized. Each of these categories selects a different kind of environment
in which the data-sets are obtained. For this project, the category is city is chosen for its
variability of situations and challenges for the implemented system.
(a) The car and the placement of sen-
sors on it used to obtain the KITTI vi-
sion benchmark suite.
(b) The setup of sensors used to obtain the KITTI vision
benchmark suite.
Figure 6.1: The vehicle and setup from the KITTI benchmark suite [43].
From all the available sensors, a few had to be selected to obtain the necessary informa-
tion. From the two available color cameras, Cam3 is picked arbitrarily. Note that all sensor
information from the GPS and the Velodyne LiDaR are then translated to the location of
the used camera.
Because the target of the predictions is the displacement of the camera in the abscissa
and ordinate axis, that information is obtained with the GPS sensor. Given that the global
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
41
==PAGE:50==
location is reported in latitude and longitude coordinates, it is transformed to meters dis-
placement with respect to the initial frame of the sequence in the two desired axis, ob-
taining fig. 6.2. As a result of the GPS information being accessible for each frame of a
sequence, the local displacement can be computed by subtracting the global displace-
ment between consecutive frames.
Figure 6.2: The car trajectory displacement on 2011_09_26_drive_0002 city sequence.
6.2
Feature extraction and matching on the KITTI suite
The feature extraction and matching that is exposed in chapter 4 is used to find feature
points in each of the frames from the desired KITTI sequences. To provide a comprehen-
sive comparison between the performance of both methods, they are applied to the same
two frames from 2011_09_26_drive_0002.
By observing at fig. 6.3 and fig. 6.4 its clear to see one of the main design characteristics of
the implemented methodology. That is, while the SIFT based features are focused in the
areas of greater change between frames, the convolutional features are evenly distributed
over the image. In both cases, the direction of motion of the vehicle used to obtain the
sequence can be devised by the angle at which the feature lines are drawn with respect
to the ordinate axis.
Despite in the presented solution features are detected over consecutive frames and the
number of false positives is lower than in fig. 6.3, its useful to challenge both methodolo-
gies by providing them with frames that are five frames apart from each other. This allows
for recognizing some systematic flaws that the devised system has.
It is important to note that, systemic errors present in either systems do not undervalue the
final prediction in either methodology for the displacement prediction application. This is
because their displacement will be proportional to the one that accurate matches deliver.
Nevertheless, false positive do cause a lot of noise for the machine learning models to
interpret.
42
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.3: Feature extraction and matching using SIFT and brute-force.
In this two
frames of 2011_09_26_drive_0002, a total of 133 matches are used.
Figure 6.4: Feature extraction and matching using the implemented methodology. In this
two frames from 2011_09_26_drive_0002, a total of 133 matches are used.
In order check if using depth information would be beneficial for the models predictive
performance, it is obtained using the LiDaR sensor that the vehicle is equipped with.
Because the depth information that the KITTI suite provides is of all the surroundings of
the car, these needs to first be translated into the frame of the camera. Once this is done,
as observed in fig. 6.6, the depth information is available per pixel coordinates where the
LiDaR is capable of obtaining information.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.5: Visualization in blue dots of 10% of the depth information available in a frame
of the 2011_09_26_drive_0002 city sequence.
From fig. 6.6 it can be observed how the depth information isn’t available for every pixel of
the frame. Namely, parts of the image that are too distant with respect to the collocation
of the Velodyne sensor are excluded.
This implies that when a feature point is detected and it lies outside of the scope of the
LiDaR, it will not have accessible depth information.
Now that the depth information is transformed with respect to the sequence frame, the
detected and matched feature points must be assigned with the depth information previ-
ously mentioned. This is done by comparing the pixel coordinates of the feature points
and the pixels coordinates of the depth information points.
Figure 6.6: Visualization of a region of an image where the blue box represents the ac-
ceptance box of 2% of the feature point coordinates. The blue dots represent depth infor-
mation points and the red dots the feature point.
Because on many occasions the pixel coordinates of the depth information and the fea-
ture point aren’t exactly the same, an acceptance box of 2% the pixel coordinates of the
detected feature point is created. As shown in fig. 6.7, this acceptance box allows for a
44
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:53==
greater degree matching with the depth information by introducing a very limited error on
the depth information assignment.
Figure 6.7: Progress diagram for when depth information is associated to the detected
and matched features.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
45
==PAGE:54==
As it can be observed in fig. 6.7, the number of features can be greatly reduced when
assigning depth information to each of the sensors. An obvious consequence of this is
that when using the feature points as input features without depth information, the number
of available sensors will be greater. This characteristic will be further discussed when
presenting the findings of the regression models.
Figure 6.7 also displays another important characteristic of the developed technique. Be-
cause when using features that have depth information, they need to have it in both frames
where the correspondence is set, only sensors that have depth information in its consec-
utive frame are used. In the case of fig. 6.7, initially 133 matches are available without
depth information. After obtaining depth information only 58 are left.
Figure 6.8: Visualization of how the matches behave when being assigned with depth
information in three consecutive frames. The correspondences of the two first images
have a red circle in the feature point and the correspondences between the second two
are marked with yellow circles.
The result of applying the implemented feature extraction and matching methodology to-
gether with the assigning of depth information to the accessible points is displayed in
fig. 6.8. In this sequence of three consecutive frames, red circles indicate correspon-
dences between the first pair of frames and yellow circles indicate correspondences be-
tween the second pair of frames. It is relevant that, as it was exposed in fig. 2.1, the
implemented methodology always looks for the best matches within the pair of images
under consideration. This causes that the location of the sensors can differ completely
even when one of the frames is common. Moreover, because there’s an assignment of
depth information to the feature points, even the number of matches is different. In this
case, whilst the two feature assignments have 52 correspondences, the first one finds 23
46
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:55==
with depth information and the second finds 39.
Having observed that the LSTM network is superior in the previous example, the results
will only use the LSTM based model. Based on previous results as well as by taking into
account the new testing environment, the used input features are the coordinates of the
feature points. For this input features a differentiation is made between when it uses depth
information and when not as well as with the number of sensors used. When using depth
information, the input feature set exposed in chapter 5 is slightly formatted to include the
new information:
[x(0,0), y(0,0), z(0,0), x(0,1), y(0,1), z(0,1), ..., x(n,n−1), y(n,n−1), z(n,n−1), x(n,n), y(n,n), z(n,n)] where
z(0,0) is the depth information of all the feature points in one frame and z(0,1) is the depth
information of their matches in the consecutive frame. Note that the depth information
that is stored is the distance in centimeters from the Cam3 location and it’s also centered.
6.3
Displacement prediction results and discussion
After having clarified all the accessible information from applying the developed methodol-
ogy in the KITTI suite, there are a number of combinations of input features that are used
for the sake of comparison. As with the sphere example, and to give an actionable bench-
mark on how the developed methodology is performing, the results are compared against
SIFT-based features matched with brute-force. Note that SIFT-based feature points will
also undergo the same process diagram presented in fig. 6.7 for the assigning of depth
information.
The intention of this test case is to give the reader an intuition of the capabilities of the
devised techniques as well as a point of comparison between the performance of the
already available feature extraction techniques with the one developed in this project.
Similarly to with section 5.5, the data-set is preliminary obtained with the feature extraction
method exposed in chapter 4. This data-set is conformed of several city sequences that
add up to a total of 1243 frames. Specifically, the used sequences are:
• 2011_09_26_drive_0001.
• 2011_09_26_drive_0002.
• 2011_09_26_drive_0005.
• 2011_09_26_drive_0013.
• 2011_09_26_drive_0093.
• 2011_09_26_drive_0106.
• 2011_09_28_drive_0001.
For each of the sequences mentioned above, the process exposed in fig. 4.6 is applied.
From it, a data-set per sequence is created. All the resulting data-sets are then gathered
into a single one.
Given that the resulting data-set includes the input features and target for all the mentioned
sequences, and for the sake of clarity when exploring the results, only one sequence
is used to explain the predicted displacements. The longest of the used sequences is
utilized, 2011_09_26_drive_0093.
The first model that is presented is trained using a unit sequence length and feature points
without depth information assigned to them. One of the main objectives tested by training
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
47
==PAGE:56==
the models with convolutional feature-points is not only to observe how the prediction of
both methods applies to this application but also to assess whether if the more uniform dis-
tribution of features over the frame has a noticeable effect on describing more accurately
the displacement of the vehicle. The hypothesis is that they will have a positive impact
on not only being better at describing the camera displacement but also at allowing for a
greater amount of depth information when this is sought.
The hyperparameters mentioned below are common to all the models presented in this
section. This allows for a more thorough comparison between the two feature extraction
and matching techniques. Moreover, in order to allow for reproducibility, the same Pytorch
seed is used for all of the presented results.
• Learning rate: 0.001.
• Number of hidden layers: 400.
• Number of epochs: 1500.
• Train/Validation size: 70/30 %.
As can be observed in fig. 6.9, the results that are obtained directly from the model are
represented with a less vibrant tone, and the average between the last 10 frames is rep-
resented by more vibrant color. The goal is to soften the oscillations in the outcome of the
model. This is the only measure that is application-specific to displacement detection to
better reproduce the movement of the camera. It is important to point out that this average
is only used to allow for a clear representation of the results and that the trajectories of the
vehicle that each of the models delivers are solely provided by the values that the models
given without any further treatment.
Figure
6.9:
Camera
displacement
prediction
comparison
applied
on
2011_09_26_drive_0093.
The RMSE results in table 6.1 show how the SIFT-based methodology accomplishes
a slightly lower error in the training set. Nevertheless, it overfits this set more than its
counterpart, which outperforms it in both the validation and the 2011_09_26_drive_0093
sequence. Note that, like in chapter 5, the errors below correspond to the normalized
values of the training and validation set i.e. their minimum value is 0 and their maximal
value is 1.
48
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:57==
Table 6.1: Comparison of the results obtained with both feature extraction and matching
methodologies without using depth information.
Convolutional features
SIFT-based features
Train RMSE
0.029
0.022
Validation RMSE
0.097
0.119
0093 RMSE
0.073
0.092
Number of sensors
130
130
By combining the displacement for the abscissa and ordinate axis, the trajectory of the
camera can be obtained. In fig. 6.10 the predicted trajectories are plotted against the real
vehicle accumulated displacement. Despite that plotting the trajectory of the vehicle over
time accumulates the error at each step, the low error introduced per frame allows for a
comprehensive representation. From it, it is noticeable that the SIFT-based methodology
accumulates more error than the features based on the presented methodology.
Figure
6.10:
Camera
trajectory
prediction
comparison
applied
on
2011_09_26_drive_0093.
The next step on trying to improve the prediction results is to assign the available depth
information to the matched feature points. By using this extra information from the en-
vironment it is expected that the results should significantly improve. As exposed at the
beginning of this chapter and shown in fig. 6.7, assigning depth information to each of
the feature points essentially changes the number of features available between a pair
of consecutive frames. Because of that, a separate data-set that includes features that
have with them depth information associated is created.
The results of using depth information in fig. 6.11 and table 6.2 indicate that convolutional
feature points assigned with depth information outperform SIFT-based ones. What is
more remarkable, it behaves as expected in offering a prediction that is more accurate
than both of the models that don’t use depth information. It is noteworthy that SIFT-
based feature points have worse performance than the same model that isn’t using depth
information. The main argumentation for this phenomenon is that the reduction of feature
points (from 130 in the previous model to 51 in this one) isn’t done with any criteria of
quality but rather with the accessibility of the depth information points.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.11:
Camera displacement comparison with depth information applied on
2011_09_26_drive_0093.
From these results, another interesting hypothesis can be devised. The main question
being, how low should the quality threshold be for the depth points to add relevant infor-
mation without depriving of valuable displacement data. The hypothesis in this project,
devised from the obtained information in fig. 6.12, is that the model using depth informa-
tion would be able to outperform the model that doesn’t use it given that it has enough
feature points, were enough for this application would be at least 130.
Table 6.2: Comparison of the results obtained with both feature extraction and matching
methodologies using depth information.
Convolutional features
SIFT-based features
Train RMSE
0.021
0.026
Validation RMSE
0.106
0.115
0093 RMSE
0.094
0.086
Number of sensors
54
51
Figure 6.12:
Camera trajectory comparison with depth information applied on
2011_09_26_drive_0093.
50
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:59==
It can be argued that the model trained with SIFT-based information sets is capable of
making better use of a greater quantity of feature points than adding another set of inde-
pendent variables, introduced by the assignment of depth. This is especially so because,
as it was exposed in fig. 6.7, given the less distributed nature of the features points, merely
51 could be assigned.
With the obtained results, one last model is created to improve the achieved performance.
By modifying the sequence length of the LSTM, in fig. 6.13 a significant improvement in
the predictions can be observed.
Figure
6.13:
Camera
displacement
prediction
comparison
applied
on
2011_09_26_drive_0093 using a sequence length of 3.
From table 6.3 it can be noted that the implemented methodology using the same data-set
as in table 6.1 outperforms, as expected, all the presented models obtaining the lowest
RMSE. Moreover, the SIFT-based model with extended sequence length yields a very
similar result with a slightly lower validation RMSE.
Table 6.3: Comparison of the results obtained with both feature extraction and matching
methodologies without using depth information and with a sequence length of 3.
Convolutional features
SIFT-based features
Train RMSE
0.019
0.023
Validation RMSE
0.087
0.069
0093 RMSE
0.068
0.054
Number of sensors
130
130
The precision displayed in both displacements can be observed in the vehicle trajectory
results from fig. 6.14. In this case, both models describe the real vehicle trajectory ac-
curately in shape with the exemption of some accumulated error at the beginning of the
sequences.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.14: Camera trajectory comparison applied on 2011_09_26_drive_0093 using a
sequence length of 3.
Finally then, from all the presented models, the one using convolutional feature points
with a sequential length of 3 is the better performing one.
6.3.1
Test on unseen data
For this case study, an unseen set is included to analyze if the models are capable of
generalizing from the 1243 frames they are trained on. This set is formed by the frames
from 2011_09_26_drive_0095.
This is especially challenging because the relation between the found coordinates and
the local displacement is specific to each sequence. Each sequence of frames from the
selected KITTI suite has a different vehicle velocity as well as several inferred challenges
such as other vehicles circulating or pedestrians.
Table 6.4 offers the results of each of the models in the mentioned unseen sequence.
Note that the RMSE results that are given are on the normalized data-set. From it, it can
be asserted that the models don’t generalize on the camera displacement problem.
Table 6.4: Results of RMSE using the better performing presented models on the un-
seen sequence 2011_09_26_drive_0095. This error is taken with respect all of the frames
present in the mentioned sequence. (CF: Convolutional features).
XY _CF_sequence
XY _SIFT_sequence
RMSE 0095
0.421
0.428
Because the fitness of the predictions deviates from the expected values greatly, it cannot
be asserted which of the models is better on the unseen data.
The main outcome from the results of table 6.4 is twofold: either the presented models
are not adequate for the intended purpose or the number of samples obtained from the
real-world scenarios of each of the sequences is insufficient. In either case, these results
reinforce what was already observed in the validation displacement predictions. That is,
both SIFT-based features and the convolutional features have a similar performance, the
implemented methodology being slightly superior.
52
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:61==
One last consideration from the results found in this chapter is on the performance of the
models in the unseen sequence set. Meanwhile, it has been proven that the implemented
feature extraction and matching methodology works as expected regarding its capability
of finding points of interest in the KITTI sequences, the machine learning models lagged
in their performance when applied for displacement prediction. This unforeseen result on
the lack of ability for the model to generalize is treated extensively in chapter 8, where
some further work on both the main chapter of this project.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:63==
7
Conclusion
The main goal of this project was to present a methodology capable of generalizing what
would have been two very diverse applications into one solution, or more specifically, a
set of two main processes. These two main processes are what divide this project into a
computer vision part where the data is obtained and another where the collected samples
are used to train machine learning models.
The first of the devised applications is a simplistic volume prediction of a sphere. This use
case is used through the project and whilst in the development of the presented method-
ologies as the debugger, given its easy to scope properties. This proved to be very useful
in the development phase, specifically the fact that the physical properties of the sphere
where simulated at each iteration when the samples where obtained. Moreover, because
of this simulated environment, only the football ball appeared at each resizing step which
allowed for most of the detected features to appear and focus in the ball itself as well as in
its immediate surrounding, greatly facilitating spotting systematic errors. With the training
of the machine learning models, it has been possible to test how using different sets of
information based on the same feature points influenced the accuracy of the predictions.
Because the decision of which application to use on the case study was based on the
availability of a data-set that included all the necessary sets of information, the number
of functionalities was already quite scoped. Changing from the original idea of using a
static camera and analyzing a dynamic environment into using a dynamic camera and
analyzing a mainly static environment allowed for an introspection into visual odometry.
This project is a proof of concept for the development of a system capable of using
matched feature points as sensors. These sensors are then sources of information that
are fed into a machine learning model with which to predict an actionable property of the
body or environment under consideration. With the realization of this project, it has been
possible to check that it is indeed feasible to develop a set of two connected processes
with which to extract actionable information from the frames alone. Nevertheless, a set of
cases have been assumed where the devised methodology won’t outcome satisfactory
results. Because the sensors that are placed on the image under consideration corre-
spond to the extracted and matched feature points, their placement isn’t controlled. This
had a number of implications, namely on both choosing an environment that would ben-
efit from such characteristics and on getting rid of the background when only a single
body was to be explored. Additionally, because the feature matching doesn’t guaran-
tee bijection, the quality threshold needed to be set at an appropriate quantity that was
tested by trial-and-error per each environment to prevent that the same feature point got
matched repeatedly. Nevertheless, testing in the presented cases proved that only the
worst matches wouldn’t respect bijection, and because at most the best couple hundred
matches were used through the report, it didn’t induce remarkable noise. Moreover, it
was shown how the implemented convolutional features are remarkably distributed over
the image, which allowed not only for a more even collection of information with respect
to the image under consideration but also greater accessibility when assigning depth in-
formation to the feature points in the range of a LiDaR sensor.
Several models have been trained and thoroughly explored with a special focus on the
input features. From the outcome of the models that are presented for both the displace-
ment prediction in the case study and the sphere volume prediction, it can be extracted
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
55
==PAGE:64==
that the presented methodology can be applied in a variety of situations with, of course,
different levels of success based on the complexity of the properties predicted. In this
proof of concept, it has been shown how despite the use case models don’t generalize,
they get up to 91.3% accuracy in the 2011_09_26_drive_0093 sequence from the KITTI
suite in predicting its camera displacement. Nevertheless, it is clear especially by looking
at the unseen sequence results that this specific section is the one that underperformed
the most.
One common ground in all machine learning models is devising a data-set with enough
samples to provide actionable outcomes. This project’s models are no exception in that
sense and, therefore, creating the data-set from the detected and matched convolutional
features has proven to be a time-consuming task. This is relevant because, given that
for each application a set of models are devised based on the samples obtained with
the convolutional feature’s information, per each modification on the implemented feature
extraction technique all the selected sequences from the KITTI suite needed to be re-run.
In order to carry out this project, many areas of knowledge previously acquired during
the Computer Science Master’s studies have been expanded. Following the proposed
methodology, there has been a special focus on machine learning architectures. Specifi-
cally, convolutional neural networks and recurrent neural networks. The fact that the op-
erational characteristics of a deeply trained convolutional neural network have been used
to successfully acquire feature points, regarded as sensors, proved to be a technical chal-
lenge that allowed for a greater degree of field research and related works exploration on
the topic. With the aim of fulfilling the scope of the initial objective of placing smart-virtual
sensors and acquiring actionable information from them, a series of recurrent neural net-
works were used. This allowed for experimentation in training the appropriate model with
several different input features to the problem that was under consideration in both volume
and displacement prediction.
The final remark is to indicate that, despite other specialized techniques such as end-to-
end machine learning ones that will outperform the proposed methodology in both inde-
pendent applications, this proof of concept showcases prospects of the ability that the set
of implemented processes have to generalize two completely different application chal-
lenges into one solution. This is mainly because finding features and matching them in a
time-series is independent of the sequence of frames. Moreover, this process is inherently
independent of obtaining actionable predictions from the feature points, and therefore that
could be regarded as a challenge itself.
56
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:65==
8
Future work
With the intention of developing a first working iteration of the proposed methodology a
number of trade-offs were done. These were applied uniformly in both main chapters of
this report: feature extraction and matching as well as the machine learning prediction
models. Following the structure of this report, the proposed future work is exposed first
for the implementation of the convolutional features and then for the machine learning
predictive models.
The first improvement would be to guarantee bijection between the matched features. By
allowing a more strict schema of correspondences and enforcing that features are only
allowed to have one match assigned to them, namely the one with the best quality, the
threshold regulating the number of matches could be augmented significantly. This in-
crement in the number of features with a guarantee in bijection would enable a greater
number of feature points to be used when being fed to the machine learning model. This
greater quantity is beneficial for the machine learning models because it allows for easier
detection of the false positives. Moreover, when in the camera displacement case study,
a greater number of feature points distributed over the image would allow a bigger abun-
dance of assignments of depth information, which has been proven to have a positive
return on the increase of the prediction accuracy.
Another implementation that would presumably improve the quality of the features would
be to use the outputs of more than one of the pool layers. Because VGG trained on
Imagenet data-set allows for the feature descriptor to look for common and universal pat-
terns, by including the output of other pool layers that are closer to the output the patterns
searched by the convolution features become larger in scale and tend to be more sophis-
ticated. Note that the last pool layer shall not be used because it is affected by specific
classification objects. Moreover, in order to improve speed in getting the feature maps
from the pre-trained model, the layers after the last used pool could be removed from the
network.
It is important to note that the input to the machine learning models doesn’t have to be
limited to the output of certain pool layers. In this direction, another interesting addition
that could induce improvements in the results would be to include the quality τmax as an
extra independent variable. This would be a relevant addition because this variable states
the robustness of the correspondence against other matches and could be an indicator
for the models on how much weight to give certain information reports it receives.
On the presented methodology, only the matches that have a quality higher than the
threshold are used. Because the threshold is dynamic to allow for the same number of
features to be used between consecutive frames, the quality of the matches detected
between two certain frames isn’t uniform throughout a whole sequence. This results in
frames where there will be several wrong correspondences. The proposed future work
would be to capture the optimal homography H that describes the transformation between
two consecutive frames so that the number of feature points satisfying this matrix is the
most. Then, using it to map the to-be-matched frames to the same coordinate system
would allow for comparing the location of the static feature points and filter out those with
low accuracy. Because the homography can be estimated from the position of at least four
point-correspondences between images, it is possible to use a robust estimator method
that provides a good estimate of H despite the presence of false-positive matches (out-
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
57
==PAGE:66==
liers). The random sample consensus (RANSAC) is the most commonly used method
for estimating the parameters of a mathematical model from a set of observed data with
outliers and could be an interesting initial approach.
Because the pre-trained image classification VGG-16 network that is used to obtain the
feature maps is extremely deep and trained on enormous and diversified image data-set,
the convolution filters search for universal patterns that generalize well. Nevertheless,
when only a certain object or body is to be under consideration, the convolution filters
will not cease to detect background noise or elements. Therefore, for the use case when
only an object is under consideration, integrating image segmentation on the body of
interest would allow for getting rid of all features from the environment. This would greatly
reduce the complexity of the machine learning models because all information fed would
be directly related to what is being inspected.
The last purposed improvement to the feature extraction and matching is to address the
following of feature points in a sequence of frames. That is, with the presented methodol-
ogy, matched features between two consecutive frames always represent the ones with
the best quality. This implies that the location of the feature points isn’t followed through-
out the sequence. It could be relevant to explore if, despite the matches would have lower
quality, they would provide more relevant information when training the machine learning
models.
For the regression models, the suggested continuation is to implement an automatic tun-
ing of the hyperparameters instead of the presented manual way. This would allow for
a faster feedback loop when iterating over the input features of the models. One popu-
lar strategy with which to accomplish automatic fine-tuning is with Bayesian optimization,
which doesn’t assume any functional forms and is used in expensive-to-evaluate functions
as the ones presented in this report.
With the use of features as information points on the environment, there are a variety of
applications that could be taken into consideration. Specifically, wind turbines diagnosis
appears to be a promising field were further versions of the presented methodology could
be applied. The inspection of a constant moving part that is under external unknown
agitation, the wind, introduces the field of vibration-based condition monitoring. Because
of the variety of operational modes and environmental conditions wind turbines are subject
to, their fault prevention remains a challenge that a similar application could explore.
58
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
D. G. Lowe, “Object recognition from local scale-invariant features”, in Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, vol. 2, 1999, pp. 1150–
1157. DOI: 10.1109/iccv.1999.790410.
[2]
Y. Ke and R. Sukthankar, “PCA-SIFT: A More Distinctive Representation for Local
Image Descriptors”, Tech. Rep. [Online]. Available: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/˜yke/
pcasift/.
[3]
A. Geiger, P. Lenz, C. Stiller, and R. Urtasun, “Vision meets Robotics: The KITTI
Dataset”, Tech. Rep. [Online]. Available: http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti..
[4]
Open CV Dev. Team, “OpenCV Introduction”, PhD thesis, 2013, pp. 5–6. [Online].
Available: https://docs.opencv.org/master/d1/dfb/intro.htmlhttp://docs.opencv.org/
modules/core/doc/intro.html.
[5]
A. J. Nathan and A. Scobell, Object Recognition from Local Scale-Invariant Fea-
tures, 2012. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004. [Online]. Available: https://
www.cs.ubc.ca/~lowe/papers/iccv99.pdf.
[6]
A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury Google, G. Chanan, T. Killeen,
Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. K. Xamla, E. Yang, Z. Devito,
M. Raison Nabla, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, Q. Ai, B. Steiner, L. F. Facebook, J. B.
Facebook, and S. Chintala, “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep
Learning Library”, Tech. Rep., 2019.
[7]
D. a. Lisin, M. a. Mattar, M. B. Blaschko, M. C. Benfield, and E. G. Learned-miller,
“Combining Local and Global Image Features for Object Class Recognition 1 In-
troduction 2 Classification with Global Features”, ISSN: 1063-6919. DOI: 10.1109/
CVPR.2005.433.
[8]
P. Fischer, A. Dosovitskiy, and T. Brox, “Descriptor Matching with Convolutional
Neural Networks: a Comparison to SIFT”, no. September, 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1405.5769.
[9]
M. Brown, “Features and Image Matching”, Tech. Rep.
[10]
| fastai. [Online]. Available: https://docs.fast.ai/.
[11]
L. Hardesty, Explained: Neural networks | MIT News, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://news.mit.edu/2017/explained- neural- networks- deep- learning- 0414http:
//news.mit.edu/2017/explained-neural-networks-deep-learning-0414.
[12]
Step-by-step Guide to Building Your Own Neural Network From Scratch. [Online].
Available: https://towardsdatascience.com/step-by-step-guide-to-building-your-own-
neural-network-from-scratch-df64b1c5ab6e.
[13]
Multiple Linear Regression Training - Multiple Input Output Linear Regression |
Coursera. [Online]. Available: https : / / www . coursera . org / lecture / deep - neural -
networks-with-pytorch/multiple-linear-regression-training-6hWji.
[14]
LSTM_Networks/LSTM Demo.ipynb at master · llSourcell/LSTM_Networks. [On-
line]. Available: https : / / github . com / llSourcell / LSTM _ Networks / blob / master /
LSTM%20Demo.ipynb.
[15]
Understanding LSTM Networks – colah’s blog, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://
colah.github.io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/http://colah.github.io/posts/
2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/.
[16]
F. G. Becker, “Learning Long-Term Dependencies with Gradient Descent is Difficult”,
2015. [Online]. Available: http://ai.dinfo.unifi.it/paolo//ps/tnn-94-gradient.pdf.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
59
==PAGE:68==
[17]
S. Merity, N. Shirish Keskar, and R. Socher, “Regularizing and Optimizing LSTM
Language Models”, Tech. Rep., 2017.
[18]
A. Myronenko, X. Song, M. A. Carreira-Perpiñán, and P. Perpiñán, “Non-rigid point
set registration: Coherent Point Drift”, Tech. Rep.
[19]
A. Myronenko and X. Song, “Point Set Registration: Coherent Point Drift”, Tech.
Rep., 2009.
[20]
J. Žbontar and Y. Le Cun, “Computing the stereo matching cost with a convolutional
neural network”, Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, vol. 07-12-June, no. 2, pp. 1592–1599, 2015,
ISSN: 10636919. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298767.
[21]
H. Zhang, W. Ni, W. Yan, D. Xiang, J. Wu, X. Yang, and H. Bian, “Registration
of Multimodal Remote Sensing Image Based on Deep Fully Convolutional Neural
Network”, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Re-
mote Sensing, vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 3028–3042, 2019, ISSN: 21511535. DOI: 10.1109/
JSTARS.2019.2916560.
[22]
F. Zhang, B. Du, and L. Zhang, “Saliency-guided unsupervised feature learning
for scene classification”, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 2175–2184, 2015, ISSN: 01962892. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2014.
2357078.
[23]
F. Ye, Y. Su, H. Xiao, X. Zhao, and W. Min, “Remote Sensing Image Registration
Using Convolutional Neural Network Features”, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1–5, 2018.
[24]
X. Han, T. Leung, Y. Jia, R. Sukthankar, and A. C. Berg, “MatchNet: Unifying feature
and metric learning for patch-based matching”, Proceedings of the IEEE Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, vol. 07-12-June,
pp. 3279–3286, 2015, ISSN: 10636919. DOI: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298948.
[25]
A. Dosovitskiy, P. Fischer, E. Ilg, P. Häusser, H. Hazırbas¸, V. Golkov, P. Van Der
Smagt, D. Cremers, and T. Brox, “FlowNet: Learning Optical Flow with Convolu-
tional Networks”, Tech. Rep.
[26]
A. Sharif, R. H. Azizpour, J. Sullivan, and S. Carlsson, “CNN Features off-the-shelf:
an Astounding Baseline for Recognition”, Tech. Rep.
[27]
Z. Yang, T. Dan, and Y. Yang, “Multi-temporal remote sensing image registration
using deep convolutional features”, IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 38 544–38 555, Jul.
2018, ISSN: 21693536. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2853100.
[28]
I. Cvišić and I. Petrović, “Stereo odometry based on careful feature selection and
tracking”, 2015 European Conference on Mobile Robots, ECMR 2015 - Proceed-
ings, pp. 0–5, 2015. DOI: 10.1109/ECMR.2015.7324219.
[29]
N. Dias and G. Laureano, “Accurate stereo visual odometry based on keypoint se-
lection”, Proceedings - 2019 Latin American Robotics Symposium, 2019 Brazilian
Symposium on Robotics and 2019 Workshop on Robotics in Education, LARS/S-
BR/WRE 2019, pp. 74–79, 2019. DOI: 10.1109/LARS-SBR-WRE48964.2019.00021.
[30]
L. Li, A. Li, Y. Tian, W. Wang, W. Chen, Y. Fan, and F. Xi, “A robust visual SLAM
system based on RGB-D camera used in various indoor scenes”, no. International
Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, pp. 1632–1637, 2018.
[31]
Z. Yu and H. Min, “Visual SLAM Algorithm Based on ORB Features and Line Fea-
tures”, Proceedings - 2019 Chinese Automation Congress, CAC 2019, pp. 3003–
3008, 2019. DOI: 10.1109/CAC48633.2019.8996373.
[32]
R. Mur-Artal, J. M. Montiel, and J. D. Tardos, “ORB-SLAM: A Versatile and Accurate
Monocular SLAM System”, IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1147–
1163, 2015, ISSN: 15523098. DOI: 10.1109/TRO.2015.2463671.
60
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:69==
[33]
H. Fan and S. Zhang, “Stereo odometry based on careful frame selection”, Pro-
ceedings - 2017 10th International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and
Design, ISCID 2017, vol. 2, pp. 177–180, 2018. DOI: 10.1109/ISCID.2017.88.
[34]
K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very depp convolutional networks for large-scale
image recognition”, Tech. Rep., 2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.robots.ox.ac.
uk/.
[35]
J. Hestness, S. Narang, N. Ardalani, G. Diamos, H. Jun, H. Kianinejad, M. Mostofa
Ali Patwary, Y. Yang, and Y. Zhou, “DEEP LEARNING SCALING IS PREDICTABLE,
EMPIRICALLY”, Tech. Rep.
[36]
OpenCV: Feature Matching. [Online]. Available: https://docs.opencv.org/3.4.9/dc/
dc3/tutorial_py_matcher.html.
[37]
Anujshah1003, pytorchvis: A library to visualize CNN in PyTorch. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/anujshah1003/pytorchvis.
[38]
A. Mordvintsev, Feature Matching — OpenCV-Python Tutorials 1 documentation,
2013. [Online]. Available: https://opencv-python-tutroals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
py_tutorials/py_feature2d/py_matcher/py_matcher.html.
[39]
Beginner’s Guide To Supervised Learning With Python | Built In. [Online]. Available:
https://builtin.com/data-science/supervised-learning-python.
[40]
Finding outliers in dataset using python - Data Driven Investor - Medium. [Online].
Available: https://medium.com/datadriveninvestor/finding-outliers-in-dataset-using-
python-efc3fce6ce32.
[41]
Stateful and Stateless LSTM for Time Series Forecasting with Python. [Online].
Available: https://machinelearningmastery.com/stateful-stateless-lstm-time-series-
forecasting-python/.
[42]
Measuring size of objects in an image with OpenCV - PyImageSearch. [Online].
Available: https://www.pyimagesearch.com/2016/03/28/measuring-size-of-objects-
in-an-image-with-opencv/.
[43]
The KITTI Vision Benchmark Suite. [Online]. Available: http://www.cvlibs.net/
datasets/kitti/index.php.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:71==
A
Appendice A
A.1
Revised plan
As it was anticipated in the risk assessment, obtaining enough relevant samples proved to
be a challenge that had a remarkable impact in choosing the case study of the presented
report. For the initial part of the report and throughout the first iterations of both the feature
extraction and matching as well as for the machine learning models, a simple simulated
body was used. Nevertheless, to overcome this data limitation a shift was made towards
visual odometry techniques.
Using a simple simulated body whose physical properties were known and controlled
proved to be the right strategy for the development of the feature extraction technique.
On the other hand, because the simulated body is significantly simpler than the environ-
ments in the sequential frames from KITTI, situations rose where the feature extraction
and matching seemed to perform correctly on the sphere but didn’t do so in the city envi-
ronments from KITTI.
One unforeseen risk was the slowness of the feedback loop of having two independent
modules. This is because any change in the feature extraction and matching directly af-
fected the input features of the machine learning models and, therefore, iterations proved
to be an arduous task.
It is remarkable to mention that the presented GANNT chart was followed thoroughly dur-
ing the development of this project. The implicit division between feature extraction and
matching and the machine learning models for prediction resulted in being very effective
in trying to find the appropriate application for the technology early on. Moreover, allow-
ing time for documentation at the end of each of the modules granted an opportunity for
reflecting on the results and allocating resources to their improvement if needed. Nev-
ertheless, it would have been more accurate if final iterations and code cleanups would
have been added in the final weeks.
On the other hand, it is important to note that the third module of the GANTT chart was
adapted to the case study. This was needed in order to obtain and process the desired
information from the KITTI suite such as local displacement over frames or depth infor-
mation transformed to the frame under consideration.
Additionally, the comparison of the proposed feature extractor with SIFT was proven useful
in order to realize some of the real benefits and disadvantages of the implemented process
with respect to the design expectations and widely tested local descriptors.
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
63
==PAGE:72==
A.2
Multi-variable volume regression with feature point
displacement and coordinates
Figure A.1: Volume prediction with linear regression using the displacement of feature
points between consecutive frames.
Table A.1: Results and hyperparameters of the training and validation phase of the linear
regression models using feature point displacement.
SIFT
Convolutional features
Train RMSE
0.136
0.14
Validation RMSE
0.163
0.186
Learning rate
0.001
0.001
Number of sensors
60
51
Epochs
100
150
Figure A.2: Volume prediction with linear regression using the coordinates of feature
points in both consecutive frames.
64
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
==PAGE:73==
Table A.2: Results and hyperparameters of the training and validation phase of the linear
regression models using feature point coordinates.
SIFT
Convolutional features
Train RMSE
0.097
0.142
Validation RMSE
0.123
0.184
Learning rate
0.001
0.001
Number of sensors
60
51
Epochs
120
100
Development of feature-based smart virtual sensors
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
