==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.Eng. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Generalized Heteroscedastic Multi-output
Censored Gaussian Processes for Demand
Prediction
Kasper Pryds Rolsted (s152987)
Supervised by Filipe Rodrigues & Daniele Gammelli
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Smart Mobility
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Bygningstorvet
Building 116
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Censoring is an issue that is prevalent in many data sets, and it is a condition in
which a phenomenon is only partially observable. This is an issue when applying
predictive models, as one does not have the actual data available since the observed
historical data is subject to censoring. This creates a bias when, for example, mod-
elling the demand of some commodity, as the historical evidence does not provide
correct information about the actual demand, thus potentially underestimating the
true demand.
In this thesis, we investigate the issue of censoring using the family of full Bayesian
non-parametric models called Gaussian Processes. We will examine cases in which
censoring is a problem and showcase that by including a Censored likelihood, one can
overcome the censoring problem and generate predictions that are more accurate to
the true demand. We will further implement extensions to the standard Gaussian
Process framework, in which we can model multiple outputs and leverage the correla-
tion of the outputs to increase the predictive performance of the model. We will also
investigate the base assumption of constant variance in the standard GP framework,
and emphasize why this is an inaccurate assumption for most real-life data. We will
further develop an input-dependent noise GP, also called the Heteroscedastic GP,
such that we can more accurately model the variance at different time steps. We
will evaluate the models on synthetically generated data, in which we create an en-
vironment to showcase the pros of these model, before moving on to a real-life data
example, where we model the demand of shared bikes in Copenhagen.
We show that using the censored GP has a significant advantage over the standard
GP on data which is prone to censoring. We shall see that by utilizing correlated
time series, we can more accurately model the true demand and obtain a much richer
posterior distribution. We will show that by adding Heteroscedasticity, we can model
the variance more accurately and thus achieve better uncertainty estimates which will
help us overcome the censoring problem. Finally, we shall see simple examples of how
we can generalize the Gaussian Process to other distributions and extend the concept
of censoring beyond the Gaussian distribution.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Censurering er et problem der hersker i mange data sæt, og det er en tilstand hvor ved
man kun kender en observation delvist. Dette er et problem når man anvender forudsi-
gende modeller fordi man ikke har det korrekte data tilgængeligt, da det observerede
historiske data er underlagt censurering. Dette skaber en partiskhed når man, for
eksempel, modellere efterspørgslen af en handelsvare, da det historiske tilgængelige
data ikke giver den korrekte information omkring den egentlige underliggende efter-
spørgsel, hvorved modellen potentielt underestimere den egentlige efterspørgsel.
I denne afhandling undersøger vi problemet omkring censurering ved at bruge familien
af fulde Bayesianske ikke-parametriske modeller kaldet Gausiske Processer. Vi under-
søger eksempler hvor censurering er et åbenlyst problem og viser at man ved at inklud-
ere et Censureret Likelihood, kan overkomme problemet og generere forudsigelse der
er mere nøjagtigt efterligner den underliggende efterspørgsel. Vi vil udover dette im-
plementere adskillige andre udvidelser til den klassiske Gaussiske Process, hvorved
vi kan modellere mange outputs på samme tid, samt udnytte korrelationen imellem
de forskellige outputs, til at forøge ydeevnen af modellen. Endvidere undersøger vi
standard antagelsen omkring konstant varians i den klassiske Gaussian Process og
understeger hvorfor denne antagelse kan være fejlagtig i de fleste data sæt fra ”virke-
ligheden”. Baseret på dette udvikler vi en input-afhængig støj GP, også kaldet en
Heteroscedastisk GP, hvorved vi kan modellere variansen i de forskellige tidsinter-
valler mere nøjagtigt. Vi evaluere de forskellige modeller på en syntetisk genereret
datasæt, hvor vi laver et miljø der viser fordelene ved de forskellige modeller, og senere
viser vi hvordan vi kan modellere efterspørgslen på delecykler i København.
Vi viser, at vi ved at bruge den Censurerede GP kan opnå signifikant bedre resultater
på data der er underlagt censurering. Endvidere ser vi, at vi ved at bruge korrelerede
tidsserier kan modellere den underliggende efterspørgsel meget mere nøjagtigt og opnå
bedre posterior fordelinger. Vi viser ydermere, at vi ved at inkluderer Heteroscedas-
ticitet kan modellere variansen mere nøjagtigt og opnå bedre usikkerhedsestimater,
hvilket vil hjælpe os med at overkomme censureringsproblemet. Til sidst vil vi se
eksempler på hvordan en Gaussian Process kan generaliseres til andre fordelinger, og
derved udvide conceptet omkring censurering til andre fordelinger over den Gaussiske
fordeling.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Management Engineering at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark, under supervision of Filipe Rodrigues and Daniele Gam-
melli, in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering
degree in Mathematical Modeling and Computing.
The work was carried out in the spring of 2020, and the project covers a workload of
35 ECTS points.
Kongens Lyngby, June 16, 2020
Kasper Pryds Rolsted (s152987)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I want to express the sincerest gratitude to my highly competent and incredibly help-
ful supervisors Filipe Rodrigues and Daniele Gammelli. Throughout the work on this
thesis, you have provided excellent support and great discussions whenever issues oc-
curred, be it through the weekly meetings or the countless emails back and forth. You
have continuously guided me through this whole process, making sure that I stayed
on track. Thank you.
I would also like to thank my parents and particularly my girlfriend, for having to
put up with the ups and downs through this whole process, and continuously making
suggestions that motivated me to continue working.
Without you all, the finished product would have never seen the light of day.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Related works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Methods and theory
7
2.1
Gaussian Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Censored likelihood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Multi-output Gaussian Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Heteroscedastic Gaussian Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.5
Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored Gaussian Process
. . . . . . .
24
2.6
Generalized Censored Gaussian Process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.7
Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.7.1
Variational Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.7.2
Stochastic Variational Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3
Experiments & Discussion
33
3.1
Synthetic data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.1.1
Standard GP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.1.2
Censored GP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.1.3
Multi-output Censored GP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.1.4
Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored GP . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.2
Donkey Republic data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.2.1
Standard GP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
3.2.2
Censored GP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.2.3
Multi-output Censored GP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.2.4
Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored GP . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.3
Generalized Censored GP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4
Conclusion
63
4.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A Technical Appendix
67
A.1 Conditional Gaussian Distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.2 Marginal Gaussian Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.3 Various other kernels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
B Additional results
71
B.1
Synthetic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
B.1.1
HMCGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
B.1.2
Grid of all results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
B.2
DR data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B.2.1
MCGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
B.2.2
HMCGP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The field of Machine Learning and more specifically, Deep Learning has become an
increasingly hot topic in recent years and is easily one of the hottest buzzwords within
many industries. Whether we like it or not, the world is becoming increasingly more
data-driven. With the ever-growing focus on data gathering, many sectors and com-
panies utilize Machine Learning in some shape or form. Much of the attention these
days is centred around sizeable Deep Learning models that are highly data-driven in
the sense that they require a massive amount of data to make any reasonable predic-
tions. However, in many cases, such data is not available, and one must resort to a
different approach.
Gaussian Processes are fully Bayesian non-parametric models, and unlike most Deep
Learning models, they have no issues in the limited data regime. Furthermore, this
type of model provides a robust theoretical framework, in which they often outper-
form some of the most popular time series models. Gaussian Processes, like many
other time series models, allows us to make predictions about future events, which
is highly sought after in many fields, one of which is transportation. Being able to
model and predict the demand for transportation services is essential for customer
satisfaction, as it allows the provider to determine the exact need of its users. This is
especially relevant for the many up and coming shared transportation services that
have come to life in recent years. One example of this is the one considered in this
thesis, namely shared bike renting in Copenhagen. An excellent model of the demand
is crucial for the providers of such shared transportation, as they are often faced with
a series of decisions in terms of how to manage the service. Some of these decisions
are industry-based, as consumers want to go from A to B, and want a reliable and
easily accessible transportation service. For bike renting, this is solved by placing
multiple bikes in hubs around the city, and a proper demand model provides a way in
which they can redirect bikes into areas with more substantial demand or naturally
highlight the need for new hubs in certain areas.
Machine Learning models are highly dependent on data, and being able to provide
a great model of the demand requires accurate historical data. However, a machine
learning model is only as good as the data it is fed, and in the field of demand
modelling, one has to also account for the supply.
If we circle back to the bike-
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
sharing example, the issue arises because the service providers cannot supply an
infinite amount of bikes around the city. Thus, for a given historical demand time
series, there is never going to be a point in time in which there were more rented bikes
than there was available at that time. This problem goes beyond just transportation
and gives rise to the issue of censored data. Because the supply limits the historical
demand, we often find ourselves training the demand model on a time series which
does not necessarily reflect the actual demand. As such, methods for which we can
deal with this are of enormous importance. Censoring is an issue that standard time
series models, including Gaussian Processes, does not account for, as they are based
solely on the observed data, and thus return a biased estimate of the demand. To
tackle this issue, we investigate several extensions to the standard Gaussian Process,
such that we explicitly account for the censored observations in the applied likelihood
function.
Gaussian Processes also provide a framework in which we gain insights into the un-
certainty of the obtained model over the demand. In the commonly used GP, the
variance is assumed to be constant over the inputs, reflecting the assumption that the
observed noise within the data is constant. This is often not the case in actual data
from the real world, as the noise can vary widely over the inputs. In order to provide
an improved demand model, heteroscedasticity is included into the Gaussian Process,
such that we can model input-dependant noise, which in turn allows us to learn how
much we must adjust for the censoring that is prevalent in the data. Finally, we can
exploit dependencies between different demand time series, as the demand and sup-
ply of bikes in areas around the city are often interrelated. If two regions are highly
correlated, with one being subject to censoring, chances are that demand in the two
zones is highly similar. This allows for a more accurate model, as we simultaneously
model a distinct but related problem.
In this thesis, we will describe the various Gaussian Process extensions and implement
them using Pyro [3]. Through several experiments, we will showcase the advantages
of the different models, specifically aimed at modelling the demand for shared bikes
in Copenhagen.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Contributions
3
1.2
Contributions
This thesis attempts to investigate some of the issues presented in the previous section
by applying several individual extensions of Gaussian Processes and finally a frame-
work that merges each of the extensions into a highly complex Gaussian Process. In
summary, the main contributions are:
• Highlighting the strength of Censored Gaussian Processes in term of predicted
posterior mean on censored data, compared to that of standard Gaussian Pro-
cesses.
This gives the ability to account for censored observations which is
prevalent in much time-series data and thus provide a way to determine the
true unobserved demand.
• Implementation and application of Multi-output Gaussian Processes, that should
provide an idea of why modelling several time-series simultaneously has advan-
tages, especially when paired with a censoring problem. This unlocks the po-
tential to overcome harder censoring issues and provides a framework where we
can utilize correlated time series to improve predictive quality.
• Emphasize the power of Heteroscedastic Gaussian Processes, as ”real life” data
is often not as structured and constant in its noise as standard GP’s assume.
This comes at the cost of inference tractability, but such a model has wide
applications in various fields where an input-dependent variance is highly sought
after.
• Provide a setting in which each of the individual elements (censoring, multi-
output and heteroscedasticity) can be put together into a Heteroscedastic Multi-
output Censored Gaussian Process.
This framework can accurately predict
demand for multiple time series, account for censored observation and handle
varying levels of noise. This framework consists of the benefits of each of the
above elements, and we show that by applying this in different data settings, we
obtain better predictive means as well as more accurate posterior distributions.
• Provide a proof of concept solution as to how the concept of censoring can be
extended to include other distributions such as the Poisson distribution, which
more accurately models the demand of discrete observations.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
1.3
Related works
A lot of previous work has been done within the field of Gaussian Processes and they
have been used in a variety of different settings. In the following, some of the most
notable and essential achievements will be presented.
Gaussian Processes: Gaussian Processes were first introduced into the field of
Machine Learning in 1996 by Williams and Rasmussen [26]. They used GPs in its
standard form, emphasizing two approaches to estimating the hyperparameters, with
the maximum likelihood being the first and a Hybrid Monte Carlo being the latter.
They experimented on both synthetic and real-life data and showed that performance
on the Robot Arm Problem proposed by Neal (1995) in [18], was comparable to that
of a Neural Network model at the time. This laid the foundation for much of the
future work of Gaussian Processes in the field of Machine Learning, which includes
work done by Bishop in [4], Williams and Rasmussen in [22] as well as many more.
In general, the standard Gaussian Process has been researched thoroughly, which in
turn yields many of the extensions that is the topic of research within this thesis.
Censoring: Censored data is not originally associated with Gaussian Processes, but
was instead introduced into the field of Econometrics in 1958 by Tobin in [25] and
since then, Censored regression models have been widely used in Econometrics and
Statistics in [20] and [10], where they introduce the The Censored Regression (Tobit)
Model. The initial proposed models were mostly focused on parametric models, but
extensions into Bayesian non-parametric models were later introduced.
Groot and Lucas in [11] proposed a model for Censored GPs, where they introduced
the concept into the field.
They suggested the use of the Tobit Likelihood over
the censored observations and handled the inference intractability using Expectation
Propagation (EP). They showed that the predictive performance of a Censored GP
outperforms a traditional GP in a simulated data experiment as well as on real hous-
ing data with the objective of predicting the number of owner-occupied homes, both
in terms of RMSE and concordance index. The censored model implemented within
this thesis is a direct extension of the model proposed in this paper; however, the EP
approach is not adopted within this thesis.
Multi-output GP: Early references to Multi-Output learning or Multi-task learn-
ing includes work done by Rich Caruana in [6], who introduced Multi-task learning
into the field of Neural Networks, by using the related tasks as an inductive bias.
Through experiments, Caruana demonstrated the benefits when modelling multiple
tasks in conjunction, and emphasized that additional information in each extra task
stimulates the predictive performance. This approach was later adopted into Gaus-
sian Processes, and Yu et al. in [28] demonstrated a hierarchical Bayesian model
which provided a framework for learning Gaussian Processes from several related
tasks.
More associated with the topic of this thesis, Álvarez and Lawrence in [1] contributed
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Related works
5
an approach to efficient Multi-output GPs, in which the Gaussian Process prior ex-
pressed the correlation between the different outputs. This introduced several variants
in which multi-output regression is possible, and showed that when modelling several
outputs simultaneously, we can reduce the uncertainty in areas in which no data
points are available (for one of the time series). Many of the methods used within
their work, is adopted within this thesis.
Heteroscedasticity: Heteroscedasticity is a well-defined term in statistics. Classic
linear regression assumes independent Gaussian noise with a constant variance σ2, but
this is not consistent with many ”real-life” data sets. Bishop (1997) in [5] introduced
Heteroscedasticity into Bayesian regression, where they allowed the noise variance to
be dependent on x. This enabled solutions in which the variance was not systemati-
cally underestimated, which resulted in better predictions. This approach was further
adopted by Goldberg (1998) in [9], where they incorporated input-dependent noise in
Gaussian Processes. They placed a prior over the noise and used MCMC to sample
the posterior distribution. On synthetic data, they showed that with increasing levels
of noise, they were able to capture the structure in the uncertainty estimates. They
did however not apply it to any real-world problems.
Finally, Miguel Lázaro and Michalis K. Titsias in [16] applied the Heteroscedastic
GP (HGP), mimicking some of the work of [9], to real-world problems and intro-
duced a variational approximation, as the evidence cannot be computed analytically.
Through several experiments, they showed that the HGP produced much more accu-
rate posterior distributions when compared to standard GP’s. They further applied
it to a volatility forecasting problem, where they compared it to a highly competitive
GARCH model, which is often used within the field of financial time series modelling.
This showed similar results for nearby forecasts, with a significant advantage being
obtained when producing distant forecasts.
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
1.4
Thesis Outline
The thesis will be structured in the following way:
• Chapter 1 contains the introduction and motivation as to why this research
topic is important, and it gives insights into why focus on this particular area
is necessary. It further contains a study of relevant previous work.
• Chapter 2 contains the theory and methods around Gaussian Processes and
puts special emphasis on the extensions that are the focus of this thesis. Each
of the individual model parts is described on its own, before putting everything
together into the final complex GP model.
Finally, chapter 2 also presents
the relevant definitions and gives a graphical approach as to how each of the
individual models can be assembled.
• Chapter 3 shows the described methods implemented in practice, and evalu-
ates each of them on selected data sets. The methods are initially evaluated
in a synthetic data setting and additionally applied to the Donkey Republic
Bicycle renting data, to estimate the demand for bicycles in different areas in
Copenhagen. Finally, a brief example of the generalized Gaussian Process is
given. The chapter further discusses the obtained results and compare them in
a variety of different settings.
• Chapter 4 concludes the thesis based on the results sections and provides a
guideline as to what findings the experiments presented. Finally, it also includes
a discussion of the future work that can be done within this field.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Methods and theory
In this chapter, the methods and theory behind the thesis will be discussed and
explained. Initially, we will go over the standard Gaussian Process, which serves as
the foundation of the thesis. Eventually, we will move over into the extensions in
terms of Censoring, Multi-output, Heteroscedasticity and finally a generalization of
GPs to other distributions.
2.1
Gaussian Process
A Gaussian Process (GP) is a stochastic process, which essentially describes a prior
distribution over functions, and attempts to find the underlying relationship between
the inputs x and the targets y, using n observed pairs of (x1, y1), ..., (xn, yn). This
allows us to make predictions for yn+1 by using xn+1 as in a standard regression
framework. Gaussian Processes fall under the family of Bayesian Learning and can
be seen as a different type of Machine Learning, in which performance does not suffer
in a small data domain, as opposed to most state of the art Deep Learning methods.
A formal definition of a GP is given as:
Definition 2.1.1. A Gaussian Process is a collection of random variables, any finite
number of which have a (consistent) joint Gaussian distribution [26].
A GP is a non-parametric model which is fully specified by a mean function m(x)
and a covariance function k(x, x′) and can be expressed in the following way:
m(x) = E[f(x)]
k(x, x′) = E[(f(x) −m(x))(f(x′) −m(x′))].
(2.1)
In particular, a set of random variables is drawn from a Gaussian Process with the
above mean and covariance, if for any finite set of elements x1, ..., xn, the correspond-
ing set of finite random variables f(x1), ..., f(xn) follows the distribution,


f (x1)
...
f (xn)

∼N





m (x1)
...
m (xn)

,


k (x1, x1)
· · ·
k (x1, xn)
...
...
...
k (xn, x1)
· · ·
k (xn, xn)





(2.2)
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Methods and theory
The formal definition of a GP can similarly be written as:
f(x) ∼GP (m(x), k (x, x′)) .
(2.3)
This imposes a GP prior on the unknown function f(x) that we want to estimate.
Generally, the mean function m(x) is taken as zero for simplicity sake, as we often
have no prior knowledge of the mean, but this is however not always the case [22]. For
now, the mean function is assumed to be zero. This comes without loss of generality,
as we can always standardize the data to match the assumption of zero mean. A pow-
erful property of the GP is the fact that they can provide a full predictive distribution
in terms of a mean estimate and an uncertainty estimate, expressing how confident
the model is in the prediction (epistemic uncertainty), which is a property that few
other regression models have. An example of a GP that shows the joint distribution
over sets of data points can be seen in Figure 2.3.
When using a Gaussian Process for regression, our outputs y are specified by the
function f(x) as
yn = f(xn) + ϵn,
(2.4)
where ϵn ∼N
 0, σ2
represents the independent noise associated to each data point
xn. Thus, f represents a draw from the GP prior which is specified by the choice of
kernel k(x, x′) and governs a function that maps from x to y. This means that GPs
can be seen as an extension of a multivariate Gaussian to infinite-sized collections
of real-valued variables and is, therefore, as a standard multivariate Gaussian, fully
specified by its second-order statistics.
Further, notice that in the standard GP
setting, there is a constant variance across the input space, i.e. homoscedastic noise.
In a GP, we consider a noise process that follows a Gaussian distribution like
p(yn|f(xn)) = N
 yn|f(xn), σ2
,
(2.5)
where σ2 is the variance. Since we are dealing with independent noise for each data
point, the joint distribution can be seen as an isotropic Gaussian, represented by
p(y|f) = N
 y|f, σ2IN

,
(2.6)
with IN being the N × N identity matrix. We can further define the marginal distri-
bution of p(f) by using the definition of a Gaussian process in Equation 2.1:
p(f) = N (f|0, K) ,
(2.7)
where each element in K is determined by the kernel function between points xn
and xm and 0 denotes a vector of zeros with dimension N. This means that the
covariance function k(x, x′) plays an essential role in a Gaussian Process and they
can be constructed in a number of different ways. Most essential is the fact that k
always have to lead to a positive semi-definite matrix, or else it is not suitable as a
covariance function. One of the most widely used covariance functions in the Squared
Exponential kernel, also sometimes referred to as the RBF kernel and is defined as
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Gaussian Process
9
kSE (x, x′) = σ2 exp
 
−(x −x′)2
2ℓ2
!
,
(2.8)
where ℓis the length scale which determines the smoothness of the function, and
how far one can reliably extrapolate away from the data. σ2 is the output variance
and represents the average distance deviation away from the mean.
The squared
exponential kernel assumes a high correlation between nearby points, which in turn
generates smoother functions. There is a variety of kernels out there, and they can
be added and multiplied, allowing for more complex relationships to be modelled [8].
See Appendix A.3 for more examples.
Figure 2.1: Draws from a GP prior with length scale 0.5 and 2 respectively
An example of samples drawn from a Gaussian Process prior with the squared expo-
nential kernel can be seen in Figure 2.1. This clearly shows how the parameters of
the kernel influence the model’s ability to find a function that suits the observed data.
More specifically, a larger length scale results in higher correlations between points
being further apart and conversely. Figure 2.2 shows an example of exactly how the
parameters of the kernels influence the similarity between observations, which again
emphasizes why the parameters are so important.
The kernel choice all depends on the prior knowledge we have on the data we are
modelling, which means that there is no ”right” choice. Still, generally, the simplest
of functions tend to be somewhat smooth, which emphasizes the popularity of the
Squared Exponential Kernel. The choice of the kernel does in fact influence which
functions we will be able to obtain, so one must also be mindful when choosing the
covariance function since some functions will not be obtainable with specific kernels.
The predictive capabilities of a Gaussian Process depend on the learned hyperparam-
eters in terms of the covariance function, namely the length-scale and the variance in
the case of the RBF kernel, which corresponds to the hyperparameters in a standard
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Methods and theory
Figure 2.2: RBF kernel with length scale of 0.2 and 2, repsectively.
Figure 2.3: Gaussian process on a sinus curve. Red line is the mean of the GP, the
green is the function that the blue points where samples from, and added noise. Notice
that the uncertainty increases when we enter the region with no observed points, as
there is no points being conditioned on [4].
parametric model. This obviously means that to generate the best possible posterior
over the data, we have to optimize the parameters suitably. Bayes rule gives us the
exact solution to the problem, in which we can compute the posterior over f, by using
the likelihood and the prior,
p(f|y, X) = p(y|f)p(f)
p(y|X) .
(2.9)
We have previously defined the prior distribution over our f, this is given in Equation
2.7, and the Gaussian likelihood in a standard GP setting is provided by
p(y|f) = N(y|f, σ2IN)
(2.10)
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Gaussian Process
11
All we need to determine is the denominator of Equation 2.9 which is the marginal
distribution of y. This can be obtained by using the marginalization property of the
Gaussian distribution [4], using the sum rule of probability:
p(y|X) =
Z
p(y|f)p(f|X)df.
(2.11)
As seen, this becomes an integral over the defined likelihood and the GP prior w.r.t
f. We can further extend this by using the specific expressions for each of the terms:
Z
p(y|f)p(f|X)df =
Z
N
 y|f, σ2I

N(f|0, K)df.
(2.12)
We can now use the convenient properties of Gaussian distribution to integrate over
f (See appendix A.2). This way, the integral can be computed as
Z
N
 y|f, σ2IN

N(f|0, K)df = N
 y|0, σ2I + K

.
(2.13)
This allows us to utilize the y conditioned on x to optimize the parameters of the
covariance function, using maximum marginal likelihood,
ˆθ = arg max
θ
 log N
 y|0, σ2I + K

,
(2.14)
where θ denotes the parameters of the covariance function. This way, we can get the
exact posterior distribution over the unknown function f. However, in most cases (as
we will see later on), this is not analytically tractable. This can be due to several
different reasons. Sometimes, the dimensionality of the latent space becomes exces-
sively high, such that we cannot work with it directly. Other times, the posterior we
are interested in has a highly complex form, meaning that computing expectations
are simply not feasible. Finally, we can run into problems with the integration not
having closed-form solutions, which, for example, can arise when we cannot utilize
the convenient marginalization property of the Gaussian distribution. This gives rise
to approximate inference methods, which will be discussed in Section 2.7.
In a regressional setting, we have to be able to make predictions for unobserved time
steps. To do this, we define C = σ2I + K, where each element in this matrix can be
written as
c(x, x′) = k (x, x′) + σ2δx,x′,
(2.15)
where δx,x′ is the Kronecker delta function that is defined as:
δx,x′ =
(
1,
if x = x′
0,
otherwise.
(2.16)
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Methods and theory
To make the predictions at yN+1 given the new input xN+1, we use the joint distri-
bution over the y’s, given as
p (yN+1, y|xN+1, x) = N (yN+1, y|0N+1, CN+1) ,
(2.17)
where
CN+1 =
 CN
k
kT
c

.
Here CN is the N × N covariance matrix which contains elements given by Equation
2.15 and k contains the elements k(xn, xN+1).
Finally, the scalar c is defined as
c = k (xN+1, xN+1) + σ2.
We can then define the conditional distribution, i.e. the predictive distribution, based
on the conditional probability of Gaussian distributions (see Appendix A.1). It is then
evident that the mean and the covariance of that distribution is given by
m (xN+1) = kTC−1
N t
σ2 (xN+1) = c −kTC−1
N k.
(2.18)
Thus, the predictive distribution is a Gaussian where both the mean and the variance
depend on xN+1. This allows us to make predictions about future time steps and
provide us with a model, where we can estimate the uncertainty of the obtained
function f.
Figure 2.4: Factor Graph for a standard Gaussian Process, where θ denotes the
parameters of the kernel and σ is the variance from which the noise is independently
sampled
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Gaussian Process
13
Figure 2.4 shows the graphical model associated with the standard GP, which is
presented as a factor graph, where we can explicitly represent the factors using the
black squares (factor nodes).
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Methods and theory
2.2
Censored likelihood
Censoring is a term that has been well-defined for some time within the field of regres-
sional models. The censoring of observations is a typical problem that is prevalent in
many data sets and occurs when we only partly know an observation. Many examples
of this exist, especially when looking at demand and supply curves. If we have a non-
infinite supply of some commodity, and the demand equals the supply at some time
t, there is bound to be some demand that is not observed within the data. This is
because there is no more supply of that particular commodity to satisfy the demand.
As such, censored models deal with this specific problem and attempts to overcome
it such that we can account for this censoring when using predictive models [7]. This
is necessary to not consistently underestimate the true demand.
Censoring in a GP framework can formally be described in the following way. Consider
x ∈RD, a vector of input variables, and y ∈R, a vector of the corresponding output
variables, comprised such that D = {(xi, yi)}n
i=1. The task is to learn a mapping
from f : RD →R, using the n pairs of observations.
To explain the concept of
censoring, we can now define a censored observation mathematically, based on the
response variable y:
yi =
 y∗
i
if y∗
i < u
u
if y∗
i ≥u ,
(2.19)
where u is defined as some upper threshold [11] and y∗
i is the true output, that is
subject to censoring. As such, censoring in this particular framework is expressed as
a limitation to our response variable, while we still fully observe the input variable.
This is a type 1 censoring, which only deals with upper censoring, although several
other censoring types are developed, which includes lower censoring as well. Equation
2.19 states that if our observed output is below the upper threshold, the observation
is not considered censored, whereas if it is above the threshold, the output variable
y∗is limited to the interval y ∈(−∞, u]. This means that if we are dealing with an
entirely non-censored case, we have y = y∗. This gives us a way to encode which
observations are censored in the given data set, and thus we can let ci denote if an
observation is censored, i.e. if yi is censored, we have ci = 1 and conversely, ci = 0
in the case of non-censoring. This is useful when having to determine the likelihood,
as the likelihood becomes a mixture of a Gaussian and a Probit likelihood term [11].
Let N
 δ|µ, σ2
denote the the noise of the unobserved latent function y∗, ϕ(·) denotes
the standard normal density and Φ(·) the Cumulative Distribution Function. We can
then define the likelihood of observing y in the case of censoring and non-censoring.
The standard likelihood term, when no censoring occurs, then becomes
p (y = y∗|f) = N
 y|f, σ2
= 1
σ ϕ
y −f
σ

,
(2.20)
and the censored likelihood term is given by
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Censored likelihood
15
p(y = u|f) = 1 −Φ
y −f
σ

,
(2.21)
where f is the predicted mean from the Gaussian Process. As all the observations
are considered independent, we can define the joint likelihood over both the censored
and non-censored observations as a product, defined by
L =
n
Y
i=1
p (yi|fi) =
Y
yi=y∗
i
 1
σ ϕ
yi −fi
σ

Y
yi=u

1 −Φ
yi −fi
σ

.
(2.22)
This is commonly known as the Tobit likelihood [7], and this enables us to model a
GP with censored and non-censored observation jointly. By replacing the standard
Gaussian likelihood used within the Gaussian Process framework, we can ensure that
the GP overcomes the censoring, and thus favours functions that interpolate points
that are above the censored observations but also accounts for the non-censored ob-
servations using the standard Gaussian Likelihood. Therefore, if we are in a setting
in which no observations are censored, i.e. ci = 0 for all i, the likelihood becomes
the base Gaussian. The posterior can however not be computed analytically any-
more since the Tobit likelihood cannot be computed explicitly. To combat this, we
can choose one of the many approximate inference techniques, which in this case is
Stochastic Variational Inference (see Section 2.7).
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Methods and theory
2.3
Multi-output Gaussian Process
There exist several extensions to standard GPs, one of which is very powerful, as
we can leverage correlations between related outputs, and thus model them in con-
junction. This is termed a Multi-output GP (sometimes Multi-task GP), and this
essentially allows us to encode information in the covariance function which acts as
a mixing of the underlying processes [1]. The multi-output GP is especially pow-
erful when combined with the previously mentioned censoring problem because we
can utilize the correlations to help us overcome the censoring issue. Consider two
correlated time series representing the demand over time of two different, but related
commodities. If one time series is subject to censoring, i.e. contains some censored
observations, we can model both of these series simultaneously, and the correlation
would help us model the true demand in the censored time series more accurately.
Recall the standard GP case, where the random variables are associated to a single
process f(x). In the multi-output case, the variables are linked to D processes {fd}D
d=1,
each of which is evaluated at potentially different inputs, where X = {Xd}D
d=1 and
Xd = {xd,n}N
n=1. Thus, the model can be described as
f ∼GP(m, K),
(2.23)
where m is a vector of mean functions for each of the D processes {md(x)}D
d=1 and
K is constructed as
K(X, X) =


(K (X1, X1))1,1
· · ·
(K (X1, XD))1,D
(K (X2, X1))2,1
· · ·
(K (X2, XD))2,D
...
· · ·
...
(K (XD, X1))D,1
· · ·
(K (XD, XD))D,D

,
(2.24)
where each element (K (x, x′))d,d′ determines the correlation between the two out-
puts fd(x) and fd′(x′), thus allowing us to utilize inter-task correlations between the
outputs [2]. The mean functions can again be assumed to be zero, just as in the
standard GP case, because we can again standardize to match this assumption.
The prior over f given some inputs X is defined as
f(X) ∼N(m(X), K(X, X)),
(2.25)
and the likelihood function over the outputs when using regression is defined as the
Gaussian distribution, such that
p(y|f, x, Σ) = N(f(x), Σ),
(2.26)
where Σ encodes the information about the variance that governs the observational
noise, such that Σ is a diagonal matrix containing the variance σ2
d for each output,
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Multi-output Gaussian Process
17
which comes from the fact that, in the multi-output case, we assume that yd(x) =
fd(x) + ϵd(x), where ϵd ∼N(0, σ2
d).
The kernels used in the multi-output case are not as straight forward as in the single
GP case. As we still want a kernel that models the relationship between the points
in the input space, the kernel K(X, X) becomes a mixture of separable kernels, as we
also want a kernel that describes the relationship between the different tasks/outputs.
Thus, we consider a class of kernels that acts on the inputs and outputs, respectively.
Such a collection can be expressed as
K (x, x′) = k (x, x′) B,
(2.27)
where k (x, x′) is a standard kernel that acts on the inputs (such as the squared
exponential) and B is a kernel that describes the correlations between the different
outputs, thus decoupling the components. This can be further generalized, on a data
matrix X, to represent a wider variety of kernel classes, using the Kronecker product,
K(X, X) =
Q
X
q=1
Bq ⊗kq(X, X),
(2.28)
where Q represents a grouping of functions, where each member of a group has the
same covariance. Separable kernels are used in a variety of different settings, but
particularly the family of Coregionlization Models [1] are widely used within Gaussian
Processes for multi-output learning. The Linear Model of Coregionlization (LMC) is
an example of a model within this family, where the D outputs are considered as
linear combination of independent random functions [2]. If {fd(x)}D
d=1 is considered
as the set of D outputs, each fd is described as the following linear combination:
fd(x) =
Q
X
q=1
ad,quq(x),
(2.29)
where uq(x) denotes the latent functions, that are assumed to be centered around
0 with covariance cov [uq(x), uq′ (x′)] = kq (x, x′) if q = q′ and 0 otherwise, and
ad,q are scalar coefficients. By creating the outputs in such a way, we ensure that
the covariance is positive semi-definite, such that it is valid within the GP framework.
The Linear Model of Coregionlization further assumes that each process {uq(x)}Q
q=1
is independent, when q ̸= q′. What is worth noting here is the fact that even though
the functions uq(x) are independent, they can, in fact, have the same covariance,
and thus the above expression can be rewritten by grouping the function that share
covariance. Equation 2.29 then becomes
fd(x) =
Q
X
q=1
Rq
X
i=1
ai
d,qui
q(x).
(2.30)
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Methods and theory
This expresses Q groups of functions, where the ui
q(x) within each group has the
same covariance. Similarly to above, ui
q(x) have zero mean and a covariance structure
cov[ui
q(x), ui′
q′ (x′)] = kq (x, x′) if i = i′ and q = q′ and they are independent. We can
use this to determine the cross covariance between two outputs, and because we have
independence between the functions ui
q(x), we can write the cross covariance in the
following way:
cov [fd(x), fd′ (x′)] = (K (x, x′))d,d′
=
Q
X
q=1
Q
X
q′=1
Rq
X
i=1
Rq
X
i′=1
ai
d,qai′
d′,q′ cov
h
ui
q(x), ui′
q′ (x′)
i
=
Q
X
q=1
bq
d,d′kq (x, x′) ,
(2.31)
where bq
d,d′ = PRq
i=1 ai
d,qai
d′,q [2].
Let us take a look at this equation. We are interested in the cross-covariance between
different output functions, and (K (x, x′))d,d′ describes exactly this. As described
above, the assumption of independence in the latent functions, reduces the 4 summa-
tions to 2, namely over Q and Rq, and from previously we know that the covariance
between two latent functions is expressed as kq (x, x′). This expression can further
be extended to incorporate all the cross covariance between the D outputs, and as
such, the resulting kernel is expressed as
K (x, x′) =
Q
X
q=1
Bqkq (x, x′) .
(2.32)
Bq is commonly referred to as the Coregionalization Matrix and by comparing Equa-
tion 2.32 to the cross-covariance equation above, we note that each of the elements
in B consists of the coefficient bq
d,d′ [1]. Further, this particular kernel fits in the fam-
ily of separable kernels, as it mimics the structure from Equation 2.28. This means
that a multi-output Gaussian Process kernel can be seen as a covariance function
that is represented as the sum of the product between two covariance functions. One
that models the correlations between the outputs independently of the inputs x, rep-
resented by Bq, and another that governs the input dependence, namely kq (x, x′),
which is independent over the functions fd(x).
The LMC thus provide us with a way to model several outputs simultaneously, and
this is the specific model used within this thesis. For completeness, we will, however,
go through a particular case of the LMC, as this also has broad applications within
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Multi-output Gaussian Process
19
the field of Multi-output Gaussian Processes. The Intrinsic Coregionalization Model
is a special case of the Linear model described above, namely when Q = 1. There are
some slight alterations done to the equations used, and this is based on the assumption
that the elements of Bq can be written in a new format.
cov [fd(x), fd′ (x′)] =
Q
X
q=1
vd,d′bqkq (x, x′) , = vd,d′
Q
X
q=1
bqkq (x, x′)
= vd,d′k (x, x′) ,
(2.33)
where vd,d′ are suitable coefficients and we assume that bq
d,d′ = vd,d′bq. The corre-
sponding kernel matrix for this particular model becomes similar to Equation 2.28,
with Q = 1,
K(X, X) = B ⊗k(X, X).
(2.34)
As a final note, the ICM assumes that each of the standard covariances given by
kq (x, x′) is equally responsible when the auto-covariance and cross-covariance are
constructed. This means that the model is more constraining than the LMC, but it
does provide a significant computational advantage [2]. We can also represent the
Multi-output Gaussian Process using a graphical approach, which slightly differs from
that of a standard GP, as we now have D outputs being modelled simultaneously.
The Factor Graph shown in Figure 2.5 explicitly puts a plate for the D outputs being
Figure 2.5: Factor Graph for a Multi-output Gaussian Process, where θd denotes the
parameters of the kernel associated to the d’th output and σd is the variance of the
d’th output
modelled and contains a constant variance of σd for each of the d outputs.
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Methods and theory
In practice, during inference, we must estimate the parameters of the coregionaliza-
tion matrix, which adds more hyper-parameters to the mixture. These are generally
randomly initialized while ensuring that the expectation of Bq is equal to the identity
matrix.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Heteroscedastic Gaussian Process
21
2.4
Heteroscedastic Gaussian Process
Standard GP’s model the observation noise as constant across all observations, but
this can often be a too restrictive assumption given most data. Usually, the noise
that is prevalent in real-life data is non-constant, and this serves a real inconvenience
for the standard GP. A good example of this is the Silverman motorcycle accident
data [24], shown in Figure 2.6. This data is inherently heteroscedastic, as we have
different levels of noise across the inputs.
Figure 2.6: Silverman’s motorcycle accident data. The axis represent the time in
milliseconds since impact and the recorded head acceleration respectively. Notice the
considerably lower noise in the beginning of the data, with increases levels between
30 and 40 ms.
For inference to be tractable in the case of a standard GP, the constant variance
is a necessary assumption. Heteroscedasticity describes how the variance is, in fact,
dependent on the inputs, meaning that we can model the observation noise differently
across the inputs. This is much better suited for many problems, especially in finance
and econometrics [10]. This does however come at a cost, as the exact inference is
no longer analytically tractable, leading to approximate inference schemes being nec-
essary. The following will explain how to explicitly incorporate heteroscedastic noise
into a GP setting, revealing a much more accurate estimate of the noise level and one
that achieves better estimates of the uncertainty.
Recall that in the standard GP regression case, we placed a GP prior on an unknown
function f(x) in the following way:
f(x) ∼GP (m(x), k (x, x′)) ,
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Methods and theory
with noise generated with constant variance given by ϵ ∼N
 0, σ2
.
As mentioned, this is termed homoscedastic noise, where all the random variables
have the same finite variance. One of the strengths of GP’s as a probabilistic model
is the fact that it comes with this measure of uncertainty, so if we want to utilize this
for non-synthetic data fully, some adaptations are in order.
Figure 2.7: Factor Graph for the Heteroscedastic Gaussian Process, where θf denotes
the parameters of the kernel associated to the function f and g is the function that
governs the variance at each x, which holds the parameters θg of the kernel associated
to g
We still place a similar prior on the unknown function f(x), but now we introduce a
variance that is dependent on xi. This way, the prior on the noise term becomes a
Gaussian given by
ϵi ∼N (0, r(xi)) ,
(2.35)
where r(xi) is a random function that governs the variance at each time step [16].
This turns our GP model into a Heteroscedastic Gaussian Process where we can
reasonably model the variety in the variance. This means we have another random
function r(x) that can take any form. Per definition, the variance is positive, so in
order to ensure that r(x) is positive, it can be parameterized as r(x) = eg(x), from
which we can place a GP prior on the unknown function g(x) as
g(x) ∼GP (µg, kg (x, x′)) .
(2.36)
Suitable covariance functions can then be selected such that it reflects how the vari-
ance behaves [17]. For this thesis, we assume that the noise is somewhat smooth, so
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Heteroscedastic Gaussian Process
23
for this purpose we generally impose a RBF kernel on g(x). The model then depends
on the parameters of the 2 covariance functions, θf and θg respectively. We can now
present the graphical model in Figure 2.7, in which we now include the function g,
which governs the time-dependent variance at each xi.
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Methods and theory
2.5
Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored Gaussian
Process
In the Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored Gaussian Process we are putting all of
the above elements together for several different reasons. As mentioned, all demand
data with non-infinite supply is subject to censoring, so we want our model to be
able to overcome that issue. The multi-output part is especially useful when work-
ing with spatial data, as it is going to help us overcome the censoring, by utilizing
cross-correlation between different outputs (correlated areas). The heteroscedasticity
will allow us to model the variance more precisely, which in turn will allow us to
determine how much to adjust for the censoring.
We define the GP prior over D functions, each of which is associated to a single
output that is being modelled, {fd}D
d=1. As in Section 2.3, we can formally describe
this as
f ∼GP(m, K),
(2.37)
where m contains the mean function associated to each of the output processes
{md(x)}D
d=1 and K describes the cross-covariance between the outputs as in Equa-
tion 2.24. As we are dealing with a censored gaussian likelihood, which partitions the
observations into censored and non-censored, and because each of our outputs is con-
tinuous, each of the outputs {yd}D
d=1 is constructed such that yd,i is generated from a
censored Gaussian distribution which is centered around fd,i(x) with an observational
noise parameter ϵd,i. This is generated from a Gaussian such that
ϵd,i ∼N (0, rd(xd,i)) ,
(2.38)
where rd(xd,i) is the variance associated with the d’th output, which depends on the
input associated to the d’th output and is time dependent. Following the formulation
given in Section 2.4, each of the heteroscedastic noise functions rd(x) associated to
each output, is parameterized as rd(x) = egd(x)) from which we can place independent
GP priors on each of the unknown gd(x) for a total of D outputs, such that
gd(X) ∼GP (µd,g, kd,g (Xd, Xd′)) ,
(2.39)
where Xd = {xd,n}N
n=1 and kd,g is the kernel that encodes the information about how
the variance at each time step, for output d, is related.
As such, the Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored Gaussian Process is a highly
complex model, which also comes at a computational cost. At each inference step,
hyperparameters for the kernel governing the cross-correlations have to be estimated,
as well as the hyperparameters that are associated to each of the independent D ker-
nels that govern the variance of each output. This leads to the final model presented
in Figure 2.8, which graphically can be seen as a combination of all the previously
shown models, combining the heteroscedasticity as well as the multi-output adoption.
==PAGE:37==
2.6 Generalized Censored Gaussian Process
25
Figure 2.8: Factor Graph for the Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored Gaussian
Process, where θd,f denotes the parameters of the kernel associated to the function f,
for the d’th output. gd,n is the function that governs the variance at each time step
and for each output, each of which holds the parameters θd,g of the kernel associated
to gd,n
2.6
Generalized Censored Gaussian Process
A standard Gaussian Process assumes that the observational likelihood p(y|f) is Gaus-
sian. This is, however, not always suitable as some data is not represented in the
continuous real number domain. For a time-series that represents the demand, we
are often presented with a discrete positive integer, which represents the demand for
a particular commodity as a number of counts. Thus, we must turn to other likeli-
hoods to properly model the dependent variable. Several distributions for counting
models exist (Poisson, negative binomial), and in the following, we will see how one
can generalize the Gaussian Process to other likelihoods, such that we can model the
dependent variable more accurately. More specifically, we will focus on the general-
ized GP with a Poisson likelihood, such that we can model the number of events in
a fixed time interval.
To introduce the Generalized GP for counting, we are focusing on the Poisson distri-
bution, where the outputs are counts such that y ∈Z+ = {0, 1, · · · }. The Poisson
distribution is parameterized by the parameter λ; the arrival rate, and the mean and
the variance of the Poisson distribution is both given by this parameter. To generalize
the Gaussian Process, we define a similar GP prior over the unknown f such that
f(x) ∼GP (0, k (x, x′)) ,
(2.40)
and change the observational likelihood such that
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Methods and theory
p(y|f) ∼Poisson(y|η(f)).
(2.41)
In this case, η represents a link function, that directly relates the latent function f
to the mean of the sufficient statistics [23]. This means that f = η(λ) and inversely
that λ = η−1(f). This link function can be chosen a number of different ways, and in
the case of the Poisson GP, we want to ensure that we achieve positive arrival rates.
Thus, the obvious choice would be the exponential function; however, this is known
to cause problems when the trend of the data is not exponential in nature [23]. A
more generally suitable link function is the softplus link function, such that
E[y|f] = η−1(f) = log
 1 + ef
⇒η(λ) = log
 eλ −1

, λ > 0.
(2.42)
This way, we can sample the latent f from a multivariate Gaussian and send them
through the link function to determine the optimal arrival rate parameter through
the Poisson likelihood. There is, however, a limitation using the Poisson distribution,
as the variance is equal to the mean. This means that the uncertainty estimates
that we obtain are tied to the mean, such that larger predicted means equals larger
uncertainty estimates.
This model can also be altered to handle the concept of censoring, as we have previ-
ously seen with the Gaussian likelihood. In this case, the censored Poisson likelihood
becomes a mixture of the Poisson likelihood explained in Equation 2.41 and the Pois-
son CDF likelihood term,
L =
n
Y
i=1
p (yi|fi) =
Y
yi=y∗
i
f yi
i e−fi
yi!
 Y
yi=u

1 −

e−fi
⌊yi⌋
X
k=0
f k
i
k!



,
(2.43)
where fi has been through the previously mentioned link function. This allows us to
distinguish between the censored and non-censored observations as we saw in section
2.2. We shall later see this applied to a few problems to provide some proof of concept
results that showcase how we can utilize this particular model.
==PAGE:39==
2.7 Inference
27
2.7
Inference
Inference describes and refers to the process of estimating hyperparameters and ran-
dom variables in a Bayesian setting [12]. As such, this is how we, through the data,
estimate the optimal parameters such that our model fits the provided data. In a
supervised Gaussian Process regression setting, this mainly refers to jointly learning
the posterior of the latent f, and the parameters of the kernel used within the GP,
given the observed variables. For instance, the Squared Exponential Kernel described
in Equation 2.8 has a length scale and variance parameter. These are examples of
values that can be learned during training and optimized such that the achieved fit
results in the lowest possible error.
Inference can be done in a number of different ways, where some problems are ”easy”,
in the sense that they can be solved analytically, whereas other problems are harder
in the sense that approximate inference is the only tractable approach. It all boils
down to computing the posterior distribution given by Bayes theorem.
Let z =
{zm}M
m=1 denote the latent variables and let x = {xn}N
n=1 denote our observations.
The posterior over the latent z is then defined as
p(z|x) = p(z)p(x|z)
p(x)
,
(2.44)
where p(z) denotes the prior on the latent variables z, p(x|z) denotes the likelihood
of observing x under the current distribution and p(x) denotes the model evidence or
the marginal likelihood. This is found by using the sum of probability, such that
p(x) =
X
z
p(x|z)p(z).
(2.45)
In this case, we are assuming that z is discrete, which lead to a sum of z.
In a
continuous setting, this would become an integral over z. The above equation is not
always easy to compute, as the denominator in many cases is intractable to compute
analytically, which is why we turn to approximate inference schemes.
The specific inference method used within this thesis is Stochastic Variational In-
ference (SVI), and this technique is under the family of approximate inference. An
advantage of this is that it is highly efficient in many Bayesian settings, also in Gaus-
sian Processes, compared to more standard Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods,
which does not scale well, resulting in inefficient computations [27]. Let us first de-
fine Variational Inference as the stepping stone before moving into SVI.
2.7.1
Variational Inference
In Variational Inference [14] (VI) the aim is to approximate the posterior distribution
of a probabilistic model, using what is often referred to as a variational distribution
==PAGE:40==
28
2 Methods and theory
or guide distribution.
Variational inference can be thought of as an optimization
problem, where we want to minimize the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between
the variational distribution and the posterior distribution [13]. The KL divergence
is a measure of closeness between two distributions, and this is directly linked to the
objective of interest, namely the Evidence Lower Bound (ELBO). The ELBO equals
the negative KL divergence up to an additive constant, and the ELBO is essentially
a bound on the logarithm of the marginal probability of the observations log p(x).
With the connection in place between the KL divergence and the ELBO, it is evi-
dent that by maximizing the ELBO, we will minimize the KL divergence. Thus the
difference between the posterior and the variational distribution is small, which is
exactly what we want [27]. Figure 2.9 gives an intuitive idea of how to think of the
process. The ellipse represents the family of variational distributions, where p(z|x)
represents the true posterior. The optimal parameter ν∗is eventually found, which
represents the variational distribution which is closest to the true posterior in terms
of KL divergence.
Figure 2.9: Illustration of how Variation Inference attempts to find an approximate
posterior based on a family of variational distributions q(z, ν)
Let us define the Variational Inference algorithm for approximate inference. Again
we consider N observations denoted x = {xn}N
n=1, M latent variables z = {zm}M
m=1
and a variational distribution q(z; λ) which has the variational parameter λ. The
ELBO is defined as the bound on the log marginal, resulting in
==PAGE:41==
2.7 Inference
29
log p(x) = log
Z
p(x, z)dz
= log
Z
p(x, z) q(z)
q(z; λ)dz
= log

Eq
p(x, z)
q(z; λ)

≥Eq[log p(x, z)] −Eq[log q(z; λ)]
≜L(q),
(2.46)
where q(z; λ) denotes the variational distribution which is expressed as a family of
possible distributions that could fit the true posterior. The inequality arise from the
use of Jensen’s inequality, namely that log E[p(x)] ≥E[log p(x)], caused by the fact
that the logarithmic function is concave. This essentially states that the marginal is
bounded by the expected log joint probability Eq[log p(x, z)] and the entropy of the
variational distribution Eq[log q(z; λ)] [13]. By specifying the KL divergence between
the posterior p(z|x) and the guide q(z; λ), we note how the KL is formally connected
to the ELBO,
KL(q(z; λ)∥p(z|x)) = Eq

log q(z; λ)
p(z|x)

= Eq[log q(z; λ)] −Eq[log p(z|x)]
= −(Eq[log p(x, z)] −Eq[log q(z; λ)]) + log p(x)
= −L(q) + constant.
(2.47)
As such, this becomes an optimization problem, where Equation 2.46 defines the
objective that is to be maximized. One then has to decide on the structure of the
variational distribution, such that we can reasonably well approximate the posterior
distribution but also allows us to have a tractable approximation.
In mean-field variational inference, we use the variational family of distributions often
referred to as the mean-field family [29]. In this fully factorized family of distributions,
each hidden variable is independent and depends only on its own parameters. The
variational family is defined as
q(z; λ) =
N
Y
i=1
q (zi; λi) ,
(2.48)
This particular distribution allows us the make iterative updates of the ELBO because
it is fully factorized. This means that we can now define the updates, such that we can
optimize over the ELBO. To show this, we will focus on the variational parameter
==PAGE:42==
30
2 Methods and theory
λj, which is associated with the latent zj.
Since we have defined the variational
distribution as the mean-field distribution, we can insert Equation 2.48 directly into
Equation 2.46, which yields
L =
Z
q (zj; λj) Eq(z¬j) [log p (zj, x|z¬j)] dzj
−
Z
q (zj; λj) log q (zj; λj) dzj + constj,
(2.49)
where z¬j denotes all of z excluding the j’th latent. The constant contains all the
terms which does not depend on zj. This equation forms the objective that can be
maximized for the j’th variable by
log q∗(zj; λj) = Eq(z−j) [log p (zj|z¬j, x)] + const.
(2.50)
To achieve the full update, we take the exponential of this equation which reveals
how we compute the update based on the j’th latent variable,
q∗(zj; λj) ∝exp
 Eq(z¬j)[log p(z, x)]

.
(2.51)
This equation is optimized using some coordinate ascent algorithm, where we com-
pute derivatives concerning the variational parameters and set them to zero. Thus, we
can, in turn, update each of the variational parameters while holding the others fixed,
until we achieve some satisfying convergence criteria. This convergence is guaranteed
because the bound is a convex optimization problem with respect to each latent vari-
able zj. The drawback of variational inference, however, is the fact that the algorithm
must utilize all the data points, which evidently becomes very computational heavy
when dealing with larger data sets, as the gradient calculations become particularly
heavy when done over high dimensional data. This is solved by introducing stochas-
tic optimization, which reveals the algorithm Stochastic Variational Inference used
within this thesis.
2.7.2
Stochastic Variational Inference
Stochastic variational inference, as the name implies, uses stochastic optimization,
where we sub-sample the data to create noisy estimates of the natural ELBO gradient
and follow the direction of the gradients (with some step size) to achieve maximiza-
tion. For high dimensional data, these noisy estimates are much cheaper to compute
than the exact gradient, and they will often result in the ability to escape certain
optima that are prevalent in highly complex objectives.
Let f(λ) denote an objective function and H(λ) denote a random function, for which
the mean equals the gradient of the objective, i.e Eq[H(λ)] = ∇λf(λ). Through
gradient optimization, we can update λ according to the observation of B(λ) in the
following way
==PAGE:43==
2.7 Inference
31
λ(t) = λ(t−1) + ρtht

λ(t−1)
,
with ht being an independent sample from the noisy gradient of H and ρt being some
predefined step size [21]. This can be shown to converge to a maximum for f(λ) if
the step size satisfies the Robbins-Monro conditions, namely
∞
X
t=1
ρt = ∞
(2.52)
∞
X
t=1
ρ2
t < ∞.
(2.53)
In order to optimize the ELBO, we must define an unbiased estimator of the gradient
such that we can compute it based on the samples of the variational distribution.
This is done by taking the gradient of the ELBO in Equation 2.46 and write it as an
expectation with respect to the guide distribution,
∇λL =
Z
∇λq(z|λ)(log p(x, z) −log q(z|λ))dz.
(2.54)
To get the gradient as an expectation, we use the fact that ∇λ[q(z|λ)] = ∇λ[log q(z|λ)]q(z|λ)
[21], and this turns the above expression into
∇λL =
Z
∇λ[q(z|λ)](log p(x, z) −log q(z|λ))dz
=
Z
∇λ log q(z|λ)(log p(x, z)
−log q(z|λ))q(z|λ)dz
= Eq [∇λ log q(z|λ)(log p(x, z) −log q(z|λ))
.
(2.55)
From this equation, we can compute noisy estimates of the gradient, based on S
Monte Carlo samples from the variational distribution such that
∇λL ≈1
S
S
X
s=1
∇λ log q

z(s)|λ
 
log p

x, z(s)
−log q

z(s)|λ

,
(2.56)
where z(s) ∼q(z|λ). This is a general black box variational inference algorithm, that
does not depend on the underlying model, but only on the variational distribution.
This is important in a probabilistic programming language like Pyro, since the imple-
mentation is targeting a large variety of models. This does, however, produce an issue,
as the variance of the ELBO estimate can in practice be very large, which will pose
as an issue during optimization. This can be reduced in a number of different ways,
including Rao-Blackwellization and control variates. For a more precise explanation
==PAGE:44==
32
2 Methods and theory
Figure 2.10: Black box variational inference [21]
of how this is explicitly done, refer to [21]. The black box variational inference scheme
is described in Figure 2.10. In the algorithm, ˆa∗
i is a scaling factor that minimizes
the variance through control variates.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3
Experiments &
Discussion
In the following, tests and comparisons between the different implemented methods
described in Chapter 2 have been conducted. The following section is composed of
two sub-sections, one of which focuses exclusively on synthetically generated data,
to show the capabilities of the models in a more controlled environment and thus
highlight the strengths of each model component. Following this, tests are made on
’real-life’ data, more specifically on the Donkey Republic bicycle rental data, provided
by Donkey Republic themselves.
This will serve as a way to determine how well
the models behave on more unstructured data that contains more observations that
are prone to different levels of noise. The tests aim to provide evidence that using
the implemented extensions of the Gaussian Process will provide better estimates
in terms of predicted mean, uncertainty estimates, but also to emphasize how we
can overcome the censoring problem previously described.
All of the models are
implemented in Python, using the Pyro probabilistic programming language [3], which
is supported by PyTorch [19] on the backend. This provides a framework that tracks
trainable parameters and efficiently computes stochastic gradients to estimate the
posterior distribution. Further, it comes with many pre-implemented modules such
as kernel functions, gradient optimizers and various likelihoods. Pyro handles all of
the inference under the hood, and thus we only have to specify the parameters that
are tied to each of the models.
3.1
Synthetic data
To generate a suitable dataset on which we can apply the proposed models, we define
a simple sinusoidal function which incorporates some of the issues that the proposed
models excel at.
As such, the base function from which the data is generated is
defined as
f(x) = 2 + 1
2 sin(2x) + x
10,
(3.1)
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Experiments & Discussion
where we generate 100 equidistant points, such that x ∈[0, 10]. This is partly to
emphasize that the performance of a Gaussian Process is not limited to large datasets,
but also to be able to process the data within a meaningful time frame. As we want
to highlight that not all data is generated with a constant variance σ2 (assumption
in the standard GP), we add different levels of noise dependant on x, such that we
include heteroscedasticity in the data. This is done by adding a linearly increasing
noise over the interval, such that the noise scale lies in the interval σh = [0.0, 0.3] over
the x’s. We then random sample the noise independently from N(ϵh|0, σh) and add
to the original function, such that our observed y is defined as
y = f(x) + ϵh.
(3.2)
Figure 3.1: Synthetically generated data. The true function is shown as a dashed
black line and the blue dots are the functions values with added noise
Figure 3.1 illustrates the synthetic data at this point in time. To emphasize the issue
of censored data, we manually censor the data based on some intensity. As we are
highlighting a type 1 censoring, i.e. upper censoring, we randomly select points in
each of the sinusoidal peaks and manually censor them, based on the chosen censoring
intensity pc,i. This means that for all observations in which ci = 1, we independently
sample the intensity such that
pc,i ∼U[a, b],
where a ≤b and a, b ∈[0, 1]. From this, we can form the censored observations as
yi = (1 −pc,i)y∗
i ,
where y∗
i is the ”true” value generated from the function in Equation 3.2. Tests are
conducted for various censoring intensities, but Figure 3.2 shows an example where
==PAGE:47==
3.1 Synthetic data
35
a = 0.2 and b = 0.3. From now on, this will be referred to as ”pc = 0.2”, emphasising
the lower bound. This provides us with the fully specified observed variables, from
which we can compare mean predictions to the underlying functions.
Figure 3.2: Synthetically generated data after manual censoring with a = 0.2 and b =
0.3. The blue x’s correspond to the censored observations and the circles correspond
to the non-censored ones
It is important to note that the generated data must be standardized for a number
of different reasons. Firstly, because we in a standard GP assume that the outputs
y has zero mean, we must match this assumption. Further, because many of the
basic kernels include scale parameters, we should also standardize the inputs to get
correct estimates of these parameters. Finally, Gaussian Processes can be prone to
numerical issues, often as a result of having to inverse an ill-conditioned covariance
matrix. Standardizing the data reduces the severity of this issue.
Having created the data in the way explained above, we hope to see an impact of
modelling the GP using a censored likelihood, as well as including heteroscedastic
noise, which should allow the heteroscedastic GP to model the uncertainty more ac-
curately.
In order to quantify the performance of each of the implemented models, the following
two measures will be reported. The Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), defined as
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
X
i=1
(ˆµi −y∗
i )2,
(3.3)
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Experiments & Discussion
where {y∗
i }n
i=1 is the true underlying demand and {ˆµi}n
i=1 is the predicted posterior
mean from the GP. Further, we report the Negative Log Probability Density (NLPD),
defined as
NLPD = −1
n
n
X
i=1
log p(y∗
i |D),
(3.4)
where D = {(xi, yi)}n
i=1 is the dataset consisting of the n input-output pairs.
The NLPD measures the accuracy of the obtained posterior distribution (lower is
better). In contrast, RMSE provides a measure that reports the performance of the
obtained predictive mean compared to the data generation process.
In the following, we shall refer to the standard Gaussian Process as SGP, the Cen-
sored Gaussian Process as CGP, the Multi-output Censored Gaussian Process as
MCGP, and finally, the Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored Gaussian Process
as HMCGP. The code is available at https://github.com/Krollo12/GHMCGP.
3.1.1
Standard GP
To determine a baseline performance for the given data, a standard GP (SGP) prior
is placed on the latent f. To impose smoothness on the unknown function, we define
a squared exponential kernel on the inputs with initial parameters σ2 = 1 and ℓ= 1.
These were arbitrarily chosen, but through several experiments, they proved to be
decent initial values. As mentioned in Section 2.1, the variance is shared across all
inputs, and we use a standard Gaussian likelihood as per Equation 2.10. Even though
exact inference is possible in the standard GP setting, we will resort to Stochastic
Variational Inference to make the results comparable. This means we also define a
gradient optimizer as a clipped version of ADAM [15], to avoid exploding gradients.
We choose an initial learning rate of 0.003, decaying at the rate of 0.99969. These
values ensured that it converged over 4000 epochs. Finally, we used 40 samples to
form the gradient estimators, which was a value that was set such that we had a
somewhat stable learning process.
The experiments were run over several different censoring intensities, where a ∈
[0.2, 0.5, 0.8], with b = a + 0.1. Figures 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5 graphically shows the esti-
mates of the posterior mean as well as the uncertainty tied to it.
The solid black line represents the posterior mean, the shaded blue area is the ±1.96·σ
of the estimated variance, and the shaded brown area is the quantiles of the samples
from the posterior. This reveals a couple of things about the Standard GP. As the cre-
ated data is inherently censored, the SGP has no way of knowing which observations
are censored or not, because this is not explicitly known in the Gaussian likelihood.
The model assumes that it has to find a function that passes through all of the values,
unaware of the fact that some of them are censored, leading to very biased estimates.
This is clearly evident in Figure 3.4 and 3.5, where the posterior mean interpolates the
==PAGE:49==
3.1 Synthetic data
37
Figure 3.3: SGP: Censoring pc = 0.2.
Figure 3.4: SGP: Censoring pc = 0.5.
Figure 3.5: SGP: Censoring pc = 0.8.
censored values exactly, unknowing that it has to account for them. This ultimately
means that the error between actual function (dashed black) and the predicted mean
is significantly high. The RMSE and the NLPD of the respective experiments can be
seen in Table 3.1.
Finally, to emphasize the input dependent noise, Figure 3.6 shows the estimated
variance, versus the true noise scale from which the data was generated.
This shows one of the drawbacks of a standard GP, namely that the variance is
constant over the inputs, and we do not see any significant lower uncertainty in the
areas in which the data contain little to no noise. Finally, we can also take a look at
how the SVI estimated the correct parameters for the kernel, where Figure 3.7 shows
the evaluation of the ELBO, based on 40 samples. The values are produced by taking
a gradient step in each iteration, and the figure show a clear sign of convergence.
Similar ELBO results are available for each of the experiments but are omitted.
The results are, however, as we expect them to be, and this provides a baseline for
which we can determine the usefulness of the extensions that have been implemented.
This also indicates why standard Gaussian Processes are not suitable when we are
dealing with censored data, and especially when we have data that is subject to large
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Experiments & Discussion
Figure 3.6: Estimated noise (blue), compared to the noise scale σh (orange).
Censoring (pc):
0.2
0.5
0.8
SGP
RMSE
1.3766
1.8131
1.7393
NLPD
3.0918
5.2277
10.1558
Table 3.1: RMSE and NLPD of the standard GP using various censoring intensities
amounts of censoring. In terms of demand modelling, this would provide a complete
misrepresentation of how the actual demand behaves, which can lead to inefficient
allocation of resources if service providers make decisions based on this model.
Figure 3.7: ELBO estimate over the course of training
==PAGE:51==
3.1 Synthetic data
39
3.1.2
Censored GP
We now turn to the Censored Gaussian Process, in which we can utilize the censored
likelihood described in Equation 2.22. This is practically done by including a boolean
censored vector cN, detailing which of the observations that are censored. As the
data was manually censored, this vector contains 1 for all the observations in Figure
3.2 that are represented as crosses and 0 for all the dots. This vector is included in
the model through the defined likelihood, which allows us to correct for the censoring.
The model is not explicitly told how much to account for the censoring. Still, the
kernel, which in this case is also a squared exponential, imposes smoothness in the
function, meaning that we obtain functional values close to the values of the non-
censored points. This also means that there is increased uncertainty in the areas of
censoring, as there are countless potential functions that pass through the censored
observations.
In order to keep the models comparable, the settings for the kernel and the optimizer
are exact replications of the ones used in the SGP, meaning that the used likelihood
is the only difference. Figures 3.8, 3.9 and 3.10 shows the censored GP for various
censoring intensities once again. We notice how in Figure 3.8, with a censoring of 0.2,
there is a clear improvement of the mean prediction around the sinusoidal peaks of
the created function. We further see an uncertainty band that is quite big, resulting
from the many censored observation. This essentially means that in the areas where
we are limited to censored observations, the unknown function we are modelling could
potentially be anywhere within this band.
We also note that when having increased levels of censoring, as shown in Figure
3.9 and 3.10, it becomes increasingly hard for the model to determine how much to
account for the censored observations, and in 3.9, the estimated function is simply
one that has a slight linear trend with barely any notion of peaks. This means that
the estimated length scale of the kernel is very large, resulting in next to no ”wiggles”
in the resulting output.
In the case of pc = 0.8, it is apparent that we actually
achieve a better fit than with the lower censoring intensities in terms of RMSE, but
we obtain a poor NLPD. One reason for the poor performance when using higher
censoring intensities could be caused by the fact that the censored observations get
”squashed” together around -1. This means that we do not see the same peak pattern
as we do when pc = 0.2. We still see the issue of not knowing the extent of the
censoring, but we see a clear sign of exactly how the censored likelihood is favouring
functions that match the censored function, while still matching to the observed non-
censored values. The quantiles of the samples from the posterior (brown) yield the
95% confidence interval, which highlights that the samples from the posterior do in
fact all account for the censoring, where we also see a lower confidence band around
the non-censored observations. Table 3.2 shows an outline of the measures in each of
the experiments.
These results are encouraging, in the sense that we can clearly see the effect of in-
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Experiments & Discussion
Figure 3.8: CGP: Censoring pc = 0.2.
Figure 3.9: CGP: Censoring pc = 0.5.
Figure 3.10: CGP: Censoring pc = 0.8.
Censoring (pc):
0.2
0.5
0.8
SGP
RMSE
1.3766
1.8131
1.7393
NLPD
3.0918
5.2277
10.1558
CGP
RMSE
0.6149
0.7640
0.5753
NLPD
1.7057
3.1462
4.9547
Table 3.2: RMSE and NLPD of the Censored GP
cluding the censored likelihood. Across the board, we see an increase in predictive
performance both in terms of RMSE and NLPD, indicating that we obtain a much
more accurate posterior. This shows how the model is able to incorporate information
from both the censored and non-censored points, which yields functions that are much
more probable. We do however note that even in a controlled experiment like this, it
is difficult to determine the exact extent of the censoring, which is why it is hard to
retrieve the precise function from which the data was generated. This leads into the
following models, in which we shall see if both the correlation and heteroscedasticity
will increase the extent to which the model will recognize more precisely how much
==PAGE:53==
3.1 Synthetic data
41
censoring is prevalent in the data and account for it.
3.1.3
Multi-output Censored GP
In the Multi-output setting, we expect the correlations between time-series to help
overcome some of the issues that we have previously seen.
To illustrate this, we
introduce a second time series on which we can leverage the correlations in a multi-
output scenario. Figure 3.11 shows the additional output dimension, in which the
time series was generated based on 100 equidistant points, in the same interval as
previously, from the function
f1(x) = sin(2x).
(3.5)
To later demonstrate the ability to learn different noise levels for each output, we add
a linearly decreasing noise, such that σh = [0.4, 0.0]. This function attains peaks in
the same areas as that of the previous function, but we do not include any censored
observations for this time series. The added output function was chosen arbitrarily,
but we wanted to highlight an example which included a function that has a similar
trend to the primary function of interest. One could also choose a function which
is perfectly correlated with the underlying function, but this would not yield any
meaningful results as this is very rarely the case in real-life scenarios. We shall later
see that for the Donkey Republic data we have somewhat similar demand patterns
across different zones in Copenhagen, which justifies the added function f1(x).
Figure 3.11: Both time series shown together, with the orange illustrating the second
output dimension
We now utilize the model of coregionalization described in Section 2.3, in which we
model the two time-series simultaneously, which in theory should help overcome the
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Experiments & Discussion
censoring that is prevalent in the first output dimension. The used likelihood function
remains the censored likelihood as in the previous section. This problem proved to be
slightly more challenging in terms of optimization. Several tweaks of hyperparameters
were made, eventually resulting in convergence after 12000 epochs. For the sake of
interpretability, the two functions are highlighted in a plot of its own, shown in Figure
3.12, in the case of 0.2 censoring.
Figure 3.12: Multi-output Censored GP with pc = 0.2. f which is the initial censored
function (Left) and the newly added non-censored function f1 (Right).
From the figure, we notice an immediate effect of the Multi-output GP when looking
at the fit on the first time series (left). Both the uncertainty band, as well as the
confidence intervals, has narrowed significantly. The uncertainty at the beginning,
where all observations are censored, is much more accurate and now follows the trend
of the true function we are trying to estimate. Moreover, the general trend in the ar-
eas of censored observations is that we see a decrease in the uncertainty, which partly
illustrate that the added output dimension helps us overcome the censoring problem.
We also achieve a much more accurate predicted mean towards the end of the series,
where we only have censored observations. In the CGP, we saw a predicted mean
that has a negative slope towards the end because we do not have any non-censored
points to fit to specifically. In this case, the trend of the second function, f1, is in-
creasing, which in turn yields a positive slope towards the end. We can also see that
for the second time series, we can quite accurately determine the correct function, as
the censored likelihood distinguishes between censored and non-censored observation
using the mixture described in Section 2.2. We do, however, disregard this function
slightly, as we are mainly interested in seeing the impact on the primary function
when modelling them simultaneously.
We can further look at the case of pc = 0.5, where we previously saw poor perfor-
mance around the censored peaks. Figure 3.13 showcase the predicted means and
uncertainties tied to this experiment.
We see a significant effect when correlating on a second time-series, as now the pre-
dicted mean is no longer a constant linear function as it fits rather nicely to the
==PAGE:55==
3.1 Synthetic data
43
Figure 3.13: Multi-output Censored GP with pc = 0.5.
non-censored observations and we see a behaviour change around the peaks. The
mean prediction is, however, by no means perfect, as this amount of censoring still
causes issues in estimating the true underlying function. The confidence interval aris-
ing from the samples of the posterior (brown) indicates that there is some uncertainty
tied to the mean, showcasing that in this extreme censoring case, it is still hard to
overcome the censoring problem and uncovering the true function. It also seems that
in the third peak we get a fit that seems to be fitting slightly to the censored obser-
vations, as we get somewhat of a ”sink” here. This is likely caused by the correlation
between the highly censored points and the second output dimension. Previously, we
saw that the CGP obtained a low RMSE when dealing with a very high amount of
censoring (pc = 0.8), and in this multi-output experiment, we actually see the same
trend, while also achieving worse results in terms of NLPD.
Figure 3.14: Multi-output Censored GP with 0.8 Censoring
The results are summarized in Table 3.3, which shows an improvement compared to
the CGP in terms of RMSE on lower censoring intensities, with a slight deterioration
when dealing with excessive censoring levels. The accuracy in the estimated posterior
(NLPD) is declining as the amount of censoring increases and performs worse than the
CGP for higher degrees of censoring. The performance reported here is only measured
on the first output dimension, in order to compare with the previous 1-dimensional
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Experiments & Discussion
models.
Censoring (pc):
0.2
0.5
0.8
SGP
RMSE
1.3766
1.8131
1.7393
NLPD
3.0918
5.2277
10.1558
CGP
RMSE
0.6149
0.7640
0.5753
NLPD
1.7057
3.1462
4.9547
MCGP
RMSE
0.4132
0.6470
0.4495
NLPD
1.3887
3.4008
5.2121
Table 3.3: Results on the synthetic data using Multi-output censored GP
In general, this shows the added benefit of using a second correlated time series,
as it can help overcome some censoring issues, but in general, the model is having
difficulties in terms of how much it has to account for the censoring, and we see that
the correlation can also impact the predicted mean negatively, which was illustrated in
the case where pc = 0.8. Obviously, this is a created example, in which we deliberately
censor every observation in the peaks of the function. In reality, there is not going to
be such a clear distinction between the areas of censoring and non-censoring, which
could also influence the performance of the model and consequently, the estimated
posterior distribution. We will determine if we can achieve better results if we model
the variance in the data more accurately to see if we can get more consistent results
across different censoring intensities.
3.1.4
Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored GP
We now turn to the full model, which includes each of the submodules previously
explained. The implemented model was applied to a similar problem as above, i.e. a
Multi-output problem, in which we now want to explicitly estimate the noise at each
input, which is generated from 2 distinct processes. To avoid noisy estimates of the
variance, we impose a squared exponential kernel and increase the number of samples
for the ELBO estimates. This was found, through experiments, to be a reasonable
approach, such that we avoid noisy samples as inference became increasingly difficult
in this particular model, most likely stemming from that fact that we have additional
parameters for each of the variance that we want to model. Figure 3.15 shows the
estimated mean when applied to the experiment with pc = 0.2.
The plot clearly indicates that by including heteroscedasticity, we can showcase the
uncertainty tied to different observations at each time step. The first time series has
an increasing noise over the interval [0, 10], and we can clearly see that the model is
able to capture this trend. In the areas where the observations are non-censored, there
is little uncertainty, where the censored regions are tied to a much more considerable
amount of ambiguity. Further, if we look at the right plot in Figure 3.15, we see that
we can model the decreasing noise trend very accurately. This time series contained
==PAGE:57==
3.1 Synthetic data
45
Figure 3.15: Heteroscedastic Multi-Output Censored GP with pc = 0.2.
no censored observations and thus shows how we allow input-dependant noise and
that much of the uncertainty is tied within the censored observations. Figure 3.16
explicitly shows the estimated variance, along with the variance from which the noise
was created, which allows us to compare the estimates to the ground truth.
Figure 3.16: Estimated noise vs true noise
This clearly shows how the model is able to learn input specific noise and deviate
from the constant noise in the standard GP implementation.
From the left plot,
we notice the clear peaks in the variance, that arise from the regions of censored
observation. In the right part of the figure, we get an estimate that follows the actual
noise very clearly, only deviating slightly.
This allows us to provide much better
estimates of the posterior distribution, which is also illustrated in Table 3.4, where
we see a significant increase in terms of RMSE and NLPD. This means that we obtain
a more accurate posterior distribution, as well as a much better estimate of the true
underlying function we are interested in.
It turns out that this model also relieves some of the issues caused by higher degrees
of censoring, revealing a much more accurate estimate of the predictive mean, shown
in Figure 3.17 and 3.18. It is still clear that the uncertainty is increasingly high in
the censored regions (as expected), but the estimated mean is more accurate. Similar
variance plots are available for these experiments in Appendix B along with a side-
==PAGE:58==
46
3 Experiments & Discussion
by-side comparison of all the models.
Figure 3.17: Heteroscedastic Multi-Output Censored GP with pc = 0.5.
Figure 3.18: Heteroscedastic Multi-Output Censored GP with pc = 0.8
The full model in this synthetic data setting highlights how we can utilize a censored
likelihood to account for censored observations, utilize the correlation between time
series to further help overcome the censoring and introduce input-dependant noise
to properly model the variance, which in turn helps us to adjust for the censoring.
Table 3.4 summarize all the results obtained on the synthetic data, and illustrates
how each of the components increases the performance. By comparing within the
same censoring intensity level, we see that the Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored
Gaussian Process obtains leading results across the board, both in terms of RMSE
and NLPD, only being outperformed slightly by the MCGP in one of the experiments
when using the RMSE as the measure. In this case, the HMCGP still obtains a much
better estimate of the posterior distribution. These findings are also illustrated in
Figure 3.19. We also note that the standard Gaussian Process is getting outperformed
by all the other implemented models, which also illuminate the fact that it is not a
reasonable modelling approach when dealing with highly censored data as well as
data that is subject to different levels of noise.
As mentioned, the data was constructed such that we could showcase a clear improve-
ment by implementing these GP extensions, and we will now turn to a ”real-life” case,
==PAGE:59==
3.1 Synthetic data
47
Censoring (pc):
0.2
0.5
0.8
RMSE
SGP
1.3766
1.8131
1.7393
CGP
0.6149
0.7640
0.5753
MCGP
0.4132
0.6470
0.4495
HMCGP
0.4256
0.5882
0.3908
NLPD
SGP
3.0918
5.2277
10.1558
CGP
1.7057
3.1462
4.9547
MCGP
1.3887
3.4008
5.2121
HMCGP
1.2159
2.2848
0.3679
Table 3.4: All results on the synthetic data (RMSE and NLPD is only calculated on
the first time series to make results comparable). Best results are in bold.
Figure 3.19: Performance of each of the models on the synthetic data
where we shall apply the same methods to determine how well these models behave
on more practical data.
==PAGE:60==
48
3 Experiments & Discussion
3.2
Donkey Republic data
The Donkey Republic data set consists of several features in which we have to do
some aggregation to obtain the time series that we want to model. The data has
been collected from March 1st 2018 until April 2nd, 2019, giving us a total of 398
days worth of data observations. The most important features are :
• Hub availability: Info about the bike availability in each of the hubs.
• Hubs: Info about the hubs, such as ID and location.
• Rentals: Timestamps of all the bike pick-ups from each hub.
In order to generate the demand for bikes, we can aggregate the rentals to find the
demand for each hub. However, the data for the individual hubs is very noisy and
fluctuates massively. To provide a reasonable demand, we instead look at the demand
for larger areas within Copenhagen. As such, we choose an area with a radius of 200
meters and look at the overall demand within this Super-hub.
Figure 3.20: Map of locations of the super-hubs. Note that the scale of the super-hub
area is not accurate, but merely for illustration purposes.
The 200-meter radius was chosen based on the assumption that people will typically
walk a maximum of 200 meters to find a bike. In order to generate the demand,
==PAGE:61==
3.2 Donkey Republic data
49
we pick central spots around the city and determine which of the minor hubs are
contained within this area.
Each of the demand for the smaller hubs can then be aggregated into the full demand
for the area, on a day to day basis. Figure 3.20 shows the selected areas, where the
black circle around Nørreport Station is treated as the main area we want to model,
whereas the others are areas on which we can correlate when using the Multi GP. The
corresponding zones are:
• Super-hub 1: Nørreport Station (Black)
• Super-hub 2: Hovedbanegården (Orange)
• Super-hub 3: Kongens Nytorv (Red)
• Super-hub 4: Rådhuspladsen (Green)
• Super-hub 5: Runde Tårn (Blue)
The areas are chosen based on the fact that they acts as central transportation hubs
in Copenhagen, with each of them having a high number of people passing through
on a given day.
The demand for the super-hubs then act as the target in our GP model, but there
is some censoring we have to take into account as well. As the demand for each hub
is the only historical data we have available, we do not know how much this is in
fact, censored. To handle this, we treat the observed demand as the true demand,
i.e. the non-censored demand. This is done to validate the censored models, as we
do not have access to the true demand. For the experiments, we manually censor
some observations as in the synthetic experiments, but we can make an assumption
as to which observations are censored. As the provided data contains the availability
of bikes in each of the hubs, we can determine if, at any point during the day, there
were 0 bikes available, i.e. the supply of bikes is 0. This will help us determine the
hubs in which there were no available bikes, and thus there is a potential demand
that we cannot see in the historical data. To incorporate this into the super-hub
framework, we define a censored observation as the following:
• Observation yi is censored if, at any point during day i, there were 0 bikes
available in each of the smaller hubs contained within the super-hub.
This allows us to label the censored observations such that we can utilize the censored
likelihood as previously described.
As in the synthetic data experiment, we can
now experiment with different censoring intensities. Figure 3.21 shows the demand
for super-hub 1 around Nørreport, which is the main area we are interested in and
Figure 3.22 shows an example after censoring.
This time series exhibits a much
more fluctuating behaviour compared to the synthetic data, and we also notice the
==PAGE:62==
50
3 Experiments & Discussion
Figure 3.21: The censored and non-censored observations in the Super-hub 1. The
y-axis represent the demand and the x-axis represent the days.
Figure 3.22: Demand around Nørreport after manual censoring and standardization.
The dashed gray line represent the true demand that we want to model.
fluctuations in the noise, meaning that the heteroscedastic extension should help us
model these more precisely.
As in the synthetic experiments, we standardize the data to fit the zero mean as-
sumption in a Gaussian Process. We will now show the performance of each of the
implemented models. Since the data consists of rentals per day, we expect that there
is a weekly repeating trend in terms of demand. To model this, the imposed kernel
is a combination between a RBF kernel and a periodic kernel,
k (x, x′) = kSE (x, x′) + kP er (x, x′) .
(3.6)
The periodic kernel is explained in detail in Appendix A.3. All results are reported
by repeating each experiment 5 times and averaging.
==PAGE:63==
3.2 Donkey Republic data
51
3.2.1
Standard GP
As is the case with most real-life data, the problem we are now modelling becomes
increasingly complicated. For instance, the amount of points has increased by a factor
of 4 compared to the synthetic data, and we no longer have a clear distinction between
censored and non-censored observations, as we had in the peaks of the sinusoidal
function.
This also means that inference becomes increasingly difficult, which resulted in much
longer training time in order to achieve convergence. Specifically, we ran a minimum
of 10000 epochs even for the less complex models (SGP and CGP), and again decaying
the learning rate over the course of training. We also had to increase the number of
samples to form the gradient estimators, as it was highly unstable on lower values,
giving very noisy estimates. This also increased the computation time significantly.
The results are graphically shown in Figures 3.26, 3.27 and 3.28.
Figure 3.23: SGP: Censoring pc = 0.2
Figure 3.24: SGP: Censoring pc = 0.5
Figure 3.25: SGP: Censoring pc = 0.8
In this case, it is hard to extract information about how well the model fits just by
looking at it graphically. Still, we immediately notice the effect of the kernel sum
between the squared exponential and the periodic kernel, giving us a very ”spikey”
==PAGE:64==
52
3 Experiments & Discussion
mean estimate. As previously, the variance estimate is constant over the inputs. We
see that the uncertainty increases as pc increases, which also makes sense as we a
trying to fit more extreme values.
We again see the drawback of the SGP, particularly in the case where pc = 0.8, as
we essentially end up with a fit of the mean which is between the censored and non-
censored observation. When comparing to the ”true” demand, which is represented
by the grey line, we end up in a much worse place. This is also reflected in Table 3.5,
where the Root Mean Squared Error increases with the amount of censoring.
Censoring (pc):
0.2
0.5
0.8
SGP
RMSE
0.7122
1.0789
1.2573
NLPD
1.3326
2.0531
2.0177
Table 3.5: RMSE and NLPD of the standard GP using various censoring intensities
on the DR data.
This again summarises the general issue that the standard GP has with censored
data, namely that it is biased towards the observations because it does not know
which observations are censored vs non-censored. As such, we see decent predictions
when we are dealing with low censoring intensities, but when increasing the censoring
amount, the model falls off quite significantly.
3.2.2
Censored GP
Turning to the Censored GP model with censored likelihood, we expect to see much
better handling of the censored observations, and less of an impact when increasing
the amount of censorship. We again use the kernel sum in Equation 3.6 to handle
the weekly trends. Results are illustrated in the Figures 3.26, 3.27 and 3.28.
Comparing this to the SGP, we see a much more streamlined predictive mean, as we
do not see the same bias towards the censored observation when increasing pc, but
rather a fit that is situated nicely around the non-censored observations. As a result,
we obtain much better estimates of the mean across the different intensities.
Censoring (pc):
0.2
0.5
0.8
SGP
RMSE
0.7122
1.0789
1.2573
NLPD
1.3326
2.0531
2.0177
SGP
RMSE
0.6640
0.8177
0.7603
NLPD
1.2701
1.7356
1.7880
Table 3.6: RMSE and NLPD of the censored GP using various censoring intensities
on the DR data.
Better results are still obtained on the lower censorship levels, but there is a signif-
icantly smaller span in the mean error, showcasing that the model can also handle
==PAGE:65==
3.2 Donkey Republic data
53
Figure 3.26: CGP: Censoring pc = 0.2
Figure 3.27: CGP: Censoring pc = 0.5
Figure 3.28: CGP: Censoring pc = 0.8
extreme censorship values and obtain an excellent fit to the data. This is consistent
with what we saw in the synthetic data experiment, where the CGP actually per-
formed very well on the highest censoring intensity. This indicates that the CGP is
able to perform on censored data tasks consistently, and thus it serves as a way to
circumvent the bias that the censored observations employ in the standard Gaussian
Process.
3.2.3
Multi-output Censored GP
In the multi-output case, we want to highlight that we can increase the performance by
correlating on different zones. An assumption here is the fact that the more correlated
two time-series are, the better estimates we should be able to obtain when modelling
them together. Further, if we at observation yi have a censored observation in time
series 1, but a non-censored observation in time series 2, it should be more comfortable
for the model to overcome the censoring, as censored observations are inherently
uncertain. As such, experiments are conducted for different areas around Copenhagen,
each of which are correlated differently to the main area around Nørreport, and
==PAGE:66==
54
3 Experiments & Discussion
each has a different censoring overlap. This overlap is explained as the number of
observations that are censored in both time series 1 and 2 at the same point in
time, out of the total observation count (398). This yields results based on different
amounts of correlation and censoring overlap.
MCGP
Zones
Super-hub 2
Super-hub 3
Super-hub 4
Super-hub 5
Correlation
0.5570
0.7254
0.7519
0.7062
Overlap
28.47%
27.23%
25.37%
23.36%
Evaluation
RMSE
NLPD
RMSE
NLPD
RMSE
NLPD
RMSE
NLPD
pc
0.2
0.4857
1.0555
0.4591
0.9553
0.4416
0.9754
0.4792
1.0202
0.5
0.6975
1.7758
0.6521
1.6730
0.6504
1.6443
0.6951
1.6602
0.8
0.6958
1.8952
0.6310
1.7812
0.6391
1.7130
0.6427
1.7111
Table 3.7: All results are produced by looking at the RMSE and NLPD for the Super-
hub 1 only, and the other time series are only being modelled in a multi-output setting,
and their error is disregarded. Best results are shown in bold, when comparing within
the same censorship level.
Table 3.7 shows the corresponding RMSE and NLPD for each experiment on the four
areas along with the correlation between the demand in Super-hub 1 and the corre-
sponding zone. This interestingly shows that for super-hub 2, we have a Spearman
correlation of 0.5570, which is the lowest among the chosen zones. When modelling
this along with Nørreport, we obtain the worst results out of all the zones, for all cen-
soring intensities. This shows the obvious effect that the amount of correlation has
on the predicted mean. Further, the remaining three zones each have a correlation of
over 0.7 with the main area. Super-hub 4 has the highest correlation, but it does not
achieve the best results across all censoring intensities. It obtains the best RMSE for
pc = 0.2 and the best results for pc = 0.5. So we cannot definitely say that higher
correlation yields better estimates, as the amount of censoring overlap also impacts
the results.
Figure 3.29: Performance of MCGP using different super-hubs
==PAGE:67==
3.2 Donkey Republic data
55
We can, however, see a general trend, namely that all the zones with high correlation
achieve better results, showcasing the strength of the Multi-output GP. One could
also have included all of the zones at the same time, resulting in a GP that models
five outputs simultaneously, but this experiment has not been conducted within this
thesis. The obtained results are also illustrated in figure 3.29.
These experiments show that when modelling two highly correlated time series, we
can better overcome the censoring in the data, yielding better results compared to
zones with lower correlation. When correlating on Super-hub 4 (Rådhuspladsen) we
saw the best results in 2 out of 3 censoring intensities. For completeness, graphic
illustrations of each experiment are included in Appendix B.2.
3.2.4
Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored GP
As for the Multi-output GP, we have the same zones included in the Heteroscedastic
Multi-output Censored GP. In this case, the problem becomes very complicated, as
we essentially have 2 times 398 pairs of (xi, yi), a GP prior on f as well as on g
which models the variance. Since we are dealing with a multi-output scenario, we
actually have g1 and g2, each modelling the respective variance in the different outputs
independently. This is quite a few more parameters that we have to estimate during
inference, and it also proved to be challenging. Several experiments were done to
determine suitable values of the hyper-parameters to ensure convergence of the ELBO,
and it turned out that we had to be significantly more ”aggressive” when choosing
the number of samples to form the gradient estimates. If this was not done, we would
almost always get noisy estimates of g2, which did not coincide with the choice of
RBF kernel that should contain smoothness, but surprisingly, we would obtain decent
estimates of g1. The general workaround was to increase the number of samples, but
this was obviously a trade-off with computational time, as most of the experiments
ended up running for more than 20 hours. An overview of the results can be found
in Table 3.8.
HMCGP
Zones
Super-hub 2
Super-hub 3
Super-hub 4
Super-hub 5
Correlation
0.5570
0.7254
0.7519
0.7062
Overlap
28.47%
27.23%
25.37%
23.36%
Evaluation
RMSE
NLPD
RMSE
NLPD
RMSE
NLPD
RMSE
NLPD
pc
0.2
0.6373
1.0660
0.6218
1.0725
0.6336
1.0688
0.6059
1.0347
0.5
0.8472
1.5999
0.8427
1.5972
0.7941
1.5573
0.7994
1.5738
0.8
0.7965
1.6276
0.7988
1.6341
0.7525
1.5731
0.7434
1.5775
Table 3.8: HMCGP results for different areas along with correlation and censoring
overlap.
To provide insights into the learned uncertainty estimates, which here depend on the
inputs, Figure 3.30 shows a data fit for Super-hub 5, which provided the best results
on pc = 0.2. When comparing this fit to that of the standalone Multi-output Censored
==PAGE:68==
56
3 Experiments & Discussion
GP, we see a much less volatile mean prediction for Super-hub 1. We further see how
nicely we can determine the uncertainty in different time steps and areas in which
the observations are very condensed shows signs of very low uncertainties.
Figure 3.30: Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored GP with pc = 0.2, showing
Super-hub 1 (left) and Super-hub 5 (right).
For the synthetic data, we manually added noise which was generated from a prede-
fined noise level, such that we can inspect the learned variance and see how well we
estimated it. This is not the case for the Donkey Republic data, as the demand is
not subject to a predefined noise pattern. We do, however, know, that in the last
couple of days of this data, Donkey Republic changed its payment method, resulting
in much higher demand in all the zones. This can be seen in both of the plots in
Figure 3.30, where the demand hits a peak during the last few days. Our model is
able to pick up this fluctuation when estimating the variance, seen in Figure 3.31.
Figure 3.31: Noise estimates for Super-hub 1 (left) and Super-hub 5 (right).
Here we see that we can correctly estimate the high amount of variance in the end,
with each time series having a similarly high variance in the middle of the time series,
which is most likely caused by the fact that the majority of the censored observations
are located within this area, along with noise non-censored observations.
==PAGE:69==
3.2 Donkey Republic data
57
In this model, we also see that we cannot definitively determine a pattern between
the amount of correlation between time series and the predictive performance, but
we again see that the best results are obtained in the hubs that have correlations
in the larger end of the scale. In order to make a comparison between the SGP, the
CGP, the MCGP and the HMCGP, we will include the results for the best performing
Super-hub, which on average is Super-hub 4, since we obtained good results both in
the Multi Censored GP and in the Heteroscedastic Multi Censored GP. As such Table
3.9 shows the performance of each model, only including the results when correlating
on Super-hub 4 for the MCGP and HMCGP.
Censoring (pc):
0.2
0.5
0.8
RMSE
SGP
0.7122
1.0789
1.2573
CGP
0.6640
0.8177
0.7603
MCGP
0.4416
0.6504
0.6391
HMCGP
0.6336
0.7941
0.7525
NLPD
SGP
1.3326
2.0531
2.0177
CGP
1.2701
1.7356
1.7880
MCGP
0.9754
1.6443
1.7130
HMCGP
1.0688
1.5573
1.5731
Table 3.9: All results on the Donkey Republic bike rental data. Best results are in
bold.
Interestingly, we see that the Multi-Output Censored GP obtains the lowest RMSE
across all censoring intensities, and also the best results in terms of NLPD when
pc = 0.2. For the higher intensities, we see that the HMCGP estimates a much more
accurate posterior, which is what we would expect to happen across the board. The
reasoning behind this is likely to be found in the inference, as the HMCGP was very
difficult to optimize properly. We previously mentioned the less volatile nature of
the mean prediction in the HMCGP, compared to MCGP, and this is likely caused
by the fact that the learned length scale in the MCGP is much lower than the one
obtained in the HMCGP. This definitely means that more work in terms of the hyper-
parameters could be done in the HMCGP. We do, however, note that the nature of
the input-dependant noise in the HMCGP is extremely valuable since we can provide
much more precise estimates of how uncertain we are of the predicted mean in differ-
ent time steps.
In general, we see that a standard GP yields unsatisfactory results when we are
dealing with censored data, thus emphasizing the need for these extended models.
Further, we see that there is a significant gain when introducing multiple outputs, as
this significantly increases the estimate of the actual underlying function. By adding
an input dependant variance, we do not get an as definite improvement in terms of
performance as we saw in the synthetic experiments, but we note that we still achieve
a richer posterior distribution on higher censoring levels. We do however have to keep
==PAGE:70==
58
3 Experiments & Discussion
Figure 3.32: Performance of the different models on the Donkey Republic data
in mind that the full model is much more complex and thus it becomes increasingly
difficult to optimize during inference, which can also be a factor that determines how
well the models performs. However, we have shown how the implemented models
work, not only on synthetically generated data but also on a ”real-life” data example.
We see a notable performance increase compared to the standard Gaussian Process,
and we again emphasize how multi-output, as well as heteroscedasticity, allow better
predictions in terms of how much we must adjust for the censoring.
3.3
Generalized Censored GP
To show how one can generalize the concept of censoring to other distributions, we
will test the developed Gaussian Process with a Poisson censored likelihood in a few
simple scenarios. The approach is very similar to what we saw in Section 3.1, as
we correspondingly generate a synthetic time series. This time, we are interested
in modelling counts, i.e.
integer counts over time.
We again choose a sinusoidal
function such that we can capture variations in the function, but we must ensure
that an outcome is a whole number. As such, the function from which our targets
were generated is defined as
f(x) = ⌊10 sin(1
2x) + 11⌋
(3.7)
where ⌊·⌋is the flooring to the nearest integer. In this case, x was given by 50 equidis-
tant points on the interval [0, 20]. This ensured that we had a positive functional
value at all inputs, as well as a function that resembles the one used for the censored
Gaussian experiments. We again manually censor points in the peak of the function
to have an example of censored data in which the Probit likelihood term can show
its stability. Figure 3.33 represents the time series after censoring, depicting the cen-
sored and non-censored observations respectively; however, this is just an example, as
we, similarly to the previous synthetic experiments, will perform tests with different
==PAGE:71==
3.3 Generalized Censored GP
59
censoring intensities.
Figure 3.33: Synthetic data for the Poisson censored GP
As was the case in the previous experiments we have shown, we want to express the
importance that the censored likelihood term has on the estimated function. As such,
we will compare the results to a Gaussian Process which incorporates a pure Poisson
likelihood, to explicitly see the effect of the Probit likelihood term. In terms of the
model itself, we will use the softplus link function as described in Section 2.6, and
impose an RBF kernel as the covariance function. Figure 3.34 shows the results of
the implemented modules.
We once again see the impact of the Probit likelihood. In the left, the Poisson likeli-
hood favours functions that explicitly pass through the observed values, even though
they are censored. This creates a clear bias, as it yields very poor performance when
comparing to the actual underlying function. The censored Poisson however, shows
us that we can obtain estimates that are not biased towards the censored observations,
but rather obtain a smooth mean that takes the censored observations into consider-
ation, which yields estimates that closely resembles that of the true function, with
a slight overestimation. We also note how the uncertainty behaves when using the
Poisson likelihood. Since the Poisson distribution models an equidispersed random
variable, i.e. the variance is equal to the mean, we obtain uncertainties that increase
with larger predicted mean. This was not the case for the standard Gaussian Process,
as we only received a single estimate of the variance, thus it was constant. In this
scenario, the mean and variance are intertwined. This means that we can potentially
obtain major uncertainty intervals if we are modelling a time series consisting of large
==PAGE:72==
60
3 Experiments & Discussion
Figure 3.34: Generalized Gaussian Process with a Poisson likelihood and a censored
Poisson likelihood respectively, using pc = 0.2.
dependent values.
Further experiments was also conducted with other censoring intensities, where Figure
3.35 and Figure 3.36 shows the results in the case of pc = 0.5 and pc = 0.8 respectively.
Figure 3.35: Generalized Gaussian Process using pc = 0.5.
Here we see similar trends as previously; namely, that censored Poisson does a way
better job at accounting for the censored observations. If we look more closely at
Figure 3.36, we actually see that the predicted mean in the censored Poisson does
not actually undercover the peaks of the true function, but rather somewhat constant
values across the peaks. This is most likely due to the fact that the observed cen-
sored values are rather constant, which is caused by the fact that we are rounding
when manually censoring the observations, such that yi = ⌊(1−pc,i)y∗
i ⌋. We do, how-
ever, still obtain a predicted mean that is not severely biased towards the censored
observations as we do in the standard Poisson likelihood.
==PAGE:73==
3.3 Generalized Censored GP
61
Figure 3.36: Generalized Gaussian Process using pc = 0.8.
Table 3.10 summarizes the obtained results in terms of RMSE and NLPD for each
experiment.
Censoring (pc):
0.2
0.5
0.8
RMSE
Poisson GP
3.4382
6.4183
9.7484
Censored Poisson GP
1.0109
2.5669
5.2079
NLPD
Poisson GP
2.4920
3.8442
9.3098
Censored Poisson GP
1.5017
2.0964
2.9917
Table 3.10: Results for the generalized GP using Poisson and censored Poisson
These results are encouraging as we again see how much better the censored version
performs on highly censored data, and this again emphasizes the effectiveness of the
censored likelihood.
Extensive research into the capabilities of this model has not been conducted due to
time constraints, but this type of model would have been more accurate to use on
the Donkey Republic data, as we are modelling discrete demand counts. Nonetheless,
these results provide a proof of concept solution as to how one can extend the cen-
soring concept to the Poisson distribution, but also shows that it is, in fact, a very
general solution. This is because we only have to change the observational likelihood
to the desired distribution by utilizing the cumulative distribution function and the
probability mass function/probability density function, depending on the nature of
the random variable one wants to model.
In general, we have shown a simple brief example in which we showcase a gener-
alization of censored GP models and confirm that this model is also able to more
accurately estimate the underlying function, without being biased by the censored
observations.
==PAGE:74==
62
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 4
Conclusion
This thesis presented a variety of different extensions to the classic Gaussian Process,
in order to model time series data, more specifically in a transportation setting. We
have shown, both in a synthetic experiment, but also a real-life experiment, that one
must account for censoring when it is prevalent in the data because we usually end
up underestimating the amount of demand at some time t. In the experiments, we
saw a significant increase when moving from the SGP to the CGP, highlighting the
strength of this type of likelihood. For three different levels of censoring intensity,
we saw that the censored GP is not biased towards the censored observations, but
instead predicts means that are closer to the non-censored values, thus avoiding a
consistent underestimation of the underlying demand. There is, however, some issues
with the model determining exactly how much to account for the censoring, which
is also represented by the high uncertainty in the areas where we have a lot of the
censored observations. Even so, the CGP does a superior job compared to the SGP,
which indicates that the first contribution mentioned in Section 1.2 is justified.
We also implemented a Multi-output Gaussian Process, in which we, together with
the censored likelihood, can more accurately estimate the underlying demand, as we
showed that we could leverage correlations between different, but related time series,
in order to help overcome the censoring problem. In the synthetic case, we saw how
the second time-series increased the performance when only looking at error rates for
the first time series, and in general, generate a much more rich and accurate posterior
probability. The added output provides us with more information as to how the data
behaves, and this can give better predictions when we are dealing with missing data
or noisy data. In the experiments on the Donkey Republic data, several different
demand areas were investigated to see if we could determine a direct link between
the amount of correlation between the time series and the performance increase. In
general, we had three areas which had a higher amount of correlation (Super-hub 3, 4
and 5). Each of these hubs generated the best results, showing us that we can, in fact,
exploit the correlation and relationship between multiple outputs. This showed an
increase in performance compared to the Censored GP, highlighting that the Multi-
output GP can help us overcome the censoring problem further.
Additionally, we implemented the full Heteroscedastic Multi-output Censored GP, in
which we explicitly add input-dependant noise. Here we placed a GP prior on the
==PAGE:76==
64
4 Conclusion
function g and parameterized it using the exponential function to ensure positivity.
During the synthetic experiments, we added a linearly increasing noise during the
data generation, and we saw that we were able to recover a similar pattern when
estimating the noise during inference. We further recognized that the noise level is
much lower in the areas with non-censored observations and higher in the censored
regions, which makes sense seeing as the model is not aware of how much to account
for the censoring, but simply favours smooth functions because of the chosen RBF
kernel. However, adding the heteroscedasticity into the model allows us to model the
variance in the data accurately, which in turn helps us to adjust for the censoring.
This is also reflected in the results, as the HMCGP achieved the lowest error and the
most accurate posterior across the different censoring intensities. In the Donkey Re-
public data, this proved to be a highly complex problem, as the amount of additional
data caused difficulties during inference. We did, however, find some values in which
we achieve decent results, but in this case, there is not as clear a distinction between
censored/non-censoring regions in the time series. On this data, the HMCGP still
provide the richest posterior, but the experiments also showed that the multi-output
GP produced better mean estimates in terms of RMSE.
Furthermore, we have demonstrated a generalization of the censored GP to the Pois-
son distribution, and through an experiment we have shown that this model is also
able to recover the true function of the censored data much more appropriately com-
pared to a model using a non-censored likelihood. There is definitely need for more
exhaustive experiments with this model, as we have only just touched upon the sur-
face, which is why this only serves as a proof of concept solution.
Finally, through the series of conducted experiments, we have shown why one must
account for censoring in data sets. We have developed several ways in which we can
increase the mean estimate of a Gaussian Process, all revolving around the censored
likelihood. The multi-output and the heteroscedasticity extensions helps us to more
accurately determine how much we must adjust for this censoring problem and thus
generally provide better results.
Overall, we have seen the effectiveness of these
extensions in practice, both synthetically and on real data, and showed that they do
provide better predictive performance as well as better uncertainty estimates, giving
them an advantage over the standard Gaussian Process. We conclude this thesis by
highlighting some of the areas which should be explored further as well as possible
future extensions.
4.1
Future Work
During the work on the thesis, several new ideas have come to life, which will be
addressed for future work.
• Further investigate the multi-output GP by using more than 2 output dimen-
==PAGE:77==
4.1 Future Work
65
sions, as this could possibly achieve better results.
• Further research in the censored Poisson GP, as well as comparisons in perfor-
mance versus the censored Gaussian likelihood.
• Extend the generalized censored Gaussian Process to include Multi-output and
provide more exhaustive experiments to determine the viability of the censored
Poisson likelihood.
==PAGE:78==
66
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A
Technical Appendix
A.1
Conditional Gaussian Distribution
If have two sets of varibles that are jointly Gaussian, then the conditional distribution
of one of them, conditioned on the other is also Gaussian [4]. We consider the vector
x given by N(x|µ, Σ) and a partitioning of x into the 2 subsets xa and xb, such that
x =
 xa
xb

.
(A.1)
We similarly partition the mean and the covariance matrix,
µ =
 µa
µb

,
Σ =
 Σaa
Σab
Σba
Σbb

.
(A.2)
Finally, we also define the inverse of the covariance matrix Λ, partitioned such that
Λ =
 Λaa
Λab
Λba
Λbb

.
(A.3)
The conditional p(xa|xb) is then given in terms of µa|b and Σa|b, defined as
µa|b = µa + ΣabΣ−1
bb (xb −µb)
Σa|b = Σaa −ΣabΣ−1
bb Σba.
(A.4)
A.2
Marginal Gaussian Distribution
Given a marginal Gaussian distribution for x, and a conditional Gaussian distribution
for y given x, in the form
p(x) = N
 x|µ, Λ−1
,
(A.5)
p(y|x) = N
 y|Ax + b, L−1
,
(A.6)
the marginal distribution of y and the conditional distribution of x given y, are given
by
==PAGE:80==
68
A Technical Appendix
p(y) = N
 y|Aµ + b, L−1 + AΛ−1AT
(A.7)
p(x|y) = N
 x|Σ

ATL(y −b) + Λµ
	
, Σ

(A.8)
with Σ =
 Λ + ATLA
−1.
A.3
Various other kernels
Rational Quadratic Kernel
The Rational Quadratic Kernel is defined as
kRQ (x, x′) = σ2
 
1 + (x −x′)2
2αℓ2
!−α
,
(A.9)
where α is the relative weighting of large-scale and small-scale variations. If α goes to
infinity the kernel mimics the squared exponential. This kernel is equivalent of adding
many squared exponential kernels together, with different length scales, which in turn
puts a prior on functions that are smooth, across all of the length scales.
Figure A.1: Samples from the Rational Quadratic Kernel with ℓ= 1 and α = 1
Periodic Kernel
The Periodic Kernel is defined as
kPer (x, x′) = σ2 exp

−2 sin2 (π |x −x′| /p)
ℓ2

,
(A.10)
where p defines the distance between the repetitions on functions. This kernel is used
when modelling functions that repeat themselves, such a sine functions etc.
==PAGE:81==
A.3 Various other kernels
69
Figure A.2: Samples from the Periodic Kernel with ℓ= 1 and p = 2
Combining kernels
We can further combine kernels, where adding acts as an ”OR” operator and multi-
plying acts as an ”AND” operator. An example is the Local Periodic Kernel, which
multiplies a squared exponential kernel and a periodic kernel.
kLocalPer (x, x′) = kPer (x, x′) kSE (x, x′)
(A.11)
= σ2 exp

−2 sin2 (π |x −x′| p)
ℓ2p

exp
 
−(x −x′)2
2ℓ2
SE
!
(A.12)
The resulting samples from this kernel is seen in Figure A.3.
Figure A.3: Samples from the Local Periodic Kernel with ℓSE = 3, ℓp = 1 and p = 1
==PAGE:82==
70
==PAGE:83==
APPENDIX B
Additional results
B.1
Synthetic
B.1.1
HMCGP
Variance estimates for 0.5 and 0.8 censoring
Figure B.1: Estimated noise vs true noise (0.5 Censoring)
Figure B.2: Estimated noise vs true noise (0.8 Censoring)
==PAGE:84==
72
B Additional results
B.1.2
Grid of all results
pc = 0.2
pc = 0.5
pc = 0.8
SGP
CGP
MCGP
HMCGP
Figure B.3: Grid results
==PAGE:85==
B.2 DR data
73
B.2
DR data
B.2.1
MCGP
Super-hub 2
Figure B.4: Super-hub 2: pc = 0.2
Figure B.5: Super-hub 2: pc = 0.5
Figure B.6: Super-hub 2: pc = 0.8
==PAGE:86==
74
B Additional results
Super-hub 3
Figure B.7: Super-hub 3: pc = 0.2
Figure B.8: Super-hub 3: pc = 0.5
Figure B.9: Super-hub 3: pc = 0.8
==PAGE:87==
B.2 DR data
75
Super-hub 4
Figure B.10: Super-hub 4: pc = 0.2
Figure B.11: Super-hub 4: pc = 0.5
Figure B.12: Super-hub 4: pc = 0.8
==PAGE:88==
76
B Additional results
Super-hub 5
Figure B.13: Super-hub 5: pc = 0.2
Figure B.14: Super-hub 5: pc = 0.5
Figure B.15: Super-hub 5: pc = 0.8
==PAGE:89==
B.2 DR data
77
B.2.2
HMCGP
Super-hub 2
Figure B.16: Super-hub 2: pc = 0.2
Figure B.17: Super-hub 2: pc = 0.5
==PAGE:90==
78
B Additional results
Figure B.18: Super-hub 2: pc = 0.8
==PAGE:91==
B.2 DR data
79
Super-hub 3
Figure B.19: Super-hub 3: pc = 0.2
Figure B.20: Super-hub 3: pc = 0.5
==PAGE:92==
80
B Additional results
Figure B.21: Super-hub 3: pc = 0.8
==PAGE:93==
B.2 DR data
81
Super-hub 4
Figure B.22: Super-hub 4: pc = 0.2
Figure B.23: Super-hub 4: pc = 0.5
==PAGE:94==
82
B Additional results
Figure B.24: Super-hub 4: pc = 0.8
==PAGE:95==
B.2 DR data
83
Super-hub 5
Figure B.25: Super-hub 5: pc = 0.2
Figure B.26: Super-hub 5: pc = 0.5
==PAGE:96==
84
B Additional results
Figure B.27: Super-hub 5: pc = 0.8
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1]
Mauricio A. Álvarez and Neil D. Lawrence. “Computationally Efficient Con-
volved Multiple Output Gaussian Processes”. In: Journal of Machine Learning
Research 12 (2011), pages 1459–1500. issn: 15324435.
[2]
Mauricio A. Álvarez, Lorenzo Rosasco, and Neil D. Lawrence. “Kernels for
vector-valued functions: A review”. In: Foundations and Trends in Machine
Learning 4.3 (2011), pages 195–266. issn: 19358237. doi: 10.1561/2200000036.
arXiv: 1106.6251.
[3]
Eli Bingham et al. “Pyro: Deep Universal Probabilistic Programming”. In: J.
Mach. Learn. Res. 20 (2019), 28:1–28:6. url: http://jmlr.org/papers/v20/
18-403.html.
[4]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Informa-
tion Science and Statistics). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2006. isbn:
0387310738.
[5]
Christopher M Bishop and Cazhaow S Quazaz. “Regression with Input-Dependent
Noise: A Bayesian Treatment”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 9. Edited by M C Mozer, M I Jordan, and T Petsche. MIT Press, 1997,
pages 347–353. url: http://papers.nips.cc/paper/1191- regression-
with-input-dependent-noise-a-bayesian-treatment.pdf.
[6]
Rich Caruana. “Multitask Learning”. In: Machine Learning 28.1 (1997), pages 41–
75. issn: 1573-0565. doi: 10.1023/A:1007379606734. url: https://doi.org/
10.1023/A:1007379606734.
[7]
A. DeMaris. Regression With Social Data: Modeling Continuous and Limited
Response Variables. 2004.
[8]
D. Duvenaud. Automatic model construction with Gaussian processes.
https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.14087, 2014.
[9]
Paul Goldberg, Christopher Williams, and Christopher Bishop. “Regression
with Input-dependent Noise: A Gaussian Process Treatment”. In: Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 10 (1998).
[10]
William H. Greene. Econometric Analysis. Fifth. Pearson Education, 2003. isbn:
0-13-066189-9.
==PAGE:98==
86
Bibliography
[11]
Perry Groot and Peter Lucas. “Gaussian process regression with censored data
using expectation propagation”. In: Proceedings of the 6th European Workshop
on Probabilistic Graphical Models, PGM 2012 (2012), pages 115–122.
[12]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. The Elements of Sta-
tistical Learning. Springer Series in Statistics. New York, NY, USA: Springer
New York Inc., 2001.
[13]
Matthew D. Hoffman et al. “Stochastic Variational Inference”. In: Journal of
Machine Learning Research 14.4 (2013), pages 1303–1347. url: http://jmlr.
org/papers/v14/hoffman13a.html.
[14]
Michael I. Jordan et al. “Introduction to variational methods for graphical mod-
els”. In: Machine Learning 37.2 (1999), pages 183–233. issn: 08856125. doi:
10.1023/A:1007665907178.
[15]
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimiza-
tion”. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (December
2014).
[16]
Miguel Lázaro-Gredilla and Michalis K. Titsias. “Variational heteroscedastic
Gaussian process regression”. In: Proceedings of the 28th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, ICML 2011 (2011), pages 841–848.
[17]
Pablo Moreno-Muñoz, Antonio Artés-Rodríguez, and Mauricio A. Álvarez. “Het-
erogeneous Multi-output Gaussian Process Prediction”. In: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 2018-Decem.NeurIPS (2018), pages 6711–6720.
issn: 10495258. arXiv: 1805.07633.
[18]
Radford M. Neal. “Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks”. AAINN02676. PhD
thesis. CAN, 1995. isbn: 0612026760.
[19]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep
Learning Library”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32.
Edited by H. Wallach et al. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019, pages 8024–8035.
url: http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/9015-pytorch-an-imperative-
style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
[20]
Carter Rakovski. “Regression With Social Data: Modeling Continuous and Lim-
ited Response Variables:Regression With Social Data: Modeling Continuous and
Limited Response Variables”. In: American Statistician - AMER STATIST 60
(2006), page 206. doi: 10.1198/tas.2006.s48.
[21]
Rajesh Ranganath, Sean Gerrish, and David M. Blei. “Black box variational
inference”. In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 33 (2014), pages 814–822.
issn: 15337928. arXiv: 1401.0118.
[22]
Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian Processes
for Machine Learning (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning). The MIT
Press, 2005. isbn: 026218253X.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
87
[23]
Lifeng Shang and Antoni B. Chan. “On Approximate Inference for Generalized
Gaussian Process Models”. In: (2013). arXiv: 1311.6371. url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1311.6371.
[24]
B. W. Silverman. “Some Aspects of the Spline Smoothing Approach to Non-
Parametric Regression Curve Fitting”. In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Soci-
ety: Series B (Methodological) 47.1 (1985), pages 1–21. doi: 10.1111/j.2517-
6161.1985.tb01327.x.
[25]
James Tobin. “Estimation of Relationships for Limited Dependent Variables”.
In: 1958.
[26]
Christopher K. I. Williams and Carl Edward Rasmussen. “Gaussian Processes
for Regression”. In: Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems. NIPS’95. Denver, Colorado: MIT Press, 1995,
pages 514–520.
[27]
David Wingate and Theophane Weber. “Automated Variational Inference in
Probabilistic Programming”. In: (2013), pages 1–7. arXiv: 1301 . 1299. url:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.1299.
[28]
Kai Yu, Volker Tresp, and Anton Schwaighofer. “Learning Gaussian Processes
from Multiple Tasks”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference
on Machine Learning. ICML ’05. Bonn, Germany: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2005, pages 1012–1019. isbn: 1595931805. doi: 10.1145/1102351.
1102479. url: https://doi.org/10.1145/1102351.1102479.
[29]
Cheng Zhang et al. “Advances in Variational Inference”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 41.8 (2019), pages 2008–2026.
issn: 19393539. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2889774. arXiv: 1711.05597.
==PAGE:100==
