==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Marvin Glissner 
Service life prediction of concrete in cold 
climate, benchmarking of chloride ingress 
simulations  
Trondheim, June 2020 
Nordic Master in Cold Climate Engineering 
Master’s thesis 
NTNU 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
Faculty of Engineering   
Department of Structural Engineering 
==PAGE:2==
i 
 
Department of Structural Engineering 
 
 
              
Faculty of Engineering 
NTNU − Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
 
MASTER THESIS 2020 
 
SUBJECT AREA: 
Concrete technology 
DATE: 
22.06.2020 
NO. OF PAGES: 
69 
 
TITLE: 
Service life prediction of concrete in cold climate, benchmarking of chloride 
ingress simulations 
BY: 
 
Marvin Glissner 
 
RESPONSIBLE  TEACHER: Prof. Dr. Mette Rica Geiker (NTNU) 
SUPERVISOR(S): Prof. Dr. Mette Rica Geiker (NTNU), Prof. Dr. Alexander Michel (DTU), Dr. Victor Marcos 
Meson(DTU) 
CARRIED OUT AT: department of structural engineering of the Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology (NTNU) 
SUMMARY: Chloride ingress into concrete can lead to pitting corrosion of reinforcement steel once a critical 
chloride threshold is reached at the boundary of the steel surface and surrounding concrete cover. This is 
especially crucial in environments where a lot of chloride containing salts are present by nature or used for 
e.g. de-icing operations in cold climates. Reactive mass transport model that can predict ingress of such 
species move more and more into the focus for reliable predictions on service life of concrete structures 
under specific exposure conditions where chloride ingress is of major relevance. As it is of such big interest 
chloride ingress into concrete and cement pastes has been an area of interest for decades. The chemical 
aspects of chloride binding are mostly understood and commonly agreed upon by the scientific community. 
However, it has been shown by several authors that also physical binding on Calcium Silicate Hydrates, that 
form the binding part of a concrete matrix, is of big importance in considerations towards total chloride 
binding capacity of cementitious material. Reactive mass transport model built for concrete service life 
prediction do not consider this physical chloride binding at the present point. This Thesis presents two 
modelling methodologies that could potentially be used for consideration of physical chloride binding in a 
reactive mass transport model, namely by means of a modified Langmuir isotherm approach and a surface 
complexation approach. The possible implementation of the modified Langmuir isotherm has been tested for 
a reactive mass transport model. Implementation before and after a chemical solver is run, was tested in this 
sequenced single step model. The used model framework has been developed at the Technical University of 
Denmark (DTU). The results received under consideration of laboratory data obtained from published studies 
show that in the used model the predictions by means of a modified Langmuir isotherm would always lead to 
an over- or underestimation of true physical bound chlorides.  Hence the modified Langmuir isotherm 
approach could only be used to hint a direction but needs careful interpretation of results. A better solution 
might be the implementation of a surface complexation term. No implementation by means of a surface 
complexation approach was included or compared to results within this work as this was not the primary 
focus. Surface complexation modelling remains interesting and promising based on the theoretical 
background and methodology presented in this Thesis.   
ACCESSIBILITY 
Open 
==PAGE:3==
ii 
 
Preface 
The work presented here is a part of the joint MSc degree in Cold Climate Engineering, carried 
out at the department of structural engineering of the Norwegian University of Science and 
Technology (NTNU) in the spring semester of 2020. The thesis has been conducted in 
collaboration with the department of civil engineering of the Techcnical University of Denmark 
(DTU). The main supervisor at NTNU was Prof. Dr. Mette Rica Geiker. DTU supervisor 
was Prof. Dr. Alexander Michel, with co-supervision of postdoc Dr. Victor Marcos Meson.  
The time frame of this work was 20 weeks as stated in the thesis regulations of the Norwegian 
University of Science and technology. Due to cancellation of meetings after travelling abroad 
from Norway to Denmark, the Thesis work has been extended by three additional weeks, when 
a nation wide shut down was decided by the government after a global virus outbreak. The idea 
to work on this topic arose during brainstorming about potential areas of interest with Dr. Mette 
Geiker after first arrival in Norway in August 2019.   
==PAGE:4==
iii 
 
Acknowledgment 
I would like to thank my supervisors Mette, Alexander and Victor for their good guidance, 
share of knowledge as well as for being available and reachable even when times allowed no 
physical presence at universities and public institutions. Especially I would like to thank Victor 
Meson for being available outside office hours, implementing all the reported procedures in 
MatLab and answering numerous modelling related questions, making it therefore possible for 
me to run the presented simulations. Thanks to my family and friends who supported me 
through the whole period of my studies and my fellow students in the cold climate engineering 
program that I experienced numerous adventures and great times with in Denmark, Greenland 
and Norway. Especially I want to thank Christy Rouault, Natalie Kate Bennett and Jean-Gabriel 
Dorval who helped me to stay positive and sane during cold, long nights of darkness and 
pandemic events. 
==PAGE:5==
iv 
 
Abstract 
Chloride ingress into concrete can lead to pitting corrosion of reinforcement steel once a critical 
chloride threshold is reached at the boundary of the steel surface and surrounding concrete 
cover. This is especially crucial in environments where a lot of chloride containing salts are 
present by nature or used for e.g. de-icing operations in cold climates. Reactive mass transport 
model that can predict ingress of such species move more and more into the focus for reliable 
predictions on service life of concrete structures under specific exposure conditions where 
chloride ingress is of major relevance. As it is of such big interest chloride ingress into concrete 
and cement pastes has been an area of interest for decades. The chemical aspects of chloride 
binding are mostly understood and commonly agreed upon by the scientific community. 
However, it has been shown by several authors that also physical binding on Calcium Silicate 
Hydrates, that form the binding part of a concrete matrix, is of big importance in considerations 
towards total chloride binding capacity of cementitious material. Reactive mass transport model 
built for concrete service life prediction do not consider this physical chloride binding at the 
present point. This Thesis presents two modelling methodologies that could potentially be used 
for consideration of physical chloride binding in a reactive mass transport model, namely by 
means of a modified Langmuir isotherm approach and a surface complexation approach. The 
possible implementation of the modified Langmuir isotherm has been tested for a reactive mass 
transport model. Implementation before and after a chemical solver is run, was tested in this 
sequenced single step model. The used model framework has been developed at the Technical 
University of Denmark (DTU). The results received under consideration of laboratory data 
obtained from published studies show that in the used model the predictions by means of a 
modified Langmuir isotherm would always lead to an over- or underestimation of true physical 
bound chlorides. Hence the modified Langmuir isotherm approach could only be used to hint a 
direction but needs careful interpretation of results. A better solution might be the 
implementation of a surface complexation term. No implementation by means of a surface 
complexation approach was included or compared to results within this work as this was not 
the primary focus. Surface complexation modelling remains interesting and promising based 
on the theoretical background and methodology presented in this Thesis.    
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
v 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
vi 
 
Contents 
Preface ...................................................................................................................................................... i 
Abstract ................................................................................................................................................... iv 
Abbreviations and list of symbols .......................................................................................................... vii 
1. Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 1 
1.1. Strengths/limitations .................................................................................................................... 2 
1.2. Objective....................................................................................................................................... 2 
2. Theoretical background ....................................................................................................................... 3 
2.1. Chloride binding capacity ............................................................................................................. 3 
2.1.1. Physical chloride binding ....................................................................................................... 4 
2.2. Reactive Mass Transport model ................................................................................................. 10 
2.2.1. Governing equation set describing the mass transport ...................................................... 11 
2.2.2. Chemical equilibrium ........................................................................................................... 12 
2.2.3. Moisture content and pore structure model ...................................................................... 13 
2.2.4. Description of model input .................................................................................................. 16 
2.3. Modelling methodology of chloride binding .............................................................................. 20 
2.3.1. Incorporation of physical bound chloride ........................................................................... 23 
3. Experimental data ............................................................................................................................. 28 
3.1. Experimental work and data ...................................................................................................... 28 
3.2. Treatment and usage of data ..................................................................................................... 31 
4. Results and Discussion ...................................................................................................................... 35 
5. Conclusion ......................................................................................................................................... 45 
6. Recommendations for further work  ................................................................................................. 46 
Literature ............................................................................................................................................... 47 
Appendix .................................................................................................................................................. 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
vii 
 
Abbreviations and list of symbols 
Cement paste 
Cement + water  
Binder 
Cement + cement substitute 
C-S-H 
Calcium Silicate Hydrate 
XRD 
X-ray diffraction 
TGA 
Thermogravimetric analysis 
Si MAS NMR 
Silicon Magic Angle Spinning Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
wt.% 
 
Weight percentage 
𝐶3𝑆 
Alite  
𝐶2𝑆 
Belite 
𝐶3𝐴 
Tricalciumaluminate 
𝐶4𝐴𝐹 
Tetracalciumaluminateferrit  
𝐶𝑎/𝑆𝑖 
Ratio of calcium to silicon [-] 
𝑤/𝑐 
Ratio of water to cement [-] 
𝑤/𝑏 
 
Ratio of water to binder [-] 
𝜁𝑑 
relative dielectricity coefficient [-] 
𝜁0 
dielectricity coefficient in vacuum [-] 
𝑃𝑐 
capillary pressure [Pa] 
𝑃𝑣 
vapour pressure [Pa] 
𝐶 
moisture capacity [g/g] 
𝑅 
universal gas constant [-] 
𝛩 
relative moisture content [g/m3] 
𝜑 
relative humidity [%] 
𝜌 
Density [g/cm3] 
𝑓 
scaling factor [-] 
𝑇 
Temperature in kelvin [k] 
μdry 
dry-cup vapour diffusion resistance factor [-] 
𝑆𝑙 
degree of saturation [%] 
𝐶𝐶𝑙 
chloride concentration [mol/l] 
𝐷𝐶𝑙
0  
ionic diffusion coefficient chloride [𝜇𝑚2/𝑠] 
𝐷 
effective diffusion coefficient [𝜇𝑚2/𝑠] 
𝐴 
Ionic activity [-] 
𝑍 
Valence [-] 
𝑀 
Molar mass [g/mol] 
𝑉 
Volume [l] 
𝑚 
Mass [g] 
𝐾 
equilibrium constant [-] 
Ѱ𝑜 
 
Surface potential [V] 
𝑎 
 
Activity of chemical species [-] 
𝐹 
 
Faraday constant [C/mol] 
𝑁 
 
Number of moles [mol] 
𝛼 
 
Bindin parameter 𝛼 [-] 
𝛽 
 
Bindin parameter 𝛽 [-] 
σ 
 
Chare density [C/m2] 
μ 
 
Ionic strength [mol/l] 
==PAGE:9==
 
1 
 
1. Introduction  
If reinforcement steel in a reinforced concrete structure is exposed to chlorides this might induce 
pitting corrosion. To initiate pitting a certain amount of chlorides has to reach the steel through 
the concrete micro-structure. There are various sources of chlorides. Chlorides are for example 
present in seawater but often structures are also exposed to de-icing salts. Especially in cold 
regions like Norway road authorities use extensive amounts of chloride containing salts to keep 
the infrastructure ice free (see e.g. (Vignisdottir et al., 2016)). If a corrosion process is initiated 
by the free chlorides in the pore solution it will alter the steel and lead to a deterioration of the 
structural integrity. Thus, chloride ingress into concrete structures is an important factor to 
determine the service lifetime of a given structure which suffers from chloride exposure. Ingress 
mechanisms are not trivial and are influenced by a huge variety of factors. The simplified 
diagram by Fidjestöl and Tuutti shows that two concrete mixes will have different chloride 
threshold values and consequently require a different concrete cover for the same service life 
(Fidjestöl and Tuutti, 1995):  
 
Figure 1: Schematic sketch of corrosion initiation depth for two different concretes (Fidjestöl 
and Tuutti, 1995) 
==PAGE:10==
 
2 
 
To have a tool aiding in determination of the service lifespan different model approaches have 
been developed over time as for example shown in (Baroghel-bouny et al., 2012). An 
interesting feature of Calcium Silicate Hydrates, the main product of cement hydration, is the 
ability to physically bind chlorides. This physical binding occurs without formation of 
additional chemical species and is most often not included in service life determination. In this 
study an existing multi-physical model framework is used to predict chloride ingress under 
certain conditions.  
1.1. Strengths/limitations 
The used model framework includes moisture as well as ionic transport and couples it with 
chemical reactions to resemble the material structure of the investigated mixture and gives an 
idea of the transport properties and ionic concentrations of different species at a given age and 
depth in the material. The weakness of this framework at this time is the absence of physical 
binding in the considerations and high dependency on correct input assumptions. 
1.2. Objective 
Therefore, the objective of this master thesis is to implement the physical binding phenomena 
into the existing model framework. This goal should be reached by: 
1. Proposing a methodology for modelling of physical chloride binding based on existing 
literature 
2. Find existing data on the topic of physical chloride binding, review it and calibrate the 
chosen method with the reviewed data  
3. Investigating the impact of the modelling sequence in a single step sequenced model on 
the results 
==PAGE:11==
 
3 
 
2. Theoretical background 
2.1. Chloride binding capacity 
The chloride binding capacity describes the ability of the cement hydration products to bind 
chloride ions. Chlorides can be present as free chloride in the pore solution as well as bound 
chlorides, either chemically or physically bound (Glasser, Marchand and Samson, 2008). 
There are opposing reports on the exact importance of physical and chemical binding capacities. 
Binding mechanisms are e.g. dependent on the Ca/Si ratio of the C-S-H gel, the pH value of the 
given exposure phase and chloride concentration as mentioned in (Shi, Geiker, Lothenbach, et 
al., 2017a). Many authors like Hirao et al. report chloride bound physical to C-S-H but do not 
provide a model or thorough explanation for  this observation (Hirao et al., 2005). Even though 
there has been extensive work done in the general field of chloride binding within the last 
decades, literature is more scarce for the physical chloride binding phenomena and comparison 
due to differences in many parameters such as the material, exposure conditions, handling of 
experiments, etc. can be troublesome. 
It is commonly accepted in the research community that chemical binding can be attributed to 
the reaction of the 𝐶3𝐴 and 𝐶4𝐴𝐹 phases and followed formation of Fe-Friedel’s salt (iron 
containing) 
,Friedel’s 
salt 
(𝐶𝑎4𝐴𝑙2𝐶𝑙2(𝑂𝐻)12 · 4𝐻20) 
and 
Kunzel’s 
salt 
(𝐶𝑎4𝐴𝑙2𝐶𝑙(𝑆𝑂4)0.5(𝑂𝐻)12 · 6𝐻2𝑂). Where the Friedel’s salt formation is of greater 
importance for common concrete service environments (Baroghel-bouny et al., 2012). 
The physical binding is mainly governed by surface complexation and electrostatic interaction 
on the C-S-H surface as will be discussed in Section 2.1.1. The cation, depending on the 
chloride salt (e.g. 𝐶𝑎+ 𝑁𝑎+ 𝐿𝑖+), has been shown to not only have an impact on the general 
binding but also on the physical binding capacity (Hencoq, 2006). Tang and Nilsson showed 
that the chloride binding capacity is dependent on content of C-S-H gel in concrete (Tang and 
Nilsson, 1993). According to their report the chloride binding capacity can be described by a 
Freundlich equation for exposure concentrations higher than 0.01 mol/l of chlorides. For 
concentrations smaller than 0.05 mol/l an isotherm following the Langmuir type has been 
proposed. Assuming the binding capacity can be described by a Langmuir isotherm it can be 
written as shown in Eq.1 (Michel, 2012):  
 
𝐷𝐶𝑙,𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑑(𝑆𝑙) = 𝐷𝐶𝑙
0 (𝑆𝑙)
1
1 + 𝛼𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟/(𝜃𝑙(1 + 𝛽𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑟𝐶𝐶𝑙)2) 
Eq.1 
==PAGE:12==
 
4 
 
According to (Glass and Buenfeld, 2000)  the 𝛼 and 𝛽 value are binding constants and 
dependent on the chloride concentration 𝐶𝐶𝑙 and exposed material. It should be stated that the 
early approach given by Tang and Nilsson does not distinguish between physical and 
chemically bound chlorides (Tang and Nilsson, 1993).  
2.1.1. Physical chloride binding 
In this thesis report as stated in the objectives (Section 1.2) the focus is given on physical 
chloride binding. Therefore, a more in-depth explanation of physical chloride binding is 
required. 
According to Plassard et al. adsorption of chlorides can be explained by Van-der-Waals  forces 
and electrostatic interactions between chlorides and the surface of C-S-H phases, surface charge 
plays thereby an important role and is created by dissociation of silanol 𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻 surface groups 
which can vary in their dissociation degree from ten to ninety percent (Plassard et al., 2005). 
The work of Plassard et al. forms the basis for more sophisticated efforts towards physical 
binding with a series of papers from Elakneswaran et al. (Elakneswaran, Nawa and 
Kurumisawa, 2009)(yoga et al., 2010) (Yogarajah, Nawa and Kurumisawa, 2018).  
The main mechanism that is considered here to cause surface charge on the C-S-H surface is 
the deprotonation as shown in following chemical reaction (Helene Viallis-Terrisse, Andre 
Nonat, 2001; Elakneswaran, Nawa and Kurumisawa, 2009): 
 
 
≡SiOH + OH−⟺≡SiO−+ H2O 
Eq.2 
 
The authors calculate the deprotonation constant by: 
 
KOH =
𝑎𝑆𝑖𝑂−
𝑎𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻⋅𝑎𝑂𝐻−exp⁡(−𝐹Ѱ𝑜
𝑅𝑇) 
 
Eq.3 
Where 𝐾𝑂𝐻 is the intrinsic equilibrium constant for deprotonation, 𝑎 is the activity of the 
species, Ѱ𝑜 is the surface potential [𝑉], R is the universal gas constant, and T is the temperature 
[k]. 
==PAGE:13==
 
5 
 
Furthermore chlorides are considered to bind (ionic) to unionized silanol groups by 
(Elakneswaran, Nawa and Kurumisawa, 2009): 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐶𝑙−⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻𝐶𝑙− 
However, Plusquellect and Nonat report in their study, based on experiments with synthetic C-
S-H suspension (varying Ca/Si ratios between 0.8 and 1.42), that chlorides do not adsorb on 
C-S-H particles but rather accumulate in the diffuse layer surrounding C-S-H when competing 
with 𝑂𝐻− ions in aqueous solution (Plusquellec and Nonat, 2016). Even though different 
approaches to explain this chloride binding, which cannot be attributed to chemical binding, 
exist, the general agreement that can be found between different authors is the importance of 
charge distribution on and around calcium silicate hydrates. Terms like “zeta potential”, 
“surface potential” or “diffuse layer” are often used in that perspective requiring a basic 
explanation of those terms to clarify their meaning. 
If cement particles and hydrate phases are exposed to liquid solution they are surrounded by an 
electrical double layer. The Stern model is a widely accepted model and can be used to help 
explain this electrical double layer (Stern, 1924). The Stern model combines earlier models of 
Helmholtz (1897) Gouy (1910) and Chapman (1913). In the model interpretation by Stern, a 
particle surface charged with a negative surface potential (Nernst potential) will be surrounded 
by a layer of adsorbed anions. This layer of anions is called the inner Helmholtz-layer. It forms 
due to high Van-der-Waals forces between the anions, which are bigger than the electrostatic 
repelling forces (Leidheiser, 1981). Following on the inner Helmholtz-layer is the outer 
Helmholtz-layer. This layer is formed by cations. Due to their size and the hydration hull these 
cations are connected to the surface by electrostatic forces. The potential which increases 
between the true surface and inner Helmholtz-layer therefore decreases in the outer Helmholtz 
layer. The inner and outer layer together are called Stern layer. Because of their bigger required 
volume within the layer the cations are not able to neutralize the whole negative charge created 
by anions. The compensation therefore happens by formation of a diffuse ion layer around the 
particle. The concentration of cations in the diffuse layer decreases exponentially with respect 
to the distance of the surface. On the other hand the concentration of negative charged ions 
increases with distance eventually the compensation of charge is reached. The point where the 
charge balance is reached marks the end of the diffuse layer. Stern and diffuse layer are 
combined in the expression electrical double layer (Müller, 1996). The true surface potential 
and the Stern potential are not directly measurable. By applying a current a part of the diffuse 
layer can be sheared away and this way a potential be measured. There are different ways to 
==PAGE:14==
 
6 
 
shear the diffuse layer. The measured potential at the shear plane is called zeta potential. The 
zeta potential is dependent on the distance between shear plane and particle surface and with 
different measuring methods different values will be measured (Müller, 1996). Figure 2 
illustrates the double layer model: 
 
Figure 2: Electrochemical double layer model (Plusquellec and Nonat, 2016) 
Other influences on the zeta potential are the ion concentration in the solution and the size of 
particles. Because of that and a huge variety of different measurement equipment, a quantitative 
comparison of studies can be quite challenging. If the ion concentration increases, the diffuse 
layer will be denser. If a constant shear distance is assumed, a smaller zeta potential will be 
measured. In high concentrations of electrolytes, charge can be neutralized in the diffuse layer 
which would lead to no possible measurement of the zeta potential (Alkan et al., 2005). This 
double layer model explains why factors such as ion concentration and pH-value of solution as 
well as associated cation have an influence on physical binding capacities. 
Tritthart reports that the physical binding of 𝐶𝑙− increases with decrease of 𝑂𝐻− concentration. 
Meaning a decrease in pH leads to increased binding of chlorides. In his perception the chlorides 
compete with hydroxyl ions for charge compensation (Tritthart, 1989). In Tritthart’s study the 
chlorides were introduced into the mixing water, which might cause additional impacts on 
samples compared to exposure of (chloride free) cured samples to a chloride containing 
exposure solution. The main conclusions of studies by Weerdt et al. and Shi et al. are that there 
is no major difference in Friedel’s salt amounts, which accounts for the majority of chemical 
binding if different exposure solutions with same chloride content are used on well hydrated 
==PAGE:15==
 
7 
 
samples. But the associated cation shows a big impact (Weerdt et al., 2015)(Shi, Geiker, De 
Weerdt, et al., 2017a). Figure 3 illustrates results from (Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017a), 
indicating that the associated cation has a huge influence on the physical chloride binding. The 
figure shows the amount of chloride adsorbed onto the C-S-H on the ordinate and the 
concentration of the exposure solution on the abscissa. If samples are exposed to a solution 
containing 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 the physical binding is, with increasing exposure concentration, increased 
compared to exposure to a 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 solution.  
In the previously mentioned study, (Weerdt et al., 2015) showed that  a linear relationship 
between bound chloride and pH value can be drawn for exposure to 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 and 𝑀𝑔𝐶𝑙2 solutions 
but not for exposure to 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 solutions. It was predicted by thermodynamic modelling that 
exposure to 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 and 𝑀𝑔𝐶𝑙2 solutions leads to precipitation of the associated salts 
𝐶𝑎(𝑂𝐻)2⁡and 𝑀𝑔(𝑂𝐻)2, which in return decreases pH and increases solubility of 𝐶𝑎 as shown 
in Figure 4.  
 
Figure 3: Physical chloride binding dependent on exposure solution (Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, 
et al., 2017a) 
==PAGE:16==
 
8 
 
 
Figure 4: Bound chlorides vs pH in paste, different exposure solutions (Weerdt et al., 2015) 
This affects the 𝐶𝑎/𝑆𝑖 ratio of the C-S-H itself. In previous studies summarized in a literature 
review by Nonat it has been reported that the structure of C-S-H is highly dependent on the 
Ca/Si ratio (Nonat, 2004) so is the silicate mean chain length. An increasing Ca/Si ratio leads 
to a decreased silicate chain length (Richardson, 2004). At high Ca/Si ratios however, the mean 
chain length does not vary much anymore (Ping Yu, R. James Kirkpatrick, Brent Poe, 1999). 
An explanation could be that with Ca/Si ratios above approximately 1.3 entire silicate chain 
segments substitute 𝑂𝐻 and create 𝑂𝐻 groups balanced by 𝐶𝑎 rather than 𝑆𝑖 (Chen et al., 2004).  
In De Weerdts study it is shown that more chloride can be associated with C-S-H phases 
containing a higher Ca/Si ratio. Exposure to 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 solution did not show altering of the C-S-H 
phases, these findings are backed not only by modelling but also experimental work (Weerdt et 
al., 2015). Inversion of the surface charge (often referred to as overcharging) of C-S-H is 
another factor. Heath and Ilett concluded by charge modelling that the surface potential 
becomes positive at high Ca/Si ratios and negative at lower Ca/Si ratios. (Heath, T. G., D. J. 
Ilett, 1996). Labbez et al. on the other hand backed simulations with experimental work 
showing that in a C-S-H suspension with high 𝐶𝑎 concentrations  𝐶𝑎2+ ions accumulate on the 
C-S-H surface and lead to a reversal of the surface charge (Labbez et al., 2007). Their 
simulation data fit well without a fitting factor to experimental electrophoretic measurement 
data. In their simulation, they only assumed the earlier mentioned dissociation of silanol sites 
to determine charge. 
≡SiOH + OH−⟺≡SiO−+ H2O 
==PAGE:17==
 
9 
 
This indicates that the theory-based simulation has a sound physical basis (Labbez et al., 2007). 
The positive charge due to overcharging might increase the ability to bind negative charged 
chloride ions. Good agreement between experimental zeta potential measurements focusing on 
degradation of hydrated cement paste and modelling of the same considering deprotonation of 
the mentioned silanol surface sites and a calcification reaction: 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐶𝑎2+ ⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎2+ + 𝐻+ 
as practiced by Pointeau et al. further helps to understand charge evolution and shows 
applicability of theoretical approaches on the surface complexation (Pointeau et al., 2006). 
Deprotonation and surface complexation due to Calcium adsorption are not the only reactions 
that should be considered when talking about surface complexation and physical chloride 
binding. Also other ions such as 𝑁𝑎+, 𝐾+, 𝐶𝑙−⁡𝑎𝑛𝑑⁡𝑆𝑜4
2− are able to bind to silanol surface sites 
(Hosokawa et al., 2006). Following reactions can therefore be of importance in those 
complexation processes: 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝑁𝑎+ ⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝑁𝑎+ 𝐻+ 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐾+ ⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐾+ 𝐻+ 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐶𝑎2+ + 𝐶𝑙−⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙+ 𝐻+ 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐶𝑎2+ + 𝑆𝑂4
2−⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎𝑆𝑂4
−+ 𝐻+ 
As the adsorption of cations appears on the surface sites, one important factor is the number of 
surface sites in the C-S-H. Terisse and Nonat estimate this number by a structural model of C-
S-H (Helene Viallis-Terrisse, Andre Nonat, 2001). In the model proposed by Taylor a jennite-
like structure is thought to be predominant in C-S-H with high Ca/Si ratio (Taylor, 1993). 
Contradicting Cong and Kirkpatrick propose a mainly tobermorite-like structure as main type 
of C-S-H with a Ca/Si ratio below 1.5 (Cong and Kirkpatrick, 1996). Considering the 
tobermorite-like structure a 𝐶𝑎𝑂2 sheet is bound on each site with a silicate chain. In the chain 
every third tetrahedron is present as a bridging part, where the end of chains consist of the 
silanol site and the bridging sites of siladinol 𝑆𝑖(𝑂𝐻)2 (Nonat, 2004)(Pointeau et al., 
2006)(Richardson, 2004). The mentioned studies do not consider siladinol in surface 
complexation processes. With a specific surface area of 500 𝑚2𝑔 Viallis-Terrisse and Nonat 
calculated a surface site density based on the tobermorite-like structure model of 4.87 
𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑠/𝑛𝑚2 (Helene Viallis-Terrisse, Andre Nonat, 2001). These values are also used by other 
authors (Elakneswaran, Nawa and Kurumisawa, 2009)(Pointeau et al., 2006).  
==PAGE:18==
 
10 
 
As has been shown, physical binding is a topic based on many factors crossing borders of 
different research disciplines. Current theoretical assumptions lead to comparable results with 
experimental work. However, focus diverge in the different studies and therefore a lack of 
quantitative comparison exists. The main mechanisms seem to be explainable with sound 
physical basis but important factors such as surface site density may need further investigation. 
2.2. Reactive Mass Transport model 
The Reactive Mass Transport model used in this thesis report (RMT) is a multi-physical model 
accounting for mass transport, chemical reactions, microstructure and hydration processes. 
Those are the key components to be able to predict ingress of a specific chemical species. The 
model framework was developed on basis of the work by (Jensen, Johannesson and Geiker, 
2014) and (Johannesson, 2010), to be able to simulate transport in cementitious systems. 
Coupling it with e.g. limiting factors for a specific ionic species at a given ingress depth and 
time, the prediction of the service life of a given structure becomes possible. Following 
schematic diagram, introduces the main components of the framework. As the schematic 
overview shows, the model consists of three main modules. One module for mass transport 
calculations, one module solving the occurring chemical reactions, and another module 
describing and calculating the pore structure. The mass transport properties are split in three 
groups: ionic transport, moisture transport, and gas transport. 
The Ionic transport is determined by advection, diffusion and electro-migration. The part 
considering moisture transport is dependent on the degree of saturation and capillary transport 
mechanism as will be elaborated in section 2.2.3. The gas transport is based on diffusion. All 
of these transport mechanisms are connected and require an input of initial transport properties 
of the porous system. Ionic transport will lead to a specific ionic concentration and potential in 
the pore solution. Moisture transport influences the ionic transport by advection, but it will also 
change the moisture content and therefore the pore saturation, the capillary pressure and relative 
humidity are affected as they all are parameters connected to each other. The resulting pore 
solution and moisture content lead to an equilibrium state. In this equilibrium state a specific 
ionic concentration and water content are reached depended on the transport conditions. 
==PAGE:19==
 
11 
 
 
Figure 5: Schematic  overview of the framework (Meson, 2019) 
 This equilibrium state with its parameters and an initial phase assemblage of the cementitious 
system is transferred to the chemical solver function. The chemical solver balances the given 
system in terms of chemical equilibria. The output is a new ionic concentration, water content 
and phase assemblage. The new information is not only fed back into the mass transport module 
where it changes the initial conditions but also into the pore structure module. The pore structure 
module requires an initial pore size distribution and phase assemblage. With the initial 
conditions a new pore size distribution is calculated and new transport properties for ionic and 
moisture transport are derived. These transport properties are fed back into the mass transport 
part.   
2.2.1. Governing equation set describing the mass transport 
The mass transport is based on the solution of a Poisson-Nernst-Planck equation system “PNP-
system”. In a PNP equation system the Planck-Nernst equation generally describes the diffusion 
of ions by using an ionic concentration- and electrical potential gradient which is coupled to the 
Poisson part. The latter determines the electrical potential and is based on Gauss law. Extension 
of the PNP system in terms of a moisture inclusion is necessary as otherwise only diffusion and 
migration would be considered but no advection (Michel et al., 2019). The extended PNP 
system takes the following shape: 
Mass Transport
Ionic transport
Diffusion
Electromigration
Moisture transport
Capillary flow
Advection
Pore solution
Ionic concentration
Potential
Moisture content
Pore saturation
Capillary pressure
RH
Chemical reaction
Saturation
Pore structure
Initial
Ionic content
Electric potential
Water content
Phase assemblage
Equilibrium
Ionic content
Electric potential
Water content
Phase assemblage
Chemical balance
Initial
Ionic content
Electric potential
Water content
Equilibrium
Ionic content
Electric potential
Water content
New
Phase assemblage
PSD
Initial
Phase assemblage
PSD
Transport properties
Ionic
Moisture
Pore structure
model
Bundle of tubes
model
==PAGE:20==
 
12 
 
 
𝜀𝑙𝜕𝑐𝑖
𝑙
𝜕𝑡+ 𝑐𝑖
𝑙𝜕𝜀
𝜕𝑡= 𝛻(𝐷𝑖
𝑙𝜀𝑙𝛻𝑐𝑖
𝑙+ 𝐷𝑖
𝑙𝑐𝑖
𝑙𝛻𝜀𝑙−𝐴𝑖
𝑙𝑍𝑖𝜀𝑙𝑐𝑖
𝑙𝛻𝐸) + 𝑣𝑙,𝑠𝜀𝑙𝛻𝑐𝑖
𝑙
+ 𝑣𝑙,𝑠𝑐𝑖
𝑙𝛻𝜀𝑙+ 𝑞𝑖 
Eq.4 
With: Indices being 𝑙= 𝑙𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑⁡𝑝ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒, 𝑠= 𝑠𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑑⁡𝑝ℎ𝑎𝑠𝑒, 𝑖= 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑢𝑒𝑛𝑡⁡𝑖, 𝜀 is the saturation, 
𝑐 the concentration, 𝐷 the effective diffusion coefficient, 𝐴 the ionic activity,  𝑍 is the valence 
of the constituent, 𝐸 is the electrical potential, 𝑣𝑙,𝑠 the velocity of the liquid along the solid and 
𝑞𝑖 a chemical equilibrium term (Jensen, Johannesson and Geiker, 2015).  
The ionic activity 𝐴 is described as 
 
𝐴𝑖
𝑙= 𝐷𝑖
𝑙⁡𝐹
𝑅⁡𝑇 
Eq.5 
(𝐹= 𝐹𝑎𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑎𝑦⁡𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡⁡𝑅= 𝑎𝑠⁡𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡⁡𝑇= 𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒⁡𝑖𝑛⁡𝑘𝑒𝑙𝑣𝑖𝑛)  
the velocity as  
 
𝑣𝑙,𝑠= −𝐷𝜀𝑙𝛻𝜀𝑖
𝑙 
Eq.6 
and the electrical potential by: 
 
 
𝜁𝑑𝜁0𝛻2𝐸= 𝐹∑𝑐𝑖𝑧𝑖
𝑛
𝑖=1
 
Eq.7 
𝜁𝑑= 𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒⁡𝑑𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑦⁡𝑐𝑜𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡, 𝜁0 = 𝑑𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦⁡𝑐𝑜𝑒𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡⁡𝑖𝑛⁡𝑣𝑎𝑐𝑢𝑢𝑚  
2.2.2. Chemical equilibrium 
The term 𝑞𝑖 for the chemical equilibrium is solved using the PHREEQC code (Parkhurst and 
Appelo, 2013), which allows for a wide variety of aqueous geochemical calculations. In the 
RMT model, equilibrium between the solid and liquid phase, vapour and liquid phase as well 
as in the liquid phase between the ionic species can be considered (Addassi et al., 2019). 
In connection with a thermodynamic database for hydrated cements and alkali activated 
materials, Cemdata18 (Lothenbach et al., 2019), the chemical equilibrium solver is able to 
predict the assemblage of the different hydrate phases forming in the hydrating cement paste. 
All common cement hydrates can be considered, and the database is valid for temperatures in 
the range between 273 to 373 Kelvin. Chemical binding in the modelled system is considered 
in terms of formation of Friedel’s salt (𝐶𝑎4𝐴𝑙2𝐶𝑙2(𝑂𝐻)12 · 4𝐻20) and Kunzel’s salt 
(𝐶𝑎4𝐴𝑙2𝐶𝑙(𝑆𝑂4)0.5(𝑂𝐻)12 · 6𝐻2𝑂). The following dissolution reactions are used to calculate 
the solubility products (Lothenbach et al., 2019): 
Friedel’s salt: 
==PAGE:21==
 
13 
 
 
 𝐶𝑎4𝐴𝑙2𝐶𝑙2(𝑂𝐻)12 · 4𝐻20 →4𝐶𝑎2+ + 2𝐴𝑙(𝑂𝐻)4
⁡−+ 2𝐶𝐿−+ 4𝑂𝐻−+ 4𝐻2𝑂 
Fe-Friedel’s salt: 
 𝐶𝑎4𝐹𝑒2𝐶𝑙2(𝑂𝐻)12 · 4𝐻20 →4𝐶𝑎2+ + 2𝐹𝑒(𝑂𝐻)4
⁡−+ 2𝐶𝐿−+ 4𝑂𝐻−+ 4𝐻2𝑂 
Kuzel’s salt: 
𝐶𝑎4𝐴𝑙2𝐶𝑙(𝑆𝑂4)0.5(𝑂𝐻)12 · 6𝐻2𝑂
→4𝐶𝑎2+ + ⁡2𝐴𝑙(𝑂𝐻)4
⁡−+ 𝐶𝑙−+ 0.5⁡𝑆𝑂4
⁡2−+ 4𝑂𝐻−+ 6𝐻2𝑂 
2.2.3. Moisture content and pore structure model 
The porous microstructure and resulting flow properties are included based on an approach by 
Scheffler and Plagge (Scheffler and Plagge, 2010) that describes it as a bundle of tubes. This 
semi-analytical-empirical model couples a physical basis with a mechanistic description, 
requiring only basic material properties as input parameters.  
In the mechanistic description, the model distinguishes between serial and parallel transport. 
As both transport coefficients for the liquid and for the vapour phase are dependent on the 
saturation degree, as will be seen later, a great variety of moisture contents can be pictured by 
this approach without loss of modelling accuracy (Scheffler and Plagge, 2010). Figure 6 
illustrates the mechanistic approach. If the moisture content is low, vapour diffusion will be 
dominating the transport properties and the number of tubes contributing to parallel transport 
considered in the model will be low. This makes a lot of sense as the amount of water required 
to form one monolayer inside a pore of hardened cement paste is reached at around 
approximately 12% relative humidity (Brunauer, Emmett and Teller, 1938). On the other hand, 
if the moisture content is high, liquid flux will be the dominating transport mechanism. With 
increasing relative vapour pressure, subsequently more and more pores will fill up by capillary 
condensation and micropore filling (Lippens, Linsen and Boer, 1964). Liquid filled pores 
become connected and parallel liquid transport becomes possible in an increasing number of 
pores. Contribution of serial and parallel transport in the different transport coefficients varies.  
==PAGE:22==
 
14 
 
 
Figure 6: Visual explanation of the difference between serial and parallel domains (Grunewald, 
John; Häupl, Peter; Bomberg, 2003) 
If the following assumptions are made: 
- 
No air transfer, no thermal gradient driven liquid transfer, no effect of gravity 
- 
No radiative transfer, no exceeding of the boiling temperature of water, and 
- 
No contribution of the vapour phase on moisture nor heat storage  
The moisture and vapour transport can be expressed as (Janssen, Blocken and Carmeliet, 2007): 
 
𝜕𝜀
𝜕𝑡= −𝐶𝑃𝑐
𝜕𝑃𝑐
𝜕𝑡 
 
Eq.8 
Where:⁡𝐶𝑃𝑐 is the moisture capacity at the given capillary pressure 𝑃𝑐. 
The dependency on the different parameters regarding the liquid and vapour phase can further 
be described by Eq.9: 
 
−𝐶𝑃𝑐
𝜕𝑃𝑐
𝜕𝑡= −𝛻(𝐷𝑣(𝛩𝑙)
𝑅⁡𝑇
𝑃𝑣, 𝑠𝑎𝑡⁡𝜑
𝜌𝑙⁡𝑅⁡𝑇+ 𝐾𝑙(𝛩𝑙)𝛻𝑃𝑐) 
Eq.9 
The two main transport coefficients are the vapour diffusion coefficient 𝐷𝑣 and the liquid 
conductivity 𝐾𝑙 those coefficients are given as function of the moisture content. 
As the used conductivity model simplifies the pore structure to tubes, a scaling factor is 
introduced. This scaling factor depends on the moisture content and the number of parallel tube 
==PAGE:23==
 
15 
 
domains and therefore refers to the mechanistic approach presented. The scaling factor 𝑓 for 
the liquid and vapour phase as presented in (Scheffler and Plagge, 2010) is calculated as: 
 
𝑓(𝑙,𝑣) =⁡[
𝑝
𝑝+ (1 −𝛩)2(1 −𝑝)] 
Eq.10 
Where 𝛩 is the relative moisture content and 𝑝 is a term for increasing domains allowing for 
parallel moisture transport in the pores due to increasing moisture content: 
 
𝑝= 𝑝(𝛩, 𝜂𝑠𝑝) = 𝛩𝜂𝑠𝑝 
Eq.11 
𝜂𝑠𝑝 is a parameter to account for the parallel pore domains as function of the relative moisture 
content 𝑀. 
The relative moisture content is calculated as the volume ratio of moisture content and porosity 
 
𝛩= 𝜃𝑙
𝜃𝑝𝑜𝑟
 
 
Eq.12 
 
Substituting Eq.10 with the terms for 𝛩 and 𝑝 leads to following two scaling factors for the 
liquid and vapour phase respectively (Michel et al., 2019): 
 
𝑓𝑣=
1 −𝜃𝑙
𝜃𝑝𝑜𝑟
( 𝜃𝑙
𝜃𝑝𝑜𝑟)
𝜂𝑠𝑝
+ (1 −𝜃𝑙
𝜃𝑝𝑜𝑟)
2
+ (1 −( 𝜃𝑙
𝜃𝑝𝑜𝑟)
𝜂𝑠𝑝
)
 
 
Eq.13 
 
𝑓𝑙=
( 𝜃𝑙
𝜃𝑝𝑜𝑟)
𝜂𝑠𝑝
( 𝜃𝑙
𝜃𝑝𝑜𝑟)
𝜂𝑠𝑝
+ (1 −𝜃𝑙
𝜃𝑝𝑜𝑟)
2
+ (1 −( 𝜃𝑙
𝜃𝑝𝑜𝑟)
𝜂𝑠𝑝
)
 
 
Eq.14 
As shown by (Schirmer, 1938) the Diffusion coefficient for air can be described as: 
 
𝐷𝑣,𝑎𝑖𝑟= 0.083 𝑃0
𝑃⁡(
𝑇
273.15)
1.81
 
 
Eq.15 
In this formula 𝑃0 is the reference pressure of 101,323 Pa and 𝑃 the ambient air pressure.  By 
dividing the 𝐷𝑣,𝑎𝑖𝑟 value by an experimentally determined diffusion resistance number μ, which 
is a specific and easy determinable material parameter, the material vapour permeability can be 
==PAGE:24==
 
16 
 
calculated. Up or downscaling with the introduced scaling factor 𝑓𝑣 leads to following equation 
(Scheffler and Plagge, 2010): 
 
𝐷𝑣(𝛩𝑙) = 𝐷𝑣,𝑎𝑖𝑟
𝜇𝑑𝑟𝑦
𝑓𝑣(𝛩𝑙) 
 
Eq.16 
The relative liquid conductivity is calculated by : 
 
𝐾𝑙,𝑟𝑒𝑙(𝛩𝑙) = (
∫
𝑃𝑐(𝜃)−2𝑑𝜃
𝜃𝑙
0
∫
𝑃𝑐(𝜃)−2
𝜃𝑠𝑎𝑡
0
𝑑𝜃
) 
 
Eq.17 
To account for the overestimated conductivity and consider the mechanistic approach the liquid 
phase scaling factor 𝑓𝑙 is applied: 
 
𝐾𝑙(𝛩𝑙) = 𝐾𝑙,𝑟𝑒𝑙(𝛩)𝑓𝑙(𝛩)⁡𝐾𝑙,𝑠𝑎𝑡 
 
Eq.18 
It is important to mention at this point that this part of the model is only intended to model the 
moisture transport. The scaling factor presented accounts for the moisture content only and the 
hereby calculated connectivity is not applied to the ionic transport itself.  
2.2.4. Description of model input 
The model framework offers the usage of a variety of input parameters, which have to be chosen 
carefully. As the model code is written as a MATLAB-code an excel sheet has been developed 
by Victor Meson (DTU BYG), to have a simplified and more structured overview on the input. 
The Matlab code extracts the input parameters from the excel sheet. The input can be diverted 
in six main classes: 
1. Spatial  
2. Time  
3. Binder 
4. Multi-phase transport 
5. Chemical 
6. Physics 
7. Miscellaneous 
==PAGE:25==
 
17 
 
2.2.4.1. Spatial 
The spatial parameters describe the space of the modelled system. Inputs are the length [𝑚] of 
the simulated system in one dimensional direction, the number of elements [−] along the given 
length and the element cross-sectional setup in the one-dimensional system [𝑚2]. The area of 
interest [𝑚] can be modified if needed, this reduces the resolution outside the chosen area and 
therefore lowers the required computational power. This is especially useful if a certain area of 
a sample should be investigated. If for example a total length of one meter is chosen and ten 
elements are defined, an area of interest of 0.1 meter would mean that all ten elements are 
spaced in this first 0.1 meter followed by a large single element of 0.9 meters. A growth factor 
[−] defines the position of the nodes between the different elements and describes the relation 
between element one and element number x. A growth factor of one means equally spaced 
elements, a growth factor below one results in a finer mesh further away from the boundary and 
a value of bigger than one will result in a higher resolution next to the boundary.  
2.2.4.2. Time 
The time parameter allows for optimization of the stepwise numerical calculation. The total 
calculation time [ℎ] sets the boundary for the step sizes [ℎ]. If the step size is e.g. set to one 
hour and the total calculation time to 24 hours, there will be 24 time steps. The interval of the 
chemical equilibrium [ℎ] calculation can be set according to the needs. This input in general 
determines how often the chemical equilibrium will be solved over the total time. In general, it 
is a rather complex solution process based on the PHREEQC code and therefore requires 
computational power increasing the overall runtime. Uncoupling it from the general step size 
allows to decrease the total runtime but influences the accuracy and outcome of the model. An 
acceleration factor [-] related to the FEM transport scheme allows to influence step sizes related 
to transport parameters. In reactive mass transport modelling stability of the code and 
computational speed are of major importance. A thorough discussion on that matter can be 
found in (Jensen, 2014).  
2.2.4.3. Binder  
The binder system can be separated into three sub sections. The subsections determine the 
binder composition, the hydration process and in the case of a concrete mixture the considered 
mix proportions. 
In the binder composition the following oxides are considered in terms of mass percentage and 
are required input parameters [𝑤𝑡. %]: 
==PAGE:26==
 
18 
 
𝐶𝑎𝑂, 𝑆𝑖𝑂2, 𝐴𝑙2𝑂3, 𝐹𝑒2𝑂3, 𝑆𝑂3, 𝐾2𝑂, 𝑁𝑎2𝑂, 𝑀𝑔𝑂, 𝐶𝑎𝑆𝑂4, 𝐶𝑂2 
Also the initial 𝐶𝑙 content [𝑤𝑡. %] is one input parameter in this step. 
The hydration is based on the maturity concept and for the hydration law two main maturity 
parameters are crucial, a shape factor [−] and reaction rate factor [−]. Other input here is the 
calibrated activation energy of the binder [
𝐽
𝑚𝑜𝑙], the reference temperature [𝐾], the curing time 
[𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠] and the reference maturity [𝑑𝑎𝑦𝑠]. In the mix design, general mixing parameters such 
as the w/c ratio [−] and entrained air porosity [
𝑚3
𝑚3] are defined. Here it is also decided if a 
concrete or cement paste will be simulated by defining a total aggregate volume ratio [
𝑚3
𝑚3] and 
setting the density of the assumingly inert aggregate phase [
𝑔
𝑐𝑚3]. The code also requires a 
reference volume, typically 1 [
𝑚3
𝑚3], to calculate the mentioned ratios. 
2.2.4.4. Multi-phase transport 
This section includes parameters needed to describe the pore structure and general transport in 
the system. 
The pore structure and pore size distribution (PSD) is based on classification into gel, capillary 
and macro pores. An initial total pore area [
𝑚2
𝑚3], which is dependent on the pore volume, has to 
be set. The mean pore radii [µ𝑚] determines the differentiation between the three pore types, 
therefore three input values are required. The pore radii standard deviation [−] describes the 
spread of the pores. The distribution of pore volume change [%] ascribed to the gel, capillary 
or macro porosity has to be set. Here again three values are needed where an input of e.g. 
[0.7, 0.25,0.05] means that 70% of pore volume change will be attributed to gel pores, 25% to 
capillary pores and 5% to macro pores. The contact angle of water [𝑑𝑒𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑠] and the surfaces 
tension [
𝑁
𝑚] are two other important values for pore size distribution determination. It is 
important to mention that the contact angle differs for adsorption and desorption, therefore two 
input values are required. The volume to area ratio [
𝑚2
𝑚3] of the pores is derived from the 
calculated PSD. The reaction depth [𝑚] defines the volume of solids, which is available for 
reaction with the pore solution. The default input, 0, allows reaction of all solids.  
For the connectivity of the pore system, ionic transport and moisture/gas transport have to be 
distinguished. In Section 2.2.3 a scaling factor has been introduced. This scaling factor requires 
input of serial and parallel connectivity [−] a global liquid connectivity [−], the dry vapour 
==PAGE:27==
 
19 
 
diffusion resistance number [−] as well as the effective moisture conductivity at saturation [𝑆]. 
As earlier explained, this is only applied for moisture and gas transport where the gas-liquid 
interactions are handled by the chemical solver function. For ionic transport the connectivity is 
described in terms of a more common tortuosity function requiring input of a tortuosity factor 
[−], tortuosity shape [−] and tortuosity limit [−] to define the function. The advective transport 
stream upwinding coefficient [−] is needed for appropriate consideration of advective ion 
transport and balances between advective and diffusive processes. The initial moisture flux 
(input 1 or 0) describes the flux direction, meaning at the start of the simulation with adsorption 
or desorption.  
2.2.4.5. Chemical 
As mentioned before the chemical solver is based on PHREEQC in connection to the 
Cemdata18 database (Lothenbach et al., 2019). This allows for consideration of 80 different 
ions and 138 different phase equilibria (considered species found in table A7 in the appendices) 
with a simple 0/1 statement, the different equilibrium reactions and ions can be considered or 
excluded in the solver. In this part of the parameter selection, the most computational power 
and time can be saved by appropriate selection of necessary species for the performed 
simulation. It is also possible to set a boundary pressure [𝑃𝑎], determining the relative humidity 
at the given boundary and imposed current [𝐶] on the boundary. Where most of the times both 
might be omitted. Meaning no external oppressed force on the system is interfering.  
2.2.4.6. Physics 
The user can decide which physics should be included in the calculation. With a true or false 
(T/F) statement following physics can be turned on or off: The ionic transport due to diffusion; 
The ionic transport due to electromigration; Moisture transport, which if activated 
automatically includes the advection; Hysteresis which with every step recalculates hysteretic 
behaviour; Recalculation of the PSD, which means the pore radius and pore volume; Inclusion 
or exclusion of the Chemical equilibrium solver and the water balance, meaning the self-
ionization of the water during transport for each step;  In addition to this, it is possible to activate 
a Newton-Raphson optimization scheme, which requires some additional input boundaries for 
the scheme itself.  
2.2.4.7. Miscellaneous 
Saving intervals [ℎ] and plotting intervals [ℎ] can be selected and turned either on or off to save 
and plot the result. Some basic constants such as exposure temperature of the system during 
==PAGE:28==
 
20 
 
simulation [𝐾], the solution density [
𝑘𝑔
𝑚3] e.g. 1000 for pure water and Dielectricity in the chosen 
solution and vacuum [
𝐹
𝑚] have to be selected. A maximum number of iteration steps as well as 
some error tolerances can be added to the simulation.  
Including the chemical phases and input parameters to the general setup options the presented 
model requires some 306 input statements. This highlights the importance of careful 
assumptions and selection as most of those statements interact with each other. This huge 
variety offers simulation of more realistic cement binder systems with the possibility of defining 
very detailed and carefully selected exposure and material conditions. 
2.3. Modelling methodology of chloride binding 
There are different methods to predict chloride binding and consequently ingress in 
cementitious materials. In their comprehensive study Baroghel-Bouny et al. focus on prediction 
of chloride binding isotherms and separated the prediction  by modelling into two main groups 
with different approaches (Baroghel-bouny et al., 2012). 
1. Prediction-based on a model using numerical inverse analysis from experimental data 
2. Prediction-based on an analytical model using material composition 
The first group consists of a total chloride content profile, which is obtained by laboratory 
experiments and calculated back to a binding isotherm. A one-dimensional multispecies ion 
transport model considering ion flux by combining a diffusion coefficient with electro- 
migration by means of the Nernst-Planck equation is used. The chloride profile calculated by 
the model is fit to the profile determined by experimental work. In the simple variant such a 
model assumes isothermal and saturated conditions and only considers specific ions in the pore 
solution that are classified as significant as for example shown in a paper by Nguyen, Baroghel-
Bouny and Dangla (Nguyen, Baroghel-Bouny and Dangla, 2006). The diffusion coefficient 
used in this model is dependent on porosity and tortuosity of the system. A simplified model 
build up in this way requires the effective chloride diffusion coefficient. As chlorides are only 
transported in solution, the effective chloride diffusion coefficient is dependent on the porosity 
accessible to water as well as the tortuosity of the pore system. Parameters describing the 
chloride binding isotherm of the Freundlich form (𝑆𝐶𝑙= 𝜇∗𝐶𝐶𝑙
ϒ ) and the composition of the 
pore solution are also necessary. The binding parameters ϒ and 𝜇 are adjusted by a numerical 
algorithm until a good agreement between experimental and calculated data is reached.  
==PAGE:29==
 
21 
 
The second group can be used for a material at a specific age. The proposed procedure includes 
differentiation between chemical chloride binding and physical chloride binding. In Baroghel’s 
approach chemical binding is considered to occur instant through Friedel’s salt formation at 
low chloride concentrations when the material first gets in contact with chlorides as proposed 
by e.g. Nilsson et al. (Nilsson et al., 1996). The initial chemical binding is therefore only 
dependent on the equivalent aluminate content. The equivalent aluminate content is a 
simplification allowing to relate both 𝐶3𝐴 and 𝐶4𝐴𝐹 phases to Friedel’s salt formation. This 
simplification accounts double the contribution of 𝐶3𝐴 compared to the one of 𝐶4𝐴𝐹 to the 
Friedel’s salt formation.  
With the assumption that Friedel’s salt is formed at low chloride concentrations and instantly 
the chemical binding becomes unrelated to the chloride concentration and only related to the 
equivalent aluminate content representing it at the ordinate of X=0. However, the physical 
binding is considered as a function dependent on the C-S-H content of the material and the 
chloride concentration. To assess the amount of equivalent aluminate content and the C-S-H 
content a hydration model is required. (Baroghel-bouny et al., 2012) use an analytical approach 
as presented by Mounaga et al. that depends on the cement composition, a set of governing 
chemical reactions that are considered in formation of the chemical phases during the hydration 
process and the degree of hydration of the resulting phase based on the age (Mounanga et al., 
2004). Even though this approach is based on kinetics it is simplified and only validated for the 
assessment of C-S-H content in CEM 1 materials(Baroghel-Bouny, 2007). 
In the model the physical binding is included by an isotherm description of  
a. The Freundlich form 
b. The Langmuir form 𝑆𝐶𝑙⁡𝑝ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙= 𝑁𝐶𝑆𝐻∗
𝛼∗𝐶𝑐𝑙
1+𝛽∗𝐶𝐶𝑙 
c. The modified Langmuir form 𝑆𝐶𝑙⁡𝑝ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙= 𝑁𝐶𝑆𝐻∗
𝛼∗𝐶𝑐𝑙
𝐶𝑂𝐻+𝛽∗𝐶𝐶𝑙 
The form of a generalized and simplified combined chloride binding isotherm assuming the 
instantaneous Friedel’s salt formation and physical adsorption then has the form shown in 
Figure 7. 
As shown both groups of prediction techniques are addressed with different methods, Baroghel 
et al. showed that there exists good agreement between the proposed methods and experimental 
data (Baroghel-bouny et al., 2012). However, a drawback is the requirement of laboratory 
==PAGE:30==
 
22 
 
testing and its results to predict chloride binding isotherms which can then be used in modelling 
for prediction of ingress.  
 
Figure 7: Generalized, simplified form of chloride binding isotherm (Baroghel-bouny et al., 
2012) 
 
Another way to tackle the problem of chloride binding is simulation of the material 
composition. Phase assemblage and changes in the phase assemblage of the material can be 
modelled using different software considering thermodynamic properties. Two examples for 
those software are the Gibbs Free Energy Minimization Software GEMS (Kulik et al., 2015) or 
PHREEQC (Parkhurst and Appelo, 2013). As those software are not specifically build for 
applications regarding cement hydration or chloride binding in cementitious systems they need 
supplementation of thermodynamic data relevant for those applications. Various publications 
with big contribution of the Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology 
(EMPA) aim to provide useable cement related data as for example in (Lothenbach and 
Winnefeld, 2006; Matschei, Lothenbach and Glasser, 2007; Lothenbach et al., 2008; Balonis et 
al., 2010; Dilnesa et al., 2011). The scientific database CEMDATA combines relevant 
thermodynamic data for cementitious materials. It is frequently updated and in its current 
version CEMDATA 18 freely available (Lothenbach et al., 2019). To utilize the 
thermodynamic data a model with a clear structural and mechanistic basis such as the C-S-H 
solid solution model proposed by Kulik can be applied (Kulik, 2011). Studies that make use of 
either PHREEQC or GEMS for thermodynamic modelling and/or comparison to experimental 
==PAGE:31==
 
23 
 
data include for example (Hosokawa et al., 2006; Pointeau et al., 2006; yoga et al., 2010; Thiéry 
and Wang, 2011; Jensen et al., 2015; Weerdt et al., 2015; Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017b; 
Shi, Geiker, Lothenbach, et al., 2017b; Hemstad, Machner and De Weerdt, 2020). In general 
those studies show a good agreement between data of phase assemblage and chemical chloride 
binding (e.g. in Friedel’s salt) which has been calculated and the one observed by 
measurements, making thermodynamic modelling a powerful tool. Combining the phase 
assemblage from thermodynamic considerations with other modelling approaches for transport 
and material parameters can be used to extend the possibilities and not only predict binding 
properties at a given time but also for example at a given point in space and lead to a chloride 
ingress profile as has been done in the introduced model framework in Section 2.2. Modelling 
requires the initial composition and conditions but there is no need of experimental data (using 
the CEM database) to predict the phase assemblage itself. Thus, the chloride chemically bound 
in Friedel’s salt can be predicted for any cementitious material with a given composition, 
exposure and age. However, the pure thermodynamic character is a drawback in terms of the 
physically bound chloride. As it does not appear directly bound in one of the hydrate phases it 
cannot be calculated itself by thermodynamic considerations. Surface complexation and 
electrostatics, which have been introduced in Section 2.1.1 are therefore not considered in the 
calculations. 
2.3.1. Incorporation of physical bound chloride  
There are two approaches that should be discussed to include the physical binding into a 
model based on thermodynamics.  
2.3.1.1. Simple inclusion 
A simple way would be a combination of a thermodynamic model and addition of chloride 
bound physically to the chemically bound chloride in the Friedel’s salt. By use of one of the 
functions (Freundlich, Langmuir, modified Langmuir) as proposed in the model group 2 by 
Baroghel et al.. This can be done after calibration of data on physical binding from experimental 
work (Baroghel-bouny et al., 2012).  
2.3.1.2. Complex inclusion 
The other more complex method includes the modelling of surface complexation with charge 
considerations, which has been introduced in Section 2.1.1. The modelling approach presented 
in (Yogarajah, Nawa and Kurumisawa, 2018) uses the geochemical code PHREEQC. Built-in 
modelling approaches and thermodynamic datasets as well as an extension with the 
==PAGE:32==
 
24 
 
CEMDATA07 database has been used for their calculations. The PHREEQC software includes 
two possible surface complexation models. One model is based on the model described by 
Dzombak and Morel (Dzombak and Morel, 1990). This model makes use of the Gouy-Chapman 
theory and equation to consider electrostatic interactions of surfaces and adsorbates. Another 
model is the charge distribution multisite complexation model (short CD-MUSIC) which offers 
a few more options than the model by Dzombak and Morel (Hiemstra and Van Riemsdijk, 
1996). In both cases, the surface charge is neutralized by an electrical double layer. Yogarajah 
et al. use the model proposed by Dzombak and Morel in connection with other further on 
explained approaches to calculate the surface site density, dissociation of the surface sites and 
finally the adsorption of different ionic species. 
Following assumptions are made (Yogarajah, Nawa and Kurumisawa, 2018): 
- 
All surface complexes are assumed to be inner-sphere complexes meaning that ions bind 
directly to the surface without intervening water molecules that formerly formed a 
water-surface interface. 
- 
Electrolyte background ions are indifferent ions that adsorb through Coulomb forces 
only and are not adsorbed on an uncharged surface. 
- 
The C-S-H surface consists only of one type of surface sites, silanol sites (𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻) 
To determine the surface electrical properties of C-S-H, Vogarajah et al. use an approach as 
proposed in (Mayant et al., 2008). In this approach the surface charge density (σexposed) [
C
m2] 
is determined from the difference in the total and the free hydroxyl concentration.  
 
σexp =
F
A⋅S (
−[NaOH]⋅VNaOH,add−{[OH−]init−[H+]init⁡}⋅Vinit
Vinit+VNaOH,add
+ [OH−]fin −[H+]fin)  
 
Eq.19 
With F is the Faraday constant [
C
m2]⁡, A⁡is the specific surface area⁡[
g
m2], S is the solid 
concentration⁡[
g
l], VNaOH,add⁡and Vinit are volumes of added NaOH and initial NaNO3 salt which 
was used in a tritration experiment to maintain a constant ionic strength. [NaOH]⁡is the molar 
concentration of the titrant, [OH−]init, [OH−]fin, [H+]init, [H+]fin⁡are molar concentrations of 
OH− and H+ derived from the pH of initial and final solution. 
The main mechanism that is considered to cause surface charge on the C-S-H surface is the 
deprotonation (see Section 2.1.1) (Helene Viallis-Terrisse, Andre Nonat, 2001; Elakneswaran, 
Nawa and Kurumisawa, 2009): 
==PAGE:33==
 
25 
 
≡SiOH + OH−⟺≡SiO−+ H2O 
The intrinsic equilibrium constant can be calculated as 
 
KOH =
𝑎𝑆𝑖𝑂−
𝑎𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻⋅𝑎𝑂𝐻−exp⁡(−𝐹Ѱ𝑜
𝑅𝑇) 
Eq.20 
Where⁡𝐾𝑂𝐻 is the intrinsic equilibrium constant for deprotonation, 𝑎 is the activity of the 
species, Ѱ𝑜 is the surface potential [𝑉], R is the universal gas constant and T is the temperature 
[k]. 
To include charge reversal due to overcharging the related reaction should as well be considered 
by an equilibrium constant (Helene Viallis-Terrisse, Andre Nonat, 2001; Elakneswaran, Nawa 
and Kurumisawa, 2009): 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐶𝑎2+ ⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎2+ + 𝐻+ 
 
𝐾𝐶𝑎= 𝑎𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎+ ⋅𝑎𝐻+
𝑎𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻⋅𝑎𝐶𝑎2+ exp⁡(𝐹Ѱ𝑜
𝑅𝑇) 
Eq.21 
Surface charge density σ⁡ [
C
m2] is changed by the dissociation as well as the complexation 
processes and can be expressed by: 
σ = F
AS [(≡SiOCa+) −(≡SiO−)] 
(≡SiOCa+) and (≡SiO−) express the the concentrations of the two different surface species 
in [
mol
l ]. 
To relate the charge σ to surface potential the gouy chapman theory is used: 
 
σ = (8000εε0RTμ)1/2sinh⁡(ZFѰo
RT )⁡ 
Eq.22 
With⁡ε is the dielectric constant of water, ε0 is the permittivity of free space [
C
V⋅m] and μ is the 
ionic strength.  
(Yogarajah, Nawa and Kurumisawa, 2018) use the presented approach and fit it to experimental 
data to calculate the constants KOH and KCa. Surface site density is obtained by fitting 
experimental data from a titration experiment to data obtained by Eq.19. 
To include highly charged C-S-H, where chloride even adsorbs to calcium adsorbed surfaces 
an additional equilibrium constant is included: 
==PAGE:34==
 
26 
 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐶𝑎2+ + 𝐶𝑙−⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙+ 𝐻+ 
 
𝐾𝐶𝑎𝐶𝐿=
𝑎𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙⋅𝑎𝐻+
𝑎𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻⋅𝑎𝐶𝑎2+ ⋅𝑎𝐶𝑙−exp (ZFѰo
RT ) 
Eq.23 
 
In fact there are different proposed values and good accuracy depends on appropriate and 
careful selection.  
Heath and Ilett calculated values for pure silica surfaces and pure calcium hydroxide surfaces 
based on a literature review as well as fitting some experimental data of zeta potential studies. 
Log K has been calculated assuming that it varies linearly with the mole fraction of calcium 
surface sites⁡Xs(Ca). 
Table 1: log K for C-S-H surface reactions (Heath, T. G., D. J. Ilett, 1996) 
complexation reaction 
Xs(Ca) = 0 
Xs(Ca) = 1 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐻+ ⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻2
+ 
-2.8 
-2.8 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂−+ 𝐻+ 
-6.8 
-6.8 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐶𝑎2+ + 𝐻2𝑂⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎𝑂𝐻+ 2𝐻+ 
-17 
-15.1 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎𝑂𝐻+ 𝐻+ ⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎𝑂𝐻2
+ 
8.3 
12.6 
≡𝑆𝑖𝐶𝑎𝑂𝐻⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎𝑂−+ 𝐻+ 
-13.4 
-13.4 
 
Viallis-Terrisse and Nonat assume that only the two reactions of silanol deprotonation and 
calcium sorption are reactions of major importance and dominate the surface chemistry of C-
S-H (Table 2). 
Also Pointeau et al. assume that the surface chemistry is dominated by those two surface 
reactions and showed by acid titration that the values of (Helene Viallis-Terrisse, Andre Nonat, 
2001) are in good agreement with experimental work (Table 3): 
Hosokawa et al. derive values with PHREEQC by calibrating against experimental sorption 
data. Values for silanol deprotonation and calcium complexation by (Helene Viallis-Terrisse, 
Andre Nonat, 2001) are considered in their calculated values (Table 4). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
27 
 
 
Table 2: log K for C-S-H surface reactions (Helene Viallis-Terrisse, Andre Nonat, 2001) 
Ca/Si ratio of C-S-H = 1.5 
complexation reaction 
log K 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂−+ 𝐻+ 
-12.3 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐶𝑎2+ ⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎+ + 𝐻+ -9.4 
 
 
 
Table 3: log K values for C-S-H surface reactions (Pointeau et al., 2006) 
complexation reaction 
Ca/Si ratio of C-S-H 
Not specified 
log K 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂−+ 𝐻+ 
-12.0 
≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐶𝑎2+ ⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎+ + 𝐻+ -9.2 
 
 
 
Table 4: log K values for C-S-H surface reactions (Hosokawa et al., 2006) 
complexation reaction 
Ca/Si ratio of C-S-H 
  
0.85 
1.2 
1.5 
1.75 
1.45 
  
log K 
 ≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝑁𝑎+ ⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝑁𝑎+ 𝐻+ 
-11.1 
-11.4 
-11.7 
-11.7 
- 
 ≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐾+ ⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐾+ 𝐻+ 
-11.3 
-11.6 
-11.6 
-11.6 
- 
 ≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐶𝑎2+ + 𝐶𝑙−⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙+ 𝐻+ 
-8.9 
 ≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐻+ 𝐶𝑎2+ + 𝑆𝑂4
2−⟺≡𝑆𝑖𝑂𝐶𝑎𝑆𝑂4
−+ 𝐻+ 
-6.0 
==PAGE:36==
 
28 
 
3. Experimental data  
3.1. Experimental work and data 
Following the experimental work by (Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017b) and the way results 
were received shall be explained. Table 5 summarizes the experimental work and execution. A 
more detailed summary, including compositions and important results follows. A thorough 
description including additional measurements that are not directly connected to the matter of 
interest are available within the cited source.  
Table 5: Summary of experimental work 
 Source 
(Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017b) 
Material 
1) "P" pure wPc binder (white Portland cement); 2) "ML" wPc with metakaolin and 
limestone substitution; 3) "M" wPc with metakaolin substitution  
w/b 
0.5/0.95 
Curing 
conditions 
three days at 5°C sealed, two months in moist room RH >98% at 20°C after initial 
curing samples crushed and powders mixed with distilled water to reach w/b 0.95 -
> rotation cured for 7 days; following ball mill crushing 
pore 
solution 
extraction 
Centrifugation of samples 
exposure 
equilibrium concentration technique; 30g sample in 15ml of 1) NaCl and 2) CaCl2 
solution, sealed, stored for two months, initial chloride concentrations 0, 0.125, 0.25, 
0.5, 1.0, 2.0 mol/l 
analysis 
total bound chlorides determined from initial and equilibrium concentration after 
exposure; XRD and TGA to determine Friedel's salt; chloride concentrations of 
extracted pore liquid measured by potentiometric titration; thermodynamic 
modelling with GEMS to calculate initial phase assemblage as well as phase 
assemblage under exposure conditions 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
29 
 
In this study three different binder were produced from white Portland cement (wPc), 
metakaolin (MK) and limestone (LM), always maintaining an initial w/b ratio of 0.5. The 
composition of the different starting materials is shown in Table 6. The three different pastes 
were obtained by mixing the materials according to the binder compositions shown in Table 7: 
Table 6: Chemical composition of starting materials (wt.%), LOI, density and blaine fineness 
(Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017b) 
wPc 
LS 
MK 
CaO 
66.13 
53.73 
0.22 
SiO2 
21.81 
3.92 
52.84 
Al2O3 
3.56 
0.33 
39.49 
Fe2O3 
0.24 
0.14 
1.42 
SO3 
3.37 
0.05 
0.06 
K2O 
0.43 
0.05 
1 
Na2O 
0.04 
0.08 
0.05 
MgO 
1.1 
0.35 
0.48 
TiO2 
0.21 
0.02 
0.88 
P2O5 
0.04 
0.1 
0.11 
LOI 
2.57 
41.8 
3.55 
Density (kg/m3) 
3080 
2700 
2530 
Blaine fineness m2/kg) 
387 
1211 
1891 
carbon content 
0.37 
- 
- 
CaCO3 
3.1 
93.8 
- 
 
 
Table 7: Binder compositions (wt.%) (Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017b) 
 Material index 
wPc 
MK 
LS 
P 
100 
- 
- 
ML 
68.1 
25.5 
6.4 
M 
68.1 
31.9 
- 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
30 
 
Table 8: Phase composition wPc by SI MAS NMR (Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017b) 
Phase 
Wt.% 
alite (“3CaO·SiO2”: C3S) 
64.9 
belite (“2CaO·SiO2”: C2S)  
16.9 
calcium aluminate (3CaO·Al2O3: C3A)  
7.8 
 
 
Table 9: Degree of hydration of alite, belite and metakaolin after 28 and 180 days of hydration 
(Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017b) 
  
28d 
180d 
  
28d 
180d 
  
28d 
180d 
Blend 
Alite 
Belite 
MK 
  
P 
81 
95 
25 
63 
- 
- 
ML 
83 
86 
34 
36 
48 
54 
M 
86 
86 
  
34 
34 
  
38 
50 
 
The phase composition of the wPc was determined by Shi et al. with Si MAS NMR as described 
in (Poulsen et al., 2009) to have the composition shown in Table 8. Si MAS NMR is also used 
to determine the degree of hydration of Alite, Belite and Metakaolin (Table 9). 
The paste samples, produced in accordance to Table 7, were sealed cured at 5°C Celsius for 
three days and afterwards stored in a moist room for two months at 20°C. After curing samples 
were crushed to a size of approximately 1mm. Crushed samples were collected and mixed with 
30% by mass of crushed paste with distilled water (resulting in w/b 0.95) and rotation cured for 
7 days at 20°C. After rotation curing samples were crushed with a ball mill. In this way Shi et 
al. assumed that samples reach a maximized DOH and the possibility of carbonation is reduced. 
Chloride binding isotherms were obtained by the equilibrium approach. 30g of sample were 
exposed to 15ml chloride solution in centrifuge tubes at 20°C for two months. The chloride ion 
concentrations of the exposure solutions were 0, 0.125, 0.25, 0.50, 1.0 and 2.0 mol/L. 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 as 
well as 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 salt of laboratory grade was used to produce those solutions. The chloride content 
of the samples after two months of exposure was measured by Thermogravimetric analysis 
(TGA) and XRD. 
==PAGE:39==
 
31 
 
The samples in the tubes were centrifuged after two months chloride exposure. It is assumed 
that the centrifuged solution shows the same chloride concentration as the pore solution, even 
though Shi et al. acknowledged that centrifugation would not completely remove the pore 
solution from the samples. Chloride concentrations of the extracted solutions were determined 
by potentiometric titration.  
The total chloride content was concluded from the difference in measured equilibrium chloride 
concentration and initial chloride concentration (found in table A2 in the Appendix) and 
reported in 𝑔/𝑔⁡𝑢𝑛ℎ𝑦𝑑𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑⁡𝑐𝑒𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡. The author assumes that chemical binding is dominated 
by Friedel’s salt formation and physical binding by adsorption of chlorides onto C-S-H. The 
amount of Friedel’s salt is investigated by experimental analysis (TGA/XRD) and 
thermodynamic modelling, showing a good agreement between those measurements and 
modelled results.   
3.2. Treatment and usage of data 
To assess the amount of physical bound chloride, certain data is required. The following section 
explains which data was used from (Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017b) and how it was 
treated to receive the amount of physical bound chloride.  
The amount of physical bound chloride is calculated as the difference between chloride bound 
in Friedel’s salt (FS) and total bound chloride. Minor amounts of chloride may also be chemical 
bound in other phases than Friedel’s but are assumed to be neglectable.  
 
𝐶𝐶𝑙,𝑝ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙= 𝐶𝐶𝑙,𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙−𝐶𝐶𝑙,𝐹𝑆 
Eq.24 
As mentioned in Section 3.1 the amount of chloride bound in Friedel’s salt can be determined 
in different ways. For example, by thermodynamic modelling or experimental TGA and XRD 
measurements. The amount of total chloride is calculated by Eq.25: 
 
𝐶𝐶𝑙,𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙[
𝑔
𝑔⁡𝑝𝑎𝑠𝑡𝑒] =
𝑀𝐶𝑙∗(𝐶𝐶𝑙,𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒,0 −𝐶𝐶𝑙,𝑒𝑞.) ∗(𝑉𝐶𝑙,𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑑+ 𝑉𝐻2𝑂,𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒)/1000
𝑚𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒
𝑤/𝑏
 
Eq.25 
With 𝑀𝐶𝑙 being the molar mass of Cl, 𝑀𝐶𝑙= 35,45⁡ [
𝑔
𝑚𝑜𝑙], 𝐶𝐶𝑙,𝑒𝑞. is the equilibrium 
concentration of chlorides in the final solution [
𝑚𝑜𝑙
𝑙] and 𝑚𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 is the wet sample mass in 
[𝑔]. The amount of free initial chloride, 𝐶𝐶𝑙,𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒,0, is calculated by: 
 
𝐶𝐶𝑙,𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒,0[𝑚𝑜𝑙
𝑙] = 𝑉𝐶𝑙,𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑑∗𝐶𝑐𝑙,𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑑
𝑉𝐶𝑙,𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑑+ 𝑉𝐻2𝑂,𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒
 
Eq.26 
==PAGE:40==
 
32 
 
 
With 𝑉𝐻2𝑂⁡being the free water of the sample obtained by 𝑉𝐻2𝑂⁡=  
𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠⁡𝑜𝑓⁡𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒∗𝑤𝑡.%⁡𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒⁡𝑤𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑟
100
 
[𝑚𝑙], 𝑉𝐶𝑙,𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑑 is the volume of added exposure solution in [𝑚𝑙] and 𝐶𝑐𝑙,𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑑 is the 
concentration of added chloride in the exposure solution [
𝑚𝑜𝑙
𝑙]. 
The amount of Friedel’s salt and total bound chloride of the equilibrated samples can be found 
in the Appendix in table A3 and table A4. After calculation of the physical bound chlorides as 
shown in Eq.24, the amount of physical bound chloride (𝐶𝐶𝑙,𝑝ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙) is fit to a modified 
Langmuir isotherm expression as has been introduced in in Section 2.1.1 and used by e.g. (Ye 
et al., 2016) or (Baroghel-bouny et al., 2012) with the form of Eq.27:  
 
 
𝐶𝐶𝑙⁡𝑝ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙= 𝑥∗
𝛼∗𝐶𝑐𝑙
1 + 𝛽∗𝐶𝐶𝑙
 
 
Eq.27 
 
Where x⁡is⁡the⁡scaling⁡factor, α is the binding parameter α and β⁡⁡is⁡the⁡binding⁡parameter⁡β. 
To fit the modified langmuir expression the excel built in solver function is used to find the 
least root mean square error.  
To asses the impact of physical binding the initial phase assemblage and change with chloride 
exposure as well as the amount of bound chlorides (physical, chemical) has to be investigated. 
For this matter initial phase assemblage calculations are compared to calculations by Shi et al.. 
After matching a comparable trend physical binding is included:  
1. before the chemical solver is run 
2. after the chemical solver is run 
The used input format via an excel sheet for the model requires input of the chemical 
compositions for the different materials. The chemical composition has to contain information 
about the content of CaO, SiO2, Al2O3, Fe2O3, SO3, K2O, Na2O, MgO, CaSO4, NaCl and CO2 
as has already been introduced in Section 2.2. 
Combination of the data from Shi et al. as presented in Table 6 and Table 7 gives the 
combined composition used as input value for the different materials (Table 10): 
 
==PAGE:41==
 
33 
 
Table 10: Combined chemical composition of the different mixtures for thermodynamic 
modelling (wt.%) 
  
P 
ML 
M 
CaO 
66.13 
48.53 
45.10 
SiO2 
21.81 
28.58 
31.71 
Al2O3 
3.56 
12.52 
15.02 
Fe2O3 
0.24 
0.53 
0.62 
SO3 
3.37 
2.31 
2.31 
K2O 
0.43 
0.55 
0.61 
Na2O 
0.04 
0.05 
0.04 
MgO 
1.1 
0.89 
0.90 
CaSO4 
4.1 
2.79 
2.79 
NaCl 
- 
- 
- 
CO2 
- 
- 
- 
 
In addition to the chemical composition, the degree of reactivity for the different components 
has to be defined. Shi et al. provided the degree of hydration for Alite, Belite and Metakaolin 
for 28 and 180 days, dependent on the mix, as shown in Table 9. To get an idea about the degree 
of hydration and reactivity of the combined materials the different oxides originating from the 
mentioned phases can be combined in accordance to assumed phase composition (Table 11) 
and the individual degree of hydration. 
Table 11: Assumed chemical phase composition Alite, Belite, Tricalcium aluminate and 
Metakaolin 
Alite 
Ca3SiO5⁡ 
Belite 
Ca2SiO4⁡ 
C3A 
3𝐶𝑎𝑂𝐴𝑙2𝑂3⁡ 
Metakaolin 
𝐴𝑙2𝑆𝑖2𝑂7⁡ 
Oxides 
wt.% 
Oxides 
wt.% 
Oxides 
wt.% 
Oxides 
wt.% 
SiO2 
26.31 
SiO2 
34.884 
Al2O3 
37.736 
Al2O3 
45.902 
CaO 
73.69 
CaO 
65.116 
CaO 
62.264 
SiO2 
54.098 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
34 
 
With this assumptions and Data given for 180 days of hydration the initial model input for 
reactivity combines to the values shown in table A7 in the appendix. However, this combination 
is at its best valid for samples at the age of 180 days of hydration. Shi et al. exposed the samples 
in their thermodynamic model to chlorides after 91 days of hydration. The used data for Alite, 
Belite and Metakaolin after 91 days of hydration is not provided within the publication (Shi, 
Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017b). The reactivity for the remaining components (Fe2O3, SO3, 
K2O, Na2O, MgO, CaSO4, NaCl and CO2) has to be assumed giving a particular uncertainty. 
The initial assumptions, with inclusion of the data at 180 days, are scaled down until accordance 
to Shi et al.’s initial phase assemblage data is reached to a satisfying degree. Graphical data has 
been extracted by a digital tool for better comparison (Rohatgi, 2019). A list with the ions 
considered for the specific thermodynamic modelling done, can be found in the Appendix (list 
A). 
Exposing the simulated materials to 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 and 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 solution of same concentrations used in 
the experiments considering the modified Langmuir isotherms for physical binding (based on 
experimental observations) allows to asses the impact of the implementation before and after 
the chemical solver is run. 
Table 12: Combined DOH for different Materials after 180 days, initial model input 
  
wPc  
(P) 
combination MK and wPc 
(ML) 
combination MK and wPc 
(M) 
  
DOH % 
DOH % 
DOH % 
CaO 
89.9 
89.9 
89.9 
SiO2 
86.8 
72.9 
75.1 
Al2O3 
100 
68.4 
68.4 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
35 
 
4. Results and Discussion 
Calculating and fitting the data for physical bound chloride to the modified Langmuir 
expression leads to following physical chloride binding isotherms (Figure 8). 
 
Figure 8: Free vs. physical bound chloride for P = pure Portland cement, M = partly 
substituted with Metakaolin, ML = partly substituted with Metakaolin and limestone  
==PAGE:44==
 
36 
 
The resulting modified Langmuir binding parameter calculated for the different mixes are given 
in Table 13. In general, it can be observed that mixtures exposed to 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 show a higher 
physical binding capacity than mixtures of the same composition exposed to 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 solution of 
same chloride concentration (Figure 8). This is true for all three mixtures. It also appears that 
the physical binding capacity for 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 exposure increases faster in lower concentrations e.g. 
the curvature of the isotherm is steeper. The influence of the Cation, especially increased 
binding under the presence of calcium cations, is one of the major findings of Shi’s investigation 
(Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017b). However, physical binding was not the focus of that 
investigation. The before mentioned observations become more clear in a direct comparison of 
the physical binding isotherms as shown in Figure 9. 
Table 13 calculated Langmuir binding parameter 
  
𝛼 
𝛽 
𝑥 
P NaCl 
0.005 
0.014 
0.1 
P CaCl2 
0.008 
0.010 
0.2 
ML NaCl 
0.023 
0.024 
0.1 
ML CaCl2 0.131 
0.121 
0.1 
M NaCl 
0.021 
0.025 
0.1 
M CaCl2 
0.102 
0.077 
0.1 
 
 
0,00
0,20
0,40
0,60
0,80
1,00
1,20
1,40
0
500
1000
1500
2000
physical bound chloride (mmol/g)
Free chloride (mmol/l)
Free vs physical bound 
chloride
Calculated NaCl P
Calculated NaCl M
Calculated NaCl ML
0,00
0,20
0,40
0,60
0,80
1,00
1,20
1,40
0
500
1000
1500
2000
physical bound chloride (mmol/g)
Free chloride (mmol/l)
Free vs physical bound 
chloride
Calculated CaCl2 P
Calculated CaCl2 M
Calculated CaCl2 ML
Figure 9: Modified Langmuir isotherms, comparison of the different materials 
==PAGE:45==
 
37 
 
The difference between the physical binding capacity of the pure wPc binder and the binder 
with cement substitution is around a factor of three for 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 exposure and around two for 
𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 exposure. The physical binding capacity for the binder containing limestone and 
metakaolin appears to be slightly higher under 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 exposure, but slightly lower under 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 
exposure compared to the binder containing only Metakaolin. Comparing the initial modelled 
phase assemblage to the phase assemblage of Shi et al. shows good agreement (Figure 10). 
There is a certain difference in the initial phase composition compared to the data retrieved 
from Shi’s plots by a digitilizing tool. However, the results show a satisfying degree of 
comparability for the initial assemblage as shown in Table 14. 
 
Figure 10 Modelled phase assemblage comparison to Shi et al. (Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 
2017a) 
 
Mix P NaCl 
 
Mix M  NaCl 
 
Mix ML NaCl 
 
Wt.% 
Shi 
model 
Shi 
model 
Shi 
model 
CSH 
39 
40 
37 
40 
37 
42 
Ettringite 
10 
10 
4 
3 
7 
7 
Mono carbonate 
 
 
11 
11 
16 
16 
CH 
20 
20 
 
 
 
 
Unreacted 
9 
12 
19 
20 
16 
16 
Strängliitite 
 
 
5 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 14 comparison of initial phase composition (0 mol/l exposure) 
==PAGE:46==
 
38 
 
Comparing the phase assemblage (Figure 11) it can be observed that for all mixes the chloride 
bearing phases e.g. Friedel’s and Kunzel’s salt are formed in a greater amount upon 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 
exposure. Kunzel’s salt is only predicte to form in mixture M at low chloride concentrations, 
which is in allingment with Shi’s predicted phase assemblage upon exposure.  
 
 
Figure 11 phase assemblage of the materials under different exposure conditions 
==PAGE:47==
 
39 
 
 
 
Table 15 wt.% of predicted bound & free chlorides of the total chlorides at an exposure level 
of 2 mol/l; Mix P, M and ML 
  
Mix P no physical 
binding 
Mix M no 
physical binding 
Mix ML no 
physical binding 
  
NaCl 
CaCl2 
NaCl 
CaCl2 
NaCl 
CaCl2 
chemical bound wt.% 
48 
63 
69 
97 
96 
100 
physical bound wt.% 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
free chlorides wt.% 
52 
37 
31 
3 
4 
0 
Table 15 exemplifies the observed amount of chlorides predicted by thermodynamic modelling 
to be bound chemical and available free in solution with the exposure solution at its peak of two 
mol/l of chloride exposure.  
So far, the physical binding has not been considered. As explained in Section 3.2 the physical 
binding has been included before and after the chemical solver is run. Including the physical 
binding before the chemical solver is run leads to the distribution of predicted bound and free 
chlorides as shown in Figure 12. In the case of 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 exposure, the majority of the bound 
chloride is predicted to be bound physical (Figure 12 a, c and e) and only a minor part is 
predicted to be bound chemical. In case of 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 exposure of Mixture P, more chloride is 
predicted to be bound chemical (Figure 12 b). For Mixture M more chlorides are predicted to 
be free in solution for 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 exposure. For 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 exposure of Mixture M (Figure 12 d), the 
calculated amount of chemical bound chloride is less than for NaCl exposure but remains 
comparable. Almost no free chlorides are predicted to be in solution. The amount of physical 
bound chloride is predicted to be identical for both exposure conditions of mixture ML (Figure 
12 e, f). No free chlorides are calculated to be in the solution. A summary in terms of wt.% of 
the bound chloride including physical binding before the chemical solver is given in following 
table: 
Table 16 wt.% of predicted bound & free chlorides of the total chlorides at an exposure level 
of 2 mol/l including physical binding before chemical solver; Mix P, M and ML 
  
Mix P physical binding 
before 
Mix M physical 
binding before 
Mix ML physical 
binding before 
  
NaCl 
CaCl2 
NaCl 
CaCl2 
NaCl 
CaCl2 
chemical bound wt.% 
2 
11 
6 
3 
12 
12 
physical bound wt.% 
62 
84 
85 
97 
88 
88 
free chlorides wt.% 
36 
5 
9 
0 
0 
0 
==PAGE:48==
 
40 
 
 
 
Figure 12 predicted bound & free chlorides including physical binding before chemical solver 
==PAGE:49==
 
41 
 
If chemical binding is considered after the chemical solver is run the distribution is calculated 
as shown in Figure 13: 
 
 
Figure 13 predicted bound & free chlorides including physical binding after chemical solver 
==PAGE:50==
 
42 
 
In this case considering the 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 exposure a significant amount of chlorides is predicted to be 
bound physical for Mixture P and M (Figure 13 a,c), but the bigger share is predicted to be 
bound chemical (b,d). In case of the 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 exposure of the pure wPc mixture, physical bound 
chloride is predicted, but the amount is smaller than in the case of 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 exposure (Figure 13 
e,f). For the mixtures containing metakaolin substitution, almost all chloride is predicted to be 
bound chemical and no free chloride is predicted in solution. For the Mixture ML there is only 
for 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 exposure a minor part of chlorides predicted to be free in solution (Figure 13 e). For 
𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 exposure all chlorides are bound (Figure 13 f). In both cases, no physical binding is 
predicted at all and all bound chloride is calculated to be bound chemical. 
The inclusion of the physical binding also has implications on the phase assemblage as it 
changes the chlorides available for reaction. The biggest impact is found in mixture M exposed 
to 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 solution. In the phase assemblage, no more formation of Friedel’s salt is predicted if 
the physical binding is included before the chemical solver. Kunzel’s salt is predicted to form 
up to the maximum exposure concentration of two mol/l. Without physical binding Kunzel’s 
salt was only predicted to be formed up to an exposure concentration of 0.7 mol/l (Figure 14). 
Comparisons of Mixture P with 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 and 𝐶𝑎𝐶𝑙2 exposure as well as Mixture M under 𝑁𝑎𝐶𝑙 
exposure are shown in in figure A1 (Appendices). A summary in terms of wt.% of the bound 
chloride including physical binding after the chemical solver is given in Table 17: 
 
Table 17 wt.% of predicted bound & free chlorides of the total chlorides at an exposure level 
of 2 mol/l incl. physic. bin. after chemical solver; Mix P, M and ML 
  
Mix P physical 
binding after 
Mix M physical 
binding after 
Mix ML physical 
binding after 
  
NaCl 
CaCl2 
NaCl 
CaCl2 
NaCl 
CaCl2 
chemical bound wt.% 
48 
63 
69 
97 
96 
100 
physical bound wt.% 
32 
22 
27 
3 
0 
0 
free chlorides wt.% 
21 
15 
5 
0 
4 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
 
43 
 
 
 
 
The big difference in physical binding capacity, has initially thought to be attributable to 
differences in C-S-H content. But as shown in Figure 11 there are no major differences between 
the C-S-H content predicted by thermodynamic modelling. Therefore, the physical binding is 
clearly not solely dependent on the C-S-H content of the material. In Section 2.1.1, it has been 
mentioned that the structure of C-S-H is dependent on the Ca/Si ratio. If cement is substituted 
with metakaolin there is clearly an increased amount of Si present in the initial mix composition. 
This will have an impact on the C-S-H itself. Also the pH-value, which is not identical for any 
of the mixtures (see Figure 11) will have an impact on the C-S-H if leaching occurs. Even 
though the C-S-H content might be comparable, the structure of it does not allow comparing it 
in terms of the physical binding capacity. 
Including physical binding as a modified Langmuir isotherm based on experimental data, helps 
to get an idea about the impact on the phase assemblage and occurring binding. However, the 
results show that the physical binding included with this approach does not necessarily reflect 
the reality. This can simply be explained by the nature of the process and modelling sequence. 
If the physical binding is included before the chemical solver is run, a certain amount of 
chlorides is considered to be bound already and does not participate in formation of any phases. 
If on the other hand physical binding is included after the chemical solver is run, all chlorides 
are first considered to be available for phase formation and only the remaining chlorides (if 
there are any) will be considered according to the Langmuir expression. Thus, running the 
Figure 14 left: Mix M, CaCl2 exposure, no physical binding right: Mix M, CaCl2 exposure, physical binding 
before chemical solver 
==PAGE:52==
 
44 
 
physical binding after running the chemical solver leads to an underestimation of physical 
binding (as seen in e.g. Figure 13). If the physical binding is run before the chemical solver 
function, the chemical binding will be underestimated (see e.g. Figure 12). In reality, chemical 
and physical binding will occur at the same time. This cannot be represented by the used 
approach. The true resulting distribution between chemical and physical bound chloride might 
therefore lay somewhere in between the predictions done with a chemical solver run before and 
after considering the modified Langmuir isotherm. Results of this study indicate that there is 
no generic isotherm that can be used for every material. This can already be identified in Figure 
9. Figure 11 shows that the assemblage of the materials is not identical and material parameters 
and assemblage as well as exposure conditions differ too much. This leads to very different 
predicted binding conditions as can be seen e.g. in Figure 12 and Figure 13. 
Considering the modelling, inclusion of a surface complexation term as introduced in Section 
2.3.1 might lead to less space for interpretation e.g. a result that lays between the values of the 
approach discussed above. The surface complexation approach also considers the Ca/Si ratio 
and the pH-value of the solution. Experimental data might therefore not be necessary.  
Initial simulation of surface complexation in PHREEQC showed that uncertainty of the surface 
site density (which is not agreed upon by the scientific community) might not have a major 
impact on bound chlorides compared to other factors, when a cementitious system is simulated. 
With an exposure of 2.0 moles of NaCl and assumed surface site density of 4.787 sites/nm2 as 
proposed by (Yogarajah, Nawa and Kurumisawa, 2018) 0.875 moles of Cl ions are calculated 
to be bound in the diffuse layer. Increasing the surface site density to 7 sites/nm2 only increases 
the chloride in the diffuse layer to 0.878 moles. Simulating the same system for a 2 moles CaCl2 
exposure leads to a calculated amount of 1.434 moles chloride in the diffuse layer with assumed 
4.787 sites/nm2. Increasing that number to 7 sites/nm2 leads to a calculated amount of 1.788 
moles chloride in the diffuse layer. That difference is substantial but clearly the impact of the 
exposure condition and material properties has an impact that is several times higher. The 
present of calcium changed the surface charge by several magnitudes, but overcharging is not 
predicted for the simulated system. Exclusion of internal surface species e.g. surface sites that 
act bridging within the material matrix changes the amount of calculated chloride in the diffuse 
layer by 0.02 moles for NaCl and 0.01 moles for CaCl2 exposure. This is a difference of two 
percent for NaCl and one percent for CaCl2 exposure. With the given uncertainty in the input 
parameters in true surface area and exact composition this can be assumed to be neglectable. 
Leaving out the internal description can therefore save processing time without a major change 
==PAGE:53==
 
45 
 
in the calculated results if the surface complexation approach is implemented. The PHREEQC 
input statements with the specified surface sites that were considered, and the structure of the 
cementitious system is included in the Appendix, calculations are based on the CEMDATA 18 
database. 
 
5. Conclusion 
Based on literature research two different approaches have been identified to include physical 
chloride binding into an existing model. A methodology for modelling of each of these 
approaches has been presented. As the focus was on implementation of physical chloride 
binding by means of a modified Langmuir expression this implementation has been calibrated 
and tested against short-term data. The impact of the modelling sequence has been investigated. 
Upon the presented results and literature, several conclusions can be made. 
1. Physical chloride binding is not solely dependent on the C-S-H content of the material, 
which will be exposed to chlorides. Dependency on C-S-H content has been assumed 
by several authors and might only be applicable for a range of very specific material 
compositions and exposure conditions. C-S-H composition is dependent on e.g. the 
Ca/Si ratio of the initial material and the pH-value due to leaching. Both therefore have 
an impact on the physical binding capacity. It has been explained that also the cation of 
the exposure solution has a huge impact at same chloride concentrations. 
2. Review and calibration against experimental data showed that there is not a single 
Langmuir expression that can reflect the behaviour of a wide range of materials. This 
connects to Point 1. and the specific parameters of materials and exposure conditions. 
The Langmuir expression can only reflect specific conditions.  
3. Inclusion of the modified Langmuir expression requires experimental data to calibrate. 
If the calibrated Langmuir isotherm is used in a sequenced model approach it will not 
necessarily reflect reality as it leads to an a) underestimation or b) overestimation of 
physical bound chloride depending on the modelling sequence (inclusion of the physical 
binding before or after the chemical solver is run in the single step sequenced model) 
and impacts thereby the predicted phase assemblage. 
 
==PAGE:54==
 
46 
 
6. Recommendations for further work  
This thesis showed that implementation of physical binding by means of the modified Langmuir 
expression requires experimental work for calibration and if it is applied in a single step 
modelled framework can only be used to reflect an overestimated or underestimated impact of 
physical binding. A methodology for surface complexation has been presented. This surface 
complexation might lead to more realistic values as it considers the impact of pH changes, 
associated cations and material structure by e.g. Ca/Si ratio. It is therefore suggested to compare 
results received and presented in this thesis with results obtained by an implementation of the 
surface complexation of the same material composition. For that matter all necessary material 
parameters should be included within this work. Initial PHREEQC based simulation showed 
that 
• The impact of the material parameters and exposure conditions is several magnitudes 
higher than the impact of assumption on the surface site density which is also not agreed 
upon by the scientific community and certainly not the same for every material 
composition 
• Exclusion of several equations describing internal site species does impact the result to 
degree that can be neglected, given the uncertainty of the input parameters and therefore 
save computational power and time 
==PAGE:55==
 
47 
 
Literature  
Addassi, M. et al. (2019) ‘MODELLING AND TESTING OF CARBONATION EFFECTS 
ON HYDRATED OIL-WELL CEMENTS’, in IFFSAR (ed.) International Workshop. CO2 
Storage in Concrete. Marne La Vallée, FR. 
Alkan, M. et al. (2005) ‘Zeta potentials of perlite samples in various electrolyte and surfactant 
media’, Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 259(1–3), pp. 
155–166. doi: 10.1016/j.colsurfa.2005.02.024. 
Balonis, M. et al. (2010) ‘Impact of chloride on the mineralogy of hydrated Portland cement 
systems’, Cement and Concrete Research. Elsevier Ltd, 40(7), pp. 1009–1022. doi: 
10.1016/j.cemconres.2010.03.002. 
Baroghel-bouny, V. et al. (2012) ‘Prediction of chloride binding isotherms of cementitious 
materials by analytical model or numerical inverse analysis’, Cement and Concrete Research. 
Elsevier Ltd, 42(9), pp. 1207–1224. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2012.05.008. 
Baroghel-Bouny, V. (2007) ‘Water vapour sorption experiments on hardened cementitious 
materials. Part I: Essential tool for analysis of hygral behaviour and its relation to pore 
structure’, Cement and Concrete Research, 37(3), pp. 414–437. doi: 
10.1016/j.cemconres.2006.11.019. 
Brunauer, S., Emmett, P. H. and Teller, E. (1938) ‘Adsorption of Gases in Multimolecular 
Layers’, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 60(2), pp. 309–319. doi: 
10.1021/ja01269a023. 
Chen, J. J. et al. (2004) ‘Solubility and structure of calcium silicate hydrate’, Cement and 
Concrete Research, 34(9), pp. 1499–1519. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2004.04.034. 
Cong, X. and Kirkpatrick, J. (1996) ‘Si MAS NMR Study of the Structure of Calcium Silicate 
Hydrate’, Advn. Cem. Bas. Mat., 3, pp. 144–156. 
Dilnesa, B. Z. et al. (2011) ‘Iron in carbonate containing AFm phases’, Cement and Concrete 
Research. Elsevier Ltd, 41(3), pp. 311–323. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2010.11.017. 
Dzombak, D. A. and Morel, F. M. M. (1990) Surface Complexation Modeling: Hydrous 
Ferric Oxide. A Wiley Interscience Publication. 
Elakneswaran, Y., Nawa, T. and Kurumisawa, K. (2009) ‘Electrokinetic potential of hydrated 
cement in relation to adsorption of chlorides’, Cement and Concrete Research. Elsevier B.V., 
39(4), pp. 340–344. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2009.01.006. 
Fidjestöl, P. and Tuutti, K. (1995) ‘The importance of chloride diffusion’, in Proceedings of 
the RILEM Workshop on Chloride Penetration into Concrete. Saint-Remy, France. 
Glass, G. K. and Buenfeld, N. R. (2000) ‘The influence of chloride binding on the chloride 
induced corrosion risk in reinforced concrete’, Corrosion Science, 42(2), pp. 329–344. doi: 
10.1016/S0010-938X(99)00083-9. 
Glasser, F. P., Marchand, J. and Samson, E. (2008) ‘Durability of concrete — Degradation 
phenomena involving detrimental chemical reactions’, Cement and Concrete Research, 38(2), 
pp. 226–246. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2007.09.015. 
Grunewald, John; Häupl, Peter; Bomberg, M. (2003) ‘Towards an engineering model of 
material characteristics for input to ham transport simulations - Part 1: An approach’, Journal 
of Thermal Envelope and Building Science, 26(4). 
Heath, T. G., D. J. Ilett, C. J. T. (1996) ‘Thermodynamic Modelling of the sorption of 
==PAGE:56==
 
48 
 
radioelements onto cementitious materials’, Mat. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 412, pp. 443–449. 
Helene Viallis-Terrisse, Andre Nonat,  and J.-C. P. (2001) ‘Zeta-Potential Study of Calcium 
Silicate Hydrates Interacting with Alkaline Cations’, Journal of Colloid and Interface 
Science, 244, pp. 58–65. doi: 10.1006/jcis.2001.7897. 
Hemstad, P., Machner, A. and De Weerdt, K. (2020) ‘The effect of artificial leaching with 
HCl on chloride binding in ordinary Portland cement paste’, Cement and Concrete Research, 
130(September 2019). doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2020.105976. 
Hencoq, P. (2006) ‘Modeling of ionic interactions at the C-S-H surface. Application to CsCl 
and LiCl solutions in comparison with NaCl solutions’, in Symposium on Advances in 
Concrete through Science and Enineering. Quebec City. 
Hiemstra, T. and Van Riemsdijk, W. H. (1996) ‘A Surface Structural Approach to Ion 
Adsorption : The Charge Distribution ( CD ) Model’, Journal of Colloid and Interface 
Science, 179, pp. 488–508. 
Hirao, H. et al. (2005) ‘Chloride Binding of Cement Estimated by Binding Isotherms of 
Hydrates’, Journal of Advanced Concrete Technology, 3(1), pp. 77–84. 
Hosokawa, Y. et al. (2006) ‘MODELS FOR CHLORIDE ION BINDINGS IN HARDENED 
CEMENT’, in 2nd International Symposium on Advances in Concrete through Science and 
Engineering. Quebec City. 
Janssen, H., Blocken, B. and Carmeliet, J. (2007) ‘Conservative modelling of the moisture 
and heat transfer in building components under atmospheric excitation’, International Journal 
of Heat and Mass Transfer, 50(5–6), pp. 1128–1140. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2006.06.048. 
Jensen, M. M. (2014) ‘A Coupled Transport and Chemical Model for Durability Predictions 
of Cement Based Materials’. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 321(September), 
p. 208. 
Jensen, M. M. et al. (2015) ‘Use of a multi-species reactive transport model to simulate 
chloride ingress in mortar exposed to NaCl solution or sea-water’, Computational Materials 
Science. Elsevier, 105, pp. 75–82. doi: 10.1016/J.COMMATSCI.2015.04.023. 
Jensen, M. M., Johannesson, B. and Geiker, M. R. (2015) ‘A Numerical Comparison of Ionic 
Multi-Species Diffusion with and without Sorption Hysteresis for Cement-Based Materials’, 
Transport in Porous Media. Springer Netherlands, 107(1), pp. 27–47. doi: 10.1007/s11242-
014-0423-3. 
Jensen, M. M. M., Johannesson, B. and Geiker, M. R. R. (2014) ‘Framework for reactive 
mass transport: Phase change modeling of concrete by a coupled mass transport and chemical 
equilibrium model’, Computational Materials Science. Elsevier, 92, pp. 213–223. doi: 
10.1016/j.commatsci.2014.05.021. 
Johannesson, B. (2010) ‘Development of a generalized version of the Poisson-Nernst-Planck 
equations using the hybrid mixture theory: Presentation of 2D numerical examples’, 
Transport in Porous Media, 85(2), pp. 565–592. doi: 10.1007/s11242-010-9578-8. 
Kulik, D. A. (2011) ‘Improving the structural consistency of C-S-H solid solution 
thermodynamic models’, Cement and Concrete Research. Elsevier Ltd, 41(5), pp. 477–495. 
doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2011.01.012. 
Kulik, D. A. et al. (2015) ‘GEMS: Gibbs Energy Minimization Software for geochemical 
modeling’, p. 12. Available at: http://gems.web.psi.ch/contribs/GEMS-talk-Sep-2015.pdf. 
==PAGE:57==
 
49 
 
Labbez, C. et al. (2007) ‘Experimental and theoretical evidence of overcharging of calcium 
silicate hydrate’, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 309(2), pp. 303–307. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcis.2007.02.048. 
Leidheiser, H. (1981) Comprehensive treatise of electrochemistry. 1. The double layer, 
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science. doi: 10.1016/0021-9797(81)90366-0. 
Lippens, B. C., Linsen, B. G. and Boer, J. H. d. (1964) ‘Studies on pore systems in catalysts I. 
The adsorption of nitrogen; apparatus and calculation’, Journal of Catalysis, 3(1), pp. 32–37. 
doi: 10.1016/0021-9517(64)90089-2. 
Lothenbach, B. et al. (2008) ‘Thermodynamic modelling of the effect of temperature on the 
hydration and porosity of Portland cement’, Cement and Concrete Research, 38(1), pp. 1–18. 
doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2007.08.017. 
Lothenbach, B. et al. (2019) ‘Cemdata18: A chemical thermodynamic database for hydrated 
Portland cements and alkali-activated materials’, Cement and Concrete Research, 115, pp. 
472–506. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2018.04.018. 
Lothenbach, B. and Winnefeld, F. (2006) ‘Thermodynamic modelling of the hydration of 
Portland cement’, Cement and Concrete Research, 36(2), pp. 209–226. doi: 
10.1016/j.cemconres.2005.03.001. 
Matschei, T., Lothenbach, B. and Glasser, F. P. (2007) ‘Thermodynamic properties of 
Portland cement hydrates in the system CaO-Al2O3-SiO2-CaSO4-CaCO3-H2O’, Cement and 
Concrete Research, 37(10), pp. 1379–1410. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2007.06.002. 
Mayant, C. et al. (2008) ‘Surface site density, silicic acid retention and transport properties of 
compacted magnetite powder’, Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, 33(14–16), pp. 991–999. 
doi: 10.1016/j.pce.2008.05.011. 
Meson, V. M. (2019) Reactive mass transport model for cement-based materials - parametric 
study. Lyngby. 
Michel, A. (2012) Reinforcement Corrosion : Numerical Simulation and Service Life 
Prediction. 
Michel, A. et al. (2019) ‘Coupled mass transport, chemical, and mechanical modelling in 
cementitious materials: A dual-lattice approach’, in Caspeele, R., Taerwe, L., and Frangopol, 
D. M. (eds) Life Cycle Analysis and Assessment in Civil Engineering: Towards an Integrated 
Vision: Proceedings of the Sixth International Symposium on Life-Cycle Civil Engineering 
(IALCCE 2018). Ghent, Belgium: CRC Press, pp. 965–972. 
Mounanga, P. et al. (2004) ‘Predicting Ca(OH)2 content and chemical shrinkage of hydrating 
cement pastes using analytical approach’, Cement and Concrete Research, 34(2), pp. 255–
265. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2003.07.006. 
Müller, R. H. (1996) Zetapotential und Partikelladung in der Laborpraxis: Einführung in die 
Theorie, Praktische Meßdurchführung, Dateninterpretation. Wissenschaftliche 
Verlagsgesellschaft. 
Nguyen, T. Q., Baroghel-Bouny, V. and Dangla, P. (2006) ‘Prediction of chloride ingress into 
saturated concrete on the basis of a multi-species model by numerical calculations’, 
Computers and Concrete, 3(6), pp. 401–422. doi: 10.12989/cac.2006.3.6.401. 
Nilsson, L. et al. (1996) ‘Chloride Penetration Into Concrete State-of-the-art: Transport 
Processes, Corrosion Initiation, Test Methods and Prediction Models’, (December 2015), p. 
151. doi: 10.13140/RG.2.1.2771.7526. 
==PAGE:58==
 
50 
 
Nonat, A. (2004) ‘The structure and stoichiometry of C-S-H’, Cement and Concrete 
Research, 34(9), pp. 1521–1528. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2004.04.035. 
Parkhurst, D. L. and Appelo, C. a. J. (2013) ‘Description of Input and Examples for 
PHREEQC Version 3 — A Computer Program for Speciation , Batch-Reaction , One-
Dimensional Transport , and Inverse Geochemical Calculations. U.S. Geological Survey 
Techniques and Methods, book 6, chapter A43, 497 p.’, U.S. Geological Survey Techniques 
and Methods, book 6, chapter A43, pp. 6-43A. 
Ping Yu, R. James Kirkpatrick, Brent Poe, P. F. M. and X. C. (1999) ‘Structure of Calcium 
Silicate Hydrate (C-S-H): Near-, Mid-, and Far-Infrared Spectroscopy’, Journal of the 
American Ceramic Society, 82, pp. 742–748. 
Plassard, C. et al. (2005) ‘Nanoscale Experimental Investigation of Particle’, Langmuir, 
21(16), pp. 7263–7270. doi: 10.1021/LA050440+. 
Plusquellec, G. and Nonat, A. (2016) ‘Interactions between calcium silicate hydrate (C-S-H) 
and calcium chloride, bromide and nitrate’, Cement and Concrete Research. Elsevier Ltd, 90, 
pp. 89–96. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2016.08.002. 
Pointeau, I. et al. (2006) ‘Measurement and modeling of the surface potential evolution of 
hydrated cement pastes as a function of degradation’, Journal of Colloid and Interface 
Science, 300(1), pp. 33–44. doi: 10.1016/j.jcis.2006.03.018. 
Poulsen, S. L. et al. (2009) ‘Improved quantification of alite and belite in anhydrous Portland 
cements by 29Si MAS NMR: Effects of paramagnetic ions’, Solid State Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance, 36(1), pp. 32–44. doi: 10.1016/j.ssnmr.2009.05.001. 
Richardson, I. G. (2004) ‘Tobermorite / jennite- and tobermorite / calcium hydroxide-based 
models for the structure of C-S-H : applicability to hardened pastes of tricalcium silicate , h -
dicalcium silicate , Portland cement , and blends of Portland cement with blast-furnace slag ’, 
Cement and Concrete Research, 34, pp. 1733–1777. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2004.05.034. 
Rohatgi, A. (2019) WebPlotDigitizer 4.2, WebPlotDigitizer. Available at: 
https://automeris.io/WebPlotDigitizer. 
Scheffler, G. A. and Plagge, R. (2010) ‘A whole range hygric material model: Modelling 
liquid and vapour transport properties in porous media’, International Journal of Heat and 
Mass Transfer. Elsevier Ltd, 53(1–3), pp. 286–296. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2009.09.030. 
Schirmer, R. (1938) ‘Die Diffusionszahl von Wasserdampf-Luft-Gemischen und die 
Verdampfungsgeschwindigkeit (german)’. Berlin: VDI-Verlag. 
Shi, Z., Geiker, M. R., Lothenbach, B., et al. (2017a) ‘Friedel’s salt profiles from 
thermogravimetric analysis and thermodynamic modelling of Portland cement-based mortars 
exposed to sodium chloride solution’, Cement and Concrete Composites. Elsevier, 78, pp. 73–
83. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2017.01.002. 
Shi, Z., Geiker, M. R., Lothenbach, B., et al. (2017b) ‘Friedel’s salt profiles from 
thermogravimetric analysis and thermodynamic modelling of Portland cement-based mortars 
exposed to sodium chloride solution’, Cement and Concrete Composites. Elsevier Ltd, 78, pp. 
73–83. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconcomp.2017.01.002. 
Shi, Z., Geiker, M. R., De Weerdt, K., et al. (2017a) ‘Role of calcium on chloride binding in 
hydrated Portland cement–metakaolin–limestone blends’, Cement and Concrete Research. 
Elsevier Ltd, 95, pp. 205–216. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2017.02.003. 
Shi, Z., Geiker, M. R., De Weerdt, K., et al. (2017b) ‘Role of calcium on chloride binding in 
==PAGE:59==
 
51 
 
hydrated Portland cement–metakaolin–limestone blends’, Cement and Concrete Research. 
Pergamon, 95, pp. 205–216. doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2017.02.003. 
Stern, O. (1924) ‘Zur Theorie der Elektrolytischen Doppelschicht’, Zeitschrift fur 
Elektrochemie, 30, pp. 508–516. doi: 10.1002/bbpc.192400182. 
Tang, L. and Nilsson, L.-O. (1993) ‘Chloride Binding Capacity and Binding Isotherms of 
OPC Pastes and Mortars’, Cement and Concrete Research, 23, pp. 247–253. 
Taylor, H. F. W. (1993) ‘Nanostructure of CSH: Current status’, Advanced Cement Based 
Materials, 1(1), pp. 38–46. doi: 10.1016/1065-7355(93)90006-A. 
Thiéry, M. and Wang, X. (2011) ‘Modelling of isothermal coupled moisture – ion transport in 
cementitious materials’, Cement and Concrete Research. Elsevier Ltd, 41(8), pp. 828–841. 
doi: 10.1016/j.cemconres.2011.04.001. 
Tritthart, J. (1989) ‘Chloride binding in cement II. The influence of the hydroxide 
concentration in the pore solution of hardened cement paste on chloride binding’, Cement and 
Concrete Research, 19, pp. 683–691. 
Vignisdottir, H. R. et al. (2016) ‘Life Cycle assessment of Anti-and De-icing Operations in 
Norway’, CIB World Building Congress, (June), pp. 441–454. 
Weerdt, K. De et al. (2015) ‘Impact of the associated cation on chloride binding of Portland 
cement paste’, Cement and Concrete Research. Elsevier Ltd, 68, pp. 196–202. doi: 
10.1016/j.cemconres.2014.01.027. 
Ye, H. et al. (2016) ‘Prediction of chloride binding isotherms for blended cements’, 
Computers and Concrete, 17(5), pp. 655–672. doi: 10.12989/cac.2016.17.5.655. 
yoga, E. et al. (2010) ‘Ion-cement hydrate interactions govern multi-ionic transport model for 
cementitious materials’, Cement and Concrete Research, 40(12), pp. 1756–1765. doi: 
10.1016/j.cemconres.2010.08.019. 
Yogarajah, E., Nawa, T. and Kurumisawa, K. (2018) ‘Influence of surface electrical 
properties of C-S-H on chloride binding in slag-blended cementitious materials’, Journal of 
Materials in Civil Engineering. American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), 30(5). doi: 
10.1061/(ASCE)MT.1943-5533.0002263. 
==PAGE:60==
 
1 
 
Appendix 
 
OH-, H+, AlO2-, AlO2H, AlSiO5-3, AlO+, Al(OH)+2, Al+3, Al(SO4)+, Al(SO4)2-, 
AlHSiO3+2, Ca(OH)+,Ca+2, CaSO4, CaCO3, CaSiO3, Ca(HCO3)+, Ca(HSiO3)+, FeO2-, 
FeO2H, FeO+, Fe(OH)+2, FeOH+, Fe+2, FeCO3, Fe(SO4), Fe+3, FeCl+, FeCl+2, FeCl2+, 
FeCl3, K+, KOH, KSO4-, Mg(OH)+, Mg+2, Mg(SO4), Mg(CO3), MgSiO3, Mg(HCO3)+, 
Mg(HSiO3)+, NaOH, Na+, Na(SO4)-, NaCO3-, NaHCO3, SiO3-2, SiO2, SO4-2, HSO4-, 
CO2, CO3-2, HCO3-, Cl- 
list A1 considered ions in thermodynamic modelling 
Table A1 constants for chloride calculations 
Constants 
  
  
  
w/b 
  
0,95 
- 
Molar mass of Cl 
  
35,45 
g/mol 
Free water wt% of wet paste 
  P 
30,4 
% 
  
  ML 29,5 
% 
  
  M 
31,4 
% 
Volume exposure solution 
    
15,00 
mL 
Mass wet paste per sample 
    
30,00 
g 
Mass paste per sample 
  P 
20,88 
g 
  
  ML 21,15 
g 
  
  M 
20,58 
g 
WPC per cement paste 
  P 
100,00 
wt% 
  
  ML 68,10 
wt% 
  
  M 
68,10 
wt% 
WPC in each sample 
  P 
20,88 
g 
  
  ML 14,22 
g 
  
  M 
14,22 
g 
Free water from paste in each sample P 
9,12 
ml 
  
  ML 8,85 
ml 
  
  M 
9,42 
ml 
 
==PAGE:61==
 
2 
 
Table A2 added, free and equilibrium chloride concentrations 
NaCl 
P  
ML 
M 
CCl,added 
CCl,free 
CCl,eq 
CCl,free 
CCl,eq 
CCl,free 
CCl,eq 
mol/l 
mol/l 
mol/l 
mol/l 
mol/l 
mol/l 
mol/l 
2,000 
1,244 
1,078 
1,258 
0,862 
1,229 
0,892 
1,000 
0,622 
0,476 
0,629 
0,359 
0,614 
0,369 
0,500 
0,311 
0,213 
0,314 
0,137 
0,307 
0,152 
0,250 
0,155 
0,081 
0,157 
0,036 
0,154 
0,047 
0,125 
0,078 
0,031 
0,079 
0,012 
0,077 
0,012 
0,000 
0,000 
0,001 
0,000 
0 
0,000 
0,001 
 
CaCl2 
P  
ML 
M 
CCl,added 
CCl,free 
CCl,eq 
CCl,free 
CCl,eq 
CCl,free 
CCl,eq 
Conc. 
mol/l 
mol/l 
mol/l 
mol/l 
mol/l 
mol/l 
2,000 
1,244 
0,695 
1,258 
0,491 
1,229 
0,419 
1,000 
0,622 
0,285 
0,629 
0,123 
0,614 
0,122 
0,500 
0,311 
0,114 
0,314 
0,042 
0,307 
0,045 
0,250 
0,155 
0,047 
0,157 
0,012 
0,154 
0,017 
0,125 
0,078 
0,019 
0,079 
0,005 
0,077 
0,005 
0,000 
0,000 
0 
0,000 
0 
0,000 
0,000 
 
Table A3 amount of Friedel's salt (g/g cement) for the different mixes and exposure conditions 
(Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017b) 
P-CaCl2 
P-NaCl 
ML-CaCl2 
ML-NaCl 
M-CaCl2 
M-NaCl 
0,00 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0,10 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0,20 
0,001476 0 
0,001138 
0 
0 
0 
0,30 
0,002747 0,000839 0,004635 
0 
0,001137 0 
0,40 
0,003045 0,002436 0,00813 
0,001192 0,010667 0 
0,50 
0,003216 0,002673 0,011626 
0,002493 0,014597 0 
0,80 
0,003429 0,003073 0,022113 
0,006148 0,021967 0,012072 
==PAGE:62==
 
3 
 
1,00 
0,003477 0,003221 0,029104 
0,00852 
0,028933 0,013782 
1,50 
0,003514 0,003417 0,032988 
0,014539 0,037278 0,016956 
2,00 
0,003522 0,003498 0,033098 
0,020874 0,037465 0,019324 
 
Table A4 amount of total bound chloride (g/g paste) for the different mixes and exposure 
conditions (Shi, Geiker, De Weerdt, et al., 2017b) 
NaCl 
  
P  
CaCl2 
  
 P 
CCl,added 
CCl,bound 
  
CCl,added 
CCl,bound 
  
Conc, 
average SD 
Conc, 
average SD 
2 
0,011 
0,001 
2 
0,021 
0 
1 
0,009 
0,001 
1 
0,014 
0 
0,5 
0,005 
0 
0,5 
0,009 
0 
0,25 
0,004 
0 
0,25 
0,005 
0 
0,125 
0,003 
0 
0,125 
0,003 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
NaCl 
  
 ML 
CaCl2 
  
 ML 
CCl,added 
CCl,bound 
  
CCl,added 
CCl,bound 
  
Conc, 
average SD 
Conc, 
average SD 
2 
0,023 
0,001 
2 
0,033 
0,001 
1 
0,015 
0 
1 
0,023 
0 
0,5 
0,009 
0 
0,5 
0,013 
0 
0,25 
0,007 
0 
0,25 
0,007 
0 
0,125 
0,004 
0 
0,125 
0,004 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
NaCl 
  
 M 
CaCl2 
  
 M 
CCl,added 
CCl,bound 
  
CCl,added 
CCl,bound 
  
Conc, 
average SD 
Conc, 
average SD 
2 
0,02 
0 
2 
0,036 
0 
1 
0,014 
0,001 
1 
0,023 
0 
0,5 
0,008 
0 
0,5 
0,012 
0 
0,25 
0,006 
0 
0,25 
0,007 
0 
==PAGE:63==
 
4 
 
0,125 
0,004 
0 
0,125 
0,003 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
Table A5 calculated amount of physical bound chloride 
Mix P 
NaCl 
 
 
 
 
Mix P 
CaCl2  
 
CCl,added CCl,final 
CCl,physical 
 
CCl,added 
CCl,final 
CCl,physical 
Conc, 
mol/L 
mmol/L 
g/g  
mmol/g  
 
Conc, 
mol/L mmol/L g/g  
mmol/g  
2 
1,078 
1078 
0,01 0,21 
2 
0,695 695 
0,02 
0,49 
1 
0,476 
476 
0,01 0,16 
1 
0,285 285 
0,01 
0,30 
0,5 
0,213 
213 
0,00 0,07 
0,5 
0,114 114 
0,01 
0,16 
0,25 
0,081 
81 
  
  
0,25 
0,047 47 
  
  
0,125 
0,031 
31 
  
  
0,125 
0,019 19 
  
  
0 
0,001 
1 
0,00 0,00 
0 
0 
0 
0,00 
0,00 
Mix 
ML 
NaCl 
 
 
 
 
Mix ML CaCl2  
 
CCl,added CCl,final 
CCl,physical 
 
CCl,added 
CCl,final 
CCl,physical 
Conc, 
mol/L 
mmol/L 
g/g  
mmol/g  
 
Conc, 
mol/L mmol/L g/g  
mmol/g  
2 
0,862 
862 
0,02 0,65 
2 
0,491 491 
0,03 
0,93 
1 
0,359 
359 
0,02 0,42 
1 
0,123 123 
0,02 
0,65 
0,5 
0,137 
137 
0,01 0,25 
0,5 
0,042 42 
0,01 
0,37 
0,25 
0,036 
36 
  
  
0,25 
0,012 12 
  
  
0,125 
0,012 
12 
  
  
0,125 
0,005 5 
  
  
0 
0 
0 
0,00 0,00 
0 
0 
0 
0,00 
0,00 
Mix M 
NaCl 
 
 
 
 
Mix M 
CaCl2  
 
CCl,added CCl,final 
CCl,physical 
 
CCl,added 
CCl,final 
CCl,physical 
Conc, 
mol/L 
mmol/L 
g/g  
mmol/g  
 
Conc, 
mol/L mmol/L g/g  
mmol/g  
2 
0,892 
892 
0,02 0,56 
2 
0,419 419 
0,04 
1,02 
1 
0,369 
369 
0,01 0,39 
1 
0,122 122 
0,02 
0,65 
0,5 
0,152 
152 
0,01 0,23 
0,5 
0,045 45 
0,01 
0,34 
0,25 
0,047 
47 
  
  
0,25 
0,017 17 
  
  
==PAGE:64==
 
5 
 
 
Table A6 reactivity (ALPHA) used for thermodynamic modelling of different species 
ALPHA 
Material P 
Material ML 
Material M 
CaO 
- 
0,85 
0,85 
0,82 
SiO2 
- 
0,83 
0,68 
0,68 
Al2O3 
- 
0,7 
0,7 
0,5 
Fe2O3 
- 
0,4 
0,4 
0,4 
SO3 
- 
0,28 
0,4 
0,2 
K2O 
- 
0,8 
0,8 
0,8 
Na2O 
- 
0,8 
0,8 
0,8 
MgO 
- 
0,8 
0,8 
0,8 
CaSO4 
- 
0,5 
0,5 
0,2 
Cl 
- 
0 
0 
0 
CO2 
- 
1 
1 
1 
0,125 
0,012 
12 
  
  
0,125 
0,005 5 
  
  
0 
0,001 
1 
0,00 0,00 
0 
0 
0 
0,00 
0,00 
==PAGE:65==
 
6 
 
 
 
 
Figure A1 Phase assemlby comparison with and without inclusion of physical binding before the chemical solver 
==PAGE:66==
 
7 
 
Table A7  possible ions, oxides and equilibrium phases to consider in the solving process 
ID OXIDE ION 
EQ 
ID 
ION 
EQ 
1 
CaO 
OH- 
'CH4(g)' 
70 
CH4 
'Fe-hemicarbonate' 
2 
SiO2 
H+ 
'CO2(g)' 
71 
CO3-2 'Fe-monosulph05' 
3 
Al2O3 
O2 
'H2(g)' 
72 
HCO3- 'Fe-monosulphate' 
4 
Fe2O3 H2 
'H2O(g)' 
73 
Cl- 
'Fe' 
5 
SO3 
AlO2- 
'H2S(g)' 
74 
ClO4- 
'Femonocarbonate' 
6 
K2O 
AlO2H 
'N2(g)' 
75 
NH4+ 
'FeOOHmic' 
7 
Na2O 
AlSiO5-3 
'O2(g)' 
76 
N2 
'Gbs' 
8 
MgO 
AlO+ 
'5CA' 
77 
NO3- 
'Gp' 
9 
CaSO4 Al(OH)+2 
'5CNA' 
78 
NH3 
'Gr' 
10 Cl 
Al+3 
'AlOHam' 
79 
HCN 
'Gt' 
11 CO2 
Al(SO4)+ 
'AlOHmic' 
80 
SCN- 
'Hem' 
12 
Al(SO4)2- 
'Amor-Sl' 
81 
'hemicarbonat10.5' 
13 
AlHSiO3+2 
'Anh' 
82 
'hemicarbonate' 
14 
Ca(OH)+ 
'Arg' 
83 
'hemicarbonate9' 
15 
Ca+2 
'Brc' 
84 
'hemihydrate' 
16 
CaSO4 
'C2AClH5' 
85 
'hydrotalcite' 
17 
CaCO3 
'C2AH7.5' 
86 
'INFCA' 
18 
CaSiO3 
'C2AH65' 
87 
'INFCN' 
19 
Ca(HCO3)+ 
'C2S' 
88 
'INFCNA' 
20 
Ca(HSiO3)+ 
'C3A' 
89 
'Jennite' 
21 
FeO2- 
'C3AFS0.84H4.32' 
90 
'K2O' 
22 
FeO2H 
'C3AH6' 
91 
'K2SO4' 
23 
FeO+ 
'C3AS0.41H5.18' 
92 
'Kln' 
24 
Fe(OH)+2 
'C3AS0.84H4.32' 
93 
'KSiOH' 
25 
FeOH+ 
'C3FH6' 
94 
'Lim' 
26 
Fe+2 
'C3FS0.84H4.32' 
95 
'M4A-OH-LDH' 
27 
FeCO3 
'C3FS1.34H3.32' 
96 
'M6A-OH-LDH' 
28 
Fe(SO4) 
'C3S' 
97 
'M8A-OH-LDH' 
29 
Fe+3 
'C4AClH10' 
98 
'Mag' 
30 
Fe(SO4)+ 
'C4AF' 
99 
'Melanterite' 
==PAGE:67==
 
8 
 
31 
FeHCO3+ 
'C4AH11' 
100 
'Mg2AlC0.5OH' 
32 
FeHSiO3+2 
'C4AH13' 
101 
'Mg2FeC0.5OH' 
33 
Fe(SO4)2- 
'C4AH19' 
102 
'Mg3AlC0.5OH' 
34 
FeHSO4+ 
'C4AsClH12' 
103 
'Mg3FeC0.5OH' 
35 
FeHSO4+2 
'C4FH13' 
104 
'Mgs' 
36 
Fe2(OH)2+4 'C12A7' 
105 
'monocarbonate05' 
37 
Fe3(OH)4+5 'CA2' 
106 
'monocarbonate9' 
38 
FeCl+ 
'CA' 
107 
'monocarbonate' 
39 
FeCl+2 
'CAH10' 
108 
'mononitrate' 
40 
FeCl2+ 
Cal' 
109 
'mononitrite' 
41 
FeCl3 
'Cls' 
110 
'monosulphate9' 
42 
K+ 
'CSH3T-T2C' 
111 
'monosulphate10_5' 
43 
KOH 
'CSH3T-T5C' 
112 
'monosulphate12' 
44 
KSO4- 
'CSH3T-TobH' 
113 
'monosulphate14' 
45 
Mg(OH)+ 
'CSHQ-JenD' 
114 
'monosulphate16' 
46 
Mg+2 
'CSHQ-JenH' 
115 
'monosulphate1205' 
47 
Mg(SO4) 
'CSHQ-TobD' 
116 
'Na2O' 
48 
Mg(CO3) 
'CSHQ-TobH' 
117 
'Na2SO4' 
49 
MgSiO3 
'Dis-Dol' 
118 
'NaSiOH' 
50 
Mg(HCO3)+ 
'ECSH1-KSH' 
119 
'Ord-Dol' 
51 
Mg(HSiO3)+ 'ECSH1-NaSH' 
120 
'Portlandite' 
52 
NaOH 
'ECSH1-SH' 
121 
'Py' 
53 
Na+ 
'ECSH1-SrSH' 
122 
'Qtz' 
54 
Na(SO4)- 
'ECSH1-TobCa' 
123 
'Sd' 
55 
NaCO3- 
'ECSH2-JenCa' 
124 
'straetlingite5_5' 
56 
NaHCO3 
'ECSH2-KSH' 
125 
'straetlingite7' 
57 
SiO3-2 
'ECSH2-NaSH' 
126 
'straetlingite' 
58 
HSiO3- 
'ECSH2-SrSH' 
127 
'Str' 
59 
SiO2 
'ECSH2-TobCa' 
128 
'Sulfur' 
60 
Si4O10-4 
'ettringite' 
129 
'syngenite' 
61 
HS- 
'ettringite03_ss' 
130 
'T2C-CNASHss' 
62 
S2O3-2 
'ettringite05' 
131 
'T5C-CNASHss' 
==PAGE:68==
 
9 
 
63 
SO3-2 
'ettringite9' 
132 
'thaumasite' 
64 
SO4-2 
'Ettringite9_des' 
133 
'Tob-I' 
65 
HSO4- 
'ettringite13' 
134 
'Tob-II' 
66 
H2S 
'Ettringite13_des' 
135 
'TobH-CNASHss' 
67 
HSO3- 
'ettringite30' 
136 
'tricarboalu03' 
68 
S-2 
'Fe-ettringite05' 
137 
'Tro' 
69 
CO2 
'Fe-ettringite' 
138 
Fe(OH)3am' 
 
PHREEQC composition and surface site description example: 
 
 
 
SOLID_SOLUTIONS 1 
 
 
CSHQ 
 
 
component CSHQ-JenD 1.554953E+00 
 
 
component CSHQ-JenH 8.543291E-01 
 
 
component CSHQ-TobD 1.154623E+00 
 
 
component CSHQ-TobH 3.992287E-02 
 
 
component KSiOH 3.710691E-01 
 
 
component NaSiOH 3.127481E+00 
 
 
C3(AF)S0.84H 
 
 
component C3AFS0.84H4.32 3.365754E-01 
 
 
component C3FS0.84H4.32 6.838743E-02 
 
 
ettringite 
 
 
component ettringite 1.123740E-01 
 
 
component ettringite30 3.839081E-02 
 
 
SO4_CO3_AFt 
 
 
component tricarboalu03 0.000000E+00 
 
 
component ettringite03_ss 0.000000E+00 
 
SURFACE 1 
 
    equilibrate with solution 1 
 
    sites_units density 
 
    Sio_e      4.787       600       25            Dw 0 
 
    Sio_i      4.787 
 
    diffuse_layer 1e-08 
 
    only_counter_ions 
 
SURFACE_MASTER_SPECIES 
 
    Sio_i         Sio_iOH#internal check for effect if not considered      
 
    Sio_e         Sio_eOH 
 
SURFACE_SPECIES 
 
Sio_eOH = Sio_eOH 
 
    log_k     0 
 
Sio_iOH = Sio_iOH 
 
    log_k     0 
 
Sio_eOH = Sio_eO- + H+ 
 
    log_k     -11.8 
 
Ca+2 + Sio_eOH = Sio_eOCa+ + H+ 
 
    log_k     -9 
 
Ca(OH)+ + Sio_eOH = Sio_eOCaOH + H+ 
 
    log_k     -12 
 
0.5SiO2 + H2O + Sio_eOH = Sio_eOSi0.5OH + H2O 
 
    log_k     3.5 
 
0.5Ca+2 + Sio_eOSi0.5OH = Sio_eOSi0.5OCa0.5 + H+ 
==PAGE:69==
 
10 
 
 
    log_k     -10.2 
 
Sio_eOSi0.5OH = Sio_eOSi0.5O- + H+ 
 
    log_k     -11.8 
 
Ca+2 + Sio_eOSi0.5OH = Sio_eOSi0.5OCa+ + H+ 
 
    log_k     -9 
 
0.5Ca+2 + Sio_iOH = (Sio_iO)Ca0.5 + H+ 
 
    log_k     -10.2 
 
Ca(OH)+ + Sio_iOH = Sio_iOCaOH + H+ 
 
    log_k     -12 
 
0.5SiO2 + H2O + Sio_iOH = Sio_iOSi0.5OH + H2O 
 
    log_k     3.5 
 
0.5Ca+2 + Sio_iOSi0.5OH = Sio_iOSi0.5OCa0.5 + H+ 
 
    log_k     -10.2 
 
Ca+2 + Cl- + Sio_eOH = Sio_eOCaCl + H+ 
 
    log_k    -8.9 
 
Ca+2 + SO4-2 + Sio_eOH = Sio_eOCaSO4- + H+ 
 
    log_k    -6 
 
0.5Ca+2 + Sio_iOH = (Sio_iO)Ca0.5 + H+ 
 
    log_k     -10.2 
 
Ca(OH)+ + Sio_iOH = Sio_iOCaOH + H+ 
 
    log_k     -12 
 
0.5SiO2 + H2O + Sio_iOH = Sio_iOSi0.5OH + H2O 
 
    log_k     3.5 
 
0.5Ca+2 + Sio_iOSi0.5OH = Sio_iOSi0.5OCa0.5 + H+ 
 
    log_k     -10.2 
 
   
