==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master project on development of transformation strategem in
Debaryomyces hansenii
Development of tools for molecular engineering
the halophilic yeast Debaryomyces hansenii
Authors
Mikkel R. Mahler (s153918)
Supervisors
José Luis Martinez Ruiz
Associate Professor
Tomas Strucko
Postdoc
June 27, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
D. hansenii
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
The halotolerance of D. hansenii
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Oleaginous yeast
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
The molecular biology of D. hansenii . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
USER Fusion cloning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Electroporation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
MAD7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Materials and methods
8
3.1
General approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Microorganisms and maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Molecular biological work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3.1
General procedure for PCR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3.2
Procedure for colony PCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3.3
Gel electrophoresis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.4
Puriﬁcation of DNA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3.5
USER fusion cloning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
D. hansenii transformation by electroporation procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Results
14
4.1
Transformation procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Theoretical constructs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2.1
MAD7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.2.2
Production of URA3 deﬁcient strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.3
Production of KU70 deﬁcient strains
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Discussion and conclusion
29
References
31
==PAGE:3==
Introduction
1
Introduction
The biotechnological industries are ever expanding. The portfolio of products the industry
produces increases, however this also means that the industry encroaches on the petrochemical
industry during the transition towards a bioeconomy.
This has so far been facilitated by
deepening the understanding of how a few organisms function and the subsequent exploitation of
this knowledge to optimize productions using those organisms. This has further been improved
by introducing heterologous pathways.
These orthodox expression platforms, i.e. Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Escherichia coli, Baccil-
lus subtilis and Aspergillus niger, have generally been used for most industrial production and
exploration. They are primarily used due to their easy cultivation and the many genetic tools
developed for exactly these organisms. However, the exploitation of a small set of organisms
does not allow for optimizations of production lines outside the capabilities of these organ-
isms. An example of this is the inherent halotolerance found in certain species as compared to
these orthodox production platforms. Many cheap growth mediums have high levels of salts
and cytotoxic chemicals, such as hydrolysates, crude glycerol and molasses from the biodiesel
and food industries.
A S. cerrevisiae cell can have its halotolerance increased by applying
heterologous halotolerance inducing genes introduced to it or by optimization by laboratory
induced evolution. However, an actual halotolerant organism can have many small adaptations
ensuring the functionality of essential genes in elevated concentrations of salts like NaCl as
would be found in waste growth mediums. Theoretically, it should be possible to achieve the
inherent resistance with enough experimentation and induced evolution, though that would be
very resource intensive and expensive. Which would slow the integration and development of
the industry. Furthermore, if a process demands more than one factor to be improved heavily,
it should be easier to simply exploit the diversity of nature rather than create that diversity in
a laboratory. It would therefore be prudent to search out unorthodox expression platforms to
introduce to the industry.
Unorthodox production platforms have several drawbacks: They are generally not well un-
derstood organisms, which requires an extensive characterization of their growth patterns and
metabolite production before they are applicable industrially. They also require the develop-
ment of molecular tools to be used for the modiﬁcation of the organism, both for optimization
of pathway eﬃciency and for introduction of heterologous pathways for production of non-
native products. However, with the recent advent of CRISPR technology, the development of
molecular tools should be substantially easier.
Debaryomyces hansenii is an ascomycetic oleaginous yeast species with extreme halotolerance.
It has long been considered an organism of interest for industrial integration due to its favorable
Page 1 of 31
==PAGE:4==
Introduction
growth on cheap substrates as well as ability to metabolize and produce lipids. Which has led
to extensive study into the metabolism of the yeast. However, use of D. hansenii has been pre-
vented by its complex internal molecular machinery, that has interfered with the development
of reliable transformation tools.
The goal of this project was the development of reliable transformation tools in D. hansenii as
well as the production of fundamental useful mutations such as URA3 deﬁciency by application
of the CRISPR system MAD7 for further study and internal molecular characterization of the
organism. However, due to the Corona pandemic most experimental work was prevented and
only the establishment of a transformation tool was conducted as well as some exploration of the
issues regarding the traditional transformation method. The rest of the planned experimental
work will be carried out theoretically and the theoretical outcomes of the planned experiments
will be explained and the subsequent actions will be described.
Page 2 of 31
==PAGE:5==
Theory
2
Theory
2.1
D. hansenii
Debaryomyces hansenii is a hemiascomycetic yeast known for its ability to grow in harsh en-
vironments, speciﬁcally in high concentrations of NaCl, and its oleaginous nature. It is also
one of the most common food spoilage yeasts and is usually the dominant yeast species found
on the surface of cheeses and meat products. In addition the yeast is also found in marine
samples[1].
It is a yeast that has garnered increasing attention both for its potential use as a biofactory,
but also for its role in the dairy industry, as a starter culture[1], and for its ability to metabolize
and produce biogenic amines, which could serve a role in the production of hormones and other
pharmaceuticals[2]. This culminated with the selection of the yeast as a part of a larger study
of yeast genomes in Nature in 2004[3], which means that the genome is fully accessible for this
yeast, which enables this work.
2.1.1
The halotolerance of D. hansenii
The halotolerance of D. hansenii has long been studied due to the species’ ubiquity in micro-
biological samples from brines, salt lakes, ocean samples as well as spoilage of low aw, water
activity, foodstuﬀs [4]. The tolerance towards the common salt NaCl was of particular interest.
In laboratory studies, it was found that growth of D. hansenii was possible in up to 3 M NaCl
solutions and that growth was induced by the addition of NaCl up to 0.5 M[5]. Other sources
claim that the tolerance level goes as high as 4 M NaCl [6]. Curiously, addition of NaCl also
seems to confer resistance towards other stress factors such as increased temperature. A study
in 2000 by Almagro et. al.[7] showed that during growth at the otherwise inhibiting temper-
ature of 34°C, growth could be restored by the addition of 0.5 M Na+. Furthermore, it has
been shown that in the absence of K+ the presence of Na+ can act as a substitute. It is theo-
rized that enzymes that in many other yeasts are K+ dependent, have variants in D. hansenii
that can utilize both K+ and Na+ ions as co-enzymes. Though this has not been tested [8].
The molecular mechanism behind this behaviour in highly saline solutions has still not been
properly elucidated. In many cases of resistance to stress factors, the mechanism behind the
tolerance is often found to be transport proteins. Due to this, it was theorized that the molec-
ular mechanism of D. hansenii halotolerance was based on extrusion of cations, speciﬁcally
Na+. Therefore, the sodium eﬄux transporters DhENA1 and DhENA2 from D. hansenii have
been transferred to S. cerevisiae. The results showed an increased resistance to Na+ and Li+.
However, this did not account for all of the halotolerance observed in D. hansenii[9]. Addi-
tionally, it has been shown that D. hansenii in the presence of high concentrations of NaCl
Page 3 of 31
==PAGE:6==
Theory
seemed to have no toxicity related eﬀects from high levels of intracellular Na+ relative to its S.
cerevisiae conterpart[10]. This has showcased that the understanding of how D. hansenii has
achieved its high osmotolerance and halotolerance is not properly understood yet. One of the
main barricades to attaining this knowledge has been the inability to study the genes in their
host organism, due to the diﬃculty of genetically editing the organism.
2.1.2
Oleaginous yeast
Oleaginous microorganisms are deﬁned as organisms that can accumulate more than 20 %
dry weight equivalent in the form of lipids [11]. This type of microorganism is particularly
useful due to the possibility of their usage in metabolization of oily wastes, such as oil spills
and waste glycerol leftover from the transesteriﬁcation process in biodiesel production, as well
as disposal of cooking oil waste. This is due to them typically having a higher tolerance for
oily environments and a more active lipid metabolism. Furthermore, the accumulation of lipids
could be useful for industrial production of lipid products, among which is biological production
of biodiesel [12]. D. hansenii is as mentioned earlier an oleaginious yeast. Speciﬁcally, D.
hansenii has a tendency of accumulation of glycerol. The yeast has been shown to typically do
this when exposed to highly osmotically stressful conditions[13]. In fact, the internal regulation
of glycerol metabolism in D. hansenii has been shown to be linked to the concentration of NaCl
in the surrounding environment[14]. Additionally, D. hansenii has been shown to grow in 18%
glycerol, which makes it ideal for implementation in lipid based biological production[15]. This
is especially important for the glycerol waste from the transesteriﬁcation process mentioned
above as the transesteriﬁcation process also produces salts, when the pH from the reaction is
neutralized.
2.1.3
The molecular biology of D. hansenii
The expression of heterologous genes in D. hansenii has historically been complicated due to
its complex internal machinery and its divergence from established molecular biology norms.
It belongs to a clade of yeast called the CTG clade, formerly known as the candida clade,
which are yeast closely related that most often translate the CTG codon as serine instead of
the normal leucine [16]. This means that any gene transferred to Debaryomyces hansenii, or
any other yeast belonging to this clade, should have its amino acid sequence changed slightly
resulting in dysfunctional proteins. This can be remedied by codon optimization, speciﬁcally
by replacing any CTG codon with another coding for leucine. This means that most genes
will have to be tailored to D. hansenii instead of simply transferred. Furthermore, the original
translation if CTG to leucine may not be gone completely as an ambiguous translation serves
regulatory functions in some closely related candida species[17].
Page 4 of 31
==PAGE:7==
Theory
Additionally, autonomously replicating sequences (ARS) that ensure the replication of plasmids
in S. cerevisiae and a wide range of other organisms do not seem to function in D. hansenii,
which has lead to the search for functional plasmids with working ARSs. So far, some have been
identiﬁed, such as the usage of pMR95 and pMR96 [5], which demonstrated the functionality
of the ARS found by Govind et.
al.
in 1992 [18].
However, the activity of the ARS was
shown not to be very eﬃcient. Other ARSs have been tried among which is the DhARS09 and
DhARS03, which showed okay transformation eﬃciency and function in the study by Minhas
et. al. in 2009[19]. There is also the possibility of using the panARS[20] which has had proven
functionality in a diverse set of yeasts [21]. Non-native constitutive promoters have been tried
and must of them are non-functional. Therefore, it is prudent to utilize native promoters, such
as DhTEF1’s and DhTEF3’s promoters [15].
2.2
USER Fusion cloning
Uracil speciﬁc excision reaction fusion assembly cloning or USER fusion cloning is a cloning
technique, whereby multiple fragments can be seamlessly joined together in succession in a
single step Without the addition of unwanted nucleotides [22].
The method is essentially
based on a type of nicking strategy, whereby long overhangs of fragments are created so that
complementary annealing can occur[23]. The main requirement of the method is to utilize
primers for the ampliﬁcation of fragments that contain a single uracil instead of the expected
thymine. This results in fragments in which a single uracil is present on each backbone of
the fragment.
Thereafter, the combination of two enzymes uracil DNA glycosidase, which
excises the uracil base, but leaves the phosphodiester backbone in place, and DNA glycosalyse-
lyase endo VIII, which excises phosphodiester backbone without a base connected to it at
both 5’ and 3’ ends. This leads to the complete removal of that single nucleotide, which in turn
creates an overhang. Coupled together with fragment design and a plasmid with complementary
overhangs to the ﬁrst and last fragment, speciﬁc ordered fusions can be achieved without much
optimization [24]. The addition of an E. coli cell to amplify the plasmid will produce new
plasmids with no nick in the back bone without the application of a ligase [25]. A visualization
of the process can be seen in ﬁgure 1.
Page 5 of 31
==PAGE:8==
Theory
Figure 1
General USER fusion cloning example with two fragments.
2.3
Electroporation
Electroporation as transformation method is the application of a powerful oscillating electric
ﬁeld to produce and maintain pores in cellular membranes to facilitate DNA absorption [26].
The main factors to take into account when using this method is that the electrical discharge
produces a stressful environment for the cells, and too high power will result in mass cell death.
The main parameters that control the strength of the electrical discharge is the voltage applied,
the prepared power of the discharge, which is often given in mFd, the discharge time given in
ms, the type of cuvette on which the discharge is exercised and the resistance of the media
containing the cells, which can be adjusted by adding buﬀers or salts to the media [27]. The
process itself takes a miniscule amount of time. Chemical agents that themselves can make
cells competent can be used to increase the eﬃciency of the electroporation procedure as well
as lowering the amount of power necessary to carry out the process [28].
Page 6 of 31
==PAGE:9==
Theory
2.4
MAD7
MAD7 is a RNA-guided nuclease, speciﬁcally a Class 2 Type V-A CRISPR-Cas system. It was
originally retrieved from the gram-positve bacterium Eubacterium rectale and later modiﬁed
by Inscripta Inc. The system is free for all research and commercialization provided that the
organism does not contain the MAD7 nuclease upon commercialization. Therefore, it is of
strict importance that the MAD7 gene is not chromosomally integrated[29]. The system has
proven functionality in bacteria, yeast and mammals[30]. The system, unlike CRISPR-Cas9,
does not require a tracrRNA, and only requires a guide RNA (gRNA) to function. The guide
RNA for the MAD7 system consists of two parts, the constant 35 nucleotide fraction that is
present in the 5’ end of the RNA, which acts as recruiter and binding site for the nuclease
and a 21 nucleotide sequence, that is the targeting sequence, which is situated in the 3’ end
of the guide RNA. MAD7’s PAM sequences are TTTV and CTTV and the targeting sequence
directly follows the PAM sequence in the 5’-3’ direction. The endonucleatic activity, or the cut,
is done at the end of the gRNA’s 3’ end[31]. MAD7 being a variant of the class 2 Cas12a/Cpf1
enzymes it leaves a 4 nucleotide ’5 overhang[30]. The process is visualized in ﬁgure 2:
Figure 2
General view of the function of the MAD7 system.
Page 7 of 31
==PAGE:10==
Materials and methods
3
Materials and methods
3.1
General approach
As explained earlier the purpose of this report is to layout a speciﬁc experimental plan for the
validation of a transformation method for D. hansenii as well as preparation for exploitation
of D. hansenii as an expression platform and a deeper dive into the molecular biology of D.
hansenii. To achieve this initially a functional and reliable transformation method has to be
established. This has historically been diﬃcult due to D. hansenii’s unique stress response,
that complicates what would initially appear to be decent results as will be showcased. Once
a transformation protocol has been established, diﬀerent autonomously replicating sequences
should be tried out as well as some diﬀerent promoters and terminators to evaluate their
eﬃciency and to ensure that the best are chosen for future experiments. The knowledge gained
in the ﬁrst two steps should then be used to introduce MAD7, a CRISPR system, to D. hansenii.
Validation of the eﬃcacy of this construct will be conﬁrmed by using gRNA targeting URA3
for a knockout and use imprinting from uridine containing plate to a normal plate to validate
the edit. This will conﬁrm that MAD7 with the plasmid construct is functional in D. hansenii.
Finally, this knowledge will be applied and a new strain of D. hansenii will be produced with
both URA3 deﬁciency and KU70 deﬁciency as this will produce a strain that is more susceptible
to targeted genetic editing as well as having a simple selective system for future transformations
3.2
Microorganisms and maintenance
The microorganism used for cloning and plasmid maintenance was DH5α competent E. coli
produced by DTU Bioengineering, department of biotechnology and biomedicine. They were
stored at -80°C in 50% glycerol before usage. After use in USER-fusion cloning, the bacteria
were grown on standard LB plates with appropriate selection (20 g/L Bacto Agar, 10 g/L
Bacto Tryptone, 10 g/L NaCl, 5 g/L Bacto Yeast extract, 200 mg/L ampicillin, mixed in
Milli-Q water) in 37 °C. Storage after growth was in 5 °C.
The yeast of primary interest is D. hansenii CBS 767 as it is the type strain of D. hansenii
var. hansenii [32]. Yet there were additional plans to also include strains from other collections
namely D. hansenii CBS1101, D. hansenii IBT22 and D. hansenii IBT84 to validate a broad
functionality of this construct. However, due to the closure of the lab this was not carried out.
The strain was initially kept at -80 °C in 50% glycerol. Before any further handling of the
strain, it was prestreaked to standard YPD plates (20 g/L Bacto Agar, 20 g/L glucose, 20 g/L
Bacto Peptone, 10 g/L Bacto Yeast, mixed in Milli-Q water). Incubation was conducted at 28
°C and storage at 5 °C.
Page 8 of 31
==PAGE:11==
Materials and methods
Any puriﬁed plasmids or linear DNA waiting to be used was stored in a sealed freezer.
3.3
Molecular biological work
This section contains all the general procedures employed for the molecular biological work
performed during the construction of the plasmids for the transformations. Additionally, it
contains the validation procedures for the work.
3.3.1
General procedure for PCR
Standard sterile PCR tubes were applied and a volume of 50 µl was used for every reaction.
A standard PCR reaction mix was prepared with the recipe: 10 µl 5X Phire Reaction Buﬀer
(Thermo Fisher), 5 µl dNTP at (2 mM), 2 µl forward primer (10 µM), 2 µl reverse primer
(10 µM), 1 µl template DNA, 1 µl of X7 DNA polymerase (Produced by the department) and
ﬁnally mixed in 29 µl Milli-Q water which can vary depending on any additional amendments
to the recipe like the addition of 1 µl DMSO for increased PCR eﬃciency. The PCR was then
run with the program: initial heating to 98 °C and hold for 2 minutes, then 35 cycles of DNA
melting to strands (20 seconds at 98 °C), store at annealing temperature (30 seconds at speciﬁc
temperature depending on the length of the primers and the speciﬁc sequence), and synthesis
(at 72 °C for a time corresponding to the length of the fragment that is being ampliﬁed 1
minute/1000 bases). Finally, the PCR product is cooled to 5 °C before further work is done.
If the template was genomic DNA, the PCR product can be puriﬁed straight from PCR mixture
as the individual strand concentration from the template is very small. However, if the template
was plasmid an initial gel electrophoresis step was used followed by a gel band puriﬁcation.
3.3.2
Procedure for colony PCR
Colony PCR was carried out in standard PCR tubes with an initial step of lysing the cells
in accordance with the following procedure: 13 µl of Milli-Q water is added to the sterile
PCR tube, then a sterile toothpick is used to collect cells from a single colony on a plate the
toothpick is quickly dipped once and taken out of the water. The PCR tube is then added to a
thermocycler with the following program: heat to 98 °C and maintain for 5 minutes, then cool to
4 °C and hold for 30 seconds, then heat again to 80 °C and hold for 10 minutes. The subsequent
heatshocks ensure proper lysis of the cells and suspension of their DNA. A short centrifugation
with a table top centrifuge to ensure sedimentation of cell debris is now performed to ensure as
little contamination during the fragment ampliﬁcation or the gel band analysis that inevitably
follows. Subsequently, a PCR mix is now added to the tube for a total ﬁnal volume of 100 µl
with the following recipe: 20 µl 5X Phire Reaction Buﬀer (Thermo Fisher), 10 µl dNTP at (2
mM), 4 µl forward primer (10 µM), 4 µl reverse primer (10 µM), 2 µl template DNA, 2 µl of X7
Page 9 of 31
==PAGE:12==
Materials and methods
DNA polymerase (Produced by the department) and ﬁnally mixed in 45 µl Milli-Q water which
can vary depending on any additional amendments to the recipe like the addition of 2 µl DMSO
for increased PCR eﬃciency. Subsequently, the PCR program run was: initial heating to 98
°C and hold for 2 minutes, then 35 cycles of DNA melting to strands (20 seconds at 98 °C),
store at annealing temperature (30 seconds at speciﬁc temperature depending on the length of
the primers and the speciﬁc sequence), and synthesis (at 72 °C for a time corresponding to the
length of the fragment that is being ampliﬁed 1 minute/1000 bases). Finally, the PCR product
is cooled to 5 °C before further work is done.
Or the recipe with the commercially available PCR master mix Quick-Load Taq 2X Master
Mix for a ﬁnal total volume of 30 µl is used: 15 µl Quick-Load Taq 2X, 1µl forward primer (10
µM), 1µl reverse primer (10 µM) added to the lysed suspension. Then this PCR program was
used: initial heating to 94 °C and hold for 5 minutes, then 35 cycles of DNA melting to strands
(35 seconds at 95 °C), store at annealing temperature (45 seconds at speciﬁc temperature
depending on the length of the primers and the speciﬁc sequence), and synthesis (at 68 °C for a
time corresponding to the length of the fragment that is being ampliﬁed 1 and 10 seconds/1000
bases). Finally, the PCR product is cooled to 10 °C before further work is done.
3.3.3
Gel electrophoresis
All gel electrophoresis was carried out in accordance with the following procedure: The gel
is 1% agarose in TAE buﬀer with visualization by SYBR-safe. The program run for the gel
electrophoresis was 20 minutes at 100 voltage. Furthermore, a standard ladder was applied
with the following fragment sizes was used for comparison (500 bp, 1000 bp, 1500 bp, 2000 bp,
3000 bp, 4000 bp, 5000 bp, 6000 bp, 8000 bp and 10000 bp). All DNA fragments were coloured
with Bromphenol Blue.
3.3.4
Puriﬁcation of DNA
Puriﬁcation of PCR products
A commercially available kit, illustraTM GFXTM PCR DNA and Gel Band Puriﬁcation Kit
from GE Healthcare, was used for the puriﬁcation of DNA either directly from PCR mixture
or from gel band. The procedure was the same as the one described in the kit with a few
minor changes: If the DNA did not come from a gel band, the gel melting step was skipped.
Two spins instead of one was employed to ensure no contaminating ethanol would be present
in the ﬁnal product, as well as the ﬁnal elution step not being carried out in the buﬀer the kit
provided but instead in Milli-Q water and with two rounds of elution instead of one.
Puriﬁcation of plasmids
A commercially available kit, GenEluteTM Plasmid Miniprep Kit form SIGMA-ALDRICH, was
Page 10 of 31
==PAGE:13==
Materials and methods
used for the puriﬁcation of plasmids from E. coli fermentation media. The puriﬁcation followed
the kits procedure description with a few minor changes: the column was spun twice instead of
once to ensure that the ethanol would not contaminate the product and the ﬁnal elution was
conducted in Milli-Q water over two rounds.
3.3.5
USER fusion cloning
To conduct a USER fusion cloning one must ﬁrst prepare the plasmid to be used for the actual
fusion event. After this the assembly of the fragments and the integration into E. coli for
plasmid ampliﬁcation can be carried out in one step.
Preparation of USER plasmid
The plasmid must be prepared with suﬃciently large overhangs for the fusion process.
In
general, the smaller the sticky overhang the lower the success of the fusion event. However, if
the overhang becomes too large, there is a risk of the overhang creating secondary structures
with itself, which would again lower the eﬃciency of the cloning.
The digest is carried out in two steps: the initial digest with a restriction enzyme, which lin-
earizes the plasmid and a subsequent digest with nicking enzyme, which elongates the overhang
to an appropriate length. The initial linearization was carried out following this recipe: 3 µl
FastDigest for AsisI buﬀer, 1.5 µl AsisI SfaAI-FD enzyme, 3 µg of plasmid, and ﬁnally add
Milli-Q water for a total ﬁnal volume of 30 µl. This mix should then be incubated overnight at
37 °C.
The second step, which is the elongation of the sticky ends by a nicking enzyme, was carried
out in accordance with the recipe: add 2 µl Nb.Bsml, 10 µl NEB3.1 for Nb.Bsml and 58 µl
Milli-Q water to the original 30 µl digest mix. Incubate the new mix in 65 °C for 2 hours, at
which point 1 µl of Nb.Bsml should be added and the mix re-incubated for an additional hour
at 65 °C. The linearized plasmid should be puriﬁed by following the puriﬁcation of plasmids
procedure.
The cloning procedure
The USER fusion cloning is performed in two steps: the assembly of the plasmid with the
prepared PCR product and the cloning step.
The initial assembly of the plasmid and the PCR product is carried out in 15 µl of total reactive
mixture volume. The following recipe should be followed: 1.5 µl 10x Cutsmart buﬀer from NEB,
1.5 µl USER enzyme mix from NEB, 1 µl plasmid from the previous step, 1-6 µl of each of the
puriﬁed PCR products, that is wished to be assembled. If needed Milli-Q water is added to
ensure that the total volume of the reactive mixture is 15 µl.
The reactive mixture is incubated for 40 minutes at 37 °C and then for 25 minutes at room
Page 11 of 31
==PAGE:14==
Materials and methods
temperature. During the ﬁrst incubation the USER enzymes are active and excising the uracil
from the PCR product, which will expose the complementary sticky ends, which will facilitate
the assembly of the plasmid. The second incubation is performed to ensure that time is suﬃcient
for the sticky ends to ﬁnd their complement and assemble the plasmids.
After incubation the mix should be cooled before use for the transformation.
15 µl reactive mixture should be added to 100 µl defrosted competent E. coli DH5α produced
by the department. The subsequent mixing must be very gentle so as not to kill the unstable
E. coli cells. This is followed by incubation on ice for 15 minutes for complete dispersion of
reactive mixture into cells, followed by a heat shock at 42 °C for 45 minutes, in which the E.
coli are forced open to allow for the penetration of the plasmid. After an additional incubation
on ice for 15 minutes to stabilize the cells. The E. coli are plated on selective media speciﬁcally
LB-amp plates and incubated overnight in 37 °C.
Any colonies that show up on the plate must have had introduced ampicilin resistance to them,
which strongly suggests a successful transformation with a complete plasmid.
3.4
D. hansenii transformation by electroporation procedure
The transformation procedure is based on the method described by Minhas et. al. 2019[28]. It
was adapted for the available BioRAD micropulser electroporation device.
The basic layout of the method is the initial cultivation of cells, the retrieval of the cells, making
the cells competent, washing of the cells, electroporation, and ﬁnally plating of the cells.
Initially a single D. hansenii CBS 767 colony is chosen and cultivated in 30 ml liquid standard
YPD media for approximately 22 hours at 28 °C and 200 rpm.
After growth, OD600 should be checked and if it is above 2.8, YPD without glucose should be
used to adjust the density of the cells until an OD600 of between 2.6 and 2.8 has been reached.
If the density of the cells is too high, it will decrease the eﬃciency of the transformation
procedure. However, if the density is too low, the number of transformants will also be low, as
there are fewer cells available for the procedure. Once the adjustment has been made, 30 ml of
the cultivation broth should be harvested by centrifugation at 4500x g for 10 minutes at room
temperature. The supernatant should be discarded.
The cells should be resuspended in 6 ml 50 mM sodium phosphate buﬀer at pH 7.5 with 25
mM DL-dithiothreitol. The DL-dithiothreitol will ensure that punctures are produced in the
harvested D. hansenii cells for later transformation. The cells should be incubated in 30 °C for
15 minutes to facilitate the eﬀect of DL-dithiothreitol.
Page 12 of 31
==PAGE:15==
Materials and methods
The cells are washed by subsequent centrifugation at 4500x g for 10 minutes at room tempera-
ture, followed by removal of supernatant and resuspension in 6 ml Milli-Q water. This process is
repeated thrice to ensure complete removal of DL-dithiothreitol. After the ﬁnal centrifugation,
the cells are resuspended in 1 ml precooled 1M sucrose. The sucrose has a stabilizing eﬀect on
the cells and allows for brief storage before the ﬁnal step. A centrifugation at 4500x g for 10
minutes at 4 °C followed. The supernatant should be discarded, and the cells resuspended in
175 µl precooled 1M sucrose and kept on ice.
The mixture should be transferred to a sterile precooled 0.2 mm electroporation cuvette. The
cuvette is precooled due to evidence that cooled cuvettes have higher transformation eﬃciency
[27]. The choice of cuvette type 0.2 mm was due to that being the type available in the lab. If it
failed a cuvette with 0.1 mm would have been used. The main advantage of the 0.1 mm is that
it increases the electrical current going through the cells thus it produces higher stress, which
could lead to more transformants, but it also produces higher cell death. Plasmid of interest
should be added into the mixture for a total amount of between 0.25 and 1.5 µg of DNA. The
reactive solution should be mixed very gently with a pipette. The electroporation is carried
out with the BioRAD micropulser instrument with the settings 2.3 kV, 5 ms and 10 mFd. The
instrument does not have the functionality to change faraday, which might be an issue since
the instrument used in the Minhas et. al. [28] protocol was a more powerful instrument with
100 mFd. The Fd are important as they signify the amount of energy that gets transferred
in a single discharge, thus they govern the stress put on the cell during the electroporation
procedure [27], which is both the driving force behind the introduction of the DNA and cell
death during the process. A single pulse is used for the procedure per cuvette. Immediately
after the electroporation 800 µl of 1M sucrose at room temperature is added to stabilize the
cells. As the amount of transformants is not known diﬀerent volumes of the electroporated
solution should be plated on selective YPD plates to ensure that a useable transformation
count is achieved and the retrieval of single colonies is possible.
A subsequent incubation of 3-4 days at 28 °C should be performed at which point single colonies
can be retrieved.
Page 13 of 31
==PAGE:16==
Results
4
Results
In this section, the experimental work that was actually performed will be shown, the results
of which will be discussed in detail both for their implications and their usability for the rest
of the report. Thereafter, a detailed description of subsequent steps to produce a URA3 and
KU70 deﬁcient strain of D. hansenii CBS767 will be presented. The theoretical results of these
experiments will be shown and alternative procedures will be discussed. This unfortunate lack
of experimental work on the second half is due to lack of access to a laboratory due to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
4.1
Transformation procedure
Experience in the lab from previous endeavors to perform any type of genomic editing in D.
hansenii has shown many problems.
Using a more traditional transformation strategy like
the "High-eﬃciency yeast transformation using the LiAc/ss carrier DNA/PEG method" [33]
D. hansenii had a tendency to exhibit initial correct editing.
However, subsequent study
showed that the DNA had been randomly chromosomally integrated, especially if the DNA
was introduced as linear (results not shown). Furthermore, the use of selective media gave
unreliable results both regarding ARS and promoter eﬃcacy.
Therefore, the alternative method of utilizing electroporation as transformation procedure was
selected.
It was fortuitous, that recently a research team had published a protocol using
electroporation to edit D. hansenii CBS767 [28]. The protocol was used as a baseline and
in combination with the manual for the BioRAD micropulser instrument, which was available
in the lab, a new protocol was developed, which can be read in the materials and methods
section.
Several preconstructed plasmids were chosen for attempted transformation, testing two diﬀerent
autonomously replicating sequences and two diﬀerent constitutive promoters for the selection
marker. Due to previous experience with the antifungal G418, only a nourseothricin based
selective marker was included in the transformation strategem, however a control was also
included for growth on YPD media containing G418, whilst bearing in mind that no such
resistance was introduced to the cells. The plasmids included and their features are presented
in table 1.
Table 1
Preconstructed plasmids for testing of the electroporation procedure.
Plasmid ID
ARS
Promoter
Selection gene
pDIV066
PanARS
DH_TEF3_Promoter
NatMX_CTGopt
pDIV095
DhARS03 and DhARS09
DH_TEF1_Promoter
NatMX_CTGopt
pDIV112
PanARS
DH_TEF1_Promoter
NatMX_CTGopt
pDIV114
DhARS03 and DhARS09
DH_TEF3_Promoter
NatMX_CTGopt
Page 14 of 31
==PAGE:17==
Results
Cultivation of D. hansenii for transformation
Five separate cultivations of D. hansenii were initiated for the transformation by electropora-
tion. One for each plasmid to be tested and ﬁnally a control, where no DNA would be added.
The cultivation was carried out in accordance with the procedure described in the materials
and methods section. The OD600 of the fermentation broth was evaluated and found to be too
high, therefore signiﬁcant dilution was carried out. This lead to a suspicion of contamination,
however subsequent microscopy only showed plankton growth with nuclei. Therefore, it was
assumed that the cultures were pure.
The remaining steps were performed in exact accordance to the protocol. After electroporation
the media containing the transformants was plated in diﬀerent volumes on indicative plates,
speciﬁcally YPD plates containing nourseothricin, which is the antifungal for which there is
resistance in the plasmids, YPD plates containing G418, which is an antifungal for which there
is no resistance in the plasmids and a pure YPD plate, exclusively for the control, which is just
there to showcase that the control is not a false negative on the plates with antifungals. An
overview of the plates produced can be seen in table 2.
Table 2
Plates produced after electroporation procedure.
Plasmid ID
YPD+NTC 200 µl
YPD+NTC 20 µl
YPD+G418 200µl
YPD 200µl
pDIV066
x
x
x
pDIV095
x
x
pDIV112
x
x
pDIV114
x
x
Control
x
x
x
x
The following scenarios were considered:
All plates are covered
• The method makes D. hansenii resistant towards the antifungals
• The plates were bad due to human error during media preparation
• Contamination by bacteria
No colonies on any plates
• Electroporation procedure was too harsh as all cells had been killed
• Step with DL-dithiothreitol was too harsh and killed the cells
Colonies on the G418 plate
• Electroporation procedure itself produces resistance towards G418.
This would be a
mirror of what was observed using lithium acetate in experiments prior to this work.
Page 15 of 31
==PAGE:18==
Results
• A possible case of contamination
Colonies on YPD plate without antibiotic only
• This would mean that no transformations had occurred and that the antifungals are
functional, which would indicate that harsher conditions are required either in the elec-
troporation step or the competency generating step.
Colonies on YPD plates with nourseothricin and not on any of the control plates except for the
YPD plate without antibiotic
• This is a strong indicator of a successful transformation. However, it alone does not show
that the DNA has been introduced and remain in circular plasmid form, which is required
for further work in the organism.
The plates were incubated at 25 °C for 2-4 days at which point colonies had appeared. The
results of which are shown on ﬁgure 3 and ﬁgure 5.
Figure 3
Picture of D. hansenii on the G418 control plates .
On ﬁgure 3, it can clearly be seen that despite no introduction of G418 resistance both the
control with no DNA added during the electroporation process as well as the transformants
with plasmid pDIV066 has resistance towards the anti-fungal. Therefore, this anti-fungal can
not be used as a selective marker in transformation experiments with D. hansenii CBS767.
This intrinsic resistance may be a part of the internal stress response of D. hansenii. As it is
Page 16 of 31
==PAGE:19==
Results
an oleaginous yeast it has high intracellular glycerol levels, which could aid in its stabilization.
It may also be the case that the binding site for G418 on the ribosome is retarded by mutation
D. hansenii.
However, this explanation is unlikely, partially due to the compound’s broad
functionality among fungi, and the fact, that despite the growth seen on ﬁgure 3, the growth is
still reduced as compared to the YPD plate with no selection in the case of the control as can
be seen on ﬁgure 4.
Figure 4
Picture of D. hansenii control on standard YPD
This suggests that the cells are ineﬃciently able to transport the compound out of the cytosol,
which suggests the presence of a cell membrane transport protein, that has slight aﬃnity for
G418.
The diﬀerences between the plasmids were the selected autonomously replicating sequences and
the promoters used for the selective marker. As can be seen on ﬁgure 5, the only two plasmids
that have shown healthy colonies were pDIV066 and pDIV112. They had diﬀerent promot-
ers, both supposedly constitutive for the resistance gene, which means that both promoters
DH_TEF3 and DH_TEF1 must have been functional in the construct. Additionally, this has
showcased that the panARS was a functional autonomously replicating sequence, whereas the
DhARS09 and DhARS03 reported by Minhas et. al.[19] had little to no function. It must be
remarked that though no colonies were present on the control, there were colonies in the case of
both pDIV095 and pDIV114, they were just very small. This may be due to very low activity
for the ARS of these plasmids or just a visualization of linear growth as after a cell division
only the cell with the plasmid could grow.
Though unlikely, the possibility remains that the results are the consequence of random chromo-
somal integration of the introduced plasmids. Therefore, an experiment to lose the nourseothricin-
resistance was commenced. Two colonies from each of the YPD plates with nourseothricinpDIV066
and pDIV112 and 2 colonies of the parental strain were selected and cultivated in standard
Page 17 of 31
==PAGE:20==
Results
Figure 5
Picture of D. hansenii transformation attempts on YPD with neorseothricin .
liquid YPD media with no selection. After cultivation, an OD600 to cell count standard de-
scribed in the protocol by Minhas et. al. [28] was used to dilute the broth to ensure that 100
cells would be present in 200 µl of the solution. 200 µl was then transferred to a fresh YPD
plate with no selection. After colonies had been formed, the YPD plate was used to imprint
onto a YPD plate with nourseothricin. The results were deﬁnitive as no colonies grew on any
of the YPD plates with nourseothricin (results not shown), which meant that the resistance
had been lost. This could only occur if the plasmids had not been chromosomally integrated,
which means that the initial transformation results were showcasing episomal plasmid based
resistance in other words a successful transformation.
A colony PCR was performed to validate the presence of the plasmids in the cells, but whilst the
plasmids appeared to have been functioning properly, a deﬁnitive conﬁrmation and validation
was not achieved before the lab closed down.
This set of results have shown that the transformation procedure seems to be functional for
Page 18 of 31
==PAGE:21==
Results
introduction, maintenance and later loss of plasmid in D. hansenii, which would allow for further
genetic editing and research in the organism. Though ﬁnal conﬁrmation of the validity of the
results remain to have been performed in the form of a colony PCR followed by sequencing to
deﬁnitively show the presence of the plasmids.
4.2
Theoretical constructs
This section contains a series of theoretical constructs as well as a thorough description of the
methodology used to obtain them. It also includes a description of alternative results and what
would be done in those cases. Due to the lack of data from the ﬁrst section i.e. only having
tried two diﬀerent promoters for the selective marker or two diﬀerent autonomously replicating
sequences, a grounded selection of the best ARS or promoter is impossible. Therefore, the back
bone and selective marker construct used for all the experiments described will be the same.
Speciﬁcally, all constructs are constructed with the usage of pDIV066, a plasmid containing
ampicillin resistance for the E. coli as well as the PanARS as described by Liachko et. al.
[20]. The theoretical constructs’ prupose is to show an experimental procedure to achieve a
more easily accessible D. hansenii strain, that can be used for future work. The ﬁrst step is
establishing a functional MAD7 protein in the organism.
4.2.1
MAD7
The introduction of MAD7 into D. hansenii comes with a few caveats due to the unique internal
machinery of the D. hansenii. The CTG codon expression problem is easily solved by ordering
a codon optimized version of the MAD7 gene using alternative codons for leucine of which there
are ﬁve. In this case only two were used TTA and TTG. The promoters and terminator chosen
must be applicable to D. hansenii so instead of using common high throughput constitutive
promoters from S. cerevisiae, constitutive promoters were ampliﬁed by PCR from puriﬁed D.
hansenii genomic DNA. For the purpose of the construct 5 fragments were planned to be
produced as can be seen in table 3.
Page 19 of 31
==PAGE:22==
Results
Table 3
Fragments for assembly of MAD7 gene. Fragments produced for USER fusion cloning.
Fragment name
Fragment length
Fragment forward primer
Fragment reverse primer
Fragment template
1A
754 bp
>DH_RNR2_Promoter_F
CGTGCGAUCGCGTGCATTCA
GCAATTCCAAAATCCCATTAG
>DH_RNR2_Promoter_R
aTTGTCTGAAUAATG
TTTGAAAGCAAC
Dh.gDNA
1B
1011 bp
>DH_TEF3_Promoter_F
CGTGCGAUCGCGTGCATTCT
ATGCAGCAATATCGGATTTATTC
>DH_TEF3_Promoter_R
aTGTTTAATUATTTAATATT
CTTACTAGTAAATTAAAATC
Dh.gDNA
2
2007 bp
>DH_gBLOCK_MAD7_F
aTTCAGACAAUGAACAACG
GGACCAACAATT
>DH_gBLOCK_MAD7_midR
aATATCTTCGUATGTTGATG
TGTCG
gBLOCK.MAD7.CTGopt
3
1831 bp
>DH_gBLOCK_MAD7_midF
aCGAAGATATUAGTGGTTT
TTATAGAGAAG
>DH_gBLOCK_MAD7_R
aCTCACACCUTTCGCTT
CTTCTTAG
gBLOCK.MAD7.CTGopt
4
304 bp
>DH_RNR2_Terminator_F
aGGTGTGAGUGGATCGCC
TTATGATCGC
>DH_RNR2_Terminator_R
CACGCGAUTATTCAGATA
AGCATATCGATATATATATTC
Dh.gDNA
These fragments would then be used in conjunction with AsisI and Nb.Bsml digested pDIV066
as this would allow for complete assembly into a single plasmid in one step. USER fusion cloning
was chosen due to the wealth of experience the department has with this speciﬁc technique.
Two clonings will be conducted, one with fragments 1a, 2, 3, 4 and treated pDIV066 and
another with fragments 1b, 2, 3, 4 and treated pDIV066. This will give two almost identical
plasmids where the only diﬀerence is the promoter used for MAD7. Despite both of them being
constitutive promoters, they are both included to give some leeway in case it turns out that
one of them does not result in a functioning MAD7 gene. The resulting plasmids can be seen
in Figure: xx
The USER fusion cloning will be conducted in accordance with the procedure described in the
material and methods section, which means that the plasmids will be present in E. coli on LB-
AMP plates. To ensure that the colonies present on the plate contain the full construct, several
colonies will be chosen and cultivated in liquid LB-amp media. The fermentation broth will be
used for plasmid puriﬁcation from E. coli. A restriction enzyme digest could be used for quick
evaluation of the USER fusion cloning experiments result. In this case the restriction enzyme
Hsp92I is chosen due to its multiple cuts and its diﬀerent band positions from the restriction
enzyme just being used on the backbone. The gel band pattern of the two constructed plasmids
and the digest of the linear pDIV066 can be seen on Figure 7.
If initial validation is good, then the puriﬁed plasmids will be sent for SANGER sequencing
by the company StarSeq with 7 primers. The primers are spaced with annealing positions of
approximately 800 bp distance to ensure that they cover the entire insert region. This will be
treated as the ﬁnal conﬁrmation that the USER fusion cloning went well.
Page 20 of 31
==PAGE:23==
Results
Figure 6
The two plasmids produced with diﬀerent promoters for MAD7.
Figure
7
Theoretical
gel
of
restriction
enzyme
digest.
Well
1
contains
the
digest
of
pDIV066+pDHTEF3+MAD7opt+tRNR2, well 2 contains the digest of pDIV066+pRNR2+MAD7opt+tRNR2,
well 3 contains the digest of pDIV066.
4.2.2
Production of URA3 deﬁcient strains
The plasmids containing the gene MAD7 have now been constructed and validated, however
no gRNA has been included in the construct so if the plasmid was transferred to D. hansenii
as it is, it would not confer anything but nourseothricin resistance. This also means that the
constructs eﬃcacy in D. hansenii has not yet been tested.
Page 21 of 31
==PAGE:24==
Results
Therefore, the ﬁrst construct to be tested is the one that produces URA3 deﬁcient strains as it
is simple to test for the success of the knock out and it can thus be used as a proof of concept
for the application of CRISPR technology in D. hansenii. Additionally, it was a planned knock
out. Unfortunately, the available gBLOCK contains the guiding RNA for the KU70 knock out,
which will be the next step in the transformation transformation strategy. One could order
new gBLOCKS containing the guiding RNA of choice, but this option is relatively expensive
compared to ordering six primers, which is what will be suggested in the following section.
Initially two fragments, S1A and S1B, which contain the tRNA for alanine and the MAD7
binding sequence and the tRNA for glycine and the terminator of TEF1 from D. hansenii
respectively, are produced by standard PCR. Thereby, two fragments are created that exclude
the guiding RNA sequence that was present in the template gBLOCK. One of the two fragments
is quite small only 133 base pair, this makes visualization of the fragment on a gel diﬃcult,
which is why for this step the usage of a 2 % agarose gel should be considered for the validation
of the fragments.
The next step is reassembling the two fragments by performing a version of PCR overlap. the
two fragments should be mixed together with the two primers DH_gBLOCK_URA3targetF
and DH_gBLOCK_URA3targetR. The two primers’ overlap is the guiding RNA for the URA3
knockout. The two primers point away from eachother, therefore the DNA polymerase in the
PCR will continue to the end of the fragments. This combined with the overlap will fuse the
fragments. As their is no need for ampliﬁcation but simply that the primers have annealed to
all the fragments and fused them together, 10 cycles of the standard PCR program should be
suﬃcient for this step and a ligase should be added to close the nicks in the backbone of the
new fragments. The resulting fragment is designated S2
Two fragments will then have to be produced for the ﬁnal assembly in a USER fusion cloning
facilitated step. The ﬁrst fragment is simply a slightly amended version of the S2 fragment
to ensure USER ready ends of the fragment, this will be accomplished by standard PCR
of the primers: DH_gBLOCK_TEF_midF and DH_gBLOCK_TEF_R and S2. This will
give the fragment S3. Finally, the D. hansenii constitutive promoter from the TEF2 gene
should be ampliﬁed from puriﬁed genomic DNA with the primers: DH_TEF2_Promoter_F
and DH_TEF2_Promoter_R. This should produce the fragment S4.
Fragment S3 and fragment S4 should be validated by standard gel electrophoresis to ensure
that the proper fragments have been produced. Due to the small fragments it should also be
considered to use 2% agarose gel in this case. All of the fragments for these steps are presented
in Table 4.
Page 22 of 31
==PAGE:25==
Results
Table 4
Fragments for construction of gRNA for URA3 targeting. Fragments produced for USER
fusion cloning.
Fragment name
Fragment length
Fragment forward primer
Fragment reverse primer
Fragment template
S1A
133 bp
>DH_gBLOCK_tRNA_F
aTACTATtATTATACAT
TAAACAAAGGGCG
>DH_gBLOCK_tRNA_R
aTCTACAAGAGtA
GAAATTAAAAAG
gBLOCK.gRNA.KU70
S1B
321 bp
>DH_gBLOCK_Term_F
GCGCAAATGGTTTAG
TGGTAAA
>DH_TEF3_Term_R
AATAACAGAGACGTA
CTAGGGAG
gBLOCK.gRNA.KU70
S2
477 bp
>DH_gBLOCK_URA3targetF
AAGACCGTAAATTTGCC
GATAGCGCAAATGGTT
TAGTGGTAAA
>DH_gBLOCK_URA3targetR
TATCGGCAAATTTACGGTC
TTaTCTACAAGAGtAGAAA
TTAAAAAG
S1A+S1B
S3
483 bp
>DH_gBLOCK_TEF_midF
aTACTATUATTATACATT
AAACAAAGGGCG
>DH_gBLOCK_TEF_R
CACGCGAUAATAACA
GAGACGTACTAGGGAG
S2
S4
522 bp
>DH_TEF2_Promoter_F
CGTGCGAUATCCCAAGC
CACCATAATAAATATAC
>DH_TEF2_Promoter_R
aATAGTAUACTGTACTGA
AAAAAGAGAAGAAG
Dh.gDNA
The USER fusion cloning will be conducted in accordance with the standard procedure in the
material and methods section. Importantly the USER fusion cloning will be conducted twice as
there are two diﬀerent plasmids it has to be inserted into: pDIV066+pDHTEF3+MAD7opt+tRNR2
and pDIV066+pRNR2+MAD7opt+tRNR2 The resulting E. coli colonies on the LB-amp plates
should be cultivated and harvested to ensure ampliﬁcation of the new construct.
A restriction enzyme digest should be used for quick evaluation of the USER fusion cloning
experiments result. In this case the restriction enzyme NsbI is chosen due to its multiple cuts
and its diﬀerent band positions from the restriction enzyme just being used on the backbones of
the constructs. The gel band pattern of the two constructed plasmids and the digest of the linear
plasmids pDIV066+pDHTEF3+MAD7opt+tRNR2 and pDIV066+pRNR2+MAD7opt+tRNR2
can be seen on Figure 8.
If initial validation is good, then the puriﬁed plasmids will be sent for SANGER sequencing
by the company StarSeq with 4 primers. The primers are spaced with annealing positions of
approximately 800 bp distance to ensure that they cover the entire insert region. The speciﬁc
gRNA region will be doubly sequenced to reduce potential error sources. This will be treated
as the ﬁnal conﬁrmation that the USER fusion cloning went well. The ﬁnal plasmids can be
seen in ﬁgure 9.
Once conﬁrmation of the constructs’ correct assembly has been obtained, it should be time to
introduce it to D. hansenii. This should be done in accordance with the electroporation protocol
described in materials and methods section and validated earlier in this section.
However,
there is a diﬀerence in the ﬁnal plating media. In addition to nourseothricin, it should contain
uridine as a successful transformant should no longer be capable of producing this metabolite
Page 23 of 31
==PAGE:26==
Results
Figure
8
Theoretical
gel
of
NsbI
enzyme
digest.
Well
1
contains
the
di-
gest
of
pDIV066_pDHRNR2_MAD7_tRNR2_gRNA.DhURA3,
well
2
contains
the
di-
gest
of
pDIV066_pDHTEF3_MAD7_tRNR2_gRNA.DhURA3,
well
3
contains
the
digest
of
pDIV066+pDHTEF3+MAD7opt+tRNR2, well 4 contains the digest of pDIV066+pRNR2+MAD7opt+tRNR2.
Figure 9
The two plasmids produced with URA3 targeting gRNAs and diﬀerent MAD7’s pro-
moters.
themselves.
If no colonies are observed several possibilities exist; a human error has resulted in one of the
more stressful steps having killed oﬀthe cells an example of this could be the step at which
the yeast cells are made competent, or the conditions were not severe enough as well as many
Page 24 of 31
==PAGE:27==
Results
others. The main strategy to proceed from here should be to simply attempt the same again.
If it fails again, the voltage should be increased during the electroporation step if possible, or
the mix of should include more DL-dithiothreitol.
If colonies are observed it cannot be assumed that the those colonies are cells that are URA3
deﬁcient as both URA3 proﬁcient and deﬁcient with the plasmid integrated should be able
to grow in the medium. A simple imprint test should be able to showcase, which colonies are
URA3 deﬁcient. The functioning MAD7 system can be identiﬁed by using a YPD plate without
uridine and one with uridine and imprinting the transformation plate onto it and the looking
for the colonies that grow on the YPD plate containing uridine and not on the standard YPD
plate. Letting the cells grow for two to three days should be suﬃcient to discern the results.
If the plates with and without uridine have identical colony count and positions it can be
concluded that something about the construct or set up has prevented proper function of the
MAD7 system. This can either be due to improper folding of the MAD7 nuclease itself, a
non-functional promoter or terminator (this should be very unlikely as a strong constitutive
promoter and a terminator both from D. hansenii were used), the tRNA ﬂanking the small
single stranded RNA are not properly automatically cut from the sequence (this would be
highly unusual as the system has proved eﬀective in organisms from rice plants [34] to fungi
like Aspergillus niger [35]). Any of these possibilities would require a complete rethinking of the
project. It can also be due to some unforeseen human error which is why the transformation
by electroporation should be repeated if all colonies are identical between the two plates. A
repeat of the plasmid assembly should not be attempted as it has been veriﬁed by sequencing.
If there are some colonies that grow on the YPD plate with uridine, but not on the YPD plate
without uridine, these should be restreaked on a YPD plate containing uridine. The amount
of colonies that grow on uridine YPD plates exclusively can be used to evaluate the eﬃcacy of
the two promoters used for MAD7 production in the two diﬀerent plasmids. The restreaked
colonies should be used for a colony PCR with the primers: which amplify the URA3 gene
should be used to verify the change.Not much can be determined by running this fragment on a
gel other than to conﬁrm the presence of one singular fragment in the PCR product. If only one
band of the corresponding length is shown in an electrophoresis experiment, the PCR product
should be sent for sequencing with those same primers. This should showcase the mutation,
that has occurred as a result of the cutting of the nuclease.
The YPD plates with uridine but not nourseothricin, should have facilitated the loss of the
plasmids. This has allowed for the further editing of the same strain with the same plasmid
design, but diﬀerent gRNA as will be utilized in the next step.
The production of a URA3 deﬁcient strain of D. hansenii will allow for simpler editing con-
structs in future, and prevent the dubious application of diﬀerent selective media as shown in
Page 25 of 31
==PAGE:28==
Results
the experimental section.
4.2.3
Production of KU70 deﬁcient strains
KU70 is one of two subunits of a complex that adheres to double strand break ends, and
protects the DNA termini whilst recruiting proteins for Non-homologous End Joining (NHEJ)
path way. The previously mentioned problems with random integration of DNA in D. hansenii’s
chromosomal DNA may have been due to an overly active NHEJ pathway. Therefore, there is
a speciﬁc reason to knock out the functionality of the KU complex in D. hansenii. However,
it is quite common to knock out the functionality of the NHEJ pathway when producing
research strains as it increases targeted gene editing eﬃciency, when the cell is forced to use its
homologous recombination pathway instead.
The gBLOCK gBLOCK.gRNA.KU70 contains the entire gRNA construct as is needed. There-
fore, all that has to be done is the ampliﬁcation of the gBLOCK DNA and the TEF2 pro-
moter.
This will be done by standard PCR ampliﬁcation for the production of two frag-
ments, that will then be used in a USER Fusion cloning step with the plasmids containing
MAD7: pDIV066+pDHTEF3+MAD7opt+tRNR2 and pDIV066+pRNR2+MAD7opt+tRNR2.
The fragments and their primers can be seen in table 5:
Table 5
Fragments for assembly of gRNA for KU70 targeting. Fragments produced for USER fusion
cloning.
Fragment name
Fragment length
Fragment forward primer
Fragment reverse primer
Fragment template
K1
483 bp
>DH_gBLOCK_TEF_midF
aTACTATUATTATACATT
AAACAAAGGGCG
>DH_gBLOCK_TEF_R
CACGCGAUAATAACA
GAGACGTACTAGGGAG
gBLOCK.gRNA.KU70
K2
522 bp
>DH_TEF2_Promoter_F
CGTGCGAUATCCCAAGC
CACCATAATAAATATAC
>DH_TEF2_Promoter_R
aATAGTAUACTGTACTGA
AAAAAGAGAAGAAG
Dh.gDNA
The plasmid for the USER fusion cloning should be predigested with the restriction enzyme
AsiSI and Nb.Bsml, which linearises the plasmids pDIV066+pDHTEF3+MAD7opt+tRNR2
and pDIV066+pRNR2+MAD7opt+tRNR2 in their insertion sites. The USER fusion cloning
should be carried out as described in the materials and methods section. After the procedure,
the E. coli colonies on the LB-amp plate should be cultivated for plasmid ampliﬁcation in
liquid LB-amp media, at which point the plasmids should be puriﬁed. The construct should be
validated ﬁrst by restriction enzyme analysis followed by sequencing. The restriction enzyme
used for the digest could be BglII as it provides diﬀerent separated bands for each plasmid and
makes them easily distinct from their parent plasmid. The theoretical result if this digest can
be seen on ﬁgure 10
If the restriction analysis shows the expected bands, the plasmids will be sent for sequencing.
Page 26 of 31
==PAGE:29==
Results
Figure
10
The
Restriction
enzyme
analysis
with
BglII
of
the
plasmids.
Well
1
con-
tains
the
digest
of
pDIV066_pDHRNR2_MAD7_tRNR2_gRNA.DhKU70,
well
2
contains
the
digest
of
pDIV066_pDHTEF3_MAD7_tRNR2_gRNA.DhKU70,
well
3
contains
the
digest
of
pDIV066+pDHTEF3+MAD7opt+tRNR2, well 4 contains the digest of pDIV066+pRNR2+MAD7opt+tRNR2.
If the sequencing as conducted by StarSeq shows the expected nucleotides, then the plasmids
will be used for electroporation based transformation of the D. hansenii strain produced in
the previous section. Therefore, all growth media used during the transformation process will
have to contain added uridine. The selective media after the transformation must contain both
uridine and nourseothricin.
After the transformation by electoporation has been carried out, there is no simple test, that
can be carried out to check whether a colony has had the desired knock out implemented.
Depending on the eﬃciency of the system showcased in the URA3 knockout it may be risky to
just pick a few colonies and assume that one of them has been correctly edited. Therefore, the
colonies should immediately be used for colony PCR, which ampliﬁes the region of KU70 that
was targeted by the gRNA. This may be a costly aﬀair as depending on the eﬃciency of the
design there might be a need to test many colonies. The ﬁnal plasmid constructs can be seen
on ﬁgure 11.
Page 27 of 31
==PAGE:30==
Results
Figure 11
The two plasmids produced with KU70 targeting gRNAs and diﬀerent MAD7’s pro-
moters.
After the colonies have been selected, they should be cultivated in liquid YPD media with
uridine to discard the plasmids after use to ensure that the nourseothricin system can be used
again.
If this process is successful a strain of D. hansenii will have been produced without an active
NHEJ pathway interferring with future edits and with the implementation of the simple URA3
deﬁciency system genomic editing and application of D. hansenii should be accessible.
Page 28 of 31
==PAGE:31==
Discussion and conclusion
5
Discussion and conclusion
The implementation and adaptation of the electroporation protocol [28] went well. The equip-
ment limitation of using the BioRAD micropulser was not an inhibiting factor and the method
appears to have resulted in stable transformation without the problem of random chromosomal
integration as had been the case for the Lithium-acetate heat shock procedure used in previous
work [33]. This was illustrated by the yeast cells loosing their resistance to nourseothricin by
growing in non-selective media. Therefore, it can be concluded that a protocol has been pro-
duced, that is capable of introducing and maintaining plasmids in circular form. This allows
for genetic modiﬁcation of the D. hansenii in future work.
The G418 resistance was found to be inert as it did not depend on introduction of DNA to the
yeast. Though it is clear that G418 still has some detrimental eﬀect on D. hansenii, when it is
compared to the plate with non-selective YPD media. The resistance may be isolated to G418,
but further studies should be conducted with other common selective markers as the resistance
may be broader.
The low functionality of DhARS09 and DhARS03 was a surprise, since they had been mentioned
in both Minhas et. al. [19] and Yaguchi et. al. [15] as highly eﬀective ARSs for D. hansenii.
However, the broad functionality of the panARS as described by Liachko et. al. [20] turned out
to include D. hansenii. To my knowledge this is the ﬁrst time a panARS has been successfully
used in D. hansenii. This also means, that a new highly eﬀective ARS has now been identiﬁed
for D. hansenii.
The loss of the ﬁnal validation due to the pandemic does hurt the trustworthiness of the results
as it is not deﬁnitively shown that the plasmid was episomally present in an unaltered state.
Though the loss of function did show that the DNA had not been chromosomally integrated.
The design of the theoretical construction of the MAD7 system was based on step wise assembly
and validation.
The ﬁrst step in which the MAD7 expression cassette was integrated into
pDIV066 by USER fusion cloning in E. coli DH5α created a plasmid without much function.
The subsequent ampliﬁcation followed by a round of USER fusion cloning and ampliﬁcation by
which the gRNA was introduced just add to the amount of time the DNA has been copied from
the initial step. This increases the chance of signiﬁcant mutations occurring, which may impair
the functionality of the ﬁnal construct. This could be avoided by attempting to introduce all
fragments simultaneously, both MAD7 and the gRNA would only have to be assembled and
ampliﬁed once. However, this would increase the fragments to assembled in one step to six
and a plasmid, which might lower the number of successful transformants in the USER fusion
cloning step below acceptable margins. This approach also has the additional disadvantage of
not producing a plasmid with MAD7 that could be used as a template for future desired edits.
Page 29 of 31
==PAGE:32==
Discussion and conclusion
Therefore, despite the increased risk of detrimental mutation by performing the procedure in
two steps, this should still be the superior procedure in the long term.
The URA3 gRNA editing by multiple rounds of PCR, producing small fragments and assem-
bling them again by using complementary primers and a ligase may also be prone to mutation,
but as the total length of the fragments is small this issue is somewhat alleviated. However,
if it were to fail a gBLOCK containing the correct gRNA should be ordered. Thereafter, the
approach should be identical to the one described for KU70, except for the validation, wherein
the uridine imprint methods can be used. The choice of URA3 as the initial edit attempted by
the MAD7 construct is important due to the simpler experimental evaluation terms. However,
there are some possible ways to do experimental validation of the KU70 knockout, such as
measure decreased cell viability when grown in media containing mutagenic compounds. These
tests however are diﬃcult to perform and require larger studies, it is therefore not recommended
to perform such tests. Instead genomic sequencing of a PCR ampliﬁed fragment of the genomic
DNA of the transformant should be applied.
If the result of validation steps were to be no MAD7 activity for either construct or either edit.
Then other promoters for the gRNA expression or a diﬀerent setup for the excision of the gRNA
from the tRNA expressed with it should be tested as DhTEF3 has already had its functionality
validated by acting as a promoter for the nourseothricin resistance gene NAT in pDIV066 and
the MAD7 gene itself has been codon optimized. However, despite the broad functionality of
the gene among diverse organisms, it is still a minor possibility that the non-functionality of
the MAD7 enzyme is due to misfolding.
If the URA3 and KU70 are knocked out as intended, not only will it prove the eﬃcacy of the
construct design it will also mean that a D. hansenii strain with simple auxotrophic selection
is available that will produce fewer unintended Chromomal integrations. It may even make the
Lithium acetate method viable for use in D. hansenii again.
This means that a strain for deep research into the minor mechanics of D. hansenii’s internal
machinery will have been produced as well as a strain ready for implementation and application
in industrial research has been made available.
Page 30 of 31
==PAGE:33==
References
[1]
Klaus Gori et al. “Debaryomyces hansenii strains diﬀer in their production of ﬂavor
compounds in a cheese-surface model”. In: MicrobiologyOpen, vol. 1, no. 2 (2012), pp. 161–
168. issn: 20458827. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.11.
[2]
Mathias Bäumlisberger et al. “The Potential of the Yeast Debaryomyces hansenii H525 to
Degrade Biogenic Amines in Food”. In: Microorganisms, vol. 3, no. 4 (2015), pp. 839–850.
issn: 2076-2607. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms3040839.
[3]
Bernard Dujon et al. “Genome evolution in yeasts”. In: Nature, vol. 430, no. 6995 (2004),
pp. 35–44. issn: 00280836. doi: 10.1038/nature02579.
[4]
Catarina Prista et al. Mechanisms underlying the halotolerant way of Debaryomyces
hansenii. 2005. doi: 10.1016/j.femsyr.2004.12.009.
[5]
Martha L Ricaurte and Nadathur S Govind. “Construction of plasmid vectors and trans-
formation of the marine yeast Debaryomyces hansenii”. In: Marine Biotechnology, vol. 1,
no. 1 (1999), pp. 15–19. issn: 14362228. doi: 10.1007/PL00011745.
[6]
Monika Aggarwal and Alok K. Mondal. “Debaryomyces hansenii: An osmotolerant and
halotolerant yeast”. In: Yeast Biotechnology: Diversity and Applications. Springer Nether-
lands, 2009, pp. 65–84. isbn: 9781402082917. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4020-8292-4_4.
[7]
Anabel Almagro et al. “Eﬀects of salts on Debaryomyces hansenii and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae under stress conditions”. In: International Journal of Food Microbiology, vol.
56, no. 2-3 (2000), pp. 191–197. issn: 01681605. doi: 10.1016/S0168-1605(00)00220-8.
[8]
Catarina Prista et al. “Physiological basis for the high salt tolerance of Debaryomyces
hansenii”. In: Applied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 63, no. 10 (1997), pp. 4005–
4009. issn: 00992240. doi: 10.1128/aem.63.10.4005-4009.1997.
[9]
Anabel Almagro et al. “Cloning and expression of two genes coding for sodium pumps in
the salt-tolerant yeast Debaryomyces hansenii”. In: Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 183, no.
10 (2001), pp. 3251–3255. issn: 00219193. doi: 10.1128/JB.183.10.3251-3255.2001.
[10]
Catarina Prista et al. “The halotolerant Debaryomyces hansenii, the Cinderella of non-
conventional yeasts”. In: Yeast, vol. 33, no. 10 (2016), pp. 523–533. issn: 10970061. doi:
10.1002/yea.3177.
[11]
Colin Ratledge and James P. Wynn. “The biochemistry and molecular biology of lipid ac-
cumulation in oleaginous microorganisms”. In: Advances in Applied Microbiology. Vol. 51.
Academic Press Inc., 2002, pp. 1–52. doi: 10.1016/S0065-2164(02)51000-5.
[12]
Xin Meng et al. Biodiesel production from oleaginous microorganisms. 2009. doi: 10.
1016/j.renene.2008.04.014.
[13]
Fernanda Lages, Magda Silva-Graça, and Candida Lucas. “Active glycerol uptake is a
mechanism underlying halotolerance in yeasts: A study of 42 species”. In: Microbiology,
==PAGE:34==
References
vol. 145, no. 9 (1999), pp. 2577–2585. issn: 13500872. doi: 10.1099/00221287-145-9-
2577.
[14]
L. Adler, A. Blomberg, and A. Nilsson. “Glycerol metabolism and osmoregulation in the
salt-tolerant yeast Debaryomyces hansenii”. In: Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 162, no. 1
(1985), pp. 300–306. issn: 00219193. doi: 10.1128/jb.162.1.300-306.1985.
[15]
Allison Yaguchi, Dyllan Rives, and Mark Blenner. “New kids on the block: emerging
oleaginous yeast of biotechnological importance”. In: AIMS Microbiology, vol. 3, no. 2
(2017), pp. 227–247. issn: 2471-1888. doi: 10.3934/microbiol.2017.2.227.
[16]
Nicolas Papon, Vincent Courdavault, and Marc Clastre. Biotechnological potential of the
fungal CTG clade species in the synthetic biology era. 2014. doi: 10.1016/j.tibtech.
2013.10.006.
[17]
Siobhán A Turner and Geraldine Butler. “The Candida pathogenic species complex”. In:
Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine, vol. 4, no. 9 (2014). issn: 21571422. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a019778.
[18]
N. S. Govind and A. T. Banaszak. “Isolation and characterization of an autonomously
replicating sequence (ARSD) from the marine yeast Debaryomyces hansenii.” In: Molec-
ular marine biology and biotechnology, vol. 1, no. 3 (1992), pp. 215–218. issn: 10536426.
[19]
Anupriya Minhas, Dipanwita Biswas, and Alok K. Mondal. “Development of host and
vector for high-eﬃciency transformation and gene disruption in Debaryomyces hansenii”.
In: FEMS Yeast Research, vol. 9, no. 1 (2009), pp. 95–102. issn: 15671356. doi: 10.1111/
j.1567-1364.2008.00457.x.
[20]
Ivan Liachko and Maitreya J. Dunham. “An autonomously replicating sequence for use
in a wide range of budding yeasts”. In: FEMS Yeast Research, vol. 14, no. 2 (2014),
pp. 364–367. issn: 15671364. doi: 10.1111/1567-1364.12123.
[21]
A Wo. “Pan-yeast autonomously replicating sequence”. In: (2014), pp. 1–22.
[22]
Fernando Geu-Flores et al. “USER fusion: A rapid and eﬃcient method for simultaneous
fusion and cloning of multiple PCR products”. In: Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 35, no. 7
(2007). issn: 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkm106.
[23]
Niels Bjørn Hansen, Mette Lübeck, and Peter Stephensen Lübeck. “Advancing USER
cloning into simpleUSER and nicking cloning”. In: Journal of Microbiological Methods,
vol. 96, no. 1 (2014), pp. 42–49. issn: 01677012. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2013.10.018.
[24]
Bo Salomonsen, Uﬀe H. Mortensen, and Barbara A. Halkier. “USER-derived cloning
methods and their primer design”. In: Methods in Molecular Biology, vol. 1116 (2014),
pp. 59–72. issn: 10643745. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-764-8_5.
[25]
Narayana Annaluru et al. “Assembling DNA fragments by USER fusion”. In: Methods in
Molecular Biology, vol. 852 (2012), pp. 77–95. issn: 10643745. doi: 10.1007/978-1-
61779-564-0_7.
Page 32 of 31
==PAGE:35==
[26]
N. M. Calvin and P. C. Hanawalt. “High-eﬃciency transformation of bacterial cells by
electroporation”. In: Journal of Bacteriology, vol. 170, no. 6 (1988), pp. 2796–2801. issn:
00219193. doi: 10.1128/jb.170.6.2796-2801.1988.
[27]
BioRAD. “MicroPulser ™Electroporation Apparatus Operating Instructions and Appli-
cations Guide Catalog Number 165-2100”. In: (), pp. 800–424.
[28]
ANU MINHAS and Dipanwita Biswas. “Development of an Eﬃcient Transformation Sys-
tem for Halotolerant Yeast Debaryomyces hansenii CBS767”. In: BIO-PROTOCOL, vol.
9, no. 17 (2019). issn: 2331-8325. doi: 10.21769/bioprotoc.3352.
[29]
Marcus A. Price et al. “Expanding and understanding the CRISPR toolbox for Bacillus
subtilis with MAD7 and dMAD7”. In: Biotechnology and Bioengineering, vol. 117, no. 6
(2020), pp. 1805–1816. issn: 10970290. doi: 10.1002/bit.27312.
[30]
Zhenyi Liu et al. “ErCas12a CRISPR-MAD7 for Model Generation in Human Cells, Mice,
and Rats”. In: The CRISPR Journal, vol. 3, no. 2 (2020), pp. 97–108. issn: 2573-1599.
doi: 10.1089/crispr.2019.0068.
[31]
Elena Maksimova et al. “In vitro and in vivo CRISPR gene editing with MAD7”. In:
(2019), p. 7. doi: doi.org/10.1101/650515.
[32]
M. Groenewald et al. “Polyphasic re-examination of Debaryomyces hansenii strains and
reinstatement of D. hansenii, D. fabryi and D. subglobosus”. In: Persoonia: Molecular
Phylogeny and Evolution of Fungi, vol. 21 (2008), pp. 17–27. issn: 00315850. doi: 10.
3767/003158508X336576.
[33]
R. Daniel Gietz and Robert H. Schiestl. “High-eﬃciency yeast transformation using the
LiAc/SS carrier DNA/PEG method”. In: Nature Protocols, vol. 2, no. 1 (2007), pp. 31–34.
issn: 17542189. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2007.13.
[34]
Kabin Xie, Bastian Minkenberg, and Yinong Yang. “Boosting CRISPR/Cas9 multiplex
editing capability with the endogenous tRNA-processing system”. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 112, no. 11 (2015),
pp. 3570–3575. issn: 10916490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1420294112.
[35]
Letian Song et al. “Eﬃcient genome editing using tRNA promoter-driven CRISPR/Cas9
gRNA in Aspergillus Niger”. In: PLoS ONE, vol. 13, no. 8 (2018). issn: 19326203. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0202868.
