==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Wind Turbine Operational Strategies for Increasing Value 
of Energy 
 
 
 
Andreas Thorsen 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0403 
June 2020 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Andreas Thorsen 
Title: Wind Turbine Operational Strategies for Increasing Value of Energy 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0403403 
June 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students.  
Project period:  
January – June 2020 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Søren Juhl Andersen 
Juan Pablo Murcia Leon 
Katherine Dykes 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The potential for increasing the value generated by a single wind turbine (WT) by altering the control
strategy in time based on the wind conditions and price of electricity is assessed. To this end, the
WT response as a function of wind conditions and control strategy is described using surrogate models
predicting loads and power production. Two surrogate models using different machine learning based
modelling techniques, random forest (RF) and artificial neural network (ANN), are developed and
tested. Both surrogate models attain accurate predictions of most modelled quantities while the ANN
model is found to be more relevant in an optimization framework. The surrogate models are deployed
in the assessment of two different sites in Denmark.
For both sites, a potential for increasing the
generated revenue without increasing fatigue damage is identified using simple methods. Additional,
more complex, solution strategies are proposed and described.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Wind Energy at the Technical University of
Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of Science degree.
First and foremost, I would like to express my gratitude and thanks to my supervisors Søren Juhl
Andersen, Juan Pablo Murcia Leon and Katherine Dykes for their support, guidance and engagement
in challenging discussions. Furthermore, their ideas and proposals for solution strategies has been much
appreciated, and is an integrated part of this work.
Moreover, I would like to thank my roommates Tor-Salve Dalsgaard and Thomas Nyegaard-Signori for
good advice on Python programming and for engaging in discussions regarding this thesis in a time
with limited possibility for outside contact. Furthermore, I would like to thank Rasmus Sode Lund,
Jens Peter Schøler Christiansen and Selma Andrea Janum Jørgensen for feedback and reviews in the
final phase of writing this thesis.
Finally, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to my friends and family for their love and support
throughout my time as a student and the process of writing this thesis.
Andreas Thorsen
Kongens Lyngby, June 27, 2020
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
WT Characterization
11
2.1
Aeroelastic simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Fatigue Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Control strategy tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Steady state analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Operation in a turbulent wind field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7
DLC 1.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.8
Partial conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3
Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
31
3.1
Design of Experiment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Convergence study of sample statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Dataset/Database II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4
Machine Learning Introduction & Model Performance Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.5
Surrogate model: Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.6
Surrogate model: Artificial Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.7
Partial conclusion & Recommendations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4
Site Presentation & Time Series of Historical Data
57
4.1
Time series of historical data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.2
Site description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.3
Partial conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5
Optimization
67
5.1
Choice hierarchy approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.2
Monte-Carlo approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.3
Partial conclusion & Recommendations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6
Conclusions & Further Work
81
6.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.2
Further work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
Bibliography
84
A WT characterization
91
B Inclusion of PSP in variable space
95
C Additional results related to convergence study
97
D Additional results related to Random Forest model
99
E Additional results related to ANN model
101
F Additional results related to site presentation
105
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
α
Wind shear exponent coefficient
αϵ2/3
Mann box parameter where α is the three-dimensional Kolmogorov constant and ϵ is the
specific rate of destruction of turbulent kinetic energy i.e. the dissipation rate
δ
Relative error
ϵ
Absolute error
Γ
Mann box turbulence anisotropy parameter
ˆy
Surrogate model predictions
Λ
Turbulence longitudinal scale parameter
λ or TSR
Tip speed ratio
Ω
Rotor rotational speed
Φ
Activation function
ϕ
Yaw misalignment
σ
Standard deviation
A
Rotor area
C
Cost
CP
Power coefficient
CT
Thrust coefficient
D
Fatigue damage
FT
Thrust
k
Number of folds in k-fold cross-validation
L
Mann box turbulence length scale
LMann,i
Mann box length in i’th direction
m
Wöhler exponent
Meq
1-Hz Damage Equivalent Load (DEL)
Meq
1-Hz Damage Equivalent Moment (DEL)
Mmax
Maximum of the absolute moment
Mm
Mean moment
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
Mr
Equivalent reversed moment amplitude
Mu
Ultimate moment
NMann,i
Mann box number of grid points in the i’th direction
R
Revenue
Rrotor
Rotor radius
T
Sample time
U
Horizontal mean wind speed
u∗
Friction velocity
X
Sample
x
Surrogate model feature
y
Surrogate model targets
DEL
Damage Equivalent Moment
FV
Future Value
MAE
Mean Absolute Error
MSE
Mean Squared Error
NPV
Net Present Value
NRMSE
Max. Normalized Root Mean Square Error
PSP
Power Set-Point
Q
Quantile
RMSE
Root Mean Square Error
RRMSE
Relative Root Mean Square Error
TI
Turbulence Intensity
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Wind energy is expected to become one of the main sources of electricity in the coming years in
both IEA’s Global Energy Outlook 2018 [1] and DNV GL’s Energy Transition Outlook 2019 [2] with
projections of wind energy supplying 30% of the world’s electricity by 2050.
As the energy market share of renewables increase, the market as a whole will change. It is likely
that operators of e.g. wind farms will be expected and motivated to provide grid services as outlined
in Ahlstrom et al. [3] which, historically, have been performed by large, central power plants. These
services ensure the reliability of the grid and are paid for by the grid operator. However, providing
services such as frequency control and power reserve requires imposing new control strategies on the
individual wind turbine (WT) leading to a change in the forcing and by extension the fatigue limited
lifetime of the WT.
Wind energy has, and is still, heavily subsidized e.g. in Denmark as described by the Danish Energy
Agency in [4] and [5]. The typical subsidy strategy is the Feed-in Tariff system [4] which covers a
variety practical implementations all designed to stimulate renewable energy production by offering an
above-market price per unit of delivered electricity. However, the industry is becoming competitive in
the energy market. As such, there is a broad agreement that the subsidies will be rolled back in the
future [2,5]. This agreement is confirmed by the fact that the first zero-subsidy wind energy projects have
already been launched in both The Netherlands [6], Denmark [7] and Germany [8] starting operation
within the next few years. Additionally, it should be noted that, in at least two of these projects [6,8],
the grid connection is established by the grid operator, which effectively serves to decrease the required
initial capital investment from the operator side.
A side effect of the Feed-in Tariff system is that the WT operators, generally, are able to sell their
production at a relatively high price regardless of the actual market price. Naturally, this results in a
production strategy focused on producing as much power as possible at all times. Without the subsidies
this picture will change, introducing new opportunities in terms of WT operational strategies on both
single WT and farm level. The price of electricity can vary significantly ranging from downright negative
prices to thousands of DKK/MWh [9]. This gives rise to the question as to whether WT operational
strategies can be tailored to increase monetary yield, by varying the power production based on the
given price at that point in time and the available wind resource. The Net Present Value (NPV) is a
descriptive quantity when it comes to appraising long term projects such as wind farms. NPV accounts
for the time value of money and is essentially the difference between summed cash outflows and summed
cash inflows taking the discount rate into account.
The power produced by a WT is extracted from the kinetic energy of the wind flowing through the rotor
plane. The extracted energy makes the rotor, and the main shaft on which it is mounted, spin. The
main shaft is in turn connected either directly or through a gear box to a generator, which produces
electricity as it rotates. A typical modern WT has a minimum required wind speed to produce power
i.e. a cut-in wind speed. Above cut-in, the power production increases with the cubed wind speed until
the rated power of the WT is reached, after which the aerodynamics are controlled to keep the power
production constant at the rated power. If wind speeds above a certain threshold occur, i.e. above
cut-out, the WT will shut down and stop producing.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
The power produced by a WT can be altered by changing the power set point (PSP) i.e. the target power
production. The PSP can be increased (boosted operation) and decreased (derated operation) compared
to the rated power of the WT (normal operation), within a range defined by the generator capabilities
and the structural design envelope. Consequently, the forcing on the structure will change based on the
operational state affecting the fatigue damage. By viewing fatigue damage as an expendable resource,
which can be spent in varying degree at different time intervals over the lifetime of a WT or wind farm, it
is hypothesized that the NPV of the asset(s) can likely be increased. This can be investigated by solving
an optimization problem aimed at maximizing NPV over the full life time, taking price of electricity
and available wind resource into account, while ensuring that the accumulated fatigue damage does
not violate design constraints. Solving such an optimization problem potentially comes at a very high
computational cost, why the fatigue damage evaluation must be performed in an efficient manner.
Surrogate modelling of the fatigue damage represented as a damage equivalent load (DEL) provides just
such an opportunity. Surrogate models are based on data from other, usually computationally heavy
or otherwise ill-suited, higher fidelity models. While the scope of a surrogate is reduced compared
to high fidelity simulations, good accuracy can be achieved when modelling integrated values such as
DELs. Many surrogate models are developed using Machine Learning (ML) to fit the model to an
existing training dataset. Furthermore, surrogates can have the advantage that analytical gradients
can be obtained as opposed to computing gradients by finite difference, which can significantly improve
efficiency in gradient based optimization problems.
1.2
Literature Review
In this section, an overview of the state-of-the-art within modelling and control based performance
optimization of WTs is presented. This includes aeroelastic modelling, control strategies, surrogate
modelling and optimization.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized power P/Prated [-]
Boosted
Normal
Derated
Figure 1.1: Power curve for normal, boosted and derated operational strategies.
It should be noted that the term ’derated’ operation may refer to a number of different operational
strategies in the literature, which can be categorized as power reserve or steady induction control
strategies. For the remainder of this report, the strategy associated with ’derating’ will be characterized
by a power curve following the normal operation power curve up to a specific PSP, below rated power,
after which the power is kept constant.
Additionally, the term ’boosted’ operation will refer to a
specific PSP above rated power, which follows and extends the cubic part of normal operation power
curve. Likewise, when the PSP is reached, the power is kept constant. Figure 1.1 shows the power
curve trends described above. Additionally, it can be noted that the PSP in this thesis shall be defined
as
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Literature Review
3
Pmax(PSP) = PSP × Prated
(1.1)
where Prated is the rated power of the WT and Pmax is the steady state power produced at the power
set-point. For example, a PSP of 0.4 prescribes derating the WT to produce no more than 40 % of its
rated capacity while a PSP of 1.1 prescribes boosting the WT to 110 % of its rated capacity. From a
steady-state perspective, each PSP has an associated wind speed denoted the PSP wind speed which
in the case with a PSP of 1.0 is the rated wind speed of the WT.
Aeroelasticity
Aeroelastic tools are used to model the one-way coupling from the flow to the WT, which is achieved
by modelling of the aerodynamic forcing on the WT, as well as its structural response and the coupling
between the two. This allows transient predictions of the generated power and the dynamic response
of the WT, which is essential for fatigue load estimations.
While higher fidelity methods such as
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and vortex based approaches exist to model the aerodynamics,
the Blade Element Momentum (BEM) method is by far the dominating modelling technique in existing
softwares as presented in the review by Ageze et al. [10]. Additionally, this approach has seen extensive
use in the industry, which adds to the notion that it can supply a sufficient level of accuracy. In the
BEM method, each wind turbine blade is discretized into a number of radial elements. Each element is
aerodynamically represented as a specific 2-D airfoil for which the aerodynamic properties are specified
by a look-up table containing the airfoil data. The method is explained in detail by Hansen [11].
Existing aeroelastic codes all based on the BEM approach include, but is not limited to, HAWC2 [12],
OpenFAST [13] (former FAST [14]) and Flex5 [15]. Modelling of the structural response of the WT can
be achieved in different ways as described by Branlard in [16]. HAWC2 uses a finite element formulation
based on Timoshenko beam elements while OpenFAST (using the ElastoDyn module) and Flex5 are
based on a modal approach using corrected Euler-Bernoulli beam theory in a formulation based on joint
coordinates and the Rayleigh-Ritz approximation. The latter allows the WT system to be represented
by very few degrees of freedom (DOF), by limiting the movement of the structure to a combination
of mode shapes. Conversely, the former, higher fidelity model, produces a more accurate prediction at
the cost of a significant increase in computational expense. Flex5 is a software developed by S. Øye
at the Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, and is the aeroelastic simulation tool used in this
thesis. It has been validated through comparison to field measurements by Zierath et al. [17] indicating
conservative estimations of the blade loads, and has formed the basis for tools developed in the industry.
Any aeroelastic tool requires a simulated wind input.
Considering turbulent wind simulation, the
fidelity of such an input can vary from a uniform field of fluctuations to Large Eddy Simulation (LES)
CFD spanning a very large range of computational cost partly due to the sheer size of modern WTs.
Engineering models capable of generating turbulent wind fields with the spatio-temporal characteristics
found in the atmosphere have been developed to enable computationally efficient alternatives to vortex
methods and CFD, such as the Mann turbulence model [18, 19] or the Sandia method by Veers [20].
These models generate a 3D wind field based on a few input parameters and can be calibrated to site
specific conditions. One of the main differences between the two wind simulation approaches is the
correlation between the three turbulent velocity components which are prescribed in Mann turbulence
but left out of the Sandia model [21]. Referring to the IEC 61400-1 standard for WT design requirements
[22], Mann turbulence is one of the two accepted models for wind simulation, why this approach will
be used in this thesis. While this model assumes a homogeneous terrain and a neutral atmosphere,
the possibility of calibrating the turbulence to fit other atmospheric stability conditions by varying the
turbulent length scale input parameter have been addressed by Peña in [23].
The above-mentioned wind input is a simulation of the local wind field interacting with the WT based
on key flow parameters describing e.g. bulk flow and turbulence. On a local scale, these parameters
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
can be obtained through measurement campaigns. However, this approach is both time consuming
and costly, why meteorological models represent a valuable alternative.
Correlations in Renewable
Energy Sources (CorRES) is a simulation tool developed at DTU Wind Energy for variable renewable
energy which, among other things, can supply historical time series of wind conditions in a geographical
area based on meteorological data as described by Koivisto et al. [24]. The time series is simulated
using the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, see Skamarock et al. [25], which supplies
meteorological data in hourly resolution on a 10 by 10 km grid covering Europe. Using mesoscale models,
such as WRF, have some drawbacks e.g. the limited spatial and temporal resolution. Additionally,
Larsén et al. [26] describes that variations in simulated wind conditions are smoothed due to spatial
and temporal averaging effects, leading to a general underestimate of e.g. short term variability in wind
speeds. These limitations are addressed in CorRES by adding fluctuations to the time series based on
stochastic simulation [24], but is unavailable for this thesis.
Loads and Control
Yaw and induction control has been investigated extensively with regard to increasing the overall power
production of a wind farm, the former being a topic currently receiving considerable attention. An
extensive review of the existing literature in the field has been provided by Kheirabadi and Nagamune
[27]. In short, the idea behind yaw control is active wake steering i.e. by deflecting the wake through
yaw control, it can be guided away from downstream WTs resulting in increased production from these
WTs at the expense of reduced production from the upstream, yawed WT. Steady induction control
simply aims to extract less energy from the wind in upstream turbines, leaving more energy for WTs
operating in wakes, while dynamic induction control, also called active wake mixing [28], may speed
up the wake breakdown through increased mixing e.g. through collective pitch motion. However, to
the knowledge of the author, the existing literature is concerned with wind farm control as a means
of increasing the overall power production of a wind plant, and does not consider the opportunity to
increase the yield on an individual level by boosting the power output of a single WT. Consequently,
the aspect of considering fatigue damage as an expendable resource, which can be spent to different
degrees over the WT lifetime, has not been assessed.
Altering the operational strategy of a WT has a direct effect on the loading. The structural loading
effect for different power reserve strategies is investigated by Fleming et al. in [29]. The general trend,
based on Design Load Case (DLC) simulations in FAST, is a decrease in structural DELs across all
power reserve strategies, which was also predicted by Griffith et al. in [30]. However, only derating, as
opposed to Delta and Percentage power reserve strategies, show a zero (blade edgewise) or decreased
DEL across all considered components. Increased pitch actuation is pointed out as a potential drawback
from power reserve control, as the pitch system becomes active at lower, and more probable, wind speeds,
while no change is expected for the more demanding above rated wind speeds. Effects on extreme loads
are also considered, where either a clear improvement or modest positive or negative affect is predicted
across all strategies. These predictions are partly verified by experimental data, but the amount of
available data should be increased to draw definitive conclusions.
Deshpande and Peters [31] addresses the dynamic power response to different controllers all aimed at
achieving derating which may be achieved through changes in rotor speed, generator torque and blade
pitch in various combinations. Changing operational state to a lower PSP is shown to potentially cause
a large overshoot and subsequent fluctuations in the transient power response. Furthermore, the stall
stability margin is changed during derated operation. It is shown that a customized controller design
can eliminate these problems and ensure optimal derated power curves. However, the loads associated
with going from one operational state to another are not investigated.
Steady state and dynamic
control considerations for active power control are presented by Mirzaei et al. [32], where three different
control strategies are presented and investigated. Since the rated rotational speed (Ω-rated) has not
necessarily been reached before the PSP for derated operational states, the desired power production
may be achieved in several different ways. It is concluded that the overall best performance is achieved
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Literature Review
5
by a constant Tip Speed Ratio (TSR or λ) approach, which is maintained until Ω-rated is reached.
This strategy offers a smooth transition from partial to full load operation, robust operation in the
full load region and good performance in transitions from one PSP to another. Furthermore, low pitch
actuation and relative DELs combined with conserved rotor inertia allows faster repowering of the
WT and better inertia response to the grid. On the other hand, in a later study by Mirzaei et al. [33]
assessing control based wind farm power optimization using the same three control strategies, a strategy
specifying constant-Ωabove the PSP wind speed determined by the specific Ωat the PSP is preferred.
This strategy achieves the lowest thrust coefficient, which is strongly correlated with the velocity deficit
in the WT wake, allowing downstream turbines to produce more power. Such considerations are also
presented in [34] where the control strategy is tailored to minimize the thrust coefficient yet seemingly
at the expense of power performance at low wind speeds and reduced stall stability margins.
Regarding power boosting operational strategies, no literature has been found which deals with the
changes to loads on the WT. On the control side, Odgaard et al. [35] proved that power boosting
above rated power can be achieved with an almost non-existing recovery period when transitioning
back to a lower PSP. However, the presented analysis does not deal with neither structural or power
electronics fatigue. While literature on the subject is scarce, WT boosting programs are available from
manufacturers such as PowerPlus by Vestas [36] and Energy Thrust by Siemens Gamesa [37], which
promise power curves with an increased PSP indicating that WT boosting is, to some extent, feasible
within the design envelope of existing WTs. The PowerPlus program offers, depending on site conditions,
a nominal increase in power output of up to 15 % for some WT designs, and both programs promise
increases in annual energy production of up to 4-5 %. Additionally, Siemens Gamesa announced that
their SG 14-222 DD WT (prototype not yet constructed) with a rated power of 14 [MW] will be reaching
15 [MW] using power boosting [38], indicating that power boosting is integrated in the design of new
WTs.
Surrogate Modelling
Machine learning based surrogate models related to the field of wind turbines has been developed and
used for various purposes often in the context of an optimization problem for which these models are well
suited. Ciri et al. [39] developed a Polynomial Chaos Expansion (PCE) based surrogate predicting farm
level power production as a function of individual WT control strategy, wind speed and wind direction.
Clifton et al. [40] used an ensemble averaged regression tree for predictions of power performance
based on wind speed, turbulence intensity and wind shear. This achieved more accurate results than
the conventional power curve wind speed binning method at much lower computational cost.
The
same approach and parameters was used by Clifton et al. [41] to estimate the power curve of a turbine
operating in a mountain pass, which affects the wind conditions due to the complex terrain. Additionally,
another model was trained to predict DELs in the blade root as function of the same inputs, but no
model validation was presented.
Surrogate modelling has also been applied for WT load predictions. In [42], a Kriging interpolation
scheme is used to model DELs on the specific WTs, design reference class IEC1A [22], in the wind
farm Horns Rev 1 in the North Sea. The model includes wake effects based on the Dynamic Wake
Meandering (DWM) model [43], and is fitted to environmental conditions measured at location. The
model is trained using a k-fold cross-validation approach, (k = 5), with a specified terminations criteria
of 2% of the function value. From the surrogate model predictions, it is found that the variations in
DELs due to wake effects can be up to 35%, which is expected to have an impact on the Operation &
Maintenance (O&M) planning for the farm. Interestingly, it is also found that, including increases in
fatigue loading due to wake effects, the damage sustained by the WTs is still lower than the requirements
for the WT class indicating that some components may in fact have a lifetime exceeding the intended
design lifetime. Hence, a potential for improved designs seem present.
Dimitrov et al. [44] provides a detailed explanation of the development of load surrogates predicting
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
fatigue damage by estimating DELs based on high fidelity load databases generated using HAWC2 with
Mann box inflow and compares the performance of several surrogate models. The variable space of the
inflow conditions covered by the surrogate, i.e. the design of experiment, is defined by a univariate
distribution for each variable over a range bounded in a conditional manner in a variable hierarchy. So
if wind speed is the primary variable and turbulence intensity is the secondary variable, the turbulence
intensity may be conditional upon the wind speed, while the tertiary variable, wind shear, may be
conditional upon both wind speed and turbulence intensity. Other variables considered are wind tilt,
yaw, veer and density as well as the Mann turbulence length scale, anisotropy factor and turbulence
dissipation factor. Only the wind speed has a non-uniform distribution, in this case a beta distribution is
used. In order to map this set of independent and identically distributed variables to a joint distribution,
the Rosenblatt Transformation [45] is applied after which a sample set can be drawn based on quasi-
Monte Carlo (quasi-MC) simulations. The developed and tested models are direct numerical integration
methods: importance sampling and nearest-neighbour interpolation, as well as ML methods: PCE,
universal Kriging and quadratic response surface. A sensitivity analysis of the models is carried out
using Sobol indices [46], which handle non-linear models. This method is variance based and provides
a global rather than local sensitivity to the input variables i.e. how much of the output variance can be
attributed to the variance in a given input, which can be interpreted as a measure of sensitivity. From
this analysis, it is concluded that the wind speed and turbulence intensity have the largest impact, while
wind shear and the Mann turbulence also have notable influence. However, the remaining variables show
minimal impact on the fatigue loads. Furthermore, an uncertainty estimate based on bootstrapping [47]
is provided to estimate the empirical distribution of the model predictions. Among the tested models,
the universal Kriging offers the best performance closely followed by the PCE approach, why the PCE
is recommended since it is significantly more computationally efficient.
Along the same lines as the former article, PCE and Artificial Neural Network (ANN) for DEL prediction
on WTs operating in wakes are developed based on an identical design of experiment by Dimitrov in [48].
However, only wind speed, turbulence intensity and wind shear variables are considered from the earlier
variable space, while new variables describing wave climate and wake behaviour are introduced. The
wake modelling is performed based on the DWM model combined with Mann turbulence flow fields
and aeroelastic simulations in HAWC2. The ANN has a feedforward architecture with fully connected
layers and hyperbolic tangent activation function. Furthermore, it is shown that effective computation
of the analytical gradients for both PCE and ANN models is possible, the latter achieved through the
back-propagation approach, based on the chain differentiation rule, which can also be used to determine
the sensitivity of the output. An approach to modelling the surrogate uncertainty is presented where
one surrogate is fitted to the mean of the different seed simulations associated with each sample point,
while another surrogate is fitted to the standard deviation of the simulations in each sample. The latter
provides a measure of the uncertainty, and can be used to build confidence intervals for the prediction.
Based on a comparison of the two load surrogates, this study concludes that the PCE approach is
outperformed by the ANN based model with respect to both accuracy and computational efficiency.
However, the ANN seems to require more training data.
In both articles [44,48], the requirement for multiple seeds per MC sample set point to reduce seed-to-
seed uncertainty is stressed. It is also pointed out that increasing the total sample size has a similar
effect. In [44], 8 seeds each simulation of 1 hour and split into 6 10-minute series is used while 6 seeds
each simulated for 10 minutes is used in [48].
Mahulja et al. [49] use a surrogate model based on a sum of radial basis functions to model DELs in WT
shaft, tower bottom and blade root as well as power production. In this case, the surrogate modelling
is part of a larger optimization framework why the smooth and continuous analytical gradients offered
by this approach are desirable. The sample set is simulated using HAWC2 and DWM with wind fields
generated using Mann turbulence. The model training is performed using a Root Mean Square Error
(RMSE) on the validation set combined with a 5-fold cross-validation, i.e. these two contributions make
up the training objective function. The different models may require a varying number of sample points
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Literature Review
7
to predict an output within the error bounds. Therefore, an initial model training and evaluation based
on 500 samples is used to give an idea of the prediction space, and subsequently acting as a validation
set. Afterwards, a sequential sampling is performed in an iterative manner, which prescribes that: new
samples are drawn, the model accuracy is evaluated and another round of new samples are drawn in
strategic locations to minimize the error in the model. The accuracy target of the final surrogate is
5%, which was achieved for all predictions excluding the tower bottom side-side estimate. Furthermore,
compared to the initial sampling, an average relative improvement of 19% is reported for the sequential
sampling model using a dataset containing 1051 samples.
Optimization
Continuing with Mahulja et al. [49] from an optimization perspective, the developed load surrogate is
subsequently used to solve a wind farm layout optimization problem. The objective of the optimization
is to maximize NPV with the WT x-y coordinates as design variables. The NPV objective function is
posed such that it incorporates WT and cabling costs on top of the classical discount rate, along with
positive and negative cash flows. Included in the negative cash flow is the relative change of DEL to
a reference multiplied by a weighting factor associated with a given turbine placement, which is aimed
at modelling changes in O&M costs. This allows the optimization problem itself to be posed with a
simple constraint on the minimum interdistance between WTs and bounds on the farm layout area.
The optimization itself is performed in two steps. Initially, the total number of turbines and the coarse
layout of the wind farm is found by genetic optimization on a predefined grid which both handles the
discrete nature of the problem, and is a sturdy approach that avoids classical optimization problems
of local extrema, finite precision and computation of derivatives. Finally, a gradient based approach
is used to fine tune the position of the WTs (but not the number). As the genetic optimization has
already placed the WTs close to a minimum, the gradient based optimization is used to further improve
an already good solution by moving the WT to the actual minimum reducing wake effects. A drawback
of this approach is a high sensitivity to weighting coefficients in the objective function.
Another optimization topic, which receives a good deal of attention, is the control strategy area. Ciri
et al. [39] optimizes the individual control of WTs in a farm to maximize farm level power production
by adjusting the torque gain. This is achieved by using a PCE based surrogate predicting power from
WT control parameters, and it is found that high rotational speed is preferred over high torque gain
for waked WTs.
Mirzaei et al. [33] also performed farm level power optimization, in this case for
several developed operational strategies for steady induction control, solely subject to a constraint on
the achievable PSPs. Applied to a heavily waked 10-WT line layout scenario, modelled using the steady-
state N.O. Jensen wake model [50], the preferred control strategy is the strategy associated with the
lowest thrust coefficient leaving more energy in the wake. However, the optimal PSPs of the individual
turbines suggest that it may be worthwhile to accept lower power generation from the WTs in the first
couple of rows, as it enables increased power capture from WTs further down the line. Pedersen and
Larsen [34] also deal with farm level power optimization through steady induction control, aimed at
limiting the thrust coefficient, wherein both farm layout and individual WT control is optimized. In
this study, the coupling between the optimal layout and optimal control problems is investigated. It is
concluded that the coupling is weak, which allows the two problems to be solved in a sequential rather
than integrated manner severely reducing the computational cost of solving the problem.
Including the loads associated with a given control strategy in the optimization problem itself, has been
done by Bossanyi [51], where dynamic optimization of total power output using both yaw and steady
induction control based on field data from the German North Sea is performed. By comparing results
from power optimization, with and without taking the resulting loads into account, it is shown that
the loads can be reduced significantly at a very small compromise in power production. However, the
increase in power production over the optimization period for a 6 WT farm is limited to ≈2% with
high uncertainties.
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
1.3
Problem Statement
In this thesis, the aim is to develop and evaluate load surrogate models allowing efficient computation of
the DELs and maximum loads on the DTU 10MW Reference Turbine under different inflow conditions
and power set-point operational states. The motivation behind the development of the surrogate is to
investigate the potential for increasing value of wind energy, by viewing fatigue damage as an expendable
resource over the lifetime of the WT. This means producing more power when the price of electricity
is high while enduring higher loads, and less power resulting in reduced loads when the price is low to
spare the WT. To assess this, a DEL and maximum load constrained induction control optimization
problem can be solved with the aim of maximizing the net present value of the asset over its life time.
To answer this problem statement, a number of research questions have been posed with a number of
subquestions. The latter are meant to encapsulate the main components required to answer the research
questions.
1. What are the general trends in relevant DELs and maximum loads associated with derated/-
boosted operational strategies for the DTU 10MW WT based on aeroelastic simulations?
a) Can the existing simulation framework for the DTU 10MW WT be tuned for derated/boosted
operation?
b) How should the DELs and maximum loads be modelled?
2. To which extent can surrogate models reproduce the aeroelastic results for power, DELs and
maximum loads based on key flow and control parameters such as wind speed, turbulence intensity,
wind shear, air density and PSP?
a) How should surrogate model performance be evaluated?
3. Which operational strategy yields the highest net present value of the revenue generated by a
single DTU 10MW turbine based on the surrogate models, price of electricity and local wind
resource over an entire WT lifetime?
a) What solution strategies can be applied?
1.4
Thesis outline
In chapter 2, the load modelling approach is described and the derated/boosted control strategies are
developed and tested. Furthermore, the load trends are evaluated based on both a relative and absolute
analysis of the DELs and maximum loads.
In chapter 3, the design of experiment used to generate datasets of aeroelastic simulation samples used
in the surrogate model development is described along with a convergence study of the sample statistics.
Two datasets are generated incorporating a 3- and a 5-dimensional variable space, respectively, which
are used in the development and evaluation of surrogate models using two different machine learning
based modelling techniques.
In chapter 4, time series with historical data of electricity price and wind conditions for two specific sites
are introduced and described. Initially, the separate price and wind condition datasets are merged and
a number of flow variables are derived from the existing data. Secondly, the joined dataset is analyzed
along with the specific sites.
In chapter 5, the optimization problem is formulated and a number of simplifications are introduced.
Three different solution strategies of varying complexity are proposed of which two are tested and the
obtained results discussed.
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Thesis outline
9
Finally, a summarizing conclusion is provided in chapter 6 along with recommendations for further
work.
As a general comment on the thesis structure, the methodology associated with each chapter is presented
in therein rather than in a separate methodology chapter. Partial conclusions are presented on a chapter-
wise basis, along with specific recommendations for future work when these have been investigated
in some detail.
The work presented in this thesis has the scope of being used in an optimization
scheme. Therefore, reading the first part of chapter 5 may provide some context for the decisions made
throughout this thesis.
The code developed for this thesis is primarily written in Python 3.7 with the addition of a number
of Bash scripts controlling the interactions with available computing cluster and a number of inherited
Matlab scripts. The code developed for this thesis is available at GitLab server of DTU Wind Energy:
https://gitlab.windenergy.dtu.dk/MasterProjects/andreasthorsen.
==PAGE:20==
10
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
WT Characterization
In this chapter, a general characterization of the DTU 10MW WT is presented. This is a three bladed,
upwind, variable speed, collective pitch regulated (VSPR) WT, with a rotor diameter of 178.3 [m] and a
hub height of 119.0 [m]. The cut-in and cut-out wind speeds are 4 [m/s] and 25 [m/s], respectively, while
the rated wind speed is 11.4 [m/s]. A detailed description and analysis is given by Bak et al. in [52]. The
characterization partly aims to ensure that the WT boosted and derated control strategies have been
implemented correctly resulting in stable WT operation, and to document its behavior. Furthermore,
it serves to give an indication of which relevant quantities to include in the later stages of the thesis.
The characterization consists of an analysis of the WT behavior in both steady and turbulent wind
conditions.
2.1
Aeroelastic simulations
As previously mentioned, the aeroelastic tool of choice is Flex5 [15] more specifically the Fortran version,
developed at DTU based on a modal modelling approach. This approach renders Flex5 of lower fidelity
on the structural side than aeroelastic tools using FEM representations such as HAWC2 [12]. However,
Flex5 is far superior in terms of computational cost. The implemented controller is simple compared
to what is used in the industry, and is e.g. restricted to collective pitch actuation. No specific docu-
mentation on the controller exists, but it resembles the basic DTU wind energy controller described by
Hansen and Henriksen [53].
Wind simulation
The wind simulation input to aeroelastic simulations is based on Mann turbulence [18, 19], which is
widely used in the industry, and a suggested method in the design standard [22].
The Mann box
contains 3-dimensional velocity fluctuations in a cartesian coordinate cuboid grid described by the
number of points in each direction NMann,i, the turbulence length scale L, the turbulence anisotropy
parameter Γ and αϵ2/3 with α being the Kolmogorov constant and ϵ being the dissipation rate of
turbulent kinetic energy. The nMann,z coordinate direction is transformed into a temporal coordinate
by applying Taylor’s Frozen Field hypothesis using the bulk horizontal mean wind speed, U. 216 distinct
Mann boxes with a length of 600 [s] are available as wind input throughout this thesis, and covers a full
Design Load Case (DLC) 1.2 simulation as specified in the standard [22]. The characteristics of these
available boxes are identical and described in table 2.1. The boxes are distinct in the sense that they
are generated using a random process which is determined by a unique turbulence seed for each box.
As such, the the boxes are random realizations of the ambient turbulent wind field yet have specified
statistical properties.
As mentioned, the 216 distinct Mann boxes come with the same characteristics, and are subsequently
scaled to accommodate the specified flow conditions. One of the flow parameters is the turbulence
intensity, TI, which in this thesis shall be defined only by the u-wise fluctuations and bulk inflow
velocity, U as
TI = σu
U
(2.1)
==PAGE:22==
12
2 WT Characterization
where σ denotes the standard deviation. However, turbulent fluctuations are present in all three direc-
tions. As such, the TI scaling factor is computed based on eq. (2.1) but the scaling is performed in all
three directions.
NMann,x
[-]
NMann,y
[-]
NMann,z
[-]
LMann,x
[m]
LMann,y
[m]
LMann,z
[m]
αϵ2/3
[m4/3s−2]
L
[m]
Γ
[-]
Λ
[m]
32
32
8192
220.5
220.5
-
1
29.4
3
42
Table 2.1: Mann box parameters for all 216 available boxes.
Regarding the Mann boxes described in 2.1, the size of wind field plane is 220.5 by 220.5 [m] i.e. the
interdistance between points is roughly 7.1 [m]. For all boxes, the number of points is constant, while
the horizontal inflow velocity is not. This means that the boxes are stretched or compressed in space,
i.e. LMann,z is scaled, to fit the required length in time of 600 [s]. As such, the temporal resolution
of the boxes is constant while the spatial resolution scales with the inflow velocity resulting in coarser
discretizations for higher wind speeds, and inherently results in scaling of the turbulent length scale with
the mean field velocity. Notably, the scaling is performed in only one direction resulting in turbulent
eddies with a potentially elongated or compressed shape in space. Furthermore, the wind field in Flex5
is discretized in a polar rather than rectangular grid. The polar grid consists of 8 radial stations and 37
azimuthal stations. For this reason, the Mann box is not fed directly to Flex5 but is first transformed
to the correct coordinate system by linear interpolation.
As a general comment to the Mann boxes used in this thesis and prescribed by the IEC standard [22],
it can be noted that the used Mann parameters in table 2.1 are subject to criticism based on the work
by Peña [23]. Apart from the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL) stability dependency of the Mann
parameters reported for Østerild in the article, the expected Mann turbulence length scale is generally
found to be higher than the prescribed 29.4 [m]; reaching values of ≈150 [m] at the DTU 10MW
WT hub height for unstable ABL conditions.
As such, using Mann boxes generated with different
parameters seems reasonable, but has not been possible in this thesis.
Simulation settings
The simulation settings for Flex5 are specified through the software Infile and allows for numerous
options of which only a few are addressed here. No foundation is modelled i.e. the tower is clamped at
the bottom. The simulation time is set to 700 [s] and the 600 [s] Mann box is recycled. Recycling in
this context refers Mann box being used in a cyclic manner i.e. the same wind appears every 600 [s]
and the box start point correlates with the end point ensuring no unphysical leaps in wind speed. This
allows the data analysis to be performed on only the latter 600 [s] part of the simulation, such that any
initial transients in the system originating from the initial conditions have died out, while the wind field
statistics match the box specifications. The sampling frequency is set to 50 [Hz] i.e. a timestep of 0.02
[s]. This is a far higher resolution than the input wind field, why interpolation is carried out between
the input wind planes. Note that the output time series is reduced to 25 [Hz] due to limited disk space.
2.2
Fatigue Analysis
The fatigue analysis is carried out based on the Palmgren-Miner rule of linear damage [54], which allows
the fatigue contribution from different stress levels to be superimposed.
D =
X
i
ni
Ni
(2.2)
where D is the damage, ni is number of cycles with a given load amplitude Si and Ni is the number
of cycles to failure for that same Si. By definition, a structure will breaks when D = 1. The number
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Fatigue Analysis
13
of cycles for all load ranges in the load time series are counted using rainflow counting described
by Rychlik [55].
This technique is based on counting stress-strain hysteresis paths in the material.
The python implementation of the rainflow counting algorithm used in this work has been developed
by Janiszewski [56], and complies with the ASTM Standard Practices for Cycle Counting in Fatigue
Analysis E1049-85 [57]. Based on (2.2), the 1-Hz damage equivalent load, Seq can be calculated as
Seq =
 
1
T
X
i
niSm
i
! 1
m
(2.3)
where T is the total sample time and m is the material specific Wöhler exponent. It is often practical
to work with moments when dealing with WTs. This relation can readily be posed in a moment form
as
Meq =
 
1
T
X
i
niM m
i
! 1
m
(2.4)
where Meq is the 1-Hz Damage Equivalent Moment (abbreviated DEL) and Mi is the moment amplitude.
However, only the amplitudes of the loads are included in (2.4) while the static loads are excluded
if rainflow counting is used alone.
The static loads are known to have an influence on the actual
fatigue limited lifetime of a component and several methods to address this behaviour exists. Large
changes in the mean load level are to be expected over both the operational range of the turbine, and
even more importantly between the different operational strategies, see the thrust curve in figure 2.2.
Therefore, the mean load level should be accounted for, which is also stressed in relation to derating
strategies by Fleming et al. [29].
The mean value correction technique used in this article is the
Goodman correction [58]. This approach is also used to model WT monopile fatigue by Blasques and
Natarajan [59], where it is found to yield a rather conservative estimate compared to other correction
techniques, such as the Walker formula and mean stress sensitivity factor based approaches. However,
the Goodman correction does not require detailed knowledge of the material properties, and is the
proposed method for general characterization of WT fatigue behaviour presented by Sutherland et
al. [60], why it is the modelling technique of choice. Based on [59], the correction proposed by Goodman
can be written as
Mr,i =
Mi
1 −Mm
Mu
(2.5)
where Mr is the equivalent reversed moment amplitude, Mm is the mean moment and Mu is the ultimate
moment. This calculation must be performed for each of the i moment amplitude and cycle pairs in
(2.4) which then becomes
Meq =
 
1
T
X
i
niM m
r,i
! 1
m
(2.6)
The Goodman correction relates the non-zero mean moment amplitudes to an equivalent zero mean
moment amplitude, which allows the fatigue to be evaluated based on a standard zero mean S-N
curve [60]. As seen in (2.5), this approach requires the mean moment which is readily obtained from
the time series. Furthermore, the ultimate moment is required. This quantity is obtained for all the
required components by running a full DLC 1.2 [22] simulation in normal operation, and finding the
maximum observed moment across all simulations. Notably, for symmetric components, i.e. the tower
bottom and main shaft, the component ultimate moment is based on the maximum magnitude of the
moment vector. This yields a maximum observed moment of 465,101 and 68,083 [kNm] for tower (TB)
and main shaft (ShaftMxy), respectively. The ultimate moments are then estimated as Mu = 1.5Mmax,
and can be found in table 2.3 where TBFA and TBSS are included to facilitate comparison with
==PAGE:24==
14
2 WT Characterization
DTU 10MW report description [52].
Note that the sensor abbreviations are provided in table 2.5.
The obtained values match reasonably well with the ultimate load analysis given in the WT reference
description [52] for the available load channels, and are therefore assumed to be representative. The
Goodman correction is assumed to be applicable across all load channels regardless of moment type.
With reference to figure 2.4, the correction is likely not necessary for some load channels, but has
been applied to all nonetheless, as it from (2.5) clearly does not alter DELs with a zero mean which is
documented in figure 2.6.
Sensor
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TB
TBFA
TBSS
ShaftMxy
ShaftMz
GenM
Mu [kNm]
90,375
30,060
1,263.2
697,653
606,300
606,150
102,125
24,975
496.20
Table 2.2: Assumed ultimate moments.
The DEL computed from (2.6) represents a single time series with a specific set of flow and control
parameters. If multiple DELs representing different flow conditions and operational strategies covering
a time period of the WT life are computed, these can be aggregated into a single representative DEL
by
Meq,aggregate =

X
j
M m
eq,jpj


1
m
(2.7)
where pj is the probability of operating the WT under conditions described by Meq,j. If the modelled
time period is represented by a time series with a DEL for each time step, the sum in eq. (2.7) is
performed over the number of time steps, n, with an identical probability for each DEL of 1/n. The
Palmgren-Miner rule from eq. (2.2) can be rewritten as
D = neq
N ∗
Meq
M ∗
m
(2.8)
where N ∗and M ∗are material specific reference values. The relative fatigue damage for a given DEL
with respect to a reference can then be calculated as
Drel =
D
Dref
=
neq
N∗

Meq
M ∗
m
neq
N∗

Meq,ref
M ∗
m =

Meq
M ∗
m

Meq,ref
M ∗
m =
M m
eq
M m
eq,ref
(2.9)
where the material specific parameters are conveniently eliminated from the equation. In the context
of this thesis, the reference quantity is always associated with normal operation of the WT. Hence,
eq. (2.9) facilitates evaluation of the fatigue damage for an arbitrary control strategy with respect to
normal operation.
The choice of Wöhler exponents are based on a review of the articles dealing with fatigue of wind
turbine components. Frandsen [61] suggests a Wöhler exponent of 4-6 for steel components and 10-12
for fiber composites, while Dimitrov et al. [62] suggests 3-5 and 10-15 for steel and fiber composites,
respectively. Galinos et al. [42] use msteel = 4 and mfiber = 12, while the fatigue analysis in the DTU
10MW WT report [52] is carried out using msteel = 3 and mfiber = 10. However, none of these articles
perform any analysis of the generator moments, which is likely relevant in this setting due to the effects
of the boosted operational states. In Jackson et al. [63], the approach to generator fatigue assessment
is to model the generator shaft using the same methods as already introduced. Assuming that the
primary fatigue component in the generator is the generator shaft, the overall fatigue of the generator
can thus be represented by fatigue analysis of the generator moment. The Wöhler exponents based on
this analysis, which will be used in the fatigue analysis, are listed in table 2.3.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Control strategy tuning
15
Moment sensor
Abbreviation
Moment type
m
Blade Root Flapwise
FlapM
Bending
12
Blade Root Edgewise
EdgeM
Bending
12
Blade Root Pitch
PitchM
Bending (pseudo-torsion)
12
Tower Bottom Fore-Aft
TBFA
Bending
4
Tower Bottom Side-Side
TBSS
Bending
4
Main Shaft y-wise
ShaftMy
Bending
4
Main Shaft x-wise
ShaftMx
Bending
4
Main Shaft z-wise
ShaftMz
Torsion
4
Generator
GenM
Torsion
4
Table 2.3:
Selected output sensors from Flex5 and assumed component Wöhler exponent, m, for
fatigue modelling.
2.3
Control strategy tuning
The first step in this analysis is to tune the WT controller settings to the desired boosted and derated
operational strategies.
For the derated operation, one approach is to alter the controller PSP and
decrease the maximum rotational speed. For the boosted operation, the maximum rotational speed
cannot be increased in the same manner, since the WT is already operating at the rated i.e. the upper
limit, which is determined by regulations and to ensure the WT structural design integrity. In theory,
the boosted states should be achievable regardless by delaying the pitch actuation to a higher wind
speed. However, it has proven problematic to increase power capture after reaching the rated rotational
speed with the current controller. An alternative is to alter the control points on the power to rotational
speed, P(Ω)-curve which specifies a target point for the controller. This approach has the downside
that it modifies the entire P(Ω)-curve resulting in a slightly altered WT response in the full variable
speed range. However, these parameters are easily modified in the Flex5 input, and has partly been
chosen due to ease of implementation as detailed WT control is not the primary focus of this thesis.
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
Time [s]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Power [kW]
Power
Vhub
Pitch
0
6
12
18
24
30
Vhub [m/s]
0
6
12
18
24
30
Pitch [°]
Figure 2.1: Time series of wind step simulation in normal operation.
The final control settings for six different operational strategies, including normal operation, are listed
in table 2.4. The remaining five include two boosted states and three derated states. The boosted
operation goes up to a PSP of 1.1, i.e. a power production of 11 [MW], while the derated goes down
to 0.4. As the loading on the WT is expected to decrease for derated operation no physical bound is
expected in this direction. This does not hold for the boosted operation where increases in both fatigue
and maximum loading should be expected, hence the choice of limiting the boosted state to 11 [MW],
which is deemed reasonable based on the power boosting performed in the industry [36–38].
==PAGE:26==
16
2 WT Characterization
The primary tool used in the tuning process of each operational state is a steady wind step simulations
as shown in figure 2.1: This is used to ensure that the controller achieves the desired behavior of the WT
and a stable response to step changes i.e. with modest overshoots and convergence to a constant value
for each wind step. The current implementation shows overall good performance with the exception of
modest power oscillations observed for the increasing wind step at approximately 7 [m/s]. Numerous
attempts have been made to correct for this behavior, but it has finally been accepted due to the thesis
time frame, and since it is not the primary focus of this work. The implications of the oscillations in
power have not been analyzed in any detail. Notably, it is plausible that the more oscillating response
associated with a turbulent wind input will not suffer substantially from this. However, a study, albeit
informal, of the surrogate model predictions for the shaft torque DEL has provided indications that
this instability is present if the turbuelence intensity is very low. A figure showing this behavior can be
viewed in Appendix E figure E.4.
Operational strategy
PSP [-]
Abbreviation
Ωcp [RPM]
Pcp [kW]
Ωmax [RPM]
Normal operation
1.0
NO10MW
8.032
5863
9.600
Derated operation
0.4
DR04MW
8.032
5863
7.100
Derated operation
0.6
DR06MW
8.032
5863
8.100
Derated operation
0.8
DR08MW
8.032
5863
8.960
Boosted operation
1.05
BO105MW
8.032
6163
9.600
Boosted operation
1.1
BO11MW
8.032
6413
9.600
Table 2.4: WT controller settings for different operational strategies. Here, [Ωcp, Pcp] is the control
target points on the P(Ω)-curve and Ωmax is the maximum rotational speed.
2.4
Steady state analysis
The steady state analysis is performed by exposing the WT to a steady wind inflow from 3 [m/s] to
25 [m/s], while neglecting gravity effects in one long simulation containing both step-up and step-down
across all specified wind speeds spending 440 [s] in each step. The discretization of the wind speeds is
tailored to the chosen operational states shown in table 2.4, such that a higher resolution is achieved in
the areas around the specified PSPs. The simulation time series for power, pitch and wind speed during
normal operation can be seen in figure 2.1. The WT response is then sorted by wind speed. Quantities
of interest when characterizing the steady behavior of the WT is the electric power, P, thrust force,
FT , rotational speed, Ω, pitch angle, θ, tip speed ratio (TSR), λ, thrust coefficient, CT , and power
coefficient, CP . All but the latter three quantities are taken directly from the Flex5 output. These are
given by
λ = ΩRrotor
U
,
CT =
FT
1
2ρAU 2 ,
CP =
P
1
2ρAU 3
(2.10)
where U is the horizontal wind speed, Rrotor is the rotor radius, A is the rotor area and ρ is the air
density. The obtained steady response across the wind speed operational range for all PSPs are shown
in figure 2.2. From the power curves, the desired power output for all operational strategies is achieved
following the same cubic path until the designates PSP is reached. All transitions to the constant power
region also exhibit a smooth behavior. The wind speed wise spacing between the PSPs is naturally
larger for the derated states compared to the boosted, due to the cubic relation between wind speed
and kinetic energy. Consequently, the DR04MW PSP is already at ≈8.5 [m/s] compared to the normal
operation PSP, which is confirmed to appear at the rated 11.4 [m/s] while the BO11MW PSP occurs
already at ≈11.8 [m/s].
As expected, the pitch actuation starts at lower and higher wind speeds,
namely at the PSP, for derated and boosted states, respectively, compared to normal operation, with
the derated control requiring higher pitch angles to decrease the energy extracted from the wind and
vice versa. Additionally, for the boosted states, the pitch angle at higher wind speeds show very little
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Steady state analysis
17
0
2500
5000
7500
10000
Power [kW]
0
10
20
30
Pitch angle [ ]
BO105MW
BO11MW
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
NO10MW
0.6
0.8
1.0
Rot. speed [rad/s]
5
10
15
Tip-speed ratio [-]
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
CP [-]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
CT [-]
5
10
15
20
25
Vhub [m/s]
500
1000
1500
Thrust [kN]
Figure 2.2: Steady state operation for investigated operational strategies.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 WT Characterization
difference from the normal operation curve, which can be attributed to the large change in aerodynamic
forcing to very small changes in angle of attack at higher wind speeds. A small, positive pitch angle
can also be observed at low wind speeds for all operational states decreasing the angle of attack. This
behavior can be attributed to the WT blade design, which is operating at a higher TSR than what it
was designed for at very low wind speeds, due to the lower limit on the rotational speed required to
stay away from the 1st tower natural frequency (based on private communication with Georg Pirrung
and David Verelst at DTU Wind Energy).
Continuing with figure 2.2, the linear region of the Ω-curve is significantly reduced for the derated
operation which effectively limits the region where optimal, constant TSR operation is possible. As
previously mentioned for the boosted operation, the control points on the P(Ω)-curve has been changed
which can be observed on the Ω-curve showing slightly lower speeds for the boosted operation in the
variable rotational speed range. The reduced speed impact is also visible on the TSR-curve where the
boosted operation constant TSR region is sligthly lower than for the normal and derated operational
strategies. The CT -curves exhibit the same tendency indicating slightly lower mean thrust levels for
the boosted states in the constant region. While this behavior may not be ideal, the alteration in the
response of the turbine is deemed acceptable. A significant reduction in mean thrust for the derated
operation is visible based on the thrust and CT -curves opposed to a modest increase for both boosted
states. As expected, the thrust peak appears at the PSP across all operational strategies. Clearly, the
largest difference in thrust level between the states appear in the PSP region, while it decreases for
higher wind speeds.
Control
The purpose of this work is not to provide deep insights into the controller design of the WT. As
mentioned previously, no specific documentation exists on the controller used in the simulations during
this thesis, but it bears resemblance to the basic DTU wind energy controller [53]. To get an idea
about the implemented control strategy, a quick study has been conducted. As described in the work
by by Mirzaei et al. [32,33], a number of different control schemes exist in the context of derated WT
operation. These include:
1. Max-Ω: The rotational speed is maximized for each wind speed and is bounded by Ω-rated.
2. Const-Ω: The rotational speed is kept constant after the PSP is reached.
3. Const-λ: The tip speed ratio is kept constant after the PSP is reached up to Ω-rated. This means
that the rotational speed increases after the PSP is reached.
Notably, the above should be considered a very simple presentation of the control strategies. Further-
more, the Const-λ is not feasible for the implementation of the boosted operation, where Ω-rated is
reached at the PSP.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Pitch angle [ ]
4
6
8
10
12
14
Tip-speed ratio [-]
BO105MW
BO11MW
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
NO10MW
Figure 2.3: Control study.
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Operation in a turbulent wind field
19
With reference to the Ω-curve in figure 2.2, the Const-Ωcontrol strategy is clearly the approach in
question. For all operational strategies, the rotational speed is observed to increase until the PSP is
reached whereafter it is kept constant, which is also expected based on the control settings specified in
table 2.4. In figure 2.3, the tip speed ratio is plotted as function of the pitch showing a trend confirming
that the controller pursues a Const-Ωstrategy as compared with results presented in [33]. The trend
is consistent across all operational states with lower PSPs extending further due to the higher pitch
angles at high wind speeds.
In the considered articles, it was found that the Const-Ωstrategy achieved the lowest thrust coefficients
being advantageous in a farm setup since CT is strongly correlated with the wake deficit based on the
N.O. Jensen wake model [50]. Conversely, from a single WT operation perspective, the Const-λ strategy
offers low pitch actuation and relative DELs. Additionally, the conserved rotor inertia due to the higher
rotational speeds allows faster repowering of the WT and good performance in the transitions between
PSPs. However, control strategy transitions will not be considered further in this thesis. Nonetheless,
the Const-λ control strategy, offers some interesting features why it would be relevant to investigate
further in another project.
Based on this analysis of the control setting and behavior for the presented operational strategy imple-
mentations, these are deemed stable and staying within the prescribed control strategy envelope. The
general control scheme is therefore assumed to be functional throughout the remainder of this report.
2.5
Operation in a turbulent wind field
The focus of this thesis is mainly on prediction of statistical quantities describing the response of the
turbine, e.g. DELs, rather than the response time series themselves. However, for good measure and
some initial realizations, a glance at the time series output from a typical Flex5 simulation is provided
in this section. In figure 2.5, some the important quantities describing the tubine operation are shown.
The WT is operating around the rated power producing 10 [MW] throughout most of the simulation
with occasional drops in production due the turbulent wind conditions. As such, most drops in power
can be explained by looking at wind speed time series. However, while the turbulent fluctuations across
the full rotor disc are correlated, this wind speed is the wind speed at the hub, and is therefore not
fully representative of the wind field across the rotor disc. Pitch actuation is present at the opposite
time intervals than the power drops, maintaining the power production at rated. Rotational speed and
thrust naturally also exhibits fluctuations yet seem to be centered around the expected mean values
with reference to figure 2.2. Notably, the rotational speed seems to overshoot the specified max. value
of 1.005 [rad/s] to a higher extent than expected by the author, considering the rotor inertia. However,
no further investigations haven been performed.
The inputs to the fatigue calculations are the load time series as presented in figure 2.4, why these
may provide some insight as to what can be expected. The highly thrust correlated loads, i.e. the
blade root flapwise and tower bottom fore-aft moments, and the torque driven loads on main shaft and
generator clearly show non-zero mean loads. Hence, the fatigue mean correction can be expected to
be of importance for these particular loads. Furthermore, the generator and main shaft torque time
series are seemingly identical, but for a constant ratio approximately equal to the gearing ratio of 50.
The blade root edgewise moment exhibits almost constant oscillations showing the gravity dominated
load effects hence the fatigue on this component is expected to be correlated to the rotational speed of
the rotor. Additionally, the shaft x-wise and y-wise as well as tower bottom side-side and blade root
pitch moment loads fluctuate around an approximately zero mean level. The shaft x-wise and y-wise
loads are quite similar in nature, which has been observed across numerous simulations. Therefore, only
results for the shaft x-wise load is considered in the remainder of this thesis.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 WT Characterization
6000
8000
10000
[kW]
Power
10
20
[m/s]
Vhub
0
20000
40000
[kNm]
FlapM1
0
20000
[kNm]
EdgeM1
250
0
250
[kNm]
PitchM1
0
100000
200000
[kNm]
TBFA
0
200000
[kNm]
TBSS
150
200
250
[kNm]
GenM
20000
0
20000
[kNm]
ShaftMx
20000
0
20000
[kNm]
ShaftMy
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time
7500
10000
12500
[kNm]
ShaftMz
Figure 2.4: Example of different load time series in a turbulent wind field at U = 12 [m/s], TI = 19.5%,
α = 0.2 and ϕ = 0 [◦].
==PAGE:31==
2.6 Database
21
6000
8000
10000
[kW]
Power
10
20
 [m/s]
Vhub
0
5
10
[°]
Pitch
0.8
1.0
1.2
[rad/s]
Omega
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time
1000
2000
[kN]
Thrust
Figure 2.5: Example of operation time series in a turbulent wind field at U = 12 [m/s], TI = 19.5%,
α = 0.2 and ϕ = 0 [◦].
2.6
Database
The database with aeroelastic simulation results developed and used throughout this thesis is presented
here. Considering the WT loading, the maximum loads are of interest in addition to the fatigue when
assessing the feasibility of an alternate operational strategy. Therefore, the absolute maximum load for
the considered load channels is stored in addition to the DELs presented in table 2.3. As described
in the estimation of the ultimate moments, the maximum load of a symmetrical component is more
realistically described by a vector sum of the load components in the plane. Therefore, the maximum
tower bottom bending and main shaft bending moments are represented as single values opposed to
the DEL counterparts. Representing the DELs in a similar manner is not possible. There are several
reasons for that, all originating from the nature of the vector sum, which produces only positive values.
Arguably, loosing the directional reference frame of the loads is believed by the author to render the
DELs less representative of the actual fatigue damage.
Additionally, the prospect of a time series
containing only positive values does not align with fatigue damage estimation approach, as it affects
both the mean load level computed as part of the Goodman correction, see eq. (2.5), and the Rainflow
Counting algorithm. The latter is affected due to reversal of potentially negative load signals, which
will interfere with the estimation of the load amplitude. For a detailed explanation of the algorithm
see [55].
As noted in table 2.3, the blade pitch moment output from Flex5 is in fact a root bending moment
rather than torsion, since no torsional degree of freedom is modelled [15]. Therefore, this sensor output
==PAGE:32==
22
2 WT Characterization
should be regarded with some skepticism, and an additional indicator for the pitch fatigue is desired.
As proposed by Fleming et al. [29], the standard deviation of the pitch angle may serve as an indicator
of the pitch activity and resulting fatigue damage, why this quantity is stored as well. Furthermore,
the mean power production is stored.
In table 2.5, a overview of the quantities derived from the Flex5 output time series and stored in the
database is presented with the abbreviations used throughout the remainder of this report. In addition
to the quantities listed there, key parameters describing wind conditions and control strategy are also
stored. Notably, separate DELs and maximum loads for all three blades are stored. While these loads
originate from the same simulation, each blade has interacted with different parts of the wind field. As
such, data for all three blades can be included in the postprocessing steps of computing statistics.
Sensor
Abbreviation
DEL
|Max|
Mean
Standard deviation
Blade Root Flapwise
FlapM
X
X
Blade Root Edgewise
EdgeM
X
X
Blade Root Pitch
PitchM
X
X
Tower Bottom Fore-Aft
TBFA
X
Tower Bottom Side-Side
TBSS
X
Tower Bottom
TB
X
Main Shaft y-wise
ShaftMy
X
Main Shaft x-wise
ShaftMx
X
Main Shaft xy-wise
ShaftMxy
X
Main Shaft z-wise
ShaftMz
X
X
Generator
GenM
X
X
Electrical power
Power
X
Pitch angle standard deviation
Std_Pitch
X
Table 2.5: Database specification.
A single simulation with a specific Mann box only represents a single realization of the statistically
equivalent turbulence for given set of flow conditions. Therefore, a number of simulations with identical
conditions but different realizations of the turbulence must be run in order to ensure some convergence
of the statistics. A specific realization of the turbulence in e.g. a Mann box is usually controlled using
a turbulent seed.
The statistical analysis is performed using quantiles. Quantiles has the advantage that no distribution
of the quantity in question is assumed making them a better choice than e.g. moment based statistics
in this setting.
As such, the 5th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 95th quantiles are computed for all sensors
listed in table 2.5, except the maximum loads. The latter are represented solely by the 95th quantile
of the absolute maximum loads i.e. representing the 95th quantile of loads, which are assumed to be
representative of the maximum loads. The 95th quantile of loads is expected to exhibit more smooth
behavior than the maximum loads and therefore easier to model using regression methods. This is
due to the expectation that the maximum loads are highly dependent on the specific realization of
the turbulence in the flow resulting in erratic behavior.
However, it must be noted that the terms
’maximum load’ and ’95th quantile of loads’ are used interchangeably throughout the remainder of this
thesis unless explicitly stated otherwise. One prospect of knowing the different quantiles of a quantity
is the estimation of its probability distribution. A study on the on the convergence of the quantiles is
presented in section 3.2.
==PAGE:33==
2.7 DLC 1.2
23
2.7
DLC 1.2
In this section, the general trends of the monitored sensors are investigated.
The investigation is
performed based on a full DLC 1.2 simulation as prescribed in the standard [22] for a turbulence category
A site with wind shear α = 0.02. The DLC 1.2 is the primary DLC for estimation of fatigue loads. The
simulations consist of 216 distinct Mann boxes, see table 2.1, covering a wind speed range from 4 to 26
[m/s] in increments of 2 [m/s]. Note that the WT shutdown is not active in the following results, why
results for 26 [m/s], which is outside the operational range, are also reported. The turbulence intensity
associated with each wind speed is specified in table 2.6. This results in 18 simulations per wind speed
step, which is divided equally into 3 yaw misalignment cases with ϕ = {0, 10, −10} [◦]. The quantiles for
each wind speed are then computed based on all 18 simulation results. As will be addressed in section
3.2, this number of simulations per wind speed results in uncertainty in the quantiles as they have not
fully converged. Therefore, the interpretation of the results should be conducted keeping this is mind.
Additionally, the analysis presented in this section only considers a specific set of wind speeds and
turbulence intensities, why the sensitivity to e.g. turbulence intensity and wind shear is not assessed.
U [m/s]
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
14.0
16.0
18.0
20.0
22.0
24.0
26.0
TI [%]
33.4
26.9
23.2
20.1
19.5
18.4
17.6
17.0
16.5
16.1
15.7
15.4
Table 2.6: DLC 1.2 wind speed wise turbulence intensity.
Effect of Goodman correction
The Goodman correction was introduced in section 2.2, and it was argued that mean load correction
is required when dealing with WT fatigue, due to the high mean load levels experienced by some com-
ponents. In order to document the effects of the Goodman correction, a comparison of the corrected
and uncorrected DEL median prediction during normal operation is performed. The result of the com-
parison is presented in figure 2.6, which shows clear differences between the corrected and uncorrected
approach. A comparison containing all load channels can be found in Appendix A figure A.3.
Figure 2.6a, 2.6b and 2.6d show notable increases in estimated DEL when the correction is included,
while the effect is almost non-existent in figure 2.6c. The latter can be explained due to the zero-mean
load level observed for the main shaft in figure 2.4, and confirms that the Goodman correction is neutral
with respect to zero-mean loads. Figure 2.6a and 2.6b bear resemblance to the thrust curve showing
small peaks, and the largest difference between corrected and uncorrected, around the rated wind speed
where the mean thrust level is highest. This result seems reasonable, as the blade flapwise and tower
bottom fore-aft moments are highly correlated with the thrust force, further adding to the notion
that the correction has been implemented correctly and alters the DEL estimation to an extent which
cannot be ignored. The largest difference in predicted DEL is observed for the shaft torque in figure
2.6d which, however, seems to maintain the same overall shape regardless of the correction. Notably,
the DEL increase seems to become more or less constant above the rated wind speed. This indicates
that a mean stress level is present in this load across all wind speeds increasing up until the rated wind
speed is reached. This lies in good agreement with the rotational speed increasing until the rated wind
speed resulting in an increased mean torque, which stays constant thereafter in the constant region of
the power curve.
==PAGE:34==
24
2 WT Characterization
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(a) FlapM: Blade flapwise.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
25000
50000
75000
100000
125000
150000
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(b) TBFA: Tower bottom fore-aft.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(c) ShaftMx: Main shaft x-wise.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(d) ShaftMz: Main shaft torque.
Figure 2.6: Comparison between Goodman corrected and uncorrected 1-Hz sample median DELs for
selected load channels based on full DLC 1.2 simulation during normal operation.
Relative analysis
Assessing the resulting changes in fatigue and maximum loads from operating the WT using the derated
and boosted control strategies is one of the research questions posed in the formulation of this thesis.
Here, an analysis of the relative changes in DELs and maximum loads with respect to the normal
operation control strategy is presented.
The relative variation, δ, from normal operation is simply
found as
δi = Qi −Qref
Qref
(2.11)
where i denotes the operational state, ref denotes normal operation and Q is one of the sample quantiles
for a given wind speed. The relative variation for four different wind speeds, U = {6, 10, 12, 16} [m/s],
across the full DLC 1.2 are presented in figures 2.7 and 2.9. The wind speeds have been chosen such
that one lies below the PSP of even the most derated state, two are in the around-rated region and
one is above rated for all considered operational states. The color coding in the figures is based on
the range of variation for the specific wind speed meaning that color-to-color comparison across wind
speeds should be avoided.
==PAGE:35==
2.7 DLC 1.2
25
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TBFA
TBSS
ShaftMx
ShaftMz
GenM
-2.9%
0.4%
0.1%
-3.8%
-4.5%
-0.0%
-0.0%
-0.0%
-0.1%
-0.0%
-0.2%
-0.0%
-0.1%
0.1%
0.0%
0.2%
0.7%
0.1%
-0.9%
-0.4%
-5.8%
-1.0%
-1.5%
-5.4%
-13.0%
-0.1%
-0.2%
0.0%
-0.4%
-1.1%
-1.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.5%
4.3%
-0.8%
0.0%
0.0%
1.6%
4.0%
(a) U = 6 [m/s]
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TBFA
TBSS
ShaftMx
ShaftMz
GenM
-26.0%
-11.1%
-1.2%
-1.2%
-0.8%
-10.9%
-5.7%
-1.7%
0.5%
0.9%
-1.4%
3.0%
4.9%
-2.8%
-4.6%
-32.5%
-14.1%
-4.4%
0.3%
-1.2%
0.9%
2.3%
-4.8%
3.6%
8.1%
-3.8%
-2.5%
0.7%
0.5%
2.5%
-21.3%
-31.9%
-18.5%
7.2%
17.0%
-22.0%
-32.9%
-18.4%
8.8%
17.6%
(b) U = 10 [m/s]
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TBFA
TBSS
ShaftMx
ShaftMz
GenM
-40.9%
-23.0%
-12.5%
2.8%
4.9%
-13.7%
-9.5%
-5.2%
0.9%
1.8%
-21.8%
-18.0%
-9.0%
0.8%
4.0%
-50.0%
-33.0%
-16.2%
0.5%
1.4%
-49.8%
-24.0%
-20.4%
-16.0%
-5.1%
-17.2%
-12.7%
-7.3%
0.0%
-0.6%
-59.9%
-35.7%
-20.7%
7.9%
18.1%
-61.0%
-36.5%
-20.7%
8.6%
18.8%
(c) U = 12 [m/s]
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TBFA
TBSS
ShaftMx
ShaftMz
GenM
-40.1%
-27.1%
-15.5%
1.7%
4.1%
-8.8%
-5.4%
-2.8%
1.1%
2.2%
-18.5%
-16.3%
-10.3%
2.5%
4.6%
-45.9%
-32.3%
-17.5%
4.1%
7.4%
-39.6%
-21.7%
-8.9%
0.3%
-1.6%
-19.2%
-9.8%
-6.2%
-0.2%
-0.6%
-55.6%
-41.7%
-24.2%
15.6%
34.1%
-57.1%
-42.3%
-25.2%
16.5%
35.4%
(d) U = 16 [m/s]
Figure 2.7: 1-Hz DELs for boosted/derated relative to normal operation for selected wind speeds
based on full DLC 1.2 simulation.
For U = 6 [m/s], very little variations are expected, which is partly confirmed in figure 2.7a. The
derated states show very small variations, which can likely be attributed to earlier mentioning of the
quantiles requiring more than 18 simulations to converge. The boosted states both show slightly higher
variations for the same loads i.e. FlapM, TBSS, ShaftMz and GenM. While this might be unexpected at
this wind speed, some alterations were made in the controller to accommodate the boosted states, which
could seem to result in slightly altered fatigue loads. Regarding ShaftMz and GenM, the increase in
DEL may, at least in part, be explained by an increased mean torque level due to the reduced rotational
speed for boosted operation imposed by the control specifications and shown in figure 2.2. Due to the
lower rotational speed, an increased torque is required to produce the same power as P = Ωτ where τ
is the torque. As such, this contribution to the increase in DEL could likely be avoided for below-rated
wind speeds by altering the boosted control strategy. However, the prospect of running in boosted
operation below the rated wind speed does not seem likely, but may have some relevance with respect
to designing the optimization solution strategy as discussed in chapter 5
For U = 10 [m/s], both DR06MW and DR08MW are in the around-rated region where increased pitch
actuation may be expected, as confirmed by the slightly increased pitch moments for these two states in
figure 2.7b. A clear, and identical, trend has developed for the generator and shaft z-wise fatigue along
a reduction in the thrust correlated fatigue for all derated states. Furthermore, the blade edgewise
DEL is consistently decreasing with decreasing PSP for the derated operation, aligning well with the
expected behavior due to the lower rotational speed with reduced PSP. These trends become even
more pronounced for the higher wind speeds in figures 2.7c and 2.7d. At above-rated wind speeds, a
very clear picture emerges, the derated operation resulting in significantly reduced DELs. Oppositely,
the boosted operation entails increases in DELs except for the shaft x-wise which is unaffected. The
increase in DELs is generally less than 12.4%, which is low compared to the decreases obtained by
derated operation. The exception is the torque loads which show both the largest decrease and by far
the largest increase, i.e. the largest relative sensitivity, across the PSPs.
==PAGE:36==
26
2 WT Characterization
A structural load analysis for different power reserve strategies, including an identical implementation
of PSP = 0.8, is presented in work by Fleming et al. [29], forming the basis for a comparison with
the results for DR08MW. However, the provided results are of lifetime rather than wind speed specific
quantities and the modelled WT, with a hub height of 40 [m], is small compared to the DTU 10MW.
Therefore, one to one comparison with the results is avoided and a more general trend perspective is
attained. The general findings for a PSP of 0.8 in [29] with respect to fatigue damage is a zero impact
on EdgeM, while an increasingly positive impact is reported for FlapM, ShaftMz, TBFA and TBSS of
-4.6, -9.1, -10.3 and -15.3 %, respectively. Comparing with the results in figure 2.7, the fatigue loads for
the mentioned sensors generally decrease for DR08MW. Consequently, the results for EdgeM do not
agree, while the general picture for the other loads is recognizable.
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TBFA
TBSS
ShaftMx
ShaftMz
GenM
-29.5%
5.1%
0.7%
-37.4%
-42.7%
-0.2%
-0.1%
-0.3%
-1.2%
-0.4%
-1.9%
-0.2%
-0.9%
0.9%
0.3%
0.8%
2.9%
0.3%
-3.7%
-1.6%
-21.4%
-3.8%
-5.9%
-19.8%
-42.8%
-0.6%
-0.8%
0.1%
-1.7%
-4.3%
-3.8%
0.1%
0.1%
6.3%
18.4%
-3.2%
0.1%
0.1%
6.6%
17.2%
(a) U = 6 [m/s]
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TBFA
TBSS
ShaftMx
ShaftMz
GenM
-97.3%
-75.7%
-13.7%
-13.2%
-8.8%
-75.0%
-50.7%
-19.1%
6.3%
12.0%
-15.5%
42.5%
77.7%
-29.1%
-43.1%
-79.3%
-45.6%
-16.6%
1.3%
-4.9%
3.8%
9.5%
-17.8%
15.0%
36.7%
-14.3%
-9.6%
2.7%
2.2%
10.4%
-61.6%
-78.4%
-55.9%
32.0%
87.2%
-63.0%
-79.8%
-55.6%
40.1%
91.3%
(b) U = 10 [m/s]
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TBFA
TBSS
ShaftMx
ShaftMz
GenM
-99.8%
-95.6%
-79.9%
38.5%
76.8%
-82.8%
-69.7%
-47.6%
11.4%
23.4%
-94.8%
-90.7%
-67.8%
9.8%
59.7%
-93.8%
-79.9%
-50.7%
2.2%
5.9%
-93.6%
-66.6%
-59.9%
-50.3%
-18.8%
-52.9%
-41.8%
-26.2%
0.0%
-2.5%
-97.4%
-82.9%
-60.5%
35.4%
94.8%
-97.7%
-83.7%
-60.4%
39.2%
99.2%
(c) U = 12 [m/s]
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TBFA
TBSS
ShaftMx
ShaftMz
GenM
-99.8%
-97.7%
-86.8%
23.1%
62.7%
-67.0%
-48.9%
-29.1%
13.7%
30.4%
-91.4%
-88.1%
-72.8%
34.9%
70.8%
-91.4%
-79.0%
-53.6%
17.3%
32.9%
-86.7%
-62.4%
-31.0%
1.1%
-6.3%
-57.3%
-33.9%
-22.5%
-0.9%
-2.4%
-96.1%
-88.4%
-67.0%
78.5%
223.6%
-96.6%
-89.0%
-68.8%
84.4%
235.9%
(d) U = 16 [m/s]
Figure 2.8: Fatigue damage for boosted/derated relative to normal operation for selected wind speeds
based on full DLC 1.2 simulation.
While the relative fatigue loads provides one perspective on the fatigue loads and facilitates comparison
with existing literature, the relative damage is the measure used in the formulation of the optimization
constraints. Computing the relative damage, see eq. (2.9), involves raising the DEL to the power of its
associated Wöhler exponent, defined in table 2.3, and may considerably change the relative variation
based on the absolute value of the DEL. Therefore, a relative fatigue damage comparison is presented in
figure 2.8. Clearly, the picture is different compared to figure 2.7. The relative fatigue damage variations
on the blades are far more pronounced, and a clear decrease in relative fatigue damage can be observed
for all sensors at above-rated wind speeds.
Additionally, it can be observed that the ShaftMz and
GenM relative fatigue damage increases, at above-rated wind speeds, are far higher than any other
sensor, confirming that the generator components are sensitive to boosted operation. Consequently, it
is likely that these two sensors will be active constraints in the optimization problem.
Based on these results, the most problematic fatigue loads clearly seem to be ShaftMz, GenM, PitchM
and FlapM. Notably, PitchM is the only sensor which, depending on wind speed, exhibits a large increase
in relative damage in both boosted operation and derated confirming that derating strategies can result
==PAGE:37==
2.7 DLC 1.2
27
in increased blade pitch fatigue.
This circumstance may add some complexity to the optimization
problem, as derating the WT evidently can also be associated with an increase in fatigue damage.
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TB
ShaftMxy
ShaftMz
GenM
-3.7%
0.1%
0.0%
-2.0%
-4.2%
-0.3%
0.8%
0.3%
-0.2%
0.4%
0.2%
0.5%
-0.4%
-0.3%
-0.9%
-3.0%
-0.6%
-0.1%
-2.6%
-4.2%
-2.0%
-0.1%
-0.0%
1.0%
2.3%
-6.4%
0.0%
0.0%
2.0%
3.4%
-6.3%
0.0%
0.0%
2.0%
3.3%
(a) U = 6 [m/s]
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TB
ShaftMxy
ShaftMz
GenM
-34.8%
-20.8%
-8.9%
-1.3%
-0.4%
-18.5%
-11.7%
-6.1%
-1.3%
1.4%
-8.8%
-4.4%
0.6%
-1.2%
-4.0%
-36.1%
-24.0%
-9.4%
3.6%
1.2%
-4.8%
-10.2%
-3.1%
3.0%
4.4%
-38.7%
-22.4%
-10.3%
2.5%
6.6%
-39.0%
-22.3%
-10.1%
2.6%
6.6%
(b) U = 10 [m/s]
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TB
ShaftMxy
ShaftMz
GenM
-40.7%
-20.7%
-9.4%
3.3%
1.8%
-25.1%
-13.6%
-8.7%
1.8%
1.7%
-8.9%
-7.4%
-2.8%
0.5%
-2.1%
-50.5%
-28.4%
-18.0%
-4.3%
-2.1%
-0.5%
-12.5%
-3.0%
-1.0%
0.4%
-38.0%
-17.6%
-12.2%
5.2%
12.0%
-38.4%
-17.5%
-11.8%
6.4%
13.0%
(c) U = 12 [m/s]
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
TB
ShaftMxy
ShaftMz
GenM
-35.6%
-14.0%
-11.4%
4.8%
10.1%
-18.7%
-11.2%
-9.5%
3.2%
6.9%
-16.7%
-9.0%
3.7%
-0.9%
-1.1%
-42.4%
-17.3%
-12.3%
3.0%
6.6%
-11.5%
-13.7%
3.8%
1.2%
1.6%
-41.0%
-22.2%
-15.7%
6.6%
12.7%
-41.3%
-22.1%
-15.6%
6.6%
13.0%
(d) U = 16 [m/s]
Figure 2.9: 95th quantile of loads for boosted/derated relative to normal operation for selected wind
speeds based on full DLC 1.2 simulation.
The second component in the load assessment is the maximum loads shown in figure 2.9. Generally,
the picture of which components experience load decreases and increases is similar to the fatigue load
analysis.
Continuing the comparison with Fleming et al. [29] which also provides an extreme load
analysis, the results seem to be in good agreement showing decreases across all considered sensors;
again except EdgeM where larger variations are generally observed in the results provided here.
The observations of trends in ShaftMz and GenM loading has shown that the two loads are very closely
related as suggested already during the analysis of the load time series. Therefore, the GenM sensor is
excluded from the further analysis and ShaftMz assumed to be representative of both the main shaft
torque and generator loads.
Absolute analysis
The developments of the DEL median and the 95th quantile of loads with wind speed for the six different
operational strategies are shown in figures 2.10 & 2.11, respectively. Note that these figures include
only a selection of sensors while additional sensors are shown in Appendix A figures A.1 & A.2.
Starting with the FlapM and TBFA DELs, these exhibit a similar development with wind speed showing
a soft peak for normal and boosted operation around the rated wind speed, which can be attributed
to the thrust dependency of these loads. TBSS shows a continuously increasing trend with wind speed
with the exception of DR08MW, which shows a more erratic behavior but follows the same overall
trend. PitchM shows a slight increase with respect to derating for low wind speeds, while boosted
operation results in larger DELs at higher wind speeds, the largest difference between strategies being
==PAGE:38==
28
2 WT Characterization
in the wind speed range from 12 to 18 [m/s]. The results from the relative analysis indicating that
ShaftMx seems to be unaffected with respect to boosting are confirmed for the entire operational range,
while consistent decreases in loading are associated with derating. Lastly, the operational strategies are
clearly distinguishable for ShaftMz with the exception of DR04MW showing some unexpected behavior
for wind speeds 8 and 10 [m/s].
50000
100000
150000
TBFA
200
300
400
500
PitchM
10000
15000
20000
ShaftMx
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
TBSS
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
Wind speed [m/s]
10000
20000
30000
40000
FlapM
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
Wind speed [m/s]
1000
2000
3000
ShaftMz
BO105MW
BO11MW
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
NO10MW
1-Hz damage equivalent load (DEL) [kNm]
Figure 2.10: 1-Hz sample median DELs as function of wind speed for selected load channels based on
full DLC 1.2 simulation.
100000
200000
300000
400000
TB
200
400
600
PitchM
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
ShaftMxy
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
Wind speed [m/s]
14000
16000
18000
EdgeM
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
Wind speed [m/s]
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
FlapM
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
Wind speed [m/s]
5000
10000
15000
ShaftMz
BO105MW
BO11MW
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
NO10MW
95th quantile of loads [kNm]
Figure 2.11: 95th quantile of loads as function of wind speed for selected load channels based on full
DLC 1.2 simulation.
Across all sensors, the general trend seems to be a significant absolute reduction in DEL for the derated
states opposed to a small increase observed for boosted operation. The exception is ShaftMz showing a
==PAGE:39==
2.7 DLC 1.2
29
large difference across all PSPs, especially between 12 and 18 [m/s]. The overall trends in fatigue loads
with wind speed described here align well with the wind speed bin-wise analysis provided by Fleming et
al. [29]. However, the results in this thesis generally indicate a larger reduction in DELs associated with
derating, and predict a reduction in DELs at high wind speeds, as opposed to the findings by Fleming
et al. indicating a low impact.
Regarding the 95th quantile of loads, TB shows a steep increase until the PSP is reached followed by
a somewhat consistently modest increase with wind speed. The behaviour a low wind speeds is likely
attributable to the fore-aft component of the resulting load, while the increase at higher wind speeds
is expected to originate from the side-side component, as a decrease in maximum loading following
the mean thrust might otherwise have been anticipated. For PitchM, reductions in maximum loading
only occur for the more significantly derated states above rated wind speeds. The ShaftMxy loading
is consistently unaffected by boosted operation, while a reduction is generally achieved by derating yet
not consistently across the derated states. EdgeM shows a clear dependency on the PSP wind speed of
the respective operational strategies, while the difference across PSPs becomes less pronounced at high
wind speeds. For FlapM, a consistent PSP dependency is observed with a maximum seemingly forming
slightly above the PSP wind speed. However, some specific event seems to influence the maximum
loading at 20 [m/s] but has not been investigated further. This observation of a distinct event at 20
[m/s] is seemingly observable, yet less pronounced, for some operational strategies in TB, EdgeM and
ShaftMz. As was the case with the DELs, the operational strategies are clearly distinguishable for
ShaftMz; the predicted maximum load absolute difference between strategies becoming almost constant
at higher wind speeds, especially for the normal and boosted strategies.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Std of blade pitch [°]
DR08MW
BO105MW
NO10MW
BO11MW
DR06MW
DR04MW
(a)
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Power [kW]
DR08MW
BO105MW
NO10MW
BO11MW
DR06MW
DR04MW
(b)
Figure 2.12: (a): Sample median blade pitch standard deviation and (b): turbulent sample median
power curve based on full DLC 1.2 simulation.
In addition to the loads, the development of the standard deviation of the pitch and the power are
presented in figures 2.12a & 2.12b, respectively. As expected, an increase in pitch actuation is observed
for the derated strategies at low wind speeds due to the activation of the power output control. Above
rated wind speeds, a consistent trend of increasing pitch actuation going from derated to boosted
operation can be observed.
Looking at the power curves in figure 2.12b, the most notable difference compared to the steady curves
in figure 2.2 is that the transition from the cubic to the constant part of the power curve is more smooth.
This result agrees with the work of e.g. Clifton et al. [40], wherein an increased power production at
lower wind speeds for a power curve including turbulence is also reported, yet not investigated in this
work. Clifton et al. finds that the increase in power production at low wind speeds can be attributed to
the net increase in available kinetic energy from gusts, due to the cubic dependency on the wind speed.
The reduced power production in the around rated region is explained by the wind speed occasionally
dropping below the rated power and reducing energy output. Oppositely, the occasional increase in
==PAGE:40==
30
2 WT Characterization
wind speed do not result in increased production, due to activation of the WT power output control.
From a surrogate modelling point of view, the observed changes in the power curve may be beneficial
as modelling a smoother curve is expected to be less problematic.
2.8
Partial conclusion
In this chapter, the aeroelastic simulations and the theoretical foundation for the fatigue analysis was
presented; the latter proven to be possible in a relative fashion eliminating a number of material specific
properties, which would otherwise have complicated the analysis. A literature study facilitating an
informed choice of Wöhler exponent was presented and resulted in exponents of 4 and 12 for steel and
fiber composite components, respectively.
Control strategies for six different PSPs, namely {0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 1.05, 1.1}, has been tuned and
tested; the upper bound boosting capacity being decided based on examples of power boosting in the
industry. The control strategies have all been validated based on a steady state analysis. The main
drawbacks are fluctuations in power production around 7 [m/s] and inconsistencies, e.g. in rotational
speed, between the boosted and normal/derated operational strategies at below rated wind speeds.
Based on a brief analysis of the load time series and existing literature covering fatigue analysis and
control strategy changes for WTs, the relevant load sensors and other quantities have been identified,
which includes DELs and maximum loads. A complete description of the database setup and stored
quantities have been provided, as well as a presentation of the post processing, i.e. statistical analysis
of the results, which is based on quantiles, due to the expected conditional dependency of the quantity
distributions on flow and control parameters.
An assessment of the influence of mean correcting the computed DELs has been performed using
the Goodman correction. The results showed increases in the corrected DELs, as compared to the
uncorrected, for thrust correlated loads while the main shaft torque DEL was nearly doubled at above
rated wind speeds. Therefore, the inclusion of a mean correction will undoubtedly make an impact
on the later results. As the Goodman correction is known to be a conservative correction approach,
additional studies investigating alternatives may be worthwhile considering the expected influence of
overpredicting DELs, which will likely serve to limit a later optimization.
Finally, a both relative and absolute analysis of the trends in both maximum and fatigue loads, as well
as the resulting relative fatigue damage associated with increases in wind speed based on a full DLC
1.2 simulation has been presented. These serve to answer one of the initial research questions posed in
this thesis. The results indicate a PSP dependency of varying degree across all considered loads. The
general trend is an increase when boosting and a decrease when derating the WT, if the PSP wind
speed for the respective strategies have been reached. A couple of exceptions to this rule has been
identified for the boosted operation showing decreased loads for the blade flapwise and tower bottom
side-side, while increases have been observed in the generator and main shaft torque. These changes
have been attributed to the aforementioned control strategy change for the boosted operation. With
respect to the fatigue constraint on the optimization problem, the primary components of interest have
been identified as the blade flapwise, blade pitch, main shaft torque and generator moment, where the
latter has been excluded from the further analysis due to its close similarity to the main shaft torque
predictions.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3
Surrogate Modelling of
Loads & Power
This chapter is dedicated to the design and development of machine learning based surrogate models
with the aim of predicting DELs, the 95th quantile of loads (referred to as Max. loads), the standard
deviation of the blade pitch angle and power. Initially, the Design of Experiment (DoE) is described
and a convergence study is conducted, defining the dataset used in the calibration of the surrogate
models.
Regarding the surrogate models, only median values are modelled and reported along with the Max.
loads in order to limit the number of models. Additionally, while model performance is reported for all
remaining sensors, the development of the models are based on case studies of three quantities; namely
the blade flapwise DEL (DEL FlapM), the blade flapwise 95th quantile of loads (Max. FlapM) and
power (Power). However, the developed models are expected to be capable of modelling all stored
quantiles.
The explored machine learning regression models are a Random Forest (RF) model, which is based
on regression trees, and an Artificial Neural Network (ANN). The implementation of the former is
performed in scikit-learn, see Pedregosa et al. [64], and the latter in TensorFlow, see Abadi et al.
[65], which are both freely available Python libraries.
The main scope of this work has been the
implementation, development and testing of the surrogate models while the theoretical introduction is
kept brief and mainly conceptual.
3.1
Design of Experiment
In order to develop a surrogate model able to predict the desired quantities, a large dataset is required
for the model training and validation [66]. The surrogate model developed throughout this thesis is
based on simulated rather than measured data. As such, the distribution of the samples in the dataset
used to develop the model can be controlled. Choosing these distributions and their bounds wisely
is an important task, as it will affect the performance of the surrogate. This procedure is commonly
referred to as the Design of Experiment (DoE). One of the primary considerations is the expected
range of input variables for which predictions are sought. Since the model is fitted to the supplied
dataset, the predictions outside the ranges covered by this dataset are dubious at best, and extrapolation
should generally be avoided. Another important consideration is the distribution of the data within
the selected variable bounds, as overrepresenting a specific part of the variable space can create a bias
in the model, giving accurate predictions for well represented regions, while allowing larger errors in
scarcely represented regions. In order to define and draw samples from a representative variable space,
the overall approach described by Dimitrov et al. [44] is adopted. Furthermore, the implementation of
DoE is performed using the chaospy v3.3.2 library developed by Feinberg and Langtangen [67].
The power produced and loads experienced by a WT can be viewed as a function of its control system,
structural properties and a number of flow related parameters describing the turbulent wind field.
Therefore, most surrogate models developed for load prediction will be WT specific. The definition of
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
the range of variation in the input variables are chosen to ensure that the model can cover as many
sites as possible, while keeping the simulations within a physically meaningful region, e.g. without
compromising the validity of the wind field. One approach to help ensuring this is by enforcing the, often
significant, correlation that exist between variables describing the wind field. Another consideration
when defining the range of variation is the resulting size of the variable space. The larger the variable
space, the more data is required to train the model giving rise to an increased computational cost and
disk space usage due to an increased number of simulations. As such, depending on the application, a
site-specific model may be a better choice saving simulation time.
The variable space of the inflow conditions covered by the surrogate is defined by a univariate distri-
bution for each variable over a range bounded in a conditional manner in a variable hierarchy. This
hierarchy allows a one-way dependency from lower to higher order variables but does not require it.
For example, if wind speed is the primary variable and turbulence intensity is the secondary variable,
the turbulence intensity may be conditional upon the wind speed while the tertiary variable, say, wind
shear may be conditional upon both wind speed and turbulence intensity. In order to build the joint
distribution of the input variables, a mapping from the space of independent and identically distributed
(i.i.d.) variables, described by the univariate distributions, to the joint distribution of the physical
variables is required. Such a mapping, allowing for conditional dependencies between the input vari-
ables, is possible by applying the Rosenblatt transformation [45] in the order going from high to low
order variable, as defined by the variable hierarchy. A 4-dimensional variable space with dimensions
{U, σu, α, ρ} is defined in table 3.1. The choice of these four variables relies on the both documented [44]
and general consensus that wind speed and turbulence intensity are the two wind field describing factors
with the highest impact on the WT response followed by the wind shear. The air density is expected to
have some impact on loads and especially power production, see e.g. Ulazia et al. [68,69], altering the
control response of the WT why it is also included. Note that the turbulence variable is modelled as
the standard deviation of the u-wise wind speed, σu, but can readily be transformed to the turbulence
intensity as TI = σu/U.
While the variable bounds have generally been adopted directly from other sources [44,70], a small study
has been performed in order to determine an appropriate range of variation for the air density. The
study is carried out with the aim of developing a general purpose model able to cover sites in the entire
northern hemisphere. The variability of the air density has been characterized in several studies by
Ulazia et al. [68,69]. A case study on the HyWind Scotland park is presented in [68] with results based
on WRF simulations showing an air density range from 1.17 to 1.35 [kg/m3]. The seasonal variation
of air density over the entire globe with respect to local means is predicted in [69] based on the ERA5
reanalysis [71]. The results show seasonal variations of 10 % over the northern hemisphere. Based on
these findings along with the density range of {1.1, 1.35} used in [44], a slightly wider bound of {1.05,
1.40} is defined.
Variable
Lower bounds
Upper bounds
Distribution
U
U ≥Umin [m/s]
U ≤Umax [m/s]
Triangular
σu
σu ≥0.025U [m/s]
σu ≤0.18

6.8+0.75U +3  10
U
2
[m/s]
Uniform
α
α≥αref,L−0.23  Umax
U

1− 0.4log R
z
2
α≤αref,U +0.4  R
z
  Umax
U

Uniform
ρ
ρ≥1.05 [kg/m3]
ρ≤1.40 [kg/m3]
Uniform
Where
Umin = 4 [m/s] is the wind speed lower bound;
Umax = 25 [m/s] is the wind speed upper bound;
R is the rotor radius;
z is the hub height;
αref,L = 0.15, αref,U = 0.22 are reference wind shear exponents at 15 [m/s];
Table 3.1: Variation bounds for considered variables. All values are defined as statistics over a 10 min
period. Bound expressions for σu and α are from Dimitrov et al. [44] & Kelly et al. [70], respectively.
==PAGE:43==
3.1 Design of Experiment
33
In addition to the variables defined in table 3.1, it is decided to include yaw misalignment inherently
rather than as a variable. This is done since the yaw misalignment is not expected to be a known
variable during the deployment of the surrogate models, including in this thesis. Yaw misalignment
is included in a similar manner as that of the DLC 1.2, see section 2.7. However, the specification of
yaw misalignment in the DLC 1.2 [22] prescribing ϕ = {0, 10, −10} [◦] is deemed too excessive. Instead,
ϕ = {0, 5, −5} [◦] is prescribed for the simulations, meaning that a given simulation is run 3 times
using the same Mann box, once for each yaw misalignment case, and the results weighted equally. This
approach relies on an assumption of normally distributed yaw inflow angles for a free standing WT.
Furthermore, the defined ϕ = {0, 5, −5} [◦] is assumed to be representative of the typical atmospheric
flow conditions.
To generate the data used for the model training, a large number of samples evenly covering the
multidimensional variable space must be drawn, for which simulations can be run. The quasi-Monte
Carlo (quasi-MC) method can be used to generate seemingly random draws from the joint distribution,
evenly covering the variable space based on low-discrepancy sequences. Both the Halton and Sobol
sequences have been used in this exact application [44,48], and the low-discrepancy sequence of choice
in this thesis is the Halton sequence. The Halton sequence [72] is a quasi-random number sequence
i.e. it is a deterministic sequence of low discrepancy, which means that it appears random in many
applications. Using a deterministic sequence when drawing the samples, as opposed to a fully random
process, has obvious advantages in terms of ensuring reproducibility. Furthermore, as opposed to other
sampling methods such as Latin Hypercube sampling [73], this approach has the advantage that it
allows drawing more samples in steps without changing the sample values, e.g. if 5 samples are initially
drawn and a total of 10 samples are drawn at a later stage, the initial 5 samples remain the same. This
has obvious advantages when it comes to generating large datasets, as more simulations can be added
in steps as deemed necessary.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Probability density
Truncated triangular distribution
Sample distribution
(a) Wind speed.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Turbulence Intensity
Truncated area
Boundary box
quasi-MC samples
(b) Turbulence intensity.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Wind shear exponent
(c) Wind shear exponent.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
1.25
1.30
1.35
1.40
Air density [kg/m³]
(d) Air density.
Figure 3.1:
Sample distributions obtained using 1000 points in a 4-dimensional variable space
{U, TI, α, ρ}. The solid line in figures b, c & d indicates the sample space bounds.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
The choice of wind distribution is motivated by the bound expressions for the turbulence intensity
and wind shear found in table 3.1, which result in a wide distribution at low wind speeds as can be
seen in figure 3.1b. In order to cover the variable space evenly when the samples are drawn, the wind
speed distribution must be chosen such that it provides more samples at low wind speeds. In this
thesis, a truncated triangular distribution is used, but other choices such as beta or truncated Weibull
distributions are used in other studies [44,48]. The wind speed bounds are set to cover the operational
range of the WT, as this is the domain in which predictions are sought. Including loads experienced in
the parked state is likely possible but has not been investigated further since it would be cumbersome to
cover in the existing simulation framework and offers information of little value in this context as there
is no variation across the operational strategies. In order to include some samples around the cut-out
speed of the WT, the triangular distribution upper bound is set to Umax + 1 and is then truncated
to Umax. The distribution peak is set to Umin along with the lower bound. The resulting truncated
triangular distribution can be seen in figure 3.1a. In figure 3.1 as a whole, the sample coverage of the
variable space is exemplified with a draw of 1000 samples.
As can be seen in figure 3.1, both the turbulence intensity and wind shear distribution are truncated.
While the capability of Flex5 to make reliable predictions under extreme flow conditions may be ques-
tionable, why avoiding these conditions altogether could be suggested, this is not the reasoning behind
the truncation. The wind shear space is truncated at -0.6 as negative wind shear of such magnitude is
believed to occur very rarely, why a finer discretization of the remaining variable space is deemed more
important. Regarding the truncation of the turbulence intensity space, this decision has been made
based on observations of negative wind speeds for simulations with very high TI. Such an observation
is shown in figure 3.2 where further investigation has proven that the bulk flow through the rotor plane
is negative. This behavior is believed to be unphysical, hence a filtering of the 216 available Mann
boxes has been carried out. The condition imposed by the filtering process requires that the bulk flow
in the Flex5 transformed polar coordinate planes do not revert and become negative. An analysis of the
number of Mann boxes satisfying this criteria with increasing turbulence intensity has been performed,
showing that 57 Mann boxes are available for TI = 85 % while less than 40 boxes are available for
TI = 90 %. As will be described in section 3.2, at least 40 Mann boxes are desired hence the truncation
of the TI variable space to 85 %.
100
200
300
400
500
600
Time [s]
10
0
10
Wind speed [m/s]
Vhub
Figure 3.2: Observation of hub height negative wind speed at U = 4.01 [m/s], TI = 111.7%, α = 0.2
and ϕ = 0 [◦] with turbulence seed 4001.
As mentioned earlier, both power production and experienced loads will have a control strategy de-
pendency. It would therefore be optimal to include the PSP governing the investigated operational
strategies in the variable space and subsequently map the PSP to a set of controller settings. This
would allow the joint distribution to include this variable in the variable space, and let the sampling
explore this dimension in an efficient manner. However, the high sensitivity of these parameters and the
tendency of the DTU 10MW to exhibit unstable operation unless the controller settings are fine tuned
has made this impossible within the available time frame. It is therefore deemed that the generated
samples must be run for all 6 defined operational states to manually populate this dimension of the
variable space. Consequently, this means that all samples drawn from the joint distribution are simu-
lated 6 times, one time for each operational state. The manually populated PSP dimension is shown
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Convergence study of sample statistics
35
in figure 3.3 illustrating the discretization of the space. As sampling in the PSP space was originally
intended, a section explaining this approach has been included in Appendix B along with the extended
variable space.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Power set-point
Boundary box
Manual discretization
Figure 3.3: Discretization of PSP space.
While the manual discretization of the PSP space shown in figure 3.3 was not initially intended, it
allows testing of an interesting hypothesis. The hypothesis is that machine learning based surrogate
models trained on data only for these six PSPs will be able to predict in the entire PSP variable range
i.e interpolation in the PSP space despite the coarse discretization is possible.
3.2
Convergence study of sample statistics
In order to determine the number of turbulence seeds to be included per sample in the surrogate model,
a convergence study is performed. From the total number of 216 available Mann boxes, each with a
different turbulence seed, 200 seeds are drawn and used in the study. Aeroelastic simulations using all
200 Mann boxes are run for all considered samples. This results in 600 simulations per sample due
to the three different yaw misalignment settings. The samples included in this study are limited to
3 randomly generated samples which can be found in table 3.2. The study is performed for normal
operation only but is assumed to be representative for all PSPs.
Sample
Mean wind speed, U
[m/s]
Turbulence intensity, TI
[%]
Wind shear, α
[-]
Yaw misalignment, ϕ
[◦]
0
5.4
27.8
0.2
{0, 5, -5}
1
12.1
11.8
0.2
{0, 5, -5}
2
8.4
7.5
0.2
{0, 5, -5}
Table 3.2: Flow characteristics for samples used in convergence study.
With reference to the steady state behavior of the WT, see figure 2.2, the following can be expected
of the 3 investigated samples. Sample 0 lies close to the cut-in wind speed, why the power production
may stop at some points throughout the simulation impacting the mean production.
Additionally,
some pitch actuation can be expected, as the sample is within an active pitch region. Sample 1 lies
slightly above the rated wind speed and the peak on the thrust curve, why the power production can
be expected to be rather stable and pitch regulation active. Sample 2 is situated on the steeper part
of the power curve around the center of the inactive pitch region. While these samples far from cover
the full variable space, they are located in regions with different WT response and therefore all provide
relevant insights.
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
As an initial investigation, the distributions of the sample data before aggregation into single sample
values are assessed. The distributions for 3 of the different types of quantities in focus in this thesis
are shown in figure 3.4. All three quantities show a distribution-like behaviour with a mode well away
from the edges of the domain, and somewhat smoothly decreasing probabilities to both sides. It is also
clear that the distribution associated with each quantity is not the same, to which it can be added
that the distribution is expected to change e.g.
for the power at above rated wind speeds.
More
specifically, the distribution of each variable is expected to be conditional on the flow parameters and
PSP. By using quantiles when aggregating the individual simulations into an aggregate sample value,
no specific distribution is assumed. This is preferred to an e.g. mean based approach, which requires
the assumption of a symmetric distribution around the most likely value of a quantity. Based on the
indications of converged distributions, it is assumed that the sample statistics are converged when using
200 seeds. Hence, the aggregated sample quantile values are assumed to be true values, and can be
used as a reference for the convergence study.
4000
4200
4400
Power [kW]
(a) Power
9000
10000
11000
12000
Maximum load [kNm]
(b) Max. moment ShaftMxy
10000
20000
30000
Damage equivalent load (DEL) [kNm]
(c) DEL TBSS
Figure 3.4: Sample 2 distribution of single simulation quantities for 200 seeds.
Based on the above assumption, 200 seeds would then be used per sample in the ideal case as no
uncertainty would then be introduced when computing the aggregated sample quantities. However, the
prospect of running 600 simulations per sample is highly infeasible with the available computational
resources. In order to quantify the uncertainty introduced by using less seeds, the full set is randomly
split into a number of sub samples. The statistical quantities are computed for each sub sample, which
represents a possible full sample quantity using less seeds per sample. As an example, the sub sample-
wise medians of the TBFA DEL for a split of 10 i.e. resulting in 10 sub samples each containing 20
distinct seeds are shown in figure 3.5a. Furthermore, the assumed true value based on the full set
median is shown. Clearly, the error varies between sub samples; the target value situated somewhere
in between the maximum and minimum sample quantity. Sub sample no. 10 turns out to be an outlier
having the largest error i.e. vertical distance to the full set value. Imagining a worst case scenario,
where all sub samples but one outlier are situated on a horizontal line with the full set value lying close
to the majority of the sub samples, the maximum possible error is then approximately the distance
from the maximum to the minimum sub sample value, and the relative error to the true value can be
computed as
δ = Xsub,max −Xsub,min
Xref
(3.1)
where Xsub,max and Xsub,min is the maximum and minimum value in the sub sample set, respectively,
and Xref is the reference value based on the 200 seed sample. This error estimate is based on a worst
case approach, and yields a conservative estimate of the uncertainty e.g. the actual error in figure 3.5a
is far less than the full subset range.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Convergence study of sample statistics
37
2
4
6
8
10
Sub sample no.
150000
155000
160000
165000
DEL [kNm]
Full set value
Sub sample point
(a)
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
No. of seeds in sample
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Relative maximum error [-]
Sample 0: Power
Sample 0: Std Pitch
Sample 1: Power
Sample 1: Std Pitch
Sample 2: Power
(b)
Figure 3.5: (a): Sample 2 TBFA DEL median for full 200 seed set and each 20 seed sub sample. (b):
Convergence of the sample median of power and pitch standard deviation with number of turbulent
seeds per sample. Displayed for various samples.
The full set is randomly shuffled and split into sub samples containing the following number of distinct
seeds: {2,4,5,8,10,20,25,40,50,100,200}. These values are specifically chosen, as they result in an equal,
integer number of seeds in all of the sub samples. Quantifying the error associated with each split using
(3.1), the convergence of the relative error with the number of turbulent seeds per sample is shown in
figure 3.5b for the median of both power and the standard deviation of the blade pitch angle. Note that
for the blade pitch, sample 2 has been excluded since it lies in the zero-pitch region, and resulted in
numerical problems when computing the relative error. For the remaining cases, a converging behavior
is visible. The general trend is that a large decrease in error can be achieved by adding more seeds if
the sample size is small. Furthermore, the convergence of the error exhibits a turning point after which
adding more seeds to the sample results in a relatively low decrease in relative error.
Going into detail with the convergence of the power median, the lowest error is observed for sample
1. As this sample is located above rated wind speed, the WT is actively controlling the amount of
extracted power to a specific value, which can explain why it is seemingly easier to predict. The relative
error associated with sample 2 is also relatively low indicating that predictions during operation on the
cubic part of the power curve does not necessarily give rise to worse predictions. However, for sample
0, the associated errors are larger up until ≈50 seeds. As mentioned earlier, this sample lies close to
cut-in wind speed of the WT, hence the simulation time series may in some cases contain periods with
no power production and thereby create a large variability in the sample distribution. Consequently, it
seems reasonable that the power predictions for sample 0 take longer to converge.
Regarding the convergence of the load quantities, these are shown for sample 0 and 1 in figure 3.6.
Convergence of the DEL 25th and 75th quantiles can be seen in Appendix C figure C.1 and display
the same behavior as the DEL median.
The convergence across all loads seem to follow the same
trends as discussed for power and pitch based on figure 3.5b.
However, the loads seem to require
more seeds to produce a given relative error. Interestingly, the maximum loads converge at a rate
comparable, and occasionally faster, than the DELs. The tower bottom side-side moment is generally
the slowest to converge from both a DEL and maximum load perspective. Other loads exhibiting slow
convergence are the tower bottom fore-aft moment and the main shaft torque moment. These loads can
be characterized as turbulence driven, hence it is plausible that they are the most uncertain. Oppositely,
the blade edgewise moment exhibits the fastest converge with blade pitch moment and main shaft x-wise
moment showing low relative errors as well.
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
0
25
50
75
100 125 150 175 200
No. of seeds in sample
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Max FlapM
Max PitchM
Max EdgeM
Max ShaftMz
Max ShaftMxy
Max TB
0
25
50
75
100 125 150 175 200
No. of seeds in sample
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
DEL FlapM
DEL PitchM
DEL EdgeM
DEL ShaftMz
DEL ShaftMx
DEL TBFA
DEL TBSS
Relative maximum error [-]
(a) Sample 0 with U = 5.4 [m/s], TI = 27.8%, α = 0.2 and ϕ = 0 [◦].
0
25
50
75
100 125 150 175 200
No. of seeds in sample
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Max FlapM
Max PitchM
Max EdgeM
Max ShaftMz
Max ShaftMxy
Max TB
0
25
50
75
100 125 150 175 200
No. of seeds in sample
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
DEL FlapM
DEL PitchM
DEL EdgeM
DEL ShaftMz
DEL ShaftMx
DEL TBFA
DEL TBSS
Relative maximum error [-]
(b) Sample 1 with U = 12.1 [m/s], TI = 11.8%, α = 0.2 and ϕ = 0 [◦]
Figure 3.6: Sample convergence of the relative error of quantiles with the number of turbulent seeds.
Sample DEL is given as the median while max load is given as the 95th quantile.
While the above plots show convergence, the relative error for some loads is still high even for a large
number of seeds. However, increasing the number of seeds is not the only way to increase the amount of
simulation data. A study, albeit informal, was conducted in which the contribution to convergence from
including different rotor start positions was assessed. Using different rotor start positions effectively
results in the WT blades hitting different patches of turbulence which would otherwise have passed
unobstructed through the rotor plane. This approach has the advantage that no new Mann box has
to be generated for each new position, effectively reducing the computational cost. The study showed
that the convergence supplied by this approach is inferior to adding more seeds why adding more seeds
has been deemed the most efficient approach to reducing the sample quantity uncertainty.
Considering the available computational resources, the target for the highest relative error across the
predicted sample quantities shown in this study is set to 20%. The resulting sample prediction uncer-
tainty is taken as the maximum relative error observed across the three considered samples and can
be viewed in tables 3.3 & 3.4 for 25 and 40 seeds, respectively. Here, it should be reiterated that the
error estimate provided by (3.1) is conservative, and that the actual error is therefore likely smaller
than estimated here. Substantial reductions in uncertainty are achieved by including 40 rather than 25
seeds e.g. for TBFA, TBSS and ShaftMz. Due to the established goal of an uncertainty below 20% for
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Dataset/Database II
39
all quantities, the required number of seeds per sample is 40; the DELs for TBSS and ShaftMz being
the deciding factors.
DELs, Power and Std_Pitch
Quantile
TBFA
TBSS
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
ShaftMx
ShaftMz
Power
Std_Pitch
5th
13.4
28.3
4.9
1.0
5.9
4.0
22.7
6.6
15.6
25th
12.8
17.9
3.7
0.5
3.5
3.9
14.4
6.6
10.8
50th
14.7
16.2
4.2
0.6
3.8
3.9
17.4
3.8
7.3
75th
10.5
23.6
4.4
0.5
3.6
3.5
16.3
3.0
8.6
95th
8.8
17.7
6.7
0.7
4.5
3.4
16.3
2.2
7.9
Maximum load
Quantile
-
TB
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
ShaftMxy
ShaftMz
-
-
95th
-
10.8
8.6
2.8
5.8
9.0
7.2
-
-
Table 3.3: Uncertainty in % of sample quantities based on maximum observed relative error across all
samples using 25 turbulent seeds per sample.
While this study does give an indication of the uncertainty it is by no means exhaustive and a more
in depth analysis is relevant. The samples in this analysis are randomly generated and limited to 3
different samples. Using more samples would allow a larger part of the variable space to be investigated
where more extreme values of e.g. turbulence intensity or proximity to the edges of the operational
range might result in altered convergence of the statistical quantities.
DELs, Power and Std_Pitch
Quantile
TBFA
TBSS
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
ShaftMx
ShaftMz
Power
Std_Pitch
5th
14.3
16.3
5.3
0.7
5.3
4.0
19.7
4.1
8.7
25th
9.4
13.8
3.4
0.3
3.4
2.5
12.2
4.2
6.4
50th
9.4
9.8
4.6
0.4
2.1
2.7
12.9
2.1
3.7
75th
7.2
13.1
4.8
0.3
2.2
2.6
9.8
2.0
6.1
95th
7.2
16.2
5.1
0.4
2.5
3.4
16.3
1.6
5.9
Maximum load
Quantile
-
TB
FlapM
EdgeM
PitchM
ShaftMxy
ShaftMz
-
-
95th
-
6.6
3.5
1.4
4.1
3.7
5.5
-
-
Table 3.4: Uncertainty in % of sample quantities based on maximum observed relative error across all
samples using 40 turbulent seeds per sample.
3.3
Dataset/Database II
Based on the DoE and the convergence study, the dataset used in the calibration of the surrogate
models is now defined and can be created. The convergence study prescribes 40 turbulent seeds per
sample point and 3 yaw misalignment cases of {0, 5, -5} [◦] per turbulent seed i.e. 120 simulations per
sample based on 40 different Mann boxes rescaled to the sample specific turbulence intensity. Due to
an unforeseen technical restriction, the size of the dataset has been limited to 6,000 samples amounting
to 720,000 Flex5 simulations. Notably, due to the manual population of the PSP variable space, this
requires a draw of 1,000 quasi-MC samples from the variable space shown in figure 3.1 and the sample
points in the figure are therefore representative of the discretization level.
Two different datasets containing 6,000 samples each have been generated. One dataset is based on a
3-dimensional variable space {PSP, U, σu} using constant values for wind shear, α = 0.2, and air density,
ρ = 1.225 [kg/m3]. Another has been generated based on a 5-dimensional space {PSP, U, σu, α, ρ} i.e.
the entire space defined in the DoE. The former is used to calibrate the RF model and has a more dense
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
discretization due to the smaller variable space compared to the latter, which have been used in the
development of the ANN.
3.4
Machine Learning Introduction & Model Performance
Evaluation
A short introduction to Machine Learning (ML) follows, primarily based on Nelli [66]. ML is a term
covering a vast number of modelling techniques used in a multitude of applications. The branch of ML
dealt with in this thesis is supervised learning i.e. the model is built based on a known set of data
specifying the model input(s) and corresponding output(s). This allows the model to be calibrated in an
iterative manner using optimization techniques i.e. by specifying an objective function, in ML denoted
the loss function, to be either maximized or minimized. The iterative procedure of calibration is called
the model training while the loss function expresses the discrepancy between the predictions of the
model being trained and the known outputs. The goal of the model training is to identify a generalized
mathematical function mapping function inputs to outputs i.e. a function capable of making accurate
predictions based on inputs that were not part of the training.
Supervised learning deals with two types of problems: classification and regression.
Classification
problems are characterized by the output variable belonging to a specific class i.e. the output is limited
to a specific set of values. Oppositely, regression deals with problems where the predicted value is
a continuous variable. In this thesis, regression models are used to predict DELs, Max. loads and
power.
In this context, the input variables to the regression model are called features, x, and the
modelled quantity is called the target/prediction. A clear distinction exists between the target, y, and
the prediction, ˆy. The target is the known quantity from the dataset associated with a specific set of
features used in the training of the regression model while the prediction is the model output. It is
possible to predict multiple quantities from the same regression model, which is an interesting prospect
likely within the scope of the applied models. However, no efforts have been made in this regard.
Model training & testing
As mentioned above, training of an ML model requires a loss function which should be chosen considering
the desired model characteristics. The loss function of choice across all models presented in this thesis
is the Mean Squared Error (MSE) given by
MSE =
1
nsamples
nsamples
X
i
(ˆytrain,i −ytrain,i)2
(3.2)
where nsamples denotes the number of samples in the training set (explained shortly). This function
has the property that the weight of a residual increases rapidly with its absolute value. This is deemed
desirable in this context where the numerical range of the output is substantial and large residuals on
predictions of e.g. large loads should be avoided. However, this type of loss function may allow somewhat
larger percentage error for predictions of small numbers since the weight of a given percentage error will
increase with the absolute target value. Another loss function providing a similar scope for the model
training is the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) yet with a less aggressive scaling of the weight of a single
residual. This loss function has also been tested to some extent but MSE has proven to provide better
model performance in this application.
A general model capable of making predictions based on unseen data is the goal. In order to evaluate the
performance of a developed model, this requires splitting the dataset into a training set and a test set.
The former is used to train the model while the latter is used to evaluate the performance of the model
after training. The evaluation of prediction errors with respect to a test set not included in the training
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Machine Learning Introduction & Model Performance Evaluation
41
process is a key element in assessing model performance. Many ML models are susceptible to overfitting
i.e. the model is calibrated too accurately to the training data thereby losing its ability to generalize.
This becomes evident when the model is used to predict the targets in the test set producing far larger
errors than indicated by the loss function. The train/test split of the dataset should be performed
in a manner aiming at adequately representing the input/output space of the model and is usually
achieved by introducing a random shuffle of the dataset before it is split into the train and test sets.
The train/test ratio should be performed such that as much data as possible if available for the model
training. However, it is desired that the test set is large enough to accurately cover the prediction space
and ensure some statistical convergence of the errors. Typical train/test ratios are 80/20 and 90/10
but the chosen ratio is typically based on the number of samples.
The main surrogate model performance evaluation approach taken in this thesis is based on k-fold
cross-validation. The basic idea behind the method is to split the dataset in k folds. The model is then
trained on a subset of the dataset containing k −1 folds and evaluated based on the single remaining
fold. This is done in a iterative manner with k iterations. In each iteration, the model is trained in on
a new k −1 fold subset of the k folds meaning that each fold will be part of the training set k −1 times
and making up the test set 1 time throughout the cross-validation. Consequently, all input/output
pairs have been predicted and evaluated once throughout the cross-validation ensuring that predictions
have been made in the entire input/output space. By averaging fold-wise performance based on the
chosen performance metric, a clearer picture of what performance can be expected from the model than
by training and testing based on a single train/test split. While this technique does not have a full
mathematical justification in the general case, a benefit is observed from averaging the performance
metric in practical applications even if the performance estimates are not independent, see e.g. the
book by Abu-Mostafa et al. [74].
Regarding the aforementioned train/test split ratio, deciding the value of k effectively decides the split
ratio and the same considerations apply. Choosing the right value of k is a topic which has received
some attention e.g. the work by Kohavi [75] where a 10-fold cross validation is found to perform well
in many applications. Abu-Mostafa et al. [74] also states that k = 10 is a common choice while Kuhn
and Kjell [76] suggest that there is no formal rule but 5 and 10 are typical choices which correspond to
80/20 and 90/10 splits, respectively..
The specific type of cross-validation used in the performance evaluation is the stratified k-fold cross-
validation described and recommended by Kohavi [75].
This particular approach is mostly used in
classification problems and ensures that the fold-wise distribution of a specified quantity in the data is
identical to that of the full dataset. This approach has been chosen due to the manual population of
the PSP variable space which means that the dataset contains information regarding 6 distinct control
strategies. The stratification then ensures that no bias to or from a specific control strategy arises as a
consequence of a randomized shuffle over or under representing a control strategy in a given fold.
To evaluate the performance of the trained surrogate model, the error between test set predictions and
targets must be quantified. Three different, yet similar, metrics have been used in this thesis denoted the
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), Relative RMSE (RRMSE) and Max. Normalized RMSE (NRMSE):
RMSE =
v
u
u
t
1
nsamples
nsamples
X
i
(ˆytest,i −ytest,i)2
(3.3)
RRMSE =
v
u
u
t
1
nsamples
nsamples
X
i
 ˆytest,i −ytest,i
ytest,i
2
(3.4)
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
NRMSE =
1
yset,max
v
u
u
t
1
nsamples
nsamples
X
i
(ˆytest,i −ytest,i)2
(3.5)
where nsamples is the number of samples in the test set and yset,max is the maximum target within the
entire dataset. While these three metrics are similar, they are believed to convey different insights in
the model errors. RMSE has the advantage of having the same unit as the modelled quantity and can
be related to it in physical terms. As discussed previously, the loss function in eq. (3.2) will, to some
degree, allow a higher relative error when predicting small numbers. The RRMSE weighs the individual
relative errors equally and therefore gives an indication of the overall relative errors. NRMSE is simply
a maximum normalized version of RMSE which provides context for the quantity at hand by relating
it to the absolute size of the predicted numbers.
Note that, in the context of ML, a distinction is made between residuals and errors in this thesis.
Residuals describe the discrepancy between the predictions and targets in the training set. Conversely,
errors refer to to the discrepancy between predictions and targets in the test set. A number of plots
showing the residuals are presented e.g.
figure 3.9c.
The errors are mainly assessed by use of the
presented evaluation metrics in eqs. (3.3), (3.4) and (3.5) in addition to the prediction vs. target plots
e.g. figure 3.9a, which are all based on test sets.
Hyperparameter tuning
Hyperparameters in the context of machine learning are roughly defined as parameters which are de-
termined by the practitioner rather than during the model training. As such, hyperparameters cannot
be learned by the algorithm itself, but must be defined and tuned by the practitioner in order to im-
prove the performance of a model. A good set of hyperparameter values varies with specific problem.
Consequently, the tuning of hyperparameters is usually performed on a trial and error basis in order to
identify the hyperparameters ensuring the best possible model performance. Notably, hyperparameters
may significantly influence the computational expense associated with training of a model, hence the
choice of model hyperparameters may also depend on the computational resources at hand.
Final model
Once the model performance has been assessed and a specific surrogate model configuration has been
chosen, the model can be trained on the full dataset before being used in a practical application since
increasing the size of the training set is expected to have a positive effect on model performance.
3.5
Surrogate model: Random Forest
Surrogate modelling of power and loads based on regression trees has seen use in the work by Clifton et
al. [40,41] providing promising results, why the initial surrogate modelling approach taken in this thesis
is is based on the Random Forest (RF) Regressor implemented in sci-kit learn v0.23.1 [77]. This ML
technique is based on regression trees described by Gordon et al. [78]. Regression trees are models using
binary branching questions, i.e. decision stumps, to predict an output based on inputs as visualized for
the present context in figure 3.7. A random forest is described by Gordon et al. [78] as an ensemble
method based on regression trees. More specifically, a random forest consists of a number of decision
trees. Each tree is trained on a random subset of samples and thus each tree is unique. When presented
with the test data, each tree predicts the outcome and the random forest returns the mean of these
predictions, thus forming an ensemble of trees, or a forest.
==PAGE:53==
3.5 Surrogate model: Random Forest
43
U, TI, PSP
PSP
U > 12
TI > 19
PSP < 1.0
U < 14
PSP < 0.5
Prediction
Start/Stop
Decision
Chosen path
Alternate path
Figure 3.7: Thought up example visualization of a branch in a random forest regression tree. U is in
[m/s] and TI in [%].
The RF model is trained on the dataset with a 3-dimensional variable space {PSP, U, σu} using constant
values for wind shear, α = 0.2, and air density, ρ = 1.225 [kg/m3]. Initially, a study investigating the
importance of dataset size and the RF hyperparameter specifying the number of regression trees to be
generated is conducted. For each combination of set size and number of trees, a 10-fold cross validation
is performed and the aggregated performance metrics computed.
The results are plotted in figure
3.8. From figure 3.8a, the performance dependency on the size of the dataset is clear and showing a
convergence of the error as the dataset size increases. Considering the trend in the convergence of error,
the possible increase in performance if a larger dataset was generated is very small why the limitation
to 6000 samples does not seems to be problematic for this model. The development of the error with
the number of trees is hardly visible in this figure why a separate plot showing only the full dataset
case is shown in figure 3.8b. Here, a rapid convergence of the error as the number of trees increase
is observed. The number of trees for the RF models is set to 300 trees based on this analysis, as the
decrease in NRMSE above 300 trees is exceedingly small and a larger number of trees is associated
with a significant increase in computational expense. As such, it is assumed that 300 trees is a fitting
hyperparameter choice across all sensors. All other hyperparameters are default values as of sci-kit
learn v0.23.1.
50
100
150
200
250
300
No. of trees [-]
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
NRMSE [%]
(a) Different number of trees and set sizes.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
No. of trees [-]
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
NRMSE [%]
Set size: 600
Set size: 1200
Set size: 1800
Set size: 2400
Set size: 3000
Set size: 3600
Set size: 4200
Set size: 4800
Set size: 5400
Set size: 6000
(b) Full data set with number of trees
Figure 3.8: RF model performance with different amounts of data a number of regression trees. The
results are from the Max. FlapM model.
Another study has investigated the tendency for overfitting of the RF model. However, no overfitting,
i.e. increasing NRMSE, has been observed for models with as much as 12,000 trees suggesting that
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
this method is not very susceptible to overfitting. This concludes the simple hyperparameter tuning
performed for the RF model.
As mentioned in the chapter introduction, only the development of models for the median DEL FlapM
and power as well as Max. FlapM is documented in detail. The fold-wise and mean performance for
these three models based on 10-fold cross-validation is shown in table 3.5. While fold to fold variation is
observed for all three models, this level of variation is to be expected and no tendency to overfitting of
specific folds is observeable. The power model consistently produces the lowest errors while the FlapM
models perform comparably; the DEL model showing slightly lower NRMSE and the max.
model
slightly lower RRMSE.
DEL FlapM
Max. FlapM
Power
Fold
RMSE
RRMSE
NRMSE
RMSE
RRMSE
NRMSE
RMSE
RRMSE
NRMSE
#
[kNm]
[%]
[%]
[kNm]
[%]
[%]
[kW]
[%]
[%]
1
351.6
1.97
0.79
563.1
1.67
0.96
31.9
0.84
0.29
2
368.5
2.00
0.82
548.7
1.60
0.94
33.5
0.83
0.30
3
341.0
1.67
0.76
560.5
1.57
0.96
33.9
0.86
0.31
4
343.4
1.71
0.77
520.4
1.48
0.89
28.6
0.78
0.26
5
334.5
1.80
0.75
500.0
1.44
0.86
24.6
0.69
0.22
6
340.0
1.78
0.76
547.2
1.55
0.94
23.9
0.62
0.22
7
359.4
1.76
0.80
538.6
1.55
0.92
29.9
0.71
0.27
8
355.9
1.72
0.79
493.5
1.37
0.84
30.8
0.64
0.28
9
361.9
1.96
0.81
531.0
1.51
0.91
24.9
0.54
0.23
10
361.0
1.79
0.81
499.3
1.44
0.85
29.6
0.70
0.27
Mean
351.7
1.81
0.79
530.2
1.52
0.91
29.2
0.72
0.27
Table 3.5: Fold-wise and mean performance.
A more detailed look at the predictions and model residuals is provided in figure 3.9 for the power
and Max. FlapM models. Similar plots for DEL FlapM are provided in Appendix D figure D.1. The
fold-wise performance of the test set predictions are shown in figures 3.9a & 3.9b, the latter confirming
the very low error documented in table 3.5. A higher variation is observed for the former including
outliers yet not in notable quantities. The residual plot as a function of wind speed in figure 3.9c shows
that the relative residuals are larger at low wind speeds. This aligns well with the expectation of low
Max. loads at these wind speeds based on e.g. figure 2.11 and the tendency to higher relative errors
for low loads due to the MSE loss function. Additionally, a tail in the residuals is visible and captured
by the plotted trend line indicating that the model predicts slightly lower values at high wind speeds.
The desired structure of the residuals is a gaussian distribution around zero. While this is not exactly
the case in figures 3.9c through 3.9f, it is seemingly not far from either, and the observed residuals are
not deemed problematic. Notably, the residuals for power predictions with wind speed shown in figure
3.9d show very low discrepancies for higher wind speeds, where the power productions across all PSPs
is somewhat constant. Conversely, a slight trend towards overprediction of power production at low
wind speeds is observeable which seems to be coupled with increasing turbulence intensities based on
figure 3.9f.
As mentioned in the DoE, the circumstance of manually populating the PSP variable space has led to
the hypothesis that a ML based surrogate model would be able to interpolate in that space. In order
to investigate this, the response surface predicted by RF model for a constant TI = 10% while covering
the full PSP and U space has been plotted in figure 3.10. The choice of this specific TI is that it is
covered at all wind speeds. Both figures show clear plateaus in predicted power and load in the PSP
dimension, the former evidently not true as the power should increase almost linearly with PSP at
higher wind speeds. Furthermore, these plateaus seem centered around the exact PSPs contained in
==PAGE:55==
3.5 Surrogate model: Random Forest
45
the dataset, see figure 3.3 for a visualization of the discretization. As such, it seems that the regression
trees may be evaluating a binary choice based on e.g. PSP < 0.5 and, if true, attribute the prediction
directly to a PSP of 0.4 i.e. a PSP which was represented in the training data. This type of behavior is
not caught by the applied performance evaluation as the test data also only represent the six predefined
control strategies.
(a) Predictions vs. Targets
(b) Predictions vs. Targets
(c) Residuals with wind speed
(d) Residuals with wind speed
(e) Residuals with TI
(f) Residuals with TI
Figure 3.9: Evaluation of Random Forest mode performance. Left: Max. FlapM. Right: Power. The
color coding of prediction vs. target plots indicate the folds. Residuals are shown as relative variation
and the fitted trend line is a 4th order polynomial.
As such, the hypothesis that a RF model is able to interpolate in PSP space is rejected. However, this
motivates the investigation of another ML modelling technique. These findings are contrary to what is
reported by Clifton et al. [40] suggesting potential to predict power response to unseen conditions, if
they are within the variable space bounds. However, the discretization of the PSP space offered here is
very coarse, and the potential for interpolation may increase somewhat if additions to the six current
==PAGE:56==
46
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
operational states were added.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Power set-point [-]
9860
13000
16140
19280
22420
25560
28700
31840
34980
38120
41260
44400
(a) Max. FlapM in [kNm].
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Power set-point [-]
220
1200
2180
3160
4140
5120
6100
7080
8060
9040
10020
11000
(b) Power in [kW].
Figure 3.10: Contour plots showing Random Forest model response surface for constant TI = 10%,
α = 0.2, ρ = 1.225 [kg/m3].
In the context of solving an optimization problem, these results indicate that it is likely not possible
to obtain gradients for a gradient based optimization problem using this technique. To the knowledge
of the author, analytical gradients for regression trees cannot be obtained. Furthermore, the tendency
to predict the same number for a range of a given variable indicates that obtaining gradient through
finite difference is likely associated with a large risk of computing flat gradients unless the step size is
very large or the discretization of the variable space very dense i.e. requiring a very large amount of
simulations.
DEL median
Model
RMSE [kNm]
RRMSE [%]
NRMSE [%]
FlapM
351.7
1.81
0.79
EdgeM
43.2
0.22
0.20
PitchM
3.0
1.73
0.66
TBFA
1184.2
2.94
0.94
TBSS
1736.7
5.34
1.20
ShaftMx
108.9
1.29
0.57
ShaftMz
48.8
7.26
1.32
95th quantile of loads
Model
RMSE [kNm]
RRMSE [%]
NRMSE [%]
FlapM
530.2
1.52
0.91
EdgeM
147.1
0.94
0.70
PitchM
5.7
2.39
0.90
TB
5114.8
2.30
1.32
ShaftMxy
630.0
2.11
1.04
ShaftMz
133.4
1.34
0.78
Power & Std_Pitch median
Model
RMSE [kW] & [◦]
RRMSE [%]
NRMSE [%]
Power
29.2
0.72
0.27
Std_Pitch
0.09
3.53E28
11.47
Table 3.6: Summary of Random Forest model performance for all considered quantities based on
10-fold cross-validation.
A summary of the performance of the RF model for all considered sensors is provided in table 3.6.
==PAGE:57==
3.6 Surrogate model: Artificial Neural Network
47
Initially, it should be noted that the very large RRMSE for Std_Pitch arises from the estimated values
being very close to zero which was also encountered during the convergence study in section 3.2. However.
this model does not seem to perform very well and and a separate study of this sensor seems advisable.
Apart from that, the model performance is overall good, the most problematic sensors being DEL
ShaftMz, DEL TBSS and Max. TB based on the NRMSE. The two former are both associated with
the TBSS sensor which has consistently been one of the more difficult loads to model. A rather large
difference is observed for the DEL ShaftMz RRMSE and NRMSE values possibly indicating that the
model has difficulties predicting the lower DELs.
While the RF model has been found to have some shortcomings with respect to interpolation and the
prospect of obtaining gradients, it should be noted that the training time required for this model is
in the order of seconds making it a very adaptive tool which can be trained in-situ. Furthermore, the
predictions made by the developed RF models show low errors within the discretized zone of the variable
space. Therefore, it seems likely that surrogate modelling of both power and loads using random forest
regression is a sound approach in many applications of which one is presented in chapter 5.
3.6
Surrogate model: Artificial Neural Network
Another machine learning modelling technique with higher complexity than the RF model is the Arti-
ficial Neural Network (ANN). This technique has seen recent use with respect to WT load modelling
in the work of Dimitrov [48] and Schröder et al. [79]. In both articles, ANN and Polynomial Chaos
Expansion (PCE) based surrogates models are compared and the ANN is found to outperform the PCE,
which has earlier been a recommended surrogate modelling technique e.g. in Dimitrov et al. [44] and
also seen use in Ciri et al. [39].
Input
layer
Output
layer
x1
x2
x3
xn
...
Hidden layer(s)
...
ϕ1
ϕ1
ϕ1
...
ϕ2
ϕ2
ϕ2
ϕ3
ŷ
(a)
5
0
5
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
(b)
Figure 3.11: (a): Schematic of feed-forward ANN with fully connected layers where Φ denotes an
acitivation function. The schematic shows a model with two hidden layers. Original illustration from
Schøler and Lund [80], altered and used with permission. (b): Activation functions including tanh
(top) and ReLU (bottom).
ANN models are inspired by the human nervous system, in which a large number of interconnected
neurons are activated to perform a given task. A neuron interconnection is associated with a weight
specific to that connection and the number of interconnections for a given neuron is determined by the
overall model architecture. The neurons are organized in layers, where a neuron is only interconnected
to other neurons not belonging to the same layer. The layers can be put into three categories, namely
the input, hidden and output layer. Roughly, the input layer is where the model features are specified,
==PAGE:58==
48
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
the hidden layer(s) where the main part of the modelling is performed and the output layer where the
complex output from the hidden layer is aggregated into an output. The ANNs explored in this thesis
are exclusively feed-forward ANNs with fully connected layers. A schematic of such an ANN is provided
in figure 3.11a and shows that information is only propagated forward through the layers; a neuron in
a given layer being interconnected to all neurons in the preceding and succeeding layer.
While the neuron interconnections are associated with weights, a neuron itself is comprised of an acti-
vation function, Φ, and a bias, b. Along with the weights and prior activations passed on through the
interconnections to the preceding layer, these determine the neuron activation, a, i.e. the value passed
on from the given neuron to the succeeding layer. The activation is given as
z =
X
j
ajwj + b
(3.6)
a = Φ(z)
(3.7)
where aj is the prior activations fed to the neuron, the sum is performed over the number of incoming
connections and a is the output activation from the neuron in question.
The choice of activation
function is one of the many hyperparameters that must be chosen when setting up an ANN. A variety
of activation functions with different properties exist, of which only the linear, tanh and Rectified Linear
Unit (ReLU) activation functions are considered in this thesis, the two latter being shown in figure 3.11b.
An activation function is assigned layer-wise i.e. in figure 3.11a Φ1 may be a tanh function while Φ2
is a ReLU function. One large difference between these two activation functions is the activation limit.
More specifically, a tanh activation will never exceed the range {-1,1} while the ReLU activation range
is {0,∞}. Notably, the output layers consists of a single neuron generating the final y output. The
activation function Φ3, used for output neuron is linear in all presented models i.e. the final activation,
namely the output prediction, is computed using only eq. (3.6).
Training & feature scaling
When an ANN is trained, the individual interconnection weights and neuron biases are calibrated. This
is done using an optimization algorithm with the objective of minimizing the loss function based on the
residuals, see eq. (3.2). The only considered optimization algorithm in this thesis is Adam optimizer by
Kinga and Ba [81], which is a complex gradient based optimization scheme. Passing the entire training
set through the optimization multiple times tends to yield better model performance. The number of
times the training set is passed though the optimization is denoted the number of epochs. Additionally,
the optimizer requires a learning rate i.e. the step size when updating the weights and biases. This is
an important parameter affecting the speed of the convergence and the found solution. A high learning
rate might speed up the initial convergence while the identified solution may be affected negatively due
to the larger step size by making the solution jump back and forth across the actual extrema. Therefore,
many optimizers, including Adam [81], uses an adaptive learning rate.
Gradient based optimizers perform better if the derivatives with respect to the features are of the same
order of magnitude which may otherwise create a bias in feature importance. Therefore, feature scaling
is standard practice when using ANNs. Two common transformations are the zero mean, unit variance
scaling and min-max scaling. The latter yielded better performance in a preliminary, albeit informal,
study and is the scaling transformation used for all developed ANNs. The transformation is applied to
the individual features and scales to the range {0,1} by
xscaled =
x −xmin
xmax −xmin
(3.8)
Scaling of the targets is also possible and may be important for the same reasons as provided above.
However, only one value is predicted for each model in the developed models and initial results indicated
==PAGE:59==
3.6 Surrogate model: Artificial Neural Network
49
worse performance when the targets are scaled. However, the time frame of the thesis has not allowed
further investigation of whether alterations in the model setup might change this result.
As such,
target scaling is not performed for the developed models. There are additional reasons for transforming
specifically the DELs from an error scaling point of view which have been left out of the work presented
here but included in the recommendations, see section 3.7.
Hyperparameter tuning
Hyperparameter tuning of ANNs can be a cumbersome process due to the large amount of different
hyperparameter combinations. To aid in the hyperparameter tuning process, a number of libraries have
been developed automating the hyperparameter search process. One such library is Keras Tuner v1.0
by O’Malley et al. [82] which has been used in this thesis. This library allows a hyperparameter search
space to be defined which is then explored by simply training, testing and logging the performance of
a model with a specific set of hyperparameters. The performance estimate is based on 5-fold cross-
validation i.e. for each evaluated set of hyperparameters the model is trained and tested 5 times i.e. a
considerable amount of computational resources is required which has motivated the choice of k. The
search space is defined by
• Hidden layers: {1,2,3,4}
• Activation functions: {ReLU, tanh}
• Neurons per hidden layer: {16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512}
• Learning rate: {1E-2, 1E-3, 1E-4}
As such, the number of combinations is far larger than what can be searched in a computationally
feasible manner and within a realistic time frame. Therefore, the search is conducted as a random
search within the defined hyperparameter space and the number of different model hyperparameter
combinations is limited to 200 trials. The search is conducted for both the DEL and Max. FlapM
model as well as the power model.
In addition to the above hyperparameters, a constant number of 2,000 epochs have been used along with
a batch size of 64. All other hyperparameters are default values as of TensorFlow v2.1. The number of
epochs may have significant impact on the results. Based on the choice of hyperparameters, a specific
model may require more or less epochs to converge as well as become overfitted. As such, using a specific
number of epochs may result in discarding models with significant potential which has been trained too
much or too little. To circumvent this, early stopping procedures can be used, specifying that training
be stopped if the performance of the model starts to degrade i.e. indicating overfitting. However, as the
convergence of the developed models exhibit erratic rather than smooth behavior making the proper
stop criteria hard to identify, these procedures have not been implemented in light of the available time
frame.
The decision of using 2,000 epochs as well as the definition of the search space partly relies on the
manual development of a baseline ANN model. This model consists of three hidden layers with 128
ReLU activation function neurons in each layer and a learning rate of 1E-2. As the baseline model
was found to perform well using 2,000 epochs this is used in the search as well.
Furthermore, the
baseline model is included in the model benchmarking. The choice of including tanh is made in order
to include a continous activation function in the search space, while the inclusion of layer sizes as low
as 16 neurons is based on the findings of Schröder et al. [79] indicating that even a small ANNs can
predict flapwise DELs. To easily communicate a specific model architecture in a condensed fashion, a
shorthand inspired by Christiansen and Lund [80] and exemplified on the described baseline model is
defined as
{128, 128, 128},
{R, R, R}
(3.9)
==PAGE:60==
50
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
Indicating a model architecture propagating values from left to right with 3 hidden layers, 128 neurons
in each layer and a layer activation function with R designating ReLu. Additionally, as a measure of the
model complexity, the number of tunable model parameters are provided for each architecture which
is simply the total number of weights and biases in the model. The results from the random search is
reported in table 3.8 along with the baseline model. Only the 10 best performing models from the search
are reported, as well as the best performing architecture solely based on tanh activation functions.
Analyzing the results in table 3.8, a learning rate of 1E-2 performs better in the general case with the
exception of a few 1E-3 cases. This could indicate that the lower learning rates have not yet converged
and requires more training. No clear pattern is observed with respect to the number of parameters
which include models ranging from approximately 5,000 to 135,000 model parameters. Higher model
complexity is associated with increased computational cost during training why a low complexity model
is preferred if it yields a satisfying performance. The solely tanh based model showing the best perfor-
mance indicated in yellow shading is consistently a single layer architecture. However, the performance
is very poor compared to models including ReLU activation functions. The best performing model is
consistently a fully ReLU based one. The baseline model, in blue shading, is the best performing model
on average scoring only first or second place across the tested sensors. From an implementation and
time-wise point of view, it is most practical to decide on a single model performing well in all cases.
Therefore, the baseline model is the model of choice which will be analyzed further in the remainder of
the section. The increase in prediction error associated with this choice compared to the best performing
model, in pink shading, from the random search is very small for the Max. FlapM model and deemed
acceptable for the DEL FlapM model.
DEL FlapM
Max. FlapM
Power
Fold
RMSE
RRMSE
NRMSE
RMSE
RRMSE
NRMSE
RMSE
RRMSE
NRMSE
#
[kNm]
[%]
[%]
[kNm]
[%]
[%]
[kW]
[%]
[%]
1
408.5
2.14
0.71
467.2
1.32
0.72
27.8
0.88
0.25
2
275.1
1.68
0.48
424.6
1.24
0.64
27.2
2.36
0.25
3
305.5
1.66
0.53
499.9
1.42
0.76
42.5
1.29
0.39
4
286.5
1.64
0.50
474.5
1.33
0.72
27.8
1.15
0.25
5
391.1
2.40
0.68
463.3
1.32
0.70
30.3
1.60
0.28
Mean
333.3
1.90
0.58
467.2
1.33
0.71
31.1
1.46
0.28
Table 3.7: Fold-wise and mean performance.
The model performance in a 5-fold cross-validation is presented on a fold-wise basis in table 3.7. A
10-fold cross validation scheme was initially tested for the final model performance evaluation. These
results indicated an unchanged mean validation loss, but larger fold to fold variation was observed. Due
to the size of the dataset and the stratification, a 10-fold cross-validation results in a test split of 600
samples equally divided between the 6 operational strategies. The larger fold to fold variations are
therefore assumed to originate from the 100 test samples per operational state not sufficiently covering
the remaining 4-dimensional variable space and leading to a bias depending on the fold-wise split. While
some fold to fold variations are observed in table 3.7 primarily for DEL FlapM and Power, the variations
are deemed within the margin of expected variation and not a sign of overfitting.
A more detailed view of the DEL FlapM model performance is provided in figure 3.12. Similar figures
for the Max. FlapM and Power models can be found in Appendix E figures E.2 & E.1. The very low
errors on the predictions are confirmed in figure 3.12a which also indicate that no outliers are present.
The residual plots now also include the residuals as a function of wind shear and air density as shown in
figure 3.12e & 3.12f, respectively. The residuals generally seem to be distributed in a gaussian fashion
around the trend line. However, it could seem that the residuals are centered around a slightly negative
value rather than zero based on the offset of the trend line in figures 3.12c, 3.12d & 3.12f. A couple
==PAGE:61==
3.6 Surrogate model: Artificial Neural Network
51
of outliers showing a variation of more than 10% are present and seem to be associated with the same
wind conditions i.e. low wind shear, low turbulence intensity and low air density.
DEL FlapM model
Layers
Activation
No. Params
LR
RMSE [kNm]
RRMSE [%]
NRMSE [%]
{64, 512, 32}
{R, R, R}
50,113
1E-2
280.2
1.67
0.49
{128, 128, 128}
{R, R, R}
33,921
1E-2
333.3
1.90
0.58
{128, 512, 128}
{t, R, R}
132,609
1E-3
336.5
1.87
0.59
{512, 128}
{t, R}
68,865
1E-2
351.1
2.06
0.61
{128, 512}
{R, R}
67,329
1E-2
409.6
2.53
0.72
{512, 16}
{t, R}
11,297
1E-2
411.5
2.51
0.72
{512, 256}
{R, R}
134,657
1E-2
422.8
2.68
0.74
{64, 512}
{R, R}
34,177
1E-2
454.4
3.01
0.79
{16, 64, 64}
{R, R, R}
5,409
1E-2
459.9
2.69
0.80
{256, 64, 128}
{t, R, R}
26,433
1E-3
564.9
3.46
0.98
{64, 512, 128}
{R, R, R}
99,457
1E-3
599.1
3.42
1.05
{256}
{t}
1,793
1E-2
5,401.2
42.45
9.43
Max. FlapM model
Layers
Activation
No. Params
LR
RMSE [kNm]
RRMSE [%]
NRMSE [%]
{64, 512, 32}
{R, R, R}
50,113
1E-2
463.9
1.31
0.70
{128, 128, 128}
{R, R, R}
33,921
1E-2
467.2
1.33
0.71
{512, 256}
{R, R}
134,657
1E-2
493,4
1.42
0.74
{128, 512}
{R, R}
67,329
1E-2
502.5
1.46
0.76
{512, 128
{t, R}
68,865
1E-2
516.5
1.57
0.78
{64, 512}
{R, R}
34,177
1E-2
532.9
1.56
0.81
{512, 16}
{t, R}
11,297
1E-2
552.3
1.77
0.83
{256, 64, 128}
{t, R, R}
26,433
1E-3
645.0
1.96
0.97
{512, 8}
{R, R}
7,185
1E-2
676.4
2.12
1.02
{16, 64, 64}
{R, R, R}
5,409
1E-2
691.5
2.05
1.04
{128, 512, 128}
{t, R, R}
132,609
1E-3
745.2
2.23
1.13
{64}
{t}
449
1E-2
11,546.6
47.33
17.45
Power model
Layers
Activation
No. Params
LR
RMSE [KW]
RRMSE [%]
NRMSE [%]
{128, 128, 128}
{R, R, R}
33,921
1E-2
31.1
1.46
0.28
{64, 512}
{R, R}
34,177
1E-2
33.7
2.10
0.31
{128, 512}
{R, R}
67,329
1E-2
33.9
2.00
0.31
{256, 64, 128}
{t, R, R}
26,433
1E-3
34.3
1.47
0.31
{512, 256}
{R, R}
134,657
1E-2
34.3
1.86
0.31
{16, 64, 64}
{R, R, R}
5,409
1E-2
35.8
1.21
0.33
{64, 512, 32}
{R, R, R}
50,113
1E-2
41.3
1.69
0.38
{128, 512, 128}
{t, R, R}
132,609
1E-3
41.4
1.68
0.38
{512, 128}
{t, R}
68,865
1E-2
44.1
1.52
0.40
{512, 16}
{t, R}
11,297
1E-2
46.0
1.68
0.42
{32, 512, 32}
{R, R, R}
33,537
1E-3
48.8
1.66
0.44
{256}
{t}
1,793
1E-2
139.8
7.03
1.27
Table 3.8: Presentation of the 10 out of 200 best performing models and the best performing model
using exclusively tanh activation functions from the keras tuner [82] random search as well as the baseline
model. The models are sorted based on best NRMSE/RMSE performance. R denotes ReLU, t denotes
tanh, No. Params is the number of tunable parameters and LR is learning rate. Pink shading indicates
the best performing model from the search, blue shading the baseline model and yellow shading the
exclusively tanh based architecture.
==PAGE:62==
52
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
(a) Predictions vs. Targets
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Power set-point [-]
2920
5511
8103
10695
13287
15879
18470
21062
23654
26246
28838
31430
(b) DEL FlapM in [kNm].
(c) Residuals with wind speed
(d) Residuals with TI
(e) Residuals with wind shear
(f) Residuals with air density
Figure 3.12: Evaluation of ANN DEL FlapM model performance. Residuals are shown as relative
variation and the fitted trend line is a 4th order polynomial. Contour plot shows response surface for
constant TI = 10%, α = 0.2 and ρ = 1.225 [kg/m3]
Response surfaces for the same wind conditions as those shown for the RF model in figure 3.10 are
plotted in figure 3.13 with the addition of the DEL FlapM response surface shown in figure 3.12b.
These plots indicate a very different behavior to that of the RF model, showing a smooth response
surface as indicated by the contours.
The predictions of power in figure 3.13b follow the expected
linear development with PSP in the constant power region above the PSP wind speed as indicated by
the equi-spaced contour lines. For the FlapM models plots, a curved line can be drawn approximately
following the PSP wind speeds which is associated with a maxima for the individual PSPs. While a
direct comparison to figures 2.10 & 2.11 cannot be justified due to the differences in TI, both response
surface show a general trend comparable to that presented in the figures.
Analogous to what was done for the RF model, table 3.9 presents the performance evaluation of the
chosen (baseline) model with respect to all considered sensors; the only difference being the evaluation
based on a 5-fold rather than 10-fold cross-validation. The Std_Pitch model is again the worst per-
==PAGE:63==
3.6 Surrogate model: Artificial Neural Network
53
forming but also the PitchM models show poor performance. The NRMSE for the remaining sensors
indicate good performance yet the RRMSE for DEL TBSS and ShaftMz suggests some error in the
output space of these particular models. A direct comparison between the performance of the ANN
and RF models is not justified due to the differences in input/output space and discretization level.
However, the error level is generally similar with the exception of the PitchM and DEL TBSS models
where the RF model shows lower errors.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Power set-point [-]
9390
12611
15833
19055
22277
25499
28720
31942
35164
38386
41608
44830
(a) Max. FlapM in [kNm].
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Power set-point [-]
150
1131
2113
3095
4077
5059
6040
7022
8004
8986
9968
10950
(b) Power in [kW].
Figure 3.13: Contour plots showing ANN model response surface for constant TI = 10%, α = 0.2, ρ
= 1.225 [kg/m3].
DEL median
Model
RMSE [kNm]
RRMSE [%]
NRMSE [%]
FlapM
333.3
1.90
0.58
EdgeM
151.9
0.77
0.65
PitchM
44.1
27.52
8.88
TBFA
802.7
2.97
0.58
TBSS
2130.2
10.74
1.42
ShaftMx
158.8
1.74
0.51
ShaftMz
60.9
7.60
1.58
95th quantile of loads
Model
RMSE [kNm]
RRMSE [%]
NRMSE [%]
FlapM
467.2
1.33
0.71
EdgeM
160.4
1.03
0.71
PitchM
42.5
22.02
6.23
TB
5523.5
2.65
1.33
ShaftMxy
775.5
2.70
1.12
ShaftMz
139.2
1.73
0.81
Power & Std_Pitch median
Model
RMSE [kNm] & [◦]
RRMSE [%]
NRMSE [%]
Power
31.1
1.46
0.28
Std_Pitch
0.55
3.71E29
11.47
Table 3.9: Summary of final ANN model performance for all considered quantities based on 5-fold
cross-validation.
==PAGE:64==
54
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
Interpolation
While the response surface plots in figures 3.13 & 3.12b indicated a smooth surface and thereby the
possibility to interpolate between PSPs a quantification of the expected errors associated with interpo-
lation is provided here. The quantification is made by performing a non-random train/test split of the
data removing one of the six discretized PSP levels from the training set i.e. a split ratio of approx-
imately 0.84/0.16, see figure 3.3 for PSP discretization. The model is then trained and subsequently
evaluated on the test set. This analysis is performed twice; once for DR08MW (PSP = 0.8) and once
for BO105MW (PSP = 1.05).
The prediction errors with respect to interpolation are shown in table 3.10 and visualized in figure
3.14 for the FlapM models. A figure including plots for power can be viewed in Appendix E figure
E.3. For BO105MW, the results indicate that the interpolating in PSP space is indeed possible and
not associated with an increase in error for the FlapM models, while the Power model a slight but
insubstantial increase in error. Furthermore, figures 3.14b & 3.14d confirms that no outliers are present.
The picture is slightly different for DR08MW, the errors for FlapM increasing substantially i.e. by a
factor of 2-3 comparing with table 3.9. The poorer model performance is clearly visible in figure 3.14a
and especially figure 3.14c. However, RRMSE stays below 4% and no outliers appear in the figures.
Opposite to the FlapM errors, the power prediction is marginally better for DR08MW but is largely
unaffected suggesting that interpolation in PSP space for power predictions is possible.
(a) DEL FlapM
(b) DEL FlapM
(c) Max. FlapM
(d) Max. FlapM
Figure 3.14: Evaluation of ANN model performance with respect to interpolation. Left: DR08MW,
Right: BO105MW
For BO105MW the distance to the nearest discretized PSP is 0.05 while the distance for DR08MW
is 0.2. As such, it is unsurprising that the model errors are larger for DR08MW. Furthermore, these
errors may be larger than the actual errors associated with interpolation in PSP space as the maximum
==PAGE:65==
3.7 Partial conclusion & Recommendations
55
interpolation distance using all six PSP levels is 0.1. This analysis includes only two cases yet two
different interpolation distances which may, without drawing decisive conclusions, be suggested as a
tentative bound on the expected error when interpolating a distance of 0.1 or less in PSP space.
DEL FlapM
Max. FlapM
Power
PSP
RMSE
RRMSE
NRMSE
RMSE
RRMSE
NRMSE
RMSE
RRMSE
NRMSE
[-]
[kNm]
[%]
[%]
[kNm]
[%]
[%]
[kW]
[%]
[%]
1.05
336.4
1.50
0.59
387.1
0.94
0.58
46.2
1.22
0.42
0.8
630.0
2.67
1.10
1301.2
3.74
1.97
44.9
1.15
0.41
Table 3.10: Model performance predicting unseen PSPs.
While this analysis of the errors associated with interpolation in PSP space is limited to just two cases
and may not be representative for the full PSP space, the results suggest a capability to interpolate
between PSPs in the ANN model associated with errors in the range presented in table 3.10. As such,
there is a motivation for constructing a surrogate model using a fully discretized PSP space with the
aim of reducing the model errors with respect to interpolation.
3.7
Partial conclusion & Recommendations
In this chapter, the design, development and evaluation of surrogate models predicting power, DELs
and Max. loads using two different ML techniques, namely a random forest and an artificial neural
network, has been documented.
Initially, the design of experiment was performed using conditional dependencies between the individ-
ual distributions of physical flow parameters in a variable hierarchy. This allowed a joint probability
distribution describing a variable space with a realistic representation of the physical variables to be
generated in which quasi-MC sampling using low-discrepancy sequences has been performed to acquire
the samples used in the surrogate model training. However, due to the limited number of control strat-
egy implementations, the PSP could not be included in the multivariate distributions space and was
discretized manually for the six available control strategies. Furthermore, a convergence study of the
sample statistics has been conducted quantifying the uncertainty for the different sensors. Based on
this analysis, a decision to run 120 simulations per sample point was made.
Secondly, a brief introduction to ML was provided, followed by the development of RF based surrogate
models capable of predicting power and loads based on U, TI and PSP. The number of regression trees
in the model was determined based on a convergence study and the model performance was evaluated
indicating low NRMSE in the range from 0.2 to 1.32% across all considered sensors but Std_Pitch.
However, the RF model was proven incapable of interpolating in PSP space showing flat plateaus in
the response surface and leading to the notion that obtaining gradients from an RF model might not
be realistic at all or at least require a very high discretization of the entire variable space.
Thirdly, an ANN model was developed predicting the same quantities yet based on additional inputs
of wind shear and air density.
A hyperparameter search was conducted investigating 200 different
model architectures for all three models, respectively. Based on this search, a single well-performing
architecture was chosen for all models defined by 3 hidden layers of 128 neurons based exclusively
on ReLU activation functions and using a learning rate of 1E-2. The performance evaluation showed
NRMSE errors in the range from 0.28 to 1.58% for all sensors but the PitchM and Std_Pitch sensors.
Furthermore, the ANN response surface was shown to be smooth making interpolation in PSP space
possible and a study quantifying the errors associated with interpolation was presented showing increases
in errors on load estimates yet within tolerable bounds.
==PAGE:66==
56
3 Surrogate Modelling of Loads & Power
While it was found that the RF model would not benefit from a larger dataset covering the 3-dimensional
space, no such conclusions can be drawn regarding the ANN and the 5-dimension variable space. The
5-dimensional space discretized using the same number of samples naturally results in a lower level of
discretization by comparison, why adding more training data may serve to improve the ANN perfor-
mance. The possibility of obtaining gradients from an ANN renders this surrogate modelling technique
more relevant from a gradient based optimization point of view while the RF model is only usable in
the case where exclusively the discretized PSPs are of interest. However, the RF model is far superior
in terms a training time and has been found to be a very robust approach in this application showing
no tendency to overfitting and requires no transformation of the training data. As such, the developed
models seem to have different pros and cons yielding no specific model preference in general terms.
Recommendation: Logarithmic scaling of DELs
For the DEL surrogate, the purpose of the prediction is to estimate the relative damage, see eq. (2.9),
which involves computation of M m
eq while the format of the samples in the database is Meq.
The
prediction of the surrogate model will undoubtedly contain some error.
ˆyi = yi + ϵi
(3.10)
Where ϵi is the absolute error associated with the i’th prediction. Note that the target, yi, i.e Meq,i,
notation is adopted for the remainder of this derivation. If the surrogate is trained to predict Meq, and
subsequently is put to the power of m, this implies, based on (3.10), that the error will be scaled as
ˆymi
i
= (Meq,i + ϵi)mi
(3.11)
As m for the considered components is a positive number with a value as high as 12, the error is highly
scaled using this approach. Alternatively, the model can predict M m
eq directly, resulting in
ˆyi = M mi
eq,i + ϵi
(3.12)
which effectively avoids scaling of the error when estimating damage. However, from an implementation
point of view, this requires mapping of the predicted DEL to its associated Wöhler exponent. To simplify
the implementation, m can be removed by use of the logarithmic power rule since
logb(M m
eq) = m logb(Meq)
(3.13)
where b is the logarithm base. This allows the surrogate predictions to be of form logb(Meq,i), thereby
treating all DEL target data in a consistent manner while the multiplication with mi can be performed
as a post processing step and M m
eq is readily obtained using the inverse logarithm as
M m
eq = bm logb(Meq)
(3.14)
and by extension the DEL is given by
Meq =
 M m
eq
1/m
(3.15)
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4
Site Presentation & Time
Series of Historical Data
In this chapter, the aim is to investigate the potential for the DTU10 MW to generate increased value
by operating the WT at different PSPs over time considering the specific wind conditions and price of
electricity at different points in time without affecting the expected lifetime of the WT. The developed
surrogate models will be used to predict loads and power production of the DTU10MW WT for two
specific sites both located in Denmark yet in different price regions.
The two sites of choice are named Vesternaes and Boevling, respectively. A rough indication of the site
locations are provided in figure 4.1. Regarding the motivation behind the choice of these two sites, the
developed surrogates predict the response of a WT placed onshore since neither monopile nor waves are
accounted for taking offshore locations off the list of potential sites. As a detailed study of potential
sites onshore fit for the erection of a large WT is out of scope in this work, the sites have been chosen
since large onshore WTs are already installed on these sites. Furthermore, the sites are chosen such
that both price regions of the Danish electricity grid are represented.
Figure 4.1: Overview indication of the two sites in Denmark: Boevling & Vesternaes, respectively.
North is up. Source: Google Maps
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Site Presentation & Time Series of Historical Data
The price regions in Denmark are DK1 and DK2, respectively. DK1 refers to the geographical region
west of Great Belt i.e everything west of Zealand while DK2 refers to Zealand and the islands i.e.
everything east of Great Belt [83]. While interconnection exists between the two grids and furthermore
between the regions and the surrounding countries, the price of electricity differs between the two regions
and is known to, occasionally, become negative e.g. during high winds due to the large production from
installed WTs [83].
4.1
Time series of historical data
The time series input to the analysis is historical data from two different sources. The price of electricity
is publicly available from Nord Pool [9] which is the leading power market in Europe covering Denmark
and all neighbouring countries.
The price data is available in no finer than hourly resolution and
only covers the years 2013 to present in this format. Going further back in time, the finest available
resolutions is on a monthly basis which is deemed too coarse for the defined objective.
The time series of wind conditions is generated using CorRES [24] introduced in section 1.2. The hourly
resolution of the price data matches with the available meteorological data from WRF [25] hence the
time series for the specific site can be generated based on the WRF data by linear interpolation in the 10
by 10 km grid. Notably, while the WRF data is available in hourly resolution, the quantities are based
on 10-minute statistics but are assumed to be representative of the wind conditions in the following
hour. The WRF simulation is a reanalysis of past weather based on boundary conditions specified by
the global atmospheric reanalysis European Reanalysis (ERA) Interim, see Dee et al. [84]. The WRF
data is available up to and including the year 2018.
Consequently, the combined dataset of wind conditions and price of electricity is limited to the years
2013 - 2018 i.e covering 6 years in total. As a correlation between wind resource and price of electricity
can be expected, no attempts have been made to extend the time series by reusing the limited amount
of price data for earlier years.
Derived quantities from WRF data
The extracted WRF data includes time series for the heights {50, 80, 100, 120, 150} [m] for wind speed,
wind direction and air density as well as height independent time series for Monin-Obukhov length
scale, temperature and friction velocity. As the hub height of the WT is 119.3 [m], the data for height
120 [m] is deemed representative of the wind conditions at hub height. In order to predict the WT
response using the developed surrogate models, some derived quantities must be estimated from the
WRF data, namely turbulence intensity and wind shear exponent. The latter is estimated from the
power law profile introduced by Davenport [85]
U(z) = U(zref)
 z
zref
α
(4.1)
The profile is fit to all 5 available heights with zref = 120 [m] in each time step, yielding the shear
exponent in a given hour. The turbulence intensity is computed using the approach described by Peña
et al. in [86] which includes validation against onshore measurements over flat, homogenous terrain
performed in Hovsøre, Denmark located close by the Boevling site. Here, the standard deviation of the
free stream flow, assumed constant over height, is estimated by
σu = Bu∗
(4.2)
==PAGE:69==
4.1 Time series of historical data
59
where u∗is the friction velocity and B is assumed to be constant B = 2.5 i.e independent of atmo-
spheric stability conditions as well as boundary layer height. Additionally, eq. (4.2) is assumed to be
representative of the hub height conditions. The turbulence intensity is then given by eq. (2.1).
Other options regarding derived quantities which have not been explored in this work includes the
opportunity to consider the turbulence length scale by estimating the Mann box turbulence length
scale based on the atmospheric stability conditions, i.e. from the Monin-Obukhov length, as suggested
by Peña in [23].
Additionally, the wind veer could be approximated across most of the rotor disc,
excluding the top part, from the wind direction time series at different heights. Inclusion of Mann box
turbulence length scale and wind veer in the variable space has already been successfully integrated in
similar surrogate models e.g. in the work by Dimitrov et al. [44].
Joining data from WRF and Nord Pool
As previously mentioned, a negative correlation between the wind resource and the price of electricity
is expected due to the large installed capacity of wind energy in Denmark. To assess this, the cross
correlation between these two time signals can be computed. The cross-correlation between two discrete
signals f and g is given by
(f ⋆g)[n] =
N−1
X
k=0
f[k]g[k + n]
(4.3)
where the overline indicates the complex conjugate, n is the time lag and the sum is performed over the
full length of the time series. The cross-correlation is computed based on the time signal with its own
mean subtracted i.e. the zero-mean signal of wind speed and price of electricity, respectively. The result
for both sites showing two different number of maximum time lags can be found in figure 4.2. Clearly,
the two time series are negatively correlated for both sites. Additionally, both cross-correlations exhibit
a peak at a time lag of 2 hours, giving rise to the question whether the time series are correctly aligned.
While the cross-correlation between the local site wind resource and regional electricity price has been
found, the regional price can only be expected to be maximally correlated to the regional rather than
the local wind resource. Both sites are situated at westerly locations near the coast line within their
respective price regions and are dominated by westerly winds, see figures 4.3a & 4.7a. As such, arriving
weather systems might change the wind conditions at these sites before the regional resource rises and
the electricity price decreases.
On the other hand, there are a number of reasons why the time series from WRF and the Nord Pool
price data could have become misaligned. As the data sets are from different sources, they have been
joined subsequently. The Nord Pool is based on historical records and can be assumed to be precise.
However, the data has been manually adjusted for local time changes i.e. daylight savings time in order
to match the time stamps of the two time series and eliminate time doublets. The WRF data consists
of 10-minute statistical quantities, which have been assumed to be representative of the coming hour
for which they are reported. Additionally, as described earlier, the WRF data is a reanalysis and a
time offset may originate from these sources. Due to these circumstances, it is assumed that the most
negative correlation should appear with zero time lag, why the time series of wind conditions and price
of electricity is readjusted with respect to each other to fulfil this i.e. by shifting one of the time series
by 2 hours. Since the WRF data covers further back in time, this time series is shifted forward such
that the covered time span remains unchanged. From an optimization point of view, aligning the time
series like this can be expected to reduce the potential for increasing revenue, as the electricity prices
will generally be lower when the wind resource is high.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Site Presentation & Time Series of Historical Data
48
36
24
12
0
12
24
36
48
Time lag [hours]
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Cross correlation
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time lag [hours]
0.34
0.32
0.30
0.28
0.26
(a) Cross correlation Vesternaes
48
36
24
12
0
12
24
36
48
Time lag [hours]
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
Cross correlation
10
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time lag [hours]
0.22
0.20
0.18
0.16
(b) Cross correlation Boevling
Figure 4.2: Normalized cross correlation between regional price of electricity and local wind resource
in a 48-hour (left) and 10-hour (right) lag window for the two sites.
4.2
Site description
In the following section, the two sites are presented. The site conditions are assessed and related to
the price of electricity. The primary aim of the assessment is to provide a preliminary analysis of the
suitability from an optimization point of view. Note that a detailed description is provided for the site
in Vesternaes while results for the site in Boevling are limited to a smaller number of key figures. This
is due to both sites showing similar overall trends. All figures included in the Vesternaes analysis which
are not reported for Boevling can be found in Appendix F figures F.1 through F.2.
Vesternaes
As indicated in figure 4.1, Vesternaes is located in the south-westernmost part of price region DK2,
more specifically on Lolland. The site is situated on the coast, the shore line running from north-west
to south-east as depicted in figure 4.3b. As can be seen on the satellite photo, the surrounding country
to the north and east of the site is primarily farm land. While no analysis of the terrain contours
have been carried out, the terrain around the site is assumed to be flat and homogeneous satisfying the
assumptions in the Mann turbulence model [18,19] and the validation measurements from [86] regarding
estimation of the turbulence intensity in eq. (4.2).
The wind rose at the Vesternaes site is shown in figure 4.3a, each sector covering 10 degrees. The site is
clearly dominated by westerly winds and the probability of the wind reaching above-rated wind speeds
is considerable which can also be seen on the aggregated site wind speed distribution shown in figure
4.6a. This characteristic is important with respect to the optimization purpose, as power boosting
is only possible at above-rated wind speeds. Considering the direction of the shore line, the wind is
predominantly coming from offshore.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Site description
61
E
N-E
N
N-W
W
S-W
S
S-E
1.0
2.1
3.1
4.1
5.2
Wind speed
[0 : 4)
[4 : 8)
[8 : 12)
[12 : 16)
[16 : 20)
[20 : 25)
[25 : inf)
(a) Wind rose with 36 sectors.
(b) Detailed site location, {lat,lon} = {54.774, 11.034}. North is
up. Source: Google Maps, accessed 2020-06-05.
Figure 4.3: Presentation of site: Vesternaes.
Figure 4.4: Full 6 year time series of wind speed and price of electricity at the Vesternaes site with
rolling mean trend lines using a monthly and yearly window.
The full time series covering all 6 years of wind speed and price of electricity are shown in figure 4.4
along with the rolling mean of each series with monthly and yearly windows, respectively. The wind
speed time series exhibit a recurring trend of high wind speeds during the winter months, occasionally
exceeding the operational range of the WT. This observation is reflected in the monthly rolling mean,
which indicates a consistent increase around the turn of the year. Looking at the boxplot in figure
4.5b, these seasonal variations are confirmed showing a higher median and a larger range of the inner
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Site Presentation & Time Series of Historical Data
quartiles in the winter months. Furthermore, the fall months are characterized by a large number of
outliers approaching wind speeds of 30 [m/s] which can likely be attributed to autumn storms while
the summer months exhibit the lowest median and inner quartile range of wind speeds. Going back to
figure 4.4, the yearly trend line is almost constant suggesting an unchanged overall wind resource at
the site across all years i.e. the potential for producing and selling electricity is not changing in time.
The price of electricity time series in figure 4.4 show less consistent patterns in the presented analysis
but indications of a daily pattern has been observed in a preliminary study, which could suggest a
correlation with a recurring, daily demand. As expected, negative prices are present yet rather rare i.e.
observed for a small number of days each year. On the other hand, positive spikes in electricity price
are more common and may be possible to exploit in an optimization. With respect to the yearly rolling
mean, a slightly decreasing trend seems to be visible centered around the year 2016. Additionally, the
general price of electricity seems to increase moderately in the last part of the time series. However,
these changes are deemed too small to have an influence on the prospect of running an optimization.
(a) Price of electricity development with wind speed.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Month
0
10
20
30
Electricity price [DKK/MWh]
(b) Boxplot of monthly wind speeds.
Figure 4.5: Trends in wind speed at Vesternaes site.
As already shown in the cross correlation analysis of the price of electricity and wind speed time series
shown in figure 4.2, a negative correlation exists between these two quantities. Expanding upon this
analysis, the price of electricity is plotted against the wind speed in figure 4.5a covering all 6 years of
time series. On top of the scatter plot, a binned mean line is shown with a bin width of 1 [m/s] covering
the range from 0 to 25 [m/s] where higher wind speeds have been left out due to the very limited data
in this region and the fact that the WT cut-out speed is exceeded. Based on the binned mean line, the
average price of electricity generally declines with increasing wind speed after the wind speeds reaches
approximately 5 [m/s], effectively cutting the mean price in half between 5 and 20 [m/s]. That the
mean price is almost constant for very low wind speeds, i.e. before or around cut-in for most WTs, and
declines with higher wind speeds further strengthens the result that the price of electricity is linked to
the wind resource.
Looking at the outlying individual points in figure 4.5a, very high prices seem to occur a lower wind
speeds only.
Conversely, negative prices appear only at higher wind speeds likely due to the full
consumption being covered by generation from WTs as reported in [83]. The general scatter indicates
that a range of prices may occur at any given wind speed yet with a declining upper bound for higher
wind speeds. This variation in the price leaves room for an optimization to exploit the possibility of
changing the operational strategy based on the current price as electricity produced at one point in
time can have many times the value of electricity produced at another. However, this possible gain in
revenue must be seen in light of the altered loads on the WT.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Site description
63
(a) Wind speed.
(b) Turbulence intensity.
(c) Wind shear exponent.
(d) Air density
Figure 4.6: Site specific variable distribution for Vesternaes in operational wind speed range.
In order to verify that the designed surrogate models cover the distribution of the flow parameters
used as model inputs, i.e. to avoid extrapolation, the site specific distribution of these parameters
at Vesternaes are plotted along with the surrogate variable space boundaries in figure 4.6. Only the
distributions inside the operational range of wind speeds for the WT are shown. Consequently, the
distribution of wind speeds shown in figure 4.6a is a comparison of distributions rather than variable
space where a Weibull distribution is clearly visible in the site specific observations. While wind speeds
outside the operational range of the WT are present in the time series, these wind speeds are not covered
by the surrogate as described in section 3.1 and must be dealt with separately to avoid extrapolation.
Considering the site-specific wind shear and air density in figure 4.6c and 4.6d, respectively, all points lie
within the boundaries with some margin. The air density distribution seems to be centered around the
standard atmospheric density yet assuming values in a range from approximately 1.13 to 1.35 [kg/m3].
The shear distribution also seems to be centered around the value 0.2 suggested as the reference value
in the design standard [22]. However, an almost straight line can be drawn as the lower bound of the
distribution above 10 [m/s]. A somewhat identical trend is visible for the distribution of turbulence
intensities in figure 4.6b, in this case for the upper bound, also becoming consistent above 10 [m/s].
This seems like an unlikely behaviour from a physical perspective, and sows some doubt regarding
the accuracy of the WRF data. As mentioned earlier, both Frehlich and Sharman [87] and Larsén et
al. [26] describes how variations in simulated wind conditions are smoothed due to spatial and temporal
averaging effect leading to a general underestimate of the short term variability in the wind conditions.
This may offer some explanation as to why more extreme wind conditions, e.g. very high turbulence or
shear, is absent in the site-specific data.
The only site-specific points in the time series violating the variable space definition is the turbulence
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Site Presentation & Time Series of Historical Data
intensity shown in figure 4.6b. Here, a number of points are situated beneath the lower bound on TI
of 2.5 [%]. However, that the atmospheric turbulence should drop below this limit seems unlikely and
is assumed to be a modelling error which can be attributed to the applied method for estimating the
turbulence intensity, see eq. (4.2). As such, the site-specific points outside the variable bounds are
redefined to have a TI of 2.5 [%] putting them inside the trustworthy prediction space of the surrogate
models.
Generally, it can be added that the site-specific points cover a small portion of the defined variable
space. This illustrates the trade-off between designing a general model capable of predicting in a large
variable space and span many sites and a more specialized, site specific model requiring far less samples
to discretize a smaller variable space, where the choice ultimately becomes a question of the overall
purpose of the designed models and the available computational resources.
Boevling
As indicated in figure 4.1, Boevling is located in western Jutland placing it in price region DK1. The
site is located with fjord on two sides, separating it from the north-south running shore line by a
couple of kilometres as can be seen in figure 4.7. The surrounding country is dominated by the fjords
and farmland. The site location is close by the WT test center in Hovsøre [88], where the terrain is
characterized as very flat and with a nearly unobstructed inflow of wind from the North Sea to the
west [23,86,88]. As such, analogous to the Vesternaes site, the terrain is deemed to adequately satisfy
the earlier model assumptions.
The wind rose for the Boevling site is shown in figure 4.7a, each sector covering 10 degrees of wind
direction. The wind is primarily westerly, yet with a relatively even distribution of wind directions
between northwest and southwest.
The probability of the wind blowing with 12 [m/s] or above is
considerable, enabling boosting of the WT. As was also the case for the Vesternaes site, the wind is
primarily coming from offshore.
E
N-E
N
N-W
W
S-W
S
S-E
0.9
1.8
2.8
3.7
4.6
Wind speed
[0 : 4)
[4 : 8)
[8 : 12)
[12 : 16)
[16 : 20)
[20 : 25)
[25 : inf)
(a) Wind rose with 36 sectors
(b) Detailed site location, {lat,lon} = {56.418, 8.181}. North is
up. Source: Google Maps, accessed 2020-06-05.
Figure 4.7: Presentation of site: Boevling.
The overall conclusions with respect to the seasonal variations in wind speed are the same for Boevling as
for Vesternaes, see the boxplot in figure 4.8b. Some small differences are visible in figure 4.8a compared
to figure 4.5a while the main trends regarding the shape of the scatter and the binned mean are similar.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Site description
65
Notably, negative electricity prices seem to appear at lower wind speeds and high price outliers are less
frequent. Note that a couple of points are excluded from the plot in 4.8a, where the price of electricity
in DK1 reached approximately 15000 [DKK/MWh] for four hours on date 2013-06-07. Additionally,
wind speeds above 25 [m/s] are observed more often suggesting a slightly larger wind resource compared
to Vesternaes, see Appendix F figures F.1 and F.2a. Regarding the site-specific distribution of wind
conditions, the overall conclusions are the same as for Vesternaes except for the turbulence intensities
which are generally higher at the Boevling site, see figure F.2.
(a) Price of electricity development with wind speed.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Month
0
10
20
30
Wind speed [m/s]
(b) Boxplot of monthly wind speeds.
Figure 4.8: Trends in wind speed at Boevling site.
Site-specific predictions
When running the optimization, one of the components will be a prediction of the potential for gen-
erating value in any given hour based on the control strategy and wind conditions. In figure 4.9, the
hourly revenue generated by the WT over six days in December 2018 operating at PSPs 0.8, 1.0 and
1.1, respectively, is shown. Clear variations are present in the potential to generate value due to the
hourly wind conditions and price of electricity. Furthermore, the potential hourly revenue across con-
trol strategies alternates between being the same and and showing a clear difference. Note that the
WT has been assumed to stop operating if the price of electricity is negative i.e. no negative revenue is
generated. The difference in potential is then present when the wind conditions allow operation above
the PSP of the respective control strategies and the price of electricity is positive. The potential to
generate value, in general and across control strategies, will then be scaled by the price of electricity
in the given hour. Conversely, the potential across PSPs is collapsed to a single line if an electricity
production of more than 8 [MW] is not achievable. In addition to being collapsed, the potential will be
zero if the wind speed is outside the operational range or when the price is zero or negative.
Dec 26
Dec 27
Dec 28
Dec 29
Dec 30
Dec 31
Jan 01
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Hourly revenue [DKK]
DR08MW
BO11MW
NO10MW
Figure 4.9: Hourly revenue at Vesternaes for three different PSPs in December 2018. Vertical gridlines
indicate the transition to the associated date. The predictions of power production are based on the
Random Forest surrogate model.
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Site Presentation & Time Series of Historical Data
From an optimization perspective, only the time intervals showing a difference in potential are of interest,
as the WT operating strategy is otherwise the same. Based on figure 4.9 alone, such intervals seem to
last for a varying amount of time while the nighttime potential generally seems smaller, likely due to
a reduced demand. Furthermore, intervals showing difference in potential cover a considerable amount
of the time series, leaving space for an optimization to try increasing the generated value by altering
the control strategy on an hourly basis.
4.3
Partial conclusion
In the above section, an assessment of of two sites located in Vesternaes and Boevling, respectively, has
been presented. Furthermore, the site specific conditions in terms of both price of electricity and wind
conditions over 6 years of historical data in hourly resolution has been analysed.
The turbulence intensity and wind shear were derived based on the available wind condition parameters.
A brief presentation of the local sites and the surrounding terrain has been provided while the directional
and seasonal variations in the available wind resource has been documented for both sites.
A negative correlation between the wind speed and the price of electricity has been identified. Based
on the analysis of the cross correlation, the two time series of electricity price and wind conditions,
respectively, have been shifted by 2 hours with respect to each other. The time shift was performed
based on the assumption that the maximum negative correlation should appear with zero time lag and
has been hypothesized to reduce the potential for increased generation of value at the sites i.e. adding
conservatism to the results obtained from a future optimization scheme.
It has been established that the site specific conditions, save for a few observations, lie within the
covered variable space of the developed surrogate models and satisfy the underlying assumptions in
e.g. the turbulence model. However, the turbulence intensity and wind shear distributions indicate
an almost linear upper bound, for the former, and lower bound, for the latter, at higher wind speeds.
Furthermore, it has been shown that the wind resource at both of the presented sites is sufficient to
permit boosted operation of the WT relatively often, making room for an optimization to explore the
possibilities of increasing the generated value. However, the resulting loads have not been addressed
and will have to be taken into account in order to constrain the optimization.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Optimization
In this section, a number of simplified approaches are taken towards solving the optimization problem
under the conditions at the presented sites. However, these approaches should be viewed as an initial
investigation and discussion of the possible solutions strategies.
This optimization problem consists of three different elements, more specifically the objective, con-
straints and design variables. The objective function models the quantity to be maximized or minimized
with respect to the design variable(s). However, the solution to the objective function is subject to a
number of conditions which must be satisfied. The constraints specify some of these conditions and are
also functions of the design variable(s). Lastly, the design variable(s) are bounded in a certain range,
effectively restricting the search space of the optimization.
Applying this to the present problem, an objective function must be identified. The Net Present Value
(NPV) has earlier been identified as a viable model for estimating the value of long term projects, as
the model takes the time value of money into account. It is given by
NPV =
n
X
t=1
FVt(PSPt)
(1 + i)t
(5.1)
where FVt is the future value or net cash flow for a period t, i is the discount rate and n is the number
of time periods. The constraints for the problem are chosen with the aim of ensuring an unchanged
life span of the WT. Therefore, the first constraint specifies that the fatigue damage on the structure
cannot exceed the reference value i.e. the fatigue damage associated with normal operation, which
the WT can be assumed designed to withstand. The second constraint specifies that the maximum
loading experienced by the structure cannot exceed critical threshold values. Fulfilling this constraint
effectively requires some room for increased maximum loads within the structural design envelope
during boosted compared to normal operation, as higher maximum loads are inevitable when boosting
the WT. Both objective and constraints are functions of the operational strategy specified by the PSP
i.e. the optimization problem has a single design variable. However, the PSP may vary in time and
can be represented as a vector specifying the operational strategy for each time period included in the
optimization. Additionally, the PSP is bounded such that only operational strategies deemed physically
feasible are explored. The constrained optimization problem can then be formally stated as
max:
PSP
NPV(PSP) =
n
X
t=1
FVt(PSPt)
(1 + i)t
s.t:
Dlife(PSP) ≤Dlife(PSP = 1)
Mmax(PSP) ≤threshold
0.4 ≤PSP ≤1.1
where bold font indicates a vector i.e.
Dlife contains the fatigue damage and Mmax contains the
maximum loading of all considered sensors which, on element-wise basis, must satisfy the constraints
for a given set of PSPs specifying the control strategy for all time periods. While the PSP is the design
variable, both the objective and the constraint functions are not uniquely defined by this parameter
==PAGE:78==
68
5 Optimization
alone, as these quantities also depend on the wind conditions in a given time period. Additionally, the
objective function also depends on the given price of electricity since the incoming cash flow is simply
the selling price per unit electricity times the number of sold units. The objective function dependency
on wind speed is clearly visible by inspecting figure 1.1 showing the influence of the wind speed on the
potential power production, and thereby on the generated value.
The above optimization problem is not easily solved using a formal optimization approach, as the
number of design variables is equal to the number of hours in the time series. In the present case, this
results in more than 50,000 design variables. Since the time frame of the thesis is limited, a simplified
problem is formulated for the further analysis, which is more easily investigated using simple method.
Here, the revenue, R, is adopted as the objective function and the constraint on maximum loads is not
considered yielding
max:
PSP
R(PSP) =
n
X
t
Rt(PSPt)
s.t:
Dlife(PSP) ≤Dlife(PSP = 1)
0.4 ≤PSP ≤1.1
where Rt is the revenue for time period t. Using revenue as the objective function means that the time
value of money is no longer included. Furthermore, it has the implication that the negative cash flows
stemming from the capital and operational expenditures are not included leaving only positive cash
flows from electricity production. As the fatigue damage on the WT is constrained, the operational
expenditures are assumed not to vary based on the chosen control strategy. The capital expenditures
are also assumed constant meaning that the solution identified in the optimization does not depend
on the negative cash flow as it is a constant quantity. However, when analyzing the relative change in
revenue, this quantity should not be mistaken for net income since
Roptimized
Rnormal
̸= Roptimized −C
Rnormal −C
(5.2)
where C is the total cost. This means that the relative comparison of revenue will show a smaller
percent-wise change than a comparison including costs and the reported results should be viewed in
the light of this. For the same reason, the revenue increase is reported as both relative and absolute
quantities. Going back to the fatigue damage constraint, it is easily reformulated in terms of relative
damage as
Drel =
Dlife(PSP)
Dlife(PSP = 1) ≤1
(5.3)
which is practical since it allows the fatigue damage constraint to be evaluated based on eq. (2.9).
Before any attempts are made towards solving the optimization problem, a number of assumptions
regarding the time series, models and the electricity market are made:
• Assumption 1: Perfect knowledge about the electricity price and wind conditions is assumed.
• Assumption 2: The surrogate model predictions are assumed to be true i.e. the documented
uncertainties are not taken into account.
• Assumption 3: Actions as an individual producer are assumed not to influence the market price
of electricity
• Assumption 4: The selling price of the produced electricity is the market price i.e. no subsidy
agreement applies.
==PAGE:79==
5 Optimization
69
• Assumption 5: Changing from one PSP to another happens instantaneously and the transitions
are assumed negligible.
• Assumption 6: The parked state of the WT can be neglected and the fatigue damage contribution
set to zero.
• Assumption 7: For the obtained results to be applicable in a future scenario, an assumption of
stationarity in price vs. wind conditions is required.
in addition to these assumptions, a number of conditions for the WT operation are listed below:
• The WT does not operate if the electricity price is zero or below.
• The WT does not operate in a full time period, if the mean wind speed is outside the operational
wind speed range of [4, 25] [m/s].
• In the wind speed range [4, 7.5] [m/s], the operational strategies are all the same and the strategy
defaults to normal operation.
No transitions between operational states are modelled in the framework of this thesis. Based on the
literature review, e.g. in the work by Deshpande and Peters [31], Mirzaei et al. [32] and Odgaard et
al. [35], it was found that smooth transitions between both derated and boosted operation is achievable.
However, changing between PSPs without an associated loss of power production or alteration in the
loads is questionable and remains a topic open for investigation.
From a modelling point of view, the time periods with wind speeds outside the operational range
represents a challenge. While the WT is parked, some forcing will still be present which cannot be
predicted by the developed models, as they cover only the operational range. However, the forcing
will be independent of control strategy. As the fatigue analysis is based on the Palmgren-Miner rule
of linear damage [54], shown in eq. (2.2), the same logic as for the relative increase in revenue, see
eq. (5.2), applies here. More specifically, a number of positive damage terms of unknown but equal
magnitude will be missing from the relative damage computation. As the terms are of equal magnitude,
it follows that the real relative damage will be closer to one than the computed. This circumstance
does not change the possible solution space for the optimization but merely means that care should be
taken when assessing the exact relative damage value. No attempt has been made to model the DELs
in parked mode and they are simply assumed to be zero.
In terms of quantifying the deviation in the relative damage, it can be noted that it is likely higher for
some load channels than others. For example, when the WT is parked, the main shaft torque DEL is
likely very small in the absence of a mean torque and without rotation. The same goes for the blade
DELs assuming that the blades are pitched to minimize the aerodynamic forcing. On the other hand,
the tower bottom DELs may be considerable in the absence of aerodynamic damping from the rotor
e.g. during storms.
In the following assessment of the solution strategies to the formulated optimization problem only
the fatigue damage from load channels main shaft torque (ShaftMz) and blade flapwise (FlapM) are
considered. This is done in order to simplify the problem further based on a philosophy of starting simple
and subsequently adding complexity in steps. The choice of the ShaftMz and FlapM is partly based
on the analysis given in chapter 2 which shows a high sensitivity of the shaft torque to the operational
strategy. In addition to this, it is desired to represent both steel and fiber composite components in
the investigation as the large difference in Wöhler exponent has an impact on the fatigue damage, see
figure 2.8, why FlapM is also included.
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Optimization
5.1
Choice hierarchy approach
The initial approach towards investigating the potential to increase the generated revenue from a
DTU10MW WT situated as the described sites in Vesternaes and Boevling, respectively, is described
here. In this approach, the WT is allowed to operate only at the six different presented PSPs. This
allows the developed surrogate model based on Random Forest regression to be used as no predictions
for intermediate PSPs are required. In order to set the upper bar for the potential increase in revenue,
the change in revenue if the WT is operated as the maximum boost capacity of PSP = 1.1 throughout
the entire six years of time series at each site is reported in table 5.1.
Site
Vesternaes
Boevling
Revenue baseline [DKK]
62,920,176
62,003,758
Revenue increase [DKK]
2,799,159
2,803,130
Revenue increase [%]
4.47
4.52
Drel FlapM [-]
1.42
1.47
Drel ShaftMz [-]
2.09
2.09
Table 5.1: Upper bound for increasing revenue at the sites and corresponding relative damage for
selected sensors. Calculated by operating at maximum boost, PSP = 1.1, throughout all 6 years of time
series. The baseline corresponds to normal operation.
As reported in table 5.1, a significant and almost identical increase in revenue is found for both sites.
However, running the WT at PSP = 1.1 permanently is clearly not feasible from a fatigue perspective
as evident from the reported increase in relative damage of which the shaft torque appears to be most
problematic.
The choice of control strategy is performed based on an assessment of the potential gain or loss in
revenue and the associated change in fatigue damage for each of the available PSPs in a given time step
i.e. the fatigue damage history is not considered. The choice is made in a hierarchical fashion evaluating
first the potential for boosting and subsequently for derating. As such, several of the possible PSPs may
satisfy their respective conditions and the hierarchy will then define the operational strategy of choice.
If neither boosting or derating is chosen, the operational strategy will default to normal operation. The
conditions for choosing one PSP or the other are manually tuned for each site, such that the fatigue
damage constraint for the full time series is satisfied. The hierarchy and choice conditions are presented
in table 5.2. The hierarchy runs from left to right and the first choice satisfying the listed condition
will be chosen. Notably, In addition to hierarchy described in the table, the WT will always choose
a boosted operation strategy if it increases the revenue, regardless of how much, without resulting in
increased fatigue damage on any of the considered load channels. Arguably, this approach is a case of
specifying controller settings rather than an actual optimization, yet the results are no less interesting
and serves to prove the potential that a more advanced approach might explore further.
As indicated in table 5.2, four different sets of choice parameters have been tuned; two sets for each
site corresponding to two different case studies. Case one designates the most simple approach taking
only revenue change and relative damage for the blade flapwise load sensor into account. The relative
damage, Drel,t is here denoted with t indicating that it corresponds to the specific time step not taking
prior or future fatigue damage into account. Case two also takes the fatigue damage from the shaft
torque into account. The conditions on fatigue damage for derated operation are imposed to ensure
that derating, and thereby losing some revenue, should only by considered if the reduction in fatigue
damage will allow boosted operation at another point in time.
Manually tuning the choice conditions is a rather cumbersome task, and the specific conditions in table
5.2 leave room for improvement. However, from a computational point of view, this approach is feasible
as the potential revenue and relative damage for all time periods and operational strategies can be
==PAGE:81==
5.1 Choice hierarchy approach
71
efficiently pre-computed using the surrogate models and only requires one choice per time step i.e. one
iteration through the entire time series containing 52584 time periods, which is achievable in ≈5-10
minutes on an ordinary laptop.
An additional speed increase could be achieved by vectorizing the
decision process which is possible since the specific choices are independent of each other.
To give an example of the described strategy, a given time step of an hour with a specific set of wind
conditions and price of electricity is considered for Vesternaes 1. Note that the evaluation of choices
is terminated when a choice satisfying the specified conditions is located. Initially, the prospect of
choosing a PSP of 1.1 is evaluated requiring an increase in revenue for the specific hour compared to
normal operation of 245 [DKK] or an arbitrary increase in revenue if this choice of PSP is not associated
with an increase in fatigue damage for FlapM. If this choice does not satisfy the conditions, the same
evaluation is performed for a PSP of 1.05, the only difference being the required revenue increase of 85
[DKK]. Next, the prospect of derating the turbine to PSP = 0.4 in considered, requiring both that the
loss of revenue be less than 300 [DKK] and that the relative fatigue damage is less than 0.1. In the
same manner, a PSP of 0.6 and then 0.8 is evaluated, requiring a loss of revenue less than 380 and 265
[DKK] and relative fatigue damage less than 0.15 and 1.0, respectively. If the conditions for neither
boosting nor derating the WT are present, the operational strategy defaults to normal operation.
Vesternaes 1
Criterion
BO11MW
BO105MW
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
NO10MW
Rev. change [DKK]
> 245
> 85
> -300
> -380
> -265
-
Drel,t FlapM [-]
-
-
< 0.1
< 0.15
< 1.0
-
Boevling 1
Rev. change [DKK]
> 220
> 58
> -300
> -380
> -255
-
Drel,t FlapM [-]
-
-
< 0.1
< 0.15
< 1.0
-
Vesternaes 2
Rev. change [DKK]
> 250
> 90
> -300
> -380
> -265
-
Drel,t FlapM [-]
-
-
< 0.1
< 0.15
< 1.0
-
Drel,t ShaftMz [-]
-
-
< 0.1
< 0.15
< 1.0
-
Boevling 2
Rev. change [DKK]
> 232
> 80
> -300
> -380
> -265
-
Drel,t FlapM [-]
-
-
< 0.1
< 0.15
< 1.0
-
Drel,t ShaftMz [-]
-
-
< 0.1
< 0.15
< 1.0
-
Table 5.2: Choice conditions and hierarchy. The choice hierarchy goes from left to right.
Regarding the selection of choice hierarchy in this approach, it can be noted that the most extreme
version of the possible control strategies is evaluated first. This is no coincidence, as it allows harder
conditions for these choices and softer conditions for less extreme PSPs. An example from Vesternaes 2
in table 5.2 is conditions for boosting the WT. If the wind conditions for a given hour are good, a PSP
of 1.1 will result in production of approximately one additional MWh compared to a PSP of 1.0, while
a PSP of 1.05 will result in half of that. As such, the choice of BO11MW requires an electricity price
of at least 250 [DKK], while BO105MW requires a price of 180 [DKK].
A time series from the Vesternaes 2 site covering six days in December 2018 is shown in figure 5.1 as a
means of presenting one of the identified solutions with more detail, and to verify the implementation of
the choice hierarchy approach. The color coding of the marker specifies the chosen operational strategy
for the hour. Note that the choice of PSP governs the shape of the hourly revenue and relative damage
==PAGE:82==
72
5 Optimization
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Hourly revenue [DKK]
5
10
15
Wind speed [m/s]
0
200
400
Electricity price [DKK/MWh]
BO105MW
BO11MW
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
NO10MW
0
1
2
Rel. damage FlapM [-]
Dec 26
Dec 27
Dec 28
Dec 29
Dec 30
Dec 31
Jan 01
0
1
2
3
Rel. damage ShaftMz [-]
Figure 5.1: Results for Vesternaes 2 in December 2018 based on the choice hierarchy approach showing
the selected operational strategy on hourly basis. No points are shown if the WT is not operating but
the full time series is indicated by the dashed line. Vertical gridlines indicate the transition to the
associated date.
==PAGE:83==
5.1 Choice hierarchy approach
73
curves, while the wind speed and price points are merely included to provide insights as to why a
particular PSP has been chosen. While relating the specific choices of hourly operational strategy back
to the scheme presented in table 5.2 is left to the reader, the overall impression is that the scheme works
as desired. Some of reasons are listed below.
• Boosted operation seems to be chosen when the price of electricity and wind resource allows for
an increased revenue.
• Hard derating to DR04MW or DR06MW appears only for very low but positive prices.
• DR08MW is chosen for a specific wind speed range just below the rated wind speed where the
difference to normal operation in terms of power production is likely small.
• Normal operation is clearly the default strategy, being chosen for intermediate price conditions
and is consistently the chosen operational strategy below the minimum wind speed condition of
7.5 [m/s].
• Derated operation is always associated with a decrease in fatigue damage and generally satisfies
the prescribed conditions.
Comparing the relative fatigue damage time series, the observed change in fatigue damage with opera-
tional strategy is larger for ShaftMz than FlapM. This aligns well with the results reported in figures
2.7 & 2.8, which indicated a very high sensitivity of ShaftMz to the PSP. Note that the seemingly very
high relative fatigue damage associated with boosting can in fact be countered by the more modest
decreases associated with derating as the aggregation of the DELs from each time step is not linear as
specified in eq. (2.7).
Based on the chosen operational strategy or PSP history for the time series in figure 5.1, some adjust-
ments to the choice conditions which could be interesting come to mind. A harder fatigue damage
condition for picking DR08MW could be tested, as the current condition of Drel,t < 1.0 does not
ensure that fatigue damage is saved on a level which allows boosting of the WT at another point in
time. Especially for FlapM, the choice of DR08MW does not seem to save much fatigue damage in
the provided time series. Regarding the specified conditions for parking the WT, an adjustment of the
lower price limit for operation could seem in place, as the generated revenues for hours with very low
but positive electricity price may not be worth the associated fatigue damage. However, adjustments
of the number of parked hours is not reflected as saved fatigue damage i.e. the saved fatigue damage
would not be accounted for within the framework presented in this report, as it requires evaluation of
the actual fatigue damage, taking additional material specific properties into account, rather than the
relative fatigue damage.
The results from applying the described operational strategy selection scheme with the conditions
outlined in table 5.2 on the time series for Vesternaes and Boevling cases 1 and 2 are shown in table 5.3.
As expected, in order to satisfy the fatigue damage constraints, the increased revenue is reduced for all
cases e.g. the revenue increase is slightly more than halved for the Boevling 1 case compared to the
upper bar values presented in table 5.1. However, an increased revenue of 1.70 and 2.15 % for Vesternaes
1 and Boevling 1, respectively, is still significant. A quick study has been conducted, verifying that the
sources of increase in revenue are distributed over all six years i.e. does not originate from a specific
period of time with e.g. very high prices. Notably, a considerable amount of time is spent in parked
mode at both sites amounting to approximately 10% of the time. Based on the presented site conditions
e.g. in figure 4.5a & 4.8a, the parked mode mainly occurs due to the wind speed dropping below the
cut-in of 4 [m/s]. A quick investigation of the Boevling site time series reveals that the electricity price
is either zero or less for 335 hours while the wind speed exceeds 25 [m/s] during only 82 hours over all
six years. Assuming that the fatigue damage associated with parked mode at low wind speeds is small,
this suggests that the earlier described error in the relative damage computation is also small.
==PAGE:84==
74
5 Optimization
Site & Case
Vesternaes 1
Boevling 1
Vesternaes 2
Boevling 2
Revenue increase [DKK]
1,071,490
1,333,914
492,983
271,208
Revenue increase [%]
1.70
2.15
0.78
0.44
Drel FlapM [-]
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.92
Drel ShaftMz [-]
Not considered
Not considered
1.00
1.00
BO11MW [Hours]
17,134
17,160
2,692
3,130
BO105MW [Hours]
6,787
8,183
5,288
5,788
NO10MW [Hours]
18.671
16,793
30,472
27,548
DR08MW [Hours]
2,550
3,135
6,848
8,990
DR06MW [Hours]
921
1,237
492
730
DR04MW [Hours]
485
757
756
1,079
Parked [Hours]
6,036
5,319
6,036
5,319
Table 5.3: Result of the choice hierarchy method for all cases and sites covering the full six year time
series.
For case 1, a significant amount of hours is spent in BO11MW. The found solutions specifies approxi-
mately the same number of hours of operation in BO11MW as in NO10MW. Performing an investigation
of this into the Boevling 1 case, this can be attributed to predictions of lower fatigue damage and higher
revenue associated with BO11MW which primarily occur in the 9 to 11.5 [m/s] wind speed range. In
the Boevling 1 case, this accounts for 13,025 of the 17,160 hours spent in BO11MW providing 252,373
[DKK] in revenue increase i.e. 19 % of the total revenue increase. While a detailed analysis of this
behavior in the predictions has not been carried out, such a trend may seem odd from a physical per-
spective and give rise to some doubt regarding the model predictions. However, a reduction in the
FlapM fatigue damage for wind speeds of 10 [m/s] was predicted already in 2.7b, suggesting that the
aeroelastic simulations prescribe this behavior and it cannot be attributed to the surrogate model. A
possible cause could be the differences in the control strategy described in table 2.4 which proved to
alter the steady response curves for the boosted operation slightly e.g. the mean thrust was observed to
be somewhat smaller in the constant TSR region compared to NO10MW, see figure 2.2, which will at
least have an effect due to the mean correction of the DELs, see eq. (2.5). This suggest that there might
be room for improvement on the WT controller side when it comes to controlling the structural loads
but requires an in depth analysis. Consequently, it seem that boosted operation may not necessarily
be associated with increased fatigue damage for some wind conditions. This notion is reinforced by the
boosting programmes offered by Vestas [36] and Siemens-Gamesa [37], which promise increased power
production without affecting WT life time if the site conditions are right.
Focusing on the differences between Vesternaes and Boevling case 1, a significantly higher increase in
revenue is achieved in Boevling despite the almost identical upper bound potential reported in table 5.1.
Considering the distribution of operational strategies, the amount of time spend parked in Boevling
is considerably lower which can be attributed to the reported slightly higher wind resource at this
site. However, this circumstance cannot explain why a lower relative increase in revenue is found at
Vesternaes 1. While the number of hours spent in BO11MW is almost identical for the two sites, this is
not so for the remainder of operational strategies. For Vesternaes 1, more time is spent in NO10MW and
less in every other operational strategy compared to Boevling 1. This could indicate that an alteration
of the choice conditions specifying softer conditions for both boosting and derating might improve the
performance at Vesternaes 1 but may also indicate that the conditions for boosting without affecting
the fatigue damage on FlapM are simply superior at Boevling 1.
Moving on to the case 2 results in table 5.3, the revenue increase is further reduced when accounting
for shaft torque fatigue damage resulting in an increase of 0.78 and 0.44 % for Vesternaes and Boevling,
respectively. While this is only a fraction of the upper bound values presented in table 5.1, an increase
is still achieved. As the choice hierarchy is rather simple, a more sophisticated approach will likely
be able to improve on these results and suggests that the basic idea behind the optimization has real
==PAGE:85==
5.2 Monte-Carlo approach
75
potential. Vesternaes 2 spends more time in normal operation and less time in every other operational
strategy than Boevling 2 as was also the case comparing case 1. Looking at the choice conditions in
table 5.2, the conditions for boosting are harder in the Vesternaes 2 case. Vice versa to what was
suggested for case 1, this could indicate that a rebalancing of the choice conditions for Boevling 2 might
allow a higher increase in revenue. However, the wind conditions at the sites are not the same. As
noted in the site presentation, the turbulence intensity at Boevling is generally slightly higher. A short
study, albeit informal, indicated that the shaft torque DEL is very sensitive to the turbulence intensity,
see Appendix E figure E.4. Hence, a balancing of the fatigue damage FlapM and ShaftMz may not be
feasible with the aim of increasing revenue based on this approach. Additionally, it can be added that
obtaining a higher revenue with a decrease in fatigue damage may be an interesting prospect from a
WT designer perspective, in this case suggesting a possibility for lowering the blade structural design
requirements and thereby cutting costs. However, as mentioned earlier, conclusions regarding the exact
non-zero fatigue budget should be made with care due to the absence of contribution from the parked
DELs in the computations. Additionally, while the Max. loads are not analysed here, they are expected
to rise based on the findings in the WT characterization e.g. figures 2.9 & 2.11
Vesternaes baseline
Dataset
Corrected
Uncorrected
Revenue baseline [DKK]
62,920,176
63,046,917
Revenue increase [DKK]
2,799,159
2,811,251
Revenue increase [%]
4.47
4.46
Vesternaes 1
Revenue increase [DKK]
1,071,490
1,095,111
Revenue increase [%]
1.70
1.74
Table 5.4: Comparison of the upper bound at Vesternaes potential and results for the Vesternaes 1
case between the time offset corrected and uncorrected time series. The relative fatigue damage has
been excluded as the results are identical.
In section 4.1, an assumption regarding the expected cross correlation between the electricity price
and local wind speed was introduced and the Nord Pool and WRF time series were shifted by 2 hours
with respect to each other. Furthermore, this shift was hypothesized to reduce the obtainable revenue
increase. To investigate this in more detail, a comparison of the results based on the corrected and
uncorrected datasets is presented in table 5.4. Apart from the baseline, only Vesternaes 1 is included
since the same choice hierarchy conditions were found to be applicable here, see table 5.2. Based on the
comparison, the uncorrected case shows slightly higher numbers in absolute terms, suggesting that the
hypothesis still stand. However, these numbers are generally of almost equal magnitude and the effect
of introducing the time offset or leaving it out seems negligible in the overall context.
As a general comment to the approach presented here, the manual tuning process is cumbersome, and
becomes increasingly time consuming when additional fatigue damage sensors are added. Additionally,
the resulting increase in revenue is expected to decrease further in that case, at least without extending
of rethinking the choice hierarchy. This calls for more sophisticated methods, which are able to impose
the global fatigue constraint and ideally allow the sensor-wise fatigue accounts independence.
5.2
Monte-Carlo approach
This approach is based on Monte-Carlo sampling of PSP values based on a predefined distribution,
somewhat analogous to the methodology used in the surrogate model Design of Experiment described
in section 3.1. In this approach, the time series is divided into smaller chunks, and a large number of
different PSP trajectories are tested for each chunk, where a PSP trajectory refers to a specification
of the PSP in each time step for the entire chunk. In this presentation, a time window or chunk size
==PAGE:86==
76
5 Optimization
of 24 hours is assumed for simplicity. The division into smaller chunks is performed to make testing
a large number of PSP trajectories computationally feasible and increase the probability of finding an
optimal solution based on (near) random Latin Hypercube sampling described by McKay et al. [73].
This sampling aims to ensure an even coverage of the variable space and is performed by drawing 24
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) PSPs from the distribution space making up one sample.
In this case, the distribution space can be defined as a uniform distribution covering the possible PSPs
i.e. from 0.4 to 1.1. This requires a surrogate model capable of describing the full PSP space i.e. the
developed ANN model is a better choice than the Random Forest in this application due to the plateaus
in the PSP dimension observed for the latter and reported in section 3.5.
An example of possible PSP trajectories are shown in figure 5.2, showing very erratic paths, along with
the distribution boundary. As neither wind conditions nor electricity price is taken into account when
generating the PSP trajectories, a large number of trajectories must be tested to encounter more optimal
solutions. From among the solutions resulting in an increased revenue for the specific chunk, the most
optimal solution which satisfies the fatigue damage constraints can be selected. From a computational
point of view, dividing the full time series into into smaller chunks and solving the optimization problem
for each of these has the advantage of splitting the problem into a large number of independent sub
problems which can easily be distributed on a large number of cores. Notably, the roughly mirrored
behavior of the two PSP trajectories observed in figure 5.2 can be attributed to Latin Hypercube
sampling approach evenly filling out the variable space using only 2 sample draws.
0
4
8
12
16
20
23
Hour of the day
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Power set-point
Sample 1
Sample 2
Boundary
Figure 5.2: Example of Monte-Carlo PSP trajectories drawn based on Latin Hypercube sampling of
24 uniform i.i.d. variables.
The approach described above has been implemented and tested with 2000 trials of different trajectories
considering fatigue damage for both FlapM and ShaftMz. The preliminary results have shown that the
revenue increases generated are very small i.e.
negligible compared to the baseline revenue.
One
explanation of this could be that the electricity prices do not vary sufficiently over the course of a single
day, making boosting infeasible as the increased fatigue damage has to saved at another point in time
on the same day. However, the time series in figure 4.9 does show large changes in potential hourly
revenue within a single day i.e. this is probably not the issue. More likely, the number of trials using
different PSP trajectories is simply not high enough to identify a more optimal solution. However, the
preliminary investigation performed here has been limited due to the thesis time frame.
In an attempt to improve on the results, a slightly altered methodology has been investigated. Here,
only the hours with the highest and lowest electricity prices and sufficiently high wind speeds are subject
to boosting and derating while the remainder of the 24 hours runs in normal operation. For boosting,
a wind speed of 11.9 [m/s], i.e. ensuring that boosting will increase power production, is required while
derating requires the originally introduced bound of 7.5 [m/s]. As an example, the two hours with the
highest price during the day, satisfying the wind speed condition, are boosted in different combinations
based on a draw of PSP trajectories containing only two PSPs from a uniform distribution with bounds
==PAGE:87==
5.3 Partial conclusion & Recommendations
77
1.0 and 1.1.
To compensate for the increased fatigue damage, a PSP trajectory containing e.g.
4
PSPs from a distribution with bounds 0.4 and 1.0 is drawn for the four hours with the lowest prices
satisfying the wind speed bound. This significantly reduces the number of computations per trial, as
the predictions for PSP = 1 can be pre-computed i.e. new predictions are only required for the time
steps with altered PSPs.
A multitude of number of hours to modify for each day/week/month has been tested with a different
number of boost to derate ratios. Among the tested variations of this approach, the best performing
has proven to have a chunk size of a month and consist of specifying a constant boost level and then
performing a large number of trials with different PSP trajectories for derating. However, the largest
observed increase for a full month deemed to have significant potential only amounts to around 3,000
[DKK]. Assuming that this is achievable for all months, the increase in revenue amounts to 216,000
[DKK] over a six year period and is therefore somewhat comparable to the increase obtained using the
choice hierarchy approach, see table 5.3, but requires further analysis.
The above method is presented as a brute-force approach to solving the optimization problem. However,
a more sophisticated version of the method could be tested, allowing the daily relative fatigue damage to
exceed 1 with some factor while imposing the full period constraint since the PSP history, and thereby
the remaining fatigue damage capacity, is known. Such a modification would most likely result in an
increased amount of fatigue damage during the first years of operation while imposing derating towards
the end of the period. Imposing a derated control strategy could be associated with high losses in
income. However, these losses are expected to appear at a later stage in the WT life span. As such,
using NPV as the objective function might yield some interesting results as the increased income in the
early life might more than make up for the lost income towards the end of the life time if discounting
of money with time is modelled. Another opportunity is to apply another distribution in the definition
of the PSP variable space which prescribes less hours spent e.g. fully derated. The idea behind this
is that the feasible number of hours in this operational state is likely less than the intermediate states
based on the results from the choice hierarchy approach in table 5.3. Alternatively, perhaps a further
assessment of the problem will allow a conditional dependency between the PSP variables with the aim
of providing PSP trajectories in an intelligent manner rather than relying on a near random sampling
strategy.
5.3
Partial conclusion & Recommendations
The original formulation of the optimization problem has been simplified, replacing the NPV objective
function with revenue and reducing the number of constraints. Two different approaches to solving the
simplified problem has been suggested and partly explored. An upper bound for the revenue increase has
been provided, showing a significant potential of approximately 4.5 % at both Vesternaes and Boevling.
The Monte-Carlo approach has been introduced and tested in a brute-force form, showing small im-
provements in increased revenue at a high computational cost. However, this approach has a lot of
potential for further refinement and should definitely not be discarded based on the preliminary results
reported here.
The main focus of the chapter has been the choice hierarchy method which provides a simple condition
based strategy for selection of an operational strategy by evaluation of the potential monetary gain or
loss and the associated fatigue budget on an hourly basis. The primary scope of the analysis has been
to provide preliminary results documenting the potential for increasing the generation of value to set
a baseline for what might be achieved by applying more sophisticated methods. The results for case
1 considering only blade flapwise fatigue damage showed substantial increases of 1.70 and 2.15 % for
Vesternaes and Boevling, respectively. Additionally, these results indicate that boosting the WT does
not necessarily increase fatigue damage, especially close to the rated wind speed. This behavior has
==PAGE:88==
78
5 Optimization
been hypothesized to originate from the slightly altered control parameters introduced when boosting
the WT, suggesting that load reductions may be achievable through a more advanced controller design.
A short study quantifying the effect of the time shift introduced based on cross correlation results
in section 4.1 which was hypothesized to reduce the revenue increase potential has been presented.
The results indicate a slightly higher potential for the non-shifted time series but has proven that the
influence of the time shift is insubstantial in context of the total potential revenue increase for the
investigated case.
The inclusion of an additional fatigue damage constraint for the shaft torque load channel introduced
for case 2 proved to reduce to performance of the suggested method considerably while still obtaining
modest revenue increases of 0.78 and 0.44 % for Vesternaes and Boevling, respectively. The flapwise
relative fatigue damage for Boevling was decreased to 0.92 indicating some unused potential for revenue
increase or, alternatively, a possibility to lower the blade design requirements. However, the general
decrease in performance can likely to some extent be attributed to the simplicity of this method, calling
for more sophisticated approaches when multiple constraints are included.
Recommendation: Price-Bin frequency approach
Another approach to solving the presented optimization problem is presented here, yet the solution
strategy has not been implemented and tested. The presentation is introductory and should be viewed
as a suggested approach rather than a fully developed solution strategy. Here, the time dimension is
eliminated and represented by frequency instead. More specifically, a number of electricity price bins
are generated. For each bin, the wind speed distribution is identified. As such, the representation
of the data is now somewhat identical to that of a wind rose, see e.g. figure 4.7a, where each bin
now represents price instead of wind direction. In addition to price and wind speed, the other flow
describing parameters used for the surrogate predictions must also be estimated. To start somewhere,
these parameters are estimated as the bin-wise means. However, a collective mean value for all bins may
also be a feasible approach. The error in the estimated fatigue damage introduced by bin means could
be quantified to some extent by computing the relative fatigue damage using some specific PSP history
between the time series using the bin mean values and the actual values for TI, α and ρ. However, since
the analysis of fatigue is relative, it is possible that the introduced error will cancel out. In addition to
the aforementioned, it should be ensured that if the bin-wise DELs are aggregated to one global DEL
using eq. (2.7), this quantity corresponds to the time series DEL aggregate using the bin mean values
for their respective price ranges. The applicability of this approach to future scenarios depends on an
assumption of stationarity in price vs. wind conditions.
A representation of the described method is provided in figure 5.3.
Note that the price bin width
and wind speed ranges have been chosen for illustrative purposes in this context. Furthermore, only a
selection of price bins have been included and each bin is reported with its corresponding mean values
for turbulence intensity, wind shear and air density.
Knowing the distribution within each price range bin, the dimensionality of the data has now been
reduced and the aim of an optimization is to determine an optimal PSP for each wind speed range in
a price bin satisfying the global constraints on e.g. fatigue damage. More specifically, in the context
of the simplified problem presented in figure 5.3, this requires determination of five PSPs in each of
the 10 price bins i.e. 50 PSPs in total. A problem of this form could be solved using gradient based
optimization. Inspiration may be found in the work by Fleming et al. [89], where an optimization with
similar characteristics is described. Python libraries which may provide algorithms for such purposes
include SciPy [90] and OpenMDAO described by Gray et al. [91]. Using gradient-based techniques
requires a model which can provide them. The optimization could be based on the developed ANN
surrogate models. These models are able to provide gradients in an computationally efficient manner
using back-propagation. Evaluation of the gradients are thus expected to be readily obtainable using
==PAGE:89==
5.3 Partial conclusion & Recommendations
79
TensorFlow ANNs, as a framework for computing gradients is already in place and forms the basis of
the training of these models using optimizers.
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
Probability
(TI = 0.094,  = 0.18,  = 1.233)  115
(TI = 0.095,  = 0.17,  = 1.235)  145
(TI = 0.093,  = 0.16,  = 1.229)  175
(TI = 0.096,  = 0.16,  = 1.232)  205
(TI = 0.097,  = 0.15,  = 1.231)  235
(TI = 0.101,  = 0.14,  = 1.228)  265
(TI = 0.103,  = 0.13,  = 1.230)  295
(TI = 0.104,  = 0.13,  = 1.233)  325
(TI = 0.103,  = 0.13,  = 1.234)  355
(TI = 0.105,  = 0.12,  = 1.230)  385
Wind speed range
[15;30]
[10;15]
[7;10]
[4;7]
[0;4]
Figure 5.3: Selection of price bins in [DKK] for Vesternaes including bin-wise distribution of wind
speed and mean condition of turbulence intensity [-], wind shear [-] and air density [kg/m3]. The price
bin center value is marked in bold.
Guessing on the structure of the solution obtained through this approach, the primary consumption of
fatigue damage would likely take place in the higher price bins, in wind speed ranges allowing boosted
operation, where boosting can be expected to yield the highest increase in revenue. Naturally, this
would come at the expense of derating in the lower price bins in order to balance the fatigue budget.
==PAGE:90==
80
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions & Further Work
In this chapter, the main conclusions of the work presented in this thesis are summarized and recom-
mendations for future work are provided.
6.1
Conclusions
In section 1.3, three main research questions were posed along with a number of subquestions. Through-
out this thesis, conclusions seeking to address these questions have been drawn on a chapter-wise basis.
The main conclusions are summarized in the following.
Trend characterization in DELs and maximum loads associated with derating and
boosting
As an overall conclusion, a control strategy dependency was documented for all considered DELs and
maximum loads. The analysis was based on DLC 1.2 simulations of 6 distinct operational strategies
in the PSP range from 0.4 to 1.1 including three derated, two boosted and the normal operation state.
The observed general trend was an increase when boosting and a decrease when derating the WT if
the PSP wind speed for the respective strategies has been reached. Furthermore, results for the fatigue
damage compared to normal operation proved the material specific response to changes in DELs. From
a combined fatigue and maximum load perspective, the flapwise, pitch, generator and shaft torque load
were identified as the most sensitive with respect to boosting.
Load and power surrogate modelling based on key flow and control parameters
An NRMSE estimate has shown that errors below 1.6% are achievable when modelling DELs and
maximum loads while an error below 0.3% is achievable when modelling power using surrogate models
based on RF and ANN. While no general preference between the two models was established, they
possess different strengths and weaknesses. Due to a coarse discretization of the PSP dimension, the
capability of surrogate model to interpolate in the input space was investigated.
The RF model taking inputs of U, TI and PSP was proven a robust approach not prone to overfitting
and requiring very little time for training while showing good performance. However, it was found
unlikely that this method can provide gradients while it was shown that interpolation in PSP space
using the available discretization is not possible.
The ANN model taking inputs of U, TI, α, ρ and PSP was shown provide a smooth response surface
making interpolation in PSP space possible. Interpolation was shown to be associated with increases
in prediction error on load estimates amounting to an NRMSE of less than 4% for the blade flapwise
DEL and maximum loads. Furthermore, the ANN model is inherently capable of providing gradients
in a computationally efficient manner. However, this comes at the cost of increased training time and
transformation of training data and subsequently input features when the model is deployed.
==PAGE:92==
82
6 Conclusions & Further Work
Optimization of generated value based on control strategy alterations
The original optimization problem was recast to a more simple version using revenue as the objective and
reducing the number of constraints. A theoretical upper bound on revenue increase of approximately
4.5% has been identified for two onshore sites. Subject to the constraint of keeping the sustained fatigue
damage over a time period at a level not exceeding that of normal operation, a simple choice based
scheme has achieved an increase in revenue of 1.70% and 2.15% considering only flapwise fatigue damage.
Furthermore, an increase in revenue of 0.78% and 0.44% has been achieved considering both flapwise
and shaft torque fatigue.
A random sampling approach using Monte-Carlo simulations of PSP time series applied to daily and
monthly time intervals was tested, generally obtaining only small increases in revenue partly attributed
to the computational limit on how many combinations of PSP that could be evaluated.
While the main question of finding an optimal solution to the optimization problem is left unanswered
and no formal optimization has been carried out, the main focus has been to provide results documenting
the potential for increasing the generation of value to set a baseline for what might be achieved by
applying more sophisticated methods. As a general conclusion to that end, the presented results suggest
that there is indeed potential.
6.2
Further work
In this section, general recommendations for further work are presented superficially, while specific
recommendations, when available, can be found in the related chapters.
• Fatigue mean correction: The Goodman correction has been used to model the mean load
influence on fatigue life. However, this model is known to be conservative, especially at high mean
levels. The prospect of modelling the mean load influence in a more precise manner may change
the amount of derated operation required to rebalance the fatigue budget after boosting. This
may effectively change the potential to generate value by altering control strategy.
• Redefinition of Flex5 Infile: The developed control strategies exhibited fluctuations in power
production at 7 [m/s] during the wind step simulation as observed in figure 2.1. Indications that
these power fluctuations are present during simulations with low TI haven been observed in figure
E.4. Therefore, a further analysis is suggested, while it is expected that a redefinition of the Flex5
Infile is required.
• Finer PSP space discretization: In order to provide accurate predictions in the entire PSP
space using the surrogate models, a finer discretization of the PSP space is required. It is possible
that the ANN prediction errors can be decreased sufficiently by developing additional control
strategy implementations along the same lines as presented in this thesis.
However, it is the
suggestion of the author that that the PSP space is included in the variable space definition
during the DoE. This requires a new, more stable implementation of the DTU 10 MW in Flex5,
which allows mapping from PSP to the appropriate control parameters in the Flex5 Infile without
an inherent risk of the aeroelastic simulations becoming unstable.
An elaboration on how to
include PSP in the variable space is provided in Appendix B.
• Restructuring of simulations setup: As described in section 2.6, the size of the dataset was
limited to 6,000 samples due to an unforeseen technical limitation. In order to accommodate
generation of larger datasets, the existing aeroelastic simulation setup should be modified or
rebuilt.
• Multiple WTs: The work presented in this thesis has been focused exclusively on a single, free
standing WT. Extending the these model to include multiple WTs and waked operating conditions
is a key element of deploying the work presented in this thesis.
==PAGE:93==
6.2 Further work
83
• Including uncertainty: The sample uncertainty was estimated in section 3.2. However, the
uncertainty propagation through the developed surrogate models has not been investigated and
leaves room for further analysis. Furthermore, if a surrogate model predicting all stored quan-
tiles, see section 2.6, rather than the median is developed, this might facilitate generation of the
distribution of the predicted quantity. This, in turn, may allow the surrogate models to be used
in decision-making under uncertainty.
• Including PSP transition dynamics: While it was suggested based in literature review that
smooth transitions between PSPs is possible, no efforts have been made towards modelling these
transitions i.e. the dynamics have not been included. Modelling the influence of the dynamics may
provide important insights regarding both applicability of the control strategy scenarios prescribed
in this thesis.
• Power electronics: The effect of changing control strategy, and perhaps especially the effect of
boosting, on the power electronics have not been addressed, why studies shedding some light on
this aspect of altering the control strategies is called for.
==PAGE:94==
84
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[1]
IEA. World Energy Outlook 2018. Technical report, IEA, Paris, 2018.
[2]
DNV GL. Energy Transition Outlook 2019 - Power Supply and Use. Technical report, DNV GL,
2019.
[3]
Mark Ahlstrom, Erik Ela, Jenny Riesz, Jonathan O’Sullivan, Benjamin F. Hobbs, Mark O’Malley,
Michael Milligan, Paul Sotkiewicz, and Jim Caldwell. The Evolution of the Market: Designing a
Market for High Levels of Variable Generation. IEEE Power and Energy Magazine, 13(6):60–66,
nov 2015.
[4]
Danish
Energy
Agency.
Fremme
af
vindmøller
|
Energistyrelsen.
https://ens.dk/
ansvarsomraader/vindenergi/fremme-af-vindmoeller. Accessed 2020-02-16.
[5]
Danish Energy Agency. Danish Experiences from Offshore Wind. Technical report, Danish Energy
Agency, 2017.
[6]
Vattenfall
awarded
Dutch
zero-subsidy
site
|
Windpower
Monthly.
https://www.
windpowermonthly.com/article/1459857/vattenfall-awarded-dutch-zero-subsidy-site,
2018. Accessed 2020-02-16.
[7]
Ingeniøren.
For første gang i Danmark:
Fire kæmpevindmøller opføres helt uden støtte
| Ingeniøren.
https://ing.dk/artikel/foerste-gang-danmark-fire-kaempevindmoeller-
opfoeres-helt-uden-stoette-225082, 2019. Accessed 2020-02-16.
[8]
Børsen.
DONG vinder tysk vindmølle-ordre på snedig vis:
Vi skal ikke have en en-
este euro. https://borsen.dk/nyheder/virksomheder/dong-vinder-tysk-vindmoelle-ordre-
paa-snedig-vis-vi-skal-ikke-have-en-eneste-euro-1ka0x, 2017. Accessed 2020-02-16.
[9]
Nord Pool. Nord Pool - Historical Market Data. https://www.nordpoolgroup.com/historical-
market-data/. Accessed 2020-04-01.
[10] Mesfin Belayneh Ageze, Yefa Hu, and Huachun Wu. Wind Turbine Aeroelastic Modeling: Basics
and Cutting Edge Trends. International Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 2017(January), 2017.
[11] Martin Hansen. Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines. Routledge, may 2015.
[12] Torben Juul Larsen and Anders Melchior Hansen. How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual. Risø National
Laboratory, 2007.
[13] NREL. OpenFAST. https://github.com/OpenFAST/openfast. Accessed 2020-03-02.
[14] Jason M Jonkman and Marshall L Buhl. FAST User’s Guide. Technical report, NREL, 2005.
[15] Stig Øye. Flex4 simulation of wind turbine dynamics. 1996.
[16] Emmanuel Simon Pierre Branlard. Flexible multibody dynamics using joint coordinates and the
Rayleigh-Ritz approximation: The general framework behind and beyond Flex.
Wind Energy,
22(7):877–893, jul 2019.
==PAGE:96==
86
Bibliography
[17] János Zierath, Roman Rachholz, and Christoph Woernle.
Field test validation of Flex5,
MSC.Adams, Alaska/Wind and SIMPACK for load calculations on wind turbines. Wind Energy,
19(7):1201–1222, jul 2016.
[18] Jakob Mann. The Spatial Structure of Neutral Atmospheric Surface-Layer Turbulence. Journal of
Fluid Mechanics, 273:141–168, 1994.
[19] Jakob Mann. Wind field simulation. Prob. Engng, Mech, 13(4):269–282, 1998.
[20] P S Veers. Three-dimensional wind simulation. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, Solar
Energy Division (publication) Sed, 7:23–31, 1988.
[21] Korn Saranyasoontorn, Lance Manuel, and Paul S. Veers. A Comparison of Standard Coherence
Models for Inflow Turbulence With Estimates from Field Measurements. Journal of Solar Energy
Engineering, 126(4):1069–1082, nov 2004.
[22] Dansk Standard. DS/EN IEC 61400-1:2019. Technical report, IEC, 2019.
[23] A. Peña. Østerild: A natural laboratory for atmospheric turbulence. Journal of Renewable and
Sustainable Energy, 11(6), 2019.
[24] Matti Koivisto, Kaushik Das, Feng Guo, Poul Sørensen, Edgar Nuño, Nicolaos Cutululis, and
Petr Maule.
Using time series simulation tools for assessing the effects of variable renewable
energy generation on power and energy systems. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Energy and
Environment, 8(3):e329, may 2019.
[25] William C. Skamarock, Joseph B. Klemp, Jimy Dudhia, David O. Gill, Dale M. Barker, Wei Wang,
and Jordan G. Powers. A description of the advanced research wrf version 3. ncar technical note
-475+str, 2008.
[26] Xiaoli Guo Larsén, Søren Ott, Jake Badger, Andrea N. Hahmann, and Jakob Mann. Recipes for
Correcting the Impact of Effective Mesoscale Resolution on the Estimation of Extreme Winds.
Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 51(3):521–533, mar 2012.
[27] Ali C. Kheirabadi and Ryozo Nagamune. A quantitative review of wind farm control with the objec-
tive of wind farm power maximization. Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics,
192:45–73, sep 2019.
[28] Alessandro Croce, Stefano Cacciola, Luca Sartori, and Paride De Fidelibus. Evaluation of the
impact of wind farm control techniques on fatigue and ultimate loads. Wind Energ. Sci. Discuss.,
2019, in review.
[29] Paul A. Fleming, Jacob Aho, Andrew Buckspan, Erik Ela, Yingchen Zhang, Vahan Gevorgian,
Andrew Scholbrock, Lucy Pao, and Rick Damiani. Effects of power reserve control on wind turbine
structural loading. Wind Energy, 19(3):453–469, mar 2016.
[30] D Todd Griffith, Nathanael C Yoder, Brian R Resor, Jonathan R White, and Joshua A Paquette.
SANDIA REPORT Structural Health and Prognostics Management for Offshore Wind Turbines:
An Initial Roadmap. Technical report, Sandia National Laboratories, 2012.
[31] Ameet S. Deshpande and Rhonda R. Peters. Wind turbine controller design considerations for
improved wind farm level curtailment tracking. In IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting,
2012.
[32] Mahmood Mirzaei, Mohsen Soltani, Niels K. Poulsen, and Hans H. Niemann. Model based active
power control of a wind turbine. In 2014 American Control Conference, pages 5037–5042. IEEE,
jun 2014.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
87
[33] Mahmood Mirzaei, Tuhfe Göçmen, Gregor Giebel, Poul Ejnar Sørensen, and Niels K. Poulsen.
Turbine Control Strategies for Wind Farm Power Optimization. American Control Conference,
July 1-3:1709–1714, 2015.
[34] Mads M Pedersen and Gunner Chr Larsen. Integrated wind farm layout and control optimization.
Wind Energ. Sci. Discuss., pages 1–19, February 2020, in review.
[35] Peter Fogh Odgaard, Tobias Gybel Hovgaard, and Rafael Wiesniewski. Model predictive control
for wind turbine power boosting. In 2016 European Control Conference (ECC), pages 1457–1462.
IEEE, jun 2016.
[36] Vestas. Vestas - PowerPlus. https://www.vestas.com/powerplus{#}! Accessed 2020-03-08.
[37] Siemens Gamesa.
Increase your wind turbines’ output | Siemens Gamesa.
https://www.
siemensgamesa.com/products-and-services/service-wind/energy-thrust.
Accessed 2020-
03-08.
[38] Siemens
Gamesa.
Increase
your
wind
turbines’
output
|
Siemens
Gamesa.
https:
//www.offshorewind.biz/2020/05/19/siemens-gamesa-cranks-it-up-to-15-mw-with-
offshore-behemoth/. Accessed 2020-05-20.
[39] Umberto Ciri, Christian Santoni, Federico Bernardoni, and Stefano Salvetti, Maria Vittoria
Leonardi. Development of a surrogate model for wind farm control. Proceedings of the Ameri-
can Control Conference, 2019-:2849–2854, 2019.
[40] A Clifton, L Kilcher, J K Lundquist, and P Fleming. Using machine learning to predict wind
turbine power output. Environmental Research Letters, 8(2):024009, jun 2013.
[41] A. Clifton, M. H. Daniels, and M. Lehning. Effect of winds in a mountain pass on turbine perfor-
mance. Wind Energy, 17(10):1543–1562, oct 2014.
[42] Christos Galinos, Nikolay Dimitrov, Torben J. Larsen, Anand Natarajan, and Kurt S. Hansen.
Mapping Wind Farm Loads and Power Production - A Case Study on Horns Rev 1. In Journal of
Physics: Conference Series, volume 753. Institute of Physics Publishing, oct 2016.
[43] Gunner C. Larsen, Helge Madsen Aagaard, Ferhat Bingöl, Jakob Mann, Søren Ott, J.N. Sørensen,
V. Okulov, N. Troldborg, Niels Morten Nielsen, Kenneth Thomsen, Torben J. Larsen, and
R Mikkelsen.
Dynamic wake meandering modeling.
Technical report, Technical University of
Denmark, 2007.
[44] Nikolay Dimitrov, Mark C. Kelly, Andrea Vignaroli, and Jacob Berg. From wind to loads: wind
turbine site-specific load estimation with surrogate models trained on high-fidelity load databases.
Wind Energy Science, 3(2):767–790, oct 2018.
[45] Murray Rosenblatt.
Remarks on a Multivariate Transformation.
The Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, 23(3):470–472, sep 1952.
[46] I M Sobol’. Global sensitivity indices for nonlinear mathematical models and their Monte Carlo
estimates. Mathematics and Computers in Simulation, 55(1-3):271–280, feb 2001.
[47] B. Efron. Bootstrap Methods: Another Look at the Jackknife. The Annals of Statistics, 7(1):1–26,
jan 1979.
[48] Nikolay Dimitrov. Surrogate models for parameterized representation of wake-induced loads in
wind farms. Wind Energy, 22(10):1371–1389, oct 2019.
[49] Stjepan Mahulja, Gunner Chr Larsen, and Ali Elham. Engineering an optimal wind farm using
surrogate models. Wind Energy, 21(12):1296–1308, dec 2018.
==PAGE:98==
88
Bibliography
[50] N. O. Jensen. A note on wind generator interaction. Risø National Laboratory, 1983.
[51] Ervin Bossanyi. Combining induction control and wake steering for wind farm energy and fatigue
loads optimisation. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1037(3):032011, jun 2018.
[52] Christian Bak, Frederik Zahle, Robert Bitsche, Taeseong Kim, Anders Yde, Lars Christian Hen-
riksen, Anand Nata-rajan, and Morten Hartvig Hansen. Report Description of the DTU 10 MW
Reference Wind Turbine. Technical report, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[53] Morten Hartvig Hansen and Lars Christian Henriksen. Basic DTU Wind Energy controller. Tech-
nical report, Department of Wind Energy, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[54] M.A. Miner. Cumulative damage in fatigue. American Society of Mechanical Engineers – Journal
of Applied Mechanics, 12(3), 1945.
[55] I Rychlik. A new definition of the rainflow cycle counting method. Int J Fatigue, 9(2):119–121,
1987.
[56] P. Janiszewski. Rainflow v2.2.0. https://github.com/iamlikeme/rainflow, 2019.
[57] American Society for Testing. Standard Practices for Cycle Counting in Fatigue Analysis. ASTM
International, 2017.
[58] J. Goodman. Mechanics Applied to Engineering. Longmans, Green and Co., London, 8th edition,
1919.
[59] J P A A Blasques and A Natarajan. Mean load effects on the fatigue life of offshore wind turbine
monopile foundations. In B Brinkmann and P Wriggers, editors, Computational Methods in Marine
Engineering V - Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Computational Methods in
Marine Engineering, pages 818–829. International Center for Numerical Methods in Engineering,
2013.
[60] Herbert Sutherland. On the Fatigue Analysis of Wind Turbines. Technical report, Sandia National
Laboratories, 2013.
[61] Sten Tronæs Frandsen. Turbulence and turbulence generated structural loading in wind turbine
clusters. PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2007.
[62] Nikolay Dimitrov, Anand Natarajan, and Mark Kelly. Model of wind shear conditional on turbu-
lence and its impact on wind turbine loads. Wind Energy, 18(11):1917–1931, nov 2015.
[63] M.C. Jackson, S.D. Umans, R.D. Dunlop, S.H. Horowitz, and A.C. Parikh. Turbine-Generator
Shaft Torques and Fatigue: Part I - Simulation Methods and Fatigue Analysis. IEEE Transactions
on Power Apparatus and Systems, PAS-98(6):2299–2307, nov 1979.
[64] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
12:2825–2830, 2011.
[65] Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro, Greg S.
Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew
Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath
Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dandelion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray, Chris
Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker,
Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wat-
tenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-scale machine learning
on heterogeneous systems, 2015. Software available from tensorflow.org.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
89
[66] Fabio Nelli. Machine Learning with scikit-learn. In Python Data Analytics, pages 313–347. Apress,
Berkeley, CA, 2018.
[67] Jonathan Feinberg and Hans Petter Langtangen. Chaospy: An open source tool for designing
methods of uncertainty quantification. Journal of Computational Science, 11:46–57, nov 2015.
[68] Alain Ulazia, Santos J. Gonzalez-Roji, Gabriel Ibarra-Berastegi, Sheila Carreno-Madinabeitia, Jon
Saenz, and Ander Nafarrate.
Seasonal Air Density Variations over The East of Scotland and
The Consequences for Offshore Wind Energy. In 2018 7th International Conference on Renewable
Energy Research and Applications (ICRERA), pages 261–265. IEEE, oct 2018.
[69] Alain Ulazia, Jon Sáenz, Gabriel Ibarra-Berastegi, Santos J. González-Rojí, and Sheila Carreno-
Madinabeitia. Global estimations of wind energy potential considering seasonal air density changes.
Energy, 187:115938, nov 2019.
[70] M Kelly, G Larsen, N K Dimitrov, and A Natarajan. Probabilistic Meteorological Characterization
for Turbine Loads. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 524(1):012076, jun 2014.
[71] Hans Hersbach, Bill Bell, Paul Berrisford, Shoji Hirahara, András Horányi, Joaquín Muñoz‐Sabater,
Julien Nicolas, Carole Peubey, Raluca Radu, Dinand Schepers, Adrian Simmons, Cornel Soci,
Saleh Abdalla, Xavier Abellan, Gianpaolo Balsamo, Peter Bechtold, Gionata Biavati, Jean Bidlot,
Massimo Bonavita, Giovanna Chiara, Per Dahlgren, Dick Dee, Michail Diamantakis, Rossana
Dragani, Johannes Flemming, Richard Forbes, Manuel Fuentes, Alan Geer, Leo Haimberger, Sean
Healy, Robin J. Hogan, Elías Hólm, Marta Janisková, Sarah Keeley, Patrick Laloyaux, Philippe
Lopez, Cristina Lupu, Gabor Radnoti, Patricia Rosnay, Iryna Rozum, Freja Vamborg, Sebastien
Villaume, and Jean‐Noël Thépaut. The ERA5 global reanalysis. Quarterly Journal of the Royal
Meteorological Society, page qj.3803, jun 2020.
[72] J. H. Halton. Algorithm 247: Radical-inverse quasi-random point sequence. Communications of
the ACM, 7(12):701–702, dec 1964.
[73] M. D. McKay, R. J. Beckman, and W. J. Conover. Comparison of Three Methods for Selecting
Values of Input Variables in the Analysis of Output from a Computer Code.
Technometrics,
21(2):239–245, may 1979.
[74] Yaser S. Abu-Mostafa, Malik. Magdon-Ismail, and Hsuan-Tien. Lin. Learning from data : a short
course. AMLBook.com, 2012.
[75] R. Kohavi. A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation and model selection.
Ijcai-95. Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
1995.
[76] Max Kuhn and Kjell Johnson. Applied Predictive Modeling. Springer New York, New York, NY,
2013.
[77] scikit learn.org. scikit-learn: Random Forest Regressor documentation. https://scikit-learn.
org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.ensemble.RandomForestRegressor.html.
Accessed
2020-06-24.
[78] A. D. Gordon, L. Breiman, J. H. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, and C. J. Stone. Classification and
Regression Trees. Biometrics, 40(3):874, sep 1984.
[79] Laura Schröder, Nikolay Krasimirov Dimitrov, David Robert Verelst, and John Aasted Sørensen.
Wind turbine site-specific load estimation using artificial neural networks calibrated by means of
high-fidelity load simulations. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1037(6):062027, jun 2018.
[80] Jens Peter Schøler Christiansen and Rasmus Sode Lund. Surrogate models for load estimations on
wind turbines operating in wakes. Master’s thesis, The Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
==PAGE:100==
90
Bibliography
[81] Diederik P. Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. 3rd International Conference
on Learning Representations, Iclr 2015 - Conference Track Proceedings, 2015.
[82] Tom O’Malley, Elie Bursztein, James Long, François Chollet, Haifeng Jin, Luca Invernizzi, et al.
Keras Tuner. https://github.com/keras-team/keras-tuner, 2019.
[83] energidanmark.dk.
Ekstremt lave spotpriser i Danmark.
https://www.energidanmark.dk/
markedsinfo/nyheder/nyheder/nyheder-2017/04/ekstremt-lave-spotpriser-i-danmark/.
Accessed 2020-06-02.
[84] D. P. Dee, S. M. Uppala, A. J. Simmons, P. Berrisford, P. Poli, S. Kobayashi, U. Andrae, M. A.
Balmaseda, G. Balsamo, P. Bauer, P. Bechtold, A. C. M. Beljaars, L. van de Berg, J. Bidlot, N. Bor-
mann, C. Delsol, R. Dragani, M. Fuentes, A. J. Geer, L. Haimberger, S. B. Healy, H. Hersbach,
E. V. Hólm, L. Isaksen, P. Kållberg, M. Köhler, M. Matricardi, A. P. McNally, B. M. Monge-Sanz,
J.-J. Morcrette, B.-K. Park, C. Peubey, P. de Rosnay, C. Tavolato, J.-N. Thépaut, and F. Vi-
tart. The ERA-Interim reanalysis: configuration and performance of the data assimilation system.
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 137(656):553–597, apr 2011.
[85] A.G. Davenport.
Rationale for determining design wind velocities.
American Society of Civil
Engineers – Proceedings, 86, 1960.
[86] Alfredo Peña, Pierre-Elouan Réthoré, and M. Paul van der Laan. On the application of the Jensen
wake model using a turbulence-dependent wake decay coefficient: the Sexbierum case. Wind Energy,
19(4):763–776, apr 2016.
[87] Rod Frehlich and Robert Sharman. The Use of Structure Functions and Spectra from Numerical
Model Output to Determine Effective Model Resolution. Monthly Weather Review, 136(4):1537–
1553, apr 2008.
[88] DTU Wind Energy.
Testcenter Hovsøre.
https://www.vindenergi.dtu.dk/test-centers/
hoevsoere_dk. Accessed 2020-06-06.
[89] Paul A. Fleming, Andrew Ning, Pieter M. O. Gebraad, and Katherine Dykes. Wind plant system
engineering through optimization of layout and yaw control. Wind Energy, 19(2):329–344, feb
2016.
[90] SciPy.org.
Scipy - Optimization and Root Finding.
https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/
reference/optimize.html#module-scipy.optimize. Accessed 2020-06-17.
[91] Justin S. Gray, John T. Hwang, Joaquim R.R.A. Martins, Kenneth T. Moore, and Bret A. Naylor.
OpenMDAO: an open-source framework for multidisciplinary design, analysis, and optimization.
Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, 59(4):1075–1104, apr 2019.
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX A
WT characterization
0
100000
200000
TBSS
NO10MW
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
50000
100000
150000
TBFA
10000
15000
20000
ShaftMy
200
300
400
500
PitchM
10000
15000
20000
ShaftMx
18000
20000
EdgeM
1000
2000
3000
ShaftMz
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
Wind speed [m/s]
20000
40000
FlapM
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
Wind speed [m/s]
20
40
60
GenM
1-Hz damage equivalent load (DEL) [kNm]
Figure A.1: 1-Hz sample median DELs as function of wind speed for all considered loads.
==PAGE:102==
92
A WT characterization
100000
200000
300000
400000
TB
NO10MW
DR04MW
DR06MW
DR08MW
BO105MW
BO11MW
200
400
600
PitchM
20000
40000
60000
ShaftMxy
14000
16000
18000
EdgeM
5000
10000
15000
ShaftMz
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
Wind speed [m/s]
20000
40000
60000
FlapM
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26
Wind speed [m/s]
100
200
300
GenM
95th quantile of loads [kNm]
Figure A.2: 95th quantile of sample maximum loads as function of wind speed for all considered loads.
==PAGE:103==
A WT characterization
93
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(a) TBSS: Tower bottom side-side.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
25000
50000
75000
100000
125000
150000
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(b) TBFA: Tower bottom fore-aft.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(c) ShaftMx: Main shaft x-wise.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(d) ShaftMz: Main shaft z-wise.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(e) ShaftMy: Main shaft y-wise.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
10
20
30
40
50
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(f) GenM: Generator moment.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(g) EdgeM: Blade edgewise.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(h) FlapM: Blade flapwise.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
Wind speed [m/s]
0
100
200
300
400
500
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
Corrected
Uncorrected
(i) PitchM: Blade pitch moment.
Figure A.3: Comparison between Goodman corrected and uncorrected 1-Hz sample median DELs for
all considered load channels based on full DLC 1.2 simulation.
==PAGE:104==
94
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX B
Inclusion of PSP in variable
space
Including PSP in variable space would allow for the quasi-MC-sampling to explore this dimension in a
more efficient manner than the currently used manual approach. Adding this dimension to the variable
space is straight forward. Initially, a uniform distribution from 0.4 to 1.1 without dependencies can
be used. Notably, using a uniform distribution for the PSP space, some samples are redundant as
the control strategies are the same until Pmax of the respective control strategies are reached.
As
such, the optimal distribution for the PSP space have opposite trends compared to e.g. TI, requiring a
distribution that widens with increasing wind speed. The full variable space using a uniform distribution
for PSP is shown in figure B.1, the added variable being presented in figure B.1e.
After drawing the PSP samples, the sample PSP will have to be mapped to the appropriate control
parameters in the FLEX5 infile to prescribe the desired operational strategy. These include, but is
not necessarily limited to, hard-coded blade pitch settings, maximum rotational speed and maximum
power production. Mapping the PSP to Pmax is straight forward based on eq. (1.1) and the blade
pitch settings are easily derived from Pmax. A study of the manually tuned maximum rotational speed
control parameter has shown that the development of this variable with PSP can be well described with
a second order polynomial in the {0.4,1.0} PSP range. Naturally, the rotational speed does not exceed
the rated speed of the WT why it remains constant above a PSP of 1.0. Boosting the WT should then
be achievable simply by altering Pmax
The above description assumed that the P(Ω)-curve does not have to be modified. However, this was
not the case using the existing FLEX5 infiles. It is possible that a stable mapping to the control points
shown in table 2.4 from PSP can be identified yet no efforts have been made in that regard. A number
of other infile configurations have been tested, which do not require an alteration of the P(Ω)-curve yet
these have proven to have other shortcomings. These shortcomings are expected to be resolveable but
this has not been achieved within the project time frame. Therefore, the approach described here has
not been used in the project.
==PAGE:106==
96
B Inclusion of PSP in variable space
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Probability density
Truncated triangular distribution
Sample distribution
(a) Wind speed.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Turbulence Intensity
Truncated area
Boundary box
quasi-MC samples
(b) Turbulence intensity.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Wind shear exponent
(c) Wind shear exponent.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
1.25
1.30
1.35
1.40
Air density [kg/m³]
(d) Air density.
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Power set-point
(e) Power set-point.
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Power set-point
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
max [rad/s]
Regression fit
Tuned control parameters
(f) PSP to control parameter mapping.
Figure B.1:
Sample distributions obtained using 1000 points in a 5-dimensional variable space
{U, TI, α, ρ, PSP}.
The solid lines in figures b, c, d & e indicate the sample space bounds while
the dashed line indicates the original distributions in table 3.1.
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX C
Additional results related to
convergence study
0
25
50
75
100 125 150 175 200
No. of seeds in sample
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
DEL FlapM
DEL PitchM
DEL EdgeM
DEL ShaftMz
DEL ShaftMx
DEL TBFA
DEL TBSS
0
25
50
75
100 125 150 175 200
No. of seeds in sample
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
DEL FlapM
DEL PitchM
DEL EdgeM
DEL ShaftMz
DEL ShaftMx
DEL TBFA
DEL TBSS
Relative maximum error [-]
(a) Sample 0 with U = 5.4 [m/s], TI = 27.8%, α = 0.2 and ϕ = 0 [◦].
0
25
50
75
100 125 150 175 200
No. of seeds in sample
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
DEL FlapM
DEL PitchM
DEL EdgeM
DEL ShaftMz
DEL ShaftMx
DEL TBFA
DEL TBSS
0
25
50
75
100 125 150 175 200
No. of seeds in sample
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
DEL FlapM
DEL PitchM
DEL EdgeM
DEL ShaftMz
DEL ShaftMx
DEL TBFA
DEL TBSS
Relative maximum error [-]
(b) Sample 1 with U = 12.1 [m/s], TI = 11.8%, α = 0.2 and ϕ = 0 [◦]
Figure C.1: Sample convergence of the relative error of DEL quantiles 25th (left) and 75th (right)
with the number of turbulent seeds.
==PAGE:108==
98
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX D
Additional results related to
Random Forest model
(a) Predictions vs. Targets
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Power set-point [-]
3460
5931
8403
10875
13347
15819
18290
20762
23234
25706
28178
30650
(b) DEL FlapM in [kNm].
(c) Residuals with wind speed
(d) Residuals with TI
Figure D.1:
Evaluation of Random Forest mode performance for DEL FlapM model.
Residuals
are shown as relative variation and the fitted trend line is 4th order polynomial. Contour plot shows
response surface for constant TI = 10%, α = 0.2 and ρ = 1.225 [kg/m3]
==PAGE:110==
100
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX E
Additional results related to
ANN model
(a) Predictions vs. Targets
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Power set-point [-]
150
1131
2113
3095
4077
5059
6040
7022
8004
8986
9968
10950
(b) Power in [kW].
(c) Residuals with wind speed
(d) Residuals with TI
(e) Residuals with wind shear
(f) Residuals with air density
Figure E.1: Evaluation of ANN Power model performance. Residuals are shown as relative variation
and the fitted trend line is a 4th order polynomial. Contour plot shows response surface for constant
TI = 10%, α = 0.2 and ρ = 1.225 [kg/m3]
==PAGE:112==
102
E Additional results related to ANN model
(a) Predictions vs. Targets
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
Power set-point [-]
9390
12611
15833
19055
22277
25499
28720
31942
35164
38386
41608
44830
(b) Max. FlapM in [kNm].
(c) Residuals with wind speed
(d) Residuals with TI
(e) Residuals with wind shear
(f) Residuals with air density
Figure E.2: Evaluation of ANN Max. FlapM model performance. Residuals are shown as relative
variation and the fitted trend line is a 4th order polynomial. Contour plot shows response surface for
constant TI = 10%, α = 0.2 and ρ = 1.225 [kg/m3]
==PAGE:113==
E Additional results related to ANN model
103
(a) DEL FlapM
(b) DEL FlapM
(c) Max. FlapM
(d) Max. FlapM
(e) Power
(f) Power
Figure E.3: Evaluation of ANN model performance with respect to interpolation. Left: DR08MW,
Right: BO105MW
==PAGE:114==
104
E Additional results related to ANN model
5
10
15
20
25
Wind speed [m/s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
1-Hz DEL [kNm]
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Figure E.4: Variation in DEL ShaftMz median for different TI levels predicted by ANN model under
conditions: α = 0.2 and ρ = 1.225. The spike at low TI may be attributable to the observations in
figure 2.1.
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX F
Additional results related to
site presentation
Figure F.1: Full 6 year time series of wind speed and price of electricity at the Bovling site with
rolling mean trend lines.
==PAGE:116==
106
F Additional results related to site presentation
(a) Wind speed.
(b) Turbulence intensity.
(c) Wind shear exponent.
(d) Air density
Figure F.2: Site specific variable distribution for Bovling in operational wind speed range.
==PAGE:117==
==PAGE:118==
