==PAGE:1==
Learning Based temporal stability
in rendering
Master Thesis
DTU Digital Media Engineering
DTU Compute
==PAGE:2==
Learning Based temporal stability
in rendering
Master Thesis
June, 2020
By
Guðni Fannar Kristjánsson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, DTU Compute, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at DTU compute, at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas computer grapics an
deep learning.
Guðni Fannar Kristjánsson - s182165
Signature
Date
ii
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In todays movie industry animations are a commonplace. However rendering a high qual-
ity animation with current technology can be very time consuming. The aim of this thesis is
to explore the possibility of accelerating this rendering process by instead of rendering full
quality animations is to reduce the rendering quality to speed it up but then afterwards use
the recent advancements in deep learning to try to improve the quality of the low quality
animations to the point that they are nearly indistinguishable from the high quality version.
To generate the animations blender was used and three different network architectures
were tested; a fairly standard image to image neural network, a neural network that pre-
dicts optical flow and a generative adversarial network. The straight forward network was
quite decent at denoising images but failed when it came to preserving fine details in the
image along with not producing temporally stable results. The optical flow architecture
produced decent results where there was small motion between frames but when the mo-
tion got sufficiently large it performed very poorly. The generative adversarial network
did not produce any good results. Although the results were not good enough to replace
the high quality versions they aren’t very far from being acceptable either and with a few
additional improvements this could very well be the future of rendering.
Learning Based temporal stability
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Guðni Fannar Kristjánsson, MSc Digital media engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Jeppe Revall Frisvad, Associate Professor, DTU
Supervisor
iv
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Related work
2
2.1
Render denoising . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Frame Interpolation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.3
Image upsampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.4
Deep fovea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
3
Data Collection
3
3.1
Blender . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4
Method
5
4.1
Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.2
Network structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4.3
Optical Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.4
Adverserial Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5
Discussion
16
5.1
Concurrent work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
5.2
Optical flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.3
Adversarial loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.4
Speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
6
Conclusion
19
Bibliography
20
Learning Based temporal stability
v
==PAGE:7==
vi
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
A standard animation typically consists of 20 or more images per second. In computer
animation, we need to compute each of these images. This is known as rendering and it
is oftentimes a computationally expensive process which is why it would be very valuable
to be able to speed up this rendering process as it would save a lot of time and compu-
tation. Machine learning is a field that has been expanding rapidly in recent years more
specifically deep learning. The idea behind deep learning is to create so called neural
networks that behave similarly to how neurons work in a brain. These networks can then
be trained to perform all kinds of different tasks and have shown a great performance in
various tasks including image anlysis and image manipulation.
The idea behind this thesis is that instead of rendering the whole animation in high quality
it could be possible to simply render a single high quality frame then the following frames
can be rendered in lower quality then a neural network is tasked with using information
from the high quality frame in order to improve the quality of the subsequent low quality
frame such that the frame becomes as close to the high quality version of that frame as
possible.
There already exist some networks that are able to denoise low quality noisy images into
higher quality ones, however applying such denoisers to one frame at a time leads to a
temporally unstable animation sequence. What this means is that every single frame may
be of high quality but when they are played in sequence they can be flickering artifacts
that are a result of underlying noise that is not visible otherwise.
1.1
Thesis Outline
Rather than presenting the method and results in separate chapters I will be presenting
each method followed by the results, this makes it easier to justify why certain adjustments
are made and to explore their effect on the results.
Learning Based temporal stability
1
==PAGE:9==
2
Related work
2.1
Render denoising
In the paper Bako et al. 2017 they use deep convolutional neural networks to denoise
Monte Carlo renderings. They do this by using two networks that handle the diffuse and
specular components of the renderings separately then later on combines the output of
the two to produce a final denoised image. However they do not make any use of temporal
data, but they do make extensive use of other cheap byproducts of the current frame such
as depth maps, normals etc.
2.2
Frame Interpolation
There are quite a few papers on this frame interpolation which is very closely related to the
one in this thesis, but rather than predicting the next frame the aim is to predict the frame
in between two other frames. In Niklaus, Mai, and Liu 2017 they train a convolutional
neural network with large 1d convolutions to interpolate the frames. The reasoning for
using separable 1d convolutions is that large 2d convolutions achieve good results but
are expensive to compute, but a pair of large 1d convolutions are fairly cheap to compute
and can be combined into large separable 2d convolutions.
In Hannemose et al. 2019 they train a neural network to learn the optical flow from two
adjacent frames to predict the in between frame, so the network learns two optical flows;
one from the previous frame to the next and one in the opposite direction. In addition to
this the network also learns to weight the images that result from applying these optical
flows in order to get the best quality for the in between frame.
2.3
Image upsampling
In the paper by Wu et al. 2017 they attempt to upscale low quality images into higher
quality images using several different loss functions rather than a single pixelwise loss
function. In their solution they use Charbonnier loss along with a perceptual loss and
an adversarial loss, which are computed from a so-called super resolution perceptual
generative adversarial network that they devised.
2.4
Deep fovea
In this paper by Kaplanyan et al. 2019 they have a very similar problem to solve where
the aim is to compress VR video sequences by having the sparse data in the peripheral
vision while having dense data in the focal vision. Then they use deep learning in order
to restore as much of the video data as possible such that the errors are not noticeable in
the peripheral vision.
2
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:10==
3
Data Collection
Seeing as this is a fairly novel approach, no pre-existing datasets of this sort exist (at least
not publicly available). Which means the data must be generated by hand. I chose to use
Blender to generate this dataset since it is a free open source rendering software which
should be good enough for this task.
3.1
Blender
The blender website has some demo files that are free to use at https://www.blender.org/
download/demo-files/ which should suffice for this project. However none of the demo
were an animation that could be rendered, but a few of them were fully modelled and
fairly detailed scenes such as the ’Barcelona Pavillion’ and ’Class room’ scenes which
were chosen as a basis for the project. To make an animation out of the scenes the
simplest way is to have the camera move around the scenes in various ways and render
the frames along the way. Fortunately the ’Barcellona pavillion’ contained 3 version of
the scene: day, sunset and night. So for the high quality version of the animation the
classroom, pavillion day and pavillion sunset were rendered using 300 samples per pixel
(spp) along with the built-in Blender denoiser to achieve a noise free animation of the
scenes. Sadly the pavillion night version proved to have a lot of noise with this amount of
samples per pixel even after applying denoiser so those frames were not used. For the
classroom scene there were rendered 300 frames and for each version of the pavillion
250 frames were rendered resulting in a total of 800 frames with each frame having the
dimension of 1920 × 1080. A single frame form each is shown in 3.1
Then low quality versions of the same images were generated without using the blender
denoiser, two versions were made one that used 1 spp and one that used 16 spp. By
default, the scenes had some post processing effects that looked nice on the 300 sample
images, but led to some very weird artifacts on the images with fewer samples, so for
consistency all post processing effects were turned off for all images. Figure 3.2 shows
the different quality settings for the classroom scene
3.2
Limitations
This data should suffice for building a decent model to solve the problem but there are still
some fundamental limitations. The first limitation is that all the animations were created by
simply moving the camera which means that in order to be able to learn the change from
one frame to the next the model only needs to learn a projective transformation in order
to map between frames. This means that it might not learn the arbitrary transformations
(a) Classroom
(b) Pavillion day
(c) Pavillion sunset
Figure 3.1: First frame of every scene from the HQ data
Learning Based temporal stability
3
==PAGE:11==
(a) 300 samples denoised
(b) 16 samples
(c) 1 sample
Figure 3.2: a cropped image of the classroom scene with the three different quality settings
used in the project
that would be necessary for the model to work on any type of scene. For example, in the
classroom scene it might not learn that a paper from the scene can bend or a chair can be
moved in a direction opposite to the camera movement so if a learned model is applied to
an animation when the camera sits still but a chair moves, rotates or deforms within the
scene it could simply fail.
The second limitation is that there is a lack of diversity in the images since all the images
are generated from 3 scenes but that does not mean that the model would generalize
well to any scene and there probably exists a scene where the model performs poorly,
but there is a fairly limited amount of scenes available freely for blender and creating
entirely new scenes is really cumbersome and out of scope for this thesis.
On top of this there is a limited time to do the project and each render takes quite a lot
of time Initially the classroom scene took almost a week to render 300 frames since each
(high quality) frame took about 25 minutes to render, but by optimizing some of the blender
settings the render time was reduced to about 10 minutes without any noticeable loss in
quality but it still took 2-3 days to render. the lower quality frames were significantly faster
to render with the 16 sample frames being about a minute each and the 1 sample frames
just a few seconds.
4
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:12==
4
Method
4.1
Input
As mentioned before, each scene contains approximately 300 frames of high and low
quality images. We will use the notation I0 to indicate frame 0 of a scene in high quality
and ˜I0 to indicate the low quality version of frame 0. So the input to the network will be
a tuple consisting of (In, ˜In+1) and the output of the network is ˆIn+1 which should be as
close to In+1 as possible
4.2
Network structure
To start off, I chose to begin with a fairly simple U-net architecture. U-nets have typically
shown a good performance in image to image tasks so it should be a good choice for this
problem. U-nets are a special type of convolutional neural networks that are composed of
an encoder and decoder. The encoder consists of a few convolutional layers and pooling
layers that repeatedly downscale the data into a compact representation, the decoder is
then composed of more convolutional layers and upsampling layers that then upscale it
back to its original size (usually). On top of this the data is also passed through so called
skip connections, where the data skips a few layers in both the encoder and decoder part.
The reason for these skip connections is so that the flow of gradients is not restricted to
going through all of the network but can also pass through the skip connections making
it easier to adjust the early layers of the network, the initial architecture can be seen in
Figure 4.1. After every convolutional layer in the network, the data is passed through a
ReLU activation function which is a non-linearity that is added to the network in order to
make it able to learn non-linear functions. (Convolutions are a linear operation and doing
multiple linear operations results in a linear operations, hence why an activation function
is required so that the network can learn non-dlinear functions). The only convolutional
layer that has no activation functions is the last one since having an activation function
there could lead to a unwanted bias in the output. The loss function I chose to start with
is the mean squared error (MSE) loss function, which can easily be computed using the
following formula mean((ˆIn+1 −In+1)2) and the network is trained to minimize this loss.
The Adam optimizer with learning rate 10−4 was used throughout most of the project.
Using this setup produced results that looked very smudgy as seen in Figure 4.2 and
none of the fine details in the resulting images were preserved.
There were however a few problems with the initial network structure that could easily be
fixed. One of the issues was with the pooling layers which are used to downscale the
images for the next layers in the network. For traditional machine learning tasks such as
classification it is usually ideal to use max pooling which simply goes through every 2x2
square of the input tensor with a stride of 2 and selects the maximum value and passes it
forward to the next layer of the network, therefore downscaling the input by a factor of 2.
However, for this specific task it doesn’t really make sense to take the maximum value but
rather to take the average value because if we were to apply average pooling and max
pooling on images the average pooling would give a much better representative of the
actual image than the max pooling operation, because the max pooling operation would
have a bias towards bright pixels.
Another issue which is not as obvious but quite similar is the upsampling operation. By
default the upsampling operation in pytorch uses the ”mode=nearest” meaning that when
Learning Based temporal stability
5
==PAGE:13==
Figure 4.1: A figure illustrating the initial U-net architecture. The yellow boxes indicate
a convolutional layer, the orange boxes are max pooling layers while the blue boxes are
upsampling layers. Every convolution layer uses a 3x3 kernel and the number of channels
was usually doubled for every pooling layer
Figure 4.2: Shows the result from the initial network without any modification trained on
1spp images, the result is very noisy and some items in the image seem doubled such as
the chair at the bottom right
6
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:14==
an image gets upsampled, the nearest pixel simply gets copied to upscale the image, but
it is much better to use ”mode=bilinear” which instead of copying the nearest pixel it takes
the nearby pixels and interpolates between them which is a much better way to upsample
the image. There are other options when it comes to upscaling but according to Niklaus,
Mai, and Liu 2017 the upsampling outperformed the other methods such as transposed
convolutions and sub-pixel convolutions by quite a bit so they weren’t tested.
In many machine learning tasks it is usually ideal to normalize the data to have a mean
close to 0 and a standard deviation of 1 and the typical way to normalize images is to move
them from the 0 - 255 pixel range to the -1 to 1 range for both the input to the network and
the target image, however the performance seemed to be better when the images were
moved in the 0 to 1 range, there is no clear reason why this is better but since it improved
the results it was used for the rest of the project.
Batch normalization is a layer in neural networks that quite often improves performance of
neural networks especially in classification tasks and is typically good for regularizing the
data to reduce overfitting. It does so by normalizing the current input batch to have close to
0 in mean and 1 in standard deviation. However, it was immediately apparent that adding
batch normalization layers was detrimental to the network and reduced the performance
significantly and in hindsight it makes sense since the data is being normalized in various
places as it is passing through the network but the target output is never normalized in
the same way so it needs to learn to ”denormalize” the data to match the target output in
which case its better to just not have batch normalization at all.
The initial network was trained using 1 spp images which were extremely noisy so to
make the problem easier for now the noisy images were replaced with images using 16
spp which are still noisy, but should the results for 16 spp images become quite good it is
always possible to go back to lower quality images.
At this point the network was doing a decent job at denoising the images and adding
more layers to this architecture didn’t seem to improve performance much but some ex-
periments with the architecture revealed that during the downsampling part of the network
it had a better performance by exchanging the convolution with pooling to two convolu-
tion with a skip connection over one of them into pooling as seen in Figure 4.3. However,
doing a similar change to the upsampling part of the network did not produce the same
positive result so it was simply omitted. the change did not have a very drastic change of
the quality of the images but the improvements were still visible as seen in Figure 4.4
4.2.1
Spatial transformer networks
The results are reasonably good but are still quite far from being temporally stable and
able to replace the 300 sample denoised images so I decided to try out something called
Spatial transformer networks (STN) first described by Jaderberg et al. 2015. These STN’s
have shown good performance in classification tasks for digits where the STN blocks
within the network learn to transform the input data such that it is easier for the rest of the
network to classify the digits within the image. The idea behind adding STN blocks for
the current task is that the STN block may be able to learn to transform the high quality
frame In such that it better matches the low quality frame ˜In+1. the STN paper discusses
3 types of transformations affine, projective and thin plate spline (TPS). However, pytorch
only implements the affine transformation which is the simplest one out of the three but
it should still be able to learn something, especially since translating the camera is an
affine transformation and there are some frames in the dataset where the camera is only
translating, so it should be able to improve the performance on the dataset giving an
indicator as to whether or not it is worth it to try to implement the other transformations.
Learning Based temporal stability
7
==PAGE:15==
Figure 4.3: By replacing every convolution and pooling layer pair with this downsampling
block improved performance a bit
(a) the basic architecture
(b) with downsampling blocks
Figure 4.4: Comparison of the two different network architectures on a on a 256x256
segment of one of the classroom frames. The improved quality is most visible on the
paper and the top part of the blackboard as well as the yellow letters becoming sharper
8
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:16==
(a) charbonnier loss
(b) squared loss
Figure 4.5: Comparison of the two different loss functions
There are a few different ways to attach the STN component to the current network for
example by adding it directly to the current data pipeline such that all the data gets trans-
formed by the STN block. Alternatively, it is possible to have the data pass through the
normal route in addition to passing it through the STN and then later on joining the data
back together. The later approach seems to make a lot more sense since then the net-
work can learn to blend the transformed data with the non transformed data rather than
transforming all of it or none of it. However, adding the STN to the network didn’t seem
to improve the performance of the network at all no matter how it was attached. This
was then later confirmed by inspecting the weights and biases of the output layer of the
STN network. It turned out that the weights got pushed towards 0 (they were around the
104 range) and the biases of the network were really close to the identity transformation
meaning that the STN would pretty much learn nothing and attempt to just pass the data
through without any transformations.
4.2.2
Loss Functions
So far the network has only been trained using the least squares loss function but there are
other options for loss functions that can improve the performance of the network. In the
paper by Wu et al. 2017 they reported that the charbonnier penalty function gave slightly
better results than the L1 and L2 norms for their task (MSE which I was using is basi-
cally the same as L2 loss). The charbonnier loss function is simply computed as follows:
mean(
√
(ˆIn+1 −In+1)2 + ϵ) where ϵ is a small but non zero value so the charbonnier loss
function is essentially the L1 norm except it is smooth around 0. However, there wasn’t a
huge difference between using the different loss functions, it seems that the charbonnier
loss clears a bit more of the noise while losing some of the image sharpness in return, in
Figure 4.5 this is most noticeable on the yellow letters above the chalkboard where the
letters become a bit blurry and on the chalkboard itself where the chalkboard has a little
less noise but the chalk writing seems to become more faded.
There are many similar pixel based loss functions that I could try out but they are unlikely
to improve the quality substantially, however there are different loss functions that don’t
only operate on a pixel level. One such loss is Structural Similarity Index Loss (SSIM loss)
and is one of many perceptual based loss functions, that instead of doing pixelwise loss it
Learning Based temporal stability
9
==PAGE:17==
attempts to find differences in the image structure and is used to for example to estimate
how compression affects image quality so it should be quite decent at removing some of
the noise from the image. The result of combining this loss with the squared loss can be
seen in Figure 4.6
(a) target image
(b) SSIM + squared loss
Figure 4.6: Comparison between ground truth image and the SSIM + squared loss with a
noticeable increase in visual quality over the previous attempts
Now the output of the neural network is fairly convincing as a real image, however a lot
of the fine detail seems to be lost in the process which shouldn’t happen if the network is
efficiently using the high quality version of the frame before since most of the detail that is
lost already exists in the high quality previous frame In. So to test the actual contribution
of the high quality frame the same data was passed through the network but this time
the high quality frame was multiplied by 0 so instead of inputting (In, ˜In+1) the input was
simply ((0 × In), ˜In+1). It turned out that the output image was nearly identical with no
noticeable loss in quality meaning that the network simply learned to denoise the ˜In+1
without actually using any of the available temporal data so any other perceptual based
loss function might be able to improve the image quality slightly but is unlikely to solve
the issue of not making use of the temporal data and therefore are unable to produce
temporally stable results.
4.3
Optical Flow
After coming to the conclusion that the previous network architecture was not learning to
use the temporal data it was clear that a different strategy was likely needed to train the
networks, a strategy that forced the networks to somehow learn to use the temporal data.
A way to do this, is to have the networks learn the optical flow from one image to the
next one. Optical flow is is essentially a map that maps how each pixel moves from one
frame to the next. Of course this is not the perfect solution since there may be objects
that were occluded in one frame that then appear in the next one which is impossible to
predict with optical flow alone, but the idea is that later on this method can be combined
with the denoising network to achieve better results.
There are two ways to learn optical flow using neural networks it can be done either
explicitly and implictly. When doing it explicitly, the rendering program would simply output
10
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:18==
the the flow vectors of where the pixels end up in the next image and then the network can
be trained to predict exactly those flow vectors. Blender has a functionality where it can
output motion vectors but in the demo scenes I used they seem to be simply wrong, since
the magnitude of the motion vectors is around the 10−3 to 10−5 suggesting that every pixel
is moving less than a pixel each frame which is not the case. My first instinct was that
these values are simply normalized in some way and need to be brought to the correct
range. However by visualizing the direction and magnitude of the vectors reveals that
there is another problem. The direction and magnitude of some parts of the same object
were drastically different when they should have had nearly identical magnitude, this was
most clearly visible in the chairs of the classroom scene where the pixels of the chair
have the same magnitude for the most part but the screws on the chair have a completely
different magnitude when all the pixels of the chair should be moving roughly the same
way. However, it seems that the motion vectors in blender are completely correct when
the same procedure is applied to the default blender scene, which is simply a cube in
space, then the values were completely fine and it was easy to map from one frame to
the other using the output vectors. But, even after looking extensively at the difference in
settings between the default scene and the others I was unable to figure out what caused
this difference in behaviour, for this reason I gave up on learning the optical flow explicitly
even though it would probably yield better results than learning the optical flow implicitly.
So, the difference between learning optical flow explicitly and implicitly is that now we
don’t have access to the ground truth optical flow F and are forced to estimate it. We can
do that by applying the estimated flow ˆF to In which yields and estimate of the next frame
ˆIn+1 we can then compare this frame with the ground truth frame In+1 to evaluate how
good the optical flow ˆF is. To do this I used the same network structure as before with
minor changes to the network to make the output have 2 channels (for the xy-movement
of each pixel) instead of the 3 rgb channels. Again I decided to use the MSE loss here.
Initially the network would not learn anything and the output image looked nothing like the
target output. the reason for this was that the network is initialized randomly, meaning
that the initial flow output is completely random as well and it is impossible for the network
to meaningfully improve the flow from the random mess that was output. To fix this issue
I multiplied weights and biases of the last layer of the network by 10−4, making the initial
output of the network very close to 0 for every pixel, however it is important to note that the
weights and biases can’t be exactly 0 because then the network would be unable to learn
at all. In addition to this, the identity mapping FI is added to the output of the network
before applying the optical flow. What this identity mapping FI does is that if the output
of the network is all zeros the image remains completely unchanged. This is because
the grid_sample function in pytorch that I used for optical flow is implemented such that
for a given pixel the function samples based on the coordinates on the original image, so
for example, (0, 0) is the center pixel of the image, (1, 1) is the bottom rightmost pixel of
the image and (−1, −1) is the top left pixel etc. So what this identity mapping FI maps
each pixel to itself so that the network now only has to learn how the pixel moves from
its initial position, rather than having it learn where it ends up based on this co-ordinate
system. By doing this the network now has a better more sensible starting point to go
from and the results are much nicer than before in the sense that the network actually
learned something however they were still lacking.
There were two improvements I made to this that had some slight positive effects. The
first one being that when training instead of always passing (In−1, ˜In) to the network the
input would be slightly randomized such that In−1 could be any of the images in the range
In−2 to In+2 this way the network should generalize better since now the network cannot
Learning Based temporal stability
11
==PAGE:19==
(a) frame with relatively little motion
(b) a frame with large motion
Figure 4.7: The optical flow prediction on a frame with little motion compared to one with
large motion
output always the same flow upon seeing the same noisy image ˜In. Also it should help the
flow network learn larger motions in the scene because now it occasionally sees frames
that have a greater temporal distance which most of the time leads to greater motion.
The other thing that improved the flow network a bit was changing the pooling layers. As
discussed before, the network had the same structure as the denoising one including the
average pooling layer, but in the context of learning optical flow the average pooling is no
longer the most obvious choice for downsampling so I tested out max pooling which gave
almost the exact same performance. I also tried a new approach so rather than using one
of the standard pooling layers, I replaced them with a convolutional layer with a stride of 2
causing it to have the same downscaling effect as the regular pooling layers, but now the
network learns how it wants to downscale, rather having a fixed operation to do it. This
had a small positive effect on the learned optical flow but it also reduced the number of
epochs required to train the network before it stopped learning so it sped up the training
process a bit. I also went back to the previous network architecture to see if it had any
difference there and it had no effect noticeable effect on the quality but it also sped up the
convergence of that network.
The performance of this optical flow method can be seen in Figure 4.7 and it seems to
work very well on frames with little motion but is quite bad where there is large motion.
The reason for this is most likely that the MSE loss function is not very good for computing
optical flow implicitly because it is only using a pixelwise comparison which is not a good
way to figure out where a misplaced pixel should be, but there is no really good alternative
since the optical flow is unknown, I also tried the SSIM loss with no success.
4.3.1
Combining
Seeing as neither the regular neural network method nor the optical flow produced par-
ticularly good results it would perhaps be possible to combine the two to get the best of
both since the ”denoiser” struggles with maintaining small details in the image while also
having some noise leftover whereas the optical flow method is good at preserving the
small details in some cases (and in those cases it was quite temporally stable). In the first
attempt to combine them the same network structure was used as before, but this time
12
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:20==
it outputs two things things: optical flow and an image. The optical flow is then applied
to the original In and the resulting images are passed forward to a few additional layers
(basically a second smaller network), where the network should ideally learn to merge
together the previous outputs into a single image, which is then used to compute the loss.
However, this network actually performed worse than the old denoiser network architec-
ture and it didn’t really seem to learn the optical flow at all. In an effort to combat this the
intermediate was modified so that it now outputs three things an optical flow, an RGB im-
age and a few extra channels worth of data. The idea behind the extra channels of data is
that there might be some information lost that could be useful in combining the two images
so the extra channels are passed along in case they contain such data. Then as before,
the data is passed along to the combining network but now instead of just computing the
loss at the final image, it is now also computed for the intermediate denoised image and
the intermediate optical flow to guarantee that the combining network receives a decent
quality denoised image and a decent image computed form the optical flow. However,
the result was very similar to before, it completely ignored the optical flow image and just
passed the denoised image straight through with no noticeable changes. The only no-
ticeable difference is that this time the denoised image was of of similar quality to the best
denoising network.
Figure 4.8: A figure illustrating the final combining network architecture. The loss is com-
puted on the denoised image, optical flow image and output image while the additional
channels are unconstrained.
4.4
Adverserial Loss
Since the previous methods did not seem to work particularly well I decided to try a differ-
ent approach that has had a lot of success in many image generation tasks this approach
is called generative adversarial networks (GAN). GANs have both a generator that gener-
ates images and a discriminator that then tries to identify the difference between the gen-
erated and real images. Then as the discriminator becomes better the generator needs
to produce more and more realistic images until they are indistinguishable from the real
images. The main idea behind this is that it might be possible to trick the discriminator
into learning what temporal stability is and therefor the generator would be able to learn
to generate images that are temporally stable.
For the first iteration of this method, rather than starting with trying to teach the GAN to
deal with the temporal stability it should be easier to teach it to just denoise the image
as before and then afterwards modifying it to learn the temporal stability. So for the gen-
erator G the input and the network architecture is the exact same as earlier such that
G(In, ˜In+1) = ˆIn+1, the discriminator D is then just a fairly basic convolutional neural
network that takes an image as an input and produces a single value in the range 0 to
1. Then the networks are trained in alternating fashion with the loss function of the dis-
Learning Based temporal stability
13
==PAGE:21==
criminator being: lossd(y, ˆy) = −(log(y) + log(1 −ˆy) where y = D(I) and ˆy = D(ˆI) so
lossd is minimized when D(I) = 0 and D(ˆI) = 1 and maximized when it is opposite. The
loss function for the generator is then lossg(ˆIn+1) = −log(D(ˆIn+1)) which is minimized by
tricking D to make a wrong prediction which in turn should make the generator network
G learn to produce realistic looking images. However, the results I got were not good at
all and can be seen in Figure 4.9. Initially, I trained the Generator using the GAN loss
+ MSE loss which produced the result seen in Figure 4.9a which basically has the same
performance as training only on the MSE loss but now there is an additional artifact in
the image which is a green/red line that goes through the center of the image. then, to
simplify debugging I removed the MSE loss so that only the GAN loss was left, which
should make it really easy for the generator to trick the discriminator because the input to
the generator G is as before (In, ˜In+1) and since In is a real image it should be possible
for the generator to learn that passing In straight through without any modification should
make it impossible for the discriminator D to distinguish between what is an image from
the generator and what is an image from the real data set. But the results it produced
were very weird images seen in 4.9b which looked nothing like real images.
(a) GAN + MSE
(b) GAN only
Figure 4.9: Shows the learned output of the generator when trained using the GAN loss
and MSE on the left image and on the right image only the GAN loss was used.
GAN’s are notoriously tricky to train so it is not clear what is wrong with my GAN setup.
since, the generator is using the same architecture as the somewhat successful networks
from before I assumed that it is fine for this task. I made sure that the loss functions and
the training procedure were correctly implemented so the problem should be the discrim-
inator. But, figuring out how to fix the discriminator is not a trivial task, if the discriminator
is too weak then it is too easy to fool and whatever it learns will be of low quality, but if
the discriminator is too strong it becomes too hard to fool so that it adapts too quickly to
whatever improvements were made recently making them useless in fooling the discrim-
inator. But, even when the discriminator is fairly balanced it can lead to the generator
learning nothing because the training goes in circles. To explain this we can think of it as
a game of rock paper scissors. Initially the generator learns to produce rock which the
discriminator learns to counter with paper, then the generator learns that it should produce
scissors which in turns makes the discriminator learn to produce rock and so on. So I tried
a few things in order to get a decent discriminator. I tried making it more complicated and
powerful and then it learned to immediately distinguish between the real and fake images
so I tested having different learning rates on the generator and the discriminator to try to
prevent the discriminator from catching up immediately. Even though I seemed to have
managed to find a decent balance between the generator and discriminator I never man-
14
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:22==
aged to get any decent results and with little time left of the project and no clear way of
fixing the problems I abandoned going any further with this GAN idea.
Learning Based temporal stability
15
==PAGE:23==
5
Discussion
5.1
Concurrent work
During the end of the project a paper was published by Hasselgren et al. 2020 which
is solving the exact same problem with some good results but seeing as it came out
really late in the process I couldn’t really build ontop of their work because it was done
concurrent to mine. However, I believe it serves as a good comparison for my work to see
what choices they made and what I should have done differently to get better results.
The main difference in performance is likely the temporal reprojection step they have in
their network architecture where they take the output of the network from the previous
frame and then reproject it to match the current frame using the motion vectors (optical
flow) output from their renderer. But, as discussed in chapter 4.3 the motion vectors that
came out of Blender simply didn’t make any sense so they were unusable, but the idea
itself was really close to the one discussed in 4.3.1 where the idea was to combine a
warped version of the previous frame with the denoised version of the current frame to
get a better estimate of what the current frame should look like. The main reason it didn’t
work for me is that the optical flow that the network learned was simply not high enough
quality to be of any use compared to the optical flow output from their renderer.
There is also another pretty significant difference between their method which is that they
don’t only use the images as input to the network but also other auxiliary data such as
normal maps, depth and more. That most likely wouldn’t have had much effect on the
performance of the denoising network architecture, except maybe a bit sharper edges
at object boundaries. But, it could have been a significant performance boost when it
comes to learning the optical flow, since it allows the network to better learn the underlying
structure of the scene. Just the depth alone helps with predicting the motion since far
away things tend to move slowly while close up things move fast. Additionally it helps
distinguishing what is the same object since a sharp change in depth probably relates to
a sharp change in motion but a sharp change in colour could be a sharp change in motion,
but it could also simply be a change in texture meaning no change in motion at all. Even
though the motion vector output was weird in blender and didn’t quite work the depth map
blender output is certain to be accurate because when debugging the motion vectors I
tried having blender outputting the depth map as a sanity check with no problems at all
so it would have been at least worth the try.
The final major difference between the implementation that could have probably improved
the performance of my networks is their loss functions. They use two loss functions L1
norm which as discussed in 4.2.2 is nearly identical to the charbonnier loss function that I
used. The second loss function is what they call temporal L1 is computed the same way
as the regular L1 but the input is different so rather than computing L1(ˆIn, In) it is instead
computed as L1(ˆIn −ˆIn+1, In −In+1) and should contain enough temporal information for
the network to learn to make it stable. This was probably my biggest shortcoming during
the whole project because I had actually thought about using this loss function or a very
similar one but convinced myself it wouldn’t work because of a calculation error, but as
I started looking into their loss function I realized the error I made. So I had thought of
using the difference between two noisy frames and two clean frames and then using the
difference between those as an error metric ((ˆIn−ˆIn+1)−(In−In+1)) but after doing some
simple algebra to convert it into ((ˆIn−In)+(In+1−ˆIn+1)) I noticed that the term (ˆIn−In) is
16
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:24==
just the difference between the predicted and the clean frame n and the term (In+1−ˆIn+1)
is the difference between clean and the predicted frame n + 1 so my thought was that
this was basically the same as computing L1(ˆIn, In) + L1(In+1, ˆIn+1) meaning that it was
no different than just computing the L1 loss on a per frame basis, failing to realize that
because the second term inverts the order of the predicted and clean frame, even though
the order doesn’t matter for most pixelwise loss functions (for example L1(a, b) = L1(b, a))
but the order does matter in this case which was a massive oversight on my part. It would
probably have allowed me to produce at least somewhat temporally stable results even
if the quality of every individual image wasn’t perfect. If I had an additional week for
programming the first thing I would do is to make use of this loss function in combination
with the MSE loss and the SSIM loss on the best performing denoising architecture.
5.2
Optical flow
As mentioned before, the optical flow network performed quite decently on frames where
there is little motion but even if it was possible to get the same performance for the large
motions there would be another problem: the network is unable to accumulate data. To
illustrate this problem lets imagine that we start off by giving it (I0, ˜I1) and it produces the
frame ˆI1 now for the next frame we can’t use I1 because it is unknown unless we already
have a high quality version of the animation (making the network pointless) so our best
bet is to use the highest quality image available which would be ˆI1 but now the problem
should be clear, the quality will keep on degrading with each pass through the network.
Even if the optical flow is as good as it possibly can get the loss of quality is unavoidable
due to things becoming occluded and occluded objects becoming visible which cannot
be handled without losing information. There are two ways to combat this issue the first
one is to periodically compute a fresh high quality frame occasionally and using that to
refresh the quality that way there we are still saving computation time by not rendering
every frame in high quality. But the combining network idea would also work to solve this
assuming that it starts making use of the optical flow since by combining the results of
the denoiser and the optical flow the output of the network would reach an equilibrium
where the amount of data picked up by the denoiser should be equal to the data lost by
the optical flow
5.3
Adversarial loss
Since I didn’t manage to get the adversarial network to work I didn’t get to try out my idea
to make the discriminator learn to detect temporal instability but the idea is still probably
sound. So, the Discriminator would be changed to accept two images rather than one
D(I, I) and it should output 0 if the two images are temporally stable and 1 if they are un-
stable. then there are three possible input pairs for the network (In, In+1), (ˆIn, In+1), (ˆIn, ˆIn+1)
but using only those as input the network would be able to figure out which of these are
temporally stable and which aren’t without actually learning temporal artifacts because
the first pair (In, In+1) are 2 real images so they should be stable, the second pair is a
real and a fake image which should be unstable and the third pair are two fake images
that should also be unstable. With this setup the Discriminator can determine whether
a pair of images is temporally unstable by simply detecting if either image is a fake one
so it is simply solving the same problem as described in 4.4, but it might be possible to
force it to learn the stability by passing it a pair of temporally stable fake images, to do
this we could use the image pair (ˆIn, In+1 + (ˆIn −In)) to explain why this might work we
would essentially be taking the noise that exists in ˆIn and adding it to the clean version
of the subsequent frame, but these frames would be temporally stable because the noise
doesn’t change from one frame to the other similar to how watching a video on a dirty
Learning Based temporal stability
17
==PAGE:25==
screen would reduce the apparent quality of the video but the video would be equally
temporally stable as if it was played on a clean screen. Therefore making it impossible
for the for the discriminator rely solely on detecting fake vs real images.
5.4
Speed
Seeing as the motivation for this project this is to accelerate the rendering process this
thesis would not be complete without mentioning the speed. The most complicated net-
works I used never took longer than about 2 seconds to produce the resulting image.
Considering that each 16 spp image takes about a minute to produce the overhead of the
network would be negligible and a significant improvement over the 10 minute rendering
time of the higher quality images.
18
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:26==
6
Conclusion
To solve this problem a dataset was created by rendering demo scenes in Blender3D.
Each scene was rendered in high quality and low quality yielding a dataset consisting
of 800 images of each quality setting. This dataset was then used to train three different
neural network architectures in an attempt to solve the problem. The input to the networks
consisted of two consecutive frames with the first one being a high quality and the second
one being low quality with the target of the networks being to create a high quality version
of the second frame.
The first network architecture was a fairly standard U-net that produced an image as
output. This output was a fairly well denoised version of the lower quality image but it
usually lacked a lot of the detail present in the high quality version on top of that the output
images were not temporally stable that is when played in a sequence there is quite a bit
of flickering artifacts that may not be visible in the stand alone image. By experimenting
a bit it turned out that this first network architecture never made use of the high quality
frame which explains why the smaller details were missing in the output.
The second arcitecture was an attempt to force the network to make use of both input
images. The network architecture was almost identical to the one before but rather than
outputting an rgb image it instead output an optical flow which determines how the pixels
should move from one image to the next, The optical flow is then applied to the high
quality image to get an estimate for the next frame. The results of this were quite good
when there was small motion between frames but once the motion got large enough the
output became extremely distorted. But seeing as the first and second architecture had
different weaknesses I attempted to combine them in order to get the best of both but for
some reason the result only got as good as the first architecture and it never made use
of the second one.
The final architecture I tried was to use generative adversarial networks which consists of
two networks, one generator which like the networks before tries to output a high quality
version of the input image. The second network known as the discriminator then tries to
judge the output of the generator and determine whether or not that is a real or generated
image then the generator uses the feedback from the discriminator in order to make the
output closer to the real images. However the results from this architecture were really
bad and there was clearly something wrong with the setup but no obvious way to fix it.
The quality of the results are not that great and certainly not good enough to replace the
high quality renderings even though the learned images far exceed the low quality input
images. If all the improvements mentioned in the discussion are applied (successfully)
the quality might be sufficiently high so that the difference between the output and the
high quality images is not noticeable but it is likely that there are still some loss in quality
that it would require further improvements before this would be a viable alternative to the
current rendering methods.
Learning Based temporal stability
19
==PAGE:27==
Bibliography
Bako, Steve et al. (July 2017). “Kernel-Predicting Convolutional Networks for Denoising
Monte Carlo Renderings”. In: ACM Trans. Graph. 36.4. ISSN: 0730-0301. DOI: 10.1145/
3072959.3073708. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3072959.3073708.
Niklaus, Simon, Long Mai, and Feng Liu (2017). “Video Frame Interpolation via Adaptive
Separable Convolution”. In: CoRR abs/1708.01692. arXiv: 1708.01692. URL: http://
arxiv.org/abs/1708.01692.
Hannemose, Morten et al. (2019). “Video Frame Interpolation via Cyclic Fine-Tuning and
Asymmetric Reverse Flow”. In: Image Analysis. Ed. by Michael Felsberg et al. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, pp. 311–323. ISBN: 978-3-030-20205-7.
Wu, Bingzhe et al. (2017). “SRPGAN: Perceptual Generative Adversarial Network for Sin-
gle Image Super Resolution”. In: CoRR abs/1712.05927. arXiv: 1712.05927. URL: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1712.05927.
Kaplanyan, Anton S. et al. (2019). DeepFovea: Neural Reconstruction for Foveated Ren-
dering and Video Compression using Learned Statistics of Natural Videos. URL: https:
//research.fb.com/wp- content/uploads/2019/11/DeepFovea- Neural- Reconstruction-
for- Foveated- Rendering- and- Video- Compression- using- Learned- Statistics- of- Natural-
Videos.pdf.
Jaderberg, Max et al. (2015). “Spatial Transformer Networks”. In: CoRR abs/1506.02025.
arXiv: 1506.02025. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02025.
Hasselgren, J. et al. (2020). Neural Temporal Adaptive Sampling and Denoising. URL:
https : / / research . nvidia . com / sites / default / files / pubs / 2020 - 05 _ Neural - Temporal -
Adaptive/NTASAD_preprint.pdf.
20
Learning Based temporal stability
==PAGE:28==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
