==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
DEVELOPMENT AND APPLICATION OF AN
ALGAL GROWTH INHIBITION TEST METHOD
FOR COLOURED SUBSTANCES
EMMA LOVÉN SLOTT
KAREN SCHARLING DYHR
==PAGE:2==
Emma Lovén Slott and Karen Scharling Dyhr: Development and application
of an algal growth inhibition test method for coloured substances
Master’s thesis, June 2020
Supervisors:
Professor Philipp Mayer, DTU Environment
Postdoc Lars Michael Skjolding, DTU Environment
ii
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
When performing algal growth inhibition tests on coloured substances it can be difﬁcult to distinguish be-
tween growth inhibition caused by shading and growth inhibition caused by chemical toxicity. This dis-
tinction is important for the subsequent risk assessment. The aim of this study was to develop and test an
algal growth inhibition test method for coloured substances where the shading effect can be distinguished
from the chemical toxicity. Parallel algal growth inhibition tests of the coloured substance titanium dioxide
nanoparticles (naTiO2), using the green algae Raphidocelis subcapitata, were carried out with varying light
paths through the test suspension (2.5, 3.9, 6.4 and 10.6 mm). The light paths were measures of the maxi-
mum length through the test suspension in the horizontally placed vials. In vitro ﬂuorescence of chlorophyll
a was used as a surrogate for measurement of algal biomass. Concentration-response curves were ﬁtted to
the relative growth inhibition following a Sigmoid curve. The concentration-response curves for the two
shortest light paths (2.5 and 3.9 mm) were identical with not signiﬁcantly different EC50 values (p < 0.05)
of 47.9 mg/L [42.7 −53.9]95% and 50.1 mg/L [44.4 −56.5]95%, respectively. The shading did, therefore,
not have an effect on these results, and the growth inhibition was caused solely by the chemical toxicity
of naTiO2. The concentration-response curves for the two longest light paths (6.4 and 10.6 mm) were left
shifted with EC50 values of 28.4 mg/L [24.0 −33.5]95% and 25 mg/L [16.6 −34.8]95% being signiﬁcantly
lower than those of the shorter light paths (p > 0.05). Thus, the treatments with the longest light paths were
affected by increasing shading. This concludes that it is possible to distinguish the shading effect from the
chemical toxicity by varying the light paths through the test suspension in the altered test setup.
A partial aim of this study was to perform the test in a closed setup without CO2 enrichment by enlarging
the headspace to suspension volume ratio (HS:S ratio). This was done by parallel tests with varying HS:S
ratio. It was not possible to develop a closed test setup without CO2 enrichment with sufﬁcient stability
and reproducibility. Based on conducted theoretical calculations and existing literature it is recommended
to further develop this test setup, as it is considered possible to achieve a satisfactory test result.
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis has been completed at the Department of Environmental Engineering at the Technical University
of Denmark from January to June 2020. The thesis serves as fulﬁlment of the MSc in Environmental En-
gineering. The thesis work corresponds to 30 ECTS points. The work, carried out in relation to this thesis,
was equally split between the two authors.
We would like to thank our supervisor, Professor Philipp Mayer, for excellent guidance throughout the
project and for always being ready to answer our questions. We would also like to thank our supervisor,
Postdoc Lars Michael Skjolding, for sharing his knowledge and experience. A special thanks to Head of
Laboratory Section Susanne Kruse for her great help and guidance in the laboratory. Finally we would like
to thank Senior Researcher Kamilla Marie Speht Kaarsholm for her help with our theoretical calculations.
Emma Lovén Slott and Karen Scharling Dyhr
Kongens Lyngby, June 2020
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
EU regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Algal growth inhibition tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
The carbonate system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Shading effect on concentration-response curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Coloured substances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Literature review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Methods
15
3.1
Test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Pilot tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Final test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Theoretical calculations of the carbonate system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Data treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.6
Literature search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Results
23
4.1
Pilot tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Final test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Discussion
31
5.1
Light path and optimal growth conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Closed algal test setup without CO2 enrichment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
vii
==PAGE:8==
5.3
Distinction between shading and chemical toxicity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Conclusions
37
7
Bibliography
39
A Appendix
43
viii
==PAGE:9==
List of abbreviations
Algal test
Algal growth inhibition test
CV
Coefﬁcient of variation
ECHA
European Chemical Agency
ETAD
The Ecological and Toxicological Association of Dyes and Organic Pigments Manufacturers
HS:S ratio
Headspace to suspension volume ratio
naTiO2
Titanium dioxide nanoparticles
∆pH
The change in pH of the controls during the algal test relative to the pH of the algal medium
REACH
Regulation, Evaluation, Authorisation, and Registration of Chemicals
TAL
Total alkalinity
TIC
Total inorganic carbon
ix
==PAGE:10==
x
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
2.1
Species and transformations of the carbonate system in algal tests. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Concentration-response curves for a coloured substance with different light paths through
the test suspension. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Illustration of the test vial with test suspension when placed horizontally on a Tube Roller.
.
11
2.4
Cross section of the test vial with test suspension when placed on a Tube Roller. . . . . . . .
11
3.1
Illustration of the laboratory test setup with vials rolling on Tube Rollers under ﬂuorescent
lamps. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Illustration of the test preparation for pilot test 2 with naTiO2 as test substance.
. . . . . . .
17
4.1
Average growth rates and changes in pH for the six treatments in pilot test 1. . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Experimental growth rates from pilot test 1 and theoretically calculated growth rates. . . . .
25
4.3
Concentration-response curves for pilot test 2 in open and closed test setup. . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Concentration-response curves for the ﬁnal test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.5
EC50 values obtained from the ﬁtted model for the ﬁnal test.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
A.1
Time-Log(biomass) plot of the three replicates of the control of pilot test 1.
. . . . . . . . .
43
A.2
Time-Log(biomass) plot of the six treatments in pilot test 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.3
Time-Log(biomass) plots of the treatments with 3.9 mm light path in pilot test 2.
. . . . . .
45
A.4
Time-Log(biomass) plots of the four treatments with different light paths in the ﬁnal test. . .
46
xi
==PAGE:12==
xii
==PAGE:13==
List of Tables
2.1
Test parameters required for an acceptable algal test according to ISO 8692. . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
The maximum light paths through the test suspension. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
EC50-values in mg/L with 95% conﬁdence intervals found in literature for testing of naTiO2
on R. subcapitata. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.1
Validity criteria for pilot test 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Validity criteria for pilot test 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
EC50 values obtained from the ﬁtted model in pilot test 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
A.1
P-values from t-test (α = 0.05) of the average growth rates for pilot test 1. . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.2
P-values from t-test (α = 0.05) of the ∆pH values for pilot test 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.3
P-values of the two-factor with replication ANOVA test (α = 0.05) for pilot test 2.
. . . . .
45
A.4
P-values of the two-factor with replication ANOVA test (α = 0.05) for the ﬁnal test.
. . . .
46
A.5
EC50 values for the open test setup with four different light paths.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.6
Validity criteria for the ﬁnal test. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
xiii
==PAGE:14==
This page is left blank intentionally
xiv
==PAGE:15==
1
|
Introduction
Algal growth inhibition tests are an essential part of regulatory ecotoxicology and are often the only tests
involving primary producers (Cleuvers and Weyers, 2003). Algal growth inhibition tests will in this report
be referred to as algal tests. Algal tests are among others a part of the data requirements for notiﬁcations of
new chemicals in the European market (European Union, 2008). One of the challenges with algal tests are
the difﬁcult test chemicals which can possess characteristics, complicating the standardised algal tests (e.g.
OECD test guideline 201 (OECD, 2011), and ISO 8692 (ISO, 2012)) (ISO, 2006). A coloured test substance
can complicate the algal test by absorbing the light needed for photosynthetic growth of the algal. When
testing the toxicity of a coloured substance, it can be difﬁcult to distinguish between the growth inhibition
caused by shading and the growth inhibition caused by the chemical toxicity of the coloured substance. Al-
tered guidelines for algal tests with coloured substances are available for both the OECD guideline (OECD,
2019) and the ISO standard (ISO, 2006). These guidelines suggest modiﬁcations regarding the light inten-
sity, test suspension volume, and agitation in order to reduce the shading effect. In this study, however, the
shading effect will not only be reduced, but it will be varied in order to distinguish between shading and
chemical toxicity. This distinction is important for the subsequent risk assessment of the test substance and
for the reproducibility of the test results (Cleuvers and Ratte, 2002).
Another characteristic of a difﬁcult test chemical can be volatilisation or hazardous risk towards humans.
To avoid volatilisation or exposure to human health, closed test vials are crucial when testing these types
of substances (ISO, 2006). By closing the test vials, the carbon availability for the photosynthetic growth
of the algae can be affected, impairing the reproducibility of the test. A way of avoiding carbon deﬁciency
is to enrich the test vials with CO2 (Halling-Sørensen et al., 1996). This can, however, be a laborious and
time consuming method. In this study, closed algal test setups without CO2 enrichment and with increased
headspace to suspension volume ratio, will be tested for sufﬁcient growth and pH stability. Furthermore,
theoretical calculations will be conducted to investigate the possibility of a closed test setup without CO2
1
==PAGE:16==
enrichment. Headspace to suspension volume ratio will in this report be referred to as HS:S ratio.
The aim of this study is to develop and test an algal test method for coloured substances where shading effect
can be distinguished from chemical toxicity. This will be done by:
• Shortening the light path through the test suspension by reducing the volume of the test suspension
• Ensuring optimal growth conditions for the algae by optimising the light intensity and the homogeneity
of the light ﬁeld
• Developing a closed test setup without CO2 enrichment by enlarging the HS:S ratio
• Distinguishing shading and chemical toxicity caused by a coloured substance by parallel tests with
varying light paths through the test suspensions
The hypothesis of this study is that the shading effect can be distinguished from the chemical toxicity of the
test substance in the altered test setup by varying the light path through the test suspension. The developed
method can then be a way of testing coloured substances in a more reproducible and reliable way. Addi-
tionally, an enlarged HS:S ratio is presumed to enable a closed algal test without CO2 enrichment. This will
make the closed algal test less laborious and more time efﬁcient.
This study will focus on titanium dioxide nanoparticles (naTiO2) as coloured test substance, using the algae
Raphidocelis subcapitata as test species.
2
==PAGE:17==
2
|
Theory
2.1
EU regulation
The European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) is an agency of the European Union (EU) working for a safer use
of chemicals in Europe, and it implements chemical legislation to protect human and environmental health
(European Chemical Agency, 2020). ECHA administrates and manages legislation for different aspects of
the chemical industry, including the Regulation, Evaluation, Authorisation, and Registration of Chemicals
(REACH). REACH establishes procedures for collecting information on the properties and potential hazards
of all chemicals on the European market (REACH, 2020). Within this registration, the manufacturers and
importers must submit information regarding the chemical in focus. According to REACH (2016), infor-
mation regarding the ecotoxicity of the chemical is required for production volumes above 1 tonne per year
which includes short term aquatic toxicity on invertebrates, growth inhibition of aquatic plants, and ready
biodegradability of the chemical.
In order to meet the regulations of the European Union, an ecotoxicological test should follow the Directive
2004/10/EC (European Union, 2004) for good laboratory practice or other international standards recognised
by ECHA (European Union, 2006). Two recognised international standards often applied when carrying out
algal tests are the ISO 8692 standard (ISO, 2012) and the OECD test guideline 201 (OECD, 2011). The
two test guidelines are very similar, however, the ISO 8692 standard is more strict on several parameters
compared to the OECD 201.
Not all chemicals can easily be tested in an algal test using the ISO 8692 standard or the OECD 201 test
guideline. To deal with these chemicals, both OECD and ISO have made guidance documents of how to alter
the test methods to minimise the uncertainties of the results based on the difﬁcult properties of the chemicals
(OECD, 2019; ISO, 2006). Coloured substances are one category of difﬁcult test chemicals, as they can
absorb the photosynthetically active light and thereby limit the growth of the algae cultures. To prevent the
3
==PAGE:18==
coloured substances from affecting the test results, OECD (2019) and ISO (2006) suggest modiﬁcation to
the standard algal test methods regarding light intensity, test suspension volume, and agitation.
2.2
Algal growth inhibition tests
Algae are primary producers and the main food source for plankton feeding organisms. They are, therefore,
essential when testing the ecotoxicity of chemicals towards aquatic ecosystems (Cleuvers and Weyers, 2003).
Widely used in algal tests are the freshwater green algae Raphidocelis subcapitata (ISO, 2012; OECD, 2011).
The green colour of R. subcapitata is caused by the chlorophyll a content. R. subcapitata is formerly known
as Selenastrum capricornutum or Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata. Algae are the primary species for testing
chemical toxicity towards aquatic plants, due to their short generation time, giving the possibility of chronic
test results in a short test period.
The principle of an algal growth inhibition test is the testing of chemical toxicity effect on algae. The algae
are incubated under identical test conditions but with a range of different concentrations of the test chemical.
The growth rates of the algae are then compared to the growth rate of the control cultures (no test chemical
added), ﬁnding the relative growth inhibition. Based on the level of growth inhibition of the test chemical,
the toxicity can be determined (ISO, 2012).
Since algae are primary producers, they require sufﬁcient light and CO2 to perform photosynthesis (Cleu-
vers and Weyers, 2003). Thus, algae are very sensitive to their surrounding environment and parameters like
temperature, light availability, nutrient concentration, and pH have inﬂuence on their growth (Naselli-Flores
and Barone, 2009). R. subcapitata can tolerate a low level of nutrients and a high turbidity, but are very sen-
sitive to CO2 deﬁciency (Naselli-Flores and Barone, 2009). Nutrients, like nitrogen, phosphorous, calcium,
magnesium, and iron, are needed for optimal growth conditions (ISO, 2012). In Table 2.1 the parameters
required for an acceptable algal test according to the ISO 8692 standard are listed.
Table 2.1: Test parameters required for an acceptable algal test according to ISO 8692 standard (ISO, 2012).
T [°C]
Light [µE · m−2 · s−1]
pH of the growth medium
23◦C ± 2◦C
60 to 120 ±10%
8.1 ± 0.2
2.2.1
Closed algal tests
When performing an algal test on a volatile or hazardous substance it is beneﬁcial to perform the test in
closed test vials to omit evaporative losses of the test substance or exposure to human health (Halling-
Sørensen et al., 1996). The toxicity of a volatile test chemical can be underestimated in an open test system,
4
==PAGE:19==
as the actual concentration in the suspension will be lower than ﬁrstly presumed due to volatilisation (Mayer
et al., 2000). With a closed test vial the pH will in some cases increase signiﬁcantly due to carbon shortage
in the system (Halling-Sørensen et al., 1996). This effect will be elaborated in Section 2.3.
Different methods have previously been investigated to establish the most beneﬁcial way of performing
an algal test of volatile or hazardous substances. Herman et al. (1990) enriched the growth medium with
additional HCO−
3 in the test suspension to support the CO2 demand for the photosynthetic algae growth.
The additional HCO−
3 increased the pH in the test suspension which then had to be neutralised before the
test start. To avoid this drift in pH caused by HCO−
3 , Brack and Rottler (1994) used a bipartite test vessel to
separate additional HCO−
3 from the test suspension. Thereby, they maintained a sufﬁcient CO2 level in the
closed vial without drift of pH. This method resulted in EC10 values for the test substance several orders of
magnitude lower than observed with an open test. However, this test method is laborious due to the bipartite
test vessel and the need for additional HCO−
3 .
Another method is enrichment of the headspace with CO2(g) to maintain the carbonate equilibrium between
the headspace and the test suspension. Halling-Sørensen et al. (1996) found that the most ideal method was
to enrich the headspace with 1% CO2 while shortening the test period from 3 days to 2 days to reduce the
CO2 demand. The paper also suggested, increasing the volume ratio between the headspace and the test
suspension as a method of minimising the pH drift. For very volatile substances, it can cause problems
with headspace above the test suspension, and, thus, phase distribution calculations are necessary (Halling-
Sørensen et al., 1996). Shortening the test period and the initial biomass was also suggested as alternative
ways of performing an algal test in a closed system, as less CO2 would be used throughout the test period
(Kühn and Pattard, 1990).
These previous studies all indicate that challenges still remain within the ﬁeld of closed algal tests. CO2
enrichment of the headspace is an additional step which makes the test more laborious and avoidance is,
therefore, desired. The pH of the test system is a very sensitive parameter, and addition of NaHCO−
3 causes
drifts which subsequently must be neutralised. By enlarging the HS:S ratio, it is believed to be possible to
perform an algal test in a closed test system without carbon enrichment to neither the headspace nor the test
suspension.
2.2.2
Determination of algal growth
Algal growth and growth inhibition are measures of algal biomass as function of time. However, it can be
difﬁcult to measure the algal biomass as weight per volume (mg algae per L suspension). Therefore, other
alternatives can be used to describe the algal growth and growth inhibition (OECD, 2011). These alternatives
5
==PAGE:20==
include manual cell counting, electronic particle counter, and chlorophyll a ﬂuorescence (OECD, 2011).
According to Mayer et al. (1997), measuring chlorophyll a ﬂuorescence can be done either in vivo, in the
living organism, or in vitro, by extracting the chlorophyll a with a solvent like acetone. The advantage of
measuring chlorophyll a ﬂuorescence in vitro is that the biochemical processes of the algae are not inﬂuenc-
ing the ﬂuorescence signal of the chlorophyll a. At low algal densities, the measured ﬂuorescence from the
chlorophyll a is linearly proportional to the algal biomass, thus the ﬂuorescence of chlorophyll a from the
algae can be used as a surrogate parameter for the algal biomass in the sample. The chlorophyll a ﬂuores-
cence measured in vitro is a sensitive, fast, and cost-effective technique. When measuring the ﬂuorescence
of chlorophyll a from the algae, it is possible to measure quite small sample volumes. The extracted algal
sample must be mixed with an organic solvent, e.g. acetone, at a 1:5 volume mixing ratio for a stable result.
This is essential for the test setup in this study, since one of the prerequisites is a small test volume.
The ﬂuorescence of chlorophyll a can be measured by ﬂuorometric analysis. In ﬂuorometric analysis a
sample of in vitro chlorophyll a is exposed to radiation from a light source ﬁltered through a primary ﬁlter
to isolate its spectrum to the absorption wavelength of chlorophyll a (Goddu et al., 1988). The chlorophyll a
pigment absorbs the light which is then emitted at a different wavelength. The ﬂuorescence of the sample is
measured at a 90◦angle from the source to avoid measuring of the initial light. Before reaching the detector,
the light beam is passed through a secondary ﬁlter to eliminate scattered radiation (Goddu et al., 1988).
2.2.3
Model
Algal growth rate can be determined as an exponential increase of algal biomass over the course of the test
period. The exponential growth rate can be calculated as follows (OECD, 2011):
µ = ln(Nn) −ln(N0)
t
(2.1)
where µ is the growth rate

d−1
, Nn is the ﬁnal biomass, N0 is the initial biomass, and t is the duration of
the test [d]. The toxicity of the test chemical will affect the growth of the algae, and the inhibition response
can be calculated as the relative reduction in growth rate caused by the test chemical (OECD, 2011):
Iµi = 1 −
µi
µavg,control
(2.2)
where I is the inhibition, µi is the speciﬁc growth rate

d−1
, and µavg,control is the average growth rate of the
control cultures grown under identical conditions but without any test substance added

d−1
.
A concentration-response curve can be ﬁtted to the obtained growth inhibition values following a Sigmoid
curve. Effect concentrations (ECx) with 95% conﬁdence intervals can be found based on this concentration-
6
==PAGE:21==
response curve by weighted non-linear regression analysis. The EC50 value is used as a parameter for
ecotoxicological effect towards speciﬁc environmental species. The EC50 value indicates the concentration
of the test chemical which has an effect on 50% of the test organisms. When performing ecotoxicological
tests on algae, the effect is speciﬁed as growth inhibition (OECD, 2011).
2.2.4
Carbon consumption and biomass production
In order to calculate the theoretical possibility of a closed algal test without CO2 enrichment, the carbon
consumption by the algae must be known. The consumption of carbon for photosynthetic growth of the
algae over time can be calculated using Equation 2.3 (Halling-Sørensen et al., 1996).
dUC(t)
dt
= k · dN
dt = k · µ · N
;
k = mC,algal · malgal
(2.3)
where UC is the consumption of carbon by photosynthesis [mg C], t is time [d], N is the number of algal
cells [cells], µ is the algal growth rate

d−1
, mC,algal is the amount of carbon in the algae [mg C/mg algae],
and malgal is the dry weight of the algae [mg algae/cells].
To ﬁnd the ﬁnal amount of consumed carbon, integration of Equation 2.3 gives Equation 2.4.
UC = k · N = k · N0 · eµ·t
(2.4)
where N0 is the number of algae cells at t0 [cells].
The amount of carbon in algae (mc,algal) is estimated to 0.5 mg carbon per mg algae (Azov et al., 1982;
Halling-Sørensen et al., 1996). The dry weight of an algae cell (malgal) can vary, depending on the growth
conditions and the size of the cell. Previous studies indicate that the dry weight of R. subcapitata cells are
between 10 −30 pg per cell (Halling-Sørensen et al., 1996; Mayer et al., 1998; Bossuyt and Janssen, 2004;
Patil et al., 2007; OECD, 2011).
2.3
The carbonate system
As CO2 is an essential parameter for algae growth, it is important to understand the dynamics of the carbon-
ate system in both water and air in algal tests. In natural environments, the carbonate system consist of six
species, as listed in Figure 2.1. The solid species calcium carbonate (CaCO3(s)) is, however, not taken into
account in regard to algal tests.
The carbonate system serves as a buffer for changes in pH, and is a signiﬁcant part of the transport of
carbon in the environment (Nazaroff and Alvarez-Cohen, 2001). The equilibrium system between the carbon
species, see Figure 2.1, is essential for understanding the carbonate system, and especially for a closed algal
test with a limited CO2(g) source.
7
==PAGE:22==
CO2(g)
Carbon dioxide gas
CO2(aq)
Dissolved carbon dioxide
H2CO3(aq)
Carbonic acid
HCO−
3 (aq)
Bicarbonate ion
CO2−
3 (aq)
Carbonate ion
CaCO3(s)
Calcium carbonate
Figure 2.1: Species and transformations of the carbonate system in algal tests.
As described by Henry’s law, equilibrium between CO2(aq) and CO2(g) will occur with sufﬁcient exposure
time (Nazaroff and Alvarez-Cohen, 2001):
[CO2(aq)] = KH · pCO2
(2.5)
where KH is the Henry’s law constant, and pCO2 is the partial pressure of CO2(g). CO2(aq) reacts rapidly
with water and forms H2CO3:
CO2(aq) + H2O ⇔H2CO3
Km = [H2CO3]
[CO2(aq)]
(2.6)
where Km is the equilibrium constant between CO2(aq) and H2CO3. It is difﬁcult to differentiate experi-
mentally between CO2(aq) and H2CO3, thus the two species are combined in one variable, H2CO∗
3 and can
be determined by:
[H2CO∗
3] = [CO2(aq)] + [H2CO3] = [CO2(aq)] · (1 + Km)
(2.7)
At equilibrium the dissociation reactions of H2CO3* and HCO−
3 can be described by:
H2CO∗
3 ⇔H+ + HCO−
3
K1 = [H+] · [HCO−
3 ]
[H2CO∗
3]
(2.8)
HCO−
3 ⇔H+ + CO2−
3
K2 = [H+] · [CO2−
3 ]
[HCO−
3 ]
(2.9)
8
==PAGE:23==
where K1 and K2 are the equilibrium constants. Based on the three carbon species in the aqueous carbonate
system, the molar concentration of total inorganic carbon (TIC) can be expressed.
TIC (mol/L) = [H2CO∗
3] + [HCO−
3 ] + [CO2−
3 ]
(2.10)
The capacity of the water to neutralise an acid is known as the total alkalinity (TAL) and can be deﬁned as:
TAL (eq/L) = [bases] −[acids] = 2[A2−] + [HA−] + [OH−] −[H+]
(2.11)
where A2−is a diprotic base and HA−is a monoprotic base. For the carbonate system, TAL is expressed as
follows:
TAL = 2[CO2−
3 ] + [HCO−
3 ] + [OH−] −[H+]
(2.12)
Another required equation is the dissociation of water:
H2O ⇔H+ + OH−
KW = [H+] · [OH−]
(2.13)
where KW is the dissociation constant for water.
In an open algal test, as CO2(aq) is consumed by the algae, more CO2(g) will enter the system to maintain
equilibrium. However, in closed algal tests CO2(g) is a limited source. Thus, when CO2(aq) is consumed
by the algae and most of the CO2(g) is depleted, the equilibrium in the system will shift towards CO2(aq),
and the amount of CO2−
3 , HCO−
3 , and H2CO3 decreases. The dominant aqueous species at pH 8 is HCO−
3 .
With a decrease in HCO−
3 , the amount of H+ ions also decreases, leading to an increase in pH (Nazaroff
and Alvarez-Cohen, 2001). A large pH drift during an algal test in closed test setup can cause problems
regarding reproducibility and thus, alternative test setups are required.
2.4
Shading effect on concentration-response curves
The concentration-response curve of an algal test shows how the chemical toxicity of a test substance inhibits
the algal growth. However, when testing a coloured substance, the growth inhibition might be affected by a
physical shading. As seen in Figure 2.2, the purple and blue concentration-response curves are left shifted
due to physical shading caused by the coloured substance. When altering the test setup by minimising
the light path through the test suspension, while obtaining a sufﬁcient light intensity and a homogeneous
light ﬁeld, the effect of the shading will be minimised (Cleuvers and Weyers, 2003; ISO, 2006). If the
shading is sufﬁciently minimised, the obtained concentration-response curve and related ECx values will
only represent the chemical toxicity of the test substance. The chemical toxicity of a test substance does
not change, regardless of the light path through the test suspension. Therefore, with sufﬁciently short light
9
==PAGE:24==
paths, no difference will be seen for the two concentration-response curves (green and red curve in Figure
2.2). The curves will solely represent the chemical toxicity of the substance. Concentration-response curves
for different test volumes, and thereby different light paths, must be compared in order to distinguish the
shading effect from the chemical toxicity.
Figure 2.2: Concentration-response curves for a coloured substance with different light paths through the test suspen-
sion. The purple and blue curve represent longer light paths which are both affected by shading, whereas the green and
red curve represent shorter light paths which are not affected by shading.
2.4.1
Determination of light paths
In this section, the maximum light paths through the test suspensions are calculated. The modiﬁed test setup
used in this study involves test vials rolling on Tube Rollers. Therefore, the test suspension will be covering
the bottom part of the vial, as shown in Figure 2.3. The maximum light path through the test suspension will
be from the top of the suspension surface to the bottom of the vial, noted as H in Figure 2.4.
The maximum light path through the suspension, H, can be found using the following equation.
maximum light path = H = r ·

1 −cos α
2

(2.14)
To ﬁnd the angle α (see Figure 2.4), the equation below must be used.
Asegment = 1
2 · r2 · (α −sin α)
(2.15)
As shown in Figure 2.4, the suspension covers a segment of the circular cross section. The area of the
10
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the test vial with test sus-
pension when placed horizontally on a Tube Roller.
Figure 2.4: Cross section of the test vial with
test suspension when placed on a Tube Roller.
segment can be found following Equation 2.16, based on the volume of the test suspension over the inner
length of the vial.
Asegment = Vsuspension
Lvial
(2.16)
From Equation 2.15, the best possible approximation for the angle α must be found.
Depending on the volume of the test suspension, the maximum light path will vary, as shown in Table 2.2.
A larger volume equals a longer light path. The light path will also vary depending on the size of the test
vial, since the segment area is dependent on the length of the vial. In this study, the test vials had an inner
length of 40 mm. The light paths are calculated as the maximum light paths through the suspension, in order
to get the most conservative measure of the distance the light has to travel through the suspension to reach
the algae.
Table 2.2: The maximum light paths through the test suspension, depending on the suspension volume. Calculations
are based on a vial with a total volume of 20 mL and an inner length of 40 mm.
Suspension volume [mL]
1.0
2.0
4.0
8.0
Light path [mm]
2.5
3.9
6.4
10.6
2.5
Coloured substances
Coloured substances are in this study deﬁned as chemicals or substances which can absorb light and thereby
cause a shading effect towards algae. Examples are dyes, pigments, and nanoparticles. Some of these are
produced in large amounts, and various products containing these coloured substances have proven to be
toxic towards aquatic ecosystems (Croce et al., 2017; Juanola-feliu et al., 2015; Bondarenko et al., 2013).
11
==PAGE:26==
In recent years, the production volume of nanoparticles has increased notably (Wigger et al., 2018), creating
a need for ecotoxicological testing in order to understand the environmental impact of these nanoparticles.
Previous studies show that different mechanisms inﬂuence the toxicity of nanoparticles towards aquatic
organisms (e.g. crustaceans and algae). Nanoparticles can aggregate and cause shading towards algae, as
the clusters of nanoparticles absorb the available light. Nanoparticles can also aggregate on natural organic
matter. This may lead to adsorption on the aquatic test organism which cause a higher "local" concentration
of the nanoparticle possibly causing higher toxicity (Handy et al., 2008). Furthermore, this adsorption can
also cause shading towards the algae, as the adsorbed nanoparticles cover the surface of the algae and block
the light (Hjorth et al., 2016). Dissolution of ions, adsorption of nutrients, and production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) are all mechanisms which can lead to increased growth inhibition (Hartmann et al., 2010; Ji
et al., 2011). In this study, the focus will be on the shading effect of the nanoparticles suspended in the growth
medium and not on the shading caused by adsorption on the algae or other mechanisms of nanoparticles.
2.5.1
Titanium dioxide nanoparticles
The test substance used in this study is titanium dioxide nanoparticles (naTiO2). NaTiO2 is a white powder
and is an important component in, among others, sunscreens and solar cells (Fu et al., 2015). The release of
naTiO2 into the environment is primarily through wastewater treatment plant efﬂuents, from exterior facades,
or accidents during transport (Salieri et al., 2015). Due to the widely use of naTiO2, several previous studies
have already investigated the toxic effect towards aquatic species. This makes naTiO2 a favourable choice
of test substance, due to the possibilities for comparison of EC50 values. In Table 2.3 previous ﬁndings of
EC50 values for naTiO2 are presented.
Table 2.3: EC50-values in mg/L with 95% conﬁdence intervals found in literature for testing of naTiO2 on R. subcapi-
tata.
Test duration [h]
Particle size [nm]
EC50 [mg/L]
Reference
96
< 100
8.7 [5.4 −14.7]95%
(Fu et al., 2015)
72
140 ± 4.4
21 [16 −26]95%
(Warheit et al., 2007)
72
≈30
71.1 [59.4 −85.1]95%
(Hartmann et al., 2010)
72
25 −70
103 [66.5 −134]95%a
(Aruoja et al., 2009)
a Values converted from mg Ti/L to mg TiO2/L
The shading effect of nanoparticles cause speculations towards the correctness of the found EC50 values.
Because of the complexities of performing algal tests on coloured substances, the question still remains
whether the found EC50 values of naTiO2 are affected by shading (Hartmann et al., 2010).
12
==PAGE:27==
The use of naTiO2 in this study is entirely as a model substance for the algal test of coloured substances and
not a toxicity test of nanoparticles.
2.6
Literature review
Attempts have previous been made to remove the shading effect of coloured substances affecting the algal
growth in various ways. In Memmert et al. (1994), the Ecological and Toxicological Association of Dyes
and Organic Pigments Manufacturers (ETAD) suggested that the shading effect could be eliminated by
subtracting the shading effect from the toxic effect. This was accomplished by making two test setups.
One which followed the standard algae test protocols where the coloured substance was mixed with the
algal suspension, and one where half of the coloured substance was placed in a Petri dish above the algal
suspension. It was believed, the second setup could simulate the effect of the shading which could be
subtracted from the effect of the standard algal test.
However, Cleuvers and Weyers (2003) proved this method of subtracting the shading effect to be inappro-
priate, having three objections to the method. The ﬁrst objection was that the subtraction assumes effect
summation which in Cleuvers et al. (2002) was proven to be incorrect. Cleuvers et al. (2002) showed that
the effects of the two parts (physical shading and chemical toxicity) followed the concept of independent
action which means that the calculations in Memmert et al. (1994) were unsuitable. The second objection
related to illumination of the algae. As the ﬂasks were continuously shaken the algae regularly entered zones
with better light conditions. This caused the shading of the standard algal test to be lessened compared to the
modiﬁed method. Thus, when subtracting the shading effect, the toxic effect would be underestimated. The
third and ﬁnal objection was that the toxic effect of the substance could decrease under shading. When algae
grow at their maximum growth rate, they are more sensitive to potential toxic effects from chemicals than
at lower growth rates. This might lead to underestimation of the toxicity of the coloured substance when
subtracting the shading effect. In conclusion, the ETAD method introduced in Memmert et al. (1994) under-
estimates the toxicity of coloured substances according to Cleuvers and Weyers (2003), and is therefore not
a suitable test method for performing an algal test of coloured substances.
Instead of subtracting the shading effect, Cleuvers and Weyers (2003) suggested following the standard test
protocols but minimising the shading effect by increasing the illumination and reducing the suspension vol-
ume. In this way the errors related to the ETAD method were avoided and the shading effect was minimised
to not affect the results of the algal test. This adjusted test method was also consistent with the modi-
ﬁed OECD guideline on difﬁcult test chemicals (OECD, 2019) and the ISO standard 14442 (ISO, 2006).
However, Cleuvers and Weyers (2003) did not conﬁrm the test results only represented the toxicity of the
13
==PAGE:28==
chemical and not the shading effect.
Attempts have also been made to use Lemna minor, the common duckweed, as an alternative aquatic plant
in growth inhibition tests of coloured substances (Hocini et al., 2019; Castro et al., 2019; Cleuvers and Ratte,
2002). The advantage of using duckweed, compared to algae, is that duckweed ﬂoats on the surface and is
thereby not affected by shading of the light absorbing chemicals. Cleuvers and Ratte (2002) recommended
to use the Lemna test in addition to the algal tests, as Lemna proved to be more sensitive than algae. The
Lemna test may thereby improve the assessment of phytotoxicity of chemicals. However, when performing
a growth inhibition test of aquatic plants, algal tests have the advantage of a shorter generation time than
Lemna tests. Therefore, a growth inhibition test for algae shows both acute and chronic effects of the test
chemical, whereas the Lemna test period must be longer to show the same results.
Challenges do still remain within the subject of improving the algal test for coloured substances. There is a
need for conﬁrming that the shading effect and the chemical toxicity can be distinguished from each other
by varying the light path through the test suspension.
14
==PAGE:29==
3
|
Methods
3.1
Test setup
All experiments in this study were performed under similar test conditions. In general, the ISO 8692 standard
was followed. However, as the aim of this study was to develop an algal test method for coloured substances,
modiﬁcations were made with inspiration from the modiﬁed ISO 14442 standard (ISO, 2006).
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the laboratory test setup with vials rolling on Tube Rollers under ﬂuorescent lamps.
All test vials were placed on Tube Rollers under ﬂuorescent lamps, see Figure 3.1. The light intensity in the
test setup was 143 µE · m−2 · s−1 ± 14%, measured at the surface of the test vials. Due to the standard
deviation of 14%, the light intensity was not in accordance with the ISO 8692 requirement of maximum
10%. The temperature was maintained at 24± 0.5◦C, and the algae culture of R. subcapitata and the growth
medium were prepared following the ISO 8682 standard. The ﬂuorescence of all samples were measured
with F-7000 Fluorescence Spectrophotometer with an excitation wavelengths of 430 nm and an emission
15
==PAGE:30==
wavelength of 670 nm. Additionally, the algal cell density of the samples were measured with Beckman
Coulter - Multisizer 3 Coulter Counter. All tests were prepared in La-Pha-Pack clear glass 20 mL screw
neck vials ND24 EPA with silicone/PTFE septum screw caps. For the open vials an  2 mm hole was
punctured in the septum using Boehm Seal Punch. The small diameter of the punctured hole ensured a low
degree of volatilisation from the vials of 8% ±2 during a 3 days test period.
The naTiO2 substance, nm-105, used for the algal tests was produced by the Joint Reseach Center and was
a mixture of both the rutile and the anatase phase of naTiO2. The nanoparticles had a primary particle size
of 15 −24 nm (Joint Research Centre, 2014).
3.2
Pilot tests
Two pilot tests and theoretical calculations were performed in order to test the functionality of a closed algal
test setup without CO2 enrichment and to distinguish shading effect from chemical toxicity of naTiO2. The
ﬁndings of the pilot tests were used to establish the ﬁnal test setup.
3.2.1
Pilot test 1: Closed algal test setup
A test of the algal growth ability in a closed system without CO2 enrichment was performed in order to
investigate if the growth conditions could sustain an algal growth inhibition test with sufﬁcient growth rates
and pH stability. Thus, no test substance was used in this test.
Five replicates of ﬁve suspension volumes, 0.9, 1.4, 2.4, 4.4, and 8.4 mL, containing growth medium and
algal inoculum were prepared with a cell density of 1 · 104 cells/mL in the closed test vials. Additionally,
three open vials with 4 mL algal suspension (growth medium and inoculum) were prepared as controls. The
vials were placed on the Tube Rollers for 72h, following the test setup described in Section 3.1.
At t0 and t72, the pH of the suspensions were measured. At t0, ﬁve extractions of 0.4 mL were taken from
the inoculum and from the growth medium (blanks). The extractions were each mixed with 1.6 mL acetone
for the ﬂuorescence measurements and placed in darkness. At t48 and t72, extractions were made from all
vials using a syringe needle. 24 hours after the t72-extraction, the ﬂuorescence of the samples were measured
with the Fluorescence Spectrophotometer.
In the last 24 hours of the algal test, after the extraction of 0.4 mL at t48, the above mentioned suspension
volumes correspond to HS:S ratios of 39:1, 19:1, 9:1, 4:1, and 1.5:1, respectively. In the last 24 hours, the
number of algal cells increases the most, thus, this is the most critical period of the test in regards to CO2
deﬁciency.
In one of the replicates of the open treatments (controls), the algae culture did not grow exponentially
16
==PAGE:31==
between day 2 and day 3. This can be seen in the time-log(biomass) plot in Figure A.1 in Appendix, where
Control 3 did not show linear correlation. This replicate will not be considered any further.
3.2.2
Pilot test 2: Algal test of naTiO2
An algal test of naTiO2 was conducted with varying light paths in order to distinguish shading effect from
the toxic effect in both an open and closed test setup to further test the capability of a closed test setup.
From a stock solution of 400 mg/L naTiO2 prepared by sonication, a concentration series was prepared in
volumetric ﬂasks. The concentrations of the test chemical were chosen in a geometric series with a ratio of
2 and with 100 mg/L as the median (25, 50, 100, 200, and 400 mg/L). To the volumetric ﬂasks, inoculum
was added for a start cell density of 1 · 104 cells/mL. Furthermore, a control containing growth medium and
inoculum without naTiO2 was prepared in a volumetric ﬂask.
The initial pH of the volumetric ﬂasks was measured after which triplicates from each concentration (ﬁve
replicates for the controls) were prepared in open and closed systems of 1 mL and 2 mL test suspension
according to Figure 3.2. These suspension volumes correspond to light paths of 2.5 mm and 3.9 mm,
respectively, according to Table 2.2. Furthermore, the suspension volumes in the closed test setup correspond
to HS:S ratios of 19:1 and 9:1, respectively.
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the test preparation for pilot test 2 with naTiO2 as test substance. Three replicates of each
treatment and ﬁve replicates of the controls for open and closed test vials of 1 mL and 2 mL suspension volume.
17
==PAGE:32==
Extractions of 0.2 mL from 5 replicates of the control and 3 replicates of blanks (containing only growth
medium) were prepared at t0. Extractions of 0.2 mL suspension for the ﬂuorescence measurement were
taken from the controls and the treatments of 2 mL after 48h. Finally, extractions were taken from all
treatments after 72h. All extractions were each mixed with 0.8 mL acetone and placed in darkness. The
ﬂuorescence of all samples was measured with the Fluorescence Spectrophotometer. One of the ﬁve ﬂuores-
cence measurements of the controls at t0 was excluded, because it deviated more than 10 standard deviations
from the four other measurements. This replicate will not be considered any further.
3.3
Final test
Based on the ﬁndings of the two pilot tests, a ﬁnal algal tests of naTiO2 with varying light paths through the
test suspension in an open test setup was conducted in order to distinguish shading effect from the chemical
toxicity.
From a stock solution of 160 mg/L naTiO2 prepared by sonication, a concentration series was prepared in
volumetric ﬂasks. The concentrations of the test substance were chosen in a geometric series with a ratio of
2 and with 40 mg/L as the median (10, 20, 40, 80, and 160 mg/L). The start cell density of the algae was
1 · 104 cells/mL. Additionally, a volumetric ﬂask was prepared as control containing inoculum and growth
medium. Triplicates from each concentration were prepared in test vials with 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, and 8.0 mL test
suspension, respectively. These suspension volumes correspond to light paths of 2.5, 3.9, 6.4, and 10.6 mm,
as seen in Table 2.2.
Extractions of 0.2 mL suspension for the ﬂuorescence measurement were taken from all vials after 48h and
72h and mixed with 0.8 mL acetone and placed in darkness. Furthermore, extractions from 5 replicates of the
inoculum and 5 replicates of blanks (containing only growth medium) were prepared at t0. The ﬂuorescence
of all samples was measured with the Fluorescence Spectrophotometer.
3.4
Theoretical calculations of the carbonate system
In addition to the experimental tests, theoretical calculations of the closed algal test setup were carried out
based on the theory presented in Section 2.3. The aim of these calculations was to investigate the theoretical
possibility of a closed test setup without CO2 enrichment. This was done by calculating the growth rates
(µ) based on the change in pH and the HS:S ratios from pilot test 1. The calculated growth rates were then
compared with the experimentally found growth rates.
These calculations required several steps:
18
==PAGE:33==
Step 1 - Carbon in growth medium
The only nutrient used in the algal tests containing carbon was NaHCO3. The growth medium consisted of
only Milli-Q water and nutrients. Milli-Q water has no alkalinity, thus TAL was only affected by NaHCO3
(Harremoës et al., 1989). With the addition of 1 mol/L NaHCO3, TAL increases with 1 eq/L (Nazaroff and
Alvarez-Cohen, 2001). A system of Equation 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.12, and 2.13 was solved for the initial total
inorganic carbon in the aqueous suspension (TICaq,start). Using the volume of the suspension (Vaq), the initial
molar amount of inorganic carbon in the suspension (n(TICaq,start)) was calculated according to Equation 3.1.
n(TICaq,start) = TICaq,start · Vaq
(3.1)
Step 2 - Carbon in headspace
The initial molar amount of carbon in the headspace (n(TICg,start)) was calculated using the ideal gas low:
n(TICg,start) = pCO2,start · Vg
R · T
(3.2)
where pCO2,start is the initial partial pressure of CO2, Vg is the volume of the headspace, R is the gas constant,
and T is the temperature.
Step 3 - Biomass production
The molar amount of carbon consumed by the algae during the 3 days test period (n(UC)) was calculated
according to Equation 2.4 with the growth rate (µ) unknown. The carbon consumption was subtracted from
the total initial molar amount of inorganic carbon in the test vial in order to determine the molar amount of
inorganic carbon at the end of the test (n(TICend) :
n(TICend) = n(TICaq,start) + n(TICg,start) −n(UC)
(3.3)
Step 4 - Determination of µ
n(TICend) can also be written as:
n(TICend) = n(TICaq,end) + n(TICg,end)
(3.4)
and can be expanded by including Equation 3.1 and 3.2:
n(TICend) = TICaq,end · Vaq + pCO2,end · Vg
R · T
(3.5)
The only carbon species removed from the system was CO2(aq), used for biomass production. Changes in
CO2 do not affect the alkalinity (Harremoës et al., 1989). A system of Equation 2.5, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.12,
19
==PAGE:34==
and 2.13 was solved for the ﬁnal partial pressure of CO2 (pCO2,end) and the ﬁnal total inorganic carbon in the
test suspension (TICaq,end) which was used in Equation 3.5.
Equation 3.5 was then solved for the unknown µ which was a part of n(TIC)end. The results of these calcu-
lations are presented in Section 4.1.2.
3.5
Data treatment
To be able to interpret the experimental results, treatment of the data was needed. This included correction
of background ﬂuorescence, calculations of validity criteria, ﬁtting of concentration-response curves, and
lastly analysis of statistics.
3.5.1
Background and growth rate corrections
The data obtained from the Fluorescence Spectrophotometer of the chlorophyll a content in the samples were
used as a measure for the biomass of the algae. The biomass measurements were corrected for background
ﬂuorescence in the growth medium. The biomass measurements were used to calculate the growth rate
and the relative growth inhibition, as described in Section 2.2.3. As the initial biomass is a very sensitive
parameter for the further calculations, the ﬂuorescence was measured in the inoculum and a dilution factor
was used for conversion. Thereby, the background interference was less signiﬁcant. The conversion is
presented below.
dilution factor =
Vinoculum
Vvolumetric ﬂask
(3.6)
biomasscorrected = biomassinoculum −background ﬂuorescence
dilution factor
(3.7)
where Vinoculum is the volume of the inoculum added to the volumetric ﬂasks, Vvolumetric ﬂask is the volume of
the volumetric ﬂasks, biomasscorrected is the corrected biomass used for further calculations, biomassinoculum
is the biomass measured in the inoculum, and background ﬂuorescence is the ﬂuorescence measured in the
growth medium. For corrected biomass values smaller than corrected initial biomass values of the controls,
the growth rates were assigned a value of 0.0 d−1 and inhibition a value of 100%.
3.5.2
Validity criteria
An algal test is considered valid, in accordance with the ISO 8692 standard, when three validity criteria are
met (ISO, 2012). Firstly, the average growth rate of the controls (µ) must be at least 1.4 d−1 within the 72h
test period. The average growth rate is calculated using Equation 2.1. Secondly, the coefﬁcient of variation
(CV) of the growth rates of the controls may not exceed 5%. CV is deﬁned as the ratio between the standard
20
==PAGE:35==
deviation (σ) and the mean growth rate (µ) of the samples, see Equation 3.8. Finally, the pH of the controls
relative to the pH of the growth medium (∆pH) may not vary more than 1.5 units.
CV = σ
µ · 100%
(3.8)
3.5.3
Concentration-response curves
Concentration-response curves were ﬁtted to the obtained growth inhibition values using non-linear regres-
sion with variable slope (four parameters) in the software GraphPad Prism 8.4.2 using least squares ﬁt
following Equation 3.9. EC50 values were found as best-ﬁt values with 95% conﬁdence intervals.
response = bottom +
top −bottom
1 +
 EC50
concentration
slope
(3.9)
Bottom and Top are the lower and upper plateaus of the Sigmoid curve assigned to 0 and 100, respectively.
EC50 is the value of concentration in the median of the bottom and top plateau. Slope is a coefﬁcient for the
steepness of the curve.
3.5.4
Statistical analysis
To help draw conclusions, regarding growth rates and ∆pH values for the different HS:S ratios in pilot test
1, statistical analysis was performed.
A two-tailed F-test was used to compare the standard deviations (σ) of the growth rates and ∆pH values for
pilot test 1. The null hypothesis (H0) was that the standard deviations (σ) of two treatments were equal.
H0 : σ1 = σ2
(3.10)
Based on the ﬁnding from the two-tailed F-test, two-tailed two-sample t-test were performed to compare
the mean growth rates as well as the ∆pH values. The null hypothesis was that the mean growth rate of
two treatments were equal. For the experimental data of pilot test 2 and the ﬁnal test, a Two-Way ANOVA
statistical analysis was used to compare the individual treatments. The null hypothesis was that all the
treatments had equal relative growth inhibition.
All statistical tests were conducted at a level of signiﬁcance of α = 0.05.
3.6
Literature search
Literature was found using the scientiﬁc search engines Web of Science and DTU Findit to obtain information
regarding the subjects within this study. Keywords were used in different combinations to target speciﬁc
topics. An example of a search text using Boolean operators was as follows:
21
==PAGE:36==
(alga* OR chlorophyll a) AND (coloured substance OR dye OR nano) AND spectroﬂuoro*
In this literature search, the main focus lied on peer-reviewed scientiﬁc articles, though reports from gov-
erning bodies have also been used. To the extent possible, the most applicable literature has been used.
Furthermore, it was attempted to obtain information from the original sources.
Based on Cleuvers and Weyers (2003) and Halling-Sørensen et al. (1996), a citation search was performed
to ﬁnd related scientiﬁc articles within the subject of matter. This was done by examine references from the
two articles, and articles referring to them. Furthermore, a search for Related Record for the two articles was
performed in the Web of Science database to ﬁnd additional articles within the subject of matter.
22
==PAGE:37==
4
|
Results
In this chapter, the results of the two pilot tests, the theoretical calculations, and the ﬁnal test will be pre-
sented. The results of the two pilot tests were used to determine the setup of the ﬁnal test.
4.1
Pilot tests
Two pilot tests and theoretical calculations were performed in order to test the functionality of a closed algal
test setup without CO2 enrichment and to distinguish shading effect from the chemical toxicity of naTiO2.
4.1.1
Pilot test 1: Closed algal test setup
A series of closed algal tests were conducted with varying HS:S ratios in order to determine growth rates
and test for sufﬁcient pH stability. Thus, no test substance was used in this test.
The average growth rates (µ), the coefﬁcients of variation of the growth rates (CV), and the changes in pH
relative to the pH of the growth medium (∆pH) are presented in Table 4.1. The average growth rates for all
six treatments were above 1.4 d−1 as required by the ISO 8692 standard. The CV of the closed treatments
of 39:1, and 19:1 HS:S ratios were above 5%, and were, therefore, not acceptable as a valid algal test. ∆pH
did not exceed 1.5 units for any of the treatments. It was not possible to measure the ﬁnal pH for the closed
treatment of 39:1 HS:S ratio due to of low suspension volume. Furthermore, it was only possible to measure
the ﬁnal pH for the closed treatments of 19:1 and 9:1 HS:S ratios when pooling the remaining suspension
from all replicates together. Therefore, no standard deviations were available for these treatments. According
to the time-log(biomass) plot in Figure A.2 in Appendix, each treatment showed linear correlation, indicating
exponential growth throughout the 3 days test period.
The average growth rates with standard deviations for the six treatments are presented in Figure 4.1a. Based
on a t-test (α = 0.05), it was found that the growth rate of the treatment with 9:1 HS:S ratio was signiﬁcantly
different from the growth rates for the treatments with 4:1 and 1.5:1 HS:S ratios, see p-values in Table A.1
23
==PAGE:38==
Table 4.1: Average growth rates (µ) with standard deviations, coefﬁcients of variation of the growth rates (CV), and the
changes in pH relative to the pH of the growth medium (∆pH) in pilot test 1 with six different HS:S ratios. These three
parameters represent the validity criteria for an algal test following ISO 8692 standard.
Suspension
volume [mL]
4.0
0.5
1.0
2.0
4.0
8.0
HS:S ratio
Open
39:1
19:1
9:1
4:1
1.5:1
µ [d−1]
2.30 ± 0.00
1.79 ± 0.15
1.94 ± 0.17
1.96 ± 0.05
1.85 ± 0.06
1.79 ± 0.05
CV [%]
0.00
8.25a
8.92a
2.68
2.98
2.66
∆pH
0.2 ± 0.1
N/A
0.41b
0.9b
1.1 ± 0.1
1.0 ± 0.1
a Criterion not met for the ISO 8692 standard
b No standard deviation available
in Appendix. None of the other closed treatments were signiﬁcantly different from each other. Furthermore,
the t-test showed that the average growth rates of the closed treatments were all signiﬁcantly different from
the average growth rate of the open treatment.
The initial pH of the growth medium was 8.0. In Figure 4.1b, ∆pH for the six treatments are presented,
except for 39:1. Based on a t-test (α = 0.05) the treatment with 19:1 HS:S ratio was the only closed
treatment not signiﬁcantly different from the open treatment regarding ∆pH. Furthermore, ∆pH for the
closed treatments with 9:1, 4:1, and 1.5:1 HS:S ratios were not signiﬁcantly different from each other. See
Table A.2 in Appendix for the p-values of the t-tests.
(a) Average growth rate.
(b) Change in pH.
Figure 4.1: (a) Average growth rates (µ) and (b) the changes in pH relative to the pH of the growth medium (∆pH) for
the six treatments in pilot test 1 represented by their HS:S ratio. Each point represent a mean of replicates with standard
deviations. No data is available for 39:1 in (b) and no standard deviations are available for 19:1 and 9:1 in (b).
24
==PAGE:39==
4.1.2
Theoretical calculations
Calculations of the carbonate system were conducted to investigate the theoretical possibility of a closed test
setup without CO2 enrichment, as described in Section 3.4.
In Figure 4.2 the theoretical and experimental growth rates are shown. The theoretically calculated growth
rates were based on the HS:S ratios and the ∆pH values of the experimental results. As no ∆pH value was
available for the treatment with 39:1 HS:S ratio, no theoretical growth rate is presented for this treatment.
The theoretical and experimental growth rates were signiﬁcantly different for all four treatments, as the
theoretically calculated growth rates deviated more than 3 standard deviations from the experimental growth
rates. The difference between the theoretical and experimental growth rates became larger as HS:S ratio
decreased.
This signiﬁcant difference between the experimental data and the theoretical calculations introduced a scep-
ticism towards the results of the closed test setup, which will be discussed in Section 5.2.
Figure 4.2: Experimental average growth rates from pilot test 1 with standard deviations and the theoretically calculated
average growth rates for different HS:S ratios.
4.1.3
Pilot test 2: Algal test of naTiO2
An algal growth inhibition test of naTiO2 was conducted with two different light paths in order to distinguish
the shading effect from the chemical toxicity. Additionally, the test was performed in both an open and closed
test setup to further test the capability of a closed test setup.
Table 4.2 shows the validity criteria for the algal test of naTiO2 in the four different test setups - open and
closed test systems with light paths of 2.5 and 3.9 mm, respectively. The two open treatments complied
with all three validity criteria for the ISO 8692 standard. The closed treatment with light path of 2.5 mm
(HS:S ratio of 19:1) did not meet the criterion of a CV of maximum 5%. Additionally, the closed treat-
25
==PAGE:40==
ment with light path of 3.9 mm (HS:S ratio of 9:1) did not meet the criterion of a ∆pH of maximum 1.5.
According to Figure A.3 in Appendix, the controls of the treatments with light path of 3.9 mm (both open
and closed) showed exponential growth throughout the 3 days test period, as the time-log(biomass) showed
linear correlation for each treatment.
Table 4.2: Average growth rates of the controls (µ) with standard deviations, coefﬁcients of variation of the growth rates
of the controls (CV), and changes in pH of the controls relative to the pH of the growth medium (∆pH) for pilot test
2 of naTiO2 in open and closed test setup with two different light paths. These three parameters represent the validity
criteria for an algal test following ISO 8692 standard.
Open
Closed
Suspension volume [mL]
1.0
2.0
1.0
2.0
Light path [mm]
2.5
3.9
2.5
3.9
HS:S ratio
−
−
19:1
9:1
µ [d−1]
1.85 ± 0.03
1.91 ± 0.03
1.59 ± 0.26
1.77 ± 0.04
CV [%]
1.83
1.66
16.46a
2.44
∆pH
0.3
−0.4
1.1
2.0a
a Criterion not met for the ISO 8692 standard
(a) Open test conditions
(b) Closed test conditions
Figure 4.3: Concentration-response curves for pilot test 2 carried out in the (a) open and (b) closed test setup with two
different light paths (2.5 and 3.9 mm). The response is calculated based on the average inhibition of the growth rates of
each concentration relative to the average growth rates of the controls. The error bars represent standard deviations of
the data points.
26
==PAGE:41==
Concentration-response curves were ﬁtted to the data sets for relative growth inhibition in the open and
closed treatments, as shown in Figure 4.3. The concentration-response curves for the two open treatments
were very similar. For the two closed treatments, the curves were more diverse and especially for the 3.9
mm treatment, the curve was not ﬁtted very well to the data points as seen in the Figure 4.3b. Additionally,
the standard deviations for the closed treatments were larger than for the open treatments, indicating poorer
data sets. Based on Two-Way ANOVA statistical analysis (α = 0.05), there was no signiﬁcant difference
between the relative growth inhibition for the two open treatments or for the two closed treatments. See
Table A.3 in Appendix for the p-values.
Table 4.3: EC50 values obtained from the ﬁtted model in pilot test 2 in open and closed test setup with two different
light paths. The EC50 values are presented as best-ﬁt values with 95% conﬁdence intervals.
Suspension
volume [mL]
Light
path [mm]
HS:S ratio
EC50 [mg/L]
Open
1.0
2.5
−
37.8 [24.0 −51.6]95%
2.0
3.9
−
45.3 [32.5 −58.8]95%
Closed
1.0
2.5
19:1
5.83 [−21.6]95%
2.0
3.9
9:1
1.75 [−]95%
The obtained EC50 values for the open and closed treatments with light paths of 2.5 and 3.9 mm are presented
in Table 4.3. No signiﬁcant difference was found between the EC50 values for the two open treatments due
to the overlapping 95% conﬁdence intervals. No 95% conﬁdence intervals could be found for the two
treatments in the closed test setup. As only one data point in the open treatments and none in the closed
treatments were below the obtained EC50 values, a new and lower concentration series was chosen for the
ﬁnal test.
The results of the two pilot tests showed inconsistent results regarding the closed test setups which led to the
ﬁnal test being performed in an open test system and with a lower concentration series.
4.2
Final test
Based on the ﬁndings of the two pilot tests, a ﬁnal algal test of naTiO2 with varying light paths in an open
test setup was conducted in order to distinguish shading effect from chemical toxicity. Two additional light
paths (6.4 and 10.6 mm) were introduced in the ﬁnal test in addition to the two light paths from pilot test 2
(2.5 and 3.9 mm).
27
==PAGE:42==
Concentration-response curves were ﬁtted to the relative inhibition of the four treatments, see Figure 4.4.
The concentration-response curves for the treatments with the two shortest light paths (2.5 and 3.9 mm) are
identical. Left shifting of the curves are seen with increasing light path. A Two-Way ANOVA statistical
analysis showed no signiﬁcant difference between the relative growth inhibitions for the treatments with the
two shortest light paths (2.5 and 3.9 mm) or between the treatments with the two longest light paths (6.4 and
10.6 mm), see Table A.4 in Appendix for p-values.
Figure 4.4: Concentration-response curve for the ﬁnal test of naTiO2 carried out in open test setup with four different
light paths. The response is calculated based on the average inhibition of growth rates of each concentration relative to
the average growth rate of the controls. The error bars represent standard deviations of the data points.
EC50 values obtained from the ﬁtted concentration-response curves for the four treatments are presented
in Figure 4.5. The EC50 values with 95% conﬁdence intervals can be found in Table A.5 in Appendix.
The ﬁgure shows that the EC50 values obtained for the two treatments with the shortest light paths were
signiﬁcantly higher than the EC50 values for the two treatments with the longest light paths, as the 95%
conﬁdence intervals do not overlap. The 95% conﬁdence intervals of the EC50 values for the two shortest
light paths overlap, indicating no signiﬁcant difference. This is also the case for the two longest light paths.
The validity criteria for the ISO 8692 standard were met for all four treatments, see Table A.6 in Appendix.
Furthermore, according to the time-log(biomass) plot in Figure A.4 in Appendix, all controls each showed
linear correlation, indicating exponential growth throughout the 3 days test period.
28
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.5: EC50 values obtained from the ﬁtted model for the ﬁnal test of naTiO2 in open test setup with four different
light paths. The data points represent best-ﬁt values with 95% conﬁdence intervals.
29
==PAGE:44==
30
==PAGE:45==
5
|
Discussion
In this chapter the results of the two pilot tests, the theoretical calculations, and the ﬁnal test will be discussed
in relation to the aim of this study. The discussion will include the growth conditions of the altered test setup,
the functionality of the closed test setup, the distinction between shading and chemical toxicity, and ﬁnally
nanoparticles as a test substance.
5.1
Light path and optimal growth conditions
The ﬁrst aim of this study was to shorten the light path through the suspension by reducing the test volume.
This was done both in pilot test 2 and in the ﬁnal test. Additionally, the light path was shorten by placing the
vials horizontally on Tube Rollers instead of vertically on a shaking table.
The second aim of this study was to ensure optimal growth conditions for the algae by optimising light
homogeneity and intensity. As seen in Figure 3.1, the test vials were placed on Tube Rollers to ensure
continuous stirring of the test suspension under ﬂuorescent lamps. The light intensity at the surface of the
test vials was 143 µE · m−2 · s−1 ± 14%. Due to the refraction of the light at the surface of the test vials
it is presumed that the light intensity at the location of the algae inside the vials was within the required
range of 60 −120 µE · m−2 · s−1. As stated by Cleuvers and Weyers (2003), the light intensity at the
location of the algae must be in the high end of the range required by ISO 8692 standard (i.e. at least 120
µE · m−2 · s−1 or even higher dependent on the algae species) in order to maintain exponential growth
even at high concentration of a coloured test substance. Furthermore, the temperature during the tests was
maintained at 24◦C ± 0.5◦C. This complies with the ISO 8692 standard. The average growth rates of the
controls for all four treatments in the ﬁnal test were all above 1.95 d−1, as seen in Table A.6, which is far
above the required growth rate of 1.4 d−1. Additionally, exponential growth was maintained in the controls
for all four treatments during the 3 days test period, as seen in Figure A.4 in Appendix, where the time-
log(biomass) plots each show linear correlation. This indicates that optimal growth conditions for the algae
31
==PAGE:46==
were ensured in the ﬁnal test.
5.2
Closed algal test setup without CO2 enrichment
The third aim of this study was to develop a closed test setup without CO2 enrichment by enlarging the
HS:S ratio. It was expected that with a large HS:S ratio the algae would have sufﬁcient CO2 for exponential
growth throughout the 3 days test period with sufﬁcient pH stability.
5.2.1
Pilot test 1
In order to fulﬁl this aim, ﬁve different treatments with varying HS:S ratios in closed vials and one treatment
in open vials as controls were tested in pilot test 1. Thus, the test was conducted without the use of any test
substance. The test showed good results regarding the growth rates of all ﬁve closed treatments with the
lowest average growth rate being 1.79 ± 0.15 d−1, see Table 4.1. However, it was expected, based on the
conducted calculations and the existing literature that the growth rates would decrease with decreasing HS:S
ratio due to the lack of CO2 in the system as seen in Figure 4.2 (Kühn and Pattard, 1990; Halling-Sørensen
et al., 1996). Only one of the closed treatments (9:1 HS:S ratio) showed signiﬁcantly different growth rates
from the other closed treatments, indicating that the expected decrease did not occur.
At least it was expected that the treatments with the lowest HS:S ratios would result in unacceptable ∆pH
values of more than 1.5 due to the consumption of CO2(aq) leading to a decrease in HCO−
3 . However, no
signiﬁcant difference was seen between ∆pH values for the three treatments with the smallest HS:S ratios
(9:1; 4:1, and 1.5:1) and none of the treatments resulted in unacceptable ∆pH values of more than 1.5 (see
Table 4.1 and Figure 4.1b). According to the theoretical calculations and previous studies, this should not
be possible within a closed test system. This raised some doubt about the credibility of the results.
It should be noted that presumptions were made regarding the carbon content and dry weight of the algae
in order to conduct the theoretical calculations. The carbon content of the algae was presumed to be 0.5 mg
carbon per mg algae (Azov et al., 1982; Halling-Sørensen et al., 1996). This content may vary, depending
on the conditions the algae are exposed to. Furthermore, it was presumed that the dry weight of the algae
was 10 pg per cell (Mayer et al., 1998). This presumption of the dry weight was the lowest value found
in literature, see Section 2.2.4. In order to get more accurate calculations, these two parameters could have
been measured in the test setup of this study. However, even if the carbon content and the dry weight of
the algae was changed to other values within the range found in literature, the conclusions remain the same.
Additionally, the theoretical calculations are consistent with the literature, and are therefore presumed to be
reliable.
32
==PAGE:47==
5.2.2
Pilot test 2
It was still desired to carry out an algal test in a closed test system and compare the results with those of an
open test system. This was achieved in pilot test 2 where an algal test with two different light paths (and
thus two different HS:S ratios) was carried out in both an open and a closed test system. Firstly, the average
growth rate of the controls in the closed treatment with HS:S ratio of 19:1 had a CV of 16.5% which is more
than three times the acceptable CV of 5% (ISO, 2012). This indicates a large uncertainty and insufﬁcient
reproducibility. Secondly, the closed treatment with HS:S ratio of 9:1 had an increase in pH of 2.0 which
is above the allowed maximum ∆pH of 1.5. The treatments in the closed algal test setup did therefore not
meet the criteria for a valid algal test, and the closed test setup shows less stability and less reproducibility
in comparison to the open test setup. Additionally, the 95% conﬁdence interval for the obtained EC50 values
for the closed treatments could not be determined by the model, being another indication of uncertain results.
Based on the results from the two pilot tests, it was decided to carry out the ﬁnal test in an open test setup.
That said, it is not concluded that a closed test setup without CO2 enrichment is impossible. In order to make
such a conclusion, the results would have to be more consistent. It is recommended to carry out further tests
in order to conﬁrm or reject the hypothesis that an enlarged HS:S ratio can enable a closed test setup without
CO2 enrichment. In both pilot tests, the treatments in the closed test setup with largest HS:S ratios (39:1
and 19:1 HS:S ratios) showed unstable results and CV above the acceptable 5%. Therefore, it would be
interesting to investigate if a larger test vial with same HS:S ratio (and thus larger suspension volume) could
be a solution to this issue. In general, it should be kept in mind that with a larger headspace the substance
might volatilise to the headspace, underestimating the toxicity of the substance. (Halling-Sørensen et al.,
1996).
5.3
Distinction between shading and chemical toxicity
The ﬁnal aim of this study was to distinguish shading and chemical toxicity caused by a coloured substance
by parallel tests with varying light paths through the test suspension.
5.3.1
Pilot test 2
In pilot test 2 with naTiO2, two different light paths of respectively 2.5 and 3.9 mm were chosen with the
hypothesis that these two light paths were short enough to not be affected by shading. Figure 4.3a shows
two very similar concentration-response curves for the two treatments in the open test system. This indicates
that shading did not affect the results and that the concentration-response curves are solely affected by the
chemical toxicity of naTiO2. In order to distinguish between shading and toxicity, additional treatments with
longer light paths were needed.
33
==PAGE:48==
5.3.2
Final test
Based on the ﬁndings in the two pilot tests, the ﬁnal test setup was determined. A new concentration series
with a median of 40 mg/L was applied, and two additional treatments with longer light paths (6.4 and 10.6
mm) were introduced. As suggested by Cleuvers and Weyers (2003), the shading was expected not to affect
the treatments with shorter light paths, as was also the case in pilot test 2. Thus, it was expected to see
identical concentration-response curves for the treatments with shorter light paths. With increasing light
paths the relative inhibition was expected to increase (i.e. decrease of the EC50 value). Figure 4.4 illustrates
the four ﬁtted concentration-response curves for the ﬁnal algal test. The ﬁgure shows the curves for the two
shortest light paths (2.5 and 3.9 mm) being identical whereas the curves for the longer light paths (6.4 and
10.6 mm) are left shifted due to shading. The ANOVA statistical analysis (α = 0.05) shows that the relative
inhibition for the treatments with light paths of 2.5 mm and 3.9 mm are not signiﬁcantly different from each
other, see Table A.4 for p-values in Appendix. These ﬁndings conﬁrm the hypothesis that the shading effect
can be distinguished from the chemical toxicity by varying the light paths in this altered algal test setup.
The concentration-response curves of the three treatments with the shortest light paths (2.5, 3.9, and 6.4
mm) are parallel. The longest light path (10.6 mm) is more affected by shading which is another mode of
action than chemical toxicity, thus the curve has a different shape.
In order to carry out a satisfactory risk assessment of a coloured substance, it is essential to distinguish any
possible shading effect from the chemical toxicity results of the algal test to not confound the measures of
chemical toxicity (Cleuvers and Ratte, 2002). By performing parallel tests with varying light paths, it was
proven possible to distinguish the shading from the toxicity, and thus obtaining a clear indication of the
chemical toxicity of the coloured substance.
It is clear from Figure 4.5 that the EC50 values obtained in the ﬁnal test for the two treatments with shortest
light paths (2.5 and 3.9 mm) are not signiﬁcantly different from each other as their 95% conﬁdence intervals
overlap. This indicates that shading did not affect these results. Thus, the EC50 value caused only by
chemical toxicity for naTiO2 can be found when the maximum light path is at least shorter than 3.9 mm. It
is important to state when performing an algal test with this modiﬁed test setup on other coloured substances,
the maximum light path without shading affecting the results, might differ, since shading is subjective to the
speciﬁc test substance.
Table 2.3 shows EC50 values for naTiO2 on R. subcapitata found by previous studies. The found EC50
values vary between 8.7 mg/L and 103 mg/L naTiO2. Thus, the EC50 values found in this study for the two
shortest light paths are approximately a factor 6 from the lowest found EC50 value and a factor 2 from the
34
==PAGE:49==
highest found EC50 value. It was expected that the EC50 values found in this study would be in the higher
range of the previously found EC50 values, since shading is proven to be distinguished from the chemical
toxicity. It should however be noted that different naTiO2 products with different particle sizes have been
used in these previous studies, and none have used the same speciﬁc naTiO2 as in this study.
5.3.3
Nanoparticles as test substance
Performing an algal test using nanoparticles as test substance can cause other problems than just shading.
Adsorption of aggregated nanoparticles to the algae can cause "local" shading which cannot be removed by
varying the light path through the suspension (Hartmann et al., 2010; Ji et al., 2011; Hjorth et al., 2016).
The focus of this study was to distinguish the shading effect caused by the suspended nanoparticles from the
chemical toxicity which was achieved, as seen in Figure 4.4 and 4.5. The test results might be affected by
other mechanisms of the nanoparticles than shading, this, however, has not affected the ability to distinguish
the shading effect from the chemical toxicity. The method developed in this study is, therefore, considered
to be useful in future testing of nanoparticles as well as other coloured substances.
35
==PAGE:50==
36
==PAGE:51==
6
|
Conclusions
The aim of this study was to develop and test an algal test method for coloured substances where shading
effect can be distinguished from chemical toxicity. Furthermore, it was desired to develop the test in a
closed system without CO2 enrichment by enlarging the HS:S ratio, to enable tests of volatile and hazardous
substances in a less laborious way. In order to fulﬁl these aims, two pilot tests, theoretical calculations, and
one ﬁnal test were conducted. Pilot test 1 was of a closed algal test setup without CO2 enrichment. Pilot
test 2 was an algal test of naTiO2 with two different light paths in both an open and closed test setup. The
ﬁnal test was a growth inhibition test of naTiO2 with four different light paths in an open test setup. The
hypothesis of this study was that with varying light paths in the altered test setup, it would be possible to
distinguish the shading effect from the chemical toxicity. The following ﬁndings were obtained in this study:
• Optimal growth conditions for the algae were achieved by altering the test setup with horizontally
placed vials on Tube Rollers under optimal light conditions.
• It was not possible to develop a closed test setup without CO2 enrichment with sufﬁcient stability
and reproducibility. Based on the conducted calculations and existing literature it is recommended to
further develop this test setup as it is considered possible to achieve a satisfactory test result.
• By minimising the light path through the test suspension, it was possible to obtain identical concentration-
response curves for the two treatments with lowest suspension volumes and thus shortest light paths.
Additionally, left shifted concentration-response curves were obtained for the treatments with in-
creased suspension volumes and thus increased light paths. This conﬁrms the hypothesis that the
shading effect can be distinguished from the chemical toxicity in this altered algal test setup by vary-
ing the light path through the test suspension.
• The developed test setup proved to be well suited for algal growth inhibition tests of coloured sub-
stances.
37
==PAGE:52==
38
==PAGE:53==
7
|
Bibliography
Aruoja, V., Dubourguier, H. C., Kasemets, K., and Kahru, A. (2009). Toxicity of nanoparticles of CuO, ZnO
and TiO2 to microalgae Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata. Science of the Total Environment, 407(4):1461–
1468.
Azov, Y., Shelef, G., and Moraine, R. (1982). Carbon limitation of biomass production in high-rate oxidation
ponds. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 24(3):579–594.
Bondarenko, O., Juganson, K., Ivask, A., Kasemets, K., Mortimer, M., and Kahru, A. (2013). Toxicity of
Ag, CuO and ZnO nanoparticles to selected environmentally relevant test organisms and mammalian cells
in vitro: A critical review. Archives of Toxicology, 87(7):1181–1200.
Bossuyt, B. T. and Janssen, C. R. (2004). Long-term acclimation of Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata (Kor-
shikov) Hindak to different copper concentrations: Changes in tolerance and physiology. Aquatic Toxi-
cology, 68(1):61–74.
Brack, W. and Rottler, H. (1994). Toxicity testing of highly volatile chemicals with green algae. Environ-
mental Science and Pollution Research, 1(4):223–228.
Castro, A. M., Nogueira, V., Lopes, I., Rocha-Santos, T., and Pereira, R. (2019). Evaluation of the potential
toxicity of efﬂuents from the textile industry before and after treatment. Applied Sciences (Switzerland),
9(18):3804.
Cleuvers, M., Altenburger, R., and Ratte, H. T. (2002). Combination effect of light and toxicity in algal tests.
Journal of Environmental Quality, 31(2):539–547.
Cleuvers, M. and Ratte, H. (2002). Phytotoxicity of coloured substances: is Lemna Duckweed an alternative
to the algal growth inhibition test? Chemosphere, 49(1):9–15.
39
==PAGE:54==
Cleuvers, M. and Weyers, A. (2003). Algal growth inhibition test: does shading of coloured substances
really matter? Water Research, 37(11):2718–2722.
Croce, R., Cinà, F., Lombardo, A., Crispeyn, G., Cappelli, C. I., Vian, M., Maiorana, S., Benfenati, E., and
Baderna, D. (2017). Aquatic toxicity of several textile dye formulations: Acute and chronic assays with
Daphnia magna and Raphidocelis subcapitata. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 144:79–87.
European Chemical Agency (2020).
ECHA - mission.
https://echa.europa.eu/about-us/
who-we-are/mission. Access: 2020-02-05.
European Union (2004). Regulation (Ec) 10/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council. Ofﬁcial
Journal of the European Union, pages 1–16.
European Union (2006). Regulation (Ec) 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council. Ofﬁcial
Journal of the European Union, pages 1–520.
European Union (2008). Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Ofﬁcial Journal of the European Union.
Fu, L., Hamzeh, M., Dodard, S., Zhao, Y. H., and Sunahara, G. I. (2015). Effects of TiO2 nanoparticles
on ROS production and growth inhibition using freshwater green algae pre-exposed to UV irradiation.
Environmental Toxicology and Pharmacology, 39(3):1074–1080.
Goddu, R. F., Little, J. N., and Kurylo, M. J. (1988). Fluorometric analysis. In Spectroscopy Source Book,
pages 262–265. McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Halling-Sørensen, B., Nyholm, N., and Baun, A. (1996). Algal toxicity tests with volatile and hazardous
compounds in air-tight test ﬂasks withCO2 enriched headspace. Chemosphere, 32(8):1513–1526.
Handy, R. D., Owen, R., and Valsami-Jones, E. (2008). The ecotoxicology of nanoparticles and nanomate-
rials: Current status, knowledge gaps, challenges, and future needs. Ecotoxicology, 17(5):315–325.
Harremoës, P., Henze, M., Arvin, E., and Dahi, E. (1989). Teoretisk vandhygiejne. Polyteknisk Forlag,.
Hartmann, N. I. B., von der Kammer, F., Hofmann, T., Baalousha, M., Ottofuelling, S., and Baun, A.
(2010). Algal testing of titanium dioxide nanoparticles - Testing considerations, inhibitory effects and
modiﬁcation of cadmium bioavailability. Toxicology, 269(2-3):190–197.
Herman, D. C., Inniss, W. E., and Mayﬁeld, C. I. (1990). Impact of volatile aromatic hydrocarbons, alone
and in combination, on growth of the freshwater alga Selenastrum capricornutum. Aquatic Toxicology,
18(18):87–100.
40
==PAGE:55==
Hjorth, R., Sørensen, S. N., Olsson, M. E., Baun, A., and Hartmann, N. B. (2016). A certain shade of green:
Can algal pigments reveal shading effects of nanoparticles? Integrated Environmental Assessment and
Management, 12(1):200–202.
Hocini, I., Benabbas, K., Khellaf, N., Djelal, H., and Amrane, A. (2019). Can duckweed be used for the
biomonitoring of textile efﬂuents? Euro-mediterranean Journal for Environmental Integration, 4(1):1–8.
ISO (2006). Water quality — guidelines for algal growth inhibition tests with poorly soluble materials,
volatile compounds, metals and waste water (ISO Standard no. 14442:2006).
ISO (2012). Water quality — fresh water algal growth inhibition test with unicellular green algae (ISO
Standard no. 8692:2012).
Ji, J., Long, Z., and Lin, D. (2011). Toxicity of oxide nanoparticles to the green algae Chlorella sp. Chemical
Engineering Journal, 170(2-3):525–530.
Joint Research Centre (2014). Titanium dioxide, nm-100, nm-101, nm-102, nm-103, nm-104, nm-105:
Characterisation and physico-chemical properties. Technical report, European Chemical Agency, Ispra,
Italy.
Juanola-feliu, E., Samitier, J., and Valls-pasola, J. (2015). Organizational and market challenges in a tech-
nology convergence scenario.
Kühn, R. and Pattard, M. (1990).
Results of the harmful effects of water pollutants to green algae
(Scenedesmus subspicatus) in the cell multiplication inhibition test. Water Research (oxford), 24(24):31–
38.
Mayer, P., Cuhel, R., and Nyholm, N. (1997). A simple in vitro ﬂuorescence method for biomass measure-
ments in algal growth inhibition tests. Water Research, 31(10):2525–2531.
Mayer, P., Frickmann, J., Christensen, E. R., and Nyholm, N. (1998). Inﬂuence of growth conditions on the
results obtained in algal toxicity tests. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 17(6):1091–1098.
Mayer, P., Nyholm, N., Verbruggen, E. M. J., Hermens, J. L. M., and Tolls, J. (2000). Algal growth inhibition
test in ﬁlled, closed bottles for volatile and sorptive materials. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry,
19(10):2551–2556.
Memmert, U., Motschi, H., Inauen, J., and Wüthrich, V. (1994).
Inhibition of algal growth caused by
coloured test substances. ETAD Project E 3023. Ecological and Toxicological Association of Dyes and
Organic Pigments Manufacturers.
41
==PAGE:56==
Naselli-Flores, L. and Barone, R. (2009). Green algae. In Encyclopedia of Inland Waters, pages 166–173.
Elsevier Inc.
Nazaroff, W. W. and Alvarez-Cohen, L. (2001). Environmental Engineering Science. John Wiley & Sons.
OECD (2011). Test no. 201: Freshwater alga and cyanobacteria, growth inhibition test. In OECD Guidelines
for the Testing of Chemicals, Section 2. OECD Publishing, Paris.
OECD (2019). Guidance Document on Aqueous-Phase Aquatic toxicity testing of Difﬁcult Test Chemicals.
Series on Testing and Assessment, page 81.
Patil, V., Källqvist, T., Olsen, E., Vogt, G., and Gislerød, H. R. (2007).
Fatty acid composition of 12
microalgae for possible use in aquaculture feed. Aquaculture International, 15(1):1–9.
REACH (2016). Guidance on registration. Technical report, European Chemical Agency, Helsinki, Finland.
REACH (2020).
Understanding REACH - ECHA.
https://echa.europa.eu/regulations/
reach/understanding-reach. Access: 2020-02-05.
Salieri, B., Righi, S., Pasteris, A., and Olsen, S. I. (2015). Freshwater ecotoxicity characterisation fac-
tor for metal oxide nanoparticles: A case study on titanium dioxide nanoparticle. Science of the Total
Environment, 505:494–502.
Warheit, D. B., Hoke, R. A., Finlay, C., Donner, E. M., Reed, K. L., and Sayes, C. M. (2007). Development of
a base set of toxicity tests using ultraﬁne TiO2 particles as a component of nanoparticle risk management.
Toxicology Letters, 171(3):99–110.
Wigger, H., Wohlleben, W., and Nowack, B. (2018). Redeﬁning environmental nanomaterial ﬂows: Con-
sequences of the regulatory nanomaterial deﬁnition on the results of environmental exposure models.
Environmental Science: Nano, 5(6):1372–1385.
42
==PAGE:57==
A
|
Appendix
Figure A.1: Time-Log(biomass) plot of the three replicates of the control in pilot test 1 showing exponential growth for
two replicates.
43
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.2: Time-Log(biomass) plot of the six treatments in pilot test 1 showing exponential growth for all treatments.
Table A.1: P-values from t-test (α = 0.05) of the average growth rates for pilot test 1.
t-test
open
39:1
19:1
9:1
4:1
1.5:1
open
2.3 · 10−3
0.014
2.1 · 10−4
8.7 · 10−5
2.7 · 10−5
39:1
0.22
0.063
0.44
0.97
19:1
0.85
0.36
0.12
9:1
0.024
1.3 · 10−3
4:1
0.10
1.5:1
Table A.2: P-values from t-test (α = 0.05) of the ∆pH values for pilot test 1.
t-test
open
39:1
19:1
9:1
4:1
1.5:1
open
0.19
0.018
0.00
0.00
39:1
19:1
0.00
0.00
0.00
9:1
0.074
0.19
4:1
0.52
1.5:1
44
==PAGE:59==
(a) Open test conditions.
(b) Closed test conditions.
Figure A.3: Time-Log(biomass) plots of the treatments with 3.9 mm light path in pilot test 2 with (a) open and (b)
closed test setup showing exponential growth for both treatments. Error bars illustrate the standard deviation but are to
small to be visibly on both plots.
Table A.3: P-values of the two-factor with replication ANOVA test (α = 0.05) for pilot test 2 in open and closed setup
with two different light paths.
Open
Closed
ANOVA: Two-Factor
With Replication
1 mL
2 mL
1 mL
2 mL
1 mL
0.48
2.5 · 10−3
1.1 · 10−4
Open
2 mL
4.9 · 10−4
1.14 · 10−5
1 mL
0.55
Closed
2 mL
45
==PAGE:60==
(a) 2.5 mm
(b) 3.9 mm
(c) 6.4 mm
(d) 10.6 mm
Figure A.4: Time-log(biomass) plots of the four treatments with different light paths (2.5 mm (a), 3.9 mm (b), 6.4
mm (c), 10.6 mm (d)) in the ﬁnal test showing exponential growth for all treatments. Error bars illustrate the standard
deviation but are to small to be visibly on all four plots.
Table A.4: P-values of the two-factor with replication ANOVA test (α = 0.05) for the ﬁnal test with four different light
paths.
ANOVA: Two-Factor
With Replication
2.5 mm
3.9 mm
6.4 mm
10.6 mm
2.5 mm
0.86
3.8 · 10−5
2.1 · 10−9
3.9 mm
1.5 · 10−5
7.1 · 10−11
6.4 mm
0.74
10.6 mm
46
==PAGE:61==
Table A.5: EC50 values from the non-linear model ﬁtted to the experimental results of the algal test of naTiO2 in an
open test setup with four different light paths. The EC50 values are presented as a best-ﬁt value and a 95% conﬁdence
interval.
Light path
EC50 [mg/L]
2.5 mm
47.9 [42.7-53.9]95%
3.9 mm
50.1 [44.4-56.5]95%
6.4 mm
28.4 [24.0-33.5]95%
10.6 mm
25.0 [16.6-34.8]95%
Table A.6: Average growth rates of the controls (µ) with standard deviations, coefﬁcients of variation of the growth
rates of the controls (CV), and changes in pH of the controls relative to the pH of the growth medium (∆pH) for the
ﬁnal test of naTiO2 with four different light paths. These three parameters represent the validity criteria for a valid algal
test following ISO 8692 standard.
Suspension volume [mL]
1.0
2.0
4.0
8.0
Light path [mm]
2.5
3.9
6.4
10.6
µ [d−1]
1.98 ± 0.02
2.05 ± 0.03
2.01 ± 0.03
1.95 ± 0.06
CV [%]
0.97
1.57
1.5
3.23
∆pH
0.1
−0.2
−0.1
−0.1
47
