==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Data-driven wind turbine performance analysis 
 
 
 
Dimitrios Kokkinopoulos 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0383 
July 2020 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Dimitrios Kokkinopoulos 
Title: Data-driven wind turbine performance analysis 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-03833 
July 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students.  
Project period:  
January 2020 - July 2020 
 
ECTS: 35 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
Nikolay Krasimirov Dimitrov 
Tuhfe Göcmen 
John Thomas Lyons 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Kristian Månsson 
Momentum Gruppen A/S 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This project is taking place under the umbrella of a Danish wind farm asset management
ﬁrm where the author is working part-time. The aim of the project is the establishment of
a certain set of procedures to evaluate the power performance of wind turbines throughout
time. This includes identifying whether a turbine is underperforming under certain wind
conditions given the fact that it was more eﬃcient under those in the past. Establishing a
benchmark turbine operation setup can lead to monthly updates on whether the turbine is
making the most out of the input wind conditions. This procedure is based on multivariate
power curve modelling in contrast to the IEC power binning method, exhibiting increased
accuracy.
The solution to the above problem is explored by applying various data-driven tech-
niques on operational SCADA data from a particular wind farm in the portfolio of the
company and evaluating the models’ performance. The company operates among others, a
large number of aged turbines with insuﬃcient data retrieval structure (meaning reduced
amount of sensors and data channels). When reporting back to the clients, the company
does not have an independent clear image of the asset’s condition besides the regular turbine
fault signals and the information from the technical operator, who most of the time monitors
a huge ﬂeet of turbines.
Therefore, it creates useful insights using the operational data to scan the turbines
under administration and evaluate remotely their condition in terms of deterioration, unusual
characteristics and change of behaviour. These methods will lead towards an enhanced wind
farm asset evaluation and relevant decision-making when it comes to acquiring or trading.
A turbine owner will be more informed regarding the value of his asset through modern
engineering solutions which will be proven to be directly connected with the operational and
ﬁnancial strategies of a wind farm.
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to take a step back, reﬂect and appraise the support and interest I have
received from my three supervisors.
More particular, the main thesis supervisor, Niko-
lay Krasimirov Dimitrov and the supportive supervisors, Tuhfe Göçmen and John Thomas
Lyons, were always present with useful guidelines, broad experience and fruitful conversa-
tions in the development of the content of this thesis. In addition, I would like to thank the
head of my department in the company, Kristian Månsson, for providing me access to the
dataset under investigation, his faith and the operational insight I am gaining from him.
This thesis was implemented under harsh conditions due to the global pandemic, forming
new ways of working exclusively remotely but also causing stress primarily for the health of
my beloved people and secondary for mine. I would like to thank my friends and ﬂatmates,
who were always around to lift my spirit up, motivate me and discuss various issues with
me these six demanding months. Finally, I would like to thank my family, which is a few
thousand kilometers away for believing in me and being always interested in the weird stuﬀ,
according to their views, I am working on.
iv
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Dataset Explanation and Analysis
8
2.1
Wind Farm Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Data Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.1
Normal Behaviour Dataset Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Visual Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Exploratory Data Analysis Toolbox Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.1
Relative Power Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.2
Binned Power Curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.3
Power Coeﬃcient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.4
Yaw Misalignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Power Performance Analysis
23
3.1
Model Selection Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Artiﬁcial Neural Network Theoretical Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.1
Feature Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3.2
Feature Transformation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.3
Parameter Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Residual Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4.1
Result Illustration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.4.2
Model Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.3
Experimentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.5
Uncertainty Mitigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4
Power Performance Validation
43
4.1
Theoretical Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Residual Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3.1
Result Illustration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3.2
Model Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Models Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Root Cause Analysis
49
5.1
Inadequacy of Model Predictions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Possible Causes for Underperformance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
v
==PAGE:6==
Contents
5.3
Root Cause Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3.1
Turbine Logbook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.3.2
Measurement Integrity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3.3
SCADA System Exploitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.4
Turbine Condition Risk Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Results Linkage to Wind Farm Operation
60
6.1
Quantiﬁcation in Financial and Environmental Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.2
Determination of Lost Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.3
Metrics Establishment for Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.3.1
Visual Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.3.2
Numerical Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.3.3
dAEP Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.4
Power Performance Assessment Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7
Conclusion - Debate
69
7.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Suggestions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.3
Reﬂection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
III
Nomenclature
IV
References
V
vi
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
As wind farm pre-construction assessments become more and more accurate, focus is
being put on the fertile ﬁeld of remote post-construction analysis for power performance
optimization. Since new installations in countries with favourable legislation frameworks
for wind energy development are curtailed due to the decrease in onshore capacity oppor-
tunities, ﬁnancial obstacles and end of subsidies, performance optimization of the already
operating wind farms is becoming gradually the centre of attention. A reduced Levelized
Cost of Energy and increased Return of Investment are two very attractive concepts for
turbine owners, developers and policy makers and can be achieved by maximizing an asset’s
eﬃciency and reliability. This means verifying that a wind turbine is making the most out of
its inﬂowing wind resources while not degrading signiﬁcantly throughout time, by following
a sophisticated, proactive and fast responsive Operations & Maintenance strategy. There-
fore, wind power plant operators require access to eﬃcient power performance evaluation
methodologies in order to aid their operational decision making. Methods with lower levels
of error will enable faster detection of wind turbines exhibiting underperformance issues.
Using the turbine manufacturer’s nominal power curve as a benchmark has proven to be
insuﬃcient due to diﬀerent actual wind and terrain conditions than the ones the turbine has
been tested on. In addition, two common wind industry strategies to be avoided are ﬁrstly
relying fully on the turbine fault signals, because an anomaly might be growing under the
radar and secondly increasing the frequency of costly service visits, because downtime has a
negative impact on the environmental scope of wind energy. Not to neglect that technicians
might not be able to detect visually every minor detail with just a visit. Recent eﬀorts
are mainly oriented towards the improvement of actual power performance evaluations in a
warranty context where the focus is placed primarily on ensuring a high level of repeatability
between turbines which are not necessarily located in similar environments [1].
This complex SCADA system data stream poses a lot of technological and scientiﬁc
challenges to interpret properly but also opportunities to convert it into knowledge through
the domains of mechanical engineering, applied mathematics, statistics and physics [2]. This
stream is usually comprised of sensors recording elements of the wind ﬂow, atmospherical
parameters, temperature of the components, mechanical behaviour of moving parts and
electrical properties. In the same study [2], it is very wisely stated that the SCADA analysis
approach can be demarcated in three categories:
• Artiﬁcial Neural Network approaches for numerical modelling issues and for their ca-
pability in codifying non-linearity
• Statistical methods for their power to turn vast data sets from a limitation into an
opportunity
• Post-processing techniques, because they dramatically simplify the size of data sets,
possibly enriching their quality
Page 1 of 72
==PAGE:8==
1.1
Background
In order to interpret the results of these analyses, establishing benchmark indicators of
normal behaviour and comparing against various timeframes of turbine operation can reveal
malfunctions or anomalies. According to the ﬁndings, one can focus on the origins of the
anomaly by performing a root cause analysis. The concept followed in this thesis is training
a model to mimic appropriately the power output of each turbine during operation in early
years and then using this model to analyse the residuals between predicted and recorded
values for later years, gaining a relative essence of the turbine performance. Since these raw
data extracted from the turbine are under varying operational or noisy conditions, faulty
operation might lead to changes in the SCADA architecture but the other way around needs
to be carefully veriﬁed.
Deteriorating performance can be captured with these techniques and save in advance
instances of excessive power losses. A thin line separates sometimes yearly underperformance
due to inevitable ageing and due to actual anomaly, being a challenge in this thesis when
dealing with an operational timespan of over ﬁve years for example. This eﬀect is magniﬁed
when the wind farm is operating under harsh environmental conditions or under a tight
layout with multiple wake interactions. It is more likely then, for crucial equipment like the
generator, the yaw mechanism, the converter or the main drive which act as systems with
many subcomponents, to result in worn parts, overheated areas and consequently, abnormal
operation. A slow and steady anomaly growth is sometimes diﬃcult to be represented by a
warning signal from the turbine and results in a failure with excessive downtime for repairing.
Machine learning models have proven to be reliable for this kind of monitoring and exhibit
brilliant cases of capturing malfunction development inside a turbine. To reach this stage,
one needs to establish the architecture illustrated as in the ﬂowchart of Figure 1.
Figure 1: Logical ﬂow
The author will navigate himself in the general ﬁeld of power curve modelling method-
ology and apply it directly for performance assessment and not condition monitoring in the
way it is known. The formulation of KPIs will take place and a preliminary root cause analy-
Page 2 of 72
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Literature Review
sis in the presence of abnormal results will be introduced. This collaboration is academically
and business oriented and as is shown in the following sections, ways of assessing the port-
folio’s eﬃciency using modern data analytics have been developed and can be integrated in
the daily operational management of wind farms. Also, from an asset manager’s viewpoint,
the cooperation between the turbine manufacturer, service provider and technical operator
can be enhanced if there is more clarity on the turbine condition and the objectives of each
party. It is a usual practise in the industry from companies settled with a particular type
of contract, to not pursuit wind farm output optimization through suggestions or service
interventions. These diﬀerent perspectives ought to be blended into making wind energy a
reliable cornerstone for green energy generation and climate change tackling.
1.2
Literature Review
There has been quite some research in the ﬁeld of power curve modelling and power
performance assessment.
The aim of this thesis is to navigate separately between those
areas, use elements from both and connect them with a direct application on business cases.
A ﬁeld where room for improvement exists by simply utilizing the SCADA data ﬂow from
the wind farm without the need of a whole data analytics team, existing already inside
a company. More computational tools are becoming open-source, giving the opportunity
to a broad range of ﬁrms to make use of them and optimize their asset operation in both
technical and commercial ways. This ﬁeld has the potential to move from the academic
level to everyday applications inside the workplace depending on the needs, resources or
evident operational problems of each individual ﬁrm. A review is following on the scientiﬁc
applications that inspired this project and guided the author in the research area of power
performance assessment of turbines through power curve modelling but keeping in parallel
a discrete distance from condition monitoring.
The modelling of the power curve based on more sophisticated algorithms rather than
the IEC power binning method is a subject with various views on. Artiﬁcial Neural Net-
works have been widely used as an alternative due to their ability to capture non-linear
relationships between an amount of primary variables and the power output of a turbine.
Model errors are decreased in [1] when comparing IEC methods and newly developed mod-
elling techniques like Polynomial Functions, Double Exponentials, Logistic Regressions and
k-Nearest Neighbours Regressions (k-NN). Before modelling the power curve in [3], Gaussian
Processes are used to pre-ﬁlter the data, making the ANN improve by 25% in root mean
square error of predicted power compared to standard methods currently applied. Similar
practises were employed in [4], by building an equivalent steady state model of a wind farm
under normal operating conditions and utilizing it with the creation of quality control charts
for anomalous functioning detection. All neural networks exhibit good power curve modelling
ability under certain conﬁgurations. On the contrary, predictions are made in [5] based on
certain rotational speeds where the higher values of them present a more accurate forecast,
shifting to the nominal power regime. In [6], machine learning techniques like Local Outlier
Factor (LOF) and Long Short-term Memory (LSTM) Recurrent Neural Network lead to a
smooth combination of a wind farm SCADA data ﬁltering and modelling for performance
analysis.
Page 3 of 72
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Literature Review
The challenging task of turbine aerodynamic upgrade improvement quantiﬁcation is
taken upon in [7] and [8], by employing an Artiﬁcial Neural Network that uses the power of
the nearby reference turbines to predict the power of the retroﬁtted target turbine and then
comparing the residuals. One can consider it as way to eliminate the bias faced from the
nacelle measurements, while the results concluded in a positive AEP change.
Various other power curve modelling techniques have been used as well to assess re-
motely the condition and reliability of turbines through power curve modelling. A simple
SCADA analysis model in [9] provides health indicators based on power residuals that are
utilized through various metrics of them which are pointing out towards underperformance.
Non-linear parametric models with a direct application of the k-NN algorithm using only
wind speed as an input for wind farm power outliers ﬁltering were developed in [10], address-
ing in parallel multiple operational issues. Gaussian Processes were used for modelling in
[11] and [12] to exploit the SCADA system data where in the latter, performance degrada-
tion identiﬁcation was enabled through a close residual analysis. Regression Trees based on
combinations of wind speed, turbulence intensity and wind shear exhibit three times higher
accuracy than the traditional IEC methodology in [13]. A multi-dimensional ﬁltering pro-
cedure in [14] optimises the ANN used by focusing on the wind speed standard deviation as
an additional feature. In his very inspirational book [15], Yu Ding suggests among others a
Kernel-based multi-dimensional power curve model and compares the inﬂuence provided by
various combinations of input weather variables on turbine output. His method outperforms
the k-NN, Smoothing Spline ANOVA and Bayesian Additive Regression Trees.
There are multiple ways one can evaluate the power performance of a wind turbine
without actually mimicing its behaviour and a good initial indication can be obtained by
establishing metrics representative of each individual unit’s condition against the whole
wind farm. A detailed approach takes place in [16] where KPIs are established based among
others on power curve shape, energy ratio and yaw eﬀect. These metrics might not require
any model establishments to mimic the behaviour of a wind turbine like in [17], where an
operating state database is used to collect information about the proper power production of
a wind turbine and a number map is being codiﬁed for converting the performance analysis
problem into a purely numerical one. This happens through a multivariate outlier detection
approach based on Mahalanobis distance and skewness/kurtosis of the reference curves as
metrics. In [18], quantiﬁcation of turbine performance is attempted through tail dependency
and concordance measurement metrics based on Copula models. These concordance metrics
on wind speed and power manage to capture months that the turbine is performing below
its optimal range characterised as anomalous, with the aid of the third and fourth moments
of the two features’ distributions. In contrast to the typical health condition identiﬁcation
researches, an innovative ageing assessment is attempted in [19] by establishing diﬀerent
measuring criteria based on the power coeﬃcient, output power, nacelle vibration and main
bearing temperature.
In the ﬁeld of condition monitoring, the research of [20] compares various architectures
of neural network classiﬁers against other machine learning algorithms for fault prediction in
various phases of its occurrence. Similar attempt but splitting the power curve into clusters
ﬁrstly and then applying Frequent Pattern Mining to detect turbine tendency towards fault
in real time is explored in [21]. Identifying the operational rules of the turbine, each new time
Page 4 of 72
==PAGE:11==
1.3
Problem Statement
step deviating from the patterns established can pinpoint parameters that cause signiﬁcant
deterioration or a need for maintenance. Performance monitoring of a wind farm following all
of its turbines’ component behaviour is deeply analysed in [22] using data-mining techniques.
Focus points on condition monitoring and insightful potential component correlations are
presented in [23] by establishing operational benchmarks.
One of the main causes of turbine underperformance is the misalignment of the rotor
and the wind ﬂow. Relevant work has been investigated and incorporated in the turbine
analytics toolbox proposed in this thesis. In [2] and [24], the same authors as in [17], using
similar malfunctioning indexes for operational quality assessment take it one step further by
analysing also the relative position of nacelles of meaningful clusters of nearby turbines under
regimes which give rise to peculiar wake eﬀects. They try to establish a connection between
anomalous misalignment and power losses, a topic being examined in the preliminary wind
farm analysis in this thesis. The indexes manage ﬁnally to point out problematic turbines of
the farm in terms of optimal alignment among them. An upgrade in the yaw control system
results in 8 kW average increase in production according to [25], minimizing extreme yaw
errors and avoiding power losses of up to 10%. In [26], numerical modelling is added to reﬁne
the monitoring and diagnosis program of the most stressed turbines.
1.3
Problem Statement
The company associated with this thesis operates a broad portfolio of wind farms across
Europe mainly as administrator but also as a technical manager in some instances. From
this turbine ﬂeet, a signiﬁcant amount is over aged with insuﬃcient data retrieval structure
meaning not enough representative sensors and data channels like turbulence intensity and air
density. In addition, there are few sensors measuring the mechanical components’ behaviour
or the temporary loading on the structure. The absence of log ﬁles on wind sensor technical
service might reveal traps in the optimal operation or alignment of the turbine.
In addition, in most of the sites barely exist any meteorological mast recording the undis-
turbed free wind ﬂow and preparing the background for a power performance assessment
according to the wind industry standard IEC 61400-12-1. Therefore, a nacelle transfer func-
tion cannot be established to correct the wind measurements from the turbines in the wind
farm under examination. Data driven navigation according to latest scientiﬁc developments
will be examined in this thesis in order to compensate for this lacking.
Having these bottlenecks stated, when the company is reporting back to its client cannot
be fully certain of the relative operation of the asset from year-to-year rather than relying
solely on the traditional O&M and the wind index. Key performance metrics on the asset
eﬃciency can make the company more independent of the duties of the third party technical
operator and service provider but also enhance the performance of the farms which the
company has taken over their technical management as well.
Ways are to be found to enrich the reporting with eﬃciency metrics and the turbine
performance to be evaluated independently. The lost production under availability contracts
should be characterised with a deeper insight and the duties of the technical operator and
service provider veriﬁed. Since the company has access to raw data from the cloud platforms,
it can utilize them and interpret them in a meaningful way as described in the previous
Page 5 of 72
==PAGE:12==
1.4
Objectives
subsections.
1.4
Objectives
The aim of the project is the establishment of a certain set of procedures to evalu-
ate the past/current power performance of wind turbines and suggest measures to improve
their eﬃciency. Those targets will be reﬂected by visualisations, observations and speciﬁc
monthly/annual metrics when it comes to company reporting. Establishing those metrics
that reﬂect the asset’s performance will contribute to a better client’s knowledge and more
informed decision making from the asset operator’s side. These methods will lead towards
an enhanced wind farm asset evaluation and relevant decision-making when it comes to
acquiring or trading. A turbine owner will be more informed regarding the value of his
asset. Engineering solutions will be directly connected with the operational and economical
strategies under the experience the company.
This includes identifying whether a turbine is underperforming under certain wind con-
ditions given the fact that it was more eﬃcient under those in the past. Establishing a
benchmark turbine operation setup can lead to monthly updates on whether the turbine is
making the most out of the input wind conditions. When signiﬁcant wake interaction or
low performance takes place, it will be attempted to identify the reasons behind the fault,
however this is considered to be a secondary priority.
The solution to the above problem will be explored by the employment of an Artiﬁcial
Neural Network (ANN) setup and validated if necessary with a statistical model.
The
reason for experimenting with this model architecture is because of its ability to map the
inherent nonlinearity between input and output. Through the literature review, ANN have
outperformed other techniques, can adapt a lot of input parameters and are ﬂexible. The
comparison with an Additive Multi-variate Kernel Regression aims at verifying hopefully the
results of the former model.
The general structure of the thesis start from data manipulation, modelling and testing
towards observation development. In the ﬁnal chapters, with input from the company, signif-
icant questions are analysed on how data driven techniques can lead to the aforementioned
targets through real case studies. Following are the classiﬁed objectives:
• Turbine performance evaluation framework in the form of a hierarchical toolbox and
key performance metrics establishment inside asset operation company
• Optimization of Artiﬁcial Neural Network applications on power curve modelling
• Prove that data-driven techniques can detect change in turbine performance through
a real case
• Present a linkage between data analytics and turbine owner beneﬁts in the form of
ﬁnancial, service strategy and optimization measures
Page 6 of 72
==PAGE:13==
1.5
Challenges
1.5
Challenges
Some challenges arise when using all these parameters for modelling and exploration.
Starting from the environmental side, atmospheric conditions are very unstable and ﬂuctuate
a lot during the 10-minute recording period. Also, some of these conditions are not usually
recorded from the typical SCADA systems like the heat ﬂux, the wind shear or veer across the
rotor and the atmospherical pressure. The habit of not registering the standard deviation
of wind and the air density in most of the turbines in the portfolio opposes obstacles in
accurate modelling.
The absense of a meteorological mast and log ﬁles on wind measurement equipment
makes it impossible to establish a nacelle transfer function to correct the measurements
from the inﬂuence of the rotor in the front, inheriting additional uncertainty in the quality
of them. As expected, erroneous data will also reduce the amount of useful timestamps.
Seasonality in the wind turbine analytics can be detected in the repetitive serial corre-
lation of the main variables from year to year. The atmospheric interactions taking place in
diﬀerent seasons are not fully captured by the SCADA sensors, therefore some of the model
error variation will be expressed by this factor.
Page 7 of 72
==PAGE:14==
2
Dataset Explanation and Analysis
2.1
Wind Farm Presentation
The wind farm picked for the needs of this analysis consists of several wind turbines in a
tight layout, functioning one under the wake of another as presented in Figure 2. The terrain
is ﬂat and the average elevation uniform. The company is administrating several turbines in
the farm on behalf of their owners while another two associated companies are responsible
for the technical management and service supervision respectively. The sub-cluster under
investigation is consisted of the ﬁve turbines highlighted with green circles which have a
nominal capacity of 2.0 MW, 125 m of hub height, 90 m rotor diameter and their code
names are registered next to the circles. They were commissioned in the late 00s and have
not exhibited any abnormal events or big component exchange according to the archive from
2014 and on, being therefore a blank page for experimentation on data-driven techniques.
Figure 2: Wind farm layout on orographic contours
One can imagine that the wind ﬂow measurements on the nacelle of the turbines will
exhibit an inherent variability due to the multiple wakes the sensors undergo. This is a
Page 8 of 72
==PAGE:15==
2.2
Data Preprocessing
challenge to see how much of the wind speed - power variability can be explained from the
model later on. This can be depicted in Figure 3, where the wind rose of each individual
turbine is plotted following the farm layout for easier understanding. The diﬀerent wake
conditions in front of each rotor are obvious and considering main direction the western bin,
turbines w86, w87 and w89 are expected to face more favourable conditions in the free wind
sectors. Average wind speed of the site is roughly 6 m/s and mean temperature 13◦.
Figure 3: Wind roses of the turbines following farm layout
2.2
Data Preprocessing
The main reasons this cluster of turbines was chosen is its uniformity, its representative
SCADA retrieval architecture in contrast to most of the company’s portfolio and the absence
of any retroﬁtting upgrades as in their neighbours. Multiple features are recorded but still,
signiﬁcant channels like wind speed standard deviation, surface pressure and pitch angle
are not stored, limiting minorly the modelling and interpretation capability of this analysis.
Nonetheless, this SCADA package provides more information than other wind farms under
the already scanned portfolio, not excluding the possibility though of other similar farms pro-
viding enough 10-minute data elements for processing. A secondary reason is the familiarity
of the author having worked again with that dataset for another purpose in the past. The
data retrieved starts from 2014 until early 2020 and includes the attributes listed in Table
1. The dataset has been indexed according to its timestamp for more ﬂexible handling.
Page 9 of 72
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Data Preprocessing
Attribute
Symbol
Unit
Attribute
Symbol
Unit
Fault
F
-
Temp nacelle
Tins
◦C
Wind speed
V
m/s
Temp bearing A
TbearA
◦C
Wind max
Vmax
m/s
Temp bearing B
TbearB
◦C
Wind min
Vmin
m/s
Temp gearbox bearing
TbearG
◦C
Wind direction
D
◦
Temp hydraulic oil
ThydrO
◦C
Temperature
Tout
◦C
Temp gearbox oil
TgearO
◦C
Yaw position
Go
◦
Temp spinner
Tspin
◦C
Rotor speed
Rtr
rpm
Temp gener slip ring top
TgenSR
◦C
Rotor max
Rtrmax
rpm
Temp HV Transformer 3-P
TtransHV
◦C
Rotor min
Rtrmin
rpm
Temp stator 3-P
Tstat
◦C
Generator speed
Gener
rpm
Frequency
Freq
Hz
Reactive power
RePow
var
Current 3-P
Cur
A
Active Power
P
kW
Voltage 3-P
Volt
V
Table 1: SCADA system features
As the volume of collected data is substantial, errors caused by sensors or the data
acquisition system are possible. For example, out-of-range values, missing data due to turbine
availability and/or electrical shut-down or corrupted data due to icing events are possible
incidents that would require the removal of recordings from the data set [1]. First step in the
data preprocessing context is to eliminate NaNs or extreme values by applying the following
rules:
• 0◦< Wind Direction < 360◦
• Power output > -500 kW
• Wind speed ̸= NaN
The length of each turbine dataset is now in Table 2. The column Features refers to
the available variables. Unfortunately, the temperature sensor of generator bearing B does
not record for any of the turbines.
Turbine
Clean data
Erroneous data
Features
w86
320818
3614
27
w87
321182
1773
35
w88
321083
1796
34
w89
321108
1771
34
w90
308569
2472
35
Table 2: Cleaning of the datasets
Having brought the dataset to a regular formation, the power curves can be plotted
to make a preliminary assessment that everything is set for further preprocessing.
The
Page 10 of 72
==PAGE:17==
2.2
Data Preprocessing
plotting includes two regimes of the turbine, one for the normal operation and one with
red when a fault signal has been generated. On a ﬁrst glimpse, they seem similar but a lot
of data points are in between the two regimes without any fault or explanation, indicating
sub-optimal performance which will be examined in a later section.
Figure 4: Power curves for turbines w86, w87 and w88
Figure 5: Power curves for turbines w89 and w90
2.2.1
Normal Behaviour Dataset Filtering
In order to prepare each dataset for the power curve modelling procedure, all the outliers
in the wind speed - power output relationship must be isolated and ﬁltered out. In the
literature review, the dataset prepared for modelling and characterised as normal, is crucial
for the applied algorithm to learn from it in a way that it does not get disrupted by outliers,
causing errors in its predictions. A separation between operational regimes will be attempted
according to the following classes:
• Operational Status: Turbine is operating normally inside the expected envelope (Power
> 1 & Rtrmax >= 8)
Page 11 of 72
==PAGE:18==
2.2
Data Preprocessing
• Transient Status: Turbine is partially producing power due to fault occurrence, re-
strictive wind conditions or out of the normal operation envelope
• Idling Status: Turbine is not producing power due to fault occurrence or restrictive
wind conditions
It needs to be pointed out that usually the normal behaviour modelling is established
after a big maintenance event of the turbine but in this thesis, it is going to cover the inside
data points of the power curve envelope. The reason is that the length of the data will absorb
the minor diﬀerences before and after maintenance. In the case of condition monitoring, this
detail should not be neglected but in the power performance ﬁeld, possible changes will be
distinguished through time on their own.
For the ﬁltering procedure, a combination of operational settings, the algorithm Local
Outlier Factor and Polynomial Regression were used since not a single application of those
methods resulted to a normal dataset. The reason is because of the wind distribution in the
site being left skewed with a short right tail, meaning few events of wind speeds above rated.
The main challenge was the very coarse density of data around rated wind speed and above,
in contrast to their increased density around cut-in wind speeds.
Figure 6: Wind histogram for turbine w88
Therefore, after the initial Operational Status ﬁlter, a Polynomial Regression of the 7th
order was ﬁtted to the curve and the data points three standard deviations away from it were
considered as outliers. The 7th order polynomial had a good score but was failing when the
data was very coarse above rated wind speed. On the contrary, applying the LOF resulted
in those high wind points being ﬁltered out completely since all of them were very coarse in
contrast to the rest of the distribution.
Before combining these two methods, this problem of uneven samples inside diﬀerent
classes was attempted to be solved through applying two LOFs with diﬀerent conﬁgurations
Page 12 of 72
==PAGE:19==
2.2
Data Preprocessing
on the two diﬀerent operational regimes, above and below rated wind speed but created non
consecutiveness around the splitting point. Another attempt was to upscale the density of
the above rated wind speed data points with similar results again.
In Figure 7, the development of the ﬁnally chosen ﬁltering procedure is visualized. The
blue outliers are slowly eliminated and a compact power curve is being developed. It is
worth mentioning that the sensitivity of the model tested later is very low on the minor
experimentations on the NBM ﬁlter for the following reasons: The outliers occupy a very
small percentage of the overall data points, not aﬀecting the learning of the algorithm and
the main concentration of data as in Figure 6, is barely aﬀected by the ﬁlters.
Figure 7: NBM ﬁlter creation procedure
Local Outlier Factor:
The Local Outlier Factor (LOF) algorithm is an unsupervised anomaly detection method
which computes the local density deviation of a given data point with respect to its neigh-
bours. It considers as outliers the samples that have a substantially lower density than their
neighbours. It is local in a way that the anomaly score depends on how isolated the object
is with respect to the surrounding neighbourhood. More precisely, locality is given by the
k-Nearest Neighbours algorithm, whose distance is used to estimate the local density. By
comparing the local density of a sample to the local densities of its neighbours, one can
identify samples that have a substantially lower density than their neighbours and consider
them as outliers [27]. In Figure 8, when comparing the local densities of each data point,
point A has a much lower density than its neighbours.
Figure 8: Local density deﬁnition [28]
Page 13 of 72
==PAGE:20==
2.2
Data Preprocessing
Two parameters play a signiﬁcant role for the LOF, the amount of neighbours and the
contamination of the dataset, meaning what percentage is classiﬁed as outliers. By randomly
picking values, one can roughly approximate the parameters appropriate for his application.
When applying this method to the power curves of Figures 4 and 5 for ﬁltering optimisation,
the LOF assigns a value on each point representing how much of an outlier the algorithm
believe it is. Applying a threshold, one can separate the more distant values accordingly. A
mask was applied to leave the nominal power observations intact. In Table 3, the parameters
used for the LOF are stated after careful tweaking to remove the remaining outliers after the
polynomial phase. The number of neighbours and the threshold are very sensitive on the
ﬁltering and they balance themselves. Contrariwise, the contamination factor was adjusted
from minimum to maximum with no inﬂuence over the result.
LOF parameters
Remaining dataset
Neighbours
Contamination
Threshold
Oper
Poly
Poly + LOF
40
0.01
-2.5
66 %
65.8 %
65.7 %
Table 3: Local Outlier Factor ﬁltering conﬁgurations
Finally, each data point has been classiﬁed among the three status, with the NBM
dataset being the one to be used for the preliminary power assessment but also the power
curve modelling later on. Two out of ﬁve are presented below in Figure 9, since all of them
share the same characteristics. Turbines w86 and w90, the least and the most wake receiving
structures according to the layout in Figure 2, present as a natural consequence a diﬀerence
in their width.
Figure 9: NBM power curves
Page 14 of 72
==PAGE:21==
2.2
Data Preprocessing
2.2.2
Visual Assessment
After establishing the curves and cleaning up the data, an exploration of the variables
contained will take place to enhance the understanding of their interdependency. Of interest
is the relationship of the power output against other parameters and a ﬁrst step to accomplish
that in the data science framework is developing correlation matrices.
This matrix will
map the dependency of power towards the rest of the features using the Spearman’s rank
correlation coeﬃcient, which is a nonparametric measure of rank correlation describing the
relationship between variables with a monotonic function.
Figure 10: Correlation matrix on turbine w88
Page 15 of 72
==PAGE:22==
2.3
Exploratory Data Analysis Toolbox Development
The colour code indicates the level of correlation and the more dense is the blue colour,
the more positively related are the two variables. As expected, the speed of the rotor has
a correlation of 1 with the generator. Most of the temperature sensors are on the same
level of relationship with the outside temperature. Total power is causing relationship with
the current of all lines, HV transformer temperature and stator.
Most of the electrical
components as well as wind direction and nacelle position are removed. The former, due to
not primary focus and the latter, due to their circular characteristics.
2.3
Exploratory Data Analysis Toolbox Development
Under this section, the foundation will be laid for analyzing elements of the inter-
turbine relationships throughout time that might reveal severe deviation from own historical
performance or farm average.
The aim is to develop a checklist of issues to be checked
for normal operation comparison between turbines as a visual preliminary assessment that
will prepare the ground for gaining more insight by modelling the power curve later on.
Included will be a wide range of topics like aerodynamic performance of the rotor, possible
yaw misalignment, power curve shifting, fault zooming and production comparison.
2.3.1
Relative Power Analysis
Understanding the wind farm in depth requires ﬁrst of all power production analysis.
Using the clean NBM dataset, it is easier to compare turbines using the mean production
rather than the sum. In Figure 11 (a), a bar chart depicts the mean power production
against the wind farm average with the dashed bars representing the no ﬁltering version. On
the right, the individual turbine power distribution is plotted.
(a) Mean power against wind farm average
(b) Distribution of power production
Figure 11: Power production comparison
Page 16 of 72
==PAGE:23==
2.3
Exploratory Data Analysis Toolbox Development
Turbines w86 and w89 probably due to their privileged siting, raise the average power
of the farm. The no ﬁltering conditions seem to favour only the production of w89. On the
right ﬁgure, it is interesting how more events of power above 1000 kW happen for these two
turbines since the wakes produced inside the farm, decrease the eﬃciency of the three more
aﬀected turbines by shifting the peak of their power distribution to the left but with also
more frequent events.
When zooming in the directional conditions, the eﬀect of the western bin’s available
wind is more than evident. As expected in Figure 12, the prevailing western sector has the
turbines peaking their mean output with a slight shift of turbine’s w90 peak due to the
wakes. The wake aﬀected turbines outperform the others when the wind is blowing from a
wide range of eastern bins.
On the fault occurrence illustration, the percentage of faults coming from each sectors
sees turbine w89 being excessively aﬀected from the upwind turbine in the sector 270-300◦.
Other than that, no signiﬁcant peak implies a sector with complex wind ﬂow, possibly causing
more downtime. It should be noted that the faults are normalised for each sector according
to the data density.
(a) Mean power per sector
(b) Fault occurrence per sector
Figure 12: Sectoral comparison
2.3.2
Binned Power Curve
As stated in the Introduction, the power curve is a universal tool for turbine comparison
or monitoring but hides a lot of challenges like which is the air density or wind direction
distribution in each year. By binning the wind speeds into intervals and taking the mean of
the power produced for turbines in the same farm and on annual base, change in performance
eﬃciency is possible to be distinguished.
In Figure 13, the binned power curves are projected on the same scale and close to each
other for every turbine. For most of the units, their annual power curves are overlapping
Page 17 of 72
==PAGE:24==
2.3
Exploratory Data Analysis Toolbox Development
each other, meaning that under the same wind speeds they are producing the same amount
of power. For turbine w90 though, there is a shift of the power curve to the right from year
to year, mainly from 2016 and on which might indicate possible underperformance.
Figure 13: Annually binned power curves per turbine
Afterwards, the relative turbine power curves are plotted against each other on a yearly
basis in Figure 14 to validate the hypothesis that the power curve of w90 is shifting to the
right.
Figure 14: Power curves per year
Page 18 of 72
==PAGE:25==
2.3
Exploratory Data Analysis Toolbox Development
It is less evident but the red curve is shifting more and more from its relative position
against the other turbines, especially from the one it possesses during the ﬁrst two years.
This does not seem to be the case for the rest of the models where their relative performance
is pinned on the same curve location.
2.3.3
Power Coeﬃcient
Crucial point is the aerodynamic performance of the rotor in terms of capturing the most
out of the kinetic energy of the wind stream. This happens through the Power Coeﬃcient in
Equation 1 which is a dimensionless metric of aerodynamic eﬃciency. Its maximum value is
0.59, called Betz limit and represents the inability of machines transforming fully the kinetic
energy into rotational because of thrust of the rotor, friction on the blades, ﬂow separation
at the trailing edge and other factors.
Cp =
P
1
2ρAV 3
(1)
P is the output power on a 10-minute step, V is the wind speed and ρ is the air density,
calculated through Equation 2 since as mentioned, no surface pressure measurements are
available. By using temperature and elevation z, one can approximate air density for every
timestep.
ρ = 353.05 ∗exp (−0.034 ∗z/(273 + Tout))/(273 + Tout)
(2)
In order to illustrate properly the Cp and having in mind it is a direct function of the tip
speed ratio and pitch angle, some rules were applied to the measurements to get a relative
impression of this coeﬃcient. The NBM datasets was used for direct comparison and wind
speeds below 4 m/s were discarded. When binning by wind speed or wind direction, a Cp
curve for each turbine appears as in Figure 15.
Figure 15: Power Coeﬃcient from 2014 to 2019
Page 19 of 72
==PAGE:26==
2.3
Exploratory Data Analysis Toolbox Development
Evidently, the Betz limit is respected, indicating that there might a nacelle transfer
function integrated in the control system. Using the whole period of the dataset, turbine
w86 seems to be the turbine with the best aerodynamic performance for every wind speed
and direction bin, with the w89 following closely, probably due to their siting in the wind
farm. Since the aim is to ﬁnd if any change has happened in this six year period, the dataset
is splitted in two three-year periods initially as in Figure 16, where main changes observed
is the boosting of all turbines’ aerodynamic performance, reaching the purple curve but also
the drop of the relative position of w90, indicated by the red curve.
(a) 2014-2017
(b) 2017-2019
Figure 16: Selective Power Coeﬃcient
2.3.4
Yaw Misalignment
A proven area of turbine underperformance is when the control system does not align
properly the nacelle towards the wind direction recorded from the wind vane. In that case,
the incoming wind ﬂow hits the rotor with a relative angle, decreasing the eﬃciency of the
kinetic energy conversion but also increasing the vibrations across the whole rotor area.
Having a high failure rate, it will lead to diﬃculties in repairing and excessive downtime
registered. Following up the study in [29], out of a sample of 300+ turbines, more than
50% were misaligned to the wind, losing on average 1.7% annual power production. Usually,
up to a 10◦of yawing bias is permitted in the control system because the sensitivity of the
turbine parts is high when rotating constantly to face the wind.
Attempts have been made to improve the yaw alignment with advanced measurement
equipment but most of these techniques introduce additional costs and rely on alignment
tolerances with the rotor axis or the true north. Turbines that are well aligned after commis-
sioning may suﬀer an alignment degradation during their operational lifetime. Such changes,
caused by a loosened, bent or warped wind vane over time, need to be detected as soon as
possible to minimize power losses [30]. If the vane is damaged, it is registering an anoma-
Page 20 of 72
==PAGE:27==
2.3
Exploratory Data Analysis Toolbox Development
lously good alignment of the wind turbine to the wind direction and therefore sends to the
control system wrong input, making the turbine operating sub-optimally and increasing the
mechanical loads in the long run. This case was examined in [31] where the discrepancy
between the relative wind direction of each turbine and the farm average is computed for
revealing anomaly indications. In [32], the eﬀect of yaw eﬀect had a greater impact on power
production in the area from 3 to 8 m/s. In the range of 15-30◦of yaw misalignment, the ro-
tational speed drops from 3 to 12% in contrast to normal conditions, aﬀecting the generator
power conversion, according to [33]. Following the cubic-cosine relationship between power
loss and yaw error, misalignments of ±10◦can cause up to 4% production loss.
Figure 17: Simpliﬁed ﬂow in front and behind the rotor [30]
Figure 17 illustrates the distortion of the wind ﬂow behind the rotor which aﬀects the
measurements. That is why a ﬂow deﬂection angle is incorporated usually which on well-
crafted models is a function of wind speed or rotor speed along with an assembly angle.
Fortunately, measurements from both the wind vane and the nacelle position exist and
simplifying the procedure for preliminary assessment purposes, the discrepancy of them will
be taken to observe if any turbine has a deviating tendency. The rotation of the nacelle is
often not accurate though, leading to a drift of the true north marking during operational
lifetime [30]. The rules applied to the data are:
• NBM status is considered for possible inherited yaw error during operation
• Wind speed > 4 m/s
• Faults of yaw error exceedance are excluded in order to not distort the samples. Their
sum for each turbine is roughly less than 25 events for the whole period.
In Figure 18, the scattered data from the pre-computed yaw error are plotted against
their respective wind speed for each turbine along with the average value per wind speed
bin. Mainly, all turbines seem to be inside an envelope of ±12◦of error which seems to be
acceptable according to the benchmarks in the previous paragraph. There are few events of
extreme misalignment for wind speeds which are low or above 20 m/s. After 12 m/s, the
average error seems to deviate from zero but is still inside normal limits.
Page 21 of 72
==PAGE:28==
2.3
Exploratory Data Analysis Toolbox Development
(a) Scatter plot per wind speed bin
(b) Mean value per wind speed bin
Figure 18: Yaw misalignment status over the six year period
In order to validate that the turbines did not face any alignment decay, their distribution
is assessed along with the relationship of the errors against the rotational speed. Apparently,
most of these errors happen before the turbine reaches the nominal rotation for cut-in speed
at 10.5 RPM. That means that either the turbine is switched oﬀdue to fault or poor wind
conditions, not implying overall any case of excess yaw error resulting in underperformance
of the turbines. When going more in detail by comparing annually these cases, no signiﬁcant
change is observed so the illustration is avoided.
(a) Distribution of yaw error
(b) Scatter plot per rotor speed bin
Figure 19: Yaw misalignment status validation over the six year period
Page 22 of 72
==PAGE:29==
3
Power Performance Analysis
Having accomplished a preliminary turbine status assessment on a wind farm level
with the techniques mentioned in the previous sections, the interest is redirected to a more
individual performance evaluation throughout time for each unit. The ﬁndings from the
previous section indicate a possibility for change in behaviour of the w90 unit, which can be
illustrated from the binned power curves and power harness coeﬃcients. This indication is
mainly relying on the wind farm level comparison and the signiﬁcant change in the position
of the curves mentioned before. A multi-dimensional modelling of each individual power
curve has as a purpose the mimicking of the turbine behaviour depending on the years of
data chosen to be fed into the model.
3.1
Model Selection Criteria
The main content of this thesis is oriented towards power curve modelling and according
to the literature reviewed, one of the most modern and eﬃcient techniques is the usage of
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks.
They were proven to outperform other types of algorithmic
architectures for regression problems. In [1], the results of parametric, non-parametric and
discrete methods were compared against the ones from neural network architectures like a
Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) with six input features. The latter was able to decrease the
levels of error. Similar in [3] where an ANN with Gaussian Filtering recorded the lower
RMSE scores among other less sophisticated structures. The MLP Regressor is chosen for
the power curve modelling task and satisﬁes the criteria listed below:
• Eﬃcient and proven power curve modelling technique with some of the lowest error
levels recorded
• Few authors have used ANN to model wind turbine power curve in the context of power
performance validation while even fewer have used more than three atmospherical
parameters to predict power
• Academic research in the ﬁeld of machine learning and attempt to connect its appli-
cation with real business cases by using open-source solutions
• IEC power curve binning method and linear models are broadly proven to not be
adequate for the necessary accuracy required in those kinds of tasks
3.2
Artiﬁcial Neural Network Theoretical Background
The Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) captures overall well the interdependency of the
input environmental variables. It is a supervised learning algorithm that learns a function
by training on a dataset.
Given an array of features X and a target y, it can learn a
non-linear function approximator for either classiﬁcation or regression. It is diﬀerent from
logistic regression because between the input and the output layer, there can be one or
more non-linear layers, called hidden layers as in Figure 21. The leftmost layer, known as
Page 23 of 72
==PAGE:30==
3.2
Artiﬁcial Neural Network Theoretical Background
the input layer, consists of a set of neurons representing the input features. Each neuron
in the hidden layer transforms the values from the previous layer with a weighted linear
summation, followed by a non-linear activation function like the hyperbolic tan function.
The output layer receives the values from the last hidden layer and transforms them into
output values. The MLP trains using backpropagation with no activation function in the
output layer, which can also be seen as using the identity function as activation function.
Therefore, it uses the square error as the loss function and the output is a set of continuous
values [34].
Figure 20: Multi-layer Perceptron properties [34], [35]
One should be familiar with linear regression, in which case the weights on the inputs
are similar to the coeﬃcients used in a regression equation. For example, a neuron may have
two inputs, requiring then three weights, one for each input and one for the bias. Like linear
regression again, larger weights indicate increased complexity and fragility. It is desirable to
keep weights in the network small and regularization techniques can be used. The weighted
inputs are summed and passed through an activation function, sometimes called a transfer
function.
An activation function is a simple mapping of summed weighted input to the output of
the neuron. It is called an activation function because it governs the threshold at which the
neuron is activated and the strength of the output signal. Traditionally, non-linear activation
functions are used because this allows the network to combine the inputs in more complex
ways and in turn provide a richer capability in the functions they can model. Non-linear
Page 24 of 72
==PAGE:31==
3.2
Artiﬁcial Neural Network Theoretical Background
functions like the logistic, also called the sigmoid function, were used that output a value
between 0 and 1 with an s-shaped distribution and the hyperbolic tangent function also
called tanh that outputs the same distribution over the range -1 to +1. More recently the
rectiﬁer activation function has been shown to provide better results for particular tasks [35].
Figure 21: Most common non-linear activation functions [36]
MLP trains using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), Adam or L-BFGS. This is where
one row of data is exposed to the network at a time as input. The network processes the
input upward activating neurons as it goes to ﬁnally produce an output value. This is called
a forward pass on the network. It is the type of pass that is also used after the network is
trained in order to make predictions on new data.
The output of the network is compared to the expected output and an error is calculated.
This error is then propagated back through the network, one layer at a time and the weights
are updated according to the amount that they contributed to the error. The process is
repeated for all of the examples in the training data. One iteration of updating the network
for the entire training dataset is called an epoch.
A network may be trained for tens,
hundreds or many thousands of epochs. Stochastic Gradient Descent updates parameters
using the gradient of the loss function with respect to a parameter that needs adaptation,
where from Equation 3, η is the learning rate which controls the step-size in the parameter
space search and Loss is the loss function used for the network [34].
w ←w −η

α∂R(w)
∂w
+ ∂Loss
∂w

(3)
Adam is similar to SGD in a sense that it is a stochastic optimizer, but it can automat-
ically adjust the amount to update parameters based on adaptive estimates of lower-order
moments. With SGD or Adam, training supports online and mini-batch learning.
For regression, MLP uses the Square Error loss function, written as in Equation 4 where
α∥W∥2
2 is an L2-regularization term (aka penalty) that penalizes complex models and a > 0
is a non-negative hyperparameter that controls the magnitude of the penalty.
Page 25 of 72
==PAGE:32==
3.3
Methodology
Loss(ˆy, y, W) = 1
2∥ˆy −y∥2
2 + α
2 ∥W∥2
2
(4)
Starting from initial random weights, the Multi-layer Perceptron minimizes the loss
function by repeatedly updating these weights. After computing the loss, a backward pass
propagates it from the output layer to the previous layers, providing each weight parameter
with an updated value meant to decrease the loss. The weights in the network can be updated
from the errors calculated for each training example and this is called online learning. It can
result in fast but also chaotic changes to the network. Alternatively, the errors can be saved
up across all of the training examples and the network can be updated at the end. This is
called batch learning and is often more stable [35].
In gradient descent, the gradient ∇LossW of the loss with respect to the weights is
computed and deducted from W. More formally, this is expressed as in Equation 5, where i
is the iteration step, and ϵ is the learning rate with a value larger than zero. The algorithm
stops when it reaches a preset maximum number of iterations or when the improvement in
loss is below a certain, small number [34].
W i+1 = W i −ϵ∇Lossi
W
(5)
3.3
Methodology
In order to mimic the power behaviour of the turbines, the feedforward ANN described
before will be fed with input data from the SCADA system of the turbines that have a
relationship with the output power. This will be based initially on the results of Chapter 2.2.2
and dealt more in depth in the following subsection. The aim is to create a power response
surface to every combination of input parameters corresponding to certain timeframes of
operation. Once this surface is created, operational data from past or future timeframes
are fed into it. The theoretical power produced based on the training set is then compared
with the recorded one in the form of residuals and with a given level of model error, the
deviations created are assessed. If they are signiﬁcant, it means the turbine operation is
diverging from its standards in the training set in two ways, either overperformance either
underperformance. If they are not signiﬁcant, it is unavoidably assumed that the turbine is
operating as usual.
3.3.1
Feature Selection
First step in creating an ANN model is picking the right set of input features which
inﬂuence signiﬁcantly the target value. Going through the properties of Table 1, many ques-
tions arise on which parameters should be included in the model. Some parameters like
the current and voltage are automatically discarded since the 10-minute power is deﬁning
them and not the other way around. A lot of temperature sensors and some insight on the
mechanical properties of the turbine are also listed. In this power performance assessment,
weight will be given in parameters that are deﬁned exclusively by the atmospherical con-
ditions. The motivation behind is the fact that if a turbine component like the rotor, the
Page 26 of 72
==PAGE:33==
3.3
Methodology
nacelle orientation system or the generator for instance is degrading signiﬁcantly through-
out time, it will inﬂuence also the power output measurements meaning there will be no
change observed in the long run, rather than relying exclusively on external factors. This
malfunctioning will be inherited in the data and not reﬂected properly as power deviation
from expectations.
Therefore, a major risk arises in this study, that is the condition of the atmospherical
elements measurement equipment through the six years of operation.
Model results are
possible to be distorted and if interesting ﬁndings arise during the assessment, it is suggested
the equipment is initially checked. Since the technical operator and the service company are
in charge of these log ﬁles, it is diﬃcult to detect the following:
• How often the anemometer and the windvane have been calibrated
• If they had a signiﬁcant damage
• If an oﬀset exists on the measurements
• If a basic nacelle transfer function is incorporated in the measured output
• If the condition of the outside temperature thermometer has been regularly checked
Following the literature review and applications with neural networks, external wind
conditions have been broadly used as input features with diﬀerent signiﬁcance overall. The
working dataset in this thesis does not include turbulence intensity, wind shear and air
density at hub height. Wind speed and direction are the basis to explain power output.
The maximum and minimum values of wind velocity will try to explain some of the wind
variation during a 10-minute period. Outside temperature will make the seasonality eﬀect
vanish until a certain degree through its substitution for air density. To be more concise,
the algorithm Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE) will rank the features according to their
importance. This technique is implemented through a Support Vector Regression (SVR)
with a linear kernel because RFE cannot take place inside an ANN framework. Some of
the non-linear type relationships in certain conditions might not be captured but still this
ranking of features will contribute to wiser input decisions. Below are the results of this
ranking:
Feature
Symbol
Rank
Wind speed mean
V
1
Wind speed max
Vmax
1
Wind speed min
Vmin
1
Wind direction
D
3
Temperature
Tout
2
Table 4: Recursive Feature Elimination results
The signiﬁcant impact of wind direction is not captured by the linear method but can
be understood when activating it, being able to reduce the average error since the wind ﬂow
Page 27 of 72
==PAGE:34==
3.3
Methodology
characteristics vary from bin to bin. The impact of Vmin was found to aﬀect minorly the
end result. Historical numerical simulation data from the site was also downloaded from
the New European Wind Atlas, developed by DTU, with the aim of using parameters like
air density, aerodynamic roughness length, friction velocity, humidity, surface pressure, rain
precipitation, heat ﬂux and turbulent kinetic energy. The idea behind is that besides their
local inaccuracy, these elements could provide with background information on the seasonal
and wind ﬂow speciﬁc characteristics leading to better predictions which did not happen.
3.3.2
Feature Transformation
Neural networks, regression tasks and classiﬁcation problems usually have as a prereq-
uisite the dataset to be transformed into a more compact and understandable format by
stabilising the variance. Given the usage of small weights in the model and the usage of
error between predictions and expected values, the scaling of inputs and outputs used to
train the model is an important factor. Unscaled input variables can result in a slow or
unstable learning process, whereas unscaled target variables on regression problems can re-
sult in exploding gradients causing the learning process to fail. Data preparation involves
using techniques such as the normalization and standardization to rescale input and output
variables prior to training a neural network model [37].
The dataset was standardized using the Preprocessing package from the sklearn plat-
form, meaning transforming the distribution of each feature so it has a mean of zero and
a standard deviation of one. In the current ANN, the transformation did not change the
model weights but reduced very much the computation time. A quantile transformation
was tried also, yielding same learning from the model side indicating that it is insensitive to
transformation techniques.
3.3.3
Parameter Optimization
By using the MLPRegressor library imported from sklearn, one can utilize the power of
open-source neural networks in wind energy applications without diving into the deep waters
of setting up one from scratch. This model comes with certain parameters for tweaking in
order to be adjusted for every application following the explanations of Section 3.1. These
parameters were empirically tweaked in the beginning to examine the response of the neural
network by setting most of the parameters to default, establishing two hidden layers of 40
and 30 neurons each and using the Rectiﬁed Linear Unit as an activation function. The
testing resulted in a model that had the capability of properly predicting power output with
a certain bias. To eliminate the bias caused by model inadequacy, the Exhaustive Grid
Search algorithm was used for tuning the hyperparameters. This algorithm trains the same
model using every time a diﬀerent combination of selected parameters of the estimator and
assigns a score to the output each time. The highest score leads to the optimum combination
of hyperparameters to be used for the modelling part.
The Exhaustive Grid Search is a rather time-consuming process since the ANN model
is ﬁtted each time with a diﬀerent set of hyperparameters which tune the model and with an
optimised combination of them arriving to ﬁner predictions. Covering a range of diﬀerent
Page 28 of 72
==PAGE:35==
3.3
Methodology
combinations seems to result in very minor model improvements though.
Figure 22: Eﬀect of diﬀerent activation functions on predictions
In Figure 22, the eﬀect of various activation functions on the predictions is visualised
while all other parameters are locked. Logistic function is narrower but results in very steady
predictions in the nominal power output area since from its nature it curtails the output
limit. Tanh and Relu functions are more accurate throughout the wind speed distribution
but they might predict over the maximum value of the target distribution.
The four hidden layer structure performs really well in decoding all the complex inter-
actions between the environmental variables and the response of the turbine to them. One
neuron in the ﬁnal layer seems to stabilise the predictions mainly in the nominal power area
for Tanh and Relu activation functions, making the Logistic one unnecessary. It might be
slightly heavier computationally speaking, but the combination of four hidden layers and the
Tanh function really stabilises the nominal power regime. Two hidden layers plus the Relu
function are able to achieve similar model scores but they tend to fail in the aforementioned
area. This optimisation problem is of absurd nature and the black box architecture of neural
networks leads sometimes to multiple hyperparameter combinations achieving high scores.
After structured tweaking through the Exhaustive Grid Search and most importantly, em-
pirical tweaking, a model with the same conﬁgurations and accuracy for every turbine was
achieved as in the following table.
ANN Parameters
Value
Activation function
Tanh
Hidden layers
90,110,60,1
Solver
Adam
Learning rate
Constant
Random state
42
Max iterations
10000
Table 5: Final neural network parameters
Page 29 of 72
==PAGE:36==
3.4
Residual Exploration
The shuﬄing of the data is of no need here since usually neighbouring timesteps share
many similar atmospherical elements. Large batch sizes do not contribute to better under-
standing from the model side since each timestep describes a 10-minute period and enough
explanation is included in small batches for every epoch. The ﬁnal combination of param-
eters is derived from empirical tweaking, the exhaustive grid search and manuals on neural
network hyperparameter optimisation.
To secure that the ANN parameters obtained from before are robust enough for working
on the given dataset’s architecture, a 5-fold Cross Validation was applied where the trained
data are splitted into ﬁve partitions which are plugged in the model every time separately to
assess their uniformity. One partition is left out for testing and evaluating the model’s skill
on unseen data. A score is assigned for every combination out of the ﬁve procedures and
the more similar the scores are, the more coherent is the dataset and the more capable is
the model of making predictions on it, without failing in certain areas of the input features’
distribution. These model scores are in the range of 0.995 with a 0.001 deviation between
them.
3.4
Residual Exploration
Having decided on the preferable features, the neural network hyperparameters and the
metrics to evaluate the results each time, it is time to obtain meaningful information from
the residuals of the model. Knowing the usual average error of the model, everytime an
unseen dataset is fed into it for prediction making and the error generated is signiﬁcantly
above the usual, it can be considered as abnormal behaviour. More speciﬁcally, a neural
network with the same setup is trained on ﬁve diﬀerent turbines meaning each time the
weights are adjusted for each turbine. The model learns better each turbine individually
and then is possible to make assessment of the model errors on a farm level. The set of
residuals generated from each ﬁtting as in Formula 6 is examined in various ways.
e = y −ˆy
(6)
The main concept as already stated is to observe any possible behavioural change in
the turbine operation throughout the 2014-2019 period for which raw data are available.
This will happen by training the neural network for every turbine with data from the ﬁrst
one, two or three years and then feed in the model the unseen datasets of the later years to
observe the distribution of the residuals. The training datasets will be splitted 80-20% to
train-test for validation of the accuracy of the model and detection of the average error in
the predictions. Having this error as a reference, the unseen dataset from 2016 and on will
be inserted each time iteratively and compare the level of prediction error with the usual one
initially and then on a wind farm level. If the predictions deviate signiﬁcantly from reality
for a given year only on one turbine, while the others generate the usual error, that means
the turbine is facing possible issues. The following ﬂowchart and the series of actions listed
below will lead to a better understanding of the overall procedure.
Page 30 of 72
==PAGE:37==
3.4
Residual Exploration
Figure 23: Power performance assessment ﬂow chart
1. Trained on 80% of the 2014-2015 dataset
2. Tested on 20% of the 2014-2015 dataset
3. Datasets from 2016 to 2019 are inserted in the trained model and the residuals are
analysed
4. Deviation from own turbine average error or wind farm level
3.4.1
Result Illustration
In order to examine properly the formed residuals for every prediction, an attempt will
be made to visualise them in a compact form and observe their behaviour throughout time
according to the ﬂowchart of Figure 23. The distribution of the residuals will be plotted
against wind speed to examine if they are uniformly distributed around zero, meaning the
model is not biased in a certain range of wind speeds. As in Figure 24, the mean residual value
per wind speed bin will translate the excess information of the aforementioned technique into
a more useful content. Negative residuals according to Formula 6 correspond to the model
predicting more power than actually recorded per timestep.
(a) Scattered residuals against wind speed
(b) Mean residual per wind speed bin
Figure 24: Turbine w86 residuals
Page 31 of 72
==PAGE:38==
3.4
Residual Exploration
For turbine w86, the residuals with purple colour indicate the volume of the standard
model error of ±10kW between the main wind distribution range of 5-10 m/s for the training
set of 2014-2015. This implies that the model is predicting the target value without a vivid
bias from the beginning. Therefore, for a turbine to be stamped as healthy, each year’s
mean residual value should follow the same pattern as in the training set. If they deviate
signiﬁcantly, it means a change in the relationship between input atmospherical conditions
and generated power.
Turbine w86 seems to have a steady operation throughout the years without signiﬁcant
deteriorating. All the curves are following closely each other meaning that for every input
year from 2016 and on, the model is predicting the power with the same average error and
no distortion is taking place between wind conditions and power.
(a) Turbine w87 residuals
(b) Turbine w88 residuals
Figure 25: Mean residual per wind speed bin
For easiness of result interpretation, the scattered residual plots are omitted and turbines
w87 and w88 are put under the microscope. The purple line corresponding to the average
error is slightly more distant to the other ones, following the same direction. Turbine 87 has
a minor distancing between average model error and predictions for the upcoming years. It is
diﬃcult to distinguish whether or not it can be expected due to natural turbine ageing which
would be more realistic if the coloured curves had more discrete distancing between them
from year to year. Maybe this ageing is present but is absorbed by the results uncertainty
envelope. Since the distance is insigniﬁcant and for w88, predictions are lower than actual
recordings only below the purple line, that means the turbines are not experiencing change
in behaviour despite the expected default deterioration.
Page 32 of 72
==PAGE:39==
3.4
Residual Exploration
(a) Turbine w89 residuals
(b) Turbine w90 residuals
Figure 26: Mean residual per wind speed bin
For turbine w89, which is performing very well on a wind farm level, it is evident that
there is some level of prediction deviation in the main range of wind speeds. The model is
biased negatively in the 3-5 m/s area without any inﬂuence on the future year’s predictions.
For turbine w90, it is clear that the model predicts signiﬁcantly more power than
recorded, but also is unbiased judging by the purple line. The main range of wind speeds, be-
tween cut-in and rated, experiences progressively decreased mean of residuals up to -140kW.
(a) Turbine w89 residuals
(b) Turbine w90 residuals
Figure 27: Residual histogram
In the histograms of Figure 27, it must be said that is diﬃcult to determine whether
Page 33 of 72
==PAGE:40==
3.4
Residual Exploration
turbine w89 is experiencing underperformance or not. More obvious for the subﬁgure on
the right, where the bell shaped residuals are being shifted vividly to the left and capturing
areas where the model has extreme errors over -200kW. For every timestep in the periods
2016 and on, the model trained on data from the two-year period of 2014-2015, expects more
power production than actually recorded.
Some more emphasis will take place to ﬁnd if the model is failing in a particular power
or directional range in the Figure 28. Apparently, across the whole power range there is an
underprediction taking place and peaking in 2018 and 2019. The power bin producing the
most extreme error to the neural network is roughly at 1500kW and it might be close to the
point where the blades start pitching to control the output steadily. Direction-wise, no sector
exhibits signiﬁcant error volume, although it was expected than in the waked directions, the
model would have a more ﬂuctuating performance.
Interestingly enough, there is a low
average error at 210 degrees, where turbine w88 is sited, with the inverse eﬀect not being
observed from that turbine.
The residuals with an absolute magnitude greater than 200kW imply that the model
failed signiﬁcantly in those areas. By eliminating those areas and investigating on the input
parameters, no obvious pattern is detected, meaning that hidden factors aﬀect severely the
operation of the turbine for those timesteps.
(a) Turbine 90 residuals vs. power
(b) Turbine w90 residuals vs. direction
Figure 28: Mean residual per bin
All in all, the Artiﬁcial Neural Network model established shows mainly an unbiased
prediction capability but points out to a possible case of underperformance from turbine w90.
In the next subsection, the visualised results will be quantiﬁed according to the metrics used
for evaluation.
Page 34 of 72
==PAGE:41==
3.4
Residual Exploration
3.4.2
Model Metrics
Various metrics will provide valuable quantiﬁable insight into the residuals of the model.
In order to evaluate all the model trials, four error metrics are adopted:
• Coeﬃcient of Determination R2 ranging from 0 to 1. It is evaluating the ﬁtting of the
model against the data points according to the following formula:
R2 = 1 −
P (yi −ˆy)2
P (yi −¯y)2
(7)
• Root Mean Square Error. It is a widely used metric in machine learning specifying
the average magnitude of a model’s deviation between predictions and reality. Highly
prone to extreme errors as well, amplifying them with the square as in its formula:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t1
n
n
X
j=1
(yj −ˆyj)2
(8)
• Percentage-wise diﬀerence between production predicted by the model and the one
recorded:
dAEP[%] = AEPmodelled
AEPactual
(9)
• Visual cross-checking. Characteristic example is a scaling fault that occurred in the
early thesis steps, which was not captured by the metrics and was leading the model
in predicting a badly ﬁtted power curve over the actual target values.
Initially, the model ﬁtting is assessed in Table 6 according to the Coeﬃcient of Deter-
mination. Scores are high and uniform between turbines indicating coherent datasets for the
initial two years used for training.
w86
w87
w88
w89
w90
0.996
0.993
0.994
0.994
0.995
Table 6: Model R-square per turbine
Next, the very useful metric of RMSE is used to assess the average model error for
the train-test period of 2014-2015 resulting in a range of 40-50kW or 2-2.5% of the nominal
power value. Relatively to applications reviewed in the literature, these RMSE scores stand
in between them and at some experiments they even outperform them.
Once the baseline error is ﬁxed, the deviation from it can be assessed and is more
obvious for turbine w90 for all the examined years along with turbines w87 and w89 for
year 2018. That year is tricky to interpret since relatively low winds occurred with peculiar
distributions adding more complexity to the already tight layout farm situation. In general,
the ﬁrst three turbine units do not exhibit any increased prediction error, even after a lot of
Page 35 of 72
==PAGE:42==
3.4
Residual Exploration
experimentation with the ANN setup. The RMSE for 2018 on predictions for turbine w90 is
almost double than the baseline indicating change of production behaviour in between years.
This means that the model has been trained on a more optimistic relationship between input
conditions and power output than tested in those later stages.
Figure 29: Root Mean Square Error metric
The dAEP metric, measuring the percentage-wise diﬀerence between the sum of pre-
dicted energy yield and the one actually recorded from each timestep, is positive if more
AEP is expected. Again the baseline is depicted in the 2014-2015 period on the leftmost
of Figure 32, where the mean should be zero, meaning the model is predicting exactly the
same amount of energy yield for the test set as recorded. Apparently this is not the case for
turbines w86 and w88 and should be kept in mind for the later years’ AEP prediction.
This is the primary case for turbine w90 where its deviation starts from 2016 by 3%
and reaches 7-8% in the latest years. For year 2018, the highest discrepancies are observed
also for two of the other turbines. Turbine w89 arrives second as the turbine expected to
produce 2-3% more yield according to the model, even if the baseline period has an average
of zero. Diﬀerent case but simple results lock the stable performance of unit w86 where
although the baseline is almost 1% up, it is incorporated in the future predictions showing
that the generated yield each time was as much as expected.
Page 36 of 72
==PAGE:43==
3.4
Residual Exploration
Figure 30: Diﬀerence between modelled and recorded energy yield
Another metric was tried where the AEP of each turbine is compared against turbine w90
as a ratio to investigate potential steady deviation but due to many background factors, the
inter-turbine comparison does not result in reliable results. These factors include what kind
of wind distribution and how much production was lost because of downtime. Using these
model metrics, the change in performance for turbine w90 is vivid following the previous
ﬁndings. According to its learning, the neural network interpolates and computes a more
optimistic power value for each combination of environmental conditions at hub height.
3.4.3
Experimentation
An alternative residual analysis approach will take place here with more frequent time
ranges ahead of the training period. Relying on the eﬀect of seasonality, the years are splitted
to two halves, one accounting for the fall/winter and the other one for spring/summer.
In the ﬁgure below, besides the ﬁrst columns reﬂecting the training set, the following
are annotated with the year and the initial month of the examined period. Therefore, every
04 refers to a spring/summer dataset starting from April and ongoing for six months. The
situation seems to not exhibit abnormal behaviour for any of the turbines until the fall
season of 2016 according to the RMSE metric and from the summer according to the dAEP
metric for turbine w90. Minor yield deviations are ﬁrstly presented in October 2016, after
the summer period, but then they pick up again signiﬁcantly from April 2017 with 6% more
yield predicted. In the meantime, the other turbines are oscillating around the inherited
level of uncertainty. Unit w89 present a 3.5% deviation during the summer periods starting
signiﬁcantly from 2016. They go along with the model residuals which for w90 in particular
Page 37 of 72
==PAGE:44==
3.4
Residual Exploration
reach 70-80kW (obvious also from seasonal power curves). The diﬀerence between the two
turbines is that for w89, steady predicted power comes back into safe limits while for the
w90, the deviations keep growing.
Figure 31: Root Mean Square Error metric
Figure 32: Diﬀerence between modelled and recorded energy yield
Page 38 of 72
==PAGE:45==
3.5
Uncertainty Mitigation
As observed, the dAEP for the initial trained period of 2014-2015 is not 0% as it should
but has a bias due to the model’s error. If the model has the tendency to predict more/less
power for certain turbines, this should be taken into account when interpreting future indi-
cations from this metric. Basically, even more separations can happen with adjusted time
window size and also the statistical moments of the residual distribution can be assessed
prior to a known failure event or an annual service. Usually, the model expects more energy
yield the summer months that recorded, a condition that might be connected to the higher
temperatures inside the nacelle and its mechanisms as well. It is likely that a component or
internal conﬁgurations had undergone a change of unknown nature. More on this ﬁeld will
explored in the later linkage of model results to wind farm operation.
3.5
Uncertainty Mitigation
Result credibility is a term describing in this section a procedure to make less blurry
and more certain the indications of the model. Focus will be put on signiﬁcant result testing,
analysing the residuals with control limits and preparing the ground for the ﬁfth section, in
order to quantify robustly the model-reality deviations.
For signiﬁcance testing, the student’s two-sample t-test will examine the signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between the actual power distribution and the modelled one. This kind of testing
is necessary to examine if the diﬀerence between two datasets does not happen by chance
and the averages of the two groups are statistically diﬀerent. It is recommended that the
datasets are normally distributed or have the same variance and the amount of samples is
not small. The prerequisites for the ﬁrst comparison are covered but for the model-actual
power comparison, the datasets are not following a normal distribution but the attempt will
happen and will be compared with the metrics from previous section. The quest here is to
lock the magnitude of diﬀerence with the t-value in between the model indications and reality.
The formula is as in 10, where the sample mean, standard deviation and sample size play a
crucial role in determining the t-value. The testing comes with a p-value, which represents
the probability of the two datasets being diﬀerent if this value is below the threshold of 0.05.
Otherwise, the null hypothesis of the datasets not being identical is rejected.
t −stat :=
¯µ
s/
√n
(10)
The t-values of the testing procedure are recorded in Figure 33, representing how signif-
icant is the deviation between the recorded power values and the predicted ones. The bars
which are dotted have a p-value lower than the threshold, meaning the diﬀerence between
the two samples is insigniﬁcant in terms of mean and variance. This is exactly the case
for the period 2014-2015 where there should be no statistical diﬀerence between model and
reality. The p-values recorded for all the turbines besides w86 are tending towards zero,
highlighting the diﬀerence between model and predictions from 2 to 11 on average. The low
limits might indicate the physical ageing of the turbines. By stepping on that fact, one can
see the tendency of turbine w90 having again the largest deviation which cannot be validated
for the other three turbines when cross-checking with the dAEP metric. It can be assumed
that it is including the physical ageing plus the growing ineﬃciency of some turbines.
Page 39 of 72
==PAGE:46==
3.5
Uncertainty Mitigation
Figure 33: T statistic values between the recorded and predicted power datasets
Next in line is to establish some control limits on the residuals and evaluate the ﬁtting
of the model. The threshold set according to usual industry applications is three times the
standard deviation assuming the residuals are following a normal distribution. This threshold
will separate whether or not large individual prediction errors are outliers, sourcing from
model failure or they imply large continuous prediction errors located in change of power
eﬃciency.
Figure 34: Residual time series for unit w90 and years 2014-2015 upper, 2019 lower
For unit w90, the residual time series in Figure 34 show that there exist timesteps
where the model is not capable of registering a proper amount of power. In the deviating
Page 40 of 72
==PAGE:47==
3.5
Uncertainty Mitigation
performance of year 2019, continuous large errors are observed shifting the mean of the
distribution some kW lower in contrast to the upper ﬁgure. Same examination was applied
to the other turbines for the various annual slots with the ﬁndings pointing out that every
deviation recorded between model and reality was due to continuous model tendency and
not individual large errors.
Finally, the modelled power curve is compared density-wise with the actual one for
random years and against the usage only of wind speed as an input, to demonstrate the
weakness of single-dimensional power curves. Under that scenario, the predictions form a
smooth line which if illustrated is like a polynomial regression inside the blue data points
envelope. In Figure 35, the predictions on the testing dataset of 2014 and on the evaluating
one of 2019 are plotted with red. They mainly overlap the testing datasets with blue and
are inside the model training dataset envelope with light blue.
Figure 35: Predicted annual power curve for unit w86
In Figure 36, although everything seems normal for 2014, the blue distribution has
shifted to the right, away from the model’s known relationship between wind and power.
The low density of the curve for 2014 is of course due to the 20% of the training 2014-2015
dataset being used testing.
Figure 36: Predicted annual power curve for unit w90
Page 41 of 72
==PAGE:48==
3.5
Uncertainty Mitigation
Being familiar with the fact that not all atmospheric conditions are recorded, these
large errors with no fault signal are examined with the following assumption. Prediction
errors are generated in the development of a fault, one timestep before or in the fading of
one, a timestep after because the turbine might be shutting down slowly or starting up with
careful handling from the control system. The newly ﬁltered normal behaviour dataset had
those data points excluded and the model retrained with no inﬂuence over the outcome. In
Section 5, additional explanation about the model prediction inadequacy will be formulated
after testing a diﬀerent algorithm architecture on the more suspiciously behaving turbines
for cross-validation purposes.
Page 42 of 72
==PAGE:49==
4
Power Performance Validation
After the ﬁndings of the previous section regarding the abnormal performance of only one
out of the ﬁve turbines of the ﬂeet, another modelling structure is suggested to be employed
and compare its ﬁndings for that particular unit using the same methodology. It should
be clariﬁed whether or not the data of that turbine has any ﬂaw that is causing the neural
network to overpredict its power, increasing its average error over every prediction. Through
the literature review, an eﬃcient multi-variate non-parametric structure was searched with
direct application and comparable results in order to ensure that the w90 unit has a changing
wind-power relationship. Uni-variate linear methods which usually consist of benchmark
applications were omitted for the same reasons described in the model selection criteria
from the previous section. Also, this chapter’s chosen model is managing to outperform
benchmark algorithms and is of familiarity due to the author’s work in the past.
4.1
Theoretical Background
Yu Ding’s work on power curve modelling [15] was chosen for the above reasons. In
this book, thorough explanation is taking place on the inadequacy of the IEC binning power
curve and the importance of parameters besides wind speed. His proposal was to create a
probabilistic power response surface following the conditional probability of each environ-
mental parameter with the form of the energy yield E(y | x). The Additive Multiplicative
Kernel (AMK) method is a kernel-based approach, going beyond the plain version of a ker-
nel density estimation or kernel regression and handling the multi-dimensional inputs with
a special structure allowing an additive trivariate ﬁtting each time. When compared against
the k-NN Regression, the Tree-based Regression and the Spline-based Regression, the AMK
outperforms all of them in terms of RMSE and computational time.
Keeping in mind that the Gaussian kernel function is a density function and as such, a
conditional density estimation with multivariate input denoted as x can be formulated
ˆf(y|x) =
n
X
i=1
wi(x)Kλy (y −yi)
(11)
where the weighting coeﬃcients are
wi(x) =
Kλx (∥x −xi∥)
Pn
j=1 Kλx (∥x −xj∥)
(12)
λx = (λ1, . . . , λq) is the vector of the bandwidth parameters associated with the en-
vironmental factors in x and q is the number of explanatory variables in x. In the above
formulation, Kλx(∥u∥), where u = x −xi is a multivariate kernel function and is composed
of a product kernel that is a multiplication of univariate kernel functions, such as
Kλx(∥u∥) = Kλ1 (u1) Kλ2 (u2) · · · Kλq (uq)
(13)
Here Kλj (uj) is generally a univariate Gaussian kernel, except for wind direction D.
Page 43 of 72
==PAGE:50==
4.1
Theoretical Background
The kernel function for D is chosen to be the von Mises kernel because D is a circular variable
that may cause trouble in numerical computation, had a Gaussian kernel been used. The
von Mises kernel function can characterize the directionality of a circular variable and takes
the form of
Kν (D −Di) = exp {ν cos (D −Di)}
2πI0(ν)
(14)
where I0(·) is the modiﬁed Bessel function of order 0 and ν is the concentration param-
eter of the von Mises kernel, which has now taken the role of the inverse of the bandwidth
parameter λD.
The idea is now is to form a series of product kernel functions taking three input variables
each, allowing up to three-factor interactions to be modeled. The use of trivariate kernels
helps alleviate the data scarcity concern, as a trivariate kernel only needs to handle a three-
dimensional space, low enough to avoid the curse of dimensionality. For high-dimensional
covariates (more than three), AMK pools multiple trivariate product kernels together in an
additive structure.
For notation simplicity, let us designate the ﬁrst two elements of x namely x1 and x2 as
V and D respectively. Other environmental variables are denoted by xj, j = 3, . . . , q. AMK
employs the following model structure,
ˆf(y|x) =
n
X
i=1
1
(q −2) [wi (x1, x2, x3) + · · · + wi (x1, x2, xq)] Kλy (y −yi) ,
ˆy(x) =
1
(q −2) [ˆy (x1, x2, x3) + · · · + ˆy (x1, x2, xq)]
(15)
In the above expression, AMK keeps the multivariate kernels but limits them to be
product kernels of three inputs. It is important to incorporate wind speed and direction
information, in every multi-variate kernel so that the triavarite kernels can capture the
interaction eﬀect between the third environmental factor as well. AMK can be used for
high-dimensional data without causing computational or data sparsity problems.
When
additional explanatory variables become available, AMK would include extra additive terms,
each of which has the same structure as the current terms, namely a trivariate kernel having
inputs of V, D and a third explanatory variable.
The key parameters in AMK are the bandwidth parameters, λy and λx. A data-driven
selection criterion, known as the Integrated Squared Error (ISE) can be used and is formulaas
follows
ISE (λx, λy) = I1 −2I2 + I3
(16)
The data-driven bandwidth selection is simply to choose the bandwidths λx and λy that
minimize ˆI1−2ˆI2, since I3 does not depend on the bandwidth selection and it can be omitted
during the minimization of ISE. Using this cross-validation algorithm could, however, take
a long time. In order to have a faster bandwidth selection for practical purposes, a simpler,
greedy kernel approach relying on V and D mainly, to select the bandwidth parameters one
Page 44 of 72
==PAGE:51==
4.2
Methodology
at a time is ﬁnally employed.
4.2
Methodology
The methodology followed in the content of this model development does not deviate
signiﬁcantly from the artiﬁcial neural network in Section 3 and is stepping on the ﬂowchart
developed in Figure 23.
Since the package kernplus that performs the AMK method is
featured in RStudio, the processed NBM dataset from Section 3.3 was loaded with the same
variables to secure the background similarity of the two models. As a result, little time was
spent on processing the dataset, picking the features and organising the model structure.
The last one is due to the fact that the parameters of the additive multiplicative kernel
regression are adjusted by the data itself in an almost black box status meaning mainly the
weighting coeﬃcients and the univariate kernel bandwidth.
4.3
Residual Exploration
Similarly to the handling of the results of the artiﬁcial neural network and the relevant
ﬂowchart, the AMK method will generate some residuals that can be transformed into in-
sightful information. The assumption is that the model RMSE will grow for every year of
turbine’s w90 operation. As the nature of this chapter is to validate the result of the neural
network for that particular turbine, only it, plus two another normally operating turbine
will be examined and compare the results. If they deviate a lot from the ANN’s predictions,
the other three turbines of the ﬂeet will be modelled with the additive multiplicative kernel
regression and identical procedure will be followed.
4.3.1
Result Illustration
Working with the residuals averaged per wind speed bin proved to be an eﬃcient way
of illustrating the model prediction deviations. Furthermore, the two techniques used for
power curve modelling are brought down on an identical level for residual comparison. Due
to some turbines not exhibiting any threatening degradation, only units w86, w89 and w90
are analysed. The ﬁrst has the steadiest performance of the ﬂeet as a benchmark while
the other two are exhibiting from minor to signiﬁcant underperformance which would be
appropriate to emphasize and cross-validate as a phenomenon.
In Figure 37, following the same principles of residual analysis from Figures 24 and 26,
the model discrepancies are averaged for each wind speed bin and presented. The Additive
Multiplicative Kernel regression proves to be robust and has its 2014-2015 scoring on the zero
horizontal axis with a purple colour. For turbine w86 there is no suspiciousness of deviation
from its initial power performance in the training period. All the lines are overlapping with
a minor bias inside the frames of uncertainty possibly. Unit w89 has an average deviation
of up to -30kW from zero where the purple line stands, meaning possibly that it is not as
eﬃcient as it used to be in the two year training period. Finally, the unit w90 has very
vivid deviation from the purple line gradually from 2016 and on, starting from -80kW and
reaching -135kW in 2019 across the whole wind speed range.
Page 45 of 72
==PAGE:52==
4.3
Residual Exploration
(a) Unit w86
(b) Unit w89
(c) Unit w90
Figure 37: Averaged residuals per wind speed bin
In general, the AMK method predicts the power with minor bias above the cut-in speed
as was observed with the ANN. The method also highlights the change of the wind-power
relationship throughout the years for unit w90 which happens gradually in contrast to w89
where all the lines are overlapping each other with a standard deviation from the purple
one. In Figure 38, the one-to-one correlation plots between predicted power from the AMK
and the actual recorded power is illustrated for two of the three units.
A healthy one-
to-one relationship takes place for w86 with the data points close to the green line. On
the contrary, the tendency of the model predicting more power for each combination of
environmental inputs than actually recorded is vivid on the right, especially for 2019 with
red.
(a) Unit w86
(b) Unit w90
Figure 38: One-to-one correlation plots between predicted and actual power
Page 46 of 72
==PAGE:53==
4.3
Residual Exploration
Next, a thorough analysis of the model metrics will take place with a certain focus on
the AEP discrepancy, following the example of Section 3.4.2.
4.3.2
Model Metrics
Initially, the Additive Multiplicative Kernel regression Coeﬃcients of Determination are
drawn and they are identical to the ones from the neural network.
w86
w89
w90
0.996
0.995
0.995
Table 7: Model R-square per turbine
Shifting towards the RMSE scores for an indication of the average model error, again
not huge discrepancies between the two methods are observed, highlighting again the in-
ability of theirs to capture fully the feature interdependency for turbine w89 and w90 more
importantly. Unit’s w86 RMSE is on the same level for every period implying steady model
performance. The deviation is due to the two models’ tendency to overpredict the modelled
power as in Figure 40. Theoretically, unit w89 could provide up to 3% more energy yield
according to its eﬃciency in the two year training period and unit w90 up to 8% for years
2017 and 2018 respectively.
Figure 39: Root Mean Square Error metric
Page 47 of 72
==PAGE:54==
4.4
Models Comparison
Figure 40: Diﬀerence between modelled and recorded energy yield
After using two methods with diﬀerent architecture, the results point out to a mild
power deviation of -30kW for unit w89 and a signiﬁcant deviation of -100kW on average for
unit w90. Turbine w88 is operating in very similar conditions as the problematic unit, being
in the end of the wind farm and receiving multiple wakes from the upwind turbines.
4.4
Models Comparison
Finally, two non-parametric models with diﬀerent architectures were employed to model
the power curves of the turbines for the given farm. Challenges were mainly faced when
familiarising with the neural networks as described during the methodology. The biggest
beneﬁt with it though is the ﬂexible structure which can also be applied on a variable time
windows individually to each turbine with low computational duration. It should be noted
that the AMK method is more stable in the cut-in regime and the residuals of the testing
period have a mean of zero for every wind speed bin.
The residuals generated from the two models are on the same level and the underperfor-
mance is highlighted from the corresponding chosen ways of power analysis. It must be noted
that both models can capture properly the wind-power relationships up to a certain degree
which is analysed in the next section. The RMSE scores on the training sets of 2014-2015
compete conﬁdently against other power curve modelling studies. The nature of the dataset
and its modelling capabilities seem to not be extremely complex to develop on, although
state-of-the-art methods were used.
Page 48 of 72
==PAGE:55==
5
Root Cause Analysis
The common indications of the two models point out to abnormal elements in the
operation of turbine w90 and more minorly of w89. When comparing to the other units that
underwent the power curve modelling procedure, no signiﬁcant change takes place. In this
chapter, reasons will be explored behind this models’ indication and if it is a malfunction of
a sensor, a component or the whole turbine system underperforming.
First of all, the reasons behind the inadequacy of model results will be explained since
although the scores have a high degree of accuracy, still they are not perfect. After clearing
out this ﬁeld, possible causes of underperformance for turbine w90 will be examined with
the aid of relevant literature and the log ﬁles. A preliminary root cause analysis will take
place according to the available SCADA channels recording secondary components.
No
excess focus will take place due to the nature of the current thesis and diﬀerent algorithmic
structures required for these kinds of tasks.
5.1
Inadequacy of Model Predictions
Since the Multi-layer Perceptron and the Additive Multiplicative Kernel method led
to a certain degree of average error, approximating the reasons behind the deviations will
help in the understanding of the limitations of the model as well. Little focus was put on
translating the error events of the turbines due to the variability of each manufacturer’s fault
signal coding.
SCADA systems were not initially designed for machine learning purposes, collecting all
the necessary channels and having a lower frequency than 10-minute periods. In addition, the
SCADA values vary over wide ranges of operational conditions, making it hard to detect an
incipient fault without an appropriate data analysis tool. The non-linear control eﬀects can
damper the features of the faults and non serious faults causing mild performance degradation
that might grow, are even harder to detect [23].
Each manufacturer has individual error event and alarm logging methodologies, with
close to no guidance on how to interpret these. Missing transparency or standardization of
error logs, limits the possibilities for coherent translation of failures and consequently improve
the performance. For the small to medium wind farm owners its practically impossible to
get this deep level of insights into the turbines actual performance and be able to quantify
the losses occurred with respect to each individual turbine error [38].
Keeping the above points in mind, the main causes of model inaccuracies are listed
below. These causes are due to external operating conditions and insuﬃcient SCADA data
recording channels. Hidden features not recorded and explaining the variation of the target
value account for a fraction of the two model’s average error.
• Complex operating conditions in terms of power output variability leading to a wider
power curve and more scattered points around it
• Wind farm tight layout and multiple wake interaction from turbines with varying hub
heights and rotor diameters
Page 49 of 72
==PAGE:56==
5.2
Possible Causes for Underperformance
• Wind shear across the rotor
• Directional veer across the rotor
• Turbulent kinetic energy and wind speed standard deviation per 10-minute period
• Presence of low-level jets at hub height and above
• Associated coherent surrounding structures
• Non frequent measurement equipment calibration and maintenance
5.2
Possible Causes for Underperformance
The decreased performance of a turbine has two stages of identiﬁcation. First stage
is the identiﬁcation of data points outside of the power curve envelope without a fault
signal. Second comes the more challenging approach followed in this thesis when examining
the performance through the normal behaviour power curve modelling. For the ﬁrst part,
external parameters are playing a role like load management or fault development in the
previous timestep before turbine is shut, decreasing the recorded power output. More focus
on that will take place in Section 6.2. For the second part, there are numerous explanations
and it will be attempted to list them for designing the next steps of the power performance
assessment. It is challenging though to be certain on whether the underproduction comes
from environmental conditions (strong or rapidly variable winds) or from network or electrical
problems [17].
A turbine in fault mode can generate hundreds of diﬀerent warnings of varying severity
which are captured from the custom control system of each manufacturer’s turbine. In the
case of underperformance as analyzed on the unit w90, there might be particular turbine
component tendency towards fault or low eﬃciency operation which is not captured by the
thresholds of the control system and be under the radar for a signiﬁcant amount of time. The
outcome of this situation would be decreased eﬃciency in converting the kinetic energy of the
wind to mechanical rotational motion and ﬁnally electrical current. Performance degradation
is taking place across the whole wind speed range until nominal power is reached and various
possible causes are registered below:
• Gearbox fault development
• Constant yaw misalignment
• Blade aerodynamic degradation due to leading and trailing edge losses, cracks or surface
damage
• Dirt, bug layer or ice buildup on blades
• Drivetrain or shaft constant misalignment
Page 50 of 72
==PAGE:57==
5.3
Root Cause Analysis
• Overloading or overtemperature of gear oil pump
• Frequency converter errors that distort the ﬁnal power electronics functioning
• Control system fastening, dirt, corrosion or sensor malfunctioning aﬀecting its accuracy
• Friction caused by bearing/gear faults rooting from excess vibrations, overheating or
insuﬃcient lubrication which create a tendency for spalled bearings and fractured gears
• Generator winding fault development
• Pitch thyristor fault develpment
• Pitch control system degradation or blade angle asymmetry [9]
5.3
Root Cause Analysis
Although a not primary target of this thesis, the investigation on the roots of the possi-
ble underperformance is a lengthy and complex process. It usually requires deeper machine
learning techniques, more SCADA data channels and higher resolution of measurements than
10-minute periods. In addition, examining all the previous components remotely is impos-
sible and requires site visit since older turbines rarely record all the parameters necessary
for a full condition monitoring framework. Some approaches based on data usually recorded
from the SCADA system for commercial turbines, are analysed in [23] by presenting possible
miscorrelation in variable relationship that might a reﬂection of underperformance.
A series of actions will take place next with the aim of diving deeper into the machinery
of w90, ﬁrstly by having a look on the logbook for serious events, secondly by verifying
the anemometer measurements and thirdly by analysing some crucial turbine components
provided by the SCADA system.
5.3.1
Turbine Logbook
Initially, the severe error logbook coming from the company reports was examined to
detect any major faults or replacements of turbine components throughout its course. Minor
incidents were neglected since they did not provide any signiﬁcant input. According to Table
8, most interesting events are spotted in 2014 when a turbine failure leads to blade reparation
or replacement. It is unknown the cause of the fault and the magnitude of the reparation
works but from March to May, the turbine was down. In order to verify the signiﬁcance of
the event, the training period for this unit in the neural network model was narrowed down
to particularly the 2015 dataset.
The predictions did not change at all, adding another
questionmark regarding the eﬃciency of the turbine in that period being a consequence of
the renovation of the blades. Another interesting event takes place in September 2016 when
the anemometer is stuck with little information on its reparation, in a period where the
change of wind-power is ﬁrstly observed.
Page 51 of 72
==PAGE:58==
5.3
Root Cause Analysis
2014
March-May
Turbine failure leading to service work and blade reparation
July
Rotor cable and slip ring reparation
August
Battery replacement
2015
July
Too many restarts leading to a reset
2016
February
Replacement of various ﬁlters (oﬄine, fan, pump motor, fan fuses)
June
Service
September
Huge insect in anemometer causing autostarts for "high wind
speeds" in parallel with a service in the transformer
2017
January
Remote monitoring
2018
April
Nacelle fan 1 stage defective spare part ordered
July
Change of oﬄine ﬁlter
August
Rotor sensor signal checked after error message
October
Ground fault in substation due to cable damage
December
Fault after notiﬁcation of "Slip: 28 above limits"
2019
April
Transformer maintenance
Table 8: Unit w90 logbook
5.3.2
Measurement Integrity
It is important to assess the scenario where the underperformance comes from false
wind speed recordings. In a complex wind farm with variable speeds and constant nacelle
yawing, it can be possible that the measurement equipment has experienced external damage
or collision. This equipment though according to the operational standards, is checked on
every annual service visit. The absence of a meteorological mast in a wake free area for nacelle
anemometer validation does not contribute in its trustworthiness. Usually, normal correlation
of meteorological wind speeds at diﬀerent heights and miscorrelation of anemometer data
against meteorological wind speeds indicates a failure with the nacelle anemometer [23].
Initially, the wind speed is only used in the neural network for predicting the power
to isolate its inﬂuence over the model. The RMSE scores are higher but the same turbine
degradation is observed when handling the residuals. This secures the other sensors’s in-
tegrity of not distorting the results but contributing in lower model errors by delivering
more information. Next, the ratios of wind speed and power per wind direction bin of 5deg
towards and around their free wind direction are assessed for units w88 and w90 on an
annual basis. One turbine’s measured value is divided by the other one’s for a given time
step. Hypothetically, there should be a diﬀerence between the annual ratios of either wind
or power since the modelled power with wind as an input exhibit such a degradation for the
former turbine unit.
To start with in the above ﬁgure, the ratios Vw88
Vw90 and Pw88
Pw90 are drawn against the wind
direction recorded by the wind vane of w90. The other turbine’s wind vane usage exhibited
similar results with a bias of a few degrees though. The directional range according to the
farm layout from Figure 2 is covering all the free wind sector for these two models.
Page 52 of 72
==PAGE:59==
5.3
Root Cause Analysis
Figure 41: Wind speed and power annual ratios between units w88 and w90
A peculiar situation arises, where on the left, the annual ratios of wind speed for 2014-
2015 seem to be the highest and then they are slowly dropping by 2018-2019, indicated by
the orange and red line respectively. In each timestep, turbine w90 is recording annually
higher and higher wind velocity that the other unit of up to 0.2 m/s. This does not seem
to be the case for the power ratios where there is no clear indication of the above event.
When using more coarse bin resolution, the directional bias of a few degrees between the
two turbines seems to stabilize with the power ratio not taking the inverse form of the wind
speed ratios.
Figure 42: Wind speed and power annual ratios between units w89 and w90
Page 53 of 72
==PAGE:60==
5.3
Root Cause Analysis
The procedure is repeated in the Figure above between w89 and w90 for the narrow
free wind sector they share towards the south. The conditions are not ideal for comparison
but the previous observations are not vivid this time, referring to the narrow range where
the lines overlap the horizontal of ratio one.
To investigate this eﬀect on the turbines’ mechanical behaviour, the same ratio is applied
to the rotational speed sensor in the Figure below. Identical marginal behaviour as in Figure
43 is exhibited with the ratio decreasing gradually by 0.02 from 2014 to 2019 instead of being
on the same level with the horizontal line. This means that for every rotational speed value
of the characterised as downwind w88 turbine, the upwind turbine w90 is recording a higher
and higher value from 2014 to 2019.
Figure 43: Rotational speed ratios between units w88 and w90
In order to mark the anemometers as "healthy", there is a long way to go and that
is mainly because the purple line should have been overlapping the horizontal line of ratio
equal to one. This would mean that both anemometers are recording the same velocity
in the free wind sector but apparently, the combined structure of nacelle and rotor along
with the ﬂat layout’s elements do not lead to that result. This inherited bias from all the
aforementioned factors leads to untrustworthy results of this assessment but in parallel,
calling out for additional actions. Power ratios do not present abnormal behaviour but it
is diﬃcult also due to the other external atmospherical parameters. When assessing the
rotational speed, similar status appears as for the anemometer. When incorporating it as a
feature in the neural network, the results do not deviate from the ﬁndings of the previous
sections. The possibility of a faulty anemometer, facing issues with its spinning or oﬀset
should not be excluded from the conclusions.
Main outcome of this section is the dilemma between the cup anemometer spinning
faster due to less friction or rotational speed behaviour being better in the later years for
Page 54 of 72
==PAGE:61==
5.3
Root Cause Analysis
unit w90. The cup anemometer is prone to signiﬁcant temperature and turbulence changes,
the former leading to variable bearing friction and the later to incorrect measurements.
That happens because the anemometer responds faster to positive wind speed changes than
negative causing the overspeeding eﬀect. In warmer months, the viscosity of the lubricant
can change leading to reduced friction and faster spinning. Therefore it can wear over time
and it is quite diﬃcult to determine when it is not measuring correctly.
Nacelle anemometers are used for identiﬁcation of the cut-in and cut-out regimes for all
turbines but only for few models they consist an active part of the control system. With
an uncalibrated or damaged nacelle anemometer, the provided manufacturer’s power curve
cannot be compared with the historical in a warranty context and a power performance
assessment according to the IEC61400-12-1 standard speciﬁcations cannot take place solely.
What is of interest here is that the historical power curve is used annually to quantify the
losses due to fault appearance. As demonstrated before, the w90 power curve is being shifted
more and more to the right, leading the calculated losses to become a smaller amount than
in the case the anemometer was consistent. In addition, if the actual wind speed is lower,
then the cut-in and cut-out deﬁned by the anemometer, take place later and lead to lost
production in the start-up and increased fatigue loads in the shut-down regimes.
5.3.3
SCADA System Exploitation
To continue with the root cause analysis, the SCADA channels are examined with
an emphasis on the component temperature sensors.
That is because they can provide
an overview of their status and are easy to handle. Going through the available turbine
attributes recorded for each unit in Table 1, various temperature, rotational motion and
electrical elements sensors exist. Electrical elements of the system like current, voltage and
reactive power are omitted due to insuﬃcient expertise in that area from the author’s side.
It should be noted in advance that sophisticated algorithms in the machine learning ﬁeld are
more appropriate for frequent pattern recognition and abnormality detection of particular
features. These methodologies, as reviewed in the literature, are very capable of detecting
deviating component behaviour when conditions are fertile, as described in the introduction
of this section.
For the purposes of this analysis, boxplots are going to be the main vehicle, by comparing
for each turbine a boxplot with outliers for the ﬁrst three operational years against one for
the latest three.
The data used correspond to the normal behaviour modelling for real
operation simulation. Through these boxplots arises the possibility to easily compare the
mean value of each component, the median, its standard deviation and the amount of outliers
or extreme values. For each turbine correspond two boxplots, with blue is the 2014-2015
era and with red the 2016-2017. The duration of one and a half year is included in each
dataset due to the range provided. The focus will mainly be on unit w90 for which in case
the underperformance is lying behind one particular component, there should be a major
diﬀerence in its mean or median value but also, more outliers gathered on the top.
Various parameters were examined with no interesting ﬁndings like in Figure 44, where
the temperature sensors of the hydraulic and gearbox oil are illustrated. The diﬀerences are
minor between the coloured bars for each unit and what concerns the gearbox oil tempera-
Page 55 of 72
==PAGE:62==
5.3
Root Cause Analysis
ture, there are more extreme temperatures for a couple of turbines.
Figure 44: Hydraulic and gearbox oil temperatures
A more peculiar situation arises when assessing the temperature of the generator’s slip
ring and of the gearbox’s bearing in Figure 45.
Figure 45: Generator slip ring and gearbox bearing temperatures
For unit w90, there is a declining trend in the slip ring from blue to red, in contrast
with the other turbines but seems to be not signiﬁcant. A steep increase is observed for
Page 56 of 72
==PAGE:63==
5.3
Root Cause Analysis
turbine w86 regarding the gearbox bearing on the right, while for the others ones, changes
are marginal. If an event happened exclusively for the latter turbine, then further investi-
gation would be followed but under those conditions, the change can be attributed to the
randomness of these two turbines’ operation.
Another interesting observation is spotted when assessing the temperature of generator
bearing A. As seen in Figure 46 (a), the distributions are tight and similar between turbines
and seasons, with the main box of observations being on the same levels, along with the
median values. This is not the case for unit w90 which seems to increase more vividly its
operational envelope but without the presence of excess extreme values. When shifting to
Figure 46 (b), with continuous lines the 2014-2015 bearing A temperatures per power bin
are plotted against the 2016-2017 values, which stand with the dashed lines. The increase
on the red lines spacing is greater than for the other units.
(a) Boxplots per turbine
(b) Temperature per power bin
Figure 46: Generator bearing A temperature
Unfortunately, the temperature sensor recordings stop in July 2017 under unknown
reasons that might be related to the wind farm operation strategy or change in the SQL
data retrieval structure. Valuable insight is lost since when choosing shorter time frames of
six months or a year, the average w90 bearing A operational temperature is still gradually
growing along with the detected underperformance from late summer of 2016. The recordings
of generator bearing B for all turbines are not available as well because they provide a 999
value constantly, making a form of validation for bearing A impossible. Although the overall
increase for that unit might be handled properly by the bearing and although it is not
observed for the other turbines, it is very likely it has kept increasing after summer 2017.
Every turbine model has a diﬀerent operational range that can withstand diﬀerent mean or
extreme temperatures, making it tricky to understand if a major bearing failure is loading
throughout the years. In some studies has been reported that an average deviation of 5-10
Page 57 of 72
==PAGE:64==
5.4
Turbine Condition Risk Table
degrees between a turbine’s bearing and the whole wind farm’s average bearing temperature
envelope lead to severe faults [39].
It should be noted down that the conditions under which these variables are compared
are not ideal because some units might have had more downtime in the winter, gathering
more "warm months" data points which are leading to higher internal temperature means
as well. In the scenario where the average generator bearing A temperature is increasing
throughout the years, the sensitivity of the turbine’s energy conversion mechanism towards
this eﬀect should be taken into account. The temperature sensor is usually outside the shell
of the bearing and if the inside operating temperature is growing steadily, the cause might
be hidden behind minorly worn "teeth", less eﬃcient lubrication or imperfect adjustment.
This can only be determined with a site visit. The veering wind due to the multiple wakes
might cause orientation deﬁcit for the rotor, increasing the power losses and loading on the
structure.
Ways of demonstrating if a speciﬁc component has a direct inﬂuence over turbine degra-
dation through time took place in this subsection. Several bottlenecks curtail the eﬃciency of
the procedure like the insuﬃcient amount of data points after 2017 and the absence of other
sensors like gearbox accelerometers. This procedure can be enriched by applying machine
learning techniques for feature outlying behaviour detection, related to a possible turbine
degradation.
5.4
Turbine Condition Risk Table
In order to summarise the ﬁndings of the power performance assessment and preliminary
root cause analysis, a proper method should be chosen and the philosophy of the risk matrix
appears to be an appropriate illustration.
The traditional structure is blended in with
the categories "Source", where possible causes of the model underperformance indications
are stated and "Underperformance", where the qualitative probability of growing turbine
ineﬃciency is stated.
Figure 47: Turbine condition risk table
Red coloured are the abnormal ﬁelds that do not indicate healthy operation and are
found mainly for unit w90, not excluding the underperformance possibility whose impact if
true, will be quantiﬁed in the next section. It is challenging to be certain of a single scenario
in that case as observed before, especially when processing data remotely so a site visit
will give answers to these topics. Due to the multiple obligations of the service company
and the expected turbine downtime, it is suggested that in the next scheduled site visit for
Page 58 of 72
==PAGE:65==
5.4
Turbine Condition Risk Table
maintenance or reparation, some things will be added in the regular checklist after receiving
input from the company’s technical crew:
• Nacelle anemometer calibration status, general condition and possible alignment with
lidar
• Generator bearing A temperature, oil level, condition and data retrieval option from
2017 and on
• Nacelle position in the CPU and if it ﬁts the actual
• Blade alignment and calibration check up along with making sure the TC-mark ﬁts
the right position due to the previous blade exchange in 2014
• Pitch angle settings in the control system
Page 59 of 72
==PAGE:66==
6
Results Linkage to Wind Farm Operation
Having established two model methodologies of diﬀerent algorithmic nature, it is time
to use meaningfully the results and extract valuable information on the turbine operation.
This will happen through a series of action aiming at linking academic research on power
curve modelling with everyday workplace operations.
Following the root cause analysis ﬁndings of the previous section, a risk table has been
set up in the end to compare realistically the various sources of the model’s results inside
the operational framework. The desired linkage will be fulﬁlled with the illustration of the
results in a way that a clear image can appear on possible ﬁnancial and environmental impact,
created by the hypothetical underperformance of turbine w90 throughout the years. The
chapter will continue with a tool for assessing in a more insightful way the lost production
of a turbine on an annual base, comparing with the methodologies of the technical operator
of the ﬂeet while in the end, monitoring metric suggestion and steps for an adaptable power
performance assessment procedure take place.
6.1
Quantiﬁcation in Financial and Environmental Terms
Having secured the deviation values between model and reality, it is about time to
quantify the underperformance eﬀect of the respective units according to its economical
impact, in terms of potential lost annual revenues and environmental impact, in terms of not
avoided CO2 emissions. This will happen with the aid of the dAEP metric introduced in
previous sections by calibrating it with what has been calculated for the 2014-2015 period.
For example, using the bar chart of Figure 32, one can see that during the ﬁrst period of
training and validating the model, three out of ﬁve turbines have not 0% as their diﬀerence in
yield. The model is either overpredicting or underpredicting minorly the power production
for the 20% of the unseen training set. The future values of this metric for each turbine
should be taking into account this model tendency in order to have more reliable results.
Theoretically, the model that way is pointing out to a percentage-wise deﬁcit in pro-
duction eﬃciency compared to the 2014-2015 period where some of the less waked turbines
exhibited their optimum wind-power relationship. The summation of all the predicted power
timesteps are divided by 6000 to pass from kW to MWh and the deﬁcit is noted down as lost
production in Table 9. One can imagine that there is power production besides the NBM
dataset but the purpose here is to receive an impression of the loss due to less eﬃcient turbine
operation. This yield is then multiplied with a e/MWh scalar, retrieved from the company
reports and without electricity price scenarios due to the stability of the feed-in-tariﬀscheme
the wind farm is under. Similar procedure takes place with the environmental impact of the
lost wind power production. Using data from the German electricity generation mixture, the
factor of 0.886 CO2 t/MWh is multiplied with the missed yield to account for the tonnes of
CO2 emissions that could have been avoided if the turbines had zero degradation. Finally,
potential lost production is translated to loss of revenues and environmental impact.
The ﬁgures appearing in this section are following the model results and cannot be val-
idated remotely or in a precise way. They represent an attempt to connect modelling results
with eﬀect on wind farm economics and environmental impact. Especially regarding the
Page 60 of 72
==PAGE:67==
6.2
Determination of Lost Production
problematic unit w90, the economical deﬁcit proves to be major and can only be considered
if all other malfunctioning measurement equipment that has been assessed previously, proves
to be the source of the power curve modelling ineﬃciency.
Turbines
w86
w87
w88
w89
w90
Total
Lost Production (MWh)
70
270
190
440
1020
1,990
Lost Revenues (e)
6,580
26,110
17,870
41,750
97,540
189,850
CO2 Emissions (t)
60
240
170
390
910
1,770
Table 9: Potential underperformance impact in the period 2016-2019
The ﬁgures exhibit a non neglectable revenue loss in the scenario picked up. Regarding
the ﬁrst three turbines, it cannot be set with conﬁdence that the lost revenue really apply
since they have been classiﬁed as "healthy". The procedure here is stepping on the dAEP
metric and the assumption, judging by the ﬁgures, that the turbines are degrading minorly.
6.2
Determination of Lost Production
One direct application of analysing operational data can be to identify as mentioned
before the ﬁrst stage of sub-optimal performance which lies in data points outside the main
wind-power envelope. Usually the technical operator is quantifying the lost production com-
ing exclusively from turbine non-availability or in other words, appearance of a fault signal.
No attention is paid in evaluating the power curve appearance and if it exhibits outliers
with no alarm and far away from the nominal curve. Since no warning is generated, the
explanation of manual shutdown or grid disturbance does not stand and questions are raised
whether to attribute that behaviour to environmental site conditions, turbine ineﬃciency or
the operator’s handling.
The illustration in Figure 48 will make the situation clearer where a classiﬁcation of the
turbine operating regimes takes place from a diﬀerent point of view, not of modelling but
of operational assessment. With blue colour, the normal productive power envelope can be
presented, with red all the timesteps carrying a fault signal, with green all the timesteps
outside of fertile wind conditions and with yellow is the non-faulty, peculiarly sub-optimal
power conditions.
The methodology for calculating the losses follows the principles given in IEC61400 by
establishing the historic power curve from the SCADA data which describes the optimal per-
formance of the WTG. For all events which have no optimal performance, either marked by
error codes or identiﬁed through user deﬁned ﬁltering algorithms, the lost production can be
established based on the historic power curve and the nacelle wind speed. The inconsistency
of the nacelle anemometer during non operation is overcome by applying correction factors
[38]. This factor was impossible to establish due to the absence of a nearby met mast.
Page 61 of 72
==PAGE:68==
6.2
Determination of Lost Production
Figure 48: Classiﬁed turbine operating regimes
The quest here is to observe how much yield has been lost due to these possible turbine
malfunctions and not from the faulty operation or the one out of environmental speciﬁcations.
By observing in greater detail the power curve on a monthly basis, these events might have
been troubleshooted by the technical company. All the turbines exhibit similar distribution
of yellow data points which occupies for each one of them, from 5.5% to 8.5% of the entire
six year dataset. According to [38], this discrepancy can be possibly explained turbine stops
or partial performance without an error code and these events sum up to an average of 0.75%
annual lost production. This is of speciﬁc importance as these losses might not be caught in
a traditional time based availability investigation.
To establish a fast procedure, representative of the turbine lost production if those
abnormal data points were in place, a polynomial regression of 7th order is ﬁtted in the blue
dataset. Afterwards, the sub-optimal dataset is ﬁtted in that regression, corresponding to
an averaged power for each wind speed bin. That way it is possible to assess the economic
impact of this turbine operatial strategy by multiplying the diﬀerence between potential
production and sub-optimal with the ﬁxed electricity price used in a previous section as in
Table 10.
Turbines
w86
w87
w88
w89
w90
Total
Lost Production (MWh)
190
150
160
170
170
1,990
Lost Revenues (e)
18,560
14,480
15,250
16,370
16,510
81,170
CO2 Emissions (t)
170
130
140
150
150
740
Table 10: Six year losses due to partially informed sub-optimal performance
Page 62 of 72
==PAGE:69==
6.3
Metrics Establishment for Monitoring
The ﬁgures are rounded up for easier interpretation and due to the uncertainty of the
procedure. The aim is to demonstrate that not paying attention to these abnormal minor
behaviour, might have resulted up to a 81,170 eannual loss for the given wind farm.
6.3
Metrics Establishment for Monitoring
Alternatives will be presented on monitoring turbine overall eﬃciency on a weekly,
monthly and annual basis. It can turn into a crucial opportunity to detect deviating turbine
performance in a ﬂeet and take actions in advance. A preliminary visual scanning of long
term SCADA data might reveal any abnormalities that can be modelled with a neural
network for further assessment. Transforming the power performance assessment problem
into a numerical problem makes it easier to handle in the suggested numerical metrics.
6.3.1
Visual Metrics
The easier way to interpret data is by visualising it as proved in earlier sections. Three
metrics are introduced here: availability, power generation ratio and power coeﬃcient.
• Availability: Following the deﬁnition of time-based availability, it is counting the hours
the turbine was operating in contrast to the total amount. Its role is mainly validating
the other two metrics when a local minimum appears without any notice.
Availability = # {(Vt, ρt, yt) s.t. yt > 0, Vci ≤Vt ≤Vco}
# {(Vt, ρt, yt)
s. t.
Vci ≤Vt ≤Vco}
(17)
• Power Generation Ratio (PGR): The idea followed is of the production-based availabil-
ity and it refers to the sum of actual power produced during a rolling window period
against the available yield of that period. The denominator may come from multiple
sources. It can be the output power of a neural network power response surface, of
the historical IEC binned power curve or of the manufacturer’s power curve. For the
current application and because it can be used as a benchmark for comparison since
year zero, the manufacturer’s power curve is used. What is of interest, is the relative
evolution of the wind-power relationship in a ﬂexible way but still the denominator’s
response can be switched to a more advanced method.
PGR =
Pn
t=1 yt
Pn
t=1 ˆy (xt)
(18)
• Power Coeﬃcient: Based on the concept of the rotor’s aerodynamic eﬃciency, this
metric is formulated as in Equation 1. Its signiﬁcance is a bit lower than the afore-
mentioned PGR but is still necessary for a diﬀerent examination angle.
The characterised as "healthy" turbine w86 will be the ﬁrst one to undergo this metrics
procedure as in Figure 49. When monthly resolution is chosen, the metrics have a higher
Page 63 of 72
==PAGE:70==
6.3
Metrics Establishment for Monitoring
average, absorbing local ﬂuctuations spotted in lower resolutions. Unfortunately, the un-
certainty of computing air density according to measured 10-minute temperature and the
turbine altitude, inﬂuences the results but does not create a seasonal bias. The black line
representing availability can be used as a reference, locking the uniformity of the wind-power
relationship of unit w86.
Figure 49: Monthly resolution metrics for unit w86
Figure 50: Monthly resolution metrics for unit w90
The combination of these metrics is applied now to the problematic unit w90 with
the aim of detecting the change in behaviour analysed previously. In the Figure above, a
Page 64 of 72
==PAGE:71==
6.3
Metrics Establishment for Monitoring
monthly resolutions is plotted where no impact is seen on the power coeﬃcient but when
using the black line as a reference, the declining trend of the PGR is observed. When zooming
into weekly resolution, the shift in production eﬃciency can be detected after middle 2016,
precisely as in the modelling section. Winter 2015-2016 is the last time the metrics are above
the black line with a peak, a condition that does not get repeated until early 2020.
Figure 51: Weekly resolution metrics for unit w90
The sudden drops in the eﬃciency metrics are happening in parallel with periods that
the turbine was unavailable.
If the time window is narrow, then during long downtime
periods the metrics decrease signiﬁcantly, although they take into account the downtime.
Another approach is to use the NBM dataset exclusively, creating more expectations on
eﬃciency but also complexity in the metrics’ calculation. The beneﬁt of having long term
data is that a certain period can be established as a benchmark, in a numerical way mainly
and if this threshold is breached with a declining trend, a call for additional actions presented
in this thesis should be taken.
6.3.2
Numerical Metrics
Generating numerical versions of the metrics might be easier for monitoring on a daily,
weekly, monthly or annual base the turbine eﬃciency. Once securing a metric corresponding
to normal turbine operation, any big deviation of the metric in the chosen monitoring period,
might imply change of behaviour. A more sophisticated version of this would be loading the
retrieved weekly or monthly dataset into the neural network of each turbine and observing
the distribution of the residuals. This method will be developed in the next point.
A monitoring example will follow using the Power Generation Ratio with an annual
resolution for easiness of illustration, which can also be downscaled to monthly or weekly.
In Table 11, the mean of the weekly metrics on an annual base is presented. What is of
interest is that turbines w86 and w89 are ﬂuctuating around the unit, without any obvious
Page 65 of 72
==PAGE:72==
6.4
Power Performance Assessment Procedure
change as in w90 where from 2016, the average of the metric drop by 0.05 and stays in that
range, being correlated with all the underperformance ﬁndings of the modelling section. The
other two models are skipped due to similarity of results. Ways to estimate the expected
ﬂuctuation of the metric inside the limits of uncertainty are to be explored.
Turbines
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
w86
1.02
1.00
0.99
0.97
0.97
0.96
w89
1.00
0.98
1.02
1.00
1.01
1.02
w90
0.95
0.99
0.97
0.92
0.91
0.92
Table 11: Annual Power Generation Ratio metrics
This can be a preliminary assessment when dealing with a big amount of turbines in a
ﬂeet. It can be narrowed down for further application in terms of weekly or monthly window
monitoring.
6.3.3
dAEP Metrics
The ﬁnal metric suggested has as well two diﬀerent applications and can be labelled
as a more sophisticated approach. It derives from the experimentations that took place
during this thesis and as already stated, it is compiled out of the actual and predicted power
production. Prerequisite is the necessity to apply the power curve modelling methodology
using the artiﬁcial neural network architecture. It would be rather considered an evaluation
metric but can be upgraded to a monitoring metric as well, following the prerequisite stated
before.
The ﬁrst application relevant would be the annual power performance analysis for de-
tection of signiﬁcant degradation as followed in the content of this thesis. The second one
would be to have a model established for each turbine of a ﬂeet and feeding it newly recorded,
weekly or monthly resolution data, observing afterwards the model’s predictions in contrast
to reality in terms of AEP diﬀerence and seasonal deviation. One can imagine that this
metric is not so diﬀerent with the numerical metrics introduced before, but it is rather an
upgraded version of it, stepping on a historical power curve response surface to estimate the
potential production with higher accuracy.
6.4
Power Performance Assessment Procedure
To summarize and illustrate hierarchically the actions described in the previous sections,
a ﬂowchart has been created. This ﬂowchart can make the series of actions implemented
easier for workplace adaptation by providing a helicopter’s view on the power performance
assessment decision making. Diﬀerent shapes indicate diﬀerent nature of actions. The square
boxes indicate that the action described inside takes place, the rhombus refers to a critical
decision and the circles the ﬁnal judgement. The boxes stamped with an asterisk, refer to
methodologies developed during this thesis and have direct applicability as more advanced
farm evaluation procedures.
Page 66 of 72
==PAGE:73==
6.4
Power Performance Assessment Procedure
Figure 52: Procedure illustration through a ﬂowchart
Firstly, the 10-minute data of the turbine is retrieved from the database and is cleaned. If
data from the whole wind farm is retrieved, it will provide valuable performance comparison
as illustrated for the current case. Afterwords, the metrics are visualized and numerical
metrics are established along with the application of the exploratory data analysis toolbox on
the wind farm data. The purpose is to decide if further modelling is required, in case change
in wind-power relationship is detected or any abnormal observations. If a turbine undergoes
successfully these tests, it is stamped as "healthy" and weekly or monthly monitoring through
the metrics is suggested. In case abnormal observations appear, the power curve modelling
methodology using artiﬁcial neural networks developed during this thesis should take place in
order to analyse the residuals and enhance the performance assessment capability. An evident
residual deviation will lead to similarly the preliminary root cause analysis methodology
analysed in Section 5, with the possibility of being expanded by using more advanced fault
analysis techniques in the future. The ﬁndings should be integrated in the checklist of the
Page 67 of 72
==PAGE:74==
6.4
Power Performance Assessment Procedure
next site visit from the service company after proper communication between the relevant
stakeholders. There is an associated cost with unplanned site visits that if the ﬁndings are
not alarming for the short-term turbine operation, then they should be held on until the
next scheduled one. The approval for checkup from the service provider side is crucial for
the optimization of the power plant because usually the provider is relying on the existing
time/production based availability contracts and has not direct interest in alternating its
services. On the other hand, the asset manager primarily, along with the technical manager
on a second phase, are obligated to make the most out of the power plant operation for their
own commercial strategy, as long as the interests of their clients, meaning the turbine owners.
Therefore, the ﬁndings should be well documented and straightforward when presented to
the service provider, after having been discussed inside the asset management environment.
The former party is responsible for site checkup and component evaluation and no action
can take place inside the turbine without its approval, otherwise it cannot guarantee reliable
turbine operation.
Page 68 of 72
==PAGE:75==
7
Conclusion - Debate
7.1
Summary
During the course of this thesis, ways of evaluating the power performance of a wind
farm were analysed with ﬁndings that were a call for action. Following the latest devel-
opments in utilising the stream of SCADA data, the gain is very signiﬁcant in terms of
underperformance detection and asset reliability. All of the demonstrated methodologies
were performed using open-source tools and can be transferred into a workplace without
excess costs or complex subject understanding. In the long run, pre-failure data can be dis-
tinguished against normal operating data with the aid of the performance metrics and the
aim of isolating and preventing upcoming major faults or performance degradation. In par-
allel, their economic and environmental impact can be quantiﬁed while in case of particular
component breakdown, the relevant repairment costs and downtime losses can be estimated
in advance to adjust the operational budget. Last but not least, mitigation measures are
suggested in form of direct modelling ﬁndings integration in the next site visit or indirectly,
in the form of condition monitoring of crucial components.
A lot of factors aﬀected the accuracy of the two deployed models like the absence of
particular SCADA channels and the multiple wake interaction between turbines of various
rotor and tower sizes. Initially, after having ﬁltered each dataset in a normal behaviour
modelling state, a Multi-layer Perceptron is trained using wind speed moments, direction
and ambient temperature, resulting in a power response surface. Same philosophy was behind
the picking of the validation model for the problematic turbine, the Additive Multiplicative
Kernel method which exhibited same indications on the change of the turbine wind-speed
relationship.
The average model error achieved is of 2% of the nominal power output,
competing with conﬁdence against other studies mentioned in the introduction under not
optimal wind conditions. By stepping on that average error, the turbine eﬃciency in contrast
to the whole wind farm was evaluated and validated for each unit as in Figure 47, except w90
which calls for particular component and sensor checking in the next site visit as described
in Section 5.4. The proposed dAEP metric is the stepping stone for quantifying the negative
eﬀects of a potential underperformance, creating the framework for fault severity assessment
and whether or not service intervention is required. Below, a list is summarizing the possible
scenarios that the turbine w90 might subject to, according to their qualitative likelihood:
1. The anemometer is spinning with less friction, recording slightly higher wind speeds
throughout the years. That has an delayed impact on the cut-in and cut-out regime,
losing production at low speeds and being exposed to greater fatigue loads in the
high wind speed regime. Plus, the annual lost production computed according to the
IEC standard is lower than reality since the power curve is shifted to the right, an
eﬀect diﬃcult to quantify. On the other hand, the turbine owner can challenge the
speciﬁc manufacture’s turbine power curve since that comparison will lead to possible
compensation for the later years of operation.
2. The temperature of the generator bearing A is increasing gradually its operational
envelope until 2017 when the recordings of this channel stop. The diﬀerence is easily
Page 69 of 72
==PAGE:76==
7.2
Suggestions
distinguishable across the whole wind farm analysed but is not threatening yet accord-
ing to the literature reviewed [23], [39]. It is of interest to obtain the rest of the data
and observe if any correlation between the two situations is correlated. In that case
the bearing might lack lubrication or have worn parts that lead to increased friction
in rotation and higher operating temperatures. Naturally, it might evolve to a severe
and costly fault.
3. Another turbine component is operating gradually more and more ineﬃciently, causing
a sub-optimal kinetic to electrical energy conversion. This can be explored through a
more advanced root cause analysis and a site visit with adding in the checkup list the
notes from Section 5.4. In that scenario, the turbine is underperforming overall and
causing money-wise damages of 97,000 e.
Unit w89 exhibited also deviating patterns but should be notiﬁed on a site visit, possibly
with the priority of the actions listed above.
Overall, its was demonstrated that data-driven techniques based on machine learning
and statistical models can detect change in turbine behaviour and lead to a preventive list of
actions, taken in advance. To accomplish that, the developed methodology passed through
a data preprocessing & visualisation toolbox, an artiﬁcial neural network hyperparameter
optimization and an excess model residual analysis as core elements of the applied part of
this thesis. These results were handled in a business oriented context through the linkage
attempted by quantifying the potential underperformance losses, assessing the sub-optimal
operating regime and suggesting relevant metrics for turbine monitoring. To highlight the
ﬁndings of a theoretical asset optimization procedure, the following arguments will present
what can further be achieved [38]:
• The reliability of the asset can be secured
• The general performance of the asset can be assessed by validating its steady perfor-
mance
• Depending on the agreed liabilities, a better quantiﬁcation of losses and claims is
enabled
• The eﬃciency of the O&M team can be quantiﬁed by identifying sub-optimal operation
regimes or equipment de-rating
• Potential asset transfer post construction analysis can de-risk a part of the transaction
and enhance its planning
• Framework for warning generation of developing fault ahead of time
7.2
Suggestions
Through this thesis’ literature review, plenty applications of condition monitoring were
encountered, each with a diﬀerent focus. The prevention of massive costly failures and re-
duction of maintenance costs can improve the whole lifetime operational value and extend
Page 70 of 72
==PAGE:77==
7.3
Reﬂection
it beyond its usual 20-year period. Condition monitoring implies continuous oversight of
the operating conditions of the equipment. This leads to the generation of early warnings
so that the chance of a system failure is minimised. It is also useful in identifying the root
cause of a faulty operation and thus, facilitating eﬀective maintenance. Key characteris-
tics of condition monitoring include: early warning, problem identiﬁcation and continuous
monitoring. Multiple ways of applying these techniques exist like thermographics, strain
measurement, vibration, acoustics and lubrication analysis, aiming at preventing faults in
major wind turbine components [40], [41]. As a prerequisite for that, a cost-beneﬁt analysis
must be performed to see if it can adapted properly to an asset management environment.
In the meantime, wind farm power performance metrics are suggested on various reso-
lutions in order to detect vivid abnormal wind-power patterns. For all three of them, ways
of adapting them and making the most out of them were discussed. Incorporating them in
the internal reporting by scanning slowly the company portfolio will lay the foundations for
the power curve methodology wherever abnormal observations occur. As described in the
summary and illustrated in the ﬂowchart of Figure 52, this series of action can lead to a
more informed service strategy and operational insight. In addition, the determination of
lost production concept from Section 6.2, can lead to questioning the technical operator or
service company when sub-optimal operation takes place visually through the power curve.
Although the impact in the six year period for the current wind farm was not signiﬁcant, in
other farms might be more impactful.
Finally, the service provider can be contacted in order to illustrate properly the ﬁndings
and add them in the next scheduled site visit, especially if the ﬁndings can be easily veriﬁed
on board for their signiﬁcance. An unscheduled site visit might be too costly according
to the current severity of the situation so it can be avoided. There always needs to be a
cost-beneﬁt balance of those interference actions in the wind farm operational environment,
although some times it is more qualitative than desired due to computing constrains.
7.3
Reﬂection
In the ﬁnal section of this thesis, the author will try to reﬂect back on his gained knowl-
edge, choices and alternatives. Overall, the work conducted on the power curve modelling
part as well as on the actual usage of the results in a meaningful way, lead to a deeper wind
turbine operation understanding. This involves wind farm modelling applications, wind ﬂow
elements and their impact, component interdependency and problem solving in terms of
optimization actions. The four objectives stated initially for this thesis were achieved suc-
cessfully and based on them, further negotiating leverage can be pursued against the other
two involved parties in the operation of a farm. Each chapter’s results were attempted to be
presented in the most understandable way possible, as well as the logical ﬂow behind every
series of actions in the modelling section and suggested procedure subsection.
The methodology developed based on the Multi-layer Perceptron and the Additive Mul-
tiplicative Kernel regression was explained why it was chosen and what are the individual
elements that characterize their eﬃciency. The usage of a benchmark power curve model was
decided that is unnecessary and out of the context of the objectives as well. The existence of
an incorporated nacelle transfer function is likely since the Power Coeﬃcient was respecting
Page 71 of 72
==PAGE:78==
7.3
Reﬂection
the Betz limit, securing possibly the integrity of all the wind sensors. The data preprocess-
ing procedure was more challenging than expected, involving more than one techniques for
optimum NBM dataset export. This was mainly due to the fact that the wind distribution
of the site does not nest a lot of knowledge in the above rated wind speed regime, making
the neural network ﬂuctuate a lot in that area before being conﬁgured properly and sta-
bilised. The model had some inherited variability when predicting shorter time frames than
annual and requires deeper investigation if its usage in the end is in that direction. Certainly,
additional testing of new farms will lead to a wider understanding of when the residual de-
viation is signiﬁcant or not, since according to the ﬁndings, three out of ﬁve turbines were
labelled as "healthy" and one potentially deviating. This might have an implication on the
hyperparameters as well.
The metrics recommended can be computed more accurately if local air density mea-
surements exist or if the methodology for calculating it is upgraded by taking into account
local pressure measurements. The resulting indexes will be even more precise if historic
power curve is used instead of the manufacturer’s curve to estimate the available energy.
That diminishes though the relativeness of the metric on the long run. On the ANN based
dAEP metric, besides summing up the predicted power versus real, the 3rd and 4th moments
of the residuals can be used as an indication of deviating performance. Even as a numer-
ical version, this more advanced method of the monitoring metrics can contribute to an
understanding from a diﬀerent angle, relying on the skewness and kurtosis of the generated
residuals dataset for the chosen evaluation time window.
There have been some really interesting applications on power curve modelling and fault
isolation in the literature review and most of them have been discussed in the introduction.
If the author was to redesign his thesis with alternatives and had a solely academical scope,
some diﬀerent algorithmic structures would be pursued. For the power curve modelling part,
the manually developed artiﬁcial Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) architecture named Long
Short-term Memory (LSTM) has been proven to minimize the error in contrast to the Multi-
layer Perceptron because it takes into account the coherency of the examined time series.
As a natural consequence, the root cause analysis could also host a more sophisticated
machine learning algorithm for fault detection like the Frequent Pattern Mining (FPM) which
through the usage of clusters, detects deviating component behaviour that is correlated with
a degrading power output tendency. To conclude with the reﬂection subsection, using similar
methodologies as the ANN, the upgrade of vortex generators installation on the blades can
be quantiﬁed in energy yield terms. The remarks stated in the end of this thesis open the
door for more experimentation in the future and continuation of these promising applications
on power performance assessment of wind farms.
Page 72 of 72
==PAGE:79==
List of Figures
1
Logical ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Wind farm layout on orographic contours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Wind roses of the turbines following farm layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Power curves for turbines w86, w87 and w88 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5
Power curves for turbines w89 and w90 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
6
Wind histogram for turbine w88 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
7
NBM ﬁlter creation procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
8
Local density deﬁnition [28]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
9
NBM power curves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
10
Correlation matrix on turbine w88
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
11
Power production comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
12
Sectoral comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
13
Annually binned power curves per turbine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
14
Power curves per year
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
15
Power Coeﬃcient from 2014 to 2019 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
16
Selective Power Coeﬃcient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
17
Simpliﬁed ﬂow in front and behind the rotor [30] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
18
Yaw misalignment status over the six year period
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
19
Yaw misalignment status validation over the six year period
. . . . . . . . .
22
20
Multi-layer Perceptron properties [34], [35] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
21
Most common non-linear activation functions [36] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
22
Eﬀect of diﬀerent activation functions on predictions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
23
Power performance assessment ﬂow chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
24
Turbine w86 residuals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
25
Mean residual per wind speed bin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
26
Mean residual per wind speed bin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
27
Residual histogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
28
Mean residual per bin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
29
Root Mean Square Error metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
30
Diﬀerence between modelled and recorded energy yield . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
31
Root Mean Square Error metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
32
Diﬀerence between modelled and recorded energy yield . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
33
T statistic values between the recorded and predicted power datasets
. . . .
40
34
Residual time series for unit w90 and years 2014-2015 upper, 2019 lower
. .
40
35
Predicted annual power curve for unit w86 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
36
Predicted annual power curve for unit w90 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
37
Averaged residuals per wind speed bin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
38
One-to-one correlation plots between predicted and actual power . . . . . . .
46
39
Root Mean Square Error metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
40
Diﬀerence between modelled and recorded energy yield . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
41
Wind speed and power annual ratios between units w88 and w90
. . . . . .
53
42
Wind speed and power annual ratios between units w89 and w90
. . . . . .
53
I
==PAGE:80==
List of Figures
43
Rotational speed ratios between units w88 and w90 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
44
Hydraulic and gearbox oil temperatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
45
Generator slip ring and gearbox bearing temperatures . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
46
Generator bearing A temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
47
Turbine condition risk table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
48
Classiﬁed turbine operating regimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
49
Monthly resolution metrics for unit w86
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
50
Monthly resolution metrics for unit w90
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
51
Weekly resolution metrics for unit w90 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
52
Procedure illustration through a ﬂowchart
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Page II of VII
==PAGE:81==
List of Tables
List of Tables
1
SCADA system features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Cleaning of the datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Local Outlier Factor ﬁltering conﬁgurations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Recursive Feature Elimination results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Final neural network parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Model R-square per turbine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
7
Model R-square per turbine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8
Unit w90 logbook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
9
Potential underperformance impact in the period 2016-2019
. . . . . . . . .
61
10
Six year losses due to partially informed sub-optimal performance . . . . . .
62
11
Annual Power Generation Ratio metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
Page III of VII
==PAGE:82==
Nomenclature
Nomenclature
AMK Additive Multiplicative Kernel
ANN Artiﬁcial Neural Network
FPM Frequent Pattern Mining
ISE
Integrated Squared Error
k-NN k-Nearest Neighbours
LCoE Levelised Cost of Energy
LOF
Local Outlier Factor
LSTM Long Short-Term Memory
MLP Multi-layer Perceptron
O&M Operations & Maintenance
PGR Power Generation Ratio
RFE
Recursive Feature Elimination
RMSE Root Mean Square Error
RoI
Return of Investment
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
SVR
Support Vector Regression
Page IV of VII
==PAGE:83==
References
References
[1] Pelletier F., Masson Chr., Tahan Ant., “Wind Turbine Power Curve Modelling Using
Artiﬁcial Neural Network,” 2015.
[2] Castellani F., Terzi L., AstolﬁD., “Mathematical Methods for SCADA Data Mining of
Onshore Wind Farms: Performance Evaluation and Wake Analysis,” 2016.
[3] Manobel B., Sehnke Fr., Lazzus J., Salfate Ign., Felder M., Montecinos S., “Wind Tur-
bine Power Curve Modeling Based on Gaussian Processes and Artiﬁcial Neural Net-
works,” 2018.
[4] Marvuglia Ant., Messineo Ant., “Monitoring of Wind Farms’ Power Curves Using Ma-
chine Learning Techniques,” 2012.
[5] Ilhan Ak., Bilgili M., Sahin B., Yasar Abd., Ozbek Ar., “Estimation of Wind Power
Output Curve using Artiﬁcial Neural Network,” 2017.
[6] Lyons J.Th., “Applied Machine Learning Techniques for Performance Analysis in Large
Wind Farms,” 2019.
[7] Castellani F., Terzi L., AstolﬁD., “A SCADA Data Mining Method for Precision Assess-
ment of Performance Enhancement from Aerodynamic Optimization of Wind Turbine
Blades,” 2018.
[8] Castellani F., Terzi L., AstolﬁD., “Wind Turbine Power Curve Upgrades,” 2018.
[9] Uluyol Ond., Parthasarathy G., Foslien W., Kim K., “Power Curve Analytic for Wind
Turbine Performance Monitoring and Prognostics,” 2011.
[10] Kusiak Andr., Zheng H., Song Zh.,, “Models for Monitoring Wind Farm Power,” 2008.
[11] Rogers T.J., Gardner P., Dervilis N., Worden K., Maguire A.E., Papatheou E., Cross
E.J., “Probabilistic Modelling of Wind Turbine Power Curves With Application of Het-
eroscedastic Gaussian Process Regression,” 2019.
[12] Butler Sh., Ringwood J., O’Connor Fr., “Exploiting SCADA System Data for Wind
Turbine Performance Monitoring,” 2013.
[13] Clifton A., Kilcher L., Lundquist J.K., Fleming P., “Using Machine Learning to Predict
Wind Turbine Power Output,” 2013.
[14] Karlsson D., “Wind Turbine Performance Monitoring using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
with a Multi-Dimensional Data Filtering Approach,” 2014.
[15] Ding Y., “Data Science for Wind Energy,” 2016.
[16] Singh Pr., “Analytical Techniques of SCADA Data to Assess Operational Wind Turbine
Performance,” 2013.
Page V of VII
==PAGE:84==
References
[17] Castellani F., Garinei Alb., Terzi L., AstolﬁD., Moretti M., Lombardi Andr., “A New
Data Mining Approach For Power Performance Veriﬁcation Of An On-shore Wind
Farm,” 2013.
[18] He Y., Kusiak Andr., “Performance Assessment of Wind Turbines: Data-Derived Quan-
titative Metricsm,” 2018.
[19] Dai J., Yang W., Cao J., Liu D., Long X., “Ageing Assessment of a Wind Turbine over
Time by interpreting Wind Farm SCADA Data,” 2017.
[20] Verma An., “A Data-Mining Approach to Monitoring Wind Turbines,” 2012.
[21] Elijorde F., Kim S., Lee J., “A Wind Turbine Fault Detection Approach Based on Cluster
Analysis and Frequent Pattern Mining,” 2014.
[22] Verma An., “Performance Monitoring of Wind Turbines: A Data-Mining Approach,”
2012.
[23] Yang W., Court R., Jiang J., “Wind Turbine Condition Monitoring by the Approach of
SCADA Data Analysis,” 2013.
[24] Castellani F., AstolﬁD., Sdringola P., Proietti St., Terzi L., “Analyzing Wind Tur-
bine Directional Behaviour: SCADA Data Mining Techniques for Eﬃciency and Power
Assessment,” 2015.
[25] AstolﬁD., Castellani F., Natili Fr., “Wind Turbine Yaw Control Optimization and its
Impact on Performance,” 2019.
[26] Castellani F., Terzi L., AstolﬁD., Piccioni Em., “Improving Wind Farm Operation
Practice Through Numerical Modelling And Data Mining.”
[27] “Local Outlier Factor documentation.” https://scikit-learn.org, 2019.
[28] “Local Outlier Factor theory.” https://en.wikipedia.org, 2019.
[29] Pedersen H. S., Marin Ed. G., “Yaw Misalignment and Power Curve Analysis,” 2016.
EMD.
[30] Mittelmeier N., Kühn M., “Determination of Optimal Wind Turbine Alignment Into the
Wind and Detection of Alignment Changes With SCADA Data,” 2018.
[31] AstolﬁD., Castellani F., Scappaticci L., Terzi L., “Diagnosis of Wind Turbine Misalign-
ment Through SCADA Data,” 2017.
[32] Dai J., Yang X., Hu W., Wen L., Tan Y., “Eﬀect Investigation of Yaw on Wind Turbine
Performance Based on SCADA Data,” 2018.
[33] Wan Sh., Cheng L., Sheng X., “Eﬀects of Yaw Error on Wind Turbine Running Char-
acteristics Based on the Equivalent Wind Speed Model,” 2015.
Page VI of VII
==PAGE:85==
References
[34] “Multi-layer Perceptron documentation.” https://scikit-learn.org, 2019.
[35] Brownlee J., “Crash Course On Multi-Layer Perceptron Neural Networks.” https://
machinelearningmastery.com, 2019.
[36] Chung H., Lee S.J., Park J., “Deep neural network using trainable activation functions,”
2016.
[37] Brownlee J., “How to use Data Scaling Improve Deep Learning Model Stability and
Performance.” https://machinelearningmastery.com, 2019.
[38] Pedersen H. S., Langreder W., “Hack the Error Codes of a Wind Turbine,” 2019. ROMO
Wind.
[39] AstolﬁD., Castellani F., Terzi L., “Fault Prevention and Diagnosis Through SCADA
Temperature Data Analysis of an Onshore Wind Farm,” 2014.
[40] Kusiak Andr., Zhang Z., Verma An., “Prediction, Operations and Condition Monitoring
in Wind Energy ,” 2013.
[41] Tautz-Weinert J., Watson S. J., “Using SCADA Data for Wind Turbine Condition
Monitoring – A Review,” 2016.
Page VII of VII
