==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering (Computer Science and Engineering)
Efficient and Interpretable Recurrent
Neural Network Grammars
Christoffer
Nave
Øhrstrøm
(s182827)
Kgs. Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
In this work, we are motivated by the hypothesis, that a linguistically informed inductive
bias is beneficial to natural language processing models. Based on this hypothesis, we
seek to improve a model with such an inductive bias: Recurrent neural network gram-
mars (RNNG). Our primary contribution lies in Parallel RNNG, where we obtain 10 to
15 times speed-up for large batch sizes. We also propose to improve RNNG with the
use of attention. This makes it possible to interpret RNNG, but causes the predictive
power to slightly deteriorate. Finally, we apply well-known regularisation methods from
RNN to RNNG and show that they improve the predictive power of RNNG. All of our
methods are evaluated against English and Chinese treebanks and compared to baselines
without [strong] inductive biases.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This dissertation is original and independent work by the author, Christoffer Nave
Øhrstrøm. It was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark under the supervision of Professor Ole
Winther, and at the Users & Information research group at Korea Advanced Institute
of Science and Technology under the supervision of Professor Alice Oh.
I am motivated by the hypothesis that a linguistically informed inductive bias is benefi-
cial to models within natural language processing. This motivation serves as the guide
for this work, where I improve upon a model with a linguistically informed inductive
bias, based on syntactic structure.
Kgs. Lyngby, June 27, 2020
Christoffer Nave Øhrstrøm (s182827)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, thank you to my advisors, Professor Alice Oh and Professor Ole
Winther, for valuable advice and guidance. A special thanks also goes to Yoon Kim for
general advice on recurrent neural network grammars and the baselines, as well as for
providing the inspiration to Parallel RNNG. A thank you also goes to Adhiguna Kuncoro
for answering questions related to the implementation of RNNG, and for providing
pretrained word vectors for the English treebank. Lastly, I would like to thank Patricia
Tousgaard Jensen for useful feedback on scientific writing.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Why Recurrent Neural Network Grammars? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
Supervised Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Feedforward Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Recurrent Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Recursive Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Recurrent Neural Network Grammars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methods
25
3.1
Analysis of Problems In RNNG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Parallel RNNG
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Attentive Representation Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4
Regularisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Experiments & Results
39
4.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Performance of Parallel RNNG
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.6
Interpretability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.7
Gradient Flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5
Discussion
55
5.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Related Works
59
7
Conclusion
61
A Hyperparameters
63
Bibliography
65
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Natural language is rich with information that linguistics have used to find structure.
An example of this is, how syntax can determine that a sentence is composed into a tree
of constituent phrases, see Figure 1.1. Another example is in morphology where a word,
dogs, is derived from its stem, dog, by adding a plural affix “s” to its stem. Such an
interpretation allows to treat affixes as functions over stems[1]. Linguistics also provides
semantic representations using graph structures[2]. We will not go into further details of
what constitutes linguistic information, but suffice to say that it seems that linguistics
provides information that could be relevant to natural language processing models. Nev-
ertheless, a common strategy has, in recent years, been to create models based on large
transformer[3] architectures that are trained on very large datasets[4]. This approach
has worked well and has achieved state-of-the-art performance in e.g.
constituency-
and dependency parsing[5], natural language inference[6], language modelling[7], and
more. Notably, these models do not make any explicit use of linguistic information, but
Figure 1.1: Example of how the sentence ”The dog eats in the kitchen.” is composed
in a tree where internal nodes are constituent phrases and leafs are words.
Each word is associated with a word type, which, in this example, can be
noun, verb, preposition, or determiner.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
analyses have still shown that such models do capture some linguistic features - such as
syntax[8], [9], as a by-product of their learning. This raises a question to the relevance of
explicitly using linguistic information in natural language models. This question serves
as a motivation for this work, where an existing linguistically informed model will be
extended to improve its performance. Notice that the aim of this work is not to answer
the question, but to improve an existing model based on the hypothesis that explicit
modelling of linguistic information is still relevant. The existing model is called recurrent
neural network grammars[10], hereby abbreviated as RNNG. The choice of this model
is motivated in Section 1.1 and is explained in detail in Section 2.5.
The primary contributions of this work are as follows:
• Parallel RNNG: Significantly faster version of RNNG that is capable of utilising
GPU parallelisation.
• Improved interpretability through incorporation of attention in RNNG.
• Incorporation and experiments using existing regularisation techniques in the con-
text of RNNG.
• The first1 Python implementation of RNNG. The code is available at https://
github.com/ChrisFugl/Recurrent-Neural-Network-Grammars.
1.1
Why Recurrent Neural Network
Grammars?
RNNG is a transition-based model of grammars that was introduced by Dyer et al.[10].
The model jointly models sentences and parse trees. See Section 2.5 for an in-depth
description of RNNG. Here we will briefly motivate the choice of working with RNNG
based on the findings of other works, including works that mitigate some of the short-
comings of RNNG.
RNNG is interesting for a multitude of reasons. The first reason is that, at the time
of its publication, RNNG achieved state-of-the-art performance in constituency parsing
on the English Penn Treebank[11] and the Chinese Penn Treebank[12], as well as in
language modelling on the English Penn Treebank.
Kuncoro et al.[13] investigated how different models manage to predict the correct verb
in a dataset[14], designed to test subject-verb number agreement.
They found that
RNNG consistently reduced the subject-verb number agreement error rate by up to
30%, compared to a LSTM[15] language model. This is despite of the LSTM language
1To the best of our knowledge.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Why Recurrent Neural Network Grammars?
3
model exhibiting lower test perplexities.
A weakness of RNNG is that they are slow to train. This weakness could have limited
the applicability of RNNG, however, Kuncoro et al.[16] showed that a LSTM language
model benefits from knowledge distillation from a RNNG trained on a small subset of
the dataset. This technique generalises to any left-to-right language model architecture,
and allows for models that are built to scale, to train on large datasets while also in-
corporating knowledge about syntax-awareness from a RNNG trained on a significantly
smaller part of the dataset. A recent study[17] extended the knowledge distillation to
bidirectional language models, where it was shown that BERT[4] benefits from distilled
syntactic knowledge on several downstream tasks, reducing relative error by up to 21%.
The findings of these studies suggest that other models may benefit from improvements
to RNNG through knowledge distillation.
RNNG is a supervised model and thus depends on sentences and their parse trees. Such
trees are time consuming to generate and require the work of trained linguists. This de-
ficiency was addressed by Kim et al.[18] through the invention of unsupervised RNNG
that, without the need for parse trees, achieved performance comparable to state-of-the-
art unsupervised language- and parsing models. Unsupervised RNNG is a promising
direction, and improvements to RNNG may potentially be transferable to their unsuper-
vised cousins.
Finally, Hale et al.[19] conducted experiments using human encephalography while test
participants listened to a chapter from a book. A RNNG with beam search[20] processed
sentences in the same chapter. They found a significant correlation between the signals
from the RNNG and the electrical signals from the human brain on the word level. Such
a correlation could not be found for a LSTM based model. The findings suggest that
RNNG with beam search is a good mechanical model of the syntactic processing that
goes on in the brain during normal human language comprehension. This is in itself an
exciting motivation to work with RNNG.
It is clear that RNNG is an interesting model. However, there has been little work
focused on improving it: Kuncoro et al.[13] found that RNNG can be slightly improved,
by only relying on the stack of constituents and adding a gated attention mechanism
to the composition function. Stern et al.[20] investigated how to effectively infer trees
in generative neural parsing models. The combination of the interesting properties of
RNNG and the shortage of work on improving it, serves as a motivation for seeking to
improve RNNG. We will discuss other related works in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
1.2
Structure
The contents of this work are structured as to first give an overview of the theory needed
to understand the proposed methods and subsequent experimental work.
Therefore,
Chapter 2 serves to provide an introduction to supervised learning and different types
of neural networks, which leads to a complete description of the topic of this work:
Recurrent neural network grammars. Following Chapter 2, we analyse problems with
RNNG and propose methods for potential improvements of RNNG. Chapter 4 evaluates
these methods on English and Chinese treebanks, and compares the proposed methods to
neural baselines without [strong] inductive biases. The experimental results in Chapter
4 are followed in Chapter 5 by a discussion of the limitations and future directions of this
work. Our work is put in relation to other works in Chapter 6, followed by a conclusion
in Chapter 7.
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Background
This chapter presents the necessary theory to understand RNNG and concludes with a
description of RNNG in Section 2.5. The theory includes several well known concepts
and methods in natural language processing, such as: Supervised learning (Section 2.1),
feedforward neural networks (Section 2.2), recurrent neural networks (Section 2.3), and
recursive neural networks (Section 2.4). Well-versed readers in these subjects may want
to skip directly to Section 2.5.
2.1
Supervised Learning
A neural network is a parameterised model with origins in the field of machine learning.
A discussion of neural networks would therefore be incomplete without a general discus-
sion of machine learning as well. The goal of this discussion is not to cover the entire
field of machine learning - a task that is beyond the scope of this work - but to discuss
topics relevant to RNNG. This discussion will be focused on supervised learning which
is especially relevant to RNNG.
Supervised learning concerns the use labelled data1 to teach some model to predict
the label of previously unseen data. Let the data be denoted by D and let (x, y) ∈D
be an observation, x, with label, y. Supervised learning methods seek to maximise an
objective function using the predictions of a model. Let the model be a parameterised
model2, Mθ, where θ is the set of model parameters. The process of training a model
is then concerned with solving the optimisation problem in Equation 2.1 where f is the
objective function and ˆθ is the set of model parameters that maximises the objective
function under the model and the data.
ˆθ = arg max
θ
f(Mθ, D)
(2.1)
An example of an objective function is the likelihood function, which can be seen in
Equation 2.2 for the case where y comes from a categorical distribution of n categories,
1The description of supervised learning as classification is intentional, although we are aware of the
fact that supervised learning also includes regression.
2Supervised learning does not require a model to be parameterised.
An example of this is the
K-nearest neighbours[21] algorithm which does not require any learnable parameters. However, this
discussion assumes the model to be parameterised in the context of RNNG being a parameterised
model.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background
Mθ(x) is a n-dimensional vector that sums to 1, and each element of Mθ(x) is in (0, 1).
The notation [v]i denotes the i-th element of vector v.
l(Mθ, D) =
Y
(x,y)∈D
[Mθ(x)]y
(2.2)
Multiplication is a slow operation in computers and may yield imprecise results due
to limited floating precision in processors. These reasons means that the log-likelihood
function is often used as an objective function instead of the likelihood function.
ll(Mθ, D) = log l(Mθ, D)
=
X
(x,y)∈D
[log Mθ(x)]y
(2.3)
The log-likelihood function replaces the cumbersome product with the fast and more
precise sum. It is possible to replace the likelihood function with the log-likelihood func-
tion because the two functions obtain their optima for the same θ, due to the logarithm
function being a monotonically increasing function and because the output of Mθ is
positive.
The question remains as how to solve the optimisation problem in equation 2.1.
A
common approach for parameterised models, is to apply gradient-based optimisation
methods.
Gradient descent[22] belongs to this class of optimisation methods and is
designed to find a minimum point of a function. There are two remarks to note here:
First is that gradient descent seeks to find a minimal point, but there is no guarantee
that it finds a global minimum. Second is that Equation 2.1 formulates the supervised
objective as a maximisation problem while gradient descent seeks to minimise. The ob-
jective function in Equation 2.1 is therefore transformed into a loss function, such that
the minimum of the loss function is at the same point as the maximum of the objective
function. The log-likelihood objective, for example, can be transformed into a loss func-
tion by multiplying by −1. This is also known as the negative log-likelihood loss and
can be seen in Equation 2.4.
nll(Mθ, D) = −
X
(x,y)∈D
[log Mθ(x)]y
(2.4)
The negative log-likelihood loss will be used in the subsequent explanation of how to
solve the optimisation problem, but gradient descent can be applied to any loss function
that is differentiable with respect to the model parameters.
Gradient descent works by iteratively searching for a minimum until it converges3. It
does so by starting with the initial model parameters, θ0, which can be any point in the
model parameter space. The parameters are updated by computing the gradient of the
3Several methods exist to determine whether the search has converged. A popular method is to
stop searching at iteration T, where T is defined by the programmer.
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Supervised Learning
7
loss function, with respect to the model parameters, and subtracting the gradient from
the current set of parameters. This can be seen in equation 2.5 for t ≥0.
θt+1 = θt −λ · ∇nll(Mθt, D)
(2.5)
λ is a hyperparameter called the learning rate. The learning rate adjusts the speed
of which gradient descent converges. Gradient descent may take a lot of iterations to
converge for a small learning rate, but may also never find a minimum for a high learning
rate. This means that the learning rate has to be tuned to the specific model and data.
A problem with gradient descent is that the loss function has to use all of the elements
in D. This can be a very time consuming operation when |D| is large, as is often the
case in deep learning. Furthermore, all of the elements in D are usually not needed to
achieve a sufficient approximation of ∇nll(Mθt, D). These observations lead to stochastic
gradient descent[23]: Stochastic gradient descent is similar to gradient descent, but does
not require the loss function to use all of the elements in D. Instead, it samples batches
of elements from D and performs updates on one batch at a time. Let Dt be the batch in
iteration t. Stochastic gradient descent is then defined by the update step in Equation
2.6.
θt+1 = θt −λ · ∇nll(Mθt, Dt)
(2.6)
Notice how this is very similar to the updating step of gradient descent, as defined in
Equation 2.5, but can be much faster for smaller batch sizes. The trade-off is that the
gradient is only an approximation of the true gradient. This means that an iteration is
more likely to cause nll(Mθt+1, D) > nll(Mθt, D) where the desired effect is for the loss
to be smaller than it was in the previous iteration.
Finally, it is worth discussing how to measure the predictive ability of a model. The
model parameters are optimised to minimise a loss function as a function of the model
and a dataset. As a consequence, the model parameters have been directly optimised
towards fitting the model parameters to the specific dataset, and it may have found
patterns that do not generalise to new observations. This phenomena is known as over-
fitting. The issue of measuring a model’s predictive ability can be addressed in more
than one way, and this work makes use of a method that is common in deep learning,
called hold-out. Hold-out partitions the dataset into three parts: Trainingset, valida-
tionset, and testset. The purpose of the trainingset is to be used in the optimisation
objective in Equation 2.1 and the corresponding loss function. The trainingset is thus
used in regard to optimising the model parameters. The validationset is used to discover
when the optimisation process incurs overfitting, and to optimise hyperparameters such
as the learning rate, batch size, etc. The testset has the purpose of being used in mea-
suring the predictive ability of a trained model. The testset has neither been used in
the optimisation objective, nor been used to optimise hyperparameters. This separation
renders the testset in a position to be a good fit for measuring a model’s predictive
ability.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background
2.2
Feedforward Neural Networks
Feedforward neural networks will serve as an introduction to neural networks, on which
recurrent neural networks and recursive neural networks will build upon. Figure 2.1
shows an illustration of a feedforward neural network. Figure 2.1 shows how a feedfor-
ward neural network propagates an n-dimensional input, x, through two hidden layers
and gives an 1-dimensional output. The exact method of forward propagation will be
discussed next, but first it is worth noting some general observations from Figure 2.1.
Firstly, the figure shows a feedforward neural network with two hidden layers, but there
is no restriction on the amount of hidden layers, and multiple hidden layers may even
be beneficial[24]. The number of hidden layers constitutes the depth of a feedforward
neural network, and the field of deep learning is named for its usage of deep neural
networks. A second observation is how each layer has a different number of inputs, also
known as neurons. This is denoted as the size of a hidden layer. The number of hidden
layers and the size of each layer are considered to be hyperparameters.
Forward propagation is computed as a series of matrix multiplications and non-linear
functions. Let W (1) ∈R3×n be the weights of the connections between the input layer
and the first hidden layer in Figure 2.1. Similarly, let W (2) ∈R2×3 and W (3) ∈R1×2 be
the weights of the connections between the consecutive layers. The value in the output
layer is then computed as shown in Equation 2.7 for some input x = [x1, · · · , xn]T.
o = f (3) 
W (3) · f (2) 
W (2) · f (1) 
W (1) · x

(2.7)
Equation 2.7 contains three functions: f (1), f (2), and f (3). These functions are known as
activation functions and are required to be non-linear. The reason for this requirement is
that feedforward neural networks would be equivalent to linear regression without it. A
common choice of activation function in the hidden layers (f (1) and f (2)) is the rectified
linear unit[25], or ReLU for short. ReLU computes the element-wise maximum of the
Figure 2.1: A feedforward neural network with two hidden layers and a single output.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Feedforward Neural Networks
9
element and zero in a n-dimensional vector, as shown in equation 2.8.
ReLU(x) =


max(0, x1)
...
max(0, xn)


(2.8)
The activation function in the output layer (f (3)) is determined based on the task that
the feedforward neural network should learn. The sigmoid function, see Equation 2.9,
is used for binary classifications as it ensures that the output is a number between zero
and 1, and can thus be treated as the probability parameter in a Bernoulli distribution.
σ(x) =
1
1 + exp(−x))
(2.9)
Softmax, see Equation 2.10, is another activation function that is frequently used in
classifications tasks with N > 2 classes. Softmax transforms a N-dimensional vector
into another N-dimensional vector, where each element is between zero and one, and
the sum of the elements is one. These properties enable the elements of the transformed
vector to be treated as the probits of a categorical distribution, which makes softmax
well-suited for classification tasks of more than two classes.4
[softmax(x)]i =
exp(xi)
PN
j=1 exp(xj)
(2.10)
Both the sigmoid and the softmax functions can be used in conjunction with the like-
lihood objective, see Equation 2.2, and in conjunction with the negative log-likelihood
loss function, see Equation 2.4, by applying the logarithmic function to the sigmoid or
softmax functions.
Feedforward neural networks may optionally include bias terms as a part of their pa-
rameters. Bias terms are vectors that are added in layers independently of the input.
Forward propagation with bias terms can be seen in Equation 2.11. We note that the
feedforward neural network in Figure 2.1 does not contain any bias terms, and from here
on, equations and figures will assume implicit bias terms for simplicity.
o = f (3) 
W (3) · f (2) 
W (2) · f (1) 
W (1) · x + b(1)
+ b(2)
+ b(3)
(2.11)
Equations 2.7 and 2.11 show how to compute a forward pass in a feedforward neural net-
work, with and without bias terms, respectively. However, gradient-based optimisation
also requires the gradient of the model. The gradient has traditionally been computed by
backpropagating[27] from the output of the forward pass, but recent years have paved the
way for automatic differentiation frameworks such as Tensorflow[28] and PyTorch[29].
This work is implemented using PyTorch, and the computation of gradients is therefore
left to the framework.
4It is worth noting that research[26] has shown that softmax poses a bottleneck in language mod-
elling, where the number of classes is in the order of thousands or tens of thousands.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background
2.3
Recurrent Neural Networks
A recurrent neural network (RNN) is a class of models designed to process sequential
data. This has rendered RNN applicable to natural language processing, due to the
sequential representation of textual data. The change to sequential data means that we
write xt to denote the input at timestep t in a sequence, and write x to denote the entire
input sequence of length T. A RNN processes each input in the sequence from left to
right5, whilst maintaining a hidden state, ht, that is passed from the previous timestep
to the next. This can be seen in Equation 2.12 where rnn is some RNN that generates
an output, yt, along with the next hidden state, ht.
"
yt
ht
#
= rnn(xt, ht−1)
(2.12)
The initial hidden state, h0, should be initialised according to the choice of the program-
mer. A common choice is to initialise the hidden state as zeros. The hidden state allows
for RNN to pass information from previous timesteps to later timesteps.
Recurrent neural networks are a powerful tool, but they suffer from a problem that
is also common in other types of neural networks: Vanishing gradients[31] and the re-
lated problem of exploding gradients.
Vanishing gradients is the term used for the
problem that stems from repeated application of partial derivatives across several layers
in a neural network. The partial derivatives require multiplication of two numbers, and
repeated partial derivatives tend to cause the gradients to vanish (decrease exponen-
tially) or to explode (increase exponentially). This leads to very small gradients or very
large gradients in the beginning layers of a neural network. Very small gradients hinder
optimisation, as each optimisation step causes an almost neglectable change for those
respective parameters. Similarly, very large gradients cause optimisation to be unstable,
as the large gradients in the beginning layers make it difficult to converge to an optima.
The problem of vanishing and exploding gradients is made even greater in RNN, as the
gradients are not only propagated through network layers, but also through timesteps.
The Long Short-Term Memory[15] (LSTM) was designed to address this problem in
RNN.
A LSTM is a commonly used kind of RNN. It splits the hidden state into two vari-
ables, ht and ct, and the output of the LSTM is ht.
This can be seen in Equation
2.13.
"
ht
ct
#
= LSTM(xt, ht−1, ct−1)
(2.13)
Equation 2.13 shows the general input and output structure of a LSTM, but does not
explain the inner workings of a LSTM. The inner workings are governed by Equations
5We note that left-to-right processing is not mandatory, and it may be beneficial to change the
processing order, as is done in bidirectional RNN[30].
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Recursive Neural Networks
11
2.14 through 2.19, where each W is a weight matrix, constituting the learnable param-
eters of a LSTM, and ⊙is the element-wise multiplication of two vectors. We remind
that bias terms are not shown, in order to simplify the equations.
it = σ (Wxi · xt + Whi · ht−1)
(2.14)
ft = σ (Wxf · xt + Whf · ht−1)
(2.15)
ot = σ (Wxo · xt + Who · ht−1)
(2.16)
ut = tanh (Wxu · xt + Whu · ht−1)
(2.17)
ct = it ⊙ut + ft ⊙ct−1
(2.18)
ht = ot ⊙tanh(ct)
(2.19)
LSTM is, as previously mentioned, designed to address the vanishing and exploding
gradient problems. It does so through the use of three gates: Input gate, it, forget gate,
ft, and output gate, ot. A gate is a vector where each element is between zero and one.
A vector, multiplied onto the gate, is preserved when the gate element is [close to] one
and dismissed when the gate element is [close to] zero. This enables the LSTM to learn
which inputs to make use of and which to forget. Crucially, it also enables the LSTM to
make the gradients less dependent on each other by dismissing some partial derivatives,
and thus serving in mitigating vanishing gradients and exploding gradients. It should be
noted that a LSTM does not completely remove the vanishing gradients and exploding
gradient problems, but it does significantly help in mitigating them.
2.4
Recursive Neural Networks
RNNG are a kind of recursive neural network, and we will introduce recursive neural
networks to be able to better understand RNNG, which will be thoroughly explained in
Section 2.5. Specifically, recursive neural networks will be introduced through a short
description of a Tree-LSTM[32].
RNN are designed to process sequential data. Recursive neural networks (RvNN) are
similarly designed to process recursively defined data. An example of this is a tree, and
an example of a tree has already been seen in Figure 1.1. Formally, a tree is defined as a
connected, acyclic, and undirected graph, where one node is denoted as the root of the
tree. This definition makes a recursive procedure well-suited for traversal and processing
of the tree. Algorithm 1 shows how to recursively traverse and process tree nodes in a
generic top-down left-to-right order.6
There are similarities between RNN and RvNN (besides from the names and abbre-
viations). An important similarity is that they both need methods to mitigate vanishing
and exploding gradients. Motivated by this, Tree-LSTM generalises the LSTM to be
6This is also known as preorder traversal.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Background
Algorithm 1 Top-down left-to-right traversal of a tree with root r.
procedure Preorder(r)
ProcessNode(r)
if r is a leaf node then
return
else
for n in children of r do
Preorder(n)
end for
end if
end procedure
able to process tree structured data.7 A Tree-LSTM forward pass processes a node, j,
with children denoted by the set, C(j). Its input is a vector representation of the node,
and the hidden states of each of its children. The equations governing the Tree-LSTM
can be seen in Equation 2.20 through 2.26.
˜hj =
X
k∈C(j)
hk
(2.20)
ij = σ

Wxixj + Whi˜hj

(2.21)
fj,k = σ (Wxfxj + Whfhk)
(2.22)
oj = σ

Wxoxj + Who˜hj

(2.23)
uj = tanh

Wxuxj + Whu˜hj

(2.24)
cj = ij ⊙uj +
X
k∈C(j)
fj,k ⊙ck
(2.25)
hj = oj ⊙tanh (cj)
(2.26)
It is clear that the equations are alike to the equations governing a LSTM. The differences
can be seen in Equation 2.20, which summarises the hidden states of the children as a
sum, and in Equation 2.22 and 2.25, where multiple forget gates are used to summarise
the cell states of the children. Despite the similarities, Tree-LSTM can yield significant
improvements over LSTM when applied to data of a recursive nature. See Tai et al.[32]
for details.
2.5
Recurrent Neural Network Grammars
Recurrent neural network grammars[10] (RNNG) is a model, which is designed to model
a sentence and a sentence’s corresponding parse tree. This broad definition allows for
7Tai et al. describes two generalisations of LSTM: Child-Sum Tree-LSTM and N-ary Tree LSTM.
We will only present Child-Sum Tree-LSTM.
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Recurrent Neural Network Grammars
13
two variants of RNNG: Discriminative and generative. The discriminative variant is
used to approximate the conditional distribution, p(y | x), where x is a sentence, and y
is a parse tree. This is also known as a [probabilistic] parser. The generative variant
approximates the joint distribution, p(x, y). Section 2.5.3 describes how the variants
can be used to infer parse trees as well as sentences from their respective distributions.
This is preceded by Section 2.5.1 and 2.5.2, where the inner workings of RNNG will be
discussed.
2.5.1
Transitions
RNNG are transition-based. This means that RNNG model sentences and parse trees
as a sequence of transitions. A transition is an instruction of how to construct a part of
a parse tree, and the entire transition sequence is a complete set of instructions for how
to construct a parse tree. We will explain the transitions through examples, starting
with the transitions for the discriminative variant. The transitions for the generative
variant will be derived from the discriminative variant. We note that the literature also
talks of transitions as actions, and we will use the two words interchangeably.
Figure 2.2 shows the parse tree of the sentence “The dog eats”.
The sentence is di-
vided into a noun phrase, “NP(The dog)”, and a verb phrase, VP(eats). The non-leaf
nodes, NP and VP, are denoted as non-terminals. The transitionset of RNNG assumes
that a parse tree is constructed in a top-down left-to-right manner. This construction
order is equivalent to the preorder traversal in Algorithm 1. A full example of how to
construct the parse tree in Figure 2.2, can be seen in Table 2.1. Table 2.1 is an example
of how transitions encode a parse tree, but it does not explain the effects of each transi-
tion, which will be explained in the following paragraphs. We see in the table that there
are three types of transitions, and Figure 2.3 shows the effect of each transition on the
construction of the tree in Figure 2.2.
• NT(x): Adds a non-terminal node, x. Subsequent nodes will become children of
this node.
Figure 2.2: Parse tree of the sentence “The dog eats.”.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Background
Transition
Remaining words
Tree bracket representation
NT(S)
[”.”, ”eats”, ”dog”, ”The”]
(S
NT(NP)
[”.”, ”eats”, ”dog”, ”The”]
(S (NP
SHIFT
[”.”, ”eats”, ”dog”]
(S (NP The
SHIFT
[”.”, ”eats”]
(S (NP The dog
REDUCE
[”.”, ”eats”]
(S (NP The dog)
NT(V P)
[”.”, ”eats”]
(S (NP The dog) (VP
SHIFT
[”.”]
(S (NP The dog) (VP eats
REDUCE
[”.”]
(S (NP The dog) (VP eats)
SHIFT
[]
(S (NP The dog) (VP eats) .
REDUCE
[]
(S (NP The dog) (VP eats) .)
Table 2.1: Example of how the parse tree, of the sentence “The dog eats.”, can be
encoded as a sequence of transitions. The parse tree is represented using
a bracket notation where “(x” introduces a non-terminal node, x, and “)”
indicates that all children have been added to a non-terminal node. The
elements between the bracket pairs, are the children of the non-terminal
node.
Figure 2.3: Effects of each type of transition in the discriminative variant of the tran-
sitionset. Each circle represents a node in the tree. The circles highlighted
in red represent the node that new nodes will become a child of.
• SHIFT: Adds the next word in the sentence as a leaf node.
• REDUCE: This transition does not add a node to the tree. Its effect can be
understood as moving the parent node pointer to its parent, such that subsequent
nodes will become children of the parent. This is visualised in Figure 2.3 as moving
the red circle from NP to S. Further explanation follows in the paragraphs below.
As we have just seen how transitions encode a parse tree, through the examples in Table
2.1 and Figure 2.3, we will now turn our attention to how transitions affect the under-
lying data structures of RNNG. RNNG have three data structures: Token buffer (B),
action history (H), and a stack (S). The token buffer represents the remaining words
in a sentence, the action history contains a representation of all transitions prior to the
==PAGE:25==
2.5 Recurrent Neural Network Grammars
15
next transition, and the stack maintains a representation of the parse tree while it is
being constructed. The means of representation will be described in Section 2.5.2. For
now it suffices to think of the token buffer as only supporting a pop operation (from the
right), the action history an append operation, and the stack to support both pop and
push operations. B initially contains the words in the sentence in reverse order, while
H and S are initially empty.
The NT(x) transition has the effect of pushing x to S and appending NT(x) to H. This
can be seen in Figure 2.4. SHIFT pops a token from the end of B, and pushes it to S,
as can be seen in Figure 2.5. SHIFT is also appended to H. REDUCE is the most com-
plicated of the transitions. It is, like all transitions, appended to H, but its complexity
stems from its effect on the stack. A REDUCE transition instructs the stack to merge
several elements into a single new element. This can be seen in 2.6 where the elements
“NP”, “The”, and “dog” is merged into “NP(The dog)”. Specifically, REDUCE pops
elements from the stack until a non-terminal node, that has not already been merged, is
found. The stack then also pops that non-terminal node and combines the non-terminal
node and its children into a single element, which is then pushed to S. The merging
operation is called a composition function and will be described in Section 2.5.2.3.
Transitions cannot be applied in an arbitrary order, as this could potentially result
in impossible trees. Consider, for example, the case where a SHIFT transition is applied
as the first transition. This is impossible as words must be children of non-terminals,
and so cannot form the root of a tree. The set of valid transitions is denoted by the
action set, AD(B, S, n), where n is the number of non-terminals that have not been
closed by a REDUCE transition. AD(B, S, n) can be computed from the following rules:
• NT(x): B is not empty and n < 100. The number of open non-terminal nodes
needs to be restricted, as a parse could potentially continue forever without this
Figure 2.4: Effect of the NT(x) transition on the data structures of RNNG.
Figure 2.5: Effect of the SHIFT transition on the data structures of RNNG.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Background
Figure 2.6: Effect of the REDUCE transition on the data structures of RNNG.
restriction. The constant 100 is chosen to be sufficiently high to consider parse
trees in the datasets to be valid, and low enough to ensure termination within a
reasonable time.
• SHIFT: B is not empty and n ≥1. The first condition ensures that there is a
word to move from the buffer, and the second condition ensures that words become
children of non-terminal nodes.
• REDUCE: The node at the top of stack is not an open non-terminal, and at least
one of these conditions: B is empty or n ≥2. The first condition satisfies that all
non-terminals must have at least one child, such that non-terminals cannot become
leaf nodes. “B is empty” allows for the root node to be completed by a REDUCE
transition, and “n ≥2” prevents a REDUCE from closing the root non-terminal
node before the buffer is empty.
The previous paragraphs have described the data structures and transitions of the dis-
criminative variant of RNNG. The corresponding data structures and transitions of the
generative variant will be derived from it. The derivation requires only a few changes:
The first change is to replace the pop-only buffer, B, with an append-only buffer, T, that
is initially empty. The second change is to replace the SHIFT transition with GEN(x)
where x is a word. GEN(x) has the effect of appending x to T and pushing x to S. This
effect can be seen in Figure 2.7. Similarly to SHIFT, GEN(x) adds a leaf node to the
parse tree, as has previously been shown for the SHIFT transitions in Figure 2.3. The
third and final change is to define the action set, AG(T, S, n), for the generative variant:
• NT(x): n < 100.
• GEN(x): n ≥1.
Figure 2.7: Effect of the GEN(x) transition on the data structures of RNNG.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Recurrent Neural Network Grammars
17
• REDUCE: The node at the top of stack is not an open non-terminal and n ≥1.
The rules for AD and AG are very similar, but the rules for AG are simpler as there is
only a requirement of a single word node in the parse tree, while AD has to ensure that
exactly all the words in B are inserted as leaf nodes in the parse tree.
2.5.2
Method
Section 2.5.1 explained the transitions and data structures of the discriminative variant
of RNNG, and derived the generative variant from it. This pattern will be repeated
in this section, where the methods in RNNG will first be presented for the discrimina-
tive variant, followed by a description of the necessary changes for the generative variant.
The architecture [of the discriminative variant] can be seen in Figure 2.8. We see in
Figure 2.8 that the token buffer and action history are represented using LSTM. We
recall that the token buffer should only support a pop operation. This can be achieved
by inserting the tokens in reverse order and storing the output at each timestep, with
a pointer initially set at the last timestep. A pop operation can then be implemented
by returning the stored output at the current timestep and moving the pointer a step
backwards. The action history should only support an append operation, which is di-
rectly supported by LSTM. The stack is represented using a StackLSTM[33], which will
be described in Section 2.5.2.2. The output of each structure is [optionally] transformed
through a dropout function[34] to mitigate overfitting. This is further applied on an
affine transformation and a ReLU activation function8 in order to create a representa-
8The RNNG paper[10] states that RNNG use the hyperbolic tangent as activation function. How-
ever, the authors’ implementation uses ReLU. This work will describe the model as implemented, rather
than as described in the paper, when the two are in disagreement.
Figure 2.8: Architecture of RNNG. The token buffer and action history are represented
using LSTM. The stack is represented using a StackLSTM. The outputs
of the structures are concatenated, followed by a series of transformations,
in order to obtain the probits of the next action in the action sequence.
This example should assign high probability to NT(VP) as highlighted in
the final layer.
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Background
tion of the current parse state. Let the output of the token buffer, at timestep t, be
denoted by Bt, St for the stack, and Ht for the action history. Each output may op-
tionally have been transformed by the dropout function. Equation 2.27 shows how to
compute the representation of the parse state, rt, at timestep t, where [v1 ; v2] is the
concatenation of the vectors v1 and v2.
rt = ReLU (Wr · [Bt ; St ; Ht])
(2.27)
The softmax is applied after a final affine transform to yield the probability distribution
of the next actions, given the previous actions, a<t. The softmax is only applied on
the set of valid actions for the current state of B, S, and number of open non-terminal
nodes, n. See Equation 2.28 where Wa denotes column a of matrix W.
p(at | a<t) =
exp (W T
at · rt)
P
a∈AD(B,S,n) exp (W T
a · rt)
(2.28)
RNNG are trained to maximise the likelihood (Equation 2.2), which amounts to min-
imising the negative log likelihood (Equation 2.4). The negative log likelihood of an
action sequence, a of length T, is then expressed as in Equation 2.29.
nll(a) = −
T
X
t=1
log p(at | a<t)
(2.29)
The effects of an action, as described in Section 2.5.1, are applied to the data structures
after computing the action probability in Equation 2.28.
2.5.2.1
Embeddings
The inputs to B, S, and H are in the form of continuous vectors.
However, words
and actions are discrete entities. This discrepancy is addressed in a usual manner, by
transforming discrete entities through learnable embeddings. Different embeddings are
used for non-terminals, actions, and words.
The generative variant of RNNG transforms words to vectors through a single learn-
able embedding, similar to how actions and non-terminals are transformed to vectors.
However, the discriminative variant treats word embeddings with special care, as can
be seen in Figure 2.9. Like the generative variant, it also has a learnable embedding,
Etoken. In addition to this, it adds pretrained embeddings, Epre, and embeddings of the
part-of-speech tags, Epos. The pretrained embeddings are generated using wang2vec[35],
which is an extension of word2vec[36], designed to account for syntax. Examples of
part-of-speech tags are “Noun” for the word “dog”, and “Verb” for the word “eats”. The
three embeddings are combined through an affine transformation to achieve the word
embedding. This is shown in Equation 2.30.
wt = ReLU (Ww · [Epre ; Etoken ; Epos])
(2.30)
==PAGE:29==
2.5 Recurrent Neural Network Grammars
19
Figure 2.9: Word embeddings for the discriminative variant of RNNG. Each word em-
bedding (w1, w2, and w3) is computed from three inputs: A pretrained em-
bedding, Epre, a learnable token embedding, Etoken, and a part-of-speech
tag embedding, Epos. Out-of-vocabulary words are randomly switched to
unknown for inputs to Etoken, which can be seen with the out-of-vocabulary
word “dog”.
Finally, the learnable token embedding, Etoken, needs to be able to address words that
are not in its vocabulary. Usually, this is done by replacing out-of-vocabulary tokens
with one [or more] special “UNK” token[s].
Etoken does this at inference time, but
behaves differently at training time. During training, the vocabulary of Etoken is defined
as all of the tokens in the trainingset along with the special unknown token(s). Tokens
that will be out-of-vocabulary at inference time, are randomly switched between the
token and the corresponding unknown token. This is illustrated in Figure 2.9, where
“dog” is out-of-vocabulary at inference time, and is randomly switched to “UNK”. The
reason for doing this, is to improve estimates of the unknown token(s), by incorporating
information about the tokens that will be replaced by the unknown token(s). This can
be seen as a kind of Laplacian smoothing.
2.5.2.2
StackLSTM
Stacks need to support pop and push operations. A consequence of this is, that the
next state does not always depend on the resulting state of the last push operation, as
this state may have been removed by some pop operation. LSTM is designed to depend
on an input and the state of the LSTM at the previous timestep, which renders LSTM
unfit to model a stack. StackLSTM[33] addresses this problem by modifying LSTM to
depend on the state at the top of the stack, instead of the state at the previous timestep.
Figure 2.10 shows a sequence of push and pop operations on a StackLSTM. Notice how
the top of the stack changes, and how those changes dictate which state the next LSTM
state should depend on.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Background
Figure 2.10: A series of push and pop operations on a StackLSTM. The stack state is
represented by the LSTM hidden state pair, (h, c), and a pointer to the
top of the stack. Red boxes indicate the top of the stack. The final push
is set to depend on (h1, c1), as (h2, c2) has been popped from the stack.
2.5.2.3
Composition Function
When a REDUCE action is applied, RNNG need to merge one or more constituents with
their corresponding non-terminal. A composition function is needed to perform this op-
eration. The composition function of choice can be seen in Figure 2.11. This composition
function is inspired by bidirectional LSTM. Namely, the composition function has two
LSTM that process the embeddings of the children nodes in left-to-right and right-to-
left order, respectively. The composition function differs from a bidirectional LSTM, by
letting the first input to both LSTM be an embedding of the non-terminal node. The
intuition of this choice is to give each LSTM knowledge of what kind of information to
focus on in the children nodes. We note that the non-terminal embedding comes from
a separate learnable embedding, rather than the embedding used when pushing x to S
in a NT(x) action. The output of each LSTM is [optionally] applied on a dropout and
combined through an affine transformation, followed by a ReLU non-linearity.
Figure 2.11: RNNG composition function: Two LSTM process the non-terminal em-
bedding as well as embeddings of the children nodes. The bottom LSTM
processes the children from left-to-right, and the top LSTM processes the
children from right-to-left. Notice that the non-terminal is processed first
for both LSTM. The output of each LSTM is combined and transformed
into a representation of the merged constituent.
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Recurrent Neural Network Grammars
21
2.5.2.4
Generative RNNG
The generative variant of RNNG can be derived from the discriminative variant through
four changes. The first change is to replace the buffer, B, with an initially empty buffer,
T, which is represented using a LSTM. This also implies to change Bt to Tt in Equa-
tion 2.27. The second change is, as mentioned in Section 2.5.2.1, that the generative
variant only computes word embeddings using a learnable token embedding, where the
vocabularies at training and inference time are identical. The third change is to replace
the set of valid actions in Equation 2.28 to the set of valid generative actions, AG(T, S, n).
The final change concerns the prediction of words. The generative variant has a greatly
larger output size as the number of words in a vocabulary tends to be in the tens of thou-
sands, where the discriminative variant tends to have an output size below a hundred.9
The timewise expensive softmax function may become very slow for a large output size.
The prediction of words are thus split into a hierarchy of softmaxes, which is also known
as a class-factored softmax[37], [38]. The first step, in this regard, is to compute the
probability of the action being GEN(x), without concern for the specific value of x, as
shown in Equation 2.31.
p(at = GEN | a<t) =
exp (W T
GEN · rt)
P
a∈AG(T,S,n) exp (W T
a · rt)
(2.31)
The second step is to compute the probability of the class of x. This is done using a
softmax on the result of an affine transformation on the representation, rt. This can be
seen in Equation 2.32.
p(x ∈c | at = GEN, a<t) = [softmax (Wc · rt)]c
(2.32)
The next step is to compute the probability of the word given the class. This is done in
a similar manner as the first step, as can be seen in Equation 2.33.
p(x | x ∈c, at = GEN, a<t) = [softmax (Wx · rt)]x
(2.33)
Finally, Equation 2.34 shows how the multiplicative property of probability theory allows
Equations 2.31, 2.32, and 2.33 to multiply, to obtain the conditional probability of
GEN(x).
p(at = GEN(x) | a<t) = p(at = GEN | a<t)
× p(x ∈c | at = GEN, a<t)
× p(x | x ∈c, at = GEN, a<t)
(2.34)
This shows how to factor the prediction of GEN(x) into a hierarchy of softmaxes, but
by what method the words are split into disjoint classes, has not been shown. This is
done by utilising Brown clustering[39] with approximately
q
|V | classes, each of nearly
the same size, for a vocabulary, V . We will not describe Brown clustering in this work,
but instead refer to the paper for details.
9The exact output sizes depend on the number of words and non-terminal symbols in a dataset.
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Background
2.5.3
Inference
This sections concerns how to make inferences using both variants of RNNG. Section
2.5.3.1 shows how to sample parse trees for a Discriminative RNNG, and Section 2.5.3.2
shows how to sample parse trees from a Generative RNNG, while also showing how to
compute p(x) for a sentence, x.
2.5.3.1
Greedy Sampling
Equation 2.28 showed how to compute the probits of a categorical distribution of the
next action. Greedy sampling makes use of this, by sampling the action with the highest
probability at the current timestep. See Equation 2.35.
bat = arg max
a
p(at = a | a<t)
(2.35)
Sampling continues until the stack only contains a single element and the buffer is empty.
The restrictions on valid actions ensures that this condition will eventually be met and,
therefore, guarantees termination.
2.5.3.2
Importance Sampling
Greedy sampling is a very efficient sampling method for Discriminative RNNG, but it
works poorly for Generative RNNG. This is explained by Stern et al.[20], who finds
that generative parsers tend to assign much higher probability to REDUCE and NT(x)
actions, than they do to GEN(x) actions. This leads to parse trees with a vast number
of non-terminal nodes. Discriminative parsers do not suffer from this issue since the
probability mass of all words in the vocabulary, are accounted for by a single SHIFT
action. Stern et al. address the issue of generative parsing through a word-level beam
search. We will, however, not explain their approach, as Dyer et al. makes use of a
different approach for inference of Generative RNNG.
Dyer et al.
uses importance sampling to make inferences of Generative RNNG. Im-
portance sampling makes use of importance weights, as defined in Equation 2.36, where
p(x, y) is computed by a Generative RNNG, and q(y | x) is a sampling distribution, which
will be defined further below.
w(x, y) = p(x, y)
q(y | x)
(2.36)
p(x), the probability of sentence x, can be computed using the importance weights by
marginalisation over the set of all valid parse trees, Y(x), of a sentence, x. See Equation
2.37.
p(x) =
X
y∈Y(x)
p(x, y) =
X
y∈Y(x)
q(y | x) · w(x, y) = Eq(y | x) w(x, y)
(2.37)
This is a correct method for computing p(x). Unfortunately, it is intractable to find
Y(x) as its size is too big to be found within any reasonable time. Instead, a Monte
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Recurrent Neural Network Grammars
23
Carlo estimate is used by sampling N 10 parse trees from q.
p(x) ≈1
N
N
X
i=1
w(x, yi)
(2.38)
Importantly, Equation 2.38 shows how Generative RNNG can be used as a [syntax-
aware] language model. The N samples also enable Generative RNNG to be used as a
parser. This can be achieved by reranking the N samples under the Generative RNNG,
which is done in Equation 2.39.
ˆy = arg max
yi
p(x, yi)
(2.39)
The question now remains as to how to obtain the sampling distribution, q(y | x). The
sampling distribution should satisfy the following three conditions:
1. p(x, y) > 0
=⇒
q(y | x) > 0. This is required to prevent division by zero in
Equation 2.36.
2. Parse tree samples can be obtained efficiently from q.
3. The conditional probability, q(y | x), can be computed. This condition is required
to compute the importance weights and disqualifies non-probabilistic parsers.
There are several sampling distributions that can satisfy the three conditions. Dyer et al.
choose to use the Discriminative RNNG as the sampling distribution, and samples from
the Discriminative RNNG using ancestral sampling. Ancestral sampling is similar to
greedy sampling, but differs by sampling from the categorical distribution of valid actions,
instead of always picking the valid action with the highest probability. Furthermore, the
distribution of valid actions is flattened by exponentiating each probability by α < 111,
followed by renormalising the resulting terms to make them sum to one.
Equation
2.40 summarises how to sample an action using ancestral sampling from a flattened
distribution.
r(at | a<t) ∝p(at | a<t)α
bat ∼r(at | a<t)
(2.40)
We note that the flattening of the categorical distribution is important, as it enables for
sampling of diverse trees, which in turn makes it more likely to sample the groundtruth
tree. The value of α should not be too low, as that would flatten the distribution too
much, resulting in a distribution which makes little or no use of the model predictions.
Dyer et al. use α = 0.8 in all of their experiments.
10N = 100 for all experiments in Dyer et al.
11The distribution can become more spiked for α > 1.
==PAGE:34==
24
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
RNNG have many interesting properties, as mentioned in Section 1.1, but they are not
without flaws. This chapter looks at potential improvements to RNNG, which will be
founded in an analysis of problems with RNNG in Section 3.1. This analysis leads to
methods of how to potentially improve RNNG, of which the first, Parallel RNNG, is
discussed in Section 3.2. Section 3.3 goes on to suggest a new representation function,
which is followed in Section 3.4 by the addition of existing regularisation techniques in
the context of RNNG. The methods will be derived in this chapter, and evaluated in
Chapter 4.
3.1
Analysis of Problems In RNNG
Inefficient batching: RNNG is difficult to batch efficiently. This means that it is
too slow to be trained on large datasets. It also makes it difficult to combine RNNG
with other models, as the inefficient batching of RNNG poses a bottleneck to how fast
the combined model can train and make inferences. There are several reasons for the
inefficient batching: The first reason is that the stack is represented using a StackL-
STM. StackLSTM maintains, as previously discussed, a stack through a pointer to the
top of the stack. This means that the stack states are not in a format that can be
utilised efficiently by a GPU. This has severe consequences on the ability to efficiently
batch RNNG. The difficulty of efficiently batching RNNG is enlarged from the com-
plexity by which it represents its inputs: Non-terminal embeddings are only computed
for NT(x) transitions, while non-terminal embeddings for the composition function are
only computed for REDUCE transitions. Likewise, word embeddings are only computed
for SHIFT/GEN(x) transitions. Additional complexity comes from the variable number
of stack elements, that needs to be popped at every REDUCE transition. Dyer et al.
mitigates this issue, by implementing RNNG as a fast C++ implementation. This is
helpful in mitigating the aforementioned issues, but does not address the fundamental
issue: RNNG cannot be utilised efficiently on a GPU due to the inefficient batching.
Lack of Python implementation: The original implementation by Dyer et al.1 is
implemented in C++. This is also the case for the implementation by Fried et al.[40]2.
1https://github.com/clab/rnng
2https://github.com/dpfried/rnng-bert
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Methods
To the best of our knowledge, the implementation by Kim et al.[18]3 is the implementa-
tion that is closest to a Python implementation of RNNG. However, the implementation
by Kim et al. assumes binary trees and is implemented in the context of unsupervised
RNNG. A Python implementation of RNNG seems to be missing. It is worth consid-
ering why this is an issue. It may seem counter intuitive that this is an issue, as a
C++ implementation will be faster than a Python implementation, which is mainly due
to Python being an interpreted programming language. Nevertheless, Python has seen
tremendous growth in the machine learning community, and the most common frame-
works (Tensorflow[28] and PyTorch[29]) are based on Python. The Python machine
learning community is, as a consequence of this, vastly greater than the C++ machine
learning community. The discrepancy makes it less likely for the general machine learn-
ing community to adopt RNNG. It also means that integration with new tools become
harder, as new tools tend to be made to work with Python [frameworks]. These reasons
constitute the issue of why a Python implementation of RNNG is needed.
Slow generative inference: The current method of inference for Generative RNNG,
is to use importance sampling, with samples from Discriminative RNNG. The results,
reported by Dyer et al., are based on 100 samples per sentence in the testset. Generat-
ing this many samples is a time consuming process, which hinders the practical usage
of Generative RNNG as a parser and as a language model. It should be mentioned that
a [partial] solution already exists for this issue, but there is a need for improvement as
the time consumption is still high. The [partial] solution is developed by Stern et al.[20],
who introduced a word-level search algorithm for generative inference. This approach is
implemented in the implementation by Fried et al. Another approach is suggested by
Dyer et al., who suggest to combine RNNG with a particle filter scheme. The validity of
this suggestion remains to be evaluated. We note that this issue is intrinsic to generative
inference in general, and not exclusive to inference of Generative RNNG.
A potential bottleneck in the representation function: As will be shown in
Section 4.1, action sequences tend to have an average length of 60-70 actions, and the
average sentence length lies in 20-25 words. This means that the action history and
token buffer encodes relatively long sequences. The stack may also grow to similar sizes.
The representation function, Equation 2.27, uses the output at the back/top of these
structures to compute the representation. Far ranging dependencies may thus fail to be
captured by the three structures, which brings about a potential bottleneck in the rep-
resentation function. This issue may especially be dominant in the beginning of a parse
for a Discriminative RNNG, where the token buffer has to encode the entire sentence,
and serves as the only input to predict the first action.
Vanishing gradients: A RNNG can be seen as a RvNN. Similar to RvNN [and RNN],
it suffers from vanishing gradients. This can be seen in Figure 3.1, which shows the
euclidean norm of the gradients of a Discriminative RNNG, on the negative log likeli-
3https://github.com/harvardnlp/urnng
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Analysis of Problems In RNNG
27
hood loss of the parse tree, of the following sentence: “Genentech stock fell 12.5 cents in
trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange to $20.125.”. We only show gradients
for this sentence, but note that the gradients behave similarly for other sentences. It
is clear from Figure 3.1, that the gradients are largest for the affine parameters in the
representation function, as well as for the parameters in the affine transformation from
the representation to the softmax layer, see Equation 2.28. Some of the gradients are
close to zero, but not exactly zero. These are the gradients of the embeddings and the
composition function parameters, and they are visualised in Figure 3.2. It is a crucial
issue that the embedding and composition function parameters have small gradients.
The embeddings are important since they define the input vectors to the RNNG. The
composition function was found, by Kuncoro et al.[41], to be key to the performance of
RNNG, despite the small gradients. This finding makes it seem likely that RNNG could
be able to train faster and improve performance, if the problem of vanishing gradients
is mitigated, and especially for the composition function.
Figure 3.1: Euclidean norm of the gradients of a Discriminative RNNG. Bias terms
are not shown for brevity. The gradients are grouped by the function that
they belong to, where i.e. “representation.affine.weight” corresponds to
Wr in Equation 2.27.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Methods
Figure 3.2: Euclidean norm of gradients of a Discriminative RNNG, where only gradi-
ents close to zero are shown.
3.2
Parallel RNNG
Section 3.1 showed how inefficient batching is a problem in RNNG. In this section, we
will propose Parallel RNNG to address this problem. Incidentally, Parallel RNNG also
mitigates the problem of slow generative inference, as the parallelisation of RNNG en-
ables faster inference. However, it does not fully address the slow generative inference,
because the core problem of depending on a great number of samples has not been
addressed. Section 3.2.1 describes Parallelisable StackLSTM[42], which is a main com-
ponent of Parallel RNNG. This is followed by Section 3.2.2 and 3.2.3, which derives the
steps to achieve Parallel RNNG using Parallelisable StackLSTM.
3.2.1
Parallelisable StackLSTM
Ding et al.[42] presents a method for parallelising StackLSTM. They do so in a gen-
eralised framework, such that push and pop operations are described as follows: Let
p(S) ∈N be a pointer to the top of the stack, S, and let xt be the stack input at
timestep t. Push and pop operations are then defined subsequently as:
• Push: Read the hidden and cell states at the top of the stack, hp(S) and cp(S). Use
these to compute the next hidden and cell states (LSTM(xt, hp(S), cp(S))), which
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Parallel RNNG
29
will be added to the stack at p(S) + 1. The stack pointer is updated to point to
p(S) + 1.
• Pop: The stack pointer is updated to point to p(S) −1.
This framework gives rise to two observations which leads to Parallelisable StackLSTMs.
The first observation is that a pop operation can be seen as a subset of a push op-
eration. This is clear in how both push and pop updates the stack pointer, while push
also inserts the result of an LSTM forward call to the new top of the stack. Treating
pop as a subset of push also necessitates that the constant stack pointer additions are
treated using a variable, o ∈{−1, 1}, where o = 1 for push and o = −1 for pop. The
stack pointer update will then be expressed as p(S) ←p(S) + o.
The second observation is that any hidden and cell states, hi and ci, where i > p(S),
will not be read until they have been overridden by a push operation. This observation
corresponds to the fact that elements no longer exist on the stack, once they have been
popped. The validity of the observation is evident, in how only push operations increase
the stack pointer, and how both push and pop operations read from the states at p(S).
The stack will be represented using two tensors: One for the hidden states, and one
for the cell states. Both tensors are of size ns × nb × nh, where ns is the maximum stack
size, nb is the batch size, and nh is the size of the LSTM weight matrices (also known as
the hidden size). Representing a stack in this manner, induces a limit on the size of the
stack. This brings a limit on the depth and width of the trees, that can be represented
using this stack, but that limit is negligible for sufficiently high values of ns4. The stack
is represented in this manner to enable efficient parallel GPU computations.
The two observations enable the push and pop operation to be merged into a single
operation, which can be computed efficiently. This operation is shown in Algorithm 2.
We see how the first observation gives rise to the second function argument, o ∈Nnb,
which allows to move the stack pointers accordingly to the desired operations of each
item in a batch. The second observation ensures that it is always safe to insert the result
of a LSTM forward call at p(S) + 1.
Algorithm 2 Combined push and pop operation in Parallelisable StackLSTM.
1: procedure ParallelisableStackLSTM(x, o)
2:
h, c ←LSTM(x, hp(S), cp(S))
3:
hp(S)+1 ←h
4:
cp(S)+1 ←c
5:
p(S) ←p(S) + o
6:
return hp(S), cp(S)
7: end procedure
4In our experiments, we use values of ns = 150 and ns = 200.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Methods
Parallelisable StackLSTM allows for an implicit third operation, besides from pop and
push. This operation will be called hold, as it is meant to do nothing. Such an effect
can be achieved by setting oi = 0 for all i where a hold operation is desired. Hold can
be beneficial in various situations, notably, in the case where some items in a batch
have finished their task while others items have not. The hold operation allows for the
finished items to not do any further changes to the stack.
3.2.2
Discriminative Parallel RNNG
Parallelisable StackLSTM brings a key component to Parallel RNNG, but further steps
are required to decide when to call the merged stack operation, and to define the inputs,
x and o, to the stack. We will show these steps for the discriminative variant of Parallel
RNNG, with the understanding that the generative variant primarily differs in how it
handles word embeddings and the token buffer. These differences do not concern the
stack and have already been discussed in Section 2.5. Further changes to the generative
variant of Parallel RNNG will be discussed in Section 3.2.3. The steps in this section
will be summarised in Algorithm 6.
We make two primary observations about the transitionset: The first observation is
that all transitions push exactly once to the stack. This observation makes it possible to
only push once at every timestep, where the stack input is a combination of the inputs
resulting from each action. In the second observation, we see that REDUCE is the only
action which pops items from the stack. This means that we know exactly when to
push and when to pop. The combined stack operation in Algorithm 2 can therefore
be split into two operations. We denote these actions as HoldOrPop, see Algorithm 3,
and HoldOrPush, see Algorithm 4. This split allows to save computations, since LSTM
calls are unnecessary for HoldOrPop operations. Notice that the two operations accept
o ∈Nnb as an argument since some items in a batch may need to neither pop nor push.
Notice also that HoldOrPush does not return the hidden state at the new top of the
stack. Instead, hp(S) will be retrieved when computing the representation function. The
reason for doing so will become evident in Section 3.3. HoldOrPop returns the hidden
state at the previous top of the stack, instead of the hidden state at the new top of
the stack. This change is needed, as pop operations for REDUCE actions require the
hidden state prior to the pointer update.
The input to HoldOrPush comes, as men-
Algorithm 3 Parallel RNNG operation to hold or pop from the stack.
1: procedure HoldOrPop(o)
2:
hprev ←hp(S)
3:
p(S) ←p(S) + o
4:
return hprev
5: end procedure
tioned above, from a combination of the inputs resulting from each action. Specifically,
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Parallel RNNG
31
Algorithm 4 Parallel RNNG operation to hold or push from the stack.
1: procedure HoldOrPush(x, o)
2:
h, c ←LSTM(x, hp(S), cp(S))
3:
hp(S)+1 ←h
4:
cp(S)+1 ←c
5:
p(S) ←p(S) + o
6: end procedure
the inputs, x ∈Rnb×nx and o ∈{0, 1}nb, where nx is the stack input size, are initialised
with zeros. Let A(i) be the set of actions in the ith iteration over a batch of action se-
quences, and let ∅denote a special action with no effect. oj is subsequently set to 1 for
all j where A(i)
j
̸= ∅. xj is correspondingly set to non-terminal embeddings where A(i)
j
matches non-terminal actions, and set to word embeddings where A(i)
j
matches SHIFT
actions. xj is likewise set to the output of the composition function, for all j where
A(i)
j
matches REDUCE actions. However, REDUCE actions need additional care, since
each REDUCE action may pop a variable number of items from the stack, which we
will direct our attention to next.
The number of items popped from the stack, can be computed in advance by maintaining
separate representations of each tree in a batch. We represent a tree in a manner similar
to Algorithm 1, where a tree is represented by a root node, r, which has children nodes,
denoted by r.children. We also enhance each node with a parent attribute, r.parent,
which may be empty. A tree can be built by applying Algorithm 5 to each action in an
action sequence, where r is the current root of the tree, as returned by the previous call
to Algorithm 5. The number of items to pop from the stack will then correspond to the
Algorithm 5 Build step in construction of a tree representation from an action sequence.
1: procedure BuildTree(r, a)
2:
if a matches NT(x) then
3:
Let n be a new node with no children.
4:
n.parent = r
5:
Add n to the children of r.
6:
return n
7:
else if a matches SHIFT then
8:
Let n be a new node with no children.
9:
n.parent = r
10:
Add n to the children of r.
11:
return r
12:
else
▷a is a reduce action.
13:
return r.parent
14:
end if
15: end procedure
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Methods
number of children of r.parent, when encountering a REDUCE action. We can use this
information to find the maximum number of pop operations in an iteration. The argu-
ment to HoldOrPop will be zero for all entries where the number of children is lower than
the current number of HoldOrPop calls [for the iteration], otherwise the entries will be
one. The outputs from HoldOrPop will be concatenated and passed to the composition
function, along with the number of children of each item, which serves to ensure that
the composition function avoids using superfluous states from hold operations. An ad-
ditional HoldOrPop is made, with oj = 1 for all j where A(i)
j
matches REDUCE actions,
to pop the non-terminal representations from the stack, and the corresponding non-
terminal embeddings are also passed to the composition function. Finally, the output
of the composition function is added to xj, for all j where A(i)
j matches REDUCE actions.
Previously, we used Algorithm 5 to build a tree with the purpose of computing the
number of children of each non-terminal node. Maintaining a tree representation has
another benefit, since it enables computation of the minimum required stack size, ns.
This ensures that the stack will always be able to accommodate trees during training.
Notice that this is only possible when training, as the entire action sequence has to
be known in advance. The stack size will be set to a sufficiently high constant value
during inference. In order to find the minimum required stack size, we observe that the
stack grows by one for NT(x) actions and for SHIFT actions. REDUCE actions shrinks
the stack by the number of children of the reduced non-terminal node. Therefore, the
stack size is limited by the depth and number of children of a node. Let this number be
denoted as s(n) for a node, n, and let T denote all the trees in a batch. Equation 3.1
shows how to compute ns for a single batch during training.
ns = max
j
max
n∈Tj s(n)
(3.1)
We have now shown all the steps necessary to arrive at [Discriminative] Parallel RNNG.
The steps can be seen in Algorithm 6, where we exclude operations on the token buffer,
the representation function, and the computation of the probability distribution in Equa-
tion 2.28. These steps are omitted since they are identical to RNNG, with the only
change being that they are to be performed in a batched manner, which can be done
automatically by deep learning frameworks.
3.2.3
Generative Parallel RNNG
Section 3.2.2 showed how to process a batch for the discriminative variant of Parallel
RNNG. The generative variant works in a very similar way. It differs, as previously
mentioned, in how it handles word embeddings and the token buffer. The changes are
equivalent to the corresponding changes discussed in Section 2.5.2.4. These changes do
not require special care to enable parallelisation, since efficient batching can be performed
automatically for these tasks, by using deep learning frameworks. However, there is
still one change which requires special care: Generative RNNG uses a class-factored
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Parallel RNNG
33
Algorithm 6 Steps in processing a batch of sequences, A, using Parallel RNNG.
1: procedure ParallelRNNG(A)
2:
Use BuildTree to build a tree, Tj, for each action sequence in A.
3:
ns ←maxj maxn∈Tj s(n)
▷Replaced with a constant value during inference.
4:
Initialise Parallelisable StackLSTM of size ns × nb × nh.
5:
na ←maxj|Aj|
6:
for i from 1 to na do
7:
Initialise x ∈Rnb×nx with zeros.
8:
Initialise o ∈{0, 1}nb with zeros.
9:
Set oj = 1 for all j where A(i)
j
̸= ∅.
10:
Insert non-terminal embeddings to xj where A(i)
j
matches NT(x).
11:
Insert word embeddings to xj where A(i)
j
matches SHIFT.
12:
Use Tj to find number of children to pop, mj, where A(i)
j
matches REDUCE.
13:
ℓ←maxj mj
14:
Let h be a list of length ℓ.
15:
k ←1
16:
while k ≤ℓdo
17:
Set o(pop)
j
to 1 where k ≤mj and 0 otherwise.
18:
hk ←HoldOrPop(o(pop))
19:
k ←k + 1
20:
end while
21:
Set o(NT)
j
to 1 where A(i)
j
matches REDUCE.
22:
HoldOrPop(o(NT))
▷pop non-terminal nodes
23:
Let ENT be the non-terminal embeddings of the popped non-terminal nodes.
24:
c ←compose(h, m, ENT)
25:
Insert cj to xj where A(i)
j
matches REDUCE.
26:
HoldOrPush(x, o)
27:
end for
28: end procedure
softmax to predict GEN(x) actions. This choice was motivated by a need to reduce
the number of computations in a Generative RNNG. However, class-factored softmax
operations are difficult to batch efficiently, because words in a batch may belong to
different classes. This means that the gain from the saved computations will be lost
in a parallel setting. The generative variant of Parallel RNNG will thus compute the
action probability distribution using a single softmax, as shown in Equation 2.28, but
over the set of valid generative actions, AG, instead of the set of valid discriminative
actions, AD.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Methods
3.3
Attentive Representation Function
Long-range dependencies may result in a potential bottleneck in the representation func-
tion, which is designed to only work on the output at the back/top of the three data
structures (stack, token buffer, and action history). In this section, we suggest to use
an attention mechanism to mitigate this potential bottleneck. We also propose the at-
tention mechanism with the aim of improving the interpretability of RNNG. This will
be discussed in Chapter 4, where we will also assess the extent to which the attentive
representation function adds interpretability to RNNG.
Attention is a common technique in natural language processing. It provides a way
to gain random access to the output at different timesteps, rather than only relying
on the output at the last timestep. A variety of attention mechanisms exist[43], [44],
and we choose to apply scaled dot-product attention as described by Vaswani et al.[3].
Scaled dot-product attention uses a query, q, and keys, K, to compute a probability
distribution over the outputs of a set of values, V . Equation 3.2 shows how to compute
the probits of the probability distribution, where dk is the size of the last dimension of
the keys.
si = q · KT
i
√dk
ai = [softmax (s)]i
(3.2)
The probits are used to compute the expectation of the values, as shown in Equation
3.3.
attention(q, K, V ) =
X
i
ai · Vi
(3.3)
Furthermore, we transform q, K, and V through separate affine transformations to en-
hance the representative power of the query, keys, and values.
The next task is to define how to apply scaled dot-product attention, in the context
of the representation function. For the stack and action history, this can be addressed
by letting them attend to themselves as shown in Equation 3.4 and in Equation 3.5.
eS
t = attention(St, S, S)
(3.4)
eH
t = attention(Ht, H, H)
(3.5)
Notice how the top/back of the stack and action history are used as the query, which
serves the purpose of instructing which elements to attend to.
This choice of self-
attention makes sense for the stack and action history, since they are updated at ev-
ery timestep. The query and keys will thus result in [potentially] new expectations at
every timestep. The buffer, however, is only updated for SHIFT and GEN(x) actions.
This makes Bt a poor choice as the query when attending to the buffer, as this would
result in a significant overlap between expectations from the attention over the buffer.
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Regularisation
35
The buffer should benefit from a query, that represents the partial tree at the current
timestep. Fortunately, such a representation is available at the top of the stack, St. The
attention over the buffer, can be seen in Equation 3.6.
eB
t = attention(St, B, B)
(3.6)
The representation can now be obtained by replacing Bt, St, and Ht with eB
t , eS
t , and
eH
t , respectively, in Equation 2.27. The result of this can be seen in Equation 3.7.
rt = ReLU

Wr ·
h
eB
t ; eS
t ; eH
t
i
(3.7)
We recall from Section 3.2 that HoldOrPush, see Algorithm 4, does not return the up-
dated top of the stack. We see the reason for this now, since this representation function
depends on the entire stack rather than only on the top of the stack, when computing
this representation function. The stack contents are thus retrieved when needed, instead
of when HoldOrPush is called.
This representation function is designed to address the potential bottleneck stemming
from long-ranging dependencies, and to improve the interpretability of RNNG. It is
worth noting, that it may also have an added benefit of mitigating vanishing gradients,
since the random access has the potential to reduce the number of computations between
dependencies.
3.4
Regularisation
RNNG is a very flexible model, which makes overfitting a pressing problem. The in-
creased power from efficient batching with Parallel RNNG may make overfitting even
greater. This is due to larger batch sizes leading to improved gradient estimates, which
in turn makes it more likely to overfit to the trainingset. In this section, we will describe
regularisation techniques that have been shown to work well for RNN. These techniques
will be applied to RNNG, and the result of this can be seen in Chapter 4.
3.4.1
Layer Normalisation
Layer normalisation[45] is motivated by a need to adapt batch normalisation[46] to RNN,
where batch sizes tend to be significantly smaller than in feedforward neural networks.
Normalisation works by subtracting the mean of an input and dividing by its standard
deviation, followed by a learnable affine transformation. In batch normalisation, the
mean and standard deviation is computed over items in a batch. This works well when
the batch size is sufficiently large to yield stable estimates of the mean and standard de-
viation. The tendency towards low batch sizes in RNN, makes these estimates unstable.
Layer normalisation remedies this by computing the mean and standard deviation over
the outputs of a layer, for every item in a batch. This makes the mean and standard
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Methods
deviation independent of the batch size, as well as other items in the batch.
Equations 2.14 to 2.17 need to be slightly altered to show how to apply layer normalisa-
tion to a LSTM. The input to the sigmoid functions and the hyperbolic tangent function,
in these equations, are sums of weighted inputs and weighted hidden states. With layer
normalisation, these inputs will be computed using an equivalent larger matrix multi-
plication where Wx = [Wxi ; Wxf ; Wxo ; Wxu] and Wh = [Whi ; Whf ; Who ; Whu]. Layer
normalisation is applied to the output of the sum of the two matrix multiplications, as
shown in Equation 3.8.
at = Wx · xt + Wh · ht−1
[ai
t ; af
t ; ao
t ; au
t ] = LayerNorm(at)
(3.8)
Equation 3.8 also shows that the output of the layer normalisation is split into four
parts. These four parts serve as input to the LSTM gates, which brings us to the altered
versions of Equations 2.14 to 2.17, as can be seen in Equations 3.9 to 3.12.
it = σ

ai
t

(3.9)
ft = σ

af
t

(3.10)
ot = σ (ao
t)
(3.11)
ut = tanh (au
t )
(3.12)
Layer normalisation is applied to all LSTM in a RNNG. Specifically, this means that
layer normalisation is applied in every layer and timestep of the stack, token buffer,
action history, and composition function.
Finally, layer normalisation is also applied with the aim of mitigating vanishing gradients.
Intuitively, layer normalisation can have this effect because it moves activation function
inputs to a scale, where gradients are expected to not vanish or explode. Naturally, this
also depends on other network architecture choices, such as activation function. The
effect of layer normalisation in mitigating vanishing gradients in RNNG, will be assessed
empirically in Chapter 4.
3.4.2
Variational Dropout
Gal and Ghahramami[47] grounds dropout and RNN in a bayesian framework, which
leads to variational dropout. We will not derive the theoretical foundation, but suffice
with showing how to use variational dropout. Variational dropout applies dropout masks
to inputs [and hidden states of an RNN]. In the context of LSTM, this is done by
multiplying masks to the inputs in Equation 3.8. The application is shown in Equation
3.13 where zx is an input mask and zh is a hidden state mask.
at = Wx · (xt · zx) + Wh · (ht−1 · zh)
(3.13)
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Regularisation
37
An important feature of variational dropout is that the masks remain unchanged through-
out all timesteps in a sequence. We experiment with variational dropout in all LSTM of
a RNNG, as well as by using it as a replacement of a standard dropout in non-recurrent
connections.
3.4.3
Embedding Dropout
Gal and Gharamami extends the idea of variational dropout to embeddings. Their ex-
tension operates at the word level, meaning that embedding dropout masks out word
types. This corresponds to applying a mask to the input of an embedding, if we consider
embedding inputs as one-hot encoded vectors. Embedding dropout can also be under-
stood as masking out rows of an embedding matrix, instead of masking out each element
of the embedding matrix. Intuitively, this should prevent the model from depending too
much on specific input types. We maintain separate embedding dropouts for each of
the six types of embeddings in RNNG: Action, token, part-of-speech tag, non-terminal,
composition non-terminal, and pretrained word vectors.
3.4.4
Weight Drop
Weight drop was introduced by Merity et al.[48] as a technique for regularising RNN-
based word level language models.
It works by applying DropConnect[49] to Wh in
Equation 3.8. The effect of this can be seen in Equation 3.14, where M is a dropout
mask.
at = Wx · xt + (M · Wh) · ht−1
(3.14)
We see that weight drop regularises a RNN through a generalised dropout on the hidden-
to-hidden weights, whereas other dropout techniques typically operate on the outputs
and hidden states of a RNN. We note that we do not mix variational dropout and weight
drop in the hidden state multiplication of Equation 3.14. This means that variational
dropout is not applied to ht−1, when also utilising weight drop. See Equation 3.15.
at = Wx · (xt · zx) + (M · Wh) · ht−1
(3.15)
The choice of not mixing variational dropout and weight drop in the hidden state mul-
tiplication, is motivated from following the recommendations of Merity et al.
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Experiments & Results
Chapter 3 proposed several methods to [potentially] improve RNNG. We will now turn
our attention towards evaluating the relevance of these methods. The evaluation starts in
Section 4.1 with a description of the datasets that the methods will be evaluated against.
Likewise, Section 4.2 describes the training process. Section 4.3 establishes two baselines,
and the primary results will be presented in Section 4.4. The performance of Parallel
RNNG is assessed in Section 4.5 The final two sections concerns properties of the meth-
ods, where Section 4.6 investigates the interpretability of the attentive representation
function, and Section 4.7 seeks to understand the effect of the methods in mitigating van-
ishing gradients. The implementation of this work is based on PyTorch[29] and is avail-
able at https://github.com/ChrisFugl/Recurrent-Neural-Network-Grammars.
4.1
Datasets
All experiments will be done on the two datasets described in this section. We note that
we seek to use the same datasets and preprocessing as done by Dyer et al.[10], in order
to compare our methods against the original version of RNNG. The datasets are the
Wall Street Journal (WSJ) section of the Penn English Treebank dataset[11], and the
Chinese Treebank (CTB)[12]. Specifically, we use version 3 of WSJ and version 5.1 of
CTB. The datasets consist of sentences with corresponding parse trees for English and
Chinese, respectively. The source of the sentences comes from news articles, while the
parse trees have been manually annotated by professional linguists. Figure 4.1 shows an
example of a parse tree in WSJ.
WSJ corresponds to §2 - §24 of the Penn English Treebank. We follow the standard split,
which uses §2 - §21 as the trainingset, §23 as the testset, and §24 as the validationset.
CTB is further divided, with §001 - §270 and §440 - §1151 being used for training, §271
- §300 for testing, and §301 - §325 for validation. Following Dyer et al, singleton tokens
(tokens that only occur once), will be treated as unknown. Unknown tokens in WSJ are
also divided into subcategories by using the Berkeley parser mapping rules1, whilst only
a single category is used for unknown tokens in CTB.
The treebanks have null elements. Null elements are used for a variety of reasons that
are out of the scope of this project, to give a complete description of. We will suffice
1https://github.com/slavpetrov/berkeleyparser
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Experiments & Results
Figure 4.1: Parse tree of the following sentence: For the moment, investors seem more
preoccupied with the “bad” junk than the “good” junk. (The integers next
to each node are used as node identifiers in visualising the parse tree, and
are as such not a part of the dataset.)
with an example, and by stating that null elements do not occur as words in sentences.
An example of the use of a null element, is as an implicit subject. Consider the sentence:
“Am on my way.” The sentence is a grammatically valid sentence, despite the fact that
it does not state the implicit subject: “I”. The treebanks follow a strategy where null
elements are inserted in place of implicit subjects. Dyer et al. does not mention any
preprocessing of null elements, however we found that the removal of null elements is
necessary to match the corpus statistics reported by Dyer et al., see Table 4.2. We
remove null elements by removing all part-of-speech tags labelled with “-NONE-” and
recursively remove all non-terminal nodes that have become leaf nodes, because of this
removal.
Additionally, Dyer et al.
does not mention any preprocessing of floating participles,
which are non-terminal modifiers. For example, a noun phrase (NP) may be enhanced
as NP-SBJ to indicate that the noun phrase is the subject of the sentence. Likewise,
the “-PRD” floating particle is used to mark a non-terminal as a predicate. We found
that the removal of floating participles was necessary to match the sample inputs in the
implementation by Dyer et al.2
We present statistics about the datasets in Table 4.1. From this we can see that the
datasets are relatively small when compared to what is commonly used in natural lan-
guage processing. Furthermore, from these statistics, we can confirm that sentences and
2https://github.com/clab/rnng/blob/master/sample_input_english.txt
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Datasets
41
Wall Street Journal
Chinese Treebank
Train
Val.
Test
Train
Val.
Test
Sequences
39,832
1,346
2,416
50,734
354
348
Tokens
950,028
32,897
56,684
1,184,532
6,898
8,008
Unique tokens
23,833
5,216
6,837
31,325
1,395
1,637
Unknown types
66
49
56
1
1
1
Unique non-terminals
26
24
25
28
21
19
Mean sentence length
23.85
24.44
23.46
23,35
19,49
23,01
Mean sequence length
61.02
62.64
60.04
76,62
60,83
72,02
Table 4.1: Statistics about datasets: WSJ and CTB.
action sequences are fairly long, as was noted in Section 3.1. We also show the dataset
statistics reported by Dyer et al., see Table 4.2. There are some discrepancies between
our statistics and the statistics reported by Dyer et al. Firstly, there is a difference of
one, in the number of sequences in the WSJ trainingset. This can be explained by the file
format of Dyer et al, which does not allow lines to start with “#”, and so makes them re-
move one sentence from the trainingset. There is also a discrepancy between the number
of unique tokens as well as the number of unknown types in WSJ. The discrepancy in the
number of unique tokens can be explained by the difference in the number of sequences,
and in the number of unknown types. However, the discrepancy between the number of
unknown types remains unexplained. We note that we use the same mapping rules as
Dyer et al., and, in fact, we use the same code as Dyer et al. to create unknown types3.
Thus it remains unexplained why Dyer et al. report a smaller number of unknown types.
A final note on the datasets and the preprocessing: The uncertainties and differences
between our statistics and preprocessing, from those of Dyer et al., necessitated a test
to ensure that the differences would not cause conflicting results. We tested this by
training a Discriminative RNNG on WSJ, using our dataset/preprocessing, but with
3https://github.com/clab/rnng/blob/master/get_oracle.py#L5
Wall Street Journal
Chinese Treebank
Train
Test
Train
Test
Sequences
39,831
2,416
50,734
348
Tokens
950,012
56,684
1,184,532
8,008
Unique tokens
23,815
6,823
31,358
1,637
Unknown types
49
42
1
1
Table 4.2: Statistics about datasets as reported by Dyer et al.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Experiments & Results
the implementation4 and hyperparameters of Dyer et al. This resulted in a F15 score of
91.81 on the WSJ testset, whereas Dyer et al. reported 91.7. We conclude that our pre-
processing does not appear to cause results to deteriorate and might even be beneficial,
however we have not conducted enough experiments to conclude the latter.
4.2
Training
This section describes the training process of the models in the experiments. See Ap-
pendix A for hyperparameters.
All models are trained to minimise the negative log likelihood loss, see Equation 2.4, and
the training is manually stopped when convergence is observed in the learning curves on
the validationset. We only keep the parameters that achieve the best validation score.
The best score is to be understood as the greatest F1 for discriminative models, and
the lowest negative log likelihood for generative models. Hyperparameters are likewise
chosen, as to optimise the validation scores. All model parameters are initialised by
following recommendations from Glorot and Bengio.[50].
The optimisation procedure differs slightly from the version of SGD described in Sec-
tion 2.1. The difference is, that the learning rate is allowed to vary at each timestep.
This changes the optimisation step, see Equation 2.6, into the form that can be seen in
Equation 4.1, where the learning rate depends on the timestep.
θt+1 = θt −λt · ∇nll(Mθt, Dt)
(4.1)
It may be beneficial to vary the learning rate, as this enables the flexibility to set an initial
high learning rate for fast learning, and to gradually decrease it for stable convergence.
We adopt the learning rate schedule of Dyer et al., which can be seen in Equation 4.2,
where et is the number of epochs and d > 0 and λ0 are hyperparameters.
λt =
λ0
1 + d · et
(4.2)
This schedule gradually decreases the learning rate, whilst [mostly] keeping the learning
rate within the same order of magnitude as the initial learning rate, λ0. We note that
this schedule is not mentioned in Dyer et al., but can be found in the implementation
of their work.
Section 2.5.2.1 discussed how Discriminative RNNG makes use of pretrained word em-
beddings. Our models, trained on WSJ, use wang2vec[49] word embeddings6. However,
4https://github.com/clab/rnng
5F1 will be defined in the context of trees in Section 4.4.
6Provided at the courtesy of Adhiguna Kuncoro.
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Baselines
43
our models trained on CTB uses Chinese word2vec[36]7 word embeddings, since the
original Chinese wang2vec embeddings were unable to be found, and time constraints
restricted the training of Chinese wang2vec word embeddings.
4.3
Baselines
This work is, as previously mentioned, motivated by the hypothesis that a linguistically
informed inductive bias is relevant in natural language processing models. This makes
it relevant to compare RNNG to models that do not rely on a linguistically informed
inductive bias. These models will serve as baselines, and we will briefly present two
models: Section 4.3.1 describes a discriminative model, and Section 4.3.2 describes a
generative model.
4.3.1
LSTM Parser
The discriminative baseline is based on Vinyals et al.[51], who apply methods from
neural machine translation to [discriminative] parsing. Their architecture is based on the
sequence-to-sequence architecture of Sutskever et al.[52], with the attention mechanism
of Bahdanau et al.[44]. The model can be understood as follows: A sentence is given
as input to an encoder, which is a LSTM with 3 layers. The encoder passes its outputs
to a decoder, which is also a LSTM with 3 layers, and the decoder state is initialised
from the encoder state at the last timestep. The decoder accepts two inputs at each
timestep: An embedding of the previous action and the result of an attention mechanism
over the encoder outputs. We choose to use the scaled dot-product attention described
in Section 3.3, where the decoder state is the query, and the encoder outputs serve as
keys and values. Similar to Vinyals et al., we also reverse the input sentence before
passing it to the encoder. However, our model differs in some significant aspects: The
word embeddings include part-of-speech tags, as described in Section 2.5.2.1, and we
experiment with the regularisation techniques described in Section 3.4.
We also do
not include an end-of-sequence symbol, as we stop predicting actions once all tokens
have been shifted, and all non-terminals have been closed by a corresponding REDUCE
action. The final difference is that Vinyals et al. make use of a transitionset, where
each REDUCE action is augmented with an argument that specifies which non-terminal
type should be closed. We do not include this argument in order to let the baseline be
comparable to RNNG.
4.3.2
LSTM Language Model
The generative model uses the architecture of Choe and Charniak[53], who formulate
generative parsing as a language modelling problem.
The architecture consists of a
7http://vectors.nlpl.eu/repository/20/35.zip
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Experiments & Results
LSTM with 3 layers, followed by an affine transformation and a softmax. The authors
also apply gradient clipping and truncated backpropagation through time to the training
process. We do not apply the latter techniques, but instead apply the regularisation
techniques from Section 3.4. The transitionset used by Choe and Charniak, corresponds
to that of Vinyals et al. Our model uses the transitionset described in Section 2.5.1
for the same reason that the discriminative baseline uses that transitionset. Finally,
the generative baseline adopts the learning rate schedule of Choe and Charniak, see
Equation 4.3.
λt = λ0 · bmax(et−e0,0)
(4.3)
b < 1, λ0 and e0 > 0 are hyperparameters, and et is the number of epochs. This learning
rate schedule exponentially decreases the initial learning rate, λ0, but not until at least
e0 epochs have passed.
4.4
Evaluation
The parsing and language modelling results will be presented below. These results will be
compared to the baselines and to state-of-the-art models. Parsing results are measured
in F1 on parse trees, where 0 is the minimum score and 100 is the maximum score.
The standard configuration for computing F1 on parse trees is by using the algorithm
described by Black et al.[54], with the parameters of Collins[55]. This is implemented in
the evalb program8, which we use to evaluate F1 between gold trees and predicted trees.
Language modelling results are measured in word-level perplexity. Word-level perplexity
is computed as shown in Equation 4.4, where x is a sentence and |x| is the number of
words in a sentence. p(x) is computed as shown in Equation 2.37.
perplexity = exp
 
−
P
x log p(x)
P
x|x|
!
(4.4)
Perplexity is defined such that lower scores are better. All scores are reported on the
testsets.
Table 4.3 shows the parsing and language modelling results of our models, along with
the results of Dyer et al. Importantly, we see that [our implementation of] RNNG and
Parallel RNNG achieve similar scores in both parsing and language modelling. In fact,
Parallel RNNG performs noticeably better on CTB. This verifies that Parallel RNNG is
comparable to RNNG. The subsequent experiments (attention and regularisation) have
been done only for Parallel RNNG, due to the parallelisation enabling more rapid ex-
periments. Unfortunately, we also see that both RNNG and Parallel RNNG do not
manage to replicate the results of Dyer et al., where the discriminative parsers on the
WSJ dataset, are about 2.5 F1 below those of Dyer et al., and the generative parsers are
about 1 F1 below. The discrepancy is magnified on the CTB dataset, where the discrim-
inative parsers are about 5 - 6.5 F1 below, and the generative parsers are about 5 - 6
8https://nlp.cs.nyu.edu/evalb/
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Evaluation
45
F1 below those of Dyer et al. Similar observations can be made for language modelling.
These discrepancies will be discussed in Chapter 5.
Table 4.3 also shows that the proposed attention method does not improve the per-
formance of RNNG, with the exception of generative parsing on WSJ. The proposed
attention method appears to be especially detrimental to language modelling. However,
it does obtain parsing scores close to those without attention. The observed results are
unexpected, as we expected the attentive representation function to improve results. We
will discuss possible reasons for this in Chapter 5.
Additionally, we see that the regularisation methods improve the results in both parsing
and language modelling. Discriminative parsing on CTB is the only case where regulari-
sation does not bring an improvement. Regularisation of Discriminative Parallel RNNG
on WSJ improves parsing by almost 1 F1, and the generative parsing by 0.14 F1 and
0.45 F1 on WSJ and CTB, respectively. Regularisation brings a significant reduction to
the WSJ language modelling task, by a reduction of 8 in perplexity. The effect is less
noticeable for CTB, with a small perplexity reduction of 0.1.
Kuncoro et al.[41] shows that a Generative RNNG, without a token buffer and an action
history, can outperform a standard Generative RNNG by 0.3 F1 on WSJ. We replicated
their findings by training stack-only Parallel RNNG with regularisation. These models
are evaluated against the samples from the discriminative regularised Parallel RNNG
parsers. We see that this improves F1 by 0.23 on the WSJ dataset. The difference,
between the finding of Kuncoro et al. and our result, is only 0.07 F1. Therefore, we
confirm the finding that a stack-only [Parallel] RNNG is beneficial on WSJ. However,
we also observe that the stack-only approach reduces F1 by 0.24 on CTB. This suggests
that the stack-only approach may only be beneficial for some languages and datasets.
We note that Kuncoro et al. only reports stack-only results on WSJ.
We see that the discriminative baseline, LSTM Parser, performs significantly worse
than RNNG and Parallel RNNG. This shows how a linguistically informed inductive
bias can be useful. We see, as well, how the generative baseline, LSTM Language Model,
is comparable to our RNNG and Parallel RNNG models, in terms of parsing scores. The
generative baseline slightly outperforms the Parallel RNNG for both datasets. The regu-
larised Parallel RNNG still outperforms the generative baseline for both datasets. This,
again, confirms the usefulness of a linguistically informed inductive bias, although the
confirmation is noticeably weaker than in the discriminative setting. It is worth mention-
ing, that the generative baseline requires 126 million parameters for the WSJ dataset
and 148 million parameters for the CTB dataset. These numbers are 22 million and 28
million parameters, respectively, for Generative Parallel RNNG. Finally, we see that the
generative baseline obtains the best language modelling scores for both datasets. This
is not too surprising, as the generative baseline is based on a regularised language model.
Figure 4.2 yields insight into how the discriminative baseline compares to Parallel RNNG.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Experiments & Results
WSJ
CTB
Model
Type
F1
Ppl.
F1
Ppl.
LSTM Parser
D
52.60
-
38.54
-
LSTM Language Model
G
92.13
100.2
82.04
143.3
RNNG (Dyer et al.)
D
91.70
-
84.60
-
RNNG (ours)
D
89.55
-
78.03
-
Parallel RNNG
D
89.28
-
79.25
-
Parallel RNNG + attention
D
89.19
-
78.25
-
Parallel RNNG + regularisation
D
90.00
-
78.82
-
RNNG (Dyer et al.)
G
93.30
105.2
86.90
148.5
RNNG (ours)
G
92.06
114.3
81.36
167.6
Parallel RNNG
G
92.12
115.8
82.02
164.2
Parallel RNNG + attention
G
92.20
122.7
79.69
188.2
Parallel RNNG + regularisation
G
92.28
107.8
82.47
164.1
Parallel RNNG stack-only + regularisation
G
92.51
106.3
82.23
164.7
Table 4.3: Parsing and language modelling results of our models, along with the results
reported by Dyer et al. The stack-only results are based on samples from
the discriminative regularised Parallel RNNG, whilst the generative baseline
results are based on samples from Parallel RNNG.
(a) WSJ
(b) CTB
Figure 4.2: F1 score of Discriminative Parallel RNNG and LSTM Parser on WSJ and
CTB as sentence length varies.
==PAGE:57==
4.5 Performance of Parallel RNNG
47
We see, that the two models are comparable for short sentences of less than 10 words,
regardless of dataset. However, the performance of the discriminative baseline decreases
greatly as sentence length increases. The performance difference is even significant at
the mean sentence length of around 20-25 (see Table 4.1). The performance of Dis-
criminative Parallel RNNG also tends to decrease as sentence length increases, but this
decrease happens at a lower rate than for the discriminative baseline. This suggests,
that the inductive bias of RNNG allows it to model long sentences.
Table 4.4 shows some state-of-the-art parsing results on WSJ. We see from this, that
RNNG are still competitive to several state-of-the-art models, and some state-of-the-art
models are in fact variations or extensions of RNNG. Interestingly, the discriminative
In-order RNNG[56] obtains a F1 of 91.8 on WSJ, which is equivalent to what we obtain
on WSJ with our preprocessing and the implementation of Dyer et al. This suggests,
that the In-order RNNG improvements might not come from model changes. We will
leave this hypothesis for further work, and note that this suggestion may also imply,
that RNNG + BERT embeddings could potentially achieve similar scores to In-order
RNNG + BERT. The models in Table 4.4 will be put in relation to our work in Chapter
6.
4.5
Performance of Parallel RNNG
Section 4.4 showed that RNNG and Parallel RNNG obtain comparable results. This
section is concerned with the performance of these models with regard to processing
speed. These experiments were done, by measuring the time it takes for the models to
compute the log likelihood of each parse tree in the WSJ trainingset, for varying batch
sizes. The computations were done using a single GeForce RTX 2080 Ti 10GB GPU.
The results can be seen in Figure 4.3.
RNNG remains [almost] constant at around
WSJ
CTB
Model
Type
F1
F1
In-order RNNG[56]
D
91.8
86.1
Self-attentive encoder[57]
D
93.55
-
Self-attentive encoder + ELMo[57]
D
95.13
-
Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar + XLNet[58]
D
96.33
-
Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar + RoBERTa[58]
D
-
92.55
In-order RNNG[56]
G
93.6
88.0
In-order RNNG + BERT[40]
G
95.71
91.81
LSTM Language Model + RNNG[59]
C
93.45
-
Table 4.4: State-of-the-art parsing results on WSJ and CTB. Type C refers to a com-
bination of discriminative and generative models.
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Experiments & Results
(a) Discriminative.
(b) Generative.
Figure 4.3: Sequences processed per second of RNNG and Parallel RNNG on the WSJ
dataset. Dots are used for the mean of the sentences per second, and the
shaded areas denote the standard deviations. The x-axis is visualised on
a log scale to spread out batch sizes evenly.
20 sequences per second for all batch sizes. This is because RNNG does not have any
means of parallelisation. Parallel RNNG is able to utilise the parallelisation capabilities
of the GPU. This is evident in Figure 4.3, which shows the processing speed growing up
to a mean around 200 to 300 seqeunces per second for large batch sizes. We see from
this, that Parallel RNNG can process sequences 10 to 15 times faster than RNNG for
large batch sizes! Figure 4.3() also shows that Discriminative Parallel RNNG converges
at around 200 sequences per second. The convergence can be explained by the need to
maintain of separate trees, which is not done in a parallel manner. We note that Figure
4.3 has fewer measurements for the generative models than for the discriminative mod-
els. This lack is caused by the generative models exceeding the GPU’s memory capacity.
The GPU memory consumption can be seen in Figure 4.4.
(a) Discriminative.
(b) Generative.
Figure 4.4: Max GPU memory used (GB) by RNNG and Parallel RNNG.
==PAGE:59==
4.6 Interpretability
49
4.6
Interpretability
The proposed attentive representation function does [mostly] not improve results, but it
does potentially add a layer of interpretability to RNNG. In this section, we will assess
the level of interpretability that the proposed attention mechanism adds to RNNG. The
assessment will be based in the following sentence and its corresponding parse tree: “Mr.
Percival declined to comment.” We note that the findings from this example generalise
to other sentences in the dataset. The interpretability comes from the usual way of
interpreting models with attention: The probits in Equation 3.2 will be visualised to
show which parts of an input sequence the model is attending to.
We see the first example of attention in Figure 4.5, where the probits of the token buffer
are visualised. The figure shows an interesting finding: The attention mechanism has
learned to attend to what it expects will be the immediate terminal tokens, as children
of a non-terminal node. This can be seen for the first NT(NP) action, where the model
attends to “Mr.” and “Percival”. The same holds true for the three NT(VP) actions,
where the model attends to the verbs “declined”, “to”, and “comment”, respectively.
We also observe a tendency of attending to the token at the back of the buffer.
Figure 4.6 shows the attention for the stack.
We make two observations from this
figure: The first observation is that predictions of REDUCE actions tend to attend to
the constituents that will be merged by the composition function. The second observa-
Figure 4.5: Attention probits of the token buffer. Each column corresponds to the
probits when predicting the action at the bottom of the column. Darker
colours indicate greater attention/probability. <SOS> is used to indicate
the special start-of-sequence token.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Experiments & Results
Figure 4.6: Attention probits of the stack. The figure is visualised in a similar fashion
to Figure 4.5. However, the rows correspond to parts of the string repre-
sentation of the parse tree. The stack merges constituents into a single
constituent through the composition function. A merged constituent is
visualised by highlighting the string representations corresponding to the
constituents that it consists of.
tion is that several predictions of SHIFT attend to the open non-terminal nodes on the
stack. This can be seen for the SHIFT actions that shift the following tokens to the stack:
“Mr.”, “declined”, “to”, and “comment”. Interestingly, this seems to suggest that the
model learns to traverse the parents of the terminal node that will be added to the tree.
Finally, we consider the action history attention in Figure 4.7. We see that the model
attends evenly to all previous actions. A possible interpretation of this is, that the ac-
tion history is important when considered as a whole, but adds little value when looking
at its parts. However, the attention over the action history does not provide any inter-
pretability as to how RNNG makes its predictions.
In this section, we have seen that attention [in the token buffer and the stack] adds
a significant layer of interpretability to RNNG, which yields some interesting findings
about how it makes its predictions. It is unfortunate, however, that the proposed atten-
tive representation function does [mostly] not improve the results.
==PAGE:61==
4.7 Gradient Flow
51
Figure 4.7: Attention probits of the action history. The figure is visualised in a similar
fashion to Figure 4.5, with the exception that each row corresponds to
actions in the history.
4.7
Gradient Flow
Recall that Figure 3.1 showed that RNNG suffers from vanishing gradients. We proposed
to apply layer normalisation and attention to mitigate the problem of vanishing gradi-
ents. We will now assess the effectiveness of these techniques in mitigating vanishing
gradients. The effect of applying layer normalisation can be seen in Figure 4.8. When
compared to Figure 3.1, it becomes clear that layer normalisation significantly mitigates
vanishing gradients. This is especially the case for the token buffer, action history, and
stack, as the gradients of these are close to evenly distributed with euclidean norms
around 300 to 5009. The composition function also receives a larger portion of gradi-
ents than what was previously the case. However, layer normalisation does not manage
to improve the gradients of the embeddings, which are still too small to be visualised
along with the other gradients. A possible reason for this could be that layer normalisa-
tion is solely applied to the LSTM structures. Further use of layer normalisation could
potentially improve the gradients of the embeddings. We will leave this for future work.
The effect of applying layer normalisation and attention can be seen in Figure 4.9. We
note that Figure 4.9 is different from Figures 3.1 and 4.8, in the sense that the former is
measured during training, while the latter are measured before training has started. The
9These gradient norms change to a scale around 1 to 2 after a few optimisation steps. However, the
distribution remains largely the same throughout training.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Experiments & Results
Figure 4.8: Euclidean norm of gradients of RNNG with layer normalisation.
effect of attention has to be measured during training, due to the attention mechanism
needing to be trained before its effect on the gradients can be properly measured. This
discrepancy means that the three figures are not directly comparable.
The gradients in Figures 4.8 and 4.9 appear to be similarly distributed. The main dif-
ferences being that the scale of the gradient norms become smaller, the action history
obtains smaller gradient norms, and the composition function obtains larger gradient
norms. However, these difference do not necessarily stem from applying attention, as
they could also be a consequence of measuring gradients during training, instead of be-
fore training has started. We assess that attention does not significantly change the
distribution of the gradients.
==PAGE:63==
4.7 Gradient Flow
53
Figure 4.9: Euclidean norm of gradients of RNNG with layer normalisation and atten-
tion.
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
We have proposed methods to improve RNNG and have shown their validity, or invalidity,
empirically. Next, we will dedicate our attention towards discussing these methods and
the results. The discussion starts in Section 5.1 with a discussion of the limitations of
this work. Section 5.2 continues the discussion by considering the future directions.
5.1
Limitations
A primary limitation of this work is how it fails to replicate the results of Dyer et al.
This was made clear in Table 4.3, where we saw that our implementation of RNNG
obtains worse scores, than the scores reported by Dyer et al. Initially, we hypothesised
that this was caused by the potential discrepancies in the preprocessing of the datasets.
However, as was showed in Section 4.1, our preprocessing of WSJ obtains a higher F1
score when using the implementation of Dyer et al. This hypothesis was, therefore, re-
jected. This means that the cause of the discrepancies is that our implementation [to
a certain extent] differs from that of Dyer et al. Nevertheless, the relative changes in
results indicate that the model implementations are [sufficiently] similar. For example,
the F1 test score improves by 0.23 on WSJ, when the generative model is restricted to
only use the stack. This relative change is equivalent to that observed by Kuncoro et
al. Likewise, we observe a difference around 2 to 3 F1 between our discriminative and
generative models. This is also equivalent to the difference in F1, between discriminative
and generative RNNG, reported by Dyer et al. This suggests that the implementation
differences should occur outside of the model implementation, as the model results follow
similar relative changes as reported in related works. The differences would, in that case,
most likely lie in the implementation of elements such as the loss function, optimisation
procedure, or data transformations.
Finally, parts of the discrepancy in the results for CTB, are likely to be explained from
the use of different pretrained word embededdings. Recall that Dyer et al. uses wang2vec
word embeddings, while we use word2vec for CTB. Notice also that this is not an issue
for WSJ, where we use the same pretrained word embeddings as Dyer et al.
Experiments showed that the proposed attentive representation function is, in most
cases, not able to improve the results of RNNG. This finding did not match our ex-
pectations, which was that attention would be beneficial in addressing the [potential]
bottleneck in the representation function.
Therefore, it is worth discussing why the
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Discussion
proposed attentive representation function failed to improve results. Our initial hypoth-
esis was that attention provided too much flexibility, leading to increased overfitting.
However, we rejected this hypothesis on the basis of a comparison of the training loss
of Parallel RNNG with and without attention. The comparison made it clear that the
Parallel RNNG without attention, obtained better (lower) training losses than the Par-
allel RNNG with attention. An explanation might also be that attention increases the
model’s sensitivity to hyperparameters, and thus we have simply not found well-suited
hyperparameters for the model with attention. This explanation cannot be eliminated
due to the infinitely large hyperparameter space, but we consider that unlikely to be the
case, as several different hyperparameter choices have been tested. Our final hypothesis
is that the RNNG structures and the attentive representation function compete in ad-
dressing similar tasks. In order to see why this could be the case, we will first consider
the buffer in a Discriminative [Parallel] RNNG: The buffer shrinks at each SHIFT action.
This effect reduces the need to enable access to long-range dependencies in the buffer,
as the progressively moving end of the buffer is likely to contain information relevant
to predicting the next action. In a similar fashion, the top of the stack will contain the
most recent nodes of the tree, and the merging of the composition function may have an
effect of reducing the need for enabling access to long-range dependencies in the stack.
Thus we see that the [discriminative] buffer and the stack have inherent mechanisms
for encouraging dependency on recent tokens and nodes, respectively. Attention, on
the other hand, encourages the use of long-range dependencies. The result may be a
competition from which neither mechanism fully benefits. We leave the investigation of
this hypothesis for future work.
5.2
Future Work
The contributions and findings of this work, bring about several research directions.
However, the first of these directions should be to identify and address the cause of the
discrepancies in the results. It is our hope, that the discussion in Section 5.1 will be
useful in this regard.
Parallel RNNG enables new and exciting uses of RNNG. Foremost, the performance
increases make it possible to train RNNG faster and with more data, which mitigates
the issue that the power of RNNG were previously limited to train on [relatively] small
datasets. A limitation in this regard is that datasets with constituency trees are difficult
to make, because of the dependency on gold-trees from professional linguists. Other
works[18], [51], [53] have mitigated this limitation by predicting silver-trees on unanno-
tated corpora using existing parsers. This approach has been shown to be able to train a
model to a point, where it is able to surpass the predictive power of the silver-tree parser.
We note that this approach is well-suited for languages with strong existing parsers, such
as English and Chinese, but ill-suited in the absence of a strong parser. In addition to
this, we do not see any immediate obstacles in using the methodology behind Parallel
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Future Work
57
RNNG, to also bring parallelisation to Unsupervised RNNG[18]. Parallel Unsupervised
RNNG is an exciting direction, with the potential to efficiently learn language modelling
and parsing tasks from large text datasets. Furthermore, we hope that Parallel RNNG,
along with the Python implementation, will encourage more research with RNNG. In
particular, we consider investigating the use of RNNG in the context of low-resource
languages, where an inductive bias is expected to be particularly useful, especially inter-
esting.
We introduced existing regularisation techniques to RNNG, and showed that they in-
deed did improve the results. We do not expect that these techniques fundamentally
change the nature of RNNG. Nevertheless, this belief should be verified by reproducing
the results of previous RNNG studies, but with the inclusion of the regularisation tech-
niques. The previous studies were described in Section 1.1, and will be briefly mentioned
again: RNNG improve subject-verb agreement over LSTM[13], syntactic knowledge is
transferable from RNNG[16], [17], and RNNG signals correlate with electric signals from
the human brain on the word level[19].
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Related Works
This work is concerned with improving RNNG. Related works to this can be under-
stood in a context of works, seeking to analyse and improve [transition-based] parsers
and language models. Examples of such works have already been shown, see Section
1.1. These examples include Kim et al.[18] who developed Unsupervised RNNG, and
Kuncoro et al.[41] who discovered that Generative RNNG benefits from disregarding the
token buffer and action history. Kuncoro et al. also investigated the use of attention in
the composition function, with the purpose of interpreting RNNG. However, contrary
to our use of attention in the representation function, their use was not detrimental to
the results.
Lui & Zhang[56] conjectured that the preorder (top-down) approach of RNNG, benefits
by guiding decision making through non-local information, but has a disadvantage in its
dependency on a strong encoding of the input sentence. This overlaps with our analy-
sis that long-range dependencies [in the token buffer] constitutes a potential bottleneck.
However, the approach of Lui & Zhang differs significantly from our approach. This is
because their approach is to combine preorder and postorder (bottom-up) transitions
into an in-order transitionset, resulting in a discriminative F1 of 91.8, and generative F1
of 93.6 on WSJ. Our work is orthogonal to Lui & Zhang, and an interesting combination
could be to apply Parallel RNNG to in-order parsing. Another line of research comes
from Fried et al.[40] who applied contextual word embeddings, specifically BERT[4], in-
stead of pretrained word embeddings to the in-order RNNG of Lui & Zhang. They did
so as a part of an analysis that showed neural parsers with a structural bias to generalise
better than neural parsers, without such a bias. Contextual word embeddings improved
the score to 95.71 on WSJ, which is among state-of-the-art in constituency parsing. In
another work[59], Fried et al. improved inference through an investigation looking at the
effect of combining discriminative and generative samples, and reranking the candidates
using weighted log probabilities of both discriminative and generative RNNG.
Parallel RNNG builds upon Parallelisable StackLSTM[42]. A primary difference here is
that we showed how Parallelisable StackLSTM can be applied to the RNNG transition-
set. This extension required special care with regard to the REDUCE action, where a
variable number of pop operations are performed. Additionally, Parallel RNNG sepa-
rates the joint stack operation of Parallelisable StackLSTM since Parallel RNNG knows
when to hold or push, and when to hold or pop. This exploitation allows us to reduce
the number of LSTM calls. Finally, Parallel RNNG differs from Parallelisable StackL-
STM by preventing any action sequence from exceeding the stack size at training time.
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Related Works
Another line of work is DyNet[60]: A framework that analyses the computation graph
to automatically batch operations. We do not know the extent that DyNet could bring
speed-up to RNNG, but our solution benefits by not having the overhead associated
with analysing the computation graph.
Kitaev & Klein[57] view recent advances in constituency parsing in a encoder-decoder
framework.
They base their work in this framework to improve the encoder with,
amongst other contributions, the use of scaled dot-product attention, following the ar-
chitecture of Vaswani et al.[3]. Our approach is similar in the use of scaled dot-product
attention, but differs in how we apply it: Kitaev & Klein apply it with multiple heads,
whereas we use a single head. Furthermore, we apply attention to the history, stack,
and token buffer, whereas Kitaev & Klein apply it directly to the sentence, which corre-
sponds to the token buffer. This suggests, that RNNG could benefit from a multi-head
attention architecture in the token buffer. We leave this hypothesis for future work.
Zhou & Zhao[58] apply the model of Kitaev & Klein to grammars based on the linguistic
theory of head-driven phrase structure grammar[61] (HPSG). They derive a simplified
HPSG by combining datasets from constituency- and dependency parsing tasks. This
enables them to obtain state-of-the-art in constituency parsing on the WSJ testset (96.33
F1) and the CTB testset (92.55 F1), when the models are combined with contextual
word embeddings from XLNet[62] and RoBERTa[6], respectively. Their work is orthogo-
nal to ours, where we focus on improving a linguistically informed model, and they focus
on improving parsing by combining datasets on the basis of a linguistic theory. An ap-
plication of RNNG with contextual word embeddings to HPSG would be an interesting
research direction that combines a linguistic theory on the dataset, with a linguisti-
cally informed inductive bias in the model. Furthermore, this approach is promising
since RNNG with BERT[40] embeddings obtain better results than the self-attentive
encoder[57] that Zhou & Zhao use in their work.
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This work was motivated by the hypothesis that a linguistically informed inductive bias
is relevant to NLP models. With this motivation in mind, we explored how to improve
one such model, specifically recurrent neural network grammars. The proposed methods
were based on a thorough description of RNNG, as well as an analysis of [potential] prob-
lems with RNNG. All of the proposed methods were evaluated empirically on English
and Chinese treebanks. The primary contribution of this work is the development of Par-
allel RNNG, which was shown to obtain results equivalent to RNNG, but significantly
faster due to parallelisation. We observed that Parallel RNNG is able to process batches
10 to 15 times faster for large batch sizes. Another contribution is the proposal to incor-
porate attention to the representation function of RNNG. However, while the proposed
attention mechanism was shown to add a layer of interpretability, it also turned out [in
most cases] to be unable to improve the predictive power of RNNG. Improved results
were, however, obtained by applying existing regularisation methods to RNNG that are
known to work well for RNN.
In short: We have improved RNNG by making it faster through parallelisation, in-
creasing interpretabilty with an attentive representation function, and by increasing
parsing and language modelling results with regularisation methods. Despite these im-
provements, our work has a shortcoming in how it fails to replicate the results of Dyer
et al. (the authors of RNNG), and we found that the shortcoming is likely to be caused
by differences in implementation details between our implementation and their imple-
mentation of RNNG.
On a final note, we will address1 the hypothesis that served as a motivation of this
work. RNNG, and our proposed methods, were compared to baselines without [strong]
inductive biases. The discriminative baseline performed much worse than RNNG and
our methods. The generative baseline, on the other hand, reached equivalent results to
RNNG and Parallel RNNG, but was outperformed once regularisation was applied to
Parallel RNNG, and when Generative Parallel RNNG only relied on the stack. We see
from this, that the linguistically informed inductive bias was central in the discrimina-
tive case, but the generative case exhibited more mixed results. We also showed that
many of the current state-of-the-art parsing methods are based on RNNG, which indi-
cates that a linguistically informed inductive bias is still relevant, at least in the case
of parsing. We consider it to be an interesting research direction to further investigate
1We do not seek to draw a complete conclusion, as that is out of the scope of this work.
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Conclusion
the hypothesis, which we have shown to have some empirical evidence, although the
evidence is not sufficiently strong to confirm the hypothesis.
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A
Hyperparameters
LSTM Parser: The hyperparameters of LSTM Parser on WSJ and CTB are equiva-
lent, except that CTB uses a batch size of 16, while a batch size of 32 is being used on
WSJ. Generally, smaller batch sizes are being used on CTB, due to a larger action space
than for WSJ, which causes the GPU to run out of memory. Both the encoder and
decoder consists of LSTM with three layers, a hidden size of 256, and a dropout rate
of 0.25. The embedding sizes are 128 for token embeddings, and 16 for part-of-speech
embeddings. LSTM Parser uses layer normalisation in both the encoder and the decoder.
LSTM Language Model: Similar to LSTM Parser, the hyperparameters of LSTM
Language Model are equivalent on WSJ and CTB, with batch size being the exception.
A batch size of 4 is being used on CTB and 20 on WSJ. The LSTM consists of three
layers, a hidden size of 1500, and a dropout rate of 0.3. Action embedding size is 1500,
and an embedding dropout of 0.15 is applied to action embeddings. LSTM Language
Model uses layer normalisation.
RNNG and Parallel RNNG: The hyperparameters of RNNG and variations of Par-
allel RNNG are shown for WSJ in Table A.1, and for CTB in Table A.2.
==PAGE:74==
64
A Hyperparameters
Dataset
WSJ
Model
RNNG
P. RNNG
P. RNNG + reg.
P. RNNG + att.
Stack-only
Type
D
G
D
G
D
G
D
G
G
Batch size
1
1
32
32
64
16
64
8
20
Learning rate
0.1
0.1
0.35
0.35
0.2
0.4
0.15
0.1
0.15
LSTM hidden size
128
256
128
256
128
256
128
256
256
LSTM layers
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Dropout
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.3
Variational dropout
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Layer normalisation
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Weight drop
-
-
-
-
0.1
0.15
-
-
-
Action emb. size
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
Action emb. dropout
-
-
-
-
0.1
0.1
-
-
-
Token emb. size
32
256
32
256
32
256
32
256
256
Token emb. dropout
-
-
-
-
0.25
0.25
-
-
-
Part-of-speech emb. size
12
-
12
-
12
-
12
-
-
Part-of-speech emb. dropout
-
-
-
-
0.25
-
-
-
-
Pretrained emb. size
100
-
100
-
100
-
100
-
-
Pretrained emb. dropout
-
-
-
-
0.25
-
-
-
-
Table A.1: Hyperparameters of RNNG and Parallel RNNG models on WSJ. Stack-only
refers to a Generative Parallel RNNG that only relies on the stack.
Dataset
CTB
Model
RNNG
P. RNNG
P. RNNG + reg.
P. RNNG + att.
Stack-only
Type
D
G
D
G
D
G
D
G
G
Batch size
1
1
32
8
128
4
18
6
10
Learning rate
0.1
0.1
0.35
0.35
0.2
0.4
0.15
0.15
0.2
LSTM hidden size
128
256
128
256
128
256
128
256
256
LSTM layers
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
Dropout
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.3
Variational dropout
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Layer normalisation
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Weight drop
-
-
-
-
0.2
0.15
-
-
-
Action emb. size
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
-
16
Action emb. dropout
-
-
-
-
0.1
0.1
-
-
-
Token emb. size
32
256
32
256
32
256
32
256
256
Token emb. dropout
-
-
-
-
0.15
0.25
-
-
-
Part-of-speech emb. size
12
-
12
-
12
-
12
-
-
Part-of-speech emb. dropout
-
-
-
-
0.15
-
-
-
-
Pretrained emb. size
100
-
100
-
100
-
100
-
-
Pretrained emb. dropout
-
-
-
-
0.15
-
-
-
-
Table A.2: Hyperparameters of RNNG and Parallel RNNG models on CTB. Stack-
only refers to a Generative Parallel RNNG that only relies on the stack.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
D. Edmiston and K. Stratos, “Compositional morpheme embeddings with affixes
as functions and stems as arguments,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on the
Relevance of Linguistic Structure in Neural Architectures for NLP, 2018, pages 1–
5.
[2]
L. Donatelli, J. Groschwitz, A. Koller, M. Lindemann, and P. Weißenhorn, “Nor-
malizing compositional structures across graphbanks,” 2020.
[3]
A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser,
and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in neural information
processing systems, 2017, pages 5998–6008.
[4]
J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training of deep
bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2018.
[5]
K. Mrini, F. Dernoncourt, T. Bui, W. Chang, and N. Nakashole, “Rethinking
self-attention: An interpretable self-attentive encoder-decoder parser,” 2019.
[6]
Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis, L. Zettle-
moyer, and V. Stoyanov, “Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach,” 2019.
[7]
Z. Dai, Z. Yang, Y. Yang, J. G. Carbonell, Q. Le, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Transformer-
xl: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context,” in Proceedings of
the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019,
pages 2978–2988.
[8]
J. Hewitt and C. D. Manning, “A structural probe for finding syntax in word repre-
sentations,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), 2019, pages 4129–4138.
[9]
K. Clark, U. Khandelwal, O. Levy, and C. D. Manning, “What does bert look at?
an analysis of bert’s attention,” in Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop Black-
boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP, 2019, pages 276–
286.
[10]
C. Dyer, A. Kuncoro, M. Ballesteros, and N. A. Smith, “Recurrent neural network
grammars,” in HLT-NAACL, 2016.
[11]
M. P. Marcus, B. Santorini, M. A. Marcinkiewicz, and A. Taylor, “Treebank-3,”
Linguistic Data Consortium, Philadelphia, volume 14, 1999.
==PAGE:76==
66
Bibliography
[12]
M. Palmer, F.-D. Chiou, N. Xue, and T.-K. Lee, “Chinese treebank 5.1 ldc2005t01,”
Web Download, 2005.
[13]
A. Kuncoro, C. Dyer, J. Hale, D. Yogatama, S. Clark, and P. Blunsom, “Lstms
can learn syntax-sensitive dependencies well, but modeling structure makes them
better,” in Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2018, pages 1426–1436.
[14]
T. Linzen, E. Dupoux, and Y. Goldberg, “Assessing the ability of lstms to learn
syntax-sensitive dependencies,” Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, volume 4, pages 521–535, 2016.
[15]
S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural computa-
tion, volume 9, number 8, pages 1735–1780, 1997.
[16]
A. Kuncoro, C. Dyer, L. Rimell, S. Clark, and P. Blunsom, “Scalable syntax-aware
language models using knowledge distillation,” in Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019, pages 3472–3484.
[17]
A. Kuncoro, L. Kong, D. Fried, D. Yogatama, L. Rimell, C. Dyer, and P. Blun-
som, “Syntactic structure distillation pretraining for bidirectional encoders,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.13482, 2020.
[18]
Y. Kim, A. M. Rush, L. Yu, A. Kuncoro, C. Dyer, and G. Melis, “Unsupervised
recurrent neural network grammars,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), 2019, pages 1105–1117.
[19]
J. Hale, C. Dyer, A. Kuncoro, and J. Brennan, “Finding syntax in human en-
cephalography with beam search,” in Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2018,
pages 2727–2736.
[20]
M. Stern, D. Fried, and D. Klein, “Effective inference for generative neural pars-
ing,” in Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, 2017, pages 1695–1700.
[21]
N. S. Altman, “An introduction to kernel and nearest-neighbor nonparametric
regression,” The American Statistician, volume 46, number 3, pages 175–185, 1992.
[22]
A. Cauchy, “Méthode générale pour la résolution des systemes d’équations simul-
tanées,” Comp. Rend. Sci. Paris, volume 25, number 1847, pages 536–538, 1847.
[23]
J. Kiefer, J. Wolfowitz, et al., “Stochastic estimation of the maximum of a re-
gression function,” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, volume 23, number 3,
pages 462–466, 1952.
[24]
R. Eldan and O. Shamir, “The power of depth for feedforward neural networks,”
in Conference on learning theory, 2016, pages 907–940.
[25]
V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified linear units improve restricted boltzmann
machines,” in Proceedings of the 27th international conference on machine learning
(ICML-10), 2010, pages 807–814.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
67
[26]
Z. Yang, Z. Dai, R. Salakhutdinov, and W. W. Cohen, “Breaking the softmax
bottleneck: A high-rank rnn language model,” 2018.
[27]
D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Learning representations by
back-propagating errors,” nature, volume 323, number 6088, pages 533–536, 1986.
[28]
Martı́n Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig
Citro, Greg S. Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghe-
mawat, Ian Goodfellow, Andrew Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Y. Jia, Rafal
Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dan Mané, Rajat
Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Murray, Chris Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens,
Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vi-
jay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Martin Wattenberg,
Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng, TensorFlow: Large-scale machine
learning on heterogeneous systems, Software available from tensorflow.org, 2015.
[Online]. Available: http://tensorflow.org/.
[29]
A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, Z. Lin, A.
Desmaison, L. Antiga, and A. Lerer, “Automatic differentiation in pytorch,” in
NIPS-W, 2017.
[30]
M. Schuster and K. K. Paliwal, “Bidirectional recurrent neural networks,” IEEE
transactions on Signal Processing, volume 45, number 11, pages 2673–2681, 1997.
[31]
S. Hochreiter, Y. Bengio, P. Frasconi, J. Schmidhuber, et al., Gradient flow in
recurrent nets: The difficulty of learning long-term dependencies, 2001.
[32]
K. S. Tai, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Improved semantic representations
from tree-structured long short-term memory networks,” in Proceedings of the
53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers), 2015, pages 1556–1566.
[33]
C. Dyer, M. Ballesteros, W. Ling, A. Matthews, and N. A. Smith, “Transition-
based dependency parsing with stack long short-term memory,” in Proceedings of
the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the
7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1:
Long Papers), 2015, pages 334–343.
[34]
N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdinov,
“Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting,” The journal
of machine learning research, volume 15, number 1, pages 1929–1958, 2014.
[35]
W. Ling, C. Dyer, A. W. Black, and I. Trancoso, “Two/too simple adaptations
of word2vec for syntax problems,” in Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, 2015, pages 1299–1304.
[36]
T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. S. Corrado, and J. Dean, “Efficient estimation of word
representations in vector space,” 2013.
==PAGE:78==
68
Bibliography
[37]
P. Baltescu and P. Blunsom, “Pragmatic neural language modelling in machine
translation,” in Proceedings of the 2015 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
2015, pages 820–829.
[38]
J. Goodman, “Classes for fast maximum entropy training,” in 2001 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing. Proceedings (Cat.
No. 01CH37221), IEEE, volume 1, 2001, pages 561–564.
[39]
P. F. Brown, P. V. Desouza, R. L. Mercer, V. J. D. Pietra, and J. C. Lai, “Class-
based n-gram models of natural language,” Computational linguistics, volume 18,
number 4, pages 467–479, 1992.
[40]
N. K. Daniel Fried and D. Klein, “Cross-domain generalization of neural con-
stituency parsers,” in Proceedings of ACL, 2019.
[41]
A. Kuncoro, M. Ballesteros, L. Kong, C. Dyer, G. Neubig, and N. A. Smith, “What
do recurrent neural network grammars learn about syntax?” In Proceedings of the
15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Volume 1, Long Papers, 2017, pages 1249–1258.
[42]
S. Ding and P. Koehn, “Parallelizable stack long short-term memory,” in Proceed-
ings of the Third Workshop on Structured Prediction for NLP, 2019, pages 1–6.
[43]
M.-T. Luong, H. Pham, and C. D. Manning, “Effective approaches to attention-
based neural machine translation,” in Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2015, pages 1412–1421.
[44]
D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural machine translation by jointly
learning to align and translate,” in 3rd International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations, ICLR 2015, 2015.
[45]
J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton, “Layer normalization,” stat, volume 1050,
page 21, 2016.
[46]
S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network train-
ing by reducing internal covariate shift,” in International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2015, pages 448–456.
[47]
Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “A theoretically grounded application of dropout in
recurrent neural networks,” in Advances in neural information processing systems,
2016, pages 1019–1027.
[48]
S. Merity, N. S. Keskar, and R. Socher, “Regularizing and optimizing lstm language
models,” 2017.
[49]
L. Wan, M. Zeiler, S. Zhang, Y. Le Cun, and R. Fergus, “Regularization of neural
networks using dropconnect,” in International conference on machine learning,
2013, pages 1058–1066.
[50]
X. Glorot and Y. Bengio, “Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedfor-
ward neural networks,” in Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference
on artificial intelligence and statistics, 2010, pages 249–256.
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
69
[51]
O. Vinyals, Ł. Kaiser, T. Koo, S. Petrov, I. Sutskever, and G. Hinton, “Grammar
as a foreign language,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2015,
pages 2773–2781.
[52]
I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, “Sequence to sequence learning with neural
networks,” in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2014, pages 3104–
3112.
[53]
E. Charniak et al., “Parsing as language modeling,” in Proceedings of the 2016 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2016, pages 2331–
2336.
[54]
E. Black, S. Abney, D. Flickinger, C. Gdaniec, R. Grishman, P. Harrison, D. Hin-
dle, R. Ingria, F. Jelinek, J. L. Klavans, et al., “A procedure for quantitatively
comparing the syntactic coverage of english grammars,” in Speech and Natural
Language: Proceedings of a Workshop Held at Pacific Grove, California, February
19-22, 1991, 1991.
[55]
M. Collins, “Three generative, lexicalised models for statistical parsing,” in Proc.
of 35th Anuual Meeting of the ACL and 8th Conference of the ECACL, 1997, 1997.
[56]
J. Liu and Y. Zhang, “In-order transition-based constituent parsing,” Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, volume 5, pages 413–424, 2017.
[57]
N. Kitaev and D. Klein, “Constituency parsing with a self-attentive encoder,”
in Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2018, pages 2676–2686.
[58]
J. Zhou and H. Zhao, “Head-driven phrase structure grammar parsing on penn
treebank,” in Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 2019, pages 2396–2408.
[59]
D. Fried, M. Stern, and D. Klein, “Improving neural parsing by disentangling
model combination and reranking effects,” in Proceedings of the 55th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Pa-
pers), Vancouver, Canada: Association for Computational Linguistics, Jul. 2017,
pages 161–166. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.
aclweb.org/anthology/P17-2025.
[60]
G. Neubig, C. Dyer, Y. Goldberg, A. Matthews, W. Ammar, A. Anastasopoulos,
M. Ballesteros, D. Chiang, D. Clothiaux, T. Cohn, K. Duh, M. Faruqui, C. Gan, D.
Garrette, Y. Ji, L. Kong, A. Kuncoro, G. Kumar, C. Malaviya, P. Michel, Y. Oda,
M. Richardson, N. Saphra, S. Swayamdipta, and P. Yin, “Dynet: The dynamic
neural network toolkit,” 2017.
[61]
I. A. Sag and C. Pollard, “Information-based syntax and semantics,” 1987.
[62]
Z. Yang, Z. Dai, Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, R. R. Salakhutdinov, and Q. V. Le, “Xlnet:
Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understanding,” in Advances
in neural information processing systems, 2019, pages 5754–5764.
==PAGE:80==
