==PAGE:1==
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based
Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
Master Thesis Project: June, 2020
Pablo Conejos
Master of Science in Sustainable Energy Engineering: Electric Energy Systems
==PAGE:2==
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power Sys-
tem
Master Thesis Project
June, 2019
By
Pablo Conejos
s182539
Supervisors:
Per Bromand Nørgård
Tom Cronin
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering, Elektrovej, Building 325,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Comments:
This report is a part of the requirements to achieve Master of Science in
Sustainable Energy Engineering at Technical University of Denmark. The
report represents 30 ECTS points.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This project studies the effect of designing an isolated renewable based mini-grid to be
prepared for an expansion of the power system in terms of satisfying the increasing de-
mand and in terms of an interconnection with another mini-grid and, eventually, the na-
tional grid.
The study covers the entire process of implementing a new isolated mini-grid operating
under AC single phase, shifting to AC three phase system, experiencing a connection to
a neighbouring mini-grid, and finally a connection to the national grid.
For that purpose, a load profile is defined, followed by the analysis of the weather con-
ditions of the location selected (solar and wind profiles). With that information, an opti-
mization assessment is performed to find the optimal energy mix to install as the demand
grows, analyzing the operational constraints of all the scenarios considered for the in-
creasing demand. With these results, a strategy applicable to every new isolated mini-grid
is described to prepare the mini-grid to evolve into a greater power system with intercon-
nections. After this strategy is formulated, the benefits of planning in advance can be
observed: saving unnecessary cost and time spent replacing specific elements of the
system while not disturbing the operation of the mini-grid.
Finally, the benefits and consequences of connecting a remote isolated mini-grid to an-
other power system such as another mini-grid and the national grid are analyzed. The
extent of the benefits of connecting a remote isolated mini-grid to the national grid are tied
to the capacity of the national grid connection and depends on the priorities of the grid
operator, whereas the extent of the benefits of connecting an isolated mini-grid to another
mini-grid are tied to the amount of losses suffered in the transmission lines, as well as the
demand profiles of the two villages.
ii
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to first thank my supervisors Per and Tom for giving me the opportunity to
work in a project of my own choice, and for all their time spent patiently with me during
the master thesis, always willing to help.
Secondly, I would like to acknowledge the role my parents had in this master thesis, deal-
ing with me and supporting me every day for two months and a half during the quarantine.
In addition, I would like to thank Freddy for introducing me into the isolated power systems
and for tirelessly propose new projects and experiences to live.
Finally, I would like to thank Piera and Alessandra for having shared the entire journey
with me.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
System Introduction
4
2.1
Isolated village, PV + Battery, single phase AC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Isolated village, PV + wind + battery, three phase AC . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Interconnection of two neighbor villages, sharing the wind turbine and the
battery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Connection to the national power grid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methodology
7
3.1
Load Study and Definition of Stage’s Thresholds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Generation Profiles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3
GAMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
CAPEX Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.5
PowerFactory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Results
21
4.1
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
GAMS Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Analysis and Expansion Strategy
36
5.1
Expansion Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6
Discussion and Conclusion
53
Bibliography
58
A Appendix: Self Evaluation
59
A.1 Original Project Planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.2 Revision of the Project Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
A.3 Self Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
B Appendix: Python Code
63
B.1 Definition of the load profiles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
B.2 Power profiles and wind power curve.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
C Appendix: GAMS Code
75
C.1 Initial Scenario of the First Stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
C.2 Initial Scenario of the Second Stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
C.3 Initial Scenario of the Third Stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
iv
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Although electricity is assumed to be part of everyday life for people around the world, it
is estimated that 15% of the world population do not have access to electricity [1]. More-
over, 84% of the people disconnected to electric grids live in remote rural areas, mostly
in either sub-Saharan Africa or developing Asia [2]. The fact that these people live in
remote locations is not a coincidence. The traditional way to provide electricity to new
regions was to expand the national grid, but getting the national grid to the rural areas
with low population density makes the procedure very expensive with few guaranties that
the arrival will take time in the near future [1, 2].
Mini-grids can provide a very good alternative for energy supply, providing a more cost
efficient solution than the expansion of the national grid to remote locations [2, 3, 4].
According to GIZ ProSolar, a mini-grid is a set of small-scale electricity generators and
possibly energy storage systems interconnected to a distribution network that supplies the
electricity demand for a limited number of consumers [5]. These mini-grids can operate in
isolation from national electricity transmission networks, making possible to provide en-
ergy to a village in a remote location before the arrival of the national grid. In addition, the
decreasing price of renewable sources and batteries enable renewable-based mini-grids
as an economic solution in comparison with fuel based mini-grids, creating green, self-
sustainable systems helping with the task of global electrification without adding pressure
to the CO2 emission targets [6]. Another benefit of using renewable sources is avoiding
fuel dependency, which not only suffers price variation leading into instability in the cost of
electricity production, but also bringing fuel to these remote places could turn to be a chal-
lenge [7]. Moreover, in the Sub-Saharan context, these isolated mini-grids supply reliable
energy when properly scaled in countries in which are suffering more than 10 outages per
month with an average duration of 8.3 hours each [1].
Isolated mini-grids do not just provide a more cost effective solution for a remote village at
the moment of installation. In addition, these systems have the potential to expand over
time as the demand grows, increase caused by the new possibilities the power system
provides. Part of the increase in household electricity demand that can be expected is
driven by rising incomes tied to the greater productivity in the village thanks to the new
power system, calling this demand growth the ‘income effect’ [3]. An increase in the
energy demand for a small remote power system has a greater impact on the system
than the same increase in the demand in the national grid due to its different proportions.
Therefore, properly scaling the system as the energy demand evolves appears as crucial
for the optimal operation of the system [5]. In order to share the load and address it in
a common and more efficient way, it may be desirable in the future to interconnect two
or more of these mini-grids if the distance to each other is not too far to form a larger
grid. Moreover, it could prove beneficial to connect the national grid to these mini-grids,
releasing pressure on the national grid transmission system and taking advantage of the
excess of energy the mini-grid produces [8]. Designing in advance a mini-grid to be part
of a larger system, as well as the larger systems to benefit from the mini-grids, appears as
crucial in order to ensure an optimal operation, avoiding some, if not all, of the investments
becoming valueless [8].
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
1
==PAGE:7==
1.2
Motivation
The purpose of this project is to assess and propose scalability solutions for a new renew-
able based mini-grid operating as a remote power system. As mentioned in the previous
section, the electricity demand is expected to increase over time in places with a newly
installed power system [2, 3, 7]. The reason lies in the fact that these remote rural areas
usually do not have a high income, and the electricity during the first months is simply
required for lighting, radio, powering fans, mobile phone and street lights [9]. After the
mini-grid is installed and the population has gotten used to the new possibilities the en-
ergy system brings, the demand is expected to increase for several reasons: population
growth, higher per-capita consumption due to the the social/economical influence of the
electrification, and new connections to the mini-grid [7]. Therefore, designing the mini-
grid in advance with a strategy to grow can save both time and cost, e.g. preparing the
system for an easy and swift shift from single phase to three phase when the the power
demand has met certain requirements, or avoiding unnecessary replacements of devices
that have reached their maximum capacity too soon. Moreover, part of the scalability so-
lutions proposed for the new mini-grid will consist of preparing the mini-grid for an eventual
connection to the national grid or to other mini-grid, leading into a beneficial exchange of
power for the energy systems.
Implementing any type of mini-grid greatly depends on the location of the mini-grid since
the demand of the population in different places will likely be different due to different
lifestyles, traditions, etc. More specifically, renewable based mini-grid depends even more
on the location because of the close ties the weather conditions and the generation profiles
have. Therefore, the outcome of this project should be a strategy and specific guidelines
to follow, but wide enough to ensure any new mini-grid can follow this assessment to
pursue a future expansion. Thus, even though the study case of this project is located in
Kenya, following the final strategy explained in the last section (section 5.1) will lead into
a mini-grid prepared for a future expansion and an eventual connection to other mini-grid
and the national grid in any location.
The case study of this project is in Kenya because, being part of the Sub-Saharan coun-
tries with low electricity connection rate, Kenya has achieved significant progress in the
energy sector with the goal of universal access to electricity by the year 2022, acknowl-
edging the importance of mini-grids in the off-grid solutions [10]. Moreover, Kenya has
a very high potential for renewable sources and numerous off-grid mini-grid projects cur-
rently active thanks to private investors [10]. In fact, DTU participated in a mini-grid project
in Ndeda, Kenya. Therefore, collecting data from this existing project facilitates the data
research.
This project could serve for private investors, the government or any figure in charge of
the implementation of a new isolated mini-grid to realize the benefit of planning in ad-
vance for a system expansion. Moreover, it could be used as a guideline to assess some
key aspects of the growth of the mini-grid like the optimal energy mix to have installed
in the system as the mini-grid expands, as well as the strategy of how to install the dif-
ferent elements needed in the mini-grid to ensure a smooth evolution without impeding
the operation. However, this are not the only procedures to take into consideration and it
should not be thought of this guidelines to be enough to ensure the optimal operation of
a mini-grid. Further studies that could be performed to expand this thesis are discussed
in section 6.
2
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:8==
1.3
Problem Formulation
The problem this project is addressing is which is a good development option for a new
remote mini-grid for escalating purposes given a future connection to another mini-grid
and national grid. This problem can be divided into several different studies.
1. How will the demand be satisfied in the given expansion?
• Analysis of the demand evolution, where different load scenarios will have to
be satisfied with the optimal energy mix. GAMS, an optimization tool that com-
pares time series on hourly basis for one full year with variation of all param-
eters within the defined constrains, will be used to find the optimal energy mix
with the minimum cost (installation and operational cost of the generation tech-
nologies) for every scenario.
2. Which layout design of the power system provides benefits to create a strategy to
adapt the mini-grid for a future demand expansion?
• Technical and financial analysis of the requirements of each load scenario to
find the best expansion strategy, considering future load scenarios require-
ments in advance so they can be fulfilled in previous stages in order to save
cost and time.
• Modelling these strategies in PowerFactory will ensure the proper behavior of
the system and the fulfillment of the operational requisites. PowerFactory is a
software that can calculate the load flow in all lines and the resulting voltages
in all nodes for a specific case, and it can automatically repeat the calculations
for all the hours of a full year.
• Having the optimal generation mix of all the scenarios as well as the operational
constrains of the different stages of the demand growth, propose a strategy to
escalate the mini-grid saving cost without penalizing the operation of the mini-
grid.
3. What are the benefits of connecting this mini-grid to another power system, such as
another mini-grid or the national grid?
• Analyzing the consequences of connecting the mini-grid to the national grid,
and assess how the national grid can benefit from this connection conducting
a comparison with a case in which the national grid would have to provide all
the electricity demand as if the mini-grid was never installed.
• Analyzing the consequences of connecting the mini-grid to a secondary smaller
mini-grid, and assess how this connection might be beneficial conducting a
comparison with a case in which the two mini-grids were never connected.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
3
==PAGE:9==
2
System Introduction
Part of this master thesis is to define the possible stages an isolated renewable based
mini-grid will have to go through as the demand for electricity increases with time. The
purpose of finding these stages will be to navigate the evolution of the mini-grid in the most
efficient possible way. Renewable based isolated mini-grids are getting more common in
the rural areas of Africa. In fact, DTU participated in a mini-grid project in Kenya, in Ndeda
island. For that reason, the system to study in this master thesis will also be placed in
Kenya, for familiarity and convenience when researching for input data. As a renewable
based mini-grid, the technologies to consider for the energy mix will be solar and wind
power coupled with a Li-Ion storage system. Moreover, this mini-grid will be eventually
connected to a smaller mini-grid to assess the benefits and impact of connecting the two,
and finally this combined mini-grid system will be connected to the national grid to analyze
the benefits this connection provides.
The system evolution can be described in four different stages as the demand increases:
1. Isolated village, PV + battery, single phase AC.
2. Isolated village, PV + wind + battery, three phase AC.
3. Interconnection of two neighboring villages, sharing the wind turbine and the battery.
4. Connection to the national power grid.
2.1
Isolated village, PV + Battery, single phase AC
The initial stage will be the energy system that would be installed to procure the present
needs of a small village with the same load profile as the Ndeda system. The Ndeda load
profile will be explained in more depth in section 3.1. The mini-grid at this stage will be
single phase since there are no 3 phase converters designed for a low energy flow, and
therefore the efficiency of the converter would be quite low resulting in very high energy
losses [11, 12]. For that reason, the mini-grid will have to be single phase until the energy
flow is abundant enough to install a 3 phase converter. The AC/DC converter plays a
key role in the system since, being a mini-grid based on renewable energy, solar power
as well as a Li-Ion storage system are considered for the energy mix. Both technologies
operate under DC energy while the distribution system should be AC since most electric
loads are designed for AC systems. At the same time, having an AC system allows the
use of transformers. For this first initial stage, wind power is taken out of the mix because
the mini-grid is single phase while wind turbines usually operate with a 3 phase generator
[13]. Therefore, the mini-grid in the first stage will simply be formed by solar power and
battery storage to satisfy the demand of the load. This first stage is shown in figure 2.1.
The solar panels and the battery will be connected to a common DC bus since both of
them are DC elements. The voltage of this DC bus will be set by the battery. Adding
batteries in series to increase the capacity of the storage system will then increase the
voltage of the bus, and therefore the elements connected to the bus need to be prepared
for said voltage increase [8]. Since the battery is setting the voltage of the bus, the solar
panels are connected to the DC bus through a DC/DC transformer to operate in its optimal
voltage. The DC part of the system will be connected through a single phase inverter to
the AC part of the system at 240 V (the inverter used has rated voltage of 240 V [11]),
where the load is attached.
4
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.1: First Stage of the system
2.2
Isolated village, PV + wind + battery, three phase AC
The second stage begins when the load has increased sufficiently to change to a 3 phase
AC system. The first change that can be included is an increased voltage in the AC part of
the system, being able to reach a line to line voltage of 415 V (240·
√
3). At this point, wind
is added to the energy mix. Wind turbines produce 3 phase AC energy, and therefore it will
be attached to the AC part of the system. Moreover, the site selection for the installation
of the wind turbines is quite important since the energy produced will change drastically
with different wind profiles, as well as differences in vegetation and land cover. Therefore,
it is preferable to install the wind turbines farther away with a better wind profile than to
install them closer to the village with a worse wind profile. Thus, installing the wind turbine
some kilometers away, the energy transmission will happen at a higher voltage to reduce
the losses in the transmission line. For that reason, the wind turbine will be connected to
the AC part through a transformer with 6 kV on the transmission side and 0.4 kV on the
distribution side. Figure 2.2 shows the diagram of the second stage.
Figure 2.2: Second Stage of the system
2.3
Interconnection of two neighbor villages, sharing the
wind turbine and the battery
Two mini-grids can be interconnected to share some asset or to support each other and
provide stability to the system. The third stage of the system will consist of the already
known mini-grid of the second stage connected to a smaller close-by village counting
only with photovoltaic generation and no battery storage. To connect the two villages,
the energy demand of the secondary village has to be enough to install a 3 phase AC
system. The secondary village will be 5 times smaller to show the support an established
village can provide to a smaller village, but avoiding too small a village that will not have
a visible impact on the power system. This second village is to be connected to the other
village through the wind turbines, sharing its production. The connection through the
wind turbines is adequate since, as said before, the site selection of the wind turbine is
critical for its production, and therefore if the wind turbines already installed are in the best
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
5
==PAGE:11==
possible location in the area, that location will also be the best for the second village since
it is located in the same region. Figure 2.3 shows the diagram of the third stage.
Figure 2.3: Third Stage of the system
2.4
Connection to the national power grid
Finally, the last stage will build on the previous stage in which two mini-grids are con-
nected and the national grid reaches these two mini-grids. In this last stage, the possible
benefits of having both mini-grids connected to the national grid will be analyzed. Since
this national grid connection would be used for the transmission of energy, the connec-
tion is done at the transmission part of the system at the higher voltage level. Figure 2.4
shows the diagram of the forth stage.
Figure 2.4: Forth Stage of the system
6
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:12==
3
Methodology
Every parameter in the study will influence the output, but the parameter that will drive
the evolution and mark the change of stages in the power system is the demand. In this
thesis study not only the demand has to be satisfied every hour, but its evolution in the
long run will drive the evolution and expansion techniques of the mini-grid. Therefore,
once the different stages of the system are defined, the first thing to analyze will be the
load evolution. The load increase will mark the time to move to the next system stage
once certain demand thresholds defined in section 3.1 are reached, creating a map from
the initial stage (a remote system with low demand) to the final stage (a mini-grid with
increased demand, connected to other mini-grid and to the national grid).
Similarly to the demand, the power profiles for solar and wind will have to be studied to
decide the capacities to install of each technology as the demand grows. Hence, solar
radiation profiles and wind speeds will have to be measured on the installation site of the
mini-grid. These profiles will play a crucial role when deciding the sizing of the genera-
tion/storage technologies; i.e, the production of the same solar panel will vary depending
on the location of the installation, and therefore in Denmark it might make sense to depend
on wind energy but in Kenya this might not be a good strategy.
Having the load and generation profiles, a study on the different stages of the system can
be carried out. In this project, the final characteristics of the system are known (final load
profile defined with a connection to another mini-grid and to the national grid). Therefore,
the first scenario to be analyzed will be the last forecasted profile to ensure the optimal
behavior of the mini-grid in its last stage. The first thing to investigate is the different
capacities to be installed of each technology to satisfy the demand every hour of the
year. For that purpose, GAMS will be used, an optimization tool that compares time
series analyses on hourly basis for one full year with variation of all parameters within the
defined constrains. With this time series comparison, the optimal energy production of
each technology for each hour is found with the minimum installation and operational cost
at the end of the year. To find the optimum mix of energy, input data to the GAMS model
will consist on the installation and operational cost of each technology (solar, wind, and
Li-Ion storage), the hourly demand of the entire year, and the hourly generation profile
of the whole year for both solar and wind power. Obviously, this optimum mix of energy
greatly depends on the cost of each technology since GAMS is calculating the minimum
cost to provide the energy required by the demand through a year. Therefore, a sensitivity
analysis will be carried out to study how the energy mix changes for different installation
cost, the greatest cost in a renewable project since the operational and maintenance cost
is comparatively low. Once the optimal energy mix is identified, PowerFactory will be
used to check for any technical constraint through the year. PowerFactory is a software
that can calculate the load flow in all lines and the resulting voltages in all nodes for one
specific case, and it can automatically repeat the calculations for all the hours for a full
year. Inputs to PowerFactory will consist on the hourly demand of both villages and the
hourly production of each technology calculated in GAMS. PowerFactory will then show
if there is any voltage or loading of any element that surpasses the operational limits.
Once the last scenario is investigated, a similar analysis will be performed for the first
stage while having in mind the requisites to be fulfilled for the final stage in case they could
be satisfied in this earlier stage, saving time and investment afterwards. In this stage, the
first load scenario will be analyzed, and GAMS will be used again to find an efficient mix of
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
7
==PAGE:13==
energy to fulfill the demand of an entire year. PowerFactory will also be used to ensure all
the elements and power flows are under the operational limits, calculating the load flow of
every hour of the year. Finally, knowing the initial and the final scenarios, the in-between
steps will be analyzed. The same study will be performed in GAMS and in PowerFactory
to find an efficient energy mix and check the operational limits at the point of changing
from one stage to the next. Therefore, two scenarios will be analyzed for each stage: the
initial scenario of every stage when the demand is at its lowest required for each stage,
and the final scenario of every stage when the demand is at its highest just before moving
to the next stage. When connecting all the stages from the initial to the last one, a strategy
to expand the mini-grid will be formed along with the optimal energy mix for every stage.
Why GAMS and PowerFactory are combined to get a complete analysis of each scenario
is explained in section 3.5 while going into more details about PowerFactory.
The evolution of the demand is different in each project, and it depends on several factors
as already explained. Therefore, in this project, the load evolution is not tied to a specific
growth rate per year, not evolving during a scenario and having the same behavior over the
year. On the other hand, the weather patterns for solar and wind energy are considered
to repeat yearly. Therefore, when a load scenario is simulated over a year, it is proven
that the scenario is sustainable through time. However, there is a step-change in the
demand from scenario to scenario, allowing the demand to increase without specifying
when that growth will take place. Whenever the change of scenario occurs within the
same stage (from the initial scenario of the stage to the final scenario of the same stage),
the generation capacities will have to be reconsidered to adapt to the increased demand.
Once the demand increases enough to move to the next stage of the system, not only the
generation capacities will have to be reconsidered, but also the topology of the system
will have to be modified to adapt to the new possibilities that comes with the next stage -
addition of wind power, connection to other mini-grid, and connection to the national grid.
The evolution of the load is explained in more depth in section 3.1.
3.1
Load Study and Definition of Stage’s Thresholds
The cornerstone of this thesis is the evolution of the load, since it will mark when and
how the system has to be modified. However, the time perspective is not crucial since
mini-grids in different locations will experience different growth rates. Therefore, the key
aspect is to be prepared for the eventual growth, whenever it happens. Moreover, since
the thesis attempts to provide general advice easy to extrapolate to other sites, the base
case does not have to be of any specific site as long as the demand taken for the base
case is realistic enough for a village in which a new mini-grid will be installed. For that
purpose, the demand for the base case will be taken from a mini-grid project in Ndeda,
Kenya, in which DTU participated. Ndeda is an island in the lake Victoria in the west part
of Kenya, with a population of 4000 people where most of the jobs are related to fishing
[14]. Their current access to energy is through a mini-grid, and before the installation of
such mini-grid there was no access to electricity [14]. Therefore, Ndeda can serve the
purpose of the base load for this study. In the master thesis ”Technical and Economic
Feasibility of Wind Power in Renewable Energy Mini-Grids in Remote Areas” [14], the
electricity demand over a week in the Ndeda island was taken with hourly resolution to
create an average daily demand with hourly resolution as well. This average day is taken
to be the base case of the load study and it is shown in figure 3.1 and in table 3.1.
By taking an hourly resolution, the energy and power of every hour will show the same
number since the energy resulting from one hour of 0.85 kW power is 0.85 kWh.
Once the base load is known, a Python code was used to create the different load profiles
8
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:14==
0
5
10
15
20
Time [hours]
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
Power [kw]
Hourly Base Load Profile
Figure 3.1: Demand averaged over an hour of one day in Ndeda, used as base load.
Table 3.1: Hourly demand of the base load during a day.
Time
00:00
01:00
02:00
03:00
04:00
05:00
06:00
07:00
Demand [kWh]
0.85
0.82
0.69
0.55
0.65
0.55
0.63
0.67
Time
08:00
09:00
10:00
11:00
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
Demand [kWh]
0.78
1.1
1.55
1.8
1.7
1.35
1.4
1.03
Time
16:00
17:00
18:00
19:00
20:00
21:00
22:00
23:00
Demand [kWh]
0.73
0.45
0.63
1.45
2.17
2.2
1.8
1.32
needed in the study. To build the load demand over a year for the first scenario, the base
load is repeated every day of the year with some random variations within every hour to
add more realism and make the system prepared for some uncertainties. The random
variations of each hour compared to the base case will be ±15%. Therefore, each hour
of every day of the year will be the base case demand at that specific hour with a random
variation of ±15%. Figure 3.2a show the load of the first year, where the random ±15%
can be noticed in the peaks. Figure 3.2b depicts the demand of the first three days of the
year for a better resolution.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Time [hours]
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Power [kw]
Hourly Load Energy Demand
(a) Load during the first year.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time [hours]
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
Power [kw]
Hourly Load Energy Demand
(b) Demand of the first three days of the first year.
Figure 3.2: First year demand.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
9
==PAGE:15==
Load during the first stage.
The initial load profile has been already defined and showed in figures 3.2.
As explained in section 2, to move from the first stage to the second stage the power
flow must be enough to change the system from AC single phase to AC three phase.
The limitation for the change to happen is, as aforementioned, the converter. Taking as
reference the SUNNY BOY STORAGE converter, the smallest converter has a nominal
power of 3.8 kW single phase [11], power enough for the initial state. As the demand
grows and reaches the maximum 3.8 kW, a second SUNNY BOY STORAGE is added
in parallel to increase the power the converters can handle to 7.6 kW, still single phase.
Once the demand grows and reaches 7.6 kW, a third single phase converter is added in
parallel and, synchronizing them, a three phase system can be accomplished in a single
three-phase cluster with three SUNNY BOY STORAGEs in parallel [12]. Therefore, the
change from the first stage to the second will occur when the load reaches 7.6 kW and
a third converter has to be installed to match the increasing demand, enabling a three
phase system.
The hour in the the base load with the maximum demand is at 22:00h with 2.2 kW, and
with the possible +15% it accounts for 2.53 kW. Therefore the ratio at which the base
load has to be multiplied to reach the threshold to change the stage is 7.6/2.53 = 3.004.
The base load of figure 3.1 multiplied times 3.004 will be the new base load for this final
scenario of the first stage. Once the base load for this scenario is found, the realistic load
profile with the random variations is achieved following the same procedure as for the
initial scenario of the first stage: repeating the base load with random variations of ±15%
for every hour of the year. Figure 3.3a shows the evolution from the three first days of
the initial scenario of the first stage to the three first days of the last scenario of the initial
stage.
Load during the second stage.
The last scenario of the first stage is going to be the joining point with the first scenario of
the second stage. Since adding a third converter and its consequent shift to a three phase
system does not automatically increase the demand, the load profile of the initial scenario
of the second stage will be the same as the final scenario of the first stage. However, the
system topology will have to adapt to the new properties - adding a transformer and wind
power, as already shown in figure 2.2.
The load profile of the final scenario of the second stage will occur when the second
village has enough demand to reach a three phase system, moment at wich the system
can advance to the third stage. Therefore, the secondary village needs a peak demand
of 7.6 kW. As aforementioned in section 2, the second village will be 5 times smaller than
the main village. Assuming both villages have the same demand pattern, the base load
of figure 3.1 will be used for both villages multiplied with different factors to build the load
profile of both villages at this point. As calculated before, a factor of 3.004 is needed for
the load base to reach the three phase threshold, and since the main village is 5 times
bigger, it will use a factor of 15.02. Following the same procedure as before, to get the
entire load profile of the year for the main village at this point (the last scenario of the
second stage, as well as the initial scenario of the third stage), the base load is multiplied
by 15.02 with the ±15% random variation in each hour. Figure 3.3b shows the evolution
of the main village in the second stage, from a maximum load consumption of 7.6 kW to
a maximum consumption of 38 kW (2.53 · 15.02).
10
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:16==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time [hours]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Power [kw]
Hourly Load Energy Demand
Initial scenario
Last scenario
(a) Load evolution during the first stage.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time [hours]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Power [kw]
Hourly Load Energy Demand
Initial scenario
Last scenario
(b) Load evolution during the second stage
Figure 3.3: Three first days of the year of the evolution of the load in the first and second
stage.
Load during the third stage.
Similarly to what happened at the beginning of the second stage, the demand in the main
village during the initial scenario of the third stage has the same load profile as in the last
scenario of the second stage. Following the same procedure to get the load profile of
the secondary village for the entire year, the base load is multiplied by 3.004 to reach the
maximum demand of 7.6 kW and given the ±15% random variation for each hour.
Moreover, when the second village (5 times smaller) reaches the 3 phase system, it has
the same load profile as the main village when it reached the 3 phase threshold, with the
slight difference of a different ±15% random variation in each hour. Therefore, figure 3.3b
also shows the relation between the main village and the second village at the moment
to move to the third stage, connecting both villages.
The end of the third stage is marked by the arrival of the national grid. However, the arrival
of the national grid is completely arbitrary and it will be totally different from one specific
mini-grid project to other. Therefore, the goal of the forth stage will be to analyze some
of the benefits a mini-grid can provide to the national grid. To make the benefits easier
to observe, the national grid connection will be done once the load in both villages has
increased while being on the third stage. Hence, the base load will be multiplied with a
factor of 20 in the main village and a factor of 4 in the second village. The same procedure
is used as in previous stages to get the complete load profile for the entire year. Figure
3.4 shows the load profile of the main village and the second village at the moment in
which the national grid arrives.
Load during the forth stage.
Having the national grid connection available, the electricity price usually drops and there-
fore the electricity demand increases [3]. For the purpose of this study, the demand was
increased 25% with respect to the previous scenario (third stage, last scenario).
Concluding with the load analysis, in this project only the initial and the final scenario of
each stage is analyzed. On the other hand, in real life the demand increases gradually.
However, unless the demand reaches the threshold to move to the next stage, the re-
strictions of the system remain the same. Therefore, while the demand remains within a
stage, only the generation capacity will have to be gradually increased to meet the de-
mand growth. How to achieve that will be discussed in section 5.1.1.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
11
==PAGE:17==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time [hours]
0
10
20
30
40
50
Power [kw]
Hourly Load Energy Demand
Main Village
Second Village
Figure 3.4: Load demand in the main village and in the second village at the moment of
arrival of the national grid.
3.2
Generation Profiles
Another key aspect to consider in a renewable based mini-grid are the profiles of the
different generation technologies. These profiles will vary greatly depending on where
the mini-grid is installed. In this study, the site selected is Kisii, Kenya, 85 km away
from Ndeda. This site is the closest location to Ndeda with available measurements that
could be found [15]. Moreover, as expressed before, the goal of this thesis is to provide
guidelines to find the optimal development path for any new mini-grid. To arrive to such
guidelines, this project will work under the assumption that a village located in Kisii with
the same load profile as Ndeda requires a new mini-grid. Indeed, the same procedure
described in this generation profile study can be applied to any location.
For this project, solar and wind profiles are needed for every hour of one year since,
as mentioned previously in this section, the weather profile is assumed to be repeated
every year. The output of this generation profile study are the capacity factors of these
technologies for every hour; i.e., the ratio of how much it is being produced every hour
compared to the installed capacity. Having this information and knowing the installed
capacity, the maximum production of every hour is known, and therefore the maximum
production of the entire year. This situation is obviously not realistic since it is impossible
to know the wind speed one year in advance, but comparing the profiles of past years it
can be seen the resemblance of the behavior in the weather patterns. Therefore, the data
achieved can be used to assess the capacities to install of each technology as part of a
long term behavior, but it shouldn’t be used to calculate the production during a specific
narrow time gap in the future.
The solar capacity factor with hourly resolution could be directly downloaded in PVWatts
website [15]. After specifying the capacity to install in the selected location, the production
of every hour was given. Therefore, the capacity factor was calculated dividing that hourly
production over the capacity to install.
The wind capacity factor was not given directly. Instead, the hourly wind speed could be
downloaded. In a Python code, the power curve of a small wind turbine [16], the type
of turbine it would be used in a mini-grid with this load demand, was used as a look-up
12
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:18==
table to compare the wind speeds of every hour and assess how much power it could be
drawn. The wind turbine selected was the Hummer H13.2-20KW, and the power curve
was drawn in per unit to extrapolate it to any installed capacity. As shown in figure 3.5,
the cut in wind is 2 m/s, the rated wind is 9 m/s, and the cut out wind is 25 m/s.
Comparing the solar and wind capacity factors through the year in figure 3.6, it can be
seen that the solar profile is more reliable and regular than the wind profile in this specific
site.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Wind Speed [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Power [p.u.]
Wind power curve
Figure 3.5: Wind power curve
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Hour of the year [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Power [p.u.]
Solar capacity factor
(a) Solar capacity factor through the year
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Hour of the year [m/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Power [p.u.]
Wind capacity factor
(b) Wind capacity factor through the year
Figure 3.6: Wind and solar capaciry factors
3.3
GAMS
As mentioned at the beginning of this section, the first thing to investigate once all the
input data is collected is the different capacities to be installed for the 7 scenarios (initial
and final scenario of the first three stages, plus the scenario once the national grid ar-
rives). That calculation is done with GAMS, an optimization tool. A mathematical model
is written in GAMS with the constraints describing the behavior of the energy system. The
objective function to be minimized is the annualized cost of the generation technologies,
composed of the annualized installation cost (CAPEX) plus the operational cost during
one year (OPEX). Therefore, GAMS will find the best combination of the variables of
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
13
==PAGE:19==
the mathematical model (installed capacities, production per hour, energy curtailment...)
given some parameters as input (energy demand of every hour of the year, generation
profiles of wind and solar, and CAPEX and OPEX per kW of the generation technologies)
to minimize the price to pay due to the generation technologies at the end of the year.
The output taken from GAMS will not only be the optimal installed capacities of the gen-
eration technologies, but also the optimal use of them every hour of the year to achieve
the minimum cost.
Every time the demand increases, an adjustment on the generation side has to be done.
Therefore a simulation of every scenario of every stage has to be performed in GAMS.
Moreover, the mathematical model to describe the system is different in every stage: on
the first stage there is no wind and no interconnection, on the second stage there is wind
and no interconnection, and on the third stage there is wind and interconnection. Hence,
there will be three different GAMS codes (for the first, second and third stage) and each
code will be run twice (with the demand of the initial scenario and the final scenario before
moving to the next stage). The case of the forth stage, where the mini-grid is connected
to the national grid, is special. The objective of that stage is to analyze the advantages
and benefits of connecting a mini-grid to the national grid, and GAMS is not needed for
that purpose. Indeed, once the national grid arrives to the mini-grid, there will be no need
to increase the generation capacities since the following increase in demand will be taken
care of by the national grid. Therefore, the advantages of the forth stage will be analyzed
merely in PowerFactory and in a simple model made in Excel explained in section 4.2.4.
In a more realistic model, the excess of energy sold to the national grid can provide a
revenue, and therefore it might be reasonable to install more generation capacity to simply
sell energy to the national grid. However, this approach is not considered in this project.
This study can be replicated for every new mini-grid project by simply adjusting the input
to the program: adapted generation profiles of wind and solar of the selected site, adapted
load profile, an the pertinent price of each technology.
3.3.1
General Assumptions of the model
The final goal of the thesis is to prepare the mini-grid since the beginning for the expansion
in the demand. Part of the study is to propose a set of technologies to produce enough
energy to cover the demand during every stage of the mini-grid on the most efficient
way possible. However, some assumptions had to be taken to simplify this part of the
study since the final goal of the project was not to find the optimal mix of energies, but
to find an efficient way of evolving the entire system and not just the generation part.
Therefore, GAMS was used to find the most economical way to produce energy within
the assumptions taken.
Technical Assumptions:
• The state of charge of the battery at the end of the year has to be at least at the
same level as the initial state of charge. With this condition, sustainability of the
system is ensured. Otherwise, the state of charge of the battery at the end of the
year could be lower, meaning the production is not enough to satisfy the demand of
the year and the system would not be sustainable on the long run.
• The initial state of charge is 50% to allow room enough to discharge or charge during
the first hours.
• The battery has no losses on the energy stored over time.
• The efficiency charging the battery is 98% and the efficiency discharging the battery
14
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:20==
is 97% [17].
• The efficiency of the converter was disregarded due to difficulties to implement it in
the mathematical model. Moreover, the efficiency of the converter used is substan-
tially high (maximum of 97.5%) [11].
• Although considered in PowerFactory, the resistive losses of the cables are not
considered in GAMS for the elements within the same village. However, losses
were considered for the energy transferred from one village to the other, as it will
be explained in the the third stage model. Despite not considering the resistive
losses, curtailment of energy is allowed and widely used as it is shown in the results
section, and therefore the extra energy curtailed should be enough to cover for the
unconsidered losses of the system.
• The lifetime of all the technologies was considered to be 20 years [17].
• The same solar profile is used for the two villages since it is assumed they are near
and therefore the solar irradiation will be the same in the two sites.
Economic Assumptions:
• All technology prices were taken from the Danish Technology Catalog [18], showing
the price per kW.
• The initial price used for the wind turbine is the price for big wind turbines since the
price per kW is lower for big wind turbines. The reason is to facilitate the inclusion
of wind power in the energy mix. In addition, this price reduction can be realistic
reflecting the consequence of bringing more wind turbine companies into mini-grids
projects, lowering the price of the small wind turbines thanks to the economy of
scale.
• The discount rate selected was the Danish one since all the prices were also referred
to Denmark.
Objective function to minimize:
For different scenarios of the same stage, only the demand input to GAMS has to be
modified. For different stages, the mathematical model has to be adapted for the new
possibilities. However, the objective function to minimize remains unmodified for every
stage or scenario. The final goal of GAMS is to minimize this function, and every decision
made by GAMS is aimed to reduce the cost defined as the objective function. The objec-
tive function is shown in equation 3.1 along with its key constraints in equations 3.2 and
3.3.
min
z =
U
∑
u=1
Annuityu +
T
∑
t=1
U
∑
u=1
OPEXu · Pu,t +
T
∑
t=1
Capacitybattery −BatteryLevelt
1000
(3.1)
s.t.
Investmentu = Capacityu · CAPEXu,
u = 1, ..., U
(3.2)
Annuityu =
Investmentu · r
(1 + r)(1 −(1 + r)−Lifetimeu),
u = 1, ..., U
(3.3)
The indices u=1, ..., U represent the set of power generating units (wind, solar and battery)
and the indices t = 1, ..., T represent the set of time periods (every hour of the year,
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
15
==PAGE:21==
T=8760). Pu,t is the energy produced at the time t by the technology u, and r is the
discount rate.
Here, the only variables that GAMS can modify is Capacityu (the installed capacity of each
technology) and Pu,t. Modifying the capacity installed will directly impact the investment
cost and therefore the annuity of the technology, affecting the objective function to mini-
mize z. Pu,t will be explored later on, but it is also a variable that can be modified thanks
to the possibility to curtail energy.
The last term of the equation 3.1, ∑T
t=1
Capacitybattery−BatteryLevelt
1000
, is a penalty to pay ev-
ery hour for not having the battery at its top capacity. The penalty to pay is proportional to
the empty space in the battery, being small enough to not affect the installed capacities to
fill the battery swiftly. This penalty, however, encourage the system to place the energy
surplus in the battery to reduce the penalty to pay instead of curtailing the energy. This
way, the energy curtailment only takes place when the battery is full, replicating how cur-
tailment happens in real scenarios. This penalty had to be imposed since GAMS, having a
perfect forecast for the entire year of the load and the power profiles (both inputs have the
information of the entire year), was curtailing energy even when the battery was almost
empty. The reason for this extreme curtailment is that thanks to the perfect knowledge,
GAMS knows for sure the quantity required in the future and the exact generation profile
that will be at that time. Therefore, the battery was disregarded unless case of need since
charging and discharging the battery has some losses due to the round-trip efficiency.
This round-trip efficiency incurred in a higher OPEX cost than simply providing the energy
needed at the moment directly from the source. Adding this penalty, the price to pay for
not having the battery full surpasses the OPEX inefficiency that comes when using the
battery, achieving a realistic use of the battery.
3.3.2
First Stage Model
In this part of the report, the constraints to shape the model into the expected behavior of
the first stage are explained.
The model of the first stage is the simplest model, dealing with just one village and having
only solar power and Li-Ion storage as technologies available. Therefore, all the energy
production comes from the solar panels, closely related to the hourly capacity factor form-
ing the solar profile:
PPV,t ≤CapacityPV · SolarProfilet,
t = 1, ..., T
(3.4)
Since equation 3.4 is using the sign ≤, the maximum production is being specified for ev-
ery hour. This maximum production equals the installed capacity of solar power (decided
by GAMS) times the capacity factor of each hour, depending on the solar radiation at that
specific hour. However, the production is allowed to produce less than the limit and curtail
energy.
The constraints modelling the battery are:
inflowt ≤PPV,t
(3.5)
outflowt ≤levelt−1
(3.6)
levelt = levelt−1 + inflowt · efficiencyin −outflowt
(3.7)
levelt ≤Capacitybattery
(3.8)
outflowt · efficiencyout ≤demandt
(3.9)
16
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:22==
The initial settings for those variables that refer to a time (t −1) and would lead into an
error the first hour of the year are shown below along with the requisites to comply by the
end of the year.
outflowt1 · efficiencyout ≤demandt1
(3.10)
levelt1 = Capacitybattery · 0.5
(3.11)
levelt8760 ≥levelt1
(3.12)
Finally, the constraint balancing the power flow of the system is:
demandt = PPV,t −inflowt + outflowt · efficiencyout
(3.13)
3.3.3
Second Stage model
In the second stage model, the only addition concerning GAMS is the addition of the wind
technology. Therefore, a wind production constraint similar to equation 3.4 will be added
to all the constraints of the first stage to complete the power generation options.
Pwind,t ≤Capacitywind · WindProfilet,
t = 1, ..., T
(3.14)
The behavior of the battery is the same and therefore the only equation that needs to be
modified is equation 3.5 to include the wind technology:
inflowt ≤PPV,t + Pwind,t
(3.15)
Finally, the constraint of the demand in the first stage in equation 3.13 also must be mod-
ified to include the wind production.
demandt = Pwind,t + PPV,t −inflowt + outflowt · efficiencyout
(3.16)
3.3.4
Third Stage model
The third stage model is the most complex one since two villages are connected and shar-
ing the wind production. Therefore, the capacity to exchange energy between villages
must be added with some losses in the energy exchanged. Moreover, the capability to
decide where to send the shared wind is added. Taking a look back to figure 2.3, stage
three was composed of the main village connected to a second village with only PV tech-
nology plus shared wind energy for the two villages. Since the system has varied notably
since the first stage, all the constraints will be displayed here even though some of them
are the same as in the first stage model.
Generation constraints:
Pwind,t ≤Capacitywind · WindProfilet
(3.17)
PPV 1,t ≤CapacityPV 1 · SolarProfilet
(3.18)
PPV 2,t ≤CapacityPV 2 · SolarProfilet
(3.19)
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
17
==PAGE:23==
Battery constraints are:
inflowt ≤PPV 1,t + PPV 2,t + Pwind,t
(3.20)
outflowt ≤levelt−1
(3.21)
levelt = levelt−1 + inflowt · efficiencyin −outflowt
(3.22)
levelt ≤Capacitybattery
(3.23)
outflowt · efficiencyout ≤demand1t + demand2t
0.9
(3.24)
Initial and final settings:
outflowt1 · efficiencyout ≤demand1t1 + demand2t1
0.9
(3.25)
levelt1 = Capacitybattery · 0.5
(3.26)
levelt8760 ≥levelt1
(3.27)
Power balance:
demand1t = PPV 1,t −inflowt + outflowt · efficiencyout + import1t −export1t
(3.28)
demand2t = PPV 2,t + import2t −export2t
(3.29)
Pwind,t = wind1t + wind2t
(3.30)
import1t = wind1t · 0.95 + export2t · 0.9
(3.31)
import2t = wind2t · 0.95 + export1t · 0.9
(3.32)
It can be seen that the link between the two villages is done through the export and import.
The amount exported from one village will flow to the other village, arriving 90% of what
was sent, i.e. 10% losses. Similarly, assuming the wind turbine is placed exactly in the
middle of both villages, the transmission losses will be half, i.e. 5% losses, arriving 95%
of the energy sent.
This losses are not very accurate, but its purpose is to make GAMS realize that sending
energy from far distances is not as efficient as to consume energy locally. Therefore, local
production and consumption is encouraged.
3.4
CAPEX Sensitivity Analysis
Since the mini-grid is based on renewable energy, no fuel is used and therefore the OPEX
price is a small percentage of the total cost. Therefore, the parameter that will cause a
higher variation on the optimal energy mix is the CAPEX, accounting for the vast majority
of the system cost. The CAPEX per kW installed according to the Danish Technology
Catalog [17, 18] of the technologies involved in this mini-grid are shown in table 3.2.
Table 3.2: CAPEX of all technologies involved in the mini-grid.
Technology
Photovoltaic
Big Wind
turbines (3.5 MW)
Small Wind
Turbines (<25 kW)
Li-Ion storage
CAPEX [Eur/kW]
1130
1120
3800
1042 [Eur/kWh]
The technology with the highest CAPEX with a big margin is the wind power for small
wind turbines. Due to the high price, the wind was not included in the energy mix in the
18
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:24==
preliminary results and the price was reduced to the same price of the big wind turbines,
assuming that the price of the small wind turbines can be brought down. The combination
of solar and wind can work quite well if the power profiles are adequate since wind turbines
keep producing at night, reducing the stress on the battery at night. This stress reduction
allows some reduction in the capacity of the battery, explaining the interest shown in add
wind power to the mix. However, the high price of the small wind turbines is only part of the
reason why this technology was not included in the mini-grid. The capacity factor profile
(how much production a specific generator can produce compared to its capacity installed)
of the renewable energies plays a key role in the final decision. In this specific site, the
wind profile is not very reliable as seen in figure 3.6. For a 100% renewable energy mini-
grid, reliability is a very important factor, and that is why even with a lower price the wind
technology will have a difficult job to make its way to the energy mix. However, for a
different purpose like support in a national grid where conventional units can adapt to a
profile with this kind of reliability, even a location like this one can take advantage of the
wind energy.
For the aforementioned relationship between solar and wind in a 100% renewable energy
mini-grid, variations of the installation cost of the different technologies will be applied to
find a price scenario in which the generation mix will be balanced with the power profiles
of this site. The result of the sensitivity analysis will be very different in different locations
due to the different generation profiles, e.g. in Denmark even if the price of the wind is
higher, probably the predominant energy source would be wind due to the lack of sun and
abundance of wind.
As mentioned before, the wind and the battery share a link since solar power does not
produce at night. Therefore, either by wind or from the battery, energy has to be provided
at night. Thus, one technology can be a partial substitute of the other. For that reason, the
price of the battery can cause a scenario in which the inclusion of wind is encouraged - if
it is very expensive to increase the battery capacity, it might be more economic to install
more wind power to reduce the dependency on the battery. The wind and the solar power
have a more direct relationship since wind turbines can be the partial substitute of solar
panels if the PV technology becomes very expensive. Therefore, the results of changing
the battery and the PV CAPEX will also be analyzed.
To perform the sensitivity analysis, GAMS will be used to test the effect of modifying
different CAPEX prices (one of GAMS’ inputs) in the last scenario of the third stage, when
the demand has grown and there is a connection between the two villages and wind and
solar can be included in the mix. Modifying just one of the parameter used as input data, it
can be assessed how the output is affected by that parameter analyzing the change in the
results. For that reason, only one CAPEX price will be changed at a time. First, the wind
installation price will be gradually brought down while the other prices remain constant to
assess the impact of the wind price on the energy mix. Secondly, the price of the solar
technology will be brought up, maintaining the other CAPEX prices, to analyze the impact
of solar on the energy mix and, again, how the solar price can influence the inclusion of
wind energy. Similarly, the battery price will be brought up while the other CAPEX prices
are held constant to see how the other technologies are affected by the battery price.
Once the sensitivity analysis has been carried out, a price scenario will be selected to
perform the complete study with those CAPEX prices.
In addition to this sensitivity analysis of the different CAPEX prices, a sensitivity analysis
could be performed to see the demand sensitivity, changing the size relation between the
two villages. This way, it could be studied how having the second village only half the size
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
19
==PAGE:25==
of the main village or, to the contrary, ten times smaller affects the optimal mix of energy.
3.5
PowerFactory
Once GAMS has been used to calculate the optimal energy installation for each scenario,
a Quasi Dynamic Simulation in PowerFactory will be performed for every scenario to
check for technical limitations. The Quasi Dynamic Simulation is a PowerFactory tool to
perform a load flow calculation for every hour of the year. With this tool, all the voltages,
currents and loading of all the elements can be studied and determine if all the values
are under the operational limits. Opposed to GAMS use, PowerFactory will not provide
a set of optimal results for each scenario. Instead, it will be used as a tool to verify if
a proposed system design will fulfil the loading and voltage limitations while supplying
enough energy to satisfy the demand every hour of the year. Therefore, PowerFactory will
be used to analyze the results provided by GAMS and find an evolution strategy through
every system stage.
As explained, GAMS will provide the optimal value of all the variables including the pro-
duction of every hour for all the technologies used. Therefore, GAMS output will be used
as PowerFactory input to set the production of each technology for every hour of the year.
The demand is also set up for every hour of the year, as done in GAMS. The battery flow,
however, is not forced since it will be the element that balance the load flow. The battery
flow should be very similar to the flow calculated in GAMS, but due to the system losses
not considered in GAMS it will not be a perfect match. However, as metioned before, the
energy curtailed should be enough to cover for the system losses. In addition, performing
the load flow the capacity of the battery is never checked, and the battery is simply used to
balance the system. Despite this, the battery capacity and loading over the year is taken
in consideration in GAMS, and therefore using GAMS’s output as PowerFactory input is
ensuring the battery capacity is never surpassed.
The first step will be to analyze the last possible scenario (once the national grid has
arrived) to make sure the requirements and needs are fulfilled by the end of the project.
Performing a Quasi-Dynamic simulation on this stage, it will be seen which part of the mini-
grid is suffering the highest load, and the elements can be adjusted accordingly to increase
the size if they are overloaded or decrease the capacity if they are far from the rated load.
Same procedure will be performed to check for the voltages, and see if more voltage
control has to be added to the system. Therefore, not only a good expansion strategy will
be achieved using PowerFactory, but also a solid mini-grid design and topology.
Once this last scenario is assessed and working properly, having in addition the optimal
behavior of the system of each scenario thanks to GAMS, the same PowerFactory as-
sessment will be performed to previous scenarios. The order of assessment, however,
will be from the last stage to the initial stage to try to comply with the requirements of the
later scenarios in the initial scenarios, since early installation of elements used in later
stages saves money and time by not having to replace already installed equipment.
20
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:26==
4
Results
4.1
Sensitivity Analysis
As explained in the methodology, the installation cost of every technology was modified
individually to analyze the impact of each technology CAPEX’ in the energy mix to install
for the last scenario of the third stage. This scenario was selected for the sensitivity anal-
ysis since it allows all the possibilities considered in this study case, i.e. the connection
between the two villages is installed, the load has grown, and both wind and solar can
be included in the energy mix. This sensitivity will also be used to explore which price
scenarios allow wind power in the mix. Therefore, the price of the wind power per kW
installed will be reduced, then the price of solar power per kW installed will be increased,
and lastly the price of the battery per kWh installed will be increased.
4.1.1
Wind CAPEX variation
Modifying a technology price affects differently the other technologies since not all the
technologies have the same relationship towards the modified technology; i.e. wind can
be a viable substitute of a particular technology but be completely independent of other
technologies. Figure 4.1 and table 4.1 shows the consequence on the capacities to install
after gradually reducing the wind CAPEX from its original price of 1120 Eur/kW installed
to 500 Eur/kW installed. In addition to the optimal installed capacities calculated with
GAMS for the different wind CAPEX, table 4.1 shows the annualized cost of the generation
technologies (considering the installation and operational cost) for each price scenario,
and the percentage each wind CAPEX reduction implies compared to the initial value .
Figure 4.1: Capacities variation as wind CAPEX is reduced
Focusing first on the wind, the technology that is affected the most with this change, it can
be seen that wind energy is included in the energy mix as soon as the price is brought
down from 1120 Eur/kW to 1000 Eur/kW (decrease of 10.71% in the CAPEX), installing
19.15 kW of wind energy. The capacity installed is then held constant when reducing the
wind CAPEX even further until the price reaches 700 Eur/kWh (a decrease of 37.5% of the
initial CAPEX), with a barely increase of 0.13 kW in the installed capacity. After this point,
when decreasing the installation cost even further, the capacity of wind installed increases
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
21
==PAGE:27==
Table 4.1: Capacities and total price of different wind CAPEX prices.
Wind CAPEX
[Eur/kW]
Battery [kWh]
PV1 [kW]
PV2 [kW]
Wind [kW]
Total Annualized
Cost [Eur]
1120
463.04
228.57
17.86
0
50,027.88
1000 (-10.71%)
455.99
220.10
17.86
19.15
49,960.04
900 (-19.64%)
455.99
220.10
17.86
19.15
49,842.23
800 (-28.57%)
455.99
220.10
17.86
19.15
49,724.44
700 (-37.50%)
455.94
219.06
18.87
19.28
49,606.28
600 (-46.43%)
452.96
219.42
18.87
27.44
49,480.24
500 (-55.36%)
452.29
217.62
20.73
29.28
49,301.10
and reaches 29.28 kW of peak power with wind CAPEX as 500 Eur/kW (a reduction of
55.36% in the original wind CAPEX).
The battery should decrease thanks to the addition of wind energy, but since the wind
profile is not constant and cannot be relied upon every hour, the battery is only slightly
reduced. When the wind energy installed is 19.15 kW, the battery is merely reduced by
1.56% of its previously installed capacity, a downsize from 463.04 kWh to 455.99 kWh, a
decrease of 7.05 kWh. On the most radical reduction of wind CAPEX considered of 55%,
the battery is reduced from its initial capacity installed to 452.29 kWh, a reduction of 2.38%
of its original capacity. It can be concluded that, with the wind profile of this specific site,
the wind profile is not very reliable and therefore the battery cannot be reduced notably.
In figure 4.1 it can be seen how, even though small, the battery reduces when the wind
increases, confirming the relation between them.
Regarding the solar installation of the secondary village (PV2), the addition of wind energy
does not modify the PV2 capacity installed; only when the wind price has been reduced
55.36%, the solar power in the secondary village is slightly increased by just 2.87 kW.
The reason of the small effect wind has on the second village is that the energy locally
produced has preference over the imported energy, and since the load of the second
village has not changed, the local solar energy does not have to change either. Moreover,
the second village does not have a battery, and therefore energy has to be imported once
the local solar energy is not producing enough; however, the second village does not see
the difference between importing energy from the battery of the main village or from wind
energy. Therefore, the addition of wind energy will influence more the main village than
the second village.
Meanwhile, the addition of wind energy does not bring down notably the solar energy
installed in the main village (PV1) due to the already mentioned unreliability of the wind
profile. With a reduction of wind CAPEX of 10.71% (wind CAPEX at 1000 Eur/kW) and
the consequent addition of 19.15 kW of wind power, the optimal solar capacity to install is
only reduced from 228.57 to 220.10 kW, a reduction of 8.47 kW (-3.89%) compared to the
19.15 kW of wind power installed. Moreover, even with a price scenario in which 29.28
kW of wind power is installed, the solar power installed in the main village is only reduced
from 228.57 to 217.62 (-5.03%), a reduction of 10.95 kW of solar power compared to the
installed 29.28 kW of wind,
Lastly, the annualized price of the generation technologies in the resulting energy mix is
barely brought down through the wind CAPEX reduction, confirming the secondary role
wind has in this site. That means that, while it is a better option to include wind energy in
the energy mix when the wind CAPEX decreases, it does not improve notably the scenario
22
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:28==
in which no wind is included. Therefore, it is clearly confirmed the secondary role that wind
energy plays in this mini-grid, and also that the factor limiting the addition of wind energy
in this specific mini-grid is the wind profile and not the price of the technology. Even when
the wind has the lowest CAPEX by a great amount, the capacity of wind power installed in
comparison with the total production capacity installed is never above 10.94%. Table 4.2
shows the different percentages of the capacity installed compared to the total capacity
installed for different price scenarios.
Table 4.2: Percentage of total installed capacity.
Wind CAPEX
[Eur/kW]
PV1
PV2
Wind
1120
92.75%
7.25%
0.00%
1000
85.61%
6.95%
7.45%
900
85.61%
6.95%
7.45%
800
85.61%
6.95%
7.45%
700
85.17%
7.34%
7.50%
600
82.57%
7.10%
10.32%
500
81.31%
7.75%
10.94%
4.1.2
Solar CAPEX variation
The same sensitivity study was performed modifying the solar installation cost to assess
the impact of the solar CAPEX in energy mix. Again, since one of the goals is to find
possible viable scenarios for wind to appear, the solar installation cost will be gradually
increased, trying to leave room for the wind to step up. Figure 4.2 and table 4.3 depicts
the consequences of increasing the solar CAPEX, also showing the annualized cost of
the generation technologies for each price scenario.
Figure 4.2: Capacities variation as solar CAPEX is increased
With the previous wind CAPEX modification, some conclusions drawn in the wind CAPEX
sensitivity analysis can now be confirmed with the result of this solar CAPEX modification.
First, wind energy does not play a main role in the energy mix even though the CAPEX
of the solar energy per kW is much higher than wind, concluding wind is not relied upon
due to the wind profile of the site. With the big increase in solar CAPEX of 50.44% (from
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
23
==PAGE:29==
Table 4.3: Capacities and total price of different solar CAPEX prices.
Solar CAPEX
[Eur/kW]
Battery [kWh]
PV1 [kW]
PV2 [kW]
Wind [kW]
Total Annualized
Cost [Eur]
1130
463.04
228.57
17.86
0
50,027.88
1200 (+6.19%)
461.39
226.56
17.86
4.43
51,084.76
1300 (+15.04%)
458.26
222.88
17.86
12.80
52,581.94
1400 (+23.89%)
455.99
220.10
17.86
19.15
54,054.33
1500 (+32.74%)
455.99
220.10
17.86
19.15
55,518.38
1600 (+41.59%)
455.99
220.10
17.86
19.15
56,982.42
1700 (+50.44%)
455.99
220.10
17.86
19.15
58,446.47
1130 to 1700 Eur/kW), only 19.15kW is installed with the consequent reduction of solar
power of 8.47 kW.
Second, as before, the solar energy installed in the secondary village remains stable
for the priority local energy enjoys, being solar energy the only generation source this
village possess. Similarly, the battery behaves with the same pattern showed with the
wind CAPEX variation, slightly decreasing when the wind is increased.
It’s interesting to note the distribution of technologies in table 4.3 after the CAPEX is
increased up to 1400 Eur/kW. This distribution is hold constant even though the price of
the solar energy keeps increasing. Moreover, it is a distribution that has already been
seen during the wind CAPEX variation (table 4.1), which was also held constant for some
step variations (wind CAPEX from 1000 to 800 Eur/kW).
It can be concluded that, as it happened with the wind CAPEX variation, the mix of energy
is not greatly influenced by the modification of the solar CAPEX. Moreover, the change suf-
fered in the capacities installed by implementing a change in the solar CAPEX of +50.44%
is smaller than the change produced by a change in the wind CAPEX of -55.36%, prov-
ing the great dependency this mini-grid has on solar energy. This dependency can also
be noted in the total annualized cost of the generation technologies, where the price has
increased from 50,027.88 Eur to 58,446.47 Eur (increase of 16.83%) while the system
energy distribution has remained very similar, i.e. it is a better solution to maintain this
energy distribution even though solar is more expensive than to modify the distribution
to reduce solar power. Again, that proves the inability of wind to easily substitute solar
power in this specific site.
4.1.3
Battery CAPEX variation
The battery is an essential element in a renewable based mini-grid, and therefore it can-
not be afforded to decrease it’s capacity as long as the CAPEX prices remain reasonable.
Increasing the battery installation price, encourages to decrease its capacity seeking an
alternative. The alternative, as mentioned, is add wind to the mix, but as widely seen, the
wind profile is not reliable enough to cover a big battery reduction. Therefore, as seen be-
fore and now again in table 4.4 and figure 4.3, it is a better solution to pay for the increased
cost of the battery rather than heavily rely on wind. It can be seen in table 4.4 that the wind
installed in the worst case considered with a battery CAPEX of 1500 Eur/kW (increase of
43.95% of the original price) is just 19.15 kW, a quantity already seen in both wind and
solar CAPEX variation. Therefore, the annualized cost of the generation technologies
with this CAPEX scenario would be 62950.70 Eur, an increase of 25.83% compared to
the initial cost. This is the highest increase seen since the system heavily depends on the
battery, and the majority of the cost comes directly from the battery installation as it will
24
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:30==
be seen in section 4.2.
Figure 4.3: Capacities variation as battery CAPEX is increased
Table 4.4: Capacities and total price of different battery CAPEX prices.
Solar CAPEX
[Eur/kW]
Battery [kWh]
PV1 [kW]
PV2 [kW]
Wind [kW]
Total Price per
year [Eur]
1042
463.04
228.57
17.86
0
50,027.88
1100 (+5.57%)
461.79
227.04
17.86
3.35
51,678.36
1200 (+15.16%)
460.58
225.60
17.86
6.58
54,515.30
1300 (+24.76%)
457.13
221.55
17.86
15.83
57,334.87
1400 (+34.36%)
455.99
220.10
17.86
19.15
60,145.18
1500 (+43.95%)
455.99
220.10
17.86
19.15
62,950.70
4.1.4
Conclusions
Even when applying a big price variation to any of the technologies considered, the initial
energy mix is not affected proportionally to such a big variation. The biggest difference
is the addition of wind energy to the mix, but always in a secondary role. However, the
addition of wind is achieved not only by the reduction of the wind energy price, but also
can be achieved if the solar or battery prices were a bit higher. Moreover, there is a
specific energy mix that was seen in different CAPEX scenarios, being quite stable since
once that scenario was reached, the capacities were held constant until a mayor CAPEX
variation happened. Only if wind keep decreasing to unrealistic levels, that equilibrium
is broken and more wind is installed, with its consequent slight reduction on solar and
battery capacities. This specific energy mix consist on a battery capacity of 455.99 kWh,
PV1 capacity of 220.10 kW, PV2 capacity of 17.86 kW, and wind capacity of 19.15 kW. The
percentage of each technology compared to the total installed capacity in this scenario is
PV1 accounting for 85.61% of the total capacity installed, PV2 for the 6.95%, and wind
for the 7.45%.
This scenario could be reached following different paths, being quite easy to end up in
this setting. The easiest way, however, is simply reducing the wind CAPEX 10.71% (from
1130 to 1000 Eur/kW). Since this energy distribution is easy to find, quite recurrent and
proved to be stable, the CAPEX scenario chosen for the remaining part of the thesis study
will be the following:
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
25
==PAGE:31==
Table 4.5: CAPEX of the different technologies used in the study case.
Battery [Eur/kWh]
PV [Eur/kW]
Wind [Eur/kW]
CAPEX
1042
1130
1000
4.2
GAMS Results
In this section only the preliminary results provided by GAMS for every scenario of every
stage will be discussed. This results, along with PowerFactory results, will be used to
build an expansion strategy discussed in section 5.
4.2.1
1st Stage: Isolated village, PV + battery, single phase AC.
As in every stage, two scenarios are considered in this stage: the initial and final scenario
of the stage. The technologies available in this stage for both scenarios are solar power
and Li-Ion battery storage to satisfy the demand of the isolated main village.
First Scenario:
The load profile of the initial scenario was described in section 3.1 and showed in figure
3.2a. The maximum peak demand of this scenario will be 2.53 kW, with an average con-
sumption of 1.12 kWh. For this scenario, the optimal installation determined by GAMS is
showed in table 4.6. The annualized cost represents the annualized cost of the gener-
ation technologies accounting the installation cost and the operational and maintenance
cost, plus the fine to pay for not having the battery full explained in equation 3.1.
Table 4.6: Optimal capacities to install in the initial scenario of the first stage.
Battery [kWh]
PV1 [kW]
Wind [kW]
PV2 [kW]
Annualized cost [Eur]
18.73
10.49
-
-
2,057.40
As seen in figure 4.4, the battery reached its limit almost every day, and therefore almost
every day energy was curtailed. However, it was cheaper to install more PV and curtail
energy than to increase the battery capacity and reduce the curtailed energy. Figure 4.4b
zooms in to show only seven days, the week in which the battery reaches 0 at the hour
1904 of the year.
(a) Battery level through the year
(b) Battery level through a week
Figure 4.4: Battery Level of the first stage, initial scenario.
26
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:32==
On the economic side, the total annualized cost including installation and maintenance
cost of the generation technologies, as explained in equation 3.1, is 2,057.40 euros, where
the total annualized installation cost accounts for 1,978.73 euros, the total OPEX for 15.10
euros and the total penalty 63.56 euros. Without considering the penalty imposed, not real
and simply added for the behavior of GAMS, the annuities compose 99.24% of the total
price and the OPEX simply 0.76%, reason why the only sensitivity analysis carried out
was on the CAPEX of the different technologies. Figure 4.6a breaks down the annualized
installation cost of the different technologies, showing how the battery accounts for the
majority of the expense of the project (63.13% of the annualized installation cost), while
the PV technology add the rest of the cost (36.87% of the installation cost).
Second Scenario:
For this scenario, the load profile was described in section 3.1 and showed in figure 3.3a.
The maximum peak demand of this scenario will be 7.6 kW, with an average consumption
of 3.36 kWh. For this scenario, the optimal installation determined by GAMS, along with
the annualized cost of the generation technologies, is showed in table 4.7.
Table 4.7: Optimal capacities to install in the last scenario of the first stage.
Battery [kWh]
PV1 [kW]
Wind [kW]
PV2 [kW]
Annualized cost [Eur]
57.74
29.64
-
-
6,150.90
Same as before, figure 4.5a shows how the battery reached its limit almost every day.
Figure 4.5b zooms in to show the same seven days, showed in figure 4.4b.
(a) Battery level through the year
(b) Battery level through a week
Figure 4.5: Battery Level of the first stage, final scenario.
On the economic side, the total cost to pay at the end of the year is 6,150.90 euros, where
the total annuities accounts for 5,914.05 euros (99.24% of the cost without considering
the penalty), the total OPEX for 45.344 euros and the total penalty 191.51 euros. Figure
4.6b breaks down the annualized installation cost of the different technologies, where the
battery accounts for the majority of the expense of the project and the PV completes the
rest of the cost. It can be seen how since the capacities installed did not increase with the
same factor, the annualized installation cost distribution slightly vary.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
27
==PAGE:33==
(a) Initial scenario of the first stage
(b) Final scenario of the first stage
Figure 4.6: Annualized installation cost distribution of the first stage.
4.2.2
2nd Stage: Isolated village, PV + wind + battery, three phase AC.
In this second stage, enough power to shift to a three phase system is achieved allowing
the use of wind power. The load profile of the initial scenario of this stage is exactly the
same as the last scenario of the previous stage. Again, in this section only the results
provided by GAMS will be discussed, and how to connect one stage with the next one will
be discussed in section 5.
First Scenario:
For this scenario, the load profile is the same as the load in the last scenario of the first
stage, having a maximum peak demand of 7.6 kW with an average consumption of 3.36
kWh. Adding wind to the technologies available, the optimal installation and its conse-
quent annualized cost of the generation technologies determined by GAMS is shown in
table 4.6.
Table 4.8: Optimal capacities to install in the initial scenario of the second stage.
Battery [kWh]
PV1 [kW]
Wind [kW]
PV2 [kW]
Annualized cost [Eur]
57.45
29.28
0.841
-
6,148.73
(a) Battery level through the year
(b) Battery level through the week
Figure 4.7: Battery Level of the second stage, initial scenario.
28
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:34==
Same as before, figure 4.5a shows how the battery reached its limit almost every day.
Moreover, it can be seen how the lowest level of every day is higher than in the figure
4.5a, where the load profile was the same but wind was not added in the mix to support
the battery at night. Figure 4.5b zooms in to show the same seven days, showed in figure
4.4b.
On the economic side, the total annualized installation cost is 6,148.73 euros. Adding
wind brings down the price from 6,150.90 euros of the last scenario in the previous stage
to 6,148.73 in this initial scenario of the second stage, always according to the model
written in GAMS. This price reduction is the reason why GAMS included wind in the mix.
Again, this costs should be taken as a guidance and not as absolute realistic values since
not all the costs were considered in the model.
Figure 4.9a breaks down the annualized installation cost of the different technologies,
where wind merely accounts for 0.87% of the cost.
Second Scenario:
In this second scenario, the final scenario of the second stage, the load increases until a
secondary village is big enough to install a 3 phase system and can be connected to the
main village. The load profile of this scenario has increased as described in section 3.1,
having a maximum peak demand of 38 kW with an average consumption of 16.82 kWh.
The optimal energy mix installation determined by GAMS, along with the consequent an-
nualized cost of the generation technologies, is showed in table 4.9.
Table 4.9: Optimal capacities to install in the last scenario of the second stage.
Battery [kWh]
PV1 [kW]
Wind [kW]
PV2 [kW]
Annualized cost [Eur]
298.15
145.73
11.34
-
31,766.96
Figure 4.8a shows the battery level over the year, and figure 4.8b zooms in to show the
same seven days as in previous scenarios. As mentioned before, the addition of wind
supports the battery at night, and having a higher wind penetration in this final scenario
of the second stage (7.2% of the total generation capacity installed) than in the initial
scenario of this stage (2.8% of the total capacity installed) causes the minimum battery
level of each day to be higher than in the previous scenario, as can be seen in figure 4.8a.
(a) Battery level through the year
(b) Battery level through the week
Figure 4.8: Battery Level of the second stage, final scenario.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
29
==PAGE:35==
The higher wind penetration in this scenario compared to the previous one can be ob-
served in figure 4.9b, where the distribution of the annualized installation cost of the dif-
ferent technologies are shown.
(a) Initial scenario of the second stage
(b) Final scenario of the second stage
Figure 4.9: Annuities distribution of the second stage.
4.2.3
3rd Stage: Interconnection of two neighbor villages, sharing the
wind turbine and the battery.
In this third stage, the secondary village with its own solar panels is connected to the main
village, sharing the wind power and the battery of the the main village.
First Scenario:
This is the first time that moving to the next stage, the total load profile is not the same as
in the last scenario of the previous stage. The reason is, while the main village have the
same load profile as in the previous case, the secondary village is added too. Therefore,
the maximum peak demand of this scenario is 38 kW of the main village plus 7.6 kW
of the secondary village, adding a total peak consumption of 45.6 kW, with an average
consumption of 20.18 kWh considering both of the villages. The optimal capacities to
install in this scenario deemed by GAMS are shown in table 4.10 along with the annualized
cost of the generation technologies.
Table 4.10: Optimal capacities to install in the first scenario of the third stage.
Battery [kWh]
PV1 [kW]
Wind [kW]
PV2 [kW]
Annualized cost [Eur]
358.24
164.51
15.24
10.25
38,261.31
As seen in table 4.10, even though the load profile of the main village has not increased,
the solar power in the main village is increased compared to the last scenario of the
previous stage. The reason is, even though the battery is shared, it is located in the main
village and therefore, the main village will have to balance the demand of the second
village, i.e. absorb the extra power generated in the second village and provide energy
when the second village is not producing enough, and providing energy from a generation
source is more efficient since the battery suffers a round-trip efficiency losses.
Figure 4.5a shows the battery level every hour of the year and figure 4.5b zooms in to
show the usual seven days.
30
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:36==
(a) Battery level through the year
(b) Battery level through the week
Figure 4.10: Battery Level of the third stage, initial scenario.
Breaking down the annualized installation cost of the different technologies in figure 4.12a,
the battery accounts for 64.58% of the annuities, PV1 for 30.96%, wind for 2.54%, and
PV2 for 1.93% of the annuities.
Last Scenario:
This last scenario is the moment in which the national grid arrives, and therefore it is
the last scenario in which the mini-grid stands on its own, as well as the last scenario
simulated with GAMS. The moment of arrival of the national grid is completely arbitrary,
and it was decided to occur once the main village has increased its size 20 times, to allow
the mini-grid to go through all the stages while isolated. The maximum peak demand of
this scenario is 50.6 kW of the main village plus 10.12 kW of the secondary village, adding
a total of 60.72 kW, with an average consumption of 26.87 kWh considering both of the
villages. The optimal capacities to install in this scenario calculated by GAMS along with
the total annualized cost of these technologies are shown in table 4.11.
Table 4.11: Optimal capacities to install in the last scenario of the third stage.
Battery [kWh]
PV1 [kW]
Wind [kW]
PV2 [kW]
Annualized cost [Eur]
455.99
220.10
19.15
17.86
49,960.04
(a) Battery level through the year
(b) Battery level through the week
Figure 4.11: Battery Level of the third stage, final scenario.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
31
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.11a shows the battery level every hour of the year and figure 4.11b zooms in to
show the usual seven days.
Breaking down the annualized installation cost of the different technologies in figure 4.12b,
the battery accounts for 63.26% of the annuities, PV1 for 31.72%, wind for 2.44%, and
PV2 for 2.57% of the annuities.
(a) Initial scenario of the third stage
(b) Final scenario of the third stage
Figure 4.12: Annuities distribution of the third stage.
4.2.4
4th Stage: Connection to the national power grid.
In this stage, the national grid arrives to the main village. Having the national grid con-
nection available, the electricity price usually drops and therefore the electricity demand
increases [3]. For the purpose of this study, the demand was increased 25% with respect
to the previous scenario (third stage, last scenario). At the same time, the generation tech-
nologies will not increase since the extra energy demand will be covered by the national
grid. Hence, GAMS will not be needed since the installed capacities will remain the same
as in the last scenario of the third stage. In addition, the generation technologies will not
curtail energy. Instead, the extra energy produced will be exported to the national grid,
one of the benefits the mini-grid will cause on the national grid. The capacities installed
at this point in the mini grid are:
Table 4.12: Optimal capacities installed when the national grid arrives.
Battery [kWh]
PV1 [kW]
Wind [kW]
PV2 [kW]
358.24
164.51
15.24
10.25
Since no optimization is needed in this case, i.e. no decision making is needed because
there is no curtailment and the capacities installed are fixed, a simple model to see the
main power flows is built in excel. This file will be needed to calculate an approximation of
the battery flow for each hour of the year, being an approximation since the energy losses
considered in this model are the same as the losses considered in GAMS in the previous
stages. In this forth stage with the national grid, there will be two balancing elements in
the mini-grid for the first time: the battery and the national grid. However, in PowerFactory
only one element can be balancing the system. Therefore, having a good approximation
32
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:38==
of the battery flow of each hour as an input to PowerFactory will enable the national grid
to behave as the only balancing element of the grid.
This simple model can be built since the demand (increased by a 25%) as well as the
power generation profiles and capacities (fixed power production since no curtailment
is available anymore) are known, and therefore only the power balancing equation is
needed to see how the system is being balanced. The battery will have preference over
the national grid to balance the mini-grid to promote the local consumption of energy,
avoiding the power losses of transporting energy from a far location. In case the battery
reaches an operational limit (the in/out power flow of the battery reaches its rated power
or the battery capacity is full/empty), the national grid will then balance the system.
The demand of both villages are known, as well as all the hourly production. To calculate
the power flows, and having in mind that the system in this stage is as described in figure
2.4, the starting point will be the second village. The difference between the demand of
the second village and its solar energy produced will be imported or exported through the
connection with the main village through the wind site.
demand2t −PV 2t = import2t,
demand2t > PV 2t
PV 2t −demand2t = export2t,
demand2t < PV 2t
(4.1)
Whenever there is need to import energy to the second village, wind energy will provide
that amount if it can produce enough energy to cover the import2t. This wind priority
comes from the fact that, as described in 3.3, the efficiencies of the energy sent from
one village to the other is assumed to be 90%, and, since the wind site is assumed to be
in between, the wind efficiency is assumed to be 95%. Therefore, when there is import
needed in the secondary village, the wind directed to the second village is described in
equation 4.2.
wind2t = import2t
0.95
,
windt > import2t
0.95
wind2t = windt,
windt ≤import2t
0.95
(4.2)
On the other hand, whenever there is a surplus of solar energy and the second village is
exporting energy, all the wind as well as the energy exported from the secondary village
is sent to the first village to be dealt with since the battery and the national grid are located
in the main village. As a result of the wind directed to the second village, the wind sent to
the first village is expressed as:
wind1t = windt −wind2t
(4.3)
Whenever the wind production cannot cover all the import needed by the secondary vil-
lage, the remaining energy will come from the main village, with the mentioned 90% of
efficiency due to resistive losses on the transmission line. Similarly, the energy imported
to the main village will be the exported energy from the secondary village plus the the
wind energy flowing to the main village, as expressed in equations 4.4 and 4.5
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
33
==PAGE:39==
export1t = import2t −(wind2t · 0.95)
0.9
(4.4)
import1t = (wind1t · 0.95) + (export2t · 0.9)
(4.5)
Finally, knowing all the power flows of the system, the balance equation can be expressed
as:
PV 1t + import1t −export1t −demand1t = balancet
(4.6)
As aforementioned, this balancet will be the battery flow as long as the battery can han-
dle it, i.e. balancet is withing the battery rated power and the level of the battery never
surpasses its capacity or goes below zero. Whenever the battery cannot satisfy all the
balancing needed by the mini-grid, the national grid connection will take care of the rest
- exporting when the battery reach its maximum capacity and importing when the bat-
tery is empty. Figures 4.13 and 4.14 show the battery level through the year and the
import/export from the national grid.
It can be seen in figure 4.13 that the minimum level of the battery of every day is notably
lower due to the 25% increase in the demand of both villages. Moreover, the battery
empties more often than before, obviously needing the national grid to import energy.
However, comparing figures 4.13 and 4.14, it can be seen that the mini-grid needs to
import energy from the grid even during periods in which the battery is not empty, meaning
that the power the battery can deliver is not enough to cover the demand during this
specific hours. On the other hand, even though the battery level reaches lower values
than before due to the increase in the demand, the battery still reaches its top capacity
since the generation technologies are not curtailing energy anymore. This extra energy
allows the battery to often be fully charged during some hours of the day. Moreover,
looking into figure 4.14, it can be seen that the national grid connection is used more
often to export the energy that is not curtailed than to import energy from the national
grid.
In addition, the amount of energy exported at the end of the year is 96,119.83 kWh, while
the amount imported is 4,533.77 kWh. Therefore, the energy exported accounts for the
95.5% of the total energy transported through the national grid, while the imported energy
accounts for the remaining 4.5%.
Figure 4.13: Battery level through the year with the national grid connection.
34
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.14: Import and export from the national grid every hour of the year.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
35
==PAGE:41==
5
Analysis and Expansion Strategy
The first thing to analyze will be the last stage, when the national grid arrives. Using
Power Factory to analyze the load flows and the loading of each element for every hour
of the year, an ideal scenario is set with ideal components of infinite capacities to ensure
the functioning of the model. Once it has been proved that the model is running, realistic
elements are chosen so the loading and the voltages of the different elements and termi-
nals are within the limit but not oversized, which would incur in higher prices than needed
and in some cases lower efficiencies. The reason of analyzing this scenario first is to
ensure that the final sizing will be appropriate at the end of the project, and in addition
understand the requirements of this stage that could be satisfied in earlier stages. The
elements in which the loading is considered are transformers, and transmission and dis-
tribution lines. The generators and the battery are not analyzed since its ideal sizing was
decided in GAMS. In addition, the capacity of the AC/DC converter connecting the DC bus
with the AC distribution system is not analyzed in PowerFactory since its capacity was
already defined in the load study, marking the moment in which it was allowed to evolve
from single phase to three phase system. Having multi-clusters in parallel of three single
phase converters, a three phase converter is formed with 11.2 kW each cluster (3.8kW ·3)
[11, 12]. Additional clusters can be added in parallel to obtain an equivalent converter with
a capacity of 11.2 kW times the number of clusters in parallel. Following this procedure,
more power can be achieved without replacing the previous device and therefore be able
to use each converter during its entire lifetime, reducing unnecessary cost.
The process is followed for the assessment of all the elements is the same: performing a
Quasi-Dynamic simulation of the entire year to check the maximum and minimum loading
of each element, identify the date and hour of those maximum and minimum loading,
investigate the load flow of that specific hour, and select a specific element according to
the characteristics and requirements of this specific load flow. By selecting the capacity of
the elements during the hour in which they suffer the higher loading, it is ensured the lines
and transformers will be able to perform under the operational limits every other hour of
the year.
Besides the loading of every element, the list of voltages at each bus is also assessed to
check the voltage remains under reasonable limits (±10%).
Figure 5.1 represents the mini-grid in PowerFactory during the last stage. As mentioned
before, the elements that needed to be given realistic characteristics were the transform-
ers (transformer 1 and 2), distribution lines (distrib. 1 and 2), and transmission lines
(transm. 1 and 2). After selecting some real devices from the PowerFactory library to
account for the losses of the system, the loading of the mentioned elements for the last
scenario considered are shown in figure 5.2.
In the list shown in figure 5.2, it can be seen that the battery is added in line 6. However,
the data depicted in the table is not correct, since the date shown is 1970 instead of
2019. Taking a closer look to the other elements, all of them remain under 100%, avoiding
overloading. Regarding the transmission lines, PowerFactory is prepared to simulate
bigger energy systems, and all the transmission lines of 6 kV had an amperage notably
greater than the one needed, resulting in a very low maximum loading. Therefore, the
smallest cable found for 6 kV was used in both of the transmission lines and the rated
current was diminished to get a nominal capacity of 5 Amps - after stepping up the voltage
36
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:42==
Figure 5.1: Power Factory representation of the mini grid during the last stage.
Figure 5.2: Maximum and minimum loading of the different elements of the mini grid during
the last stage through the year.
from 0.4kV to 6kV, the maximum current flowing through the transmission lines occurs
during the 1st of April at 9 PM, where the current is merely 4.252 Amps. On the distribution
lines, there were elements in the library that would result in a higher maximum loading
adjusting better to the 100%, but the voltage drop through the line was too big to be
acceptable, and therefore the distribution cables had to be chosen to avoid a voltage
drop of more than 10%. Moreover, since in the second village the load and the production
are very low, even selecting the cable with the smallest capacity is still only achieving a
maximum load of 26.833%.
Regarding the voltage at each bus, figure 5.3 shows the the maximum and minimum
voltages achieved, arranging the maximum voltages in figure 5.3a and the minumum
voltages in figure 5.3b. It can be seen that the maximum voltage achieved in the system
through the year is 1.089 p.u., less than the 10% allowed, while the minimum voltage
achieved in the system is 0.905 p.u., also inside the 10% variation allowed. Therefore,
all the voltages of the system are within the operational limits through the year. However,
as mentioned before, the minimum voltage achieved of 0.905 p.u. in the load bus 2 and
0.916 in the load bus 1 (the bus at the end of the distribution lines) is within the allowed
limit because the capacity of the distribution line was selected to be greater than needed
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
37
==PAGE:43==
in terms of loading. Adjusting the distribution line by selecting a cable with fewer capacity
will bring the voltage at the end of the lines below the allowed 0.9 p.u.
(a) List of the maximum voltages achieved.
(b) List of the minimum voltages achieved.
Figure 5.3: Voltage limits achieved through the year.
In the last stage, the national grid is widely used to balance the reactive power besides
exporting the extra energy and importing energy when needed, as shown in figure 5.4.
Therefore, it had to be study if these elements selected were working properly in the
previous stage without the national grid available to balance the reactive power. The
national grid was always absorbing the reactive power created by the system since the
loads defined were only active loads. Therefore, the mini-grid is constantly exporting a
quantity around 40 kVAR of reactive power.
On the other hand, the loading in the previous stages should not be a problem if this same
devices are installed then, since the load flow of the system will be lower.
Figure 5.4: National grid contribution of active and reactive power through the year.
Following the same procedure as explained for the last stage, the Quasi-Dynamic simula-
tion was performed to get the maximum loading of the elements of interest as well as the
maximum and minimum voltage of each bus on each scenario of each stage. Table 5.1
and 5.2 summarize the results. The analysis is performed from the last scenario to the
initial to see how the loading of the elements decreases as the previous stages take place.
However, the first stage could not be analyzed in power factory since the converter used
38
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:44==
in PowerFactory only allows three phases. Despite not having the PowerFactory confir-
mation, only the distribution line in the first village is still in place, and since the power
flowing in the first stage is the lowest of all scenarios, there is no reason to think the line
will be overloaded.
Table 5.1: Maximum loading of the devices during the different scenarios of the different
stages.
Device
Stage 3:
Last scenario
Stage 3:
First scenario
Stage 2:
Last scenario
Stage 2:
First scenario
Transformer 1
21.75%
20.45%
11.32%
9.40%
Transformer 2
70.46%
51.30%
-
-
Trans. Line 1
66.74%
62.79%
34.84%
28.84%
Trans. Line 2
43.96%
39.36%
-
-
Distr. Line 1
42.40%
31.27%
31.27%
6.00%
Distr. Line 2
20.84%
15.34%
-
-
Table 5.2: Maximum and minimum voltage in the system during the different scenarios of
the different stages.
Stage 3:
Last scenario
Stage 3:
First scenario
Stage 2:
Last scenario
Stage 2:
First scenario
Max voltage [p.u.]
1.09
1.06
1.05
1.01
Min voltage [p.u.]
0.91
0.94
0.95
0.99
Once the loading and the voltage are proved to remain within the limits, a closer look to
the reactive power previously absorbed by the national grid is assessed. Performing a
single load flow for any hour it can be seen that the element of the mini-grid absorbing the
reactive energy is the converter in the main village, shown in figure 5.1.
5.1
Expansion Strategy
In this section, the strategy to evolve the mini-grid as the demand increases will be dis-
cussed gathering all the results achieved through this paper.
5.1.1
Capacity Evolution of the Generation Technologies
The first aspect to analyze will be how to install all the generation power in a fashion that
is both realistic and reasonable while following the energy demand. Thanks to the study
performed in section 4.2 with GAMS, the optimal energy mix is calculated for the initial
and the final scenario of every stage. The reason why it is only analyzed the starting and
ending point of each stage is to assess the moments in which the system experiments a
major change. The changes happening in between the initial scenario of a stage and the
final scenario of that same stage are trivial on the generation perspective, simply having
to install more capacity of solar power and battery storage as the demand increases. To
gradually increase the capacity of solar power and battery capacity is quite straightfor-
ward, achieved by simply installing more solar panels and battery cells on the same bus.
On the other hand, increasing wind power implies a sudden step-increase when dealing
with a demand this modest since each wind turbine has a high capacity compared to a sin-
gle solar panel. Table 5.3 summarizes the optimal capacities to install deemed by GAMS
for the different scenarios.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
39
==PAGE:45==
Table 5.3: Capacities and total annualized price as the mini-grid evolves.
Stage and
Scenario
Battery
[kWh]
PV1
[kW]
Wind
[kW]
PV2
[kW]
Total annualized
price [Eur]
St1: sc1
18.73
10.49
-
-
2,057.40
St1: sc2
57.74
29.64
-
-
6,150.90
St2: sc1
57.45
29.28
0.841
-
6,148.73
St2: sc2
2298.15
145.73
11.34
-
31,766.96
St3: sc1
358.24
164.51
15.24
10.25
38,261.31
St3: sc2
455.99
220.10
19.15
17.86
49,960.04
As mentioned before, there is no complication installing the quantities proposed in the
initial scenario since solar power and batteries capacity are very scalable. Gradually
increasing the power generation capacity to follow the demand growth from the initial
scenario to the last scenario of the first stage will not be a challenge since, being single
phase, wind is not an option yet. Therefore, solar power and the battery capacity can
be scaled as the demand increases until the last scenario of the first stage is reached,
once the load demands enough power to change the system from a single phase to three
phase.
Reached this moment, wind can be added to the mix. It can be noted that, adding wind
to the mix while having the same load profile (the first scenario of the second stage has
the same load profile as the last scenario of the first stage), the optimal capacity of solar
power and the battery has diminished. In a realistic scenario, the capacities of these tech-
nologies would not be reduced if the demand is expected to keep growing in the future.
Therefore, the solar power and the battery capacities will remain unaltered. In addition, it
is not realistic to install merely 0.841 kW of wind energy. Looking into the last scenario of
this second stage, 11.34 kW of wind will be needed. Due to the already mentioned lack
of flexibility for wind turbines to escalate, the most realistic capacity to install to obtain a
similar magnitude to the capacity proposed is a wind turbine of 10 kW. Since this amount
will be used in the future, and it is not easy to install wind turbines with lower capacity,
this 10 kW will be installed in the first scenario of the second stage as soon as the sys-
tem evolves to a three phase system. Therefore, the capacities to install at the beginning
of the second stage is just 10 kW of wind turbine, since the other existing technologies
will remain constant due to the inefficiency of decreasing its capacities to increase it af-
terwards. This new logic is tested in GAMS, adding the constraint of a minimum wind
capacity of 10 kW and the solar power and battery capacities with a minimum of its previ-
ous capacity of 29.64 kW of solar power and 57.74 kWh of battery capacity. As a result,
GAMS confirmed that the optimal mix of energy under this constraints are the minimum
capacities allowed in the constraints. Table 5.4 will summarize the capacities to install
with the realistic constraints.
While the demand grows once in the second stage until reaching the last scenario of the
second stage, the strategy to follow the the demand growth is to install solar power and
more battery capacity as needed, since the wind capacity installed is already what will
be optimal in the last scenario of this second stage. However, increasing the solar and
battery capacities might not be needed at first since the wind installed at the beginning of
this second stage is more than needed at the moment. Therefore, running GAMS with the
demand profile of the end of the second stage and the constrains of wind turbine capacity
of fixed 10 kW, the optimal energy mix under this constrains is 146.31 kW of solar power,
10 kW of wind power, and 298.62 kWh of Li-Ion battery.
40
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:46==
The starting point of the third stage is marked by the connection of the secondary village to
the main mini-grid. As a consequence, advancing from the second stage to the third stage
implies a sudden increase of the total load at the beginning of a stage, something that only
occurs from stage two to stage three. Adding this second load while keeping the main load
as in the last scenario of the previous stage, not only brings the addition of a secondary
source of solar power to the system, but it also increases the wind capacity and the solar
power and battery capacity in the main village, reasons explained already in section 4.2.3.
As it happened at the beginning of the second stage, the proposed increase in wind power
by GAMS, just 5.24 kW, would require a wind turbine too small to be efficient, as it can
be seen from the different prices per kW for large wind turbines and small wind turbines
[18]. In addition, the demand is expected to keep increasing, and the wind installed will
not be enough in the coming years. Looking at the last scenario of the third stage, GAMS
proposed a wind capacity of 19.15 kW. This amount is approximated to 20 kW to get a
more realistic value. Following the same reasoning as in the first scenario of the second
stage, the new amount of wind installed will be what is needed in the future due to its lack
of scalability. This way, the wind capacity at the beginning of the third stage will be 20 kW,
increasing 10 kW compared to the last scenario of the previous stage. Forcing GAMS to
install a total of 20 kW of wind power, the modified optimal mix for this initial scenario of
the third stage is 162.47 kW of solar power in the main village, 10.25 kW of solar power
in the secondary village, 20 kW of wind energy, and 356.60 kWh of battery capacity.
As in the previous stage, the wind does not need to be increased through the evolution of
this stage. Therefore, as the demand increases, more solar power and battery capacity
are to be installed as needed. In the last scenario of the third stage, just before the national
grid arrives, the optimal energy mix proposed under realistic constraints are 219.09 kW of
solar power in the main village, 18.87 kW of solar power in the secondary village, 20 kW
of wind, and 455.68 kWh of Li-Ion battery capacity. At this point, the national grid arrives
and these generation capacities will not be expanded anymore.
The wind installed at the beginning of stages 2 and 3 does not necessarily have be the
amount of wind required at the end of the stage. Instead, the amount of wind to be installed
at the beginning of the stage should try to minimize the overshooting as much as possible.
However, since it is difficult to install smaller wind turbines than 10 kW, this quantity is
selected. It is merely a coincidence that the amount required at the end of the stage is
exactly an increase of 10 kW. Therefore, if the required wind energy at the end of the
stage was an increase considerably higher than 10 kW, only a wind turbine of 10 kW
will be installed, eventually having to install more 10 kW wind turbines. However, if the
required increase of wind power during a stage was significantly smaller than 10 kW, a
wind turbine of 10 kW would be installed as long as the wind needed in the future is
expected to increase at least 10 kW, even if the increase happens in a future stage.
Table 5.4 summarizes the capacities to install in each scenario of each stage and the total
annualized cost as a result of minimizing the objective function showed in equation 3.1,
showing in brackets the previously proposed capacities by GAMS without realistic values.
Figure 5.5 shows the comparison between the optimal evolution of the capacities of the
different generation technologies suggested by GAMS without considering the wind scal-
ability difficulties (figure 5.5a), and the the same capacity evolution after a realistic ap-
proach was considered (figure 5.5b). The only noticeable difference can be appreciated
on the wind evolution. Figure (a) allows a gradual increase in the wind capacity, whereas
figure (b) shows the realistic approach. Besides this wind behavior, the other capacities
are not significantly affected, leading into a mix of energy very similar to the optimal sug-
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
41
==PAGE:47==
gestion. Therefore, this realistic constrains does not incur in a relevant increase in the
total annualized cost.
Table 5.4: Realistic capacities and total annualized price as the mini-grid evolves.
Stage and
Scenario
Battery [kWh]
PV1 [kW]
Wind [kW]
PV2 [kW]
Total Price per
year [Eur]
St1: sc1
18.73 (18.73)
10.49 (10.49)
-
-
2057.40
St1: sc2
57.74 (57.74)
29.64 (29.64)
-
-
6150.90
St2: sc1
57.74 (57.45)
29.64 (29.28)
10 (0.841)
-
6692.72
St2: sc2
298.62 (298.15)
146.31 (145.73)
10 (11.34)
-
31767.34
St3: sc1
356.60 (358.24)
162.47 (164.51)
20 (15.24)
10.25 (10.25)
38264.08
St3: sc2
455.68 (455.99)
219.09 (220.10)
20 (19.15)
18.87 (17.86)
49978.62
(a) Optimal evolution of the capacities
(b) Real evolution of the capacities
Figure 5.5: Evolution of the capacities through all the stages.
Running all the different scenarios in GAMS with the realistic capacities to installed sum-
marized in table 5.4, the realistic values for production, curtailment, and annuity cost are
updated. Figure 5.6 depicts the evolution of the production of the different technologies
for the new scenarios.
On the initial scenario of the second stage, when 10 kW of wind is added to the 29.64
kW of solar power in the main village, the total energy produced is 29,980.21 kWh, of
which 82.32% comes from solar power and the other 17.68% comes from the wind. It is
interesting to note that the production in this scenario is less than in the previous scenario
even when the load profile is exactly the same - the production during the final scenario
of the first stage is 30,224.29 kWh. The reason for this slight decrease is the addition of
wind, reducing the amount of battery use and therefore avoiding the round-trip efficiency
of the battery. Although the wind power is entitled of the 17.68% of the production, it
accounts for the 25.23% of the total generation capacity installed. The lower percentage
in the production can be explained because, if there is need to curtail energy, the wind
energy will be curtailed first since, even though very small, the operation cost of producing
one kWh once the wind turbine is installed (OPEX) is higher than the solar cost (0.0028
Eur/kWh for wind power while 0.0015 Eur/kWh for solar power).
In the following scenario, the final scenario of the second stage, the total energy produced
42
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:48==
is 150,956.20 kWh, where 93.16% of the production comes from solar power and only
6.84% comes from the wind. This sudden decrease in wind participation accounts for
the increase in the load and the correspondent increase in solar power, whereas the
wind installed remained constant. However, wind power produced 10,320.43 kWh by
the end of the year, doubling the energy produced the previous scenario with the same
capacity installed. The reason is the wind capacity installed for the previous scenario
was greater than the optimal capacity needed, and therefore the energy curtailed was
quite considerable. In this scenario, the energy mix is very close to the optimal mix, and
therefore the curtailment went back to optimal levels.
The same wind reduction in the share of the energy produced can be seen comparing
the initial and the last scenario of the third stage due to the same reasoning: the wind
capacity is not increased moving from the first to the last scenario while the solar and the
battery capacities were increased. Despite this wind penetration decrease, the reduction
is smaller than the one experienced during the second stage since the overshoot of wind
installed at the beginning of the stage is also smaller. More about this overshoot in the
wind capacity at the beginning of stages two and three is explained next.
(a) Evolution of the production
(b) Evolution of the production percentages
Figure 5.6: Evolution of the production through all the stages.
Figure 5.7 depicts the evolution of the production/curtailment ratio for the new scenarios.
It can be seen from figure 5.7 that the production is usually around 60% of the maximum
production available, except in the initial scenario of the second stage. This sudden drop
(a) Evolution of the production/curtailment
(b) Evolution of the curtailment percentages
Figure 5.7: Evolution of the production/curtailment through all the stages.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
43
==PAGE:49==
is explain by the overshot in the capacities installed by adding 10 kW of wind power to the
system instead of following a gradual implementation. Following this logic, the curtailment
in the first scenario of the third stage should suffer the same consequences. However, the
overshot in the capacity installed in this scenario is not as large as it is in the first scenario
of the second stage. The overshot in wind capacity the first time wind is added to the mix
is 9.159 kW more than needed, while the overshot during the second time wind is added
to the mix is merely 4.76 kW. Moreover, the load during the first time wind is added to the
mix has a maximum demand of 7.6 kW, whereas the maximum load during the second
time wind is added is 38 kW. Therefore, an overshot of 9.159 kW over a demand of 7.6
kW has a greater impact than an overshot of 4.76 kW over a demand of 38 kW.
On the economic aspect, only the annualized installation cost of each technology is an-
alyzed since this cost accounts in all cases for a minimum percentage of 96.15% of the
total annualized cost. Figure 5.8 depicts the evolution of the annuity distribution for the
new scenarios. The battery accounts in every scenario for 60% of the cost, while the
other 40% is distributed throughout the generation technologies (solar power in the main
village, shared wind, and solar power in the secondary village).
In the first scenario of the second stage, with the sudden addition of 10 kW of wind,
9.46% of the cost is related to the wind energy while the solar power in the main village is
responsible for 31.70% of the cost. Since the wind is not increased for the next scenario,
the wind share in the cost of the last scenario of the second stage is reduced to 2.01%.
Figure 5.8: Annuity distribution evolution through the stages
5.1.2
Complete evolution of the mini-grid
After the analysis of all the results obtained, this section presents the final assessment on
how to evolve a mini-grid to adapt to the increasing demand. This strategy is considering
a small town in the region of Kisii, Kenya. However, the same strategy can be followed in
any site as long as the same study performed through this thesis is carried out for the new
site, simply adapting the input given to GAMS. In this new site, the capacities to install of
the generation technologies will vary due to the different meteorological conditions, but the
evolution of the mini-grid can follow the same pattern. Another important aspect to take in
consideration is the rate of growth foresighted for each mini-grid, being notably different
depending on various aspects such as economic power of the civilians or cultural habits.
This rate of growth, however, will only affect the evolution of the mini-grid at the moment
of replacing some elements of the mini-grid once its end of life is reached. In fact, the
stages already defined are not affected by this rate of growth, i.e. the evolution of the
mini-grid is driven by the increase in the load, no matter the speed of growth.
44
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:50==
Stage 1: Isolated village, PV + battery, single phase AC.
As explained when describing the first stage of the system in section 2, this initial stage
will consist of a single phase AC system with small electricity demand provided by solar
power along with a Li-Ion battery. As defined in the load analysis, section 3.1, the max-
imum power demand in the initial scenario is 2.53 kW. To satisfy this initial demand, as
analyzed in section 5.1.1, the optimal energy mix to install (following the assumptions of
the technologies available) is 10.49 kW of solar power along with a Li-Ion battery of 18.73
kWh. Both of the technologies operate with DC energy, and therefore will be connected
to the same DC bus. As mentioned in section 2.1, the battery is the element setting the
voltage of the bus since it is directly connected to the DC bus while the solar panels are
connected through a DC/DC converter to track its maximum efficiency output [8]. To con-
nect this DC bus to the AC part of the system, a single phase converter with maximum
power of 3.8 kW [11] will be used. This converter has a minimum DC voltage of 100 V,
according to its data-sheet. Therefore, since the battery is the element setting the voltage,
enough battery cells in series should be added to ensure a voltage of at least 100 V (bat-
tery cells in series increase the voltage at the terminals, parallel battery cells increases the
current). The voltage of the DC bus will be raised in the future to allow more power flow
without resulting in a current too high, so this power electronics (DC/DC transformer and
the AC/DC converter) are to be designed to stand higher voltages, allowing an increase
in the voltage without the need of replacing these devices.
The AC part of the system will have a voltage of 240 volts, since many loads are designed
to operate at that level. This AC voltage will be set by the converter. The distribution cable
to install connecting the converter and the load will be a three phase with neutral phase
cable, following the parallel scheme showed in figure 5.9 to achieve a single phase cable
with the double of the capacity. This parallel scheme is not done to increase the capacity
of the cable, which under a 3 phase system would have a maximum amperage of 184 A
according to the model used in PowerFactory, but to install the optimum capacity needed
in the last scenario considered, saving time and money avoiding to replace an eventually
insufficient distribution cable. This action is advised only if the lifespan of the cable is
superior to the years that will pass until this 3 phase cable with 184 A capacity is needed.
Otherwise, a cheaper cable with smaller capacity can be installed since it will have to be
replaced before this high capacity is needed, using that renovation to install the cable with
higher capacity. With all these installations the initial scenario will be working under the
operational limits, as proved in section 5 with the PowerFactory study.
Figure 5.9: Parallel scheme of a three phase with neutral cable, used as single phase.
The load will start to increase, and the battery and the solar power installed will have to be
increased to meet the demand increase. These two technologies are easily scalable by
simple adding more solar panels and battery cells to the DC bus. However, increasing the
capacity of the battery by installing more battery cells in series will result in a higher voltage
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
45
==PAGE:51==
of the bus. While this voltage increase has its benefits since more power is allowed to
flow through the bus without excessive currents (P = V · I), the AC/DC converter has a
maximum DC voltage of 600 V that should never be surpassed. What to do if this voltage
limit is reached will be explained later on.
The increase in the generation capacity to follow the demand growth will be carried out
until the maximum outflow power the DC bus has to provide to the load reaches 3.8 kW,
the maximum power flow the AC/DC converter can handle. Once that power is reached,
a second single phase AC/DC converter is to be installed in parallel with the previous one
to increase the capacity of the power flow to 7.6 kW (doubling the rated power). As the
load keeps increasing, more solar power and battery capacity will be installed as needed
to get the optimum mix, performing the same study done in section 4.2 with GAMS to
calculate the optimal mix. Once the load requires 7.6 kW, a third single phase converter
is to be installed to increase the power capacity that can be delivered from the DC bus.
This point is the last scenario studied of the first stage, where the optimal energy mix will
require to have installed a total of 57.74 kWh battery and a 29.64 kW of solar power to
satisfy a demand with a maximum demand of 7.6 kW during peak hours. Once the third
single phase converter is installed to allow the system to keep increasing, a three phase
system can be formed [12], and the second stage is reached.
Stage 2: Isolated village, PV + wind + battery, three phase AC.
On the second stage, having a three phase system allows the voltage to increase in the
AC distribution part of the system to 400 V line to line (240 ·
√
3). The only change to be
done in the distribution cable will be to connect the cable as a conventional three phase
cable, since the capacity was selected to be enough for all the scenarios considered. This
change in the connection simply requires changing from the parallel scheme to a natural
three phase system, having each converter directly attached to a different phase.
Moreover, thanks to possibility of having a three phase system, wind can be added to
the system. In order to add wind, a location with a good wind profile has to be found.
It is assumed in this thesis that the wind location is 5 km away from the city. Another
assumption is that this best wind location is in between the main village in which this
initial mini-grid is being installed and a secondary village with its own mini-grid (5 times
smaller) which will also be interested in the wind provided at this site since it provides the
best power profile in the area. Having the wind in between these two villages, and both
wanting to connect to it, the interconnection of the two villages will eventually be done
through the wind once the secondary village reaches the necessary load of 7.6 kW to
install a third converter and shift to a three phase system.
Therefore, to minimize the losses on the transmission line, the voltage level is to be
stepped up to 6 kV, decreasing the current flowing through it and hence the losses. As a
consequence, a three phase transformer will be installed on the main village converting
the 0.4 kV on the distribution system to 6 kV to the transmission system. As did with the
distribution line, the transformer to be installed will have a capacity of 160 kW to avoid
replacing it, saving time and cost. However, as specified in the distribution line, this strat-
egy only is advisable if the lifespan of the transformer is long enough to allow the load
to grow with time and get to the capacity of the transformer. If the lifespan of the trans-
former is shorter than the years needed for the load to increase to this quantity, a smaller
transformer should be installed, with a capacity required by the system by the end of its
lifetime. The same procedure is used for the transmission line connecting the wind turbine
to the village, which it will have an capacity of 5 amps that will be used in the last scenario
considered, as long as its lifetime is long enough to endure all the time required to get to
that point.
46
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:52==
In the first scenario of the second stage, the maximum load is still 7.6 kW since the third
converter is just added to the system to allow more room to increase. As explained in
section 5, the amount of wind to install at this point is 10 kW even though it is not the
optimal amount for the immediate situation, but it will be optimal once the load keeps
increasing. Since the load has not increased yet, only the wind power is installed and
the solar and battery capacities remains at 29.64 kW and 57.74 kWh respectively. With
this load, the maximum current flowing through the DC bus is just 76 Amps ( 7.6kW
100V ), a
reasonable amount.
The load will keep increasing and the same GAMS study can be done to assess how
to install more solar power and battery capacity having at least the capacity of what is
already installed, knowing that the wind will not change its capacity until the new stage is
reached. Once the power required by the load is 11.4 (the amount the three converters
in parallel can handle), a second cluster of three phase converters with an extra 11.4 kW
capacity will be installed in parallel, having a total capacity of 22.8 kW. Once the load
reaches 22.8 kW, another cluster of three phase converters is to be added in parallel to
increase the capacity of the bus to 34.2 kW, following the mentioned strategy to install
solar and battery capacity. The same step will be performed once the load requires 34.2
kW and another set of three phase converter is added to get a maximum capacity of 45.6
kW. However, once the secondary village requires enough power to evolve to a three
phase system (7.6 kW) and assuming the secondary village is 5 times smaller, the main
village will have a maximum load demand during peak hours of 38 kW (7.6kW · 5). This
is the last scenario analyzed of the second scenario. At this point, following the optimal
energy mix, the wind installed will still be 10 kW, the solar power installed will be 146.31
kW and the battery capacity will be 298.62 kWh.
Once this conditions are met, the system can move to the third stage.
Stage 3: Interconnection of two neighbor villages, sharing the wind turbine and
the battery.
Once the secondary village has reached enough power demand to move into a three
phase system, the village will be connected to the wind turbine site following the same
procedure and reasoning used for the main village, i.e. installing the transformer and the
transmission lines with a capacity enough to withstand the last scenario considered as
long as its lifetime allows it. The demand during peak hours in this initial scenario of the
third stage accounts for 38 kW of the main village and 7.6 kW of the secondary village,
adding a total maximum demand of 45.6 kW. To fulfill this initial scenario, another 10 kW
of wind energy is added to have a total capacity of wind power of 20 kW, a solar capacity
of 162.47 kW in the main village, a solar capacity of 10.25 on the secondary village, and
a battery capacity of 356.6 kWh located in the main village. Regarding the wind power, if
the lifetime of the previously installed 10 kW wind turbine is reaching its end, instead of
installing an additional 10 kW wind turbine and replace the old 10 kW wind turbine, a new
20 kW wind turbine can be installed.
As aforementioned, the arrival of the national grid is completely arbitrary, and it was de-
cided to happen once the main village reached an increase rate of 20 compared to its
initial state. Therefore, the load at that time will have a maximum consumption of 50.6
kW (2.53kW · 20), while the secondary village will have a value 5 times smaller of 10.12
kW, adding a total of 60.72 kW of maximum load. To provide all the energy at this last
scenario of the third stage, the same 20 kW of wind are available plus 219.09 kW of solar
power in the main village, 18.87 kW of solar power on the secondary village, and a battery
capacity of 455.68 kWh placed on the main village.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
47
==PAGE:53==
Considering the power the common DC bus can provide (energy coming from the solar
panels and the battery), there is a limit. The maximum current allowed should not over-
pass 100 amps [8], and the maximum voltage at which the converters can operate is 600
volts [11]. Therefore, the maximum power a common DC bus of this characteristics can
provide is 60 kW (P = 600V ·100A). Once this power is reached, another common DC bus
can be added to keep increasing the power the solar power and the battery can provide.
This second DC bus will have the same characteristics and should be increased following
the same procedure as in the existing DC bus: adding batteries and solar panels in se-
ries, connecting the battery directly to the DC bus and the solar panels through a DC/DC
transformer. However, if the maximum 600 V is reached before the power flowing through
the bus is 60 kW as a consequence of adding too many batteries in series (and therefore,
having a current inferior to 100 A), another set of batteries in series should be connected
to the common DC bus through another DC/DC transformer to increase the capacity of
the batteries without raising the voltage of the bus as shown in figure 5.10, increasing
the current. In theory, every single battery pack could be connected to the bus through
a DC/DC converter, and therefore the voltage of the bus would be easier to control, but
with the proposed layout less DC/DC converters are needed, saving the cost of installing
them.
Figure 5.10: Adding more batteries to the DC bus once the 600 V has been reached while
the power flow is under the rated value.
Stage 4: Connection to the national power grid.
Once the national grid arrives, the evolution of the system is finished since the national grid
will be in charged of providing the following increase in the demand. In addition, energy
curtailment will not happen any longer, exporting the excess of the energy produced to
the national grid.
5.1.3
Strategy without a neighbour village
The strategy to develop this mini-grid could have been too specific in terms that not every
mini-grid will have a neighbour village to connect to. However, the strategy to increase
the mini-grid will be the same as the one proposed except the third stage, in which the
neighbour village is connected; ie. the steps to follow are the same as in stage one,
48
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:54==
two and four, skipping stage 3. Instead, the load will keep increasing and the path to
keep up with the demand is to continue with the strategy described for stage 2 with the
consideration of adding a parallel DC bus once the power is already at 60 kV. The benefits
of having two villages interconnected will be assessed in section 5.1.5.
5.1.4
Benefits provided to the national grid
There are several benefits of having a mini-grid in an isolated area connected to the na-
tional grid compared to the scenario in which the national grid arrives to the remote place
without a previous mini-grid.
The most obvious one is that electricity can be provided sooner to the inhabitants of the
area, since it is installed and developed prior to the arrival of the national grid. However,
not only for the consumers is better to have a mini-grid before the arrival of the national
grid, but also the national grid can benefit from the existence of a mini-grid.
In terms of power, having a mini-grid to produce local energy implies that less energy
has to be transported to the remote location, reducing the losses incurred in the process.
Taking as an example the mini-grid of this study, when the national grid arrives, increasing
the electricity demand 25%, there is a total demand during the year of arrival of 294,119.39
kWh. However, the production of the mini-grid reduces the amount imported from the
national grid to simply 4,533.77 kWh, merely 1.54% of the total demand. Therefore, the
energy needed to be produced and transported from the national grid to this village is
remarkably lower, and therefore the energy losses are also remarkably lower.
In addition, the national grid not only has to generate and transport significantly less
amount of energy, but also can accept the energy produced in the mini-grid that can-
not be stored in the battery to reduce the production of energy somewhere else in the
grid. Focusing again in the example of the mini-grid studied in this paper, the total energy
the mini-grid is injecting into the national grid accounts for 96,119.83 kWh through the
entire year. This amount of energy will not be the production of energy reduced some-
where else in the grid since transporting this energy to a distant load will incur in losses.
However, this quantity is always a surplus compared to a scenario in which the mini-grid
was not installed by the time the national grid arrives.
On the other hand, allowing all this excess of energy to flow from the mini-grid to the
national grid implies higher cost in the transmission cable connecting the national grid to
the mini-grid. If there were no mini grid, the maximum power flowing from the national grid
to the mini-grid will be the addition of the peak demand in the two neighbour villages. In our
case of study, the maximum power demand during one hour for the two village together
is 75.83 kW. With the mini-grid installed, the maximum energy required from the national
grid is just 45.08 kW. However, the national grid connection is used more often to export
the excess of energy generated than to import it. In fact, the maximum power injected
into the national grid is 161.85 kW, more than doubling the capacity the connection would
require if the village did not have a mini-grid (the mentioned 75.83 kW).
Regardless, this extra cost is optional and it implies to get the benefit of having extra en-
ergy from the mini-grid. If the cost of getting this extra energy does not pay off the installa-
tion of a transmission cable capable of transporting this amounts of energy, a cheaper and
smaller cable could be installed and allow energy curtailment when it cannot be stored in
the battery and the connection to the national grid is at its full capacity. In the case the ca-
ble installed only had a capacity for 45.08 kW (the maximum power the mini-grid requires
from the national grid), the total energy exported to the national grid would be 69,968.28
kWh, notably smaller than the quantity exported with a connection allowing all the energy
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
49
==PAGE:55==
excess of the mini grid (the mentioned 96,119.83 kWh), but still greater than the 4,533.77
kWh imported from the grid. Therefore, a study could be performed to assess if installing
a cable with higher capacity produces enough benefits to pay off the the cost of installing
this greater cable. In the case it does not pay off to install a bigger cable, installing the
necessary 45.08 kW cable to satisfy the demand still reports a huge benefit:
• Installing a smaller cable than it would have been installed if there was no mini-
grid prior to the arrival of the national grid, saving installation cost in the connection
(installing a 45.08 kW cable instead of 75.83 kW).
• Reducing the amount of energy the mini-grid requires from the national grid to
merely a 1.54% of the energy needed without the existence of a mini-grid.
• Although the exported energy from the mini-grid to the national grid could be higher
with a greater connection, the mini-grid exports under these circumstances 69,968.28
kWh in contrast with the imported 4,533.77 kWh; the energy exported would account
for the 93.91% of the energy flowing through the national grid, while the energy re-
quired from the national grid accounts for the remaining 6.09%.
This scenario of a cable just as big as the maximum power required by the mini-grid from
the national grid is not realistic, since the capacity of the cable will never be exactly the
current power demand. As the demand is expected to increase, the transmission cables
are usually installed with more capacity than required allowing room to and increase in
the power flowing. Despite this fact, this case was analyzed to prove that even under
less favorable constraints, the mini-grid still reports a reasonable amount of benefits to
the national grid.
5.1.5
Consequences of having a neighbor village
In this section, the study case presented in this project with two interconnected mini-grids
will be compared to a scenario in which the two mini-grids are independent from each
other.
For that purpose, the scenario to compare will be the last scenario of the third stage, where
the two mini-grids are interconnected and just before the arrival of the national grid. The
capacities to install in the two interconnected mini-grids at this scenario along the resulting
annualized cost of the generation technologies is shown in table 5.5. Moreover, to clearly
show the benefits of connecting two mini-grids, an ideal interconnection is modelled with
no transmission losses between the two mini-grids or the wind.
Table 5.5: Optimal capacities to install in the last scenario of the third stage with trans-
mission losses and without transmission losses.
Battery [kWh]
PV1 [kW]
Wind [kW]
PV2 [kW]
Cost [Eur]
Realistic
455.99
220.10
19.15
17.86
49,960.04
No losses
447.46
-
18.48
235.44
49,151.46
Likewise, table 5.6 shows the capacities to be installed if the two villages had the same
load profile of the last scenario of the third stage, but completely independent. To make
the secondary village independent, the secondary village is now allowed to install batteries
in its mini-grid since there are hours of the year in which there is neither sun nor wind, and
therefore without a storage technology the mini-grid will not be able to satisfy the demand
during these hours.
50
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:56==
Table 5.6: Optimal capacities to install if the two villages were independent with the load
profile of the last scenario of the third stage.
Battery [kWh]
PV [kW]
Wind [kW]
Cost [Eur]
Main Village
369.86
198.53
7.06
40,502.92
Secondary Village
80.6
40.61
2.91
8,667.59
Total in both villages
450.46
239.14
9.97
49,170.51
First of all, it can be seen in table 5.5 that, without the losses in the transmission lines, all
the capacities in the interconnected system are slightly reduced since there is no need of
producing energy to make up for the losses. That reduction is reflected in the annualized
price of the generation technologies for the lossless transmission system. In addition,
since there are no losses transporting energy, there is no difference between installing
generation capacity in one village or the other, and as a consequence all the solar power
is selected to be installed in the secondary village. Never the less, installing all the capacity
in the main village, or half in one village and half on the other, would yield the same result.
Comparing the interconnected case without transmission losses and the scenario with the
independent villages, it can be seen that the interconnection creates a better environment
to share wind since one village might not need it at a specific hour but the other village
might do, due to the ±15% random variation added in the two demand profiles for every
hour. In the case of the individual villages, install wind is not as beneficial since it might be
required only for very specific times. Therefore, connecting the two villages add together
all these specific times when wind is needed, and since they don’t occur at the same
time, more wind can be installed since it will be beneficial during more hours compared
to any of the individual villages. In addition, the battery is critical at night when dealing
only with solar power. However, since wind power also produces energy at night, some
stress is taken away from the battery, and the capacity needed is reduced. Likewise,
since the wind power also produces energy during the day, less solar power is needed.
All this capacities reduction is slightly reflected in the annualized cost of the generation
technologies, saving 19.04 Eur per year.
The difference in the cost is irrelevant since the difference is not big enough to make an
impact. However, it is interesting to see the behavior of sharing technologies instead of
each village having its own generation technologies.
Comparing the interconnected system with transmission losses and the case with indi-
vidual villages, it can be seen that the same behavior is observed with the shared wind.
However, since the capacities of the generation technologies have to be increased to
compensate the transmission losses, the annualized price of the generation technologies
is slightly higher than the case with the individual villages.
Nonetheless, in the case of interconnected villages, the power system has a wider dis-
tribution between solar and wind energy, even though the solar power is still clearly pre-
dominant. However, having a more diverse power system also provides some benefit in
terms of stability and security. In the case of a cloudy day or malfunction of some power
electronic device connected to the solar panels like the DC/DC transformer, having more
capacity of an alternative power source can help mitigate the effects of this malfunction-
ing. This benefit can have some economic value. Despite the economic value, GAMS is
not considering this savings since it is hard to quantify it, and more importantly, it was not
added into the code. Thus, having a varied energy mix also provide some benefit.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
51
==PAGE:57==
Additional conclusions are that the more different the demand patterns of the two villages
are, the more benefits can be drawn from sharing generation technologies. If the two
villages had exactly the same load profile, both villages would have exactly the same
distribution on the installed capacities of the generation technologies, and sharing these
technologies would not yield any benefit.
Another important aspect is the losses coming from the transmission system. If the losses
are too high, the benefits of sharing generation technologies are diluted with the losses,
and produce and consume locally would be preferred. On the other hand, with a lossless
transmission system, sharing generation technologies can provide benefits.
52
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:58==
6
Discussion and Conclusion
The research carried along this project allows for a variety of conclusions to be drawn.
Working towards the goal of global access to electricity, mini-grids are a very competent
alternative to the extension of national grid for most of remote, rural areas. By installing
a stand-alone mini-grid in these places, a tremendous cost is saved by preventing the
installation of overhead lines with their pertinent towers, or buried cables with their ex-
cavation cost. Moreover, it is not uncommon for the landscape and topography of these
regions to entail a challenge for construction work. However, if the national grid extension
plan is carried out, the implementation of a mini-grid prior to the arrival of the national grid
can still bring benefits to the national grid.
Focusing now in more specific findings of this project, it should be noted that the re-
sults proposed by GAMS, the optimization tool used to find the optimal energy mix to be
installed through the different stages of the expansion of the mini-grid, should not be fol-
lowed blindly. Optimization tools like GAMS only take into consideration the mathematical
model written with its respective inputs and constrains. Therefore, the model might not
consider some issue that would affect the output if the author did not include said issue.
Hence, care is needed when analyzing the results and it should be considered if some rel-
evant piece of information is not being taken into account. In this study case, GAMS was
used to assess what energy mix would result in the least annualized cost while provid-
ing the energy demanded. However, only the installation cost (CAPEX) and operational
cost (OPEX) were taken in consideration for the different technologies. Therefore, some
costs were left aside, e.g., transportation costs (transporting wind turbines to a remote
location will be a challenge compared to transporting solar panels), permits to install a
specific technology, etc. Moreover, the excess of energy produced in the mini-grid and
provided to the national grid could be sold and create some revenue, while in this report
the economical benefit of selling the excess of energy is not considered. On the other
hand, GAMS is a very useful tool to analyze which parameters heavily affect the output,
but will not necessarily provide the best possible solution in real life; the solution will be
the optimal solution only under the assumptions and conditions considered in the model.
Reflecting on the different GAMS inputs, the load might be the input that affects the result
the most. The reason is the lack of flexibility this input accepts since it has to be satisfied
every hour, plus the fact that it has no substitute option - if solar power is very expensive
or the solar profile is very poor, less capacity can be installed in benefit of wind energy.
Moreover, GAMS calculates the optimal capacities to be installed making sure the demand
is accurately satisfied at the moment of maximum stress of the year, since installing more
generation capacity would incur in a higher cost and the system would not need it; i.e.,
GAMS will suggest just enough capacity to make sure the demand is satisfied for the worst
hour in the defined year. Complying with this worst moment of the year, the remaining
hours will be satisfied. Looking into the battery level through the year of all the scenarios
analyzed in GAMS (the initial and final scenario of stages one, two, and three) depicted in
figures 4.4a, 4.5a, 4.7a, 4.8a, 4.10a, and 4.11a, it can be seen that the point of maximum
stress for the system in terms of satisfying the demand is at the hour 1904 of the year
(21st of March at 7AM), being the only hour of the year in which the battery level reaches
0. Therefore, if the demand at this hour of the year was to increase, the capacities to be
installed would have to increase to meet the demand in this hour of increased maximum
stress for the system. Since there is a ±15% random variation assigned to every hour
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
53
==PAGE:59==
of the year, it will be fairly simple that running again the python code to assign demand
values to every hour of the year a higher random variation percentage is assigned to this
specific moment. Moreover, even if the demand remains with the values assigned for
this study case for every hour except for an increase in this specific hour, the generation
capacities would have to be increased since the previous optimal capacities were just
right for the previous maximum stress point and they would fall short for this increased
maximum stress point. Obviously, not only the point of maximum stress affects GAMS
results; the state in which this specific point is reached is just as important, and for that
reason all the hours prior to this point affect the outcome.
Following with the impact of the other inputs, the technology prices also affect the optimal
mix, as it was seen in the sensitivity analysis performed for the CAPEX of the different
technologies. Obviously, since the goal is to achieve the minimum cost while meeting
the demand, a technology with a lower levelized cost of energy (LCOE) is preferred to
another technology with a higher cost to generate the same amount of energy. This is the
case for conventional units since energy can be generated as long as fuel is available.
However, the price is just another parameter to consider when renewable energies are
being used. Dealing with renewable energy, the power profiles (solar radiation and wind
profiles) are as important as the price. If both solar and wind had the same power profile
and could generate the same amount of energy every hour of the day, the technology with
the lowest cost to produce energy would always be preferred. However, this is not the
case, and solar radiation and wind speeds are quite different. The most obvious difference
is that wind can produce energy at night while solar energy cannot. For that reason,
energy cannot always be produced and the power profiles greatly affect the outcome of
the optimal mix, since providing enough energy is nonnegotiable and minimizing the cost
is just a benefit. Even when a technology is cheap and a high capacity is installed, if the
weather conditions are not adequate that technology can be valueless. That consequence
can be seen in this study case, in which the price taken for wind power is lower than the
price of solar power, and still, since the wind profile is not reliable enough, solar power
is the preferred technology to provide the bulk of the energy. In any way, the addition of
energy storage system such as Li-Ion batteries can soften the difference in power profiles,
storing the excess of energy produced during productive hours and giving it back when
the generation sources cannot. Regardless, even with the addition of a battery to reduce
the problem of uneven production, a bad energy profile (like wind in this study case) will
lead to a low capacity factor by the end of the year, increasing the price of the levelized
cost of the energy generated.
Regarding the results yielded by GAMS, and as mentioned before, the initial values pro-
posed by GAMS were not realistic since no limitations were added to the capacity selection
in terms of the capacity of each solar panel, wind turbine, or battery cell. Taking as an
example the first scenario of the second stage in which GAMS proposed to install 0.841
kW of wind power, there is no impediment in installing that specific amount of wind power;
the problem comes when trying to find a wind turbine in the market of that specific capac-
ity. Moreover, the results provided by GAMS should be taken only as a reference, since
these results are the best possible energy mix but only for this exact load profile through
the year and with this exact power generation profiles. Thus, as soon as these param-
eters change, the result will be slightly different. Under real circumstances, the chances
that the demand of each hour of the year is exactly the same as in the previous year, and
that the solar radiation and wind speed of each hour are also the same as that same hour
in the previous year is practically nonexistent. Hence, under GAMS understanding, the
optimal mix for a year and the next one will be different even if the average demand of
54
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:60==
two consecutive years is the same. That is the reason why this values should only be
used as a reference, and why they could be slightly modified in section 5.1.1 to achieve
more realistic results without a great effect in the operational or economical point of view,
forming a more suitable strategy under realistic circumstances.
Concerning the strategy, planning in advance seems like a very useful action that is not
usually carried out in projects like this one. Planning in advance has the potential to yield
savings in the future, but there is always some uncertainty coming from the forecast -
what happens if the forecast is too optimistic and the village does not progress as much
as foreseen and the expected demand is never reached? Moreover, investors tend to
favor revenues in the short term even though these actions might provide less benefits in
the future. The strategy suggested in this project is interesting in sites where the growth is
heavily expected; the faster the demand grows, the more convenient and more certainties
of savings this strategy provides. On the contrary, in a location in which the growth is
expected to be quite slow, a high investment is paid upfront to install a capacity that might
never be used before having to replace some elements of the system at the end of its
lifetime. Nevertheless, the strategy proposed is not only relying on the forecast of future
demand; while there are some elements that are suggested to be installed from the initial
stages with high capacities expected to be needed in the future (transformers and lines),
the generation technologies along with its pertinent power electronics are suggested to
be increased gradually, limiting in a certain way the risk of over-installation.
Reflecting back on the problem formulation, there were three main questions addressing
the needs of the development of the mini-grid system.
The first topic was how to satisfy the demand every hour of the year as the energy demand
increases. Using GAMS and the following strategy for the evolution of the generation
technologies capacity in sections 4.2 and 5.1.1, this issue was addressed.
The second topic was which layout design of the power system provides benefits regard-
ing a future demand expansion. After analyzing the technical constraints of the different
technologies, four stages were designed to depict the path the topology of the mini-grid
will follow. Moreover, after GAMS results were analyzed, PowerFactory confirmed these
results would not cause overloading or voltage instability. Finally, all this information came
together in the strategy formulated in section 5.1.2 to assess step by step how to increase
the power in the DC bus and how to install each element of the system (wind turbines,
transformers, and lines), along with basic economical reasoning to back up the strategy
followed.
The last topic to take care of was the benefits and consequences of connecting a remote
mini-grid to another mini-grid, and eventually to the national grid. An analysis on the
benefits coming from connecting the mini-grid to the national grid was performed in section
5.1.4. The extent of these benefits was tied to the capacity of the national grid connection,
and depends on the priorities of the grid operator - does the operator receive more benefits
from a higher capacity allowing more energy coming from the mini-grid into the national
grid, or the cost of installing a greater transmission system is not covered by the amount
of energy this extra capacity would allow? Similarly, an analysis of the consequences
of the interconnection of two neighbouring mini-grids was carried out in section 5.1.5,
where the benefits are tied to the amount of losses in the transmission lines and in the
demand profiles of the two villages - the lower the losses in the transmission lines and the
greater the difference in the demand patterns of the two villages are, the more beneficial
connecting the two mini-grids is.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
55
==PAGE:61==
Perspective
After finalizing the project, a look back provides some perspective on topics and assess-
ments that could have been performed in a different fashion.
First of all, the location was chosen in Kenya due to the ease of gathering data thanks to
previous projects carried out by DTU in Ndeda, an island in Kenya. However, as men-
tioned several times, the intention of this project was to provide a procedure that could be
followed in different locations. Therefore, the study case of this project could have been
in any other location as long as solar radiation and wind profiles were available, along
with the load profile of a village in said location. The results provided would have been
different, but the procedure would remain the same.
Secondly, the layout of the two villages was arbitrarily selected. It was decided that the
secondary village would not have batteries in its mini-grid to force the interaction between
villages and see the effect of sharing components of the system, like wind power or a
battery. However, these two villages could have local batteries, reducing the need of in-
teraction and shared components, probably using the interconnection simply as a backup
source in case of malfunctioning of either the batteries or any of the generation technolo-
gies.
Continuing with the layout of the system, the size relating the main village and the sec-
ondary village could have been different. In this study case, the secondary mini-grid was
selected to be 5 times smaller than the main village to have a clear distinction between
the main village and a supported secondary village. In addition, the secondary village
was not supposed to be too small since it would not have a notable impact on the system.
However, a different relationship between villages could have been selected, e.g. two
villages of the same size, one with good solar profile while the other one with good wind
profile.
It is hoped that this project sheds some light on the advantages of planning in advance
so future mini-grid projects can take profit of its benefits.
Future Work
There is always room for improvement, and with the project as it is, there are some ideas
to complement a project like this one.
Considering the topography of the system, the optimal layout of the system could be
studied to reduce losses. In this study case, the common DC bus was selected since it is
a layout that has been proved to work [8, 19]. However, using PowerFactory or a similar
software, different layouts could be analyzed to assess which one incur in less losses.
Aspects that could be analyzed could be the maximum capacity of each DC bus, different
types of power electronics such as AC/DC and DC/DC converters to reduce losses, or
simply have a pure AC system with each DC element having its own AC/DC converter.
Stability is a topic that could be further investigated in this project, despite voltage sta-
bility being checked with PowerFactory. Therefore, an analysis regarding the frequency
stability could be performed to have a better understanding on the robustness of the sys-
tem, even though this mini-grid should be robust since the batteries and power electronics
have a fast response.
Finally, a study on which ancillary services the mini-grid can provide to the grid could
be performed, in addition to benefiting from the excess of energy produced in the mini-
grid. This ancillary services could be voltage regulation (mainly on the interconnection to
the national grid) or frequency regulation, provided that the mini-grid is robust enough to
56
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:62==
provide these services. In the case of frequency regulation, the excess energy the mini-
grid is injecting in the national grid could be regulated to address power imbalances in
other parts of the national grid. Moreover, the battery could absorb excess power of the
national grid even though the mini-grid would not need it to help with power imbalances
of the national grid, or the battery could provide energy stored to the national grid to aid
the system in moments of short energy production.
To conclude this project, it is expected that after the assessments and analysis performed
and the conclusions drawn, the reader understands the value and benefits of planning in
advance for future scenarios, and more specifically the value a mini-grid can provide to
other power systems if planned in advance.
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
57
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
G. Ireland, A. Hughes, and B. Merven. A techno economic renewable hybrid tech-
nology mini-grid simulation and costing model for off-grid rural electrification plan-
ning in Sub-Saharan Africa. 2017.
[2]
Chukwuma Azimoh et al. “Replicability and scalability of mini-grid solution to rural
electrification programs in sub-Saharan Africa”. In: Renewable Energy 106 (Jan.
2017), pp. 222–231. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2017.01.017.
[3]
TFE Consulting and Pact Myanmar. “Bridging the Energy Gap: Demand Scenarios
for Mini-Grids in Myanmar”. In: (2018).
[4]
John Hansen and George Xydis. “Rural electrification in Kenya: a useful case for
remote areas in sub-Saharan Africa”. In: Energy Efficiency (Dec. 2018). DOI: 10.
1007/s12053-018-9756-z.
[5]
GIZ ProSolar. What size shall it be? A guide to mini-grid sizing and demand fore-
casting. 2016.
[6]
KIERAN MULVANEY. Climate change report card: These countries are reaching
targets. URL: https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/2019/09/climate-
change-report-card-co2-emissions/. (accessed: 26.06.2020).
[7]
Pablo Díaz et al. “FAR from the grid: A rural electrification field study”. In: Renewable
Energy 35 (Dec. 2010), pp. 2829–2834. DOI: 10.1016/j.renene.2010.05.005.
[8]
Per Nørgaard and Tom Cronin. Mini-grids as valuable parts of larger grids.
[9]
Muyiwa Adaramola et al. “Multipurpose renewable energy resources based hybrid
energy system for remote community in northern Ghana”. In: Sustainable Energy
Technologies and Assessments (Feb. 2017). DOI: 10.1016/j.seta.2017.02.011.
[10]
The World Bank. Kenya Charts Path to Achieving Universal Access to Electricity.
URL: https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2018/12/06/kenya-charts-path-
to-achieving-universal-access-to-electricity. (accessed: 17.06.2020).
[11]
SMA. SUNNY BOY STORAGE 3.8-US / 5.0-US / 6.0-US. URL: https://files.sma.
de/downloads/SBSXX-US-DS-en-20.pdf. (accessed: 23.06.2020).
[12]
SMA. Multicluster Box for Sunny Island 4548-US and 6048-US. URL: https://files.
sma.de/downloads/CLUSTBOX-DUS140330W.pdf. (accessed: 23.06.2020).
[13]
Hummer. URL: http://www.chinahummer.cn/index.php/index/list_m/s_id/2001.
(accessed: 23.06.2020).
[14]
Daniel Ryan Austin. “Technical and Economic Feasibility of Wind Power in Renew-
able Energy Mini-Grids in Remote Areas”. In: (July 2019).
[15]
PVWatts Calculator. URL: https://pvwatts.nrel.gov/pvwatts.php. (accessed: 23.06.2020).
[16]
Hummer H13.2-20KW. URL: https://en.wind-turbine-models.com/turbines/1688-
hummer-h13.2-20kw. (accessed: 23.06.2020).
[17]
Energinet. Technology Data: Energy Storage. 2018.
[18]
Energinet. Technology Data: Generation of Electricity and Districh heating. 2018.
[19]
K. Tomas-Manez et al. “High efficiency non-isolated three port DC-DC converter for
PV-battery systems”. In: 2016 IEEE 8th International Power Electronics and Motion
Control Conference (IPEMC-ECCE Asia). 2016, pp. 1806–1812.
58
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:64==
A
Appendix: Self Evaluation
A.1
Original Project Planning
Project Objective:
In many areas, centralized power is not feasible due to relatively small, dispersed loads in
remote locations. Specifically, many rural communities remain isolated from larger, tradi-
tional grids due to geographic and economic constraints. The electrification of the global
off-grid rural population remains a major task of many developing and developed coun-
tries, and mini-grids represent the most cost-effective way to provide universal electricity
access to these populations.
Moreover, mini-grids can be an effective asset in the future if they are connected to the
national grid or to another nearby mini-grid. In addition, the mini-grid itself tend to increase
in size since the population covered by this new mini-grid will start to consume more
energy once they have access to it. Therefore, to establish a new mini-grid it would be
wise to consider these future expansions and design the mini-grid since the beginning
with a strategy to make the scalability as easy as possible.
The objective of this thesis will therefore be to define a basic layout of the mini-grid for
its first stage along with an expansion strategy to adapt to the increasing demand and an
eventual interconnection to another mini-grid and the national grid. The different areas
to focus will be to find the optimal mini-grid layout for the different stages of demand
(expansion strategy), different generation technologies to find the optimum mix as the load
increases (solar power, wind power, and electrochemical battery storage will be available),
and the effect of connecting the mini-grid to other mini-grid and to the national grid.
Problem Formulation
Which is the best development option of a new remote mini-grid for escalating purposes
given a future connection to another mini-grid and national grid?
1. How will the demand be satisffied in the given expansion?
• Analysis of the demand evolution, where different load scenarios will have to be
satisfied with the optimal mix of energy. GAMS will be used to find the optimal
economic mix of energy for every scenario.
2. Which layout design provides the best benefits having in mind a future demand
expansion?
• Technical and financial analysis of different mini-grid layouts to find the best
expansion strategy, studying common DC bus and an AC distribution system
(one or three phase). Modelling these strategies in PowerFactory will ensure
the proper behavior of the system and the fulfillment of the operational requi-
sites.
3. How easily can this mini-grid be connected to another power system?
• Investigate the optimal connection of the different layouts and scenarios to an-
other grid/micro-grid as well as the advantages the connection implies.
Methodology
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
59
==PAGE:65==
The parameter that will influence every other factor in the power system will be the de-
mand. In this study not only the demand has to be satisfied, but its evolution will drive the
evolution and expansion techniques of the mini-grid. Therefore, the first thing to analyze
will be the load evolution. Once the load is studied through time, different load scenarios
will be defined as the load increases. Depending on the celerity at which the load in-
creases, the time interval between these scenarios will vary (every year, every two years,
every five years...). The lifespan of the components forming the power system will be
taken in consideration, and therefore the time span between load scenarios will be quite
relevant. These load profiles can be taken from previous projects on similar cases.
Same as for the demand, a power supply study has to be performed, and since this will
be a renewable-based mini grid, solar radiation profiles and wind speeds will have to be
measured on the site of the mini-grid installation. These profiles will play a crucial role
when deciding the sizing of the generation/storage technologies.
Having the load and generation profiles, a study on the layouts of the mini-grid can be car-
ried out. In this project, the final characteristics of the system are known (final load profile
with a connection to another mini-grid and to the national grid). Therefore, the first sce-
nario to be analyzed will be the last forecasted profile to ensure the optimal behavior of the
mini-grid in its last stage. Different designs will be analyzed in PowerFactory to identify the
optimum layout: number of DC busses, voltage of each DC bus, voltage on the distribu-
tion system, number of phases through the system, voltage on the interconnections, and
size of the components (inverters, DC transformers, AC transformers, breakers...). Along
with the technical study performed in PowerFactory, a basic economic assessment will
be carried out to complement the study and have a realistic decision. Moreover, GAMS
will be used to optimize economically the energy mix of this last stage.
Once the final destination is known, a similar analysis will be performed for the first stage
while having in mind the requisites to be fulfilled for the final stage in case they could be
satisfied in this stage, saving time and investment afterwards. In this stage, the first load
scenario will be analyzed, and GAMS will be used again to find the optimal mix of energy.
PowerFactory will also be used to find the optimum layout, but in this stage there will be
no interconnection to another power system and the distribution system will have to be AC
single phase since there are no three phase inverters for low power systems. As before,
a simple economic assessment will be performed to complete the study.
Knowing the initial and the final scenarios, the in between steps will be analyzed. De-
pending on the load study, different stages will be defined, and the same study will be
performed in PowerFactory and GAMS to find the optimal layout and energy mix. Con-
necting all the stages from the beginning to the last one, a strategy to expand the mini-grid
will be formed along with the optimal energy mix for every stage.
Expected Outcome
The outcome of the project should be a strategy to find the optimal way to implement a
new mini-grid so it is prepared since the beginning to experiment an expansion and an
interconnection, trading a higher investment on the initial stages to save cost and time
on the final stages of the evolution. Since the exact point at which the mini-grid should
evolve depends heavily on the specific site characteristics and the evolution of the load,
the outcome should not be a final definite solution. Instead, the outcome should come in
the form of advise and guidelines on the behaviour of the scalability of a mini-grid, and
in suggestions on when and how the mini-grid should evolve. Groups that can benefit
from this outcome consist on the entity responsible to design and implement a new mini-
60
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:66==
grid as well as the government, since this new strategy might help them to plan the grid
expansion on a different fashion.
A.2
Revision of the Project Plan
The core of the project plan and most of its details remain the same in the final project.
However, as the project was evolving new priorities were arising and some details changed.
These changes are mentioned in this section.
Even though the problem formulation in the thesis is longer than the problem formulation in
the Project Planning, the topics mentioned are the same. The extra information provided
in the final Problem Formulation simply add more details since, now that the project is
over, the descriptions could be more accurate. However, a minor change was included in
the third question of the Problem Formulation. In the project planning, the third topic refers
about which is the optimal confection to another mini-grid or national grid. In the project,
the third question refers to the benefits the connection can report instead of focusing on the
optimal connection. The reason was that, having transformers and a transmission system,
connecting the national grid to this transmission system does not entail any challenge or
issue, and therefore the assessment on the national grid was performed about the benefits
the connection provides.
Regarding the methodology planned in the project planning, a specific rate of growth for
the demand was supposed to be taken to have a more specific study case. Therefore,
there was supposed to be a fixed amount of years from stage to stage, also allowing the
perspective of the lifespan of the different elements. However, as the goal of the strategy
was to be wide enough to fit any possible mini-grid, time was finally not considered as
a factor, and the evolution of the demand was simply considered through its growing
magnitude, not allocating a specific time frame for the evolution.
In addition, in the methodology of the project planning is said that PoweFactory would be
used to analyze different designs to identify the optimum layout (number of DC busses,
voltage of each DC bus, voltage on the distribution system, number of phases through the
system, voltage on the interconnections, and size of the components) However, with the
exception of the size of the components, PowerFactory was not used to find the optimum
layout. These issues were taken care in the final expansion strategy proposed, but they
were addressed as technical constraints limiting the strategy, and they were not further
investigated in PowerFactory to try to find a better alternative. The reason was there
were other priorities in this project, like the benefits of planning in advance or the benefits
of connecting the mini-grid to another mini-grid and/or the national grid. However, the
possibility of performing an analysis on this matter is addressed in the ”future work” section
in the conclusion as a way to expand this project (a layout was designed to prepare the
mini-grid to evolve. If in addition the layout is to be optimized even further in terms of
losses with tools like PowerFactory, that should be part of another study).
Finally, the expected outcome described in the original project planning matches with the
final outcome of the project.
A.3
Self Evaluation
Now that the project is finished, I can say that I am satisfied with the project in general,
but also with the results. This project has a special meaning to me since I am involved
in a entrepreneurial project about sustainable modular cabins with solar panels that will
be interconnected creating a micro-grid between them. Therefore, this project helped me
to take some perspective and to analyze how a micro/mini-grid can be expanded almost
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
61
==PAGE:67==
effortlessly if it is designed since the beginning to experience this evolution. Focusing
more on the content of the project, I am happy to have performed a wide variety of studies
and analysis (site selection, designing the system and villages to connect, load studies,
generation profiles studies, optimization of the installed capacity, assessment of technical
issues and limitations, and developing a strategy to evolve a mini-grid), giving me a good
perspective of what is needed to implement a mini-grid project in real life.
Reflecting about the process itself, I think I managed my time quite successfully, being
able to perform all the task I planned to do before the last week. In addition, I am also
happy with the communication had with the supervisors, meeting more often during the
initial months when I had more doubts and reducing the amount of meetings per month
once I had a clearer vision of what I had to do, giving me time to complete some relevant
tasks before meeting again. If we had met more often, even though some doubts would
have been clarified sooner, I probably could have not been able to show any valuable
progress.
In a strange way, the COVID-19 crisis allowed me to be more constant with the thesis
since, removing numerous distractions as a consequence of the quarantine, I could really
focus on thesis.
If I had to start with this project again, I would explore the possibility of using HOMER
as a tool. HOMER is used to design and evaluate technically and financially the options
for off-grid and on-grid power systems for remote, stand-alone and distributed generation
applications, and while using GAMS and PowerFactory separately gave me a better un-
derstanding of the entire process, having a tool that performs both tasks at the same time
is worthy of investigation. Other than exploring HOMER possibilities, I think I would still
plan the project following the same steps since the project follows quite a linear path -
until the output of one study is not achieved, the next study cannot be started since the
output of the previous study is used as the input of the following study.
62
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:68==
B
Appendix: Python Code
In this Appendix, all the Python code used in this project is showed. Two different files
were used:
• Code to define all the load profiles for each scenario analyzed.
• Code used during the generation profiles to determine the power curve of the wind
turbine as well as the capacity factor in per unit of each hour for wind and solar
power.
B.1
Definition of the load profiles
1
2
import numpy as np
3
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
4
import random
5
import openpyxl as xls
6
7
8
#time span
9
days=365
#number of days to model
10
t0=0; t1 = 24*days; dt = 1
11
t = np.arange(t0,t1,dt)
12
13
14
#base load from Hansen paper
15
base_load=np.array
([0.85,0.82,0.69,0.55,0.65,0.55,0.63,0.67,0.78,1.1,1.55,1.8,1.7,1.35,1.4,
16
1.03,0.73,0.45,0.63,1.45,2.17,2.2,1.8,1.32]) #kW
17
total_daily_base_load=np.sum(base_load)
18
t_base = np.arange(0,24,1)
19
20
21
#plot base load load
22
plt.plot(t_base ,base_load)
23
plt.title('Hourly Base Load Profile')
24
plt.xlabel('Time [hours]')
25
plt.ylabel('Power [kw]')
26
plt.grid()
27
plt.savefig('base_load.pdf')
28
plt.show()
29
30
31
"""
32
Load Profile Definition: 1st year
33
"""
34
35
#base modifiers
36
modifier=np.ones(len(t))
37
38
for x in range (0,len(t)):
39
modifier[x]=random.uniform(0.85,1.15)
40
41
42
#load
43
extended_base=np.tile(base_load , days)
44
load=extended_base*modifier
45
total_load=np.sum(load)
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
63
==PAGE:69==
46
47
#first 3 days
48
days_3=3
49
t_3days = np.arange(0,24*days_3 ,1)
50
load_3days=np.ones(len(t_3days))
51
52
for x in range (0,len(t_3days)):
53
load_3days[x]=load[x]
54
55
56
"""
57
Load Profile Definition: second stage x3.004
58
"""
59
base_load_3=base_load*3.004
60
61
#base modifiers
62
modifier_3=np.ones(len(t))
63
64
for x in range (0,len(t)):
65
modifier_3[x]=random.uniform(0.85,1.15)
66
67
#load village
68
extended_base_3=np.tile(base_load_3 , days)
69
load_3=extended_base_3*modifier_3
70
71
#first 3 days
72
load_3_3days=np.ones(len(t_3days))
73
74
for x in range (0,len(t_3days)):
75
load_3_3days[x]=load_3[x]
76
77
78
79
"""
80
Load Profile Definition: third stage x15.02
81
"""
82
83
#VILLAGE 1
84
85
base_load_15=base_load*15.02
86
87
#base modifiers
88
modifier_15=np.ones(len(t))
89
90
for x in range (0,len(t)):
91
modifier_15[x]=random.uniform(0.85,1.15)
92
93
#load village
94
extended_base_15=np.tile(base_load_15 , days)
95
load_15=extended_base_15*modifier_15
96
97
#first 3 days
98
load_15_3days=np.ones(len(t_3days))
99
100
for x in range (0,len(t_3days)):
101
load_15_3days[x]=load_15[x]
102
103
104
105
#VILLAGE 2
106
107
base_load_15B=base_load*3.004
64
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:70==
108
109
#base modifiers
110
modifier_15B=np.ones(len(t))
111
112
for x in range (0,len(t)):
113
modifier_15B[x]=random.uniform(0.85,1.15)
114
115
#load village
116
extended_base_15B=np.tile(base_load_15B , days)
117
load_15B=extended_base_15B*modifier_15B
118
119
#first 3 days
120
load_15B_3days=np.ones(len(t_3days))
121
122
for x in range (0,len(t_3days)):
123
load_15B_3days[x]=load_15B[x]
124
125
126
127
"""
128
Load Profile Definition: forth stage x20
129
"""
130
#VILLAGE 1
131
132
base_load_20=base_load*20
133
134
#base modifiers
135
modifier_20=np.ones(len(t))
136
137
for x in range (0,len(t)):
138
modifier_20[x]=random.uniform(0.85,1.15)
139
140
#load village
141
extended_base_20=np.tile(base_load_20 , days)
142
load_20=extended_base_20*modifier_20
143
144
#first 3 days
145
load_20_3days=np.ones(len(t_3days))
146
147
for x in range (0,len(t_3days)):
148
load_20_3days[x]=load_20[x]
149
150
151
152
#VILLAGE 2
153
154
base_load_20B=base_load*4
155
156
#base modifiers
157
modifier_20B=np.ones(len(t))
158
159
for x in range (0,len(t)):
160
modifier_20B[x]=random.uniform(0.85,1.15)
161
162
#load village
163
extended_base_20B=np.tile(base_load_20B , days)
164
load_20B=extended_base_20B*modifier_20B
165
166
#first 3 days
167
load_20B_3days=np.ones(len(t_3days))
168
169
for x in range (0,len(t_3days)):
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
65
==PAGE:71==
170
load_20B_3days[x]=load_20B[x]
171
172
173
174
"""
175
Plots
176
"""
177
178
#plot load of year 1
179
plt.plot(t,load)
180
plt.title('Hourly Load Energy Demand')
181
plt.xlabel('Time [hours]')
182
plt.ylabel('Power [kw]')
183
plt.grid()
184
plt.savefig('load_year1.pdf')
185
plt.show()
186
187
#plot only 3 first days of load year 1
188
plt.plot(t_3days ,load_3days)
189
plt.title('Hourly Load Energy Demand')
190
plt.xlabel('Time [hours]')
191
plt.ylabel('Power [kw]')
192
plt.grid()
193
plt.savefig('load_year1_3days.pdf')
194
plt.show()
195
196
#plot only 3 first days of load year 1 vs load_3: evolution of first phase
197
plt.plot(t_3days ,load_3days , label='Initial scenario')
198
plt.plot(t_3days ,load_3_3days , label='Last scenario')
199
plt.title('Hourly Load Energy Demand')
200
plt.xlabel('Time [hours]')
201
plt.ylabel('Power [kw]')
202
plt.legend(loc='upper left')
203
plt.grid()
204
plt.savefig('load_stage1_evolution.pdf')
205
plt.show()
206
207
#plot only 3 first days of load_3 vs load_15: evolution of second phase
208
plt.plot(t_3days ,load_3_3days , label='Initial scenario')
209
plt.plot(t_3days ,load_15_3days , label='Last scenario')
210
plt.title('Hourly Load Energy Demand')
211
plt.xlabel('Time [hours]')
212
plt.ylabel('Power [kw]')
213
plt.legend(loc='upper left')
214
plt.grid()
215
plt.savefig('load_stage2_evolution.pdf')
216
plt.show()
217
218
#plot only 3 first days of village 1 vs village 2 when national grid arrives
219
plt.plot(t_3days ,load_20_3days , label='Main Village')
220
plt.plot(t_3days ,load_20B_3days , label='Second Village')
221
plt.title('Hourly Load Energy Demand')
222
plt.xlabel('Time [hours]')
223
plt.ylabel('Power [kw]')
224
plt.legend(loc='upper left')
225
plt.grid()
226
plt.savefig('load_national_grid.pdf')
227
plt.show()
228
229
230
231
66
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:72==
232
233
"""
234
Save it in an excel sheet
235
"""
236
#Calculate loads in p.u.
237
load_max= np.amax(load)
238
load_pu=load/load_max
239
240
load_3_max= np.amax(load_3)
241
load_3_pu=load_3/load_3_max
242
243
load_15_max= np.amax(load_15)
244
load_15_pu=load_15/load_15_max
245
246
load_15B_max= np.amax(load_15B)
247
load_15B_pu=load_15B/load_15B_max
248
249
load20_max= np.amax(load_20)
250
load20_pu=load_20/load20_max
251
252
load20B_max= np.amax(load_20B)
253
load20B_pu=load_20B/load20B_max
254
255
#write into the excel file
256
workbook = xls.Workbook()
257
sheet = workbook.active
258
sheet["A1"] = "Time"
259
sheet["B1"] = "Load [kW]"
260
sheet["C1"] = "Load p.u."
261
sheet["D1"] = "Load x3 [kW]"
262
sheet["E1"] = "Load x3 p.u."
263
sheet["F1"] = "LoadA x15 [kW]"
264
sheet["G1"] = "LoadA x15 p.u."
265
sheet["H1"] = "LoadB x15 [kW]"
266
sheet["I1"] = "LoadB x15 p.u."
267
sheet["J1"] = "LoadA x20 [kW]"
268
sheet["K1"] = "LoadA x20 p.u."
269
sheet["L1"] = "LoadB x20 [kW]"
270
sheet["M1"] = "LoadB x20 p.u."
271
272
273
for month in range (1,13): #loop to write the time
274
year=2019
275
if month==1:
276
i=1+1
277
for day in range (1,32):
278
for hour in range (0,24):
279
if day<10:
280
if hour <10:
281
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
282
i=i+1
283
else:
284
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
285
i=i+1
286
else:
287
if hour <10:
288
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
289
i=i+1
290
else:
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
67
==PAGE:73==
291
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
292
i=i+1
293
elif month==2:
294
i=745+1
295
for day in range (1,29):
296
for hour in range (0,24):
297
if day<10:
298
if hour <10:
299
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
300
i=i+1
301
else:
302
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
303
i=i+1
304
else:
305
if hour <10:
306
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
307
i=i+1
308
else:
309
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
310
i=i+1
311
elif month==3:
312
i=1417+1
313
for day in range (1,32):
314
for hour in range (0,24):
315
if day<10:
316
if hour <10:
317
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
318
i=i+1
319
else:
320
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
321
i=i+1
322
else:
323
if hour <10:
324
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
325
i=i+1
326
else:
327
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
328
i=i+1
329
elif month==4:
330
i=2161+1
331
for day in range (1,31):
332
for hour in range (0,24):
333
if day<10:
334
if hour <10:
335
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
336
i=i+1
337
else:
338
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
339
i=i+1
340
else:
341
if hour <10:
68
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:74==
342
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
343
i=i+1
344
else:
345
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
346
i=i+1
347
elif month==5:
348
i=2881+1
349
for day in range (1,32):
350
for hour in range (0,24):
351
if day<10:
352
if hour <10:
353
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
354
i=i+1
355
else:
356
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
357
i=i+1
358
else:
359
if hour <10:
360
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
361
i=i+1
362
else:
363
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
364
i=i+1
365
elif month==6:
366
i=3625+1
367
for day in range (1,31):
368
for hour in range (0,24):
369
if day<10:
370
if hour <10:
371
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
372
i=i+1
373
else:
374
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
375
i=i+1
376
else:
377
if hour <10:
378
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
379
i=i+1
380
else:
381
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
382
i=i+1
383
elif month==7:
384
i=4345+1
385
for day in range (1,32):
386
for hour in range (0,24):
387
if day<10:
388
if hour <10:
389
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
390
i=i+1
391
else:
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
69
==PAGE:75==
392
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
393
i=i+1
394
else:
395
if hour <10:
396
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
397
i=i+1
398
else:
399
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
400
i=i+1
401
elif month==8:
402
i=5089+1
403
for day in range (1,32):
404
for hour in range (0,24):
405
if day<10:
406
if hour <10:
407
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
408
i=i+1
409
else:
410
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
411
i=i+1
412
else:
413
if hour <10:
414
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
415
i=i+1
416
else:
417
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
418
i=i+1
419
elif month==9:
420
i=5833+1
421
for day in range (1,31):
422
for hour in range (0,24):
423
if day<10:
424
if hour <10:
425
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
426
i=i+1
427
else:
428
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
429
i=i+1
430
else:
431
if hour <10:
432
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
433
i=i+1
434
else:
435
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
436
i=i+1
437
elif month==10:
438
i=6553+1
439
for day in range (1,32):
440
for hour in range (0,24):
441
if day<10:
442
if hour <10:
70
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:76==
443
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
444
i=i+1
445
else:
446
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
447
i=i+1
448
else:
449
if hour <10:
450
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
451
i=i+1
452
else:
453
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
454
i=i+1
455
elif month==11:
456
i=7297+1
457
for day in range (1,31):
458
for hour in range (0,24):
459
if day<10:
460
if hour <10:
461
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
462
i=i+1
463
else:
464
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
465
i=i+1
466
else:
467
if hour <10:
468
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
469
i=i+1
470
else:
471
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
472
i=i+1
473
elif month==12:
474
i=8017+1
475
for day in range (1,32):
476
for hour in range (0,24):
477
if day<10:
478
if hour <10:
479
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
480
i=i+1
481
else:
482
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/0%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
483
i=i+1
484
else:
485
if hour <10:
486
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d 0%d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
487
i=i+1
488
else:
489
sheet["A%d"%(i)] = "%d/%d/%d %d:00:00" %(year,month,
day,hour)
490
i=i+1
491
492
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
71
==PAGE:77==
493
for x in range (0,len(t)): #loop to write the loads
494
sheet["B%d"%(x+2)] = load[x]
495
sheet["C%d"%(x+2)] = load_pu[x]*100
496
sheet["D%d"%(x+2)] = load_3[x]
497
sheet["E%d"%(x+2)] = load_3_pu[x]*100
498
sheet["F%d"%(x+2)] = load_15[x]
499
sheet["G%d"%(x+2)] = load_15_pu[x]*100
500
sheet["H%d"%(x+2)] = load_15B[x]
501
sheet["I%d"%(x+2)] = load_15B_pu[x]*100
502
sheet["J%d"%(x+2)] = load_20[x]
503
sheet["K%d"%(x+2)] = load20_pu[x]*100
504
sheet["L%d"%(x+2)] = load_20B[x]
505
sheet["M%d"%(x+2)] = load20B_pu[x]*100
506
507
508
workbook.save(filename="load_data.xlsx")
Listing B.1: Code to define all the load profiles for each scenario analyzed.
B.2
Power profiles and wind power curve.
1
2
3
import numpy as np
4
import pandas as pd
5
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
6
import openpyxl as xls
7
8
"""
9
Wind
10
"""
11
#import data from excel
12
data = pd.read_excel (r'C:\Users\Pablo\Documents\DTU\Thesis\Power Profiles of
Kenya\Wind_speeds.xlsx',dtype={'Wind Speed [m/s]': float}) #place "r"
before the path string to address special character , such as '\'. Don't
forget to put the file name at the end of the path + '.xlsx'
13
df = pd.DataFrame(data, columns= ['Wind Speed [m/s]'])
14
15
wind_speed=np.array(df)
16
maximum_speed=np.max(wind_speed)
17
average_speed=np.average(wind_speed)
18
19
20
#power curve
21
p_curve_short=np.array
([0,0,0,2,4,6,9,13,16,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,20,0])
/20
22
ws = np.arange(0,50.001,0.01)
23
p_curve=np.zeros(len(ws))
24
25
for j in range (200,2599):
26
y=int(j/100)
27
p_curve[j]=(p_curve_short[y+1]-p_curve_short[y])/100*(j-y*100)+
p_curve_short[y]
28
29
30
31
plt.plot(ws,p_curve)
32
plt.title('Wind power curve')
33
plt.xlabel('Wind Speed [m/s]')
34
plt.ylabel('Power [p.u.]')
35
plt.xlim(0,30)
72
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:78==
36
plt.grid()
37
plt.savefig('wind_power_curve.pdf')
38
plt.show()
39
40
41
#Assign power factors to wind speeds
42
43
wind_hourly_cf=np.zeros(len(wind_speed))
44
x100=np.zeros(len(wind_speed),dtype=int)
45
for j in range (0,len(wind_speed)):
46
x100[j]=wind_speed[j]*100
47
48
49
for j in range (0,len(wind_hourly_cf)):
50
wind_hourly_cf[j]=p_curve[x100[j]]
51
52
hours_years= np.arange(0,8760,1)
53
54
plt.plot(hours_years ,wind_hourly_cf)
55
plt.title('Wind capacity factor')
56
plt.xlabel('Hour of the year [m/s]')
57
plt.ylabel('Power [p.u.]')
58
plt.grid()
59
plt.savefig('wind_cf.pdf')
60
plt.show()
61
62
63
#Write capacity factors on excel
64
65
workbook = xls.Workbook()
66
sheet = workbook.active
67
68
for i in range (0,len(wind_hourly_cf)): #loop to write the loads
69
sheet["A%d"%(i+1)] = wind_hourly_cf[i]
70
71
workbook.save(filename="wind_capacity_factor.xlsx")
72
73
74
"""
75
Solar
76
"""
77
#import data from excel
78
data2 = pd.read_excel (r'C:\Users\Pablo\Documents\DTU\Thesis\Power Profiles of
Kenya\pv profile.xlsx',dtype={'Capacity Factor': float}) #place "r"
before the path string to address special character , such as '\'. Don't
forget to put the file name at the end of the path + '.xlsx'
79
df2 = pd.DataFrame(data2, columns= ['Capacity Factor'])
80
81
solar_hourly_cf=np.array(df2)
82
83
84
#plot solar capacity factors
85
plt.plot(hours_years ,solar_hourly_cf)
86
plt.title('Solar capacity factor')
87
plt.xlabel('Hour of the year [m/s]')
88
plt.ylabel('Power [p.u.]')
89
plt.grid()
90
plt.savefig('solar_cf.pdf')
91
plt.show()
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
73
==PAGE:79==
Listing B.2: Code used during the generation profiles to determine the power curve of
the wind turbine as well as the capacity factor in per unit of each hour for wind and solar
power.
74
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:80==
C
Appendix: GAMS Code
In this appendix, all the different GAMS files used in the project are included. Although
the core of every model is very similar, a different file was used for each scenario since
the inputs needed are different from scenario to scenario.
Moreover, every scenario has two versions of the code: the code providing ideal results,
and the code under realistic constraints to generate an output that can be used in the
strategy. Since the code for both cases are the same except for an additional set of con-
straints making sure the minimum generation capacity installed follow realistic capacities,
only the second version of the code will be included.
In addition, the code used for the initial and the final scenario within the same stage of the
system is the same with the exception of a different load input. Therefore, only one of the
two scenarios per stage will be shown.
C.1
Initial Scenario of the First Stage
1
2
Sets
3
u
Technologies
/pv, st_ch, st_dis , st_cap/
4
5
t
timesteps
/t1*t8760/
6
subt(t)
7
;
8
9
subt(t)$(ord(t)>1)=yes;
10
11
Parameters
12
CAPEX(u)
Euros-kW installed
13
/pv 1130, st_ch 150, st_dis 150, st_cap 1042/
14
15
OPEX(u)
Euros-kW installed
16
/pv 0.0015, st_ch 0, st_dis 0, st_cap 0/
17
18
Lifetime(u)
Lifetime of the technologies in years
19
/pv 20, st_ch 20, st_dis 20, st_cap 20/
20
21
*import external files
22
d(t) demand in kW/
23
$ondelim
24
$include consumption_1st_1st.csv
25
$offdelim
26
/
27
28
solar_profile(t) solar profile /
29
$ondelim
30
$include PV_Modelling.csv
31
$offdelim
32
/
33
34
;
35
36
Scalars
37
r
interest rate
/0.023/
38
eff_in
charging efficiency
/0.98/
39
eff_out
discharging efficiency
/0.97/
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
75
==PAGE:81==
40
eff_conv converter efficiency
/1/
41
seclevel security level kWh
/00/
42
43
Free Variable
44
Z;
45
46
Positive Variable
47
*technical
48
Cap(u)
Installed capacities per technology kW
49
level
Storage level kWh
50
st_inflow
Charge of the storage kW
51
st_outflow
Discharge of the storage kW
52
curtailment
Energy curtailed
53
54
*economical
55
Investment(u)
Total investment cost of one technology MEUR
56
Annuity(u)
Annualized cost of the technology
57
58
P(u,t)
Energy production
59
pv_mod
Production modified
60
;
61
62
Equations
63
Obj
Objective function in EUR
64
65
*economical
66
I(u)
Total investment cost of a technology EUR
67
Ann(u)
Annualized cost of a technology
68
69
*tecnical
70
prod_pv(u,t)
production pv
71
prod_mod(t)
PV production +1
72
73
*storage
74
balance(t)
storage balance
75
inflow(t)
storage inflow
76
outflow(t)
storage outflow
77
max_l
maximum storage level
78
st_init(t)
initial storage level
79
max_ch(t)
maximum charging
80
max_dis(t)
maximum discharging
81
dis_limit(t)
discharging limitation
82
dis_init(t)
discharging initial level
83
min_level(t)
security of storage
84
st_end(t)
storage final level
85
86
*Demand
87
demand(t)
demand constraint
88
;
89
90
Obj..
Z=e=sum(u,Annuity(u))+sum(t,P('pv',t))*OPEX('pv')
91
+sum(t,st_inflow(t))*OPEX('st_ch ')+sum(t,st_outflow(t
))*OPEX('st_dis ')
92
+sum(t,(Cap('st_cap ')-level(t))/1000);
93
94
I(u)..
Investment(u) =e= Cap(u)*CAPEX(u);
95
Ann(u)..
Annuity(u) =e= (Investment(u)*r)/((1+r)*(1-(1+r)**(-
Lifetime(u))));
96
97
*res
98
prod_pv(u,t)..
P('pv',t) =e= Cap('pv')*solar_profile(t)-curtailment(t)
;
76
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:82==
99
100
*storage
101
inflow(t)..
st_inflow(t)=l=P('pv',t);
102
outflow(t)$(subt(t))..
st_outflow(t)=l=level(t-1);
103
balance(t)$(subt(t))..
level(t)=e=level(t-1)+st_inflow(t)*eff_in -
st_outflow(t);
104
max_l(t)..
level(t)=l=Cap('st_cap ');
105
max_ch(t)..
st_inflow(t)=l=Cap('st_ch ');
106
max_dis(t)..
st_outflow(t)=l=Cap('st_dis ');
107
dis_limit(t)..
st_outflow(t)*eff_out=l=d(t)/eff_conv;
108
min_level(t)..
level(t)=g= seclevel;
109
110
*initial and final settings
111
dis_init(t)..
d('t1')/eff_conv=e=st_outflow('t1')*eff_out;
112
st_init(t)..
level('t1')=e=(Cap('st_cap ')-seclevel)*0.5+
seclevel;
113
st_end(t)..
level('t8760 ')=g= level('t1');
114
115
*demand
116
demand(t)..
d(t)/eff_conv=e=P('pv',t)-st_inflow(t)+
st_outflow(t)*eff_out;
117
prod_mod(t)..
pv_mod(t)=e=P('pv',t)+1;
118
119
display '------Solve---------';
120
121
122
model First /all/;
123
solve First using mip minimizing Z;
124
125
display Z.l, Cap.l, d, P.l, curtailment.l, level.l, st_inflow.l, st_outflow.l,
annuity.l ;
126
127
128
execute_unload "th_results_1st_1st.gdx" Z.l, Cap.l, pv_mod.l, level.l,
st_inflow.l, st_outflow.l, annuity.l;
129
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_1st_1st.gdx o=th_results_1st_1st.xls var=Z.l
rng=cost!';
130
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_1st_1st.gdx o=th_results_1st_1st.xls var=Cap.l
rng=capacities!'
131
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_1st_1st.gdx o=th_results_1st_1st.xls var=pv_mod
.l rng=production! rdim=1 cdim=0';
132
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_1st_1st.gdx o=th_results_1st_1st.xls var=level.
l rng=battery_level! rdim=1 cdim=0';
133
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_1st_1st.gdx o=th_results_1st_1st.xls var=
st_inflow.l rng=inflow! rdim=1 cdim=0';
134
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_1st_1st.gdx o=th_results_1st_1st.xls var=
st_outflow.l rng=outflow! rdim=1 cdim=0';
135
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_1st_1st.gdx o=th_results_1st_1st.xls var=
annuity.l rng=annuity!';
C.2
Initial Scenario of the Second Stage
1
Sets
2
u
Technologies
/pv, wind, st_ch, st_dis , st_cap/
3
4
t
timesteps
/t1*t8760/
5
subt(t)
6
;
7
8
subt(t)$(ord(t)>1)=yes;
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
77
==PAGE:83==
9
10
Parameters
11
CAPEX(u)
Euros-kW installed
12
/pv 1130, wind 1000, st_ch 150, st_dis 150, st_cap 1042/
13
14
OPEX(u)
Euros-kWh produced
15
/pv 0.0015, wind 0.0028, st_ch 0, st_dis 0, st_cap 0/
16
17
Lifetime(u)
Lifetime of the technologies in years
18
/pv 20, wind 20, st_ch 20, st_dis 20, st_cap 20/
19
20
*import external files
21
d(t) demand in kW/
22
$ondelim
23
$include consumption_2nd_2nd.csv
24
$offdelim
25
/
26
27
solar_profile(t) solar profile /
28
$ondelim
29
$include PV_Modelling.csv
30
$offdelim
31
/
32
33
wind_profile(t) wind profile /
34
$ondelim
35
$include Wind_Modelling.csv
36
$offdelim
37
/
38
39
;
40
41
Scalars
42
r
interest rate
/0.023/
43
eff_in
charging efficiency
/0.98/
44
eff_out
discharging efficiency
/0.97/
45
eff_conv converter efficiency
/0.95/
46
seclevel security level kWh
/000/
47
48
Free Variable
49
Z;
50
51
Positive Variable
52
*technical
53
Cap(u)
Installed capacities per technology kW
54
level
Storage level kWh
55
st_inflow
Charge of the storage kW
56
st_outflow
Discharge of the storage kW
57
pv_curt
PV curtailed
58
w_curt
Wind curtailed
59
60
*economical
61
Investment(u)
Total investment cost of one technology MEUR
62
Annuity(u)
Annualized cost of the technology
63
64
P(u,t)
Energy production
65
pv_mod
Production PV modified
66
w_mod
Production wind modified
67
;
68
69
Equations
70
Obj
Objective function in EUR
78
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:84==
71
72
*economical
73
I(u)
Total investment cost of a technology EUR
74
Ann(u)
Annualized cost of a technology
75
76
*tecnical
77
prod_pv(u,t)
production pv
78
prod_wind(u,t)
production wind
79
pv_curtailment(t)
PV curtailed
80
wind_curtailment(t)
wind curtailed
81
pv_modified(t)
PV production +1
82
wind_modified(t)
Wind production +1
83
84
*storage
85
balance(t)
storage balance
86
inflow(t)
storage inflow
87
outflow(t)
storage outflow
88
max_l
maximum storage level
89
st_init(t)
initial storage level
90
max_ch(t)
maximum charging
91
max_dis(t)
maximum discharging
92
dis_limit(t)
discharging limitation
93
dis_init(t)
discharging initial level
94
min_level(t)
security of storage
95
st_end(t)
storage final level
96
97
*Demand
98
demand(t)
demand constraint
99
100
*Realistic capacities
101
solar_capacity
realistic solar
102
storage_capacity
realistic battery
103
wind_capacity
realistic wind
104
;
105
106
Obj..
Z=e=sum(u,Annuity(u))+sum(t,P('pv',t))*OPEX('pv')+sum(t,P('
wind',t))*OPEX('wind')
107
+sum(t,st_inflow(t))*OPEX('st_ch ')+sum(t,st_outflow(t
))*OPEX('st_dis ')
108
+sum(t,(Cap('st_cap ')-level(t))/1000);
109
110
I(u)..
Investment(u) =e= Cap(u)*CAPEX(u);
111
Ann(u)..
Annuity(u) =e= (Investment(u)*r)/((1+r)*(1-(1+r)**(-
Lifetime(u))));
112
113
114
*realistic capacities
115
solar_capacity..
Cap('pv')=g=29.64223591;
116
storage_capacity..
Cap('st_cap ')=g=57.74388557;
117
wind_capacity..
Cap('wind ')=e=10;
118
119
*res
120
prod_pv(u,t)..
P('pv',t) =l= Cap('pv')*solar_profile(t);
121
prod_wind(u,t)..
P('wind',t) =l= Cap('wind ')*wind_profile(t);
122
pv_curtailment(t)..
pv_curt(t)=e= Cap('pv')*solar_profile(t)-P('pv',t);
123
wind_curtailment(t)..
w_curt(t)=e= Cap('wind ')*wind_profile(t)-P('wind',t);
124
125
*storage
126
inflow(t)..
st_inflow(t)=l=P('pv',t);
127
outflow(t)$(subt(t))..
st_outflow(t)=l=level(t-1);
128
balance(t)$(subt(t))..
level(t)=e=level(t-1)+st_inflow(t)*eff_in -
st_outflow(t);
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
79
==PAGE:85==
129
max_l(t)..
level(t)=l=Cap('st_cap ');
130
max_ch(t)..
st_inflow(t)=l=Cap('st_ch ');
131
max_dis(t)..
st_outflow(t)=l=Cap('st_dis ');
132
dis_limit(t)..
st_outflow(t)*eff_out=l=d(t);
133
min_level(t)..
level(t)=g= seclevel;
134
135
*initial and final settings
136
dis_init(t)..
st_outflow('t1')*eff_out=l=d('t1');
137
st_init(t)..
level('t1')=e=(Cap('st_cap ')-seclevel)*0.5+
seclevel;
138
st_end(t)..
level('t8760 ')=g= level('t1');
139
140
*demand
141
demand(t)..
d(t)=e=P('pv',t)+P('wind',t)-st_inflow(t)+
st_outflow(t)*eff_out;
142
pv_modified(t)..
pv_mod(t)=e=P('pv',t)+1;
143
wind_modified(t)..
w_mod(t)=e=P('wind',t)+1;
144
145
display '------Solve---------';
146
147
148
model First /all/;
149
solve First using mip minimizing Z;
150
151
display Z.l, Cap.l, d, P.l, pv_curt.l, w_curt.l, level.l, st_inflow.l,
st_outflow.l, annuity.l ;
152
153
154
execute_unload "th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.gdx" Z.l, Cap.l, w_mod.l, pv_mod.
l, level.l, st_inflow.l, st_outflow.l, annuity.l;
155
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.xls var=Z.l rng=cost!';
156
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.xls var=Cap.l rng=capacities!'
157
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.xls var=w_mod.l rng=wind! rdim=1 cdim=0';
158
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.xls var=pv_mod.l rng=pv! rdim=1 cdim=0';
159
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.xls var=level.l rng=battery_level! rdim=1
cdim=0';
160
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.xls var=st_inflow.l rng=inflow! rdim=1 cdim
=0';
161
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.xls var=st_outflow.l rng=outflow! rdim=1 cdim
=0';
162
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_2nd_2nd_realistic.xls var=annuity.l rng=annuity!';
C.3
Initial Scenario of the Third Stage
1
Sets
2
u
Technologies
/pv1, st_ch1, st_dis1 , st_cap1 , pv2, wind/
3
4
t
timesteps
/t1*t8760/
5
subt(t)
6
;
7
8
subt(t)$(ord(t)>1)=yes;
80
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:86==
9
10
Parameters
11
CAPEX(u)
Euros-kW installed
12
/pv1 1130, st_ch1 150, st_dis1 150, st_cap1 1042, pv2 1130, wind
1000/
13
14
OPEX(u)
Euros-kW installed
15
/pv1 0.0015, st_ch1 0, st_dis1 0, st_cap1 0, pv2 0.0015, wind 0.0028/
16
17
Lifetime(u)
Lifetime of the technologies in years
18
/pv1 20, st_ch1 20, st_dis1 20, st_cap1 20, pv2 20, wind 20/
19
20
*import external files
21
d1(t) demand in kW/
22
$ondelim
23
$include consumption_3rd_2nd_A.csv
24
$offdelim
25
/
26
27
d2(t) demand in kW/
28
$ondelim
29
$include consumption_3rd_2nd_B.csv
30
$offdelim
31
/
32
33
solar_profile(t) solar profile /
34
$ondelim
35
$include PV_Modelling.csv
36
$offdelim
37
/
38
39
wind_profile(t) wind profile /
40
$ondelim
41
$include Wind_Modelling.csv
42
$offdelim
43
/
44
;
45
46
Scalars
47
r
interest rate
/0.023/
48
*exp_opex
exporting OPEX
/3.00/
49
eff_in
charging efficiency
/0.98/
50
eff_out
discharging efficiency
/0.97/
51
eff_conv
converter efficiency
/0.95/
52
seclevel
security level kWh
/000/
53
54
55
Free Variable
56
Z;
57
58
Positive Variable
59
60
*technical
61
Cap(u)
Installed capacities per technology kW
62
level1
Storage level of village 1 kWh
63
st_inflow1
Charge of the storage in village 1 kW
64
st_outflow1
Discharge of the storage in village 1 kW
65
import1
Energy imported in village 1
66
import2
Energy imported in village 2
67
export1
Energy exported from village 1
68
export2
Energy exported from village 2
69
wind1
Wind going to village 1
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
81
==PAGE:87==
70
wind2
Wind going to village 2
71
w1_mod
wind1 modifier
72
w2_mod
wind2 modifier
73
pv1_mod
pv1 modifier
74
pv2_mod
pv2 modifier
75
76
*economical
77
Investment(u)
Total investment cost of one technology MEUR
78
Annuity(u)
Annualized cost of the technology
79
80
*energy production
81
P(u,t)
Energy production
82
;
83
84
Equations
85
Obj
Objective function in EUR
86
87
*economical
88
I(u)
Total investment cost of a technology EUR
89
Ann(u)
Annualized cost of a technology
90
91
*tecnical
92
prod_pv1(u,t)
production pv village 1
93
prod_pv2(u,t)
production pv village 2
94
prod_wind(u,t)
production wind
95
96
*storage1
97
balance1(t)
storage balance village 1
98
inflow1(t)
storage inflow village 1
99
outflow1(t)
storage outflow village 1
100
max_level1
maximum storage level village 1
101
st_init1(t)
initial storage level village 1
102
max_ch1(t)
maximum charging village 1
103
max_dis1(t)
maximum discharging village 1
104
dis_limit1(t)
discharging limitation village 1
105
dis_init1(t)
discharging initial level village 1
106
min_level1(t)
security of storage village 1
107
st_end1(t)
storage final level village 1
108
109
*Demand
110
demand1(t)
demand constraint for village 1
111
demand2(t)
demand constraint for village 2
112
imp1(t)
importing energy in village 1
113
imp2(t)
importing energy in village 2
114
wind_share(t)
wind distribution for both villages
115
pv1(t)
PV1 +1
116
pv2(t)
PV2 +1
117
w1(t)
wind1 +1
118
w2(t)
wind2 +1
119
120
121
*Realistic capacities
122
solar1_capacity
realistic solar
123
storage_capacity
realistic battery
124
wind_capacity
realistic wind
125
solar2_capacity
realistic solar
126
;
127
128
Obj..
Z=e=sum(u,Annuity(u))+sum(t,P('wind',t))*OPEX('wind ')+sum(t
,P('pv1',t))*OPEX('pv1')
129
+sum(t,st_inflow1(t))*OPEX('st_ch1 ')+sum(t,
st_outflow1(t))*OPEX('st_dis1 ')
82
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:88==
130
+sum(t,P('pv2',t))*OPEX('pv2')+sum(t,(Cap('st_cap1 ')-
level1(t))/1000);
131
132
I(u)..
Investment(u) =e= Cap(u)*CAPEX(u);
133
Ann(u)..
Annuity(u) =e= (Investment(u)*r)/((1+r)*(1-(1+r)**(-
Lifetime(u))));
134
135
*realistic capacities
136
solar1_capacity..
Cap('pv1')=g=162.4662909;
137
storage_capacity..
Cap('st_cap1 ')=g=356.5963054;
138
wind_capacity..
Cap('wind ')=g=20;
139
solar2_capacity..
Cap('pv2')=g=10.24974199;
140
141
*res
142
prod_wind(u,t)..
P('wind',t) =l= Cap('wind ')*wind_profile(t);
143
prod_pv1(u,t)..
P('pv1',t) =l= Cap('pv1')*solar_profile(t);
144
prod_pv2(u,t)..
P('pv2',t) =l= Cap('pv2')*solar_profile(t);
145
146
*storage village 1
147
inflow1(t)..
st_inflow1(t)=l=P('pv1',t)+P('pv2',t)+P('
wind',t);
148
outflow1(t)$(subt(t))..
st_outflow1(t)=l=level1(t-1);
149
balance1(t)$(subt(t))..
level1(t)=e=level1(t-1)+st_inflow1(t)*eff_in
-st_outflow1(t);
150
max_level1(t)..
level1(t)=l=Cap('st_cap1 ');
151
max_ch1(t)..
st_inflow1(t)=l=Cap('st_ch1 ');
152
max_dis1(t)..
st_outflow1(t)=l=Cap('st_dis1 ');
153
dis_limit1(t)..
st_outflow1(t)*eff_out=l=d1(t)+d2(t)/0.9;
154
min_level1(t)..
level1(t)=g= seclevel;
155
156
*initial and final settings village 1
157
dis_init1(t)..
st_outflow1('t1')*eff_out=l=d1('t1')+d2('t1
')/0.9;
158
st_init1(t)..
level1('t1')=e=(Cap('st_cap1 ')-seclevel)
*0.5+seclevel;
159
st_end1(t)..
level1('t8760 ')=g= level1('t1');
160
161
*demand balance
162
demand1(t)..
d1(t)=e=P('pv1',t)-st_inflow1(t)+st_outflow1
(t)*eff_out+import1(t)-export1(t);
163
demand2(t)..
d2(t)=e=P('pv2',t)+import2(t)-export2(t);
164
imp1(t)..
import1(t)=e=wind1(t)*0.95+export2(t)*0.9;
165
imp2(t)..
import2(t)=e=wind2(t)*0.95+export1(t)*0.9;
166
wind_share(t)..
P('wind',t)=e=wind1(t)+wind2(t);
167
w1(t)..
w1_mod(t)=e=wind1(t)+1;
168
w2(t)..
w2_mod(t)=e=wind2(t)+1;
169
pv1(t)..
pv1_mod(t)=e= P('pv1',t)+1;
170
pv2(t)..
pv2_mod(t)=e= P('pv2',t)+1;
171
172
display '------Solve---------';
173
174
175
model First /all/;
176
solve First using mip minimizing Z;
177
178
display Z.l, Cap.l, annuity.l, d1, d2, P.l, wind1.l, wind2.l, level1.l,
st_inflow1.l, st_outflow1.l, import1.l, export1.l, import2.l, export2.l;
179
180
181
execute_unload "th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.gdx" Z.l, annuity.l, Cap.l, P.l,
pv1_mod.l, pv2_mod.l, w1_mod.l, w2_mod.l, level1.l, st_inflow1.l,
st_outflow1.l;
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
83
==PAGE:89==
182
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.xls var=Z.l rng=cost!';
183
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.xls var=annuity.l rng=annuity!';
184
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.xls var=Cap.l rng=capacities!'
185
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.xls var=P.l rng=production! rdim=2 cdim=0';
186
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.xls var=pv1_mod.l rng=pv_1! rdim=1 cdim=0';
187
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.xls var=pv2_mod.l rng=pv_2! rdim=1 cdim=0';
188
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.xls var=w1_mod.l rng=wind_1! rdim=1 cdim=0';
189
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.xls var=w2_mod.l rng=wind_2! rdim=1 cdim=0';
190
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.xls var=level1.l rng=battery_level_1! rdim=1
cdim=0';
191
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.xls var=st_inflow1.l rng=inflow_1! rdim=1
cdim=0';
192
execute 'gdxxrw.exe th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.gdx o=
th_results_3rd_2nd_realistic.xls var=st_outflow1.l rng=outflow_1! rdim=1
cdim=0';
84
Scalability Solutions for a New Renewable Based Mini-grid as a Remote Power System
==PAGE:90==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 325
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. (+45) 45 25 35 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
