==PAGE:1==
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile
Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
Master Thesis
July, 2020
By
Christian Arendt Rasmussen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Pl. 345C, 2800 Kgs. Lyn-
gby Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the Department of Health Technology at DTU, Technical
University of Denmark, for acquiring a master’s degree in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology
(MSc).
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Identifying mobile genetic elements (MGEs) is a challenging problem to face from both a tech-
nological and biological perspective. In hyperarid areas, MGEs are found to be enriched and
only limited knowledge exists about their biological context. This paper applies metagenomic
analyses for hypolith samples, photosynthetic organisms living in hyperarid environments, to
investigate approaches for identifying MGEs and analyse their biological context. The study
focuses mainly on the identification of plasmids, extrachromosomal mobile genetic elements
(eMGEs). Three approaches for identifying MGEs in hypoliths were carried out namely, one us-
ing long-read sequencing by Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) SMRT sequencing, one using short-
read sequencing by Illumina and finally, a hybrid approach using both long- and short reads.
For each approach, metagenomic assemblies and binning demonstrate the effectiveness of
each approach aimed at evaluating the quality of the resulting metagenomic bins. The two most
effective approaches were found to be the hybrid- and the short-read approach which produced
several metagenomic bins of high completeness and low contamination. A dereplicated set of
metagenomic bins from each assembly were compared and aligned which revealed multiple in-
stances of MGEs in the form insertion sequence elements. Within the set of most similar bins
from each assembly, the number of plasmids were predicted and compared. It was observed
that the hybrid approach allowed for identifying more plasmids compared with the short-read
assembly. Functional properties of protein families were identified from open reading frames
(ORfs) of plasmids predicted from metagenomic bins of the hybrid assembly. This was carried
out in a probabilistic manner using profile hidden Markov models. These observations revealed
multiple occurrences of protein families with functions revolving around energy production, cel-
lular activities and gene regulation.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Acknowledgements
First, I thank Associate Professor Gisle Alberg Vestergaard, gisves@dtu.dk, DTU HEALTH
TECH, Department of Health Technology, Technical University of Denmark, for supervising this
project. His guidance and dedication has been valuable and has made this project an enjoyable
and insightful experience.
I also thank Dr. Doreen Fischer, Research Unit for Comparative Microbiome Analysis, Helmholtz
Zentrum München, for helping with accessing sequencing data. Sequencing data ownership
and rights are reserved for Helmholtz Zentrum München, Deutsches Forschungszentrum für
Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH), Ingolstädter Landstr. 1, 85764 Neuherberg, www.helmholtz-
muenchen.de.
Most of the work and data analysis was done on the platform, Incerta, provided by Technical
University of Denmark under the system administrator, Peter Wad Sackett, pwsa@dtu.dk. I am
thankful that I was given the opportunity to work in this platform which has helped the project a
great deal in terms of speeding up certain computationally demanding processes.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Acknowledgements
iv
2
Introduction
1
3
Methods
2
3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.3
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.4
Binning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.5
Quality control
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.6
Analysis of taxonomy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.7
Analysis of plasmids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
4
Results
7
4.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.2
Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4.3
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.4
Binning and quality control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.5
Analysis of taxonomy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.6
Analysis of plasmids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Discussion
23
5.1
Data and preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Assembly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
Binning, quality control and analysis of taxonomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
Analysis of plasmids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Conclusion
27
7
Supplementary material
28
A Appendix
33
A.1 Binning and Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
A.2 De-replication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
v
==PAGE:7==
2
Introduction
Mobile genetic elements (MGEs) are found in almost all life forms and through identification of
these elements, it it possible to further understand biological aspects such as bacterial adapta-
tion. Plasmids, extrachromosomal mobile genetic elements (eMGEs), can mediate horizontal
gene transfer through conjugation and thereby provide adaptive advantages to organisms living
in certain conditions [35] [15].
Recent studies show that MGEs are enriched within bacterial communities in extreme environ-
ments [39] [22]. Hypoliths, photosynthetic organisms and extremophiles, are examples of such
life forms present in hyperarid areas of the Atacama Desert. These organisms are found under-
neath quartz rocks that are translucent which allows for photosynthesis and protection against
uv-radiation while also being able to hold moisture. The Atacama Desert is a hot desert located
in Chile, South America, and is known for its lack of precipitation. It has become an interesting
place to study the climatic limitations to life. Hence, hypoliths become interesting candidates
when it comes to studying the biological context of MGEs and adaptive properties of organisms
living in hyperarid enviroments [21].
From a technological perspective, it is a challenging issue to identify MGEs because they cause
insertions and rearrangements within genomes. Nevertheless, the usage of long-read sequenc-
ing technologies like Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) may prove to be successful in terms of identi-
fying MGEs. Long-read sequencing is capable of generating longer contigs and allows for distin-
guishing between homologous sequences more effectively compared to short-read sequencing
[42].
The purpose of this paper is to study the effect of utilizing long reads to identify MGEs based on
metagenomic analyses of hypolith samples that have been sequenced with PacBio (long-read
sequencing) and Illumina (short-read sequencing). It is important to mention that this study fo-
cuses mainly on the identification of plasmids. Three different approaches have been carried
out namely, one using only long reads, one using only short reads and a hybrid approach com-
bining both long reads and short reads. All three approaches will undergo similar metagenomic
analyses with the objective of comparing the approaches in terms of identifying MGEs and ulti-
mately, analyse whether found MGEs carry functional properties beneficial for organisms living
in hyperarid environments.
It is believed that a hybrid approach will produce a high-quality assembly where utilization of long
reads effectively allows for identification of MGEs. Hence, this approach will lead to a proper
way of analysing their biological context regarding organisms living in hyperarid environments.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
1
==PAGE:8==
3
Methods
Figure 3.1 on the following page outlines the approaches that illustrates step-by-step what tasks
and tools that have gone into studying the problem. This figure acts as the backbone of how
this study was carried out. Each box (soft edges) indicates a given step whereas boxes inside
(sharp edges) correspond to the tools used and coloured based on what type of sequencing data
that has been used i.e. long reads/PacBio (green), short reads/Illumina (blue) and the hybrid
consisting of both types of reads (purple). Following that, a detailed description of the workflow
will be described.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
2
==PAGE:9==
Analysis of 
plasmids
Quality control
Binning
Assembly
Preprocessing
Data
PacBio
MetaSPAdes
Classification:
PlasFlow 1.1
Jupyter/Python
Functionality
OrfM
Pfam
Hmmsearch
Jupyter/Python
CCS
CheckM
MetaBAT 2
Illumina
Bbduk
Sickle
Flye
MetaSPAdes
MetaBAT 2
MetaBAT 2
CheckM
CheckM
Analysis of 
taxonomy
Blobtools
dRep
MUMmer
Blobtools
GRiD
Description:
Jupyter/Python
Figure 3.1: Flowchart illustrating the workflow.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
3
==PAGE:10==
3.1
Data
Hypolith samples have been sequenced using both PacBio SMRT sequencing and Illumina se-
quencing. This data was used as input for the following downstream processes which was
worked with on the platform, Incerta, provided by Technical University of Denmark with system
administrator, Peter Wad Sackett, pwsa@dtu.dk.
3.2
Preprocessing
For both types of reads resulted by the different sequencing technologies, different types of pre-
processing were carried out.
PacBio data was preprocessed using circular consensus sequencing (CCS) [2] to account for
sequencing errors. PacBio’s CCS tool [31] was used to generate accurate long reads i.e. HiFi
reads where subreads were given as input in the format of unaligned .bam files. Default pa-
rameters were used as recommended by the tool because it is already optimized for balancing
speed in terms of CPU time and output quality. Illumina short reads were subjected to adapter
trimming using bbduk [4] and quality trimming using sickle [18].
3.3
Assembly
For each type of preprocessed reads, metagenomic assemblies were made.
For the processed PacBio long reads, Flye[10] was used for metagenomic assembly. Flye 2.7
supports PacBio HiFi reads and was thus the desired version to perform the assembly according
to the preprocessing of reads. Flye’s Hifi mode along with the mode for metagenomic assembly
was used. Furthermore, the option for keeping short unassembled plasmids [9] was used.
For the processed Illumina reads, MetaSPAdes [38] was used for metagenomic assembly.
The hybrid assembly was carried out using the Illumina paired end reads and the PacBio CCS
reads by hybridSPAdes [3]. The hybridSPAdes algorithm constructs the assembly graph using
the Illumina short reads. The PacBio long reads are then mapped to the assembly graph where
occurring gaps are closed using the consensus of long reads that span the gaps.
3.4
Binning
MetaBAT 2 [28] was used as tool to perform binning of the metagenomic assemblies from both
PacBio- and Illumina data as well as the hybrid assembly. The approach was to align PacBio-
and Illumina reads to their respecive metagenomic assemblies using Minimap 2 [25]. Minimap 2
supports both PacBio CCS genomic reads and paired end reads. Alignment files were produced
in .sam format. The alignment files were then converted to sorted- and indexed .bam files using
samtools [24]. The assemblies and corresponding alignment files were then given as input to
MetaBAT 2 for binning. The binning of the hybrid assembly followed the same approach. All
alignment files resulted by aligning both PacBio- and Illumina reads to the hybrid assembly were
given as input to MetaBAT 2 for binning.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
4
==PAGE:11==
3.5
Quality control
The binning of each assembly resulted in metagenomic bins to be analysed in order to evaluate
the effectiveness of each approach in terms of bin quality. For the three assemblies, CheckM
[32] was used to asses the quality of metagenomic bins based on genome completeness and
contamination by quantifying singly-copy genes within a phylogenetic lineage. The bins were
assessed in terms of size, completeness and contamination. For comparison purposes, a ta-
ble was created for listing bins of similar taxonimical classification along with ranging values of
completeness and contamination.
3.6
Analysis of taxonomy
Taxonomic analyses of each assembly were further carried out to compare the yield of genetic
information resulted by each approach.
3.6.1
Long-read assembly: Taxonomic partitioning
Visualizing the taxonomic partitioning of the PacBio assembly of CCS reads was done using
Blobtools [20] and was carried out by executing the following steps. Firstly, the base/read cov-
erage of CCS reads mapped to the assembly was calculated by Blobtool’s module map2cov
resulting in two files, one for each sequencing file. Secondly, given sequences were linked to
NCBI TaxIDs resulted by a BLASTn search against the NCBI nt sequence collection [29] result-
ing in a single file. Ultimately, the assembly, coverage and hits files were used for Blobtools to
visualize the taxonomic partioning of the assembly. Additionally, the tool was used to analyse
the taxonomic partitioning of the metagenomic bins resulted by the PacBio CCS reads assem-
bly. This was done by calculating the base/read coverage for each metagenomic bin mapped
to the assembly and then following the same steps as before.
3.6.2
Long-read metagenomic bins: Origin of replication rates
Moreover, GRiD [13] was used for the assembly of the PacBio CCS reads to further analyse
the resulting metagenomic bins based on rates of growth and origin of replication. The growth
rate index (GRiD) was calculated from the metagenomic bins used as references along with the
CCS reads given as input.
3.6.3
Comparison: Hybrid assembly versus long-read assembly
Finally, the hybrid assembly was compared to the PacBio CCS reads assembly by visualizing
the hybrid assembly with Blobtools and compare mapped/unmapped sequences in the two as-
semblies.
3.6.4
Comparison: Hybrid assembly versus short-read assembly
The hybrid assembly and the assembly made from Illumina reads were compared. The tool,
dRep [11], was used along with CheckM for genome de-replication to filter the bins of each
assembly based on completeness, contamination, strain heterogeneity, length and N50. After
de-replication, the set of filtered bins for each assembly was compared pair-wise and clustered
using dRep’s module for genome comparison. Based on the clustering and average nucleotide
identity, two sets of bins were observed similar. In this context, a set of similar bins mean a
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
5
==PAGE:12==
cluster of two bins where one bin is from the hybrid assembly and the other bin is from the
Illumina reads assembly with an average nucleotide identity of 90% or more. MUMmer [1] was
then used as an alignment tool to find maximal unique matches (MUMs) between the two sets
of similar bins where output was visualized with a local version of gnuplot [44].
3.7
Analysis of plasmids
The analyses of plasmids were carried out for the hybrid and short-read approach where plas-
mids were classified from the metagenomic bins followed by a description of these and ultimately,
the functional properties of the plasmids were studied.
3.7.1
Classification
For each set of similar bins, the number of plasmids classified within each bin was compared.
PlasFlow [33] was used as tool for classification of plasmids. Firstly, the metagenomic bins were
filtered by sequence length so that only sequences of length of more than 1000 bp remained.
Secondly, the output i.e. the .tsv file from PlasFlow containing classification of sequences were
used for visualization and comparison between the number of plasmids identified within each
set of similar metagenomic bins using self-made scripts by Jupyter Notebook and Python [34]
[19].
3.7.2
Description
For decribing the plasmids, a swarmplot was made to visualise the distribution of plasmids sizes
within the metagenomic bins of the hybrid assembly. This was done using self-made scripts.
Furthermore, a multiple alignment of plasmids within each metagenomic bin was done for con-
structing a phylogenetic tree illustrating plasmid sequence similarities. The multiple alignment
was done using sequence analysis tools of EMBL-EBi [26]. The multiple alignment file was
converted to Newick format using TreeHugger [36] and visualised through FigTree [14].
3.7.3
Functionality
Finally, protein families were identified within plasmids with the purpose of analysing functional
properties contained within the metagenomic bins.
Open reading frames (ORFs) of the metagenomic bins were predicted using OrfM [7]. A thresh-
old including only ORFs of length ≥300 bp was set. Next, ORFs were used as queries to search
against the profile database, Pfam [43], by hmmsearch [16] in order to carry out a probabilistic
approach of identifying protein families [12]. Only Pfam entries of e-values below 1e-3 were
included.
The next step focused on comparing Pfam entries and see if found plasmids with respect to
their metagenomic bin carried similar functional properties. The output given by hmmsearch
was analysed using self-made scripts.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
6
==PAGE:13==
4
Results
The results provided by each objective of the given workflow will be presented in the following.
4.1
Data
The sequenced hypolith samples resulted in a total of approximately 5.5 Gb data by PacBio
SMRT sequencing. Approximately 6 Gb data was resulted by Illumina sequencing.
4.2
Preprocessing
The generated PacBio CCS reads resulted in approximately 200 Mb of data. The Illumina reads
after adapter and quality trimming resulted in approximately 5 Gb of data. The length histograms
of the preprocessed read lengths can be seen below in Figure 4.1a and 4.1b. The PacBio CCS
reads shows sequence lengths ranging up to approximately 8000 bp with a mode of around 2000
bp with a total of approximately 88,000 reads. The mode of Illumina read lengths are around
300bp with a total number of reads around 9,500,000.
(a) Length histogram of PacBio reads after
preprocessing by consensus circular se-
quencing.
(b) Length histogram of Illumina reads af-
ter preprocessing by adapter- and quality
trimming
Figure 4.1: Length histograms of PacBio- and Illumina reads. The x-axes represent the se-
quence length in bp. The y-axes represent the number of sequences.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
7
==PAGE:14==
4.3
Assembly
In Figures 4.2a, 4.2b and 4.2c shows the Nx contig lengths for the assemblies made from PacBio
CCS reads, Illumina reads and the hybrid assembly respectively. The y-axis represents the con-
tig length and the x-axis represents the Nx value ranging from 0 to 1 i.e. 0 to 100%. The plots
show the minimum contig length required to cover x % of the assemblies. The long-read assem-
bly (left) shows a lesser decrease in minimum contig length as Nx goes from 0 to 1 compared
to the other assemblies. The short-read assembly (middle) shows a greater decrease in contig
lengths of below 25 kbp at Nx values above 0.1. From Figure 4.2c, the curvature and sequence
length values reveal that the hybrid assembly (right) contains longer contigs compared with the
short-read assembly.
(a) Nx-plot: Long-read assem-
bly.
Sequence lengths range
from 0 to 70 kbp.
(b) Nx-plot: Short-read assem-
bly.
Sequence lengths range
from 0 to 350 kbp.
(c) Nx-plot:
Hybrid assembly.
Sequence lengths range from 0
to 300 kbp.
Figure 4.2: Nx-plots of the assemblies. The x-axes represent the Nx values from 0 to 1. The
y-axes represent the sequence length in base pairs.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
8
==PAGE:15==
4.4
Binning and quality control
The binning of the assembly of PacBio CCS reads resulted in two metagenomic bins ranging
from approximately 48-57% completeness and approximately 0-2% contamination with bin sizes
approximately 2.8-3.6 Mb. Details regarding the bins such as bin lineage and quantitative mea-
sures of marker genes occurrences can be seen in the Appendix in figure A.1.
The binning of the assembly of Illumina reads resulted in a total of 16 metagenomic bins rang-
ing from approximately 6-99 % completeness and approximately 0-22% contamination with bin
sizes from approximately 0.2-5.7 Mb. From the set of bins, there were found three metagenomic
bins above 95 % completeness and less than 3 % contamination. More details regarding the
bins can be found in the Appendix in figure A.2.
The binning of the hybrid assembly resulted in 14 metagenomic bins ranging from approximately
7 % to nearly 100 % completeness and approximately 0-2 % contamination with bin sizes from
approximately 0.2-5.0 Mb. From this set of bins, there were found two metagenomic bins above
95 % completeness and less than 1 % contamination. More details regarding the bins can be
found in the Appendix in figure A.3.
The following table compares the quality of metagenomic bins resulted by each assembly. Val-
ues are given in intervals ranging from lowest- to highest value (rounded). Percentage values
are rounded to nearest ones. The hybrid assembly shows the highest completeness (C+) for
taxon cyanobacteria (UID2189) compared to the other assemblies. However, the hybrid assem-
bly has lower completeness for other given taxons compared to the assembly made by illumina
reads. The hybrid assembly has the lowest contamination (C-) compared to the assembly made
by illumina reads. Additionally, the hybrid assembly compared to the assembly made by PacBio
CCS reads has a higher completeness and similar contamination. In the following section, fur-
ther analysis of the metagenomic bins will be carried out.
PacBio:bin
Illumina:bin
Hybrid:bin
PacBio:C+
Illumina:C+
Hybrid:C+
PacBio:C-
Illumina:C-
Hybrid:C-
Cyanobacteria
(UID2189)
Cyanobacteria
(UID2189)
Cyanobacteria
(UID2189)
48- 57%
85-97%
64-100%
0-2%
0-3%
0-2%
N/A
Cyanobacteria
(UID2182)
Cyanobacteria
(UID2182)
N/A
51-99%
47-96%
N/A
0-1%
0-1%
N/A
Actinobacteria
(UID1454)
Actinobacteria
(UID1454)
N/A
52-79%
7-48%
N/A
3-10%
<1%
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
9
==PAGE:16==
4.5
Analysis of taxonomy
This section will firstly present results from analysing the taxonomic partitioning of the long-read
assembly. Following that, the hybrid assembly will be compared to the long-read assembly and
short-read assembly, respectively.
4.5.1
Long-read assembly: Taxonomic partitioning
It was observed that given assemblies resulted in multiple bins that were taxonomically identi-
cal. The binning of the assembly of PacBio CCS reads resulted in only metagenomic bins that
were identical namely, cyanobacteria. Figure 4.3, visualises the taxonomic partitioning of the
assembly given by base coverage and GC proportion. This visualisation shows a scatterplot
with coverage and GC histograms for each taxonomic group weighted by the cumulative length
of sequences i.e. span. The circles correspond to sequences with diameter proportional to se-
quence length and are coloured based on taxonomical classification described in the legend.
The observed cluster of cyanobacteria shows a binomial distribution.
Figure 4.3: Visualization of the taxonomic partition of the assembly of PacBio CCS reads.
In addition to visualising the taxonomic partitioning of the assembly, Figure 4.4 visualises the
partitioning of the metagenomic bins. In this case, circles are coloured based on which metage-
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
10
==PAGE:17==
nomic bin, if any, the sequences belong to. This figure elucidates how the observed binomial
distribution from before is caused by differences in GC proportions. The red circles are se-
quences that do not belong to either of the given metagenomic bins.
Figure 4.4: Bins are mapped against the assembly of PacBio CCS reads to compute base
coverage per sequence. It is hence identified what bins correspond to what sequences in the
assembly. It can be seen how the two bins are separated by GC proportion. The red circles
labeled as ”Undef” (undefined) is the remaining sequences not included in the bins.
4.5.2
Long-read metagenomic bins: Origin of replication rates
In addition to the difference in GC proportion, the following table shows that there also exists
a difference in the origin of replication rate for the two binned cyanobacteria in the long-read
assembly. The table displays an index of the growth rate (GRiD), 95 % confidence interval,
unrefined GRiD value, dnaA/ori ratio, and ter/dif ratio. Calculations are based on the coverage
of all contigs of the given metagenomic bin.
Bin
GRiD
95% CI
Ori-ratio
Ter/dif ratio
1
1.24
1.21;1.35
0.93
0.88
3
1.27
1.22;1.34
0.84
0.88
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
11
==PAGE:18==
4.5.3
Comparison: Hybrid assembly versus long-read assembly
Figure 4.5 visualizes the taxonomic partitioning of the hybrid assembly. This figure compared
with Figure 4.3 shows a more dispersed distribution of taxons. Also, from the vertical histogram,
more sequences of higher coverage exists. From the blobplot, more taxonomically classified
sequences exists which will be described further in the following.
Figure 4.5: Visualization of the taxonomic partition of the hybrid assembly.
In Figure 4.6 and 4.7, it is observed that there exists an increase in number of mapped se-
quences in the hybrid assembly compared to the assembly made from only PacBio CCS reads.
The hybrid assembly contains approximately 60 % mapped sequences. Approximately 17 %
of the mapped sequences produced only insignificant matches with an e-value threshold set at
1e-25 and around 1 % undefined Bacteria. The long-read assembly contains approximately 22
% mapped sequences. In both cases, the majority of mapped reads are classified as Cyanobac-
teria.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
12
==PAGE:19==
Figure 4.6: Barplot representing the proportion of mapped and unmapped reads of the hybrid
assembly.
Figure 4.7: Barplot representing the proportion of mapped and unmapped reads of the long-read
assembly.
4.5.4
Comparison: Hybrid assembly versus short-read assembly
In the following, the hybrid- and short-read assembly will be compared in terms of other ap-
proaches. In Figure A.4 and A.5 in Appendix, the de-replication of metagenomic bins from
the hybrid and short-read assembly has been performed. The genomes were scored based on
completeness, contamination, strain heterogeneity, length and N50. Figure 4.8 below shows the
clustering dendrogram, when the de-replicated genomes from the hybrid and short-read assem-
bly are compared. It is seen that several metagenomic bins from both the hybrid assembly and
short-read assembly are clustered together. Observations also show clusters of metagenomic
bins formed from only the short-read assembly.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
13
==PAGE:20==
100.0
80.0
60.0
40.0
20.0
0.0
MASH Average Nucleotide Identity (ANI)
illumina.b19.A54.fa (8_0)
illumina.b21.C92.fa (1_0)
illumina.b8.K203.fa (2_0)
hybrid.b12.C82.fa (3_1)
illumina.b7.C82.fa (3_1)
illumina.b5.C89.fa (5_0)
hybrid.b17.C89.fa (4_1)
illumina.b2.C89.fa (4_1)
hybrid.b8.C89.fa (6_0)
illumina.b13.C89.fa (7_0)
MASH clustering
Figure 4.8: Clustering dendrogram of de-replicated genomes from the hybrid- and short-read
assembly. Genomes are compared using Mash and clustered based on average nucleotide
identity (ANI). The notation is given as < assembly > . < bin_number > . < Taxon_UID > .fa
whereas ”illumina.b2.C89.fa” means the metagenomic bin from the Illumina reads assembly
from Bin 2 that corresponds to Cyanobacteria (UID2189). The dotted line represents the ANI
threshold that is 90%.
From the metagenomic bin comparison, the most similar metagenomic bins resulted in two sets:
Bin 7 from the short-read assembly, illumina.b7.C82, and bin 12 from the hybrid assembly, hy-
brid.b12.C82. The second set is: Bin 2 from the short-read assembly, illumina.b2.C89, and
bin 17 from the hybrid assembly, hybrid.b17.C89. The metagenomic bins were classified as
cyanobacteria.
Figure 4.9 and 4.10 are plots of maximal unique matches between the sets of similar metage-
nomic bins. Forward MUMs are plotted as purple lines/crosses while reverse MUMs are plotted
as green lines/dots. The purple lines of slope == 1 represents segments of conservation be-
tween the two sequences. The green lines of slope == -1 represent sequences in one genome
that matches the reverse complement in the other. In Figure 4.9 when looking at the forward
MUMs, one longer conserved segment can be observed along with multiple shorter segments
of conservation and corresponding inversions representing transpositions. What is furthermore
observed at the position of the metagenomic bin from the hybrid assembly, that is approximately
equal to the maximum length of the metagenomic bin from the Illumina assembly, is that an-
other conserved segment occurs. In Figure 4.10, the green segment in the upper left area of
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
14
==PAGE:21==
the graph shows an inversion and transposition because the slope is negative and the location
is inconsistent with the longest segment of conservation of forward MUMs.
Figure 4.9: Plot of MUMs between bin 7 from the short-read assembly, illumina.b7.C82, and bin
12 from the hybrid assembly, hybrid.b12.C82
Figure 4.10: Plot of MUMs between bin 2 from the short-read assembly, illumina.b2.C89, and
bin 17 from the hybrid assembly, hybrid.b17.C89
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
15
==PAGE:22==
4.6
Analysis of plasmids
The analysis of plasmids is based on comparing plasmids classified within metagenomic bins of
the hybrid assembly by describing the plasmids in terms of size and amount and furthermore, by
studying their functional properties in terms of identifying sequence homologs from the plasmids’
ORFs. This will be carried out in the following.
4.6.1
Classification of plasmids
For each of the two sets of most similar metagenomic bins, a comparison based on the amount
of classified plasmids existing within each metagenomic bin was carried out. The two sets are:
(hybrid.b12.C82, illumina.b7.C82) and (hybrid.b17.C89, illumina.b2.C89).
From Figure 4.11 (a), it can be seen that 10 plasmids are classified in hybrid.b12.C82, whereas
7 plasmids are classified in illumina.b7.C82.
Additionally, looking at Figure 4.11 (b), 76 plasmids are classified in hybrid.b17.C89 whereas,
illumina.b2.C89) 64 plasmids were classified.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: Amount of plasmids classfied is compared within the sets of similar metagenomic
bins given a probability threshold, p ≥0.8. Number of plasmids are grouped by distinct classes
given different prediction probabilities. The x-axis represents under which taxonomic rank the
plasmids are classified. The y-axis represents the number of plasmids. For each class of plas-
mids, two bars visualize the amount of plasmids found in the metagenomic bin from the hybrid
assembly and the short-read assembly. The label ’C’ corresponds to plasmids with host identi-
fied as Cyanobacteria, ’P’ as Proteobacteria and ’U’ as plasmids sequences where the host is
unclassified.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
16
==PAGE:23==
4.6.2
Description of plasmids
In the following, Figure 4.12 shows a swarmplot illustrating the amount of plasmids classified
from the metagenomic bins: hybrid.b12.C82 at hybrid.b17.C89 given contig lengths. Most plas-
mids classified can be seen to have sequence lengths of approximately 5,000-6,000 bp. Two
sequences are observed with lengths above 10,000 bp from hybrid.b12.C82. Longer plasmid
sequences are observed from hybrid.b17.C89 with several sequence lengths above 30,000 bp.
The difference in number of plasmids is also illustrated from this plot where the greater abun-
dance of plasmids classified from hybrid.b17.C89 is evident.
Figure 4.12: Swarmplot of the two metagenomic bins: hybrid.b12.C82 and hybrid.b17.C89. The
x-axis represents the metagenomic bins. The y-axis represents the classified plasmid sequence
lengths from each metagenomic bin. The dots represent plasmid sequences scattered from
specific coordinates on the x-axis.
The figures, 4.13 and 4.14, are phylogenetic tree constructed from multiple alignment of plasmid
sequences predicted from the metagenomic bins: hybrid.b12.C82 at hybrid.b17.C89. Both trees
contain a scale bar indicating the (scaled) branch length i.e. the degree of nucleotide dissimilarity
between plasmid sequences. Furthermore, the nodes of the phylogenetic trees contain the
names of sequence headers from the metagenomic bins classified as plasmids. It is observed
from both phylogenetic trees, especially from Figure 4.14, that branch lengths are generally short
except for a few sequences corresponding to the significantly longer plasmid sequences seen
from the forementioned swarmplot in Figure 4.12. The pictures of the phylogenetic trees are
also available in higher resolutions from the supplementary material handed in together with this
paper.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.13: Phylogenetic tree of hybrid.b12.C82 of 10 plasmid sequences with scale bar value
of 0.08
Figure 4.14: Phylogenetic tree of hybrid.b17.C89 of 76 plasmid sequences with scale bar value
of 0.06
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
18
==PAGE:25==
4.6.3
Functional analysis of plasmids
The following Venn diagram in Figure 4.15 shows the relationship between the number of distinct
Pfam entries found from the ORFs of the plasmids of each metagenomic bin. hybrid.b12.C82
contains 148 distinct Pfam entries and hybrid.b17.C89 contains 535 distinct Pfam entries. 78
distinct Pfam entries are found from both metagenomic bins. In the Venn diagram, the circles
are coloured based on whether the Pfam entries originates from hybrid.b12.C82 (lightcoral) or
hybrid.b17.C89 (silver) with sizes proportional to the amount of distinct Pfam entries.
Figure 4.15: Venn diagram of distinct Pfam entries from ORFs of plasmids from hybrid.b12.C82
(red) and hybrid.b17.C89 (green). 28 distinct Pfam entries are in common.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.16 are boxplots of the number of occurrences of Pfam entries found within the ORFs of
the plasmids from the two metagenomic bins. In both boxplots, mulitple outliers show that highly
abundant Pfam entries exists. Furthermore, the histograms seen in Figure 4.17 are presented
to show the distribution of E-values corresponding to Pfam entries found from ORFs of plas-
mids from each metagenomic bin. Both distributions are right skewed where most Pfam entries
observed contain E-values below 0.0002.
(a) hybrid.b12.C82
(b) hybrid.b17.C89
Figure 4.16: Boxplots illustrating the number of occurrences of Pfam entries found within the
ORFs of the plasmids from the two metagenomic bins of the hybrid assembly
(a) hybrid.b12.C82
(b) hybrid.b17.C89
Figure 4.17: Histograms illustrating the distributions of E-values of Pfam entries found within the
ORFs of the plasmids from the two metagenomic bins from the hybrid assembly
Figure 4.18 visualises Pfam entries and their relative occurrence (in percentages) found from the
plasmid ORFs of the two metagenomic bins. It can be seen that the relative occurrence of given
Pfam entries are greater for Pfam entries found from plasmid ORFs of hybrid.b17.C89 compared
with those found from hybrid.b12.C82. The most abundant Pfam entries found are those related
to the AAA protein superfamily with functional properties revolving around energy production
and cellular activities. In addition, ATPases and oxidoreductases were found whose functional
properties also revolve around energy production. Moreover, HATPase and methyltransferases
are observed with relatively high frequencies.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
20
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.18: Horizontal barplot showing the abundance of shared Pfam entries found from the
ORFs of plasmids from each metagenomic bin. The x-axis represents the number of Pfam
entries and the y-axis represents the specific Pfam entries.
The entry, HATPase, corresponds to the GHKL domain (Gyrase, Hsp90, Histidine Kinase, MutL)
which is found in heat shock proteins, Hsp90 [17]. They are able to mitigate damage caused
by cell stress [6] such as high temperatures or UV-radiation that are conditions in which these
organisms survive.
Methyltransferases are enzymes for regulatory purposes and are catalyzing reactions concerned
with modification of DNA, RNA, proteins and small molecules.
Moreover, the entry, HisKA, corresponds to the enzyme, histidine kinase. This protein is reg-
ulated by environmental stimuli and is part of the two-component regulatory system used for
sensing and responding to changes in environmental conditions by differential expression medi-
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
21
==PAGE:28==
ated by a response regulator protein [41]. In relation to this, the entry GerE is of high occurrence
and corresponds to the LuxR-type DNA-binding HTH domain present in transcription regulators
of the LuxR/FixJ family of response regulators.
For a single case, the hmmsearch output files for plasmid ORFs of hybrid.b12.C82, the se-
quence positions aligned to given entries, HisKA and GerE, are located next to one another in
the same plasmid sequence. This could mean that they are part of the same regulatory system
i.e. operon. The output of the hmmsearch hits files are described under supplementary material
in chapter 7.
The table below shows a filtered output of the hmmsearch output files for plasmid ORFs of hy-
brid.b12.C82 including the plasmid ORF header, Pfam entry and sequence location. Two rows
are marked with bold text in the table indicating Pfam entries, HisKA and GerE, where both
entries belong to the same plasmid sequence with locations next to one another indicating the
existence of an operon.
Header_ORF
Pfam_entry
Seq_from
Seq_to
NODE_2571_length_5030_cov_15.309347_1437_6_2
GerE
210
197
NODE_2571_length_5030_cov_15.309347_1437_6_2
GerE
254
234
NODE_2243_length_5564_cov_11.698856_101_5_5
HisKA
280
259
NODE_2243_length_5564_cov_11.698856_101_5_5
HisKA
838
794
NODE_2243_length_5564_cov_11.698856_101_5_5
HisKA
909
845
NODE_2243_length_5564_cov_11.698856_101_5_5
HisKA
1456
1421
NODE_2571_length_5030_cov_15.309347_170_5_1
HisKA
277
212
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
22
==PAGE:29==
5
Discussion
5.1
Data and preprocessing
To deal with the issue that sequencing technologies are less accurate for long reads compared
to short reads [2], circular consensus sequencing was done for PacBio subreads. Furthermore,
it was important to perform adapter- and quality trimming of Illumina reads because results of
downstream analyses would otherwise be compromised resulting in misassembly and sequence
contamination.
It is observed in Section 4.2 after preprocessing of reads, a rather large amount of Illumina
reads data is available relative to PacBio CCS reads data. Consequently, having less data of
long reads will limit the degree to which the hybrid assembly will be influenced by long reads [3].
This will be further discussed in the following.
5.2
Assembly
Looking at Section 4.3, it is observed that the assembly of PacBio CCS reads does not result
in significantly longer contigs when comparing the corresponding Nx-plot to that of the Nx-plot
of the Illumina reads assembly. However, when performing the hybrid assembly, an increase in
contig length can be seen when comparing the Nx-plot of the hybrid assembly to the Nx-plot of
the Illumina reads assembly. Thus, the long reads do impact the hybrid assembly.
5.3
Binning, quality control and analysis of taxonomy
From Section 4.5 in the table comparing metagenomic bins assigned as Cyanobacteria (UID2189),
the hybrid assembly yielded the bin wih highest completeness and lowest contamination. For the
remaining metagenomic bins of shared taxonomic rank, the bins created from the Illumina reads
assembly have the highest completeness however, they were also the most contaminated. The
results indicate that assembling short reads and closing gaps by the consensus of long read
reduced contamination and thus, the hybrid approach give rise to an assembly of higher quality.
5.3.1
Long-read assembly: Taxonomic partitioning
It was seen from the PacBio CCS reads assembly that two bins of identical taxonomic rank were
resulted. Multiple bins of identical taxonomic rank was also present for the other assemblies.
Blobtools is another way of looking at taxonomic partitioning and for the PacBio CCS reads as-
sembly, it was used to further visualize that a binomial distribution classified as Cyanobacteria
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
23
==PAGE:30==
corresponding to the two identical bins found originally. From Figure 4.7, the results mean that
two identical bins exist, however, two distinct bins occur because they contain different GC pro-
portions.
5.3.2
Long-read metagenomic bins: Origin of replication rates
In most bacterial genomes, dnaA, a protein for initiating DNA replication, is located in close prox-
imity to the ori while replication typically terminates at dif sequences [13]. Therefore, accurate
GRiD predictions in rapidly dividing cells should have dnaA and dif coverage similar to those of
ori and ter, respectively. This means that two metagenomic bins of identical taxonomic rank are
found and they are placed in two different bins because, as already mentioned, they containt
different GC proportions which is likely caused by that fact that one of the Cyanobacteria is more
rapidly dividing.
5.3.3
Comparison: Hybrid assembly versus long-read assembly
From Figure 4.5, the hybrid assembly shows an increase in mapped reads. Although, the large
amount of data from the short reads likely cause an increase in number of mapped sequences,
it also produces more insignificant matches, when looking at Figure and 4.6 and 4.7, because
short sequences are more likely to occur by chance.
5.3.4
Comparison: Hybrid assembly versus short-read assembly
De-replication and pair-wise comparison of metagenomic bins were necessary steps because
multiple metagenomic bins of identical taxonomic rank were resulted from both the hybrid- and
Illumina reads assembly. The tool, dRep, uses CheckM for filtering metagenomic bins based on
completeness. Mash is used to initially cluster the bins by pairwise mutation distance followed
by more sensitive step of computing ANI by ANIm for bins above 90 % Mash ANI[11] [30] [37].
Because metagenomic bins are de-replicated and also, the hybrid assembly contains the Illu-
mina reads already, it is expected that the alignment between the similar metagenomic bins
show large segments of conservation which is also confirmed as seen in Figure 4.9 and 4.10.
From Figure 4.9, forward MUMs show a large segment of conservation that almost span the
length of the metagenomic bin from the Illumina reads assembly. From Figure 4.10, forward
MUMs show a large segment of conservation but does not span the length of the metagenomic
bins. However, the reverse MUMs show a larger segment of conservation that almost span the
length of both metagenomic bins.
It is still seen from both plots that a lot of shorter translocated segments of conservation exists.
Knowing that de-replication and similarity of metagenomic bins is already accounted for, these
observations are likely to indicate MGEs in the form of insertion sequence elements [27]. The
dissimilarity between the metagenomic bins is also caused by the fact that metagenomic bins
from the hybrid assembly contains additional sequences constructed from PacBio CCS long
reads in addition to the Illumina short reads.
5.4
Analysis of plasmids
Mobile genetic elements play an important role when it comes to horizontal gene transfer [15]
whereas the transfer of mobile genes by bacterial conjugation is mediated by plasmids [35].
Therefore, it was of interest to look at plasmid abundance between similar metagenomic bins
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
24
==PAGE:31==
resulted by different assemblies namely, the hybrid assembly and the Illumina reads assembly
to then examine, whether the utilization of long reads will help to identify plasmids.
5.4.1
Classification of plasmids
PlasFlow’s classification method [33] is kmer-based and relies on a neural network approach
capable of recovering both circular and linear plasmids that allows for taxonomical classification
of sequences with an accuracy of up to 96 %. Classification of plasmids is based on averaging
probabilities of assignment to PlasFlow’s array of classes computed by normalized kmer fre-
quencies.
Plasflow has 26 classes [33] under which sequences were classified including: chromosome.Acidobacteria,
chromosome.Actinobacteria, chromosome.Bacteroidetes, chromosome.Chlamydiae, chromo-
some.Chlorobi, chromosome.Chloroflexi, chromosome.Cyanobacteria, chromosome.DeinococcusThermus,
chromosome.Firmicutes, chromosome.Fusobacteria, chromosome.Nitrospirae, chromosome.other,
chromosome.Planctomycetes, chromosome.Proteobacteria, chromosome.Spirochaetes, chro-
mosome.Tenericutes, chromosome.Thermotogae, chromosome.Verrucomicrobia, plasmid.Actinobacteria,
plasmid.Bacteroidetes, plasmid.Chlamydiae, plasmid.Cyanobacteria, plasmid.DeinococcusThermus,
plasmid.Firmicutes, plasmid.Fusobacteria, plasmid.other, plasmid.Proteobacteria, plasmid.Spirochaetes.
The tool is hence limited by the array of classes the underlying model is trained upon. However,
this is not an issue in this study because the taxonomy of metagenomic bins is already included
within above classes. Furthermore, the tool does not perform well on short sequences as it be-
comes challenging to get proper kmer coverage from these. Hence, filtering by sequence length
was done to avoid unreliable results.
From Figure 4.11 (a), it is observed that 3 additional classified plasmids occurs in hybrid.b12.C82
compared with illumina.b7.C82 given p ≥0.8. In addition, from Figure 4.11 (b), more plas-
mids are found within the metagenomic bin from the hybrid assembly that is, 12 more plasmids
are classified in hybrid.b17.C89 compared with illumina.b2.C89 given a probability threshold of
p ≥0.8.
It is observed from figures, A.4 and A.5, that hybrid.b12.C82 has the greatest N50 (minimum con-
tig length required to cover 50% of the metagenomic bin) value compared with illumina.b7.C82.
This could mean that the long reads have generated longer contigs that better distinguishes
between homologous sequences [40]. On the other hand, 12 more plasmids were classified in
hybrid.b17.C89 compared with illumina.b2.C89. However, the N50 values in both metagenomic
bins are almost similar in this case whereas, hybrid.b17.C89 is of higher completeness which
could explain the increase in predicted plasmids.
In short, the hybrid assembly, as a consequence of utilizing long-reads, is able to capture more
plasmids from the constructed sequences than what the Illumina reads assembly can provide us-
ing only short reads likely due to the fact that a hybrid approach becomes better at distinguishing
among homologous sequences [42].
5.4.2
Description of plasmids
The swarmplot seen in Figure 4.12 is another way of visualising the distribution of plasmid se-
quence lengths from each metagenomic bin. It can be seen from both meagenomic bins that
most of the predicted plasmids contain similar sequence lengths. Therefore, the phylogenetic
trees constructed from the plasmids sequences seen in figures 4.13 and 4.14 were visualized for
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
25
==PAGE:32==
the purpose of describing the sequence similarity of the plasmids. This is important to mention
as the evolutionary relationship of plasmids is difficult to capture given horizontal gene trans-
fer events [8]. Thus, the phylogenetic trees were presented with a radial layout with no root.
TreeHugger is an online tool and was chosen because it offers sequence confidentiality where
sequences are deleted after processing.
5.4.3
Functional analysis of plasmids
Given that the phylogenetic trees revealed high sequence similarities between plasmids it was
investigated whether plasmids across metagenomic bins carried similar functional properties.
The plasmids were analyzed given a probabilistic approach. Profile HMMs are probabilistic
models for identifying homologous sequences using multiple sequence alignment. In addition,
Pfam, a database of protein families, each represented by multiple sequence alignments and
hidden Markov models (HMMs), was used together with hmmsearch. This ultimately allowed
for investigating functional properties of protein families based on the ORFs of the predicted
pasmids.
To investigate the biological context of found plasmids, it was firstly analysed whether com-
mon Pfam entries were found from plasmid ORFs in both metagenomic bins. The results from
the Venn diagram, seen in Figure 4.15, shows that several protein families occurr from plasmid
ORFs in both metagenomic bins which indicates that plasmids within metagenomic bins share
similar functional properties.
Besides the distinct number of shared Pfam entries, Figure 4.16a and 4.16b were to account
for the number of occurrences of Pfam entries within each metagenomic bin. It is interesting to
observe outliers in this case as they show specific protein families of high occurrence that could
be responsible for bacterial adaptation in hyperarid environments.
From the final figure, 4.18, it becomes evident from the Pfam entries and their relative occur-
rences that plasmids are likely involved in a biological context where they carry genes revolving
around production, transportation and binding of energy (ATP) given observed occurrences of
the AAA protein family, ATPas and oxidoreductases. However, it is difficult to define the exact
functional properties of these protein families because AAA proteins contain multiple subfami-
lies and oxidoreductases are involved in an array of reactions catalysing the transfer of electrons
between molecules.
The observed occurrences of histidine kinases and GHKL domains which could be involved in
gene regulation and cell repair as a response to environmental stressors such as heat and aridity
caused by hyperarid conditions [39]. In addition, the existence of operons was studied where
entries, HisKA and GerE, were found next to one another indicating a relationship where dif-
ferential gene expression is regulated by environmental stimuli although, this was only evident
from plasmids classified in one of the metagenomic bins.
The above statements presented are based on predicted plasmids. Further research of these
plasmids and their hosts would be of interest to validate predicted plasmids. One way to do
so would be to map plasmids and their respective hosts based on methylation profiles. There
exists a study using inter-pulse duration values of single-molecule real-time sequencing (SMRT)
for constructing DNA methylation signatures [5] which is supported by PacBio sequencing data.
Given that this approach utilizes both long-reads and short-reads, bisulfite sequencing could be
an approach for the Illumina short reads for detecting DNA methylation [23]. In addition, the
results presented based on functional analysis of these plasmids are concerned with a single
hypolith sample and thus, it becomes challenging to provide statistical significance for given
findings.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
26
==PAGE:33==
6
Conclusion
The goal was to explore three different approaches utilizing different types of sequencing data
and evaluate how these approaches compared in terms of identifying MGEs, including plasmids,
and study their biological context through downstream metagenomic analyses.
The hybrid approach showed an effective use of the long-reads resulting in longer contigs com-
pared to the other approaches and furthermore, provided metagenomic bins of high complete-
ness and low contamination. Analysis of the PacBio CCS reads assembly elucidated how result-
ing metagenomic bins of identical taxonomic classification was caused by different GC proportion
which may be explained by the fact that organisms replicate at different rates. A comparison
between the PacBio CCS reads assembly with the hybrid assembly revealed that a larger pro-
portion of reads could be mapped to the hybrid assembly. A comparison between the number
of classified plasmids from metagenomic bins of the hybrid- and Illumina reads assembly con-
cluded that the hybrid approach was the most effective in terms of identifying plasmids given that
more plasmids were classified within metagenomic bins of the hybrid assembly in both cases.
This was likely resulted because of the hybrid assembly producing longer contigs and metage-
nomic bins of higher completeness.
This lead to the analysis of whether identified plasmids within each metagenomic bin from the
hybrid assembly shared similar functional properties. Hence, it became evident from the identi-
fied sequence homologs i.e. protein families and their relative occurrences that plasmids were
likely involved in functions revolving around production, transportation and binding of energy.
Since sequence homologs were identified as large protein families, it complicated further anal-
ysis of the plasmids and their biological context.
This study proposes a hybrid approach using both long and short reads to produce high-quality
assemblies to effectively identify MGEs in the form of plasmids (eMGEs). However, further val-
idation of these plasmids by mapping them to their host based on methylation profiles could be
a future direction to enforce above statement. Results show that plasmids are likely involved in
functions revolving around production, transportation and binding of energy for organisms in hy-
perarid conditions although, it remains a challenging issue to study the exact roles and functional
properties of plasmids in this context.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
27
==PAGE:34==
7
Supplementary material
Files regarding predicted plasmids and visualisations using self-made scripts are available from
the supplementary material. The script is called plasmid_analysis.ipynb.
Phylogenetic tree are also added for better visualisations of these and are seen in folder Phylo-
genetic trees.
Plasmid sequences are in folder Plasmid fasta files.
Plasmid ORFs are in folder Plasmid ORFs.
Output from PlasFlow are in folder: Plasmid prediction files.
Output from hmmsearch are in folder: hmmsearch hits files.
Files from hmmsearch have been manipulated and are seen in: hmmsearch data files.
The hmmsearch hit files include the following columns (enumerated):
1. The name of the target sequence or profile.
2. Accession of the target sequence or profile, or ’-’ if none is available
3. Length of the target sequence or profile, in residues. This (together with the query length)
is useful for interpreting where the domain coordinates (in subsequent columns) lie in the
sequence.
4. Name of the query sequence or profile.
5. Accession of the target sequence or profile, or ’-’ if none is available.
6. Length of the query sequence or profile, in residues.
7. E-value of the overall sequence/profile comparison (including all domains).
8. Bit score of the overall sequence/profile comparison (including all domains), inclusive of a
null2 bias composition correction to the score.
9. The biased composition score correction that was applied to the bit score.
10. This domain’s number (1..ndom).
11. The total number of domains reported in the sequence, ndom.
12. The “conditional E-value”, a permissive measure of how reliable this particular domain may
be. The conditional E-value is calculated on a smaller search space than the independent
Evalue. The conditional E-value uses the number of targets that pass the reporting thresh-
olds. The null hypothesis test posed by the conditional E-value is as follows. Suppose
that we believe that there is already sufficient evidence (from other domains) to identify
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
28
==PAGE:35==
the set of reported sequences as homologs of our query; now, how many additional do-
mains would we expect to find with at least this particular domain’s bit score, if the rest of
those reported sequences were random nonhomologous sequence (i.e. outside the other
domain(s) that were sufficient to identified them as homologs in the first place)?
13. The “independent E-value”, the E-value that the sequence/profile comparison would have
received if this were the only domain envelope found in it, excluding any others. This is a
stringent measure of how reliable this particular domain may be. The independent E-value
uses the total number of targets in the target database.
14. The bit score for this domain.
15. The biased composition (null2) score correction that was applied to the domain bit score.
16. The start of the MEA alignment of this domain with respect to the profile, numbered 1..N
for a profile of N consensus positions.
17. The end of the MEA alignment of this domain with respect to the profile, numbered 1..N
for a profile of N consensus positions.
18. The start of the MEA alignment of this domain with respect to the sequence, numbered
1..L for a sequence of L residues.
19. The end of the MEA alignment of this domain with respect to the sequence, numbered 1..L
for a sequence of L residues.
20. The start of the domain envelope on the sequence, numbered 1..L for a sequence of L
residues. The envelope defines a subsequence for which their is substantial probability
mass supporting a homologous domain, whether or not a single discrete alignment can be
identified. The envelope may extend beyond the endpoints of the MEA alignment, and in
fact often does, for weakly scoring domains.
21. The end of the domain envelope on the sequence, numbered 1..L for a sequence of L
residues.
22. The mean posterior probability of aligned residues in the MEA alignment; a measure of
how reliable the overall alignment is (from 0 to 1, with 1.00 indicating a completely reliable
alignment according to the model).
23. The remainder of the line is the target’s description line, as free text.3
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
29
==PAGE:36==
Bibliography
[1]
”Versatile and open software for comparing large genomes.” S. Kurtz. A. Phillippy. A.L.
Delcher. M. Smoot. M. Shumway. C. Antonescu and S.L. Salzberg. Genome Biology
(2004). 5:R12.
[2]
Wenger et al. Accurate circular consensus long-read sequencing improves variant detec-
tion and assembly of a human genome. 2019. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41587-019-
0217-9.
[3]
Antipov D. et al. hybridSPAdes: an algorithm for hybrid assembly of short and long reads.
2016. URL: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btv688.
[4]
BBMap - Bushnell B. - sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap/.
[5]
Beaulaurier J. Zhu S. Deikus G. et al. Metagenomic binning and association of plasmids
with bacterial host genomes using DNA methylation. Nat Biotechnol. 2018;36(1):61￿69.
doi:10.1038/nbt.4037.
[6]
Helen M. Beere. “‘The stress of dying’: the role of heat shock proteins in the regulation of
apoptosis”. In: Journal of Cell Science 117.13 (2004), pp. 2641–2651. ISSN: 0021-9533.
DOI: 10.1242/jcs.01284. eprint: https://jcs.biologists.org/content/117/13/2641.full.pdf.
URL: https://jcs.biologists.org/content/117/13/2641.
[7]
Ben J. Woodcroft. Joel A. Boyd and Gene W. Tyson. OrfM: A fast open reading frame pre-
dictor for metagenomic data. (2016). Bioinformatics. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw241.
[8]
“Brilli M, Mengoni A, Fondi M, Bazzicalupo M, Liò P, Fani R. Analysis of plasmid genes
by phylogenetic profiling and visualization of homology relationships using Blast2Network.
BMC Bioinformatics. 2008;9:551. Published 2008 Dec 21. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-9-551”.
In: ().
[9]
De novo assembler for single molecule sequencing reads using repeat graphs. 2019. URL:
https://github.com/fenderglass/Flye/blob/flye/docs/USAGE.md.
[10]
De novo assembler for single molecule sequencing reads using repeat graphs. 2020. URL:
https://github.com/fenderglass/Flye.
[11]
dRep: A tool for fast and accurate genome de-replication that enables tracking of microbial
genotypes and improved genome recovery from metagenomes. Matthew R. Olm. Christo-
pher T. Brown. Brandon Brooks. Jillian F. Banfield. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2017.126.
[12]
Eddy SR (2011) Accelerated Profile HMM Searches. PLoS Comput Biol 7(10): e1002195.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002195.
[13]
Emiola A. Oh J. High throughput in situ metagenomic measurement of bacterial replication
at ultra-low sequencing coverage. Nat Commun 9; 4956 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
018-07240-8.
[14]
“FigTree v1.4.4. Released by rambaut 26 Nov 2018”. In: (). URL: https://github.com/
rambaut/figtree/releases.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
30
==PAGE:37==
[15]
Frost LS. Leplae R. Summers AO. Toussaint A. Mobile genetic elements: the agents of
open source evolution. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2005.3(9):722￿732. doi:10.1038/nrmicro1235.
[16]
hmmsearch available through: http://hmmer.org/.
[17]
Immormino RM. Dollins DE. Shaffer PL. Soldano KL. Walker MA. Gewirth DT (October
2004). ”Ligand-induced conformational shift in the N-terminal domain of GRP94. an Hsp90
chaperone”. J. Biol. Chem. 279 (44): 46162–71. doi:10.1074/jbc.M405253200. PMID 15292259.
[18]
Joshi NA, Fass JN. (2011). Sickle: A sliding-window, adaptive, quality-based trimming tool
for FastQ files (Version 1.33) [Software]. Available at https://github.com/najoshi/sickle.
[19]
Jupyter Notebooks – a publishing format for reproducible computational workflows. Thomas
Kluyver, Benjamin Ragan-Kelley, Fernando Pérez, Brian Granger, Matthias Bussonnier,
Jonathan Frederic, Kyle Kelley, Jessica Hamrick, Jason Grout, Sylvain Corlay, Paul Ivanov,
Damián Avila, Safia Abdalla, Carol Willing, Jupyter Development Team. https://doi.org/10.3233/978-
1-61499-649-1-87.
[20]
Laetsch DR and Blaxter ML. BlobTools: Interrogation of genome assemblies [version 1;
peer review: 2 approved with reservations]. F1000Research 2017. 6:1287 (https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000resea
[21]
Le PT. Makhalanyane TP. Guerrero LD. Vikram S. Van de Peer Y. Cowan DA. Compar-
ative Metagenomic Analysis Reveals Mechanisms for Stress Response in Hypoliths from
Extreme Hyperarid Deserts. Genome Biol Evol. 2016;8(9):2737￿2747. Published 2016
Sep 11. doi:10.1093/gbe/evw189.
[22]
Li S.J.; Hua Z.S.; Huang L.N.; Li J.; Shi S.H.; Chen L.X.; Kuang, J.L.; Liu J.; Shu, W.S.
Microbial communities evolve faster in extreme environments. Sci. Rep. 2014. 4. 6205.
[23]
Li Y. Tollefsbol TO. DNA methylation detection: bisulfite genomic sequencing analysis.
Methods Mol Biol. 2011;791:11￿21. doi:10.1007/978-1-61779-316-52.
[24]
Li. H. et al. The Sequence Alignment/Map format and SAMtools. 2009. URL: doi:10.1093/
bioinformatics/btp352.
[25]
Li. H. Minimap2: pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences. 2018. URL: doi:10.1093/
bioinformatics/bty191.
[26]
Fábio Madeira et al. “The EMBL-EBI search and sequence analysis tools APIs in 2019”.
In: Nucleic Acids Research 47.W1 (July 2019), W636–W641. ISSN: 0305-1048. DOI: 10.
1093/nar/gkz268. URL: https://europepmc.org/articles/PMC6602479.
[27]
Mahillon. Jacques. Chandler. Michael (1998-09-01). ”Insertion Sequences”. Microbiology
and Molecular Biology Reviews. 62 (3): 725–774. doi:10.1128/MMBR.62.3.725-774.1998.
ISSN 1092-2172. PMC 98933. PMID 9729608.
[28]
MetaBAT Copyright (c) 2014. The Regents of the University of California, through Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory. URL: https : / / bitbucket . org / berkeleylab / metabat / src /
master/.
[29]
NCBI Resource Coordinators. Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnol-
ogy Information. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018;46(D1):D8￿D13. doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1095.
[30]
Ondov. B.D.. Treangen, T.J. Melsted P. et al. Mash: fast genome and metagenome dis-
tance estimation using MinHash. 2016. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-016-0997-x.
[31]
Pacific Biosciences. CCS – Generate Highly Accurate Single-Molecule Consensus Reads
(HiFi Reads). 2020. URL: https://github.com/PacificBiosciences/ccs.
[32]
Parks DH, Imelfort M. Skennerton CT. Hugenholtz P. Tyson GW. 2015. CheckM: assessing
the quality of microbial genomes recovered from isolates single cells and metagenomes.
Genome Research. 25: 1043–1055.
[33]
Pawel S Krawczyk. Leszek Lipinski. Andrzej Dziembowski. PlasFlow: predicting plasmid
sequences in metagenomic data using genome signatures. Nucleic Acids Research. Vol-
ume 46. Issue 6. 6 April 2018. Page e35. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkx13210.1038/nrmicro1235.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
31
==PAGE:38==
[34]
Fernando Pérez and Brian E. Granger. “IPython: a System for Interactive Scientific Com-
puting”. In: Computing in Science and Engineering 9.3 (May 2007), pp. 21–29. ISSN: 1521-
9615. DOI: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.53. URL: https://ipython.org.
[35]
Rankin. D. J. Rocha. E. P. C. Brown. S. P. (January 2011). ”What traits are carried on
mobile genetic elements and why?”. Heredity. 106 (1): 1–10. doi:10.1038/hdy.2010.24.
PMC 3183850. PMID 20332804.
[36]
“Rasmus Wernersson. Anders Gorm Pedersen. TreeHugger - your friendly local neigh-
borhood tree builder. Publication in preparation.” In: ().
[37]
Michael Richter and Ramon Rosselló-Móra. “Shifting the genomic gold standard for the
prokaryotic species definition”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106.45
(2009), pp. 19126–19131. ISSN: 0027-8424. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0906412106. eprint: https:
//www.pnas.org/content/106/45/19126.full.pdf. URL: https://www.pnas.org/content/106/
45/19126.
[38]
S. Nurk et al. metaSPAdes: a new versatile de novo metagenomics assembler. 2016. URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.03071.
[39]
Sáenz, J.S.; Airo, A.; Schulze-Makuch D.; Schloter M.; Vestergaard G. Functional Traits
Co-Occurring with Mobile Genetic Elements in the Microbiome of the Atacama Desert.
Diversity 2019. 11. 205.
[40]
“Sharon I. Kertesz M. Hug LA. et al. Accurate, multi-kb reads resolve complex populations
and detect rare microorganisms. Genome Res. 2015;25(4):534-543. doi:10.1101/gr.183012.114”.
In: ().
[41]
“Stock AM. Robinson VL. Goudreau PN (2000). ”Two-component signal transduction”. An-
nual Review of Biochemistry. 69 (1): 183â€“215. doi:10.1146/annurev.biochem.69.1.183.
PMID 10966457.” In: ().
[42]
Suzuki Y. Nishijima S. Furuta Y. et al. Long-read metagenomic exploration of extrachromo-
somal mobile genetic elements in the human gut. Microbiome 7. 119 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-
019-0737-z.
[43]
The Pfam protein families database in 2019: S. El-Gebali. J. Mistry. A. Bateman. S.R.
Eddy. A. Luciani. S.C. Potter. M. Qureshi. L.J. Richardson. G.A. Salazar. A. Smart. E.L.L.
Sonnhammer. L. Hirsh. L. Paladin. D. Piovesan. S.C.E. Tosatto. R.D. Finn. Nucleic Acids
Research (2019) doi: 10.1093/nar/gky995.
[44]
Thomas Williams, Colin Kelley, and many others. Gnuplot 4.4: an interactive plotting pro-
gram. http://gnuplot.sourceforge.net/. Mar. 2010.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
32
==PAGE:39==
A
Appendix
A.1
Binning and Analysis
The following figures show details regarding the bins resulted from the three assemblies. For
each bin a lineage is assigned based on marker genes found. Furthermore, discrete number of
occurrences of marker genes given the lineage is show ranging from 0-5+ can be seen.
Figure A.1: Bins resulted from assembly of PacBio CCS reads
Figure A.2: Bins resulted from assembly of Illumina reads
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure A.3: Bins resulted from the hybrid assembly of PacBio CCS- and Illumina reads
A.2
De-replication
The following figures show the de-replication of putative genomes from the hybrid- and Illumina
reads assembly. The bins shown are chosen as the best putative genomes amongst the set of
bins that are the same putative genomes.
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure A.4: Scored putative genomes of the hybrid assembly
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure A.5: Scored putative genomes of the Illumina reads assembly
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
36
==PAGE:43==
Long-read Metagenomic Analysis of Mobile Genetic Elements In Hypoliths
37
