==PAGE:1==
Experimental platform for controlled migration
of oxygen vacancies in SrTiO3 heterostructures
under elevated temperatures
Master Thesis
DTU Sustainable Energy Engineering
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Experimental platform for controlled migration of oxygen vacancies in SrTiO3
heterostructures under elevated temperatures
Master Thesis
July, 2020
By
Nishtha Shelly
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report
title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Fysikvej, Build-
ing 310, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:5==
AUTHOR’S DECLARATION
I
declare that the work in this dissertation was carried out in accordance
with the requirements of the University’s Regulations and Code of
Practice for Research Degree Programmes and that it has not been sub-
mitted for any other academic award. Except where indicated by speciﬁc
reference in the text, the work is the candidate’s own work. Work done in
collaboration with, or with the assistance of, others, is indicated as such.
Any views expressed in the dissertation are those of the author.
This thesis has been prepared over ﬁve months at the Section of Functional
Oxides, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulﬁlment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc. (Eng).
Nishtha Shelly - s181220
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:6==
ABSTRACT
Human dependence on energy has lead to increased energy demand and the conven-
tional energy harvesting methods are doing more harm than good. The realization
for a sustainable approach has motivated us to reduce the energy demand by devel-
oping future electronic devices that are faster and possess high electron mobility. A
fundamental way to achieve this is via enhancement of material properties. It includes
improving the device at the material level by synthesizing a multifunctional material
system whose properties can be controlled according to the device application. In
particular, oxide perovskites are known to exhibit a myriad collection of interesting
properties. Transition-metal oxide perovskites like SrTiO3 (STO) is one such example.
The electron donors (oxygen vacancies) of STO are mobile, which allows for making
electronics that can evolve over time. There is a complex inter-dependency of elec-
trical conductivity, electron density and mobility on oxygen vacancies in STO and
the basic motivation behind this thesis stems from this: high temperature response of
electron mobility in STO heterostructures and decoupling the effects of all other parameters to
understand their effect on electrical conductivity separately. An experimental platform is
designed to investigate the effects of temperature and electrostatic gating on the elec-
tronic properties of any conducting or semiconducting sample. This platform allows to
perform annealing as well as real-time measurements of the electrical conductivity on
three samples simultaneously. It contains provisions to connect/disconnect the three
samples from measurement units using wires and connectors. It also provides the
option to carry out the experiments and measurements in vacuum or any gaseous en-
vironment. In this thesis, STO based heterostructures are considered and through heat
transfer modelling of this structure placed in the experimental setup and subjected to
certain temperature variations, a heater temperature of 50°C as input was ﬁnalized
to perform the experiments. Later, temperature distribution proﬁles across samples’
surfaces were linked to distribution proﬁles of donors in the sample to approximate
the effects of temperature on the diffusion proﬁle of donors. A reﬂection about how
this effects the mobility as well as use of electrostatic gate is also presented at the end.
iii
==PAGE:7==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
T
his master thesis was written as a part of the Masters in Sustainable Energy
at the Department of Energy Conversion and Storage in Danmarks Tekniske
Universitet. This thesis was conducted between 01st February and 21st July 2020
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) under the direct supervision of Nini
Pryds, Professor at Department of Energy Conversion and Storage, Dennis Valbjørn
Christensen, researcher at DTU Energy Conversion and Storage.
I would like to use this opportunity to express my sincere gratitude towards my
supervisors Nini Pryds and Dennis Valbjørn Christensen for the continuous support
and the guidance bestowed upon me. A special thanks also goes to Felix Gunkel, who
guided me throughout this project with his constructive feedbacks and encouragement,
without which the realization of this project would not have been possible.
Last but not the least, I would like to thank my family and my friends who have given
me unconditional support throughout my academics.
DTU Lyngby, Denmark
Nishtha Shelly
July 21, 2020
iv
==PAGE:8==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
List of Tables
vii
List of Figures
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
STO and its general properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Defect chemistry in STO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Effect of temperature and applied ﬁeld on electrical properties of STO .
4
1.4
STO based heterostructures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4.1
Formation of 2-dimensional electron gas . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Mobility in STO based heterostructures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5.1
Low temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5.2
Room and high temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.6
Modelling: Defect proﬁle of STO-based heterostructure . . . . . . . . .
11
1.7
Deposition techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Experimental setup
14
2.1
Aim of experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.1
Post-deposition annealing of STO samples
. . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.2
Effect of time on mobility
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1.3
Gating STO interface to control oxygen vacancy diffusion . . . .
16
2.2
Experimental apparatus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Modelling
28
3.1
COMSOL modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.1
Geometry of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.2
Materials applied on the geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
v
==PAGE:9==
TABLE OF CONTENTS
3.1.3
Study and boundary conditions used by COMSOL . . . . . . . .
31
3.1.4
Physics module used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.1.5
Mesh choice and analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Oxygen vacancy distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Results
38
4.1
COMSOL modelling results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.1
Temperature distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1.2
Time evolution of surface temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.2
Oxygen vacancy modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Discussion and conclusion
52
Bibliography
57
vi
==PAGE:10==
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE
Page
1.1
General properties of STO [3][27][28][2]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1
Sample and chip carrier material as well as dimensions used in the present design.
18
2.2
Electrical power, heating and size speciﬁcations of COSSIM KER3100-08S High-
Precision Temperature Controller system. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3
Dimensions and material used to build individual apparatus assembled for experi-
ments as as shown in ﬁgure 2.5.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1
Material parameters of Aluminium, Alumina and STO used in COMSOL. . . . .
31
3.2
Parameters which were taken from COMSOL. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
vii
==PAGE:11==
==PAGE:12==
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE
Page
1.1
Cubic structure of STO. (a) shows x-y plane view and (b) shows the 3D view. Green
atoms at the corners of the cube represent Sr, the centre white atom stands for Ti
and red atoms on the face centre are for O. For visual convenience, Oxygen ions
are shown to be smaller than Strontium and Titanium ions whereas in reality they
are larger than the two. Ionic radii of Ti+4, Sr+2 and O−2 are 74.5 pm, 118 pm and
140 pm respectively. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Single crystal of STO [2]. Green atoms represent Sr, pink for Ti and blue for O. . . .
3
1.3
Resistivity versus temperature for doped STO samples. Resistivity decreases ﬁrst
from 5 K to 75 K and then increases for samples having electron density, n=2×1016.
’n’ increases with a high temperature.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
STO heterostructure with a capping layer. In case of a GAO capping layer, oxygen
vacancies feel an ’interfacial’ force pulling them towards the interface (x=0) as
opposed to diffusion and drift. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Separation between vacancies and electrons can reduce at high temperatures due
to diffusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.6
Electron mobility enhancement observed in GAO/STO at temperatures of 2 K -20
K due to 6 months storage in a vacuum desiccator while keeping electron density
constant[22]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1
Change in sheet conductance (GS) as a function of charge density (measured at
room temperature) brought about by annealing up to 200°C [9].
. . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Tuning sheet conductance of GAO/STO (left plot) and LAO/STO (right plot) by
annealing in 1 bar oxygen. Plots are shown for time evolution of conductance (GS)
values relative to initial conductance (GS(t=0)) [9]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
ix
==PAGE:13==
LIST OF FIGURES
2.3
A picture of planned experimental setup which consists of a closed annealing
chamber housing three samples for simultaneous temperature and resistivity
measurements. It also has provision to bias two samples with +/- voltage while
leaving the third sample un-biased as a reference for comparison. The 4 bonding
wires A,B,C,D are to be used for resistivity measurements using Van der Pauw
method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
A closed chamber for placing samples, carry out annealing and real time electrical
measurements in vacuum or gas. The radius of the chamber base is 125 mm. The
base has 16 connecting wires (C) going inside out and additional provision for 4
more wires (besides the wire bunch, C) suitable for gating. . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Modiﬁcations on the chamber base to accommodate a stand with heater placed on
it, a new hole for heater cable to pass through and space to ﬁx D-type connectors
used to link ’connecting wires (C)’ going in and out of the base with the wires
coming from the samples. These electrical connections are explained in more detail
later in this section. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
For controlled annealing of the samples, a circular heater with a small circular
metallic plate (marked as F) shown in (a) is used along with its controller shown
in (b). The black outer disc is the insulation covering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.7
(a) Top view of designed sample stage showing 3 sample beds and extended plate.
To enhance visual interpretation, a blue block representing a ceramic chip carrier is
placed on one of the sample beds. (b) Dimensions of extended plate, sample beds
and chip carrier placement are also shown. (c) Bottom part (radius = 14.8 mm) of
the extended plate (diameter = 70 mm) that sits on the heater plate directly. (d) A
zoomed-in view showing a chip carrier (green) placed on one of the sample beds.
22
2.8
(a) Physical realization of sample stage based on previously mentioned dimensions
and design considerations consisting of three adjacent protruding blocks (sample
beds) to place chip carrier along with samples as well as a thermocouple station
at the edge to ﬁx three thermocouples to measure temperatures of three samples
simultaneously. (b) ceramic chip carrier with conducting pathways. The red
rectangle marked in the centre of the image is where a sample can be placed and
electrically connected to measuring wires. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.9
Heater with the sample stage placed on it. The markings identify the different
parts of the sample stage assembly - sample beds, sample holder, thermocouple
station and a metallic block to keep measuring wires in place.
. . . . . . . . . .
24
x
==PAGE:14==
LIST OF FIGURES
2.10 Van der Pauw geometry for samples - (a) cloverleaf geometry. Though difﬁcult to
fabricate but this geometry is ideal to ensure lowest errors. Geometry in (b) is also
acceptable and relatively easier to fabricate.[1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.11 Van der Pauw arrangement with 4 contacts on the periphery of an arbitrary shape[29]. 26
2.12 A schematic showing the Van der Pauw arrangement for measuring R1. Upon
tweaking the connections, R2 can also be computed and resistivity can be ob-
tained. It also shows how the connections reach out to the measuring units placed
outside the chamber via D-type connectors that conveniently separate the chip
carrier+sample assembly from the ﬁxed wires on the chamber base.
. . . . . . .
26
3.1
Sample stage geometry used in COMSOL depicting (a) Top view showing three
STO samples and chip carriers placed on sample bed blocks (b) Bottom view. The
inner circle is the part that sits directly on the heater and (c) Side view of the
sample stage geometry showing, bottom plate, extended plate and sample beds
with chip carrier and STO samples. This geometry is based on dimensions shown
in ﬁgure 2.7. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Shaded regions showing the different materials that the sample stage geometry is
made of. (a) Aluminium was used for sample stage since it has a higher melting
point than the annealing temperature range while (b) Alumina chip carriers are
used for placing the samples and hence this is shown with green and (c) orange is
used to represent STO samples. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Heat input to the sample stage. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
Parametric variations to understand the sensitivity towards convection and radiation. 33
3.5
Mesh covering the sample stage geometry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.6
Mesh sensitivity analysis to choose the appropriate mesh element size rendering
low computational time and most accurate sample surface temperature. . . . . .
35
3.7
Initial distribution of oxygen vacancies conﬁned at the interface. This is the case
at t=0 i.e. before diffusion process starts and does not account for surrounding
charge carriers, drift and interfacial force. Once diffusion starts, oxygen vacancies
will move from a high concentration (H.C) at the interface to low concentration
(L.C) in the bulk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1
Temperature distribution across the sample stage. (a) shows surface temperature
variation across the samples and (b) shows the input heater temperature on the
bottom-most part of geometry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
xi
==PAGE:15==
LIST OF FIGURES
4.2
x-z view of sample stage with marked points showing the top most and the bottom
most points along z-axis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3
Temperature variation along the line segment AB. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Temperature variation at sample surfaces for different time stages for input tem-
perature of 200°C and geometry having perfect thermal contacts. . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
Cut line marking across the three sample surfaces. (a) Top view of the marking
and (b) x-z view of the marking. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6
Settling time of steady state temperature at T0 = 200°C for (a) Perfect thermal
contacts and (b) Poor thermal contacts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.7
Settling time of steady state temperature at T0 = 50°C for perfect and poor contacts. 44
4.8
Time evolution of oxygen vacancy diffusion in STO slab at input temperatures of
(a) 200°C and (b) 50°C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.9
Depth of diffusion fronts for (a) Short and (b) Long time spans. On both plots,
right side y-axis in orange color represents diffusion depth range for 200°C while
left side y-axis in blue represents the same for 20°C and 50°C.
. . . . . . . . . .
47
4.10 Fitting the diffusion depth curve with function describing diffusion in one-dimension. 49
4.11 Comparison of oxygen vacancy diffusion for perfect and poor contacts at 200°C. .
50
4.12 Comparison of diffusion front depth among the three samples. 174.78°C corre-
sponds to S2 and 176.81°C corresponds to S1/S3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
xii
==PAGE:16==
C H A P T E R
1
INTRODUCTION
Energy efﬁciency improvement leads to energy savings and this reduces the ﬁnal
energy demand[4][19]. Since all solid state electronic devices like transistors, diodes,
memory and integrated chips run on electric current, therefore, electron mobility
through a conductor must improve. A high mobility is desirable to combat world
energy crisis. The ratio of the output drift velocity vd of electrons to the electric
ﬁeld E, that drives the electron ﬂow is known as mobility (µ=vd/E). And electrical
conductivity σ[S/m] is entirely a material property that is directly proportional to
electron mobility given by:
σ = enµ
(1.1)
where ’e’ is the elementary charge[C], ’n’ is the carrier density[/cm3] and µ is the
electron mobility[cm2/(V· s)].
The electrons in electronic devices are formed by n-type donors having a ﬁxed loca-
tion in device. These donors provide ﬁxed scattering sites that are responsible for
reduction in electron mobility. However, in oxide electronic materials like Strontium
Titanate, it has been recently found out[22] [31] that electron donors are mobile at
room temperature and can result in an increase of electron mobility that time. This
thesis aims at designing, building and simulating an experimental platform capable
of annealing and performing real-time conductivity measurements of three samples
simultaneously. The samples can be exposed to varying temperatures (20°C to 350°C)
and gases (O2, N2, Ar) and electrostatic potential (0 V to +/-200 V) to induce a change
in electron mobility by changing the location of donors while keeping the number of
donors and electrons constant.
1
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
This chapter aims to introduce the material under consideration, SrTiO3 (STO), its
properties, structural defects, inﬂuence of defects on its electrical properties and ﬁnally
the methods to fabricate this material structure.
1.1
STO and its general properties
SrTiO3 (STO) is a transition-metal oxide having a perovskite crystal structure - ABX3.
A = Sr and B = Ti are cations and X = O is an anion shown in the following ﬁgure
1.1. Green atoms at the corners of the cube represent Sr, the centre white atom stands
for Ti and red atoms on the face centre are for O. A table (1.1) listing out the general
properties of bulk STO is also shown. The structure and properties shown are for
room temperature cubic STO. However, at around 105 K STO undergoes a phase
transition from cubic to tetragonal [15]. Furthermore, regardless of the temperature,
STO changes phase depending upon its thickness. It has been reported by Ji D. et al.
[14] that ultrathin ﬁlms - 4 unit cells(u.c.) or below - of STO undergo a phase transition
from Rhombohedral to Tetragonal with large polarization.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.1: Cubic structure of STO. (a) shows x-y plane view and (b) shows the 3D view.
Green atoms at the corners of the cube represent Sr, the centre white atom stands for Ti and red
atoms on the face centre are for O. For visual convenience, Oxygen ions are shown to be
smaller than Strontium and Titanium ions whereas in reality they are larger than the two.
Ionic radii of Ti+4, Sr+2 and O−2 are 74.5 pm, 118 pm and 140 pm respectively.
2
==PAGE:18==
1.2. DEFECT CHEMISTRY IN STO
Property
Value
Lattice constant (Å)
3.905
Band gap (eV)
3.25 (indirect)
3.75 (direct)
Dielectric constant
at room temperature
300
Thermal Conductivity (W/mK)
12
Density (g/cm3)
5.12
Melting point (°C)
2080
Electron mobility (cm2/Vs)
22,000 (at 2K)
1-10 (at 300 K)
Table 1.1: General properties of STO [3][27][28][2]
Figure 1.2 shows <001> surface of STO with TiO2 terminating layer. While it can
be terminated by SrO layer as well but TiO2 layer is known to be more stable[2].
Figure 1.2: Single crystal of STO [2]. Green atoms represent Sr, pink for Ti and blue for O.
1.2
Defect chemistry in STO
Most of STO’s properties are attributed to certain defects present in its crystal. Ideal
materials are the ones without any defects however, no material is ideal and from a
thermodynamic point of view, a material is bound to have defects above 0 K. While
3
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
defects prevent an ideal structure, but they also beneﬁt. In STO, Oxygen vacancies
(Vo ), a common type of point defect, are used to tune many properties (electrical,
optical etc.). Vo in the STO crystal forms as a result of a missing oxygen atom in
the lattice. This is shown in the following equation using the Kröger-Vink notation
(O×
o represents neutral oxygen atom in the lattice).
O×
o −−⇀
↽−−Vo + 2e′ + 1
2O2
(1.2)
These vacancies can be obtained by reducing the STO single crystal by vacuum anneal-
ing. From equation 1.2, it is evident that there are two electrons (e’) obtained for every
Vo and Vo carries a net positive charge as indicated by two dots when using the
Kröger-Vink convention. This is important because these vacancies are responsible for
the multi-functionality of STO and while stoichiometric STO is electrically insulating
but STO with sufﬁcient concentration of oxygen vacancies is both metallic conducting
and superconducting at low temperatures. Due to the importance of oxygen vacancies
in determining the functional properties of STO, it is highly desirable to control the
location and diffusion of oxygen vacancies. Since diffusion process is greatly tempera-
ture dependent, hence, at a certain value of temperature, vacancies will have enough
energy to cross the activation energy barrier (∼0.5 eV[9]) and diffuse through the
material. This can have many implications as discussed in section 1.3. Similarly, due
to the net positive charge that these oxygen vacancy defects carry, an applied electric
ﬁeld across STO will have a signiﬁcant effect on their movement and distribution.
1.3
Effect of temperature and applied ﬁeld on electrical
properties of STO
Though STO has many useful properties, the focus in this thesis is on its electrical
properties like high conductivity and mobility. High conductivity arises due to the
occupation of charge carriers in 3d orbitals of Ti. In the stoichiometric case without
oxygen vacancies, Ti has an oxidation state of +4 in bulk and all it’s orbitals are empty
initially. Broadly, temperature has the following roles to play:
1. Create oxygen vacancies - Annealing STO crystal in oxygen-less environment
results in the formation of oxygen vacancies inside the crystal. This is explained
by equation 1.2 which depends on a rate constant k(T). At room temperature,
4
==PAGE:20==
1.3. EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE AND APPLIED FIELD ON ELECTRICAL
PROPERTIES OF STO
forward reaction is favourable. The electrons donated by vacancies contribute
in making STO conducting and since charge carrier concentration depends on
vacancy concentration, therefore, controlled variation in temperature and partial
pressure of surrounding gas will result in an alteration in charge carrier density
too.
2. Effect on redistribution and proﬁle of defects and charge carriers - Temperature
provides the necessary activation energy for diffusion process to occur which
results in redistribution of charges and defects.
3. Effect on mobility - Temperature also has a profound effect on electron mobility
in STO. At low temperatures (like 2 K), electron mobility has been observed to
be very large (22,000 cm2 /Vs [26],[27]) but goes on to reduce with an increasing
temperature. At room temperature (300 K), it is found to be orders of magnitude
lower[27] than what it is at low temperatures.
Electrical conductivity, mobility, oxygen vacancies and electron density are all very
closely related and do not respond the same way to temperature changes. High tem-
perature leads to increase in oxygen vacancies provided this happens in a controlled
and reducing environment. In the presence of oxygen or an oxidizing environment,
oxygen vacancies get reﬁlled.
Several studies report details about electron mobility variation with temperature
in bulk STO. A. Spinelli et al.[23] show the increase in electron density with increas-
ing temperature in STO single crystals by doping some of them with Nb and the
rest via temperature reduction. They justify this variation by using equation 1.2 and
mentioning that the forward reaction is dominated at low oxygen partial pressures.
Further, they show temperature dependence of resistivity as a function of increasing
temperature under reduced environments. The trend reveals decreasing resistivity
from 5 K - 75 K where a turning point occurs and resistivity starts increasing from
75 K up to 300 K for samples having n = 2×1016. For electron densities higher than
this value, resistivity increases along the entire range of temperature (5 K to 300 K).
They also show a temperature dependent mobility where mobility is seen to vary as:
µ ∝T−m,2.8 ≤m ≤3.2. F. Trier et al. explain how different scattering mechanisms
have an effect on mobility in different temperature ranges[26]. For T<10 K, mobility
is inﬂuenced by defect and donor scattering, for 10 K<T<150 K, electron-electron
5
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
interactions dominate it while for T>150 K, optical phonon scattering mechanisms
inﬂuence mobility of electrons.
Figure 1.3: Resistivity versus temperature for doped STO samples. Resistivity decreases ﬁrst
from 5 K to 75 K and then increases for samples having electron density, n=2×1016. ’n’
increases with a high temperature.
Apart from temperature, it is essential to also consider here the response of applied
electric ﬁeld on defects and charge carriers. Since oxygen vacancies carry a net positive
charge, therefore, they will move along the direction of an applied electric ﬁeld
while charge carriers i.e. electrons will move in the opposite (anti-parallel) direction
of the electric ﬁeld. This principle is used in valence change memristors[16]. It is
noteworthy that the dielectric constant of STO is different at different temperatures,
for instance, it is extremely high (20,000 at 2 K [13]) at low temperatures which
should be taken into consideration while electrostatically gating STO samples. A high
dielectric would polarize the material much more as compared to a low dielectric in
the presence of an external ﬁeld, thereby, reducing its effect inside the material. Finally,
electrostatic gating is a technique also used to tune electron density in certain STO
based heterostructures as discussed in section 1.4.
6
==PAGE:22==
1.4. STO BASED HETEROSTRUCTURES
1.4
STO based heterostructures
Despite of a high bulk mobility, the focus of research is shifting on other forms of STO.
Heterostructures of STO for instance, show a much higher mobility. A heterostructure
essentially means two different layers of chemical composition combined together to
form one structure. Such a heterostructure is synthesized by epitaxial growth processes
discussed in more detail in section 1.7. The capping layer can be a fellow perovskite
like in the case of pervoskite/perovskite heterostructure: LaAl2O3/SrTiO3 (LAO/STO)
or a structure like spinel/perovskite heterostructure. A very popular spinel/perovskite
heterostructure of STO is γ-Al2O3/SrTiO3 (GAO/STO) which is formed by depositing
γ-Al2O3 as a capping layer on (001) surface of STO. GAO/STO is known to show an
exceptionally high mobility (140,000 cm2/Vs) at 2 K[7] and also a high carrier density
at its interface. While electron mobilities of LAO/STO heterostructures are less than
the conventional semiconductors, GAO/STO on the other hand is not just comparable
but may also prove to be a replacement for conventional electronic materials. Both
these forms as well as similar forms of heterostructures carry the potential to disrupt
conventional technology. The reason is because though individually these materials
are insulators but in the heterostructure form, a 2-dimensional electron gas (2DEG)
with numerous functionalities is observed at their interfaces.
1.4.1
Formation of 2-dimensional electron gas
Different mechanisms have been proposed for the formation of 2DEG for LAO/STO
and GAO/STO.
For LAO/STO system:
The formation of 2DEGs greatly depends on thickness of the LAO slab. Conductivity
is observed for a LAO thickness of more than 4 unit cells[25]. The mechanism of
conductivity is generally explained by combination of two possible processes - 1)
’polarity discontinuity’ since STO is non-polar while LAO is polar with alternative
+/- charge on LaO+ and AlO−
2 planes respectively. 2) Defect formation [17],[30]. The
combined effect results in ’Polarity-induced defect formation’ where oxygen vacancies
are formed in LAO and due to the polar discontinuity, a monotonically increasing
potential facilitates the electrons to move to STO and rather than occupying the defect
states of oxygen, electrons prefer to occupy the conduction band of Ti since it has a
lower energy.
7
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
This interface shows many properties like high conductivity[18], superconductivity[21],
high mobility[6], thermoelectricity[20], resistive switching[25], magnetoresistance[5],
photoconductivity[24] to name a few.
For GAO/STO system:
2DEG formation in GAO/STO is mainly attributed to GAO thickness (must be >1.5 unit
cells) and lattice symmetry breaking. γ-Al2O3 has a spinel structure while SrTiO3 is a
perovskite and when any structural transition happens, it causes symmetry breaking.
Due to this, Oxygen atoms migrate towards GAO leaving behind oxygen vacancies
and a high density of (2DEG) appears at the STO side of the interface. Essentially
oxygen vacancies act like donors so a high concentration of vacancies leads to a high
electron density. On the other hand, they also act like trapping and scattering sites
so some fraction of the donated electrons are trapped by oxygen vacancies at the
interface while the rest are itinerant electrons that occupy a wider spatial distribution.
On the contrary, some understanding about oxygen vacancies has been developed
over time[22]. For a clearer interpretation, consider ﬁgure 1.4.
Figure 1.4: STO heterostructure with a capping layer. In case of a GAO capping layer, oxygen
vacancies feel an ’interfacial’ force pulling them towards the interface (x=0) as opposed to
diffusion and drift.
While diffusion and drift processes take the vacancies into bulk, a third driving force
drives them to the interface instead. Since natural process like diffusion and drift
cannot be neglected, hence, some of the vacancies do reach out to further depths away
from the interface but over time, they are inevitably pulled towards the interface where
8
==PAGE:24==
1.5. MOBILITY IN STO BASED HETEROSTRUCTURES
they trap some electrons while also paving way for the rest of them to move in a more
conductive path without much scattering.
1.5
Mobility in STO based heterostructures
Process explained in section 1.4 about preferential occupation of oxygen vacancies
at the GAO/STO interface naturally aids in electron-donor separation and serves to
justify the observed enhanced mobility as compared to other heterostructures like
LAO/STO. In fact, mobility enhancement is also observed at room temperature upon
storage over long time periods[22] which can be understood by this explanation.
As mentioned previously in section 1.3, mobility in bulk STO varies with different
temperatures and electron densities, this is true for STO heterostructures as well which
is described in more detail below for separate temperature ranges:
1.5.1
Low temperature
While generally STO heterostructures show high mobility at low electron density,
GAO/STO heterostructure being an exception shows high mobility at high electron
densities in low temperature range. Mobility (µ) is seen to increase with increase in
carrier density (ns) approximately by the relation µ = ns1.5 . By applying an optimized
mix of deposition and temperature conditions, Christensen D.V. et al. reported the
value of ns (∼5×1014) corresponding to a maximum µ (∼100,000 cm2/Vs)[10]. A
value signiﬁcantly higher than this turns the entire substrate being conducting with
a decreased mobility matching the bulk value since vacancies get distributed in the
entire STO slab. At low temperatures, the dielectric constant of STO is large and
it facilitates high mobility due to the separation of donor and charge i.e. oxygen
vacancies and electrons. Since oxygen vacancies contribute towards scattering of
charges therefore, a separation of oxygen vacancies and electrons reduces scattering
and aids in increase in electron mobility.
1.5.2
Room and high temperature
Just like bulk STO, GAO/STO heterostructure at room temperature (300 K) also
shows an increasing trend of mobility with increasing carrier density[26]. At room
temperature, scattering happens mostly due to electron-phonon coupling which is
reduced by electron screening when carrier density is high. On the other hand, high
9
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
temperature affects mobility differently: vacancies in GAO/STO ﬁrst get redistributed
thereby localizing the electrons more and then after reaching a quasi-equilibrium state
they might get oxidized if the annealing takes place in an oxygen environment thereby
reducing electron density and hence the mobility. In contrast to low temperature
range, where both high electron density and a low temperature aid in electron mobility
through electron screening and a high dielectric constant, but at high temperatures,
mobility is enhanced mainly due to high electron density. Since there is a natural
tendency for vacancies to migrate to the interface over time, this might be hindered
at room temperatures or higher due to enhancement in process like diffusion. This
would further lessen the separation of donor-electron (see ﬁgure 1.5) and inﬂuence the
proﬁles of both depth as well as electrons. Nonetheless, high temperature regime can
enhance the low temperature mobility if diffusion process is controlled.
Figure 1.5: Separation between vacancies and electrons can reduce at high temperatures due
to diffusion.
While low and room temperature mobility has been explored experimentally and
some valid theoretical reasoning also exists for the same, yet high temperature (>300
K) mobility study is still to be explored.
10
==PAGE:26==
1.6. MODELLING: DEFECT PROFILE OF STO-BASED HETEROSTRUCTURE
1.6
Modelling: Defect proﬁle of STO-based
heterostructure
Since annealing and low temperature mobility is very closely related to each other and
mobility is seen to decrease with annealing (except the cases of slow and controlled
annealing), therefore, in this thesis, special attention is given to the effect of tempera-
ture on the experimental apparatus and achieving precise temperature values during
experiments. High temperature leads to reduction of vacancies (and electron density)
but if controlled at certain temperatures like 100 °C, it leads to mobility enhancement
(see ﬁgure 1.6)[22]. An attempt is made in this work to investigate the defect proﬁles
by employing a simple model of oxygen vacancies conditioned to certain assump-
tions. It is discussed in subsequent chapters and provides an insight about vacancy
distribution proﬁle due to diffusion in a semi-inﬁnite STO slab.
Figure 1.6: Electron mobility enhancement observed in GAO/STO at temperatures of 2 K -20
K due to 6 months storage in a vacuum desiccator while keeping electron density constant[22].
1.7
Deposition techniques
Most commonly used techniques to synthesize thin ﬁlms are the epitaxial techniques.
In Greek, ‘Epi’ means ‘top’ and ‘Taxis’ means ‘ordered manner’. In the same way, these
techniques are used to deposit the desired material layer by layer on top of a substrate.
11
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
There are different techniques for various applications having their own pros and
cons. Liquid Phase Epitaxy (LPE) and vapour Phase Epitaxy (VPE) or Chemical Vapour
Deposition (CVD) are two relatively inexpensive methods of deposition with very good
quality of material deposition. But both of them are homoepitaxy techniques meaning
that they are used to grow the same material as that of the substrate, difference being
that material deposited is more pure than the substrate. This also means that these
techniques cannot be used to grow heterostructures. A similar techniques knowns as
Metalorganic Chemical Vapour Deposition (MOCVD) though similar to CVD, but is used
to fabricate heterostructures of extremely high quality. It can be used to produce both
single crystal as well as polycrystalline thin ﬁlms. Similar expensive but high quality
rendering techniques used are Metal-Organic Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MOMBE) and
Molecular-Bbeam Epitaxy (MBE). Both of these techniques require ultra-high vacuum
and are capable of producing extremely high quality materials and atomically abrupt
heterostructures. In fact, MBE is known to be so precise that it is the most preferred
technique for fabricating nanostructures like nanowires and quantum dots.
For GAO/STO systems, the highest electron mobility has been obtained by fabricating
the heterostructure using Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD). As mentioned in previous
sections, many parameters need to be controlled in a PLD process and especially in
the case of GAO/STO which is sensitive to the deposition conditions. PLD is a vapour
deposition technique where target material is ablated by laser and then deposited on
the substrate. Energetic laser pulses strike the target material that is to be deposited
and this releases the material in plasma form. This plasma plume expands and this
expansion depends on parameters like pressure of the surrounding gas. It then gets
deposited on top of the substrate as a thin ﬁlm. This process happens in high vac-
uum or in an atmosphere of a chosen suitable gas. Oxygen is the most commonly
used gas for depositing oxides. For GAO/STO structures, Christensen D.V. et al. [8]
have reported that a minimum of 1.5 unit cells of GAO ﬁlm is required to make the
heterostructure conducting and carried out the entire fabrication process in oxygen
atmosphere of pressure 10−5mbar.
12
==PAGE:28==
1.7. DEPOSITION TECHNIQUES
Objectives
• Investigate changes in defect proﬁle under controlled annealing while keeping
constant defect and electron density.
• Develop insight about electron mobility in relation to changes in defect proﬁle.
• Investigate possibility of manipulating oxygen vacancies by an applied electric
ﬁeld (electromigration) and its effect on electron mobility.
Methodology
• Physical design of experiment
• COMSOL modelling to simulate heat transfer during experiments
• Model oxygen vacancy diffusion through STO under the inﬂuence of different
temperatures to understand defect proﬁle and distribution
13
==PAGE:29==
C H A P T E R
2
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
2.1
Aim of experiments
This chapter explains the design of an experimental platform aimed at studying
mobility in STO interfaces at elevated temperatures. The platform can be used to
anneal and study any sample and has provisions to carry out experiments in vacuum
or gaseous environment, perform gating experiments and electrical measurements.
Following are the experimental goals:
1. Perform post-deposition annealing on STO samples
2. Time-dependent study of mobility
3. Study the effect of gating on mobility
Following is a detailed description of the design consideration accounting for the
above mentioned goals.
2.1.1
Post-deposition annealing of STO samples
In order to choose a heater of suitable heating capacity and selecting materials for
building certain parts used in the setup (discussed in 2.2), it was essential to determine
the maximum limit of annealing temperature. Results published by Christensen et al.
[9] have been used to determine the upper limit. These results reveal that conductivity
decreases with annealing which is a result of reduction in electron density (see ﬁgure
2.1). At 200°C, it is possible to obtain a slight reduction in conductivity (and electron
14
==PAGE:30==
2.1. AIM OF EXPERIMENTS
density) shown in ﬁgure 2.2. The goal is to have no change in conductivity brought
about by electron density in order to evaluate the change in conductivity only due to
change in mobility at elevated temperatures. Due to unavoidable heat losses (discussed
in 4.1), this upper limit of temperature will not be reached and therefore serves as a
good upper value.
Figure 2.1: Change in sheet conductance (GS) as a function of charge density (measured at
room temperature) brought about by annealing up to 200°C [9].
Figure 2.2: Tuning sheet conductance of GAO/STO (left plot) and LAO/STO (right plot) by
annealing in 1 bar oxygen. Plots are shown for time evolution of conductance (GS) values
relative to initial conductance (GS(t=0)) [9].
15
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
2.1.2
Effect of time on mobility
Unlike semiconductors, in STO heterostructures, both the dopants (defects - oxygen
vacancies) as well as charge carriers (electrons) are mobile. This causes a redistribution
and this proﬁle changes dynamically over time. P. Schütz et al.[22] show enhance-
ment in GAO/STO electron mobility at low temperatures by storing the samples for a
prolonged time (6 months) or by annealing gently around 100°C without disrupting
electron density (see ﬁgure 1.6). They validate and attribute the observed enhancement
in electron mobility to charge-donor separation that happens due to oxygen vacancies’
preferential occupation at the interface as described in detail in 1.4.
These considerations prove that a prolonged storage of STO heterostructures at room
temperatures leads to enhancement in electron mobility but to speed up the process,
annealing can be done while also taking care that diffusion is controlled and it doesn’t
affect the charge carrier density. So, in this thesis an experimental setup is designed
in order to also study the effect of time on mobility of STO heterostructures when
subjected to elevated temperatures ranging from room temperature to 200°C. This
can be achieved by controlled annealing of the sample, e.g. being able to control the
temperature and time of the annealing process. During this time, the experimental
setup should provide the ability to measure the transport properties of the sample
in-situ during the annealing. Comparing pre-annealing and post-annealing transport
measurements will convey the rate of mobility enhancement upon annealing.
2.1.3
Gating STO interface to control oxygen vacancy diffusion
Finally, the experimental setup must provide a provision to carry out gating experi-
ments. This is important since an applied electric ﬁeld will ensure an external control
over the diffusion process of vacancies and further aid in separation of donors and
carriers inside STO to improve mobility. Since oxygen vacancies carry a net positive
charge, an applied electric ﬁeld will be useful in manipulating defects at a high tem-
perature which can otherwise be a source of reduction in low-temperature mobility.
This will provide an extra dynamic control over electron mobility. The experimental
setup should provide the possibility to measure resistivity and mobility of the three
identical samples and also their distribution proﬁles simultaneously when subjected to
one of the three cases: positive, negative and zero bias. More details about the design
and assembly of the setup are mentioned in 2.2.
16
==PAGE:32==
2.1. AIM OF EXPERIMENTS
Experimental setup
Figure 2.3 shows a drawing of the experiment depicting three samples (grey adjacent
squares) placed in a closed annealing chamber being heated along with gas input,
temperature sensing and provision for gate voltage bias (positive bias on the right
sample, negative bias on the left sample and zero bias on the middle sample). The
samples have 4 bonding wires emanating out of the corners to be used for resistivity
measurement using Van der Pauw method.
Figure 2.3: A picture of planned experimental setup which consists of a closed annealing
chamber housing three samples for simultaneous temperature and resistivity measurements.
It also has provision to bias two samples with +/- voltage while leaving the third sample
un-biased as a reference for comparison. The 4 bonding wires A,B,C,D are to be used for
resistivity measurements using Van der Pauw method.
To carry out resistivity measurements, each sample needs to be placed on a chip carrier
(see ﬁgure 2.8(b)) since bonding wires are too fragile to be connected to any other
equipment. Table 2.1 shows the speciﬁcations of the chip carrier and samples.
17
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Sample
SrTiO3 (STO) based heterostructures
Length
5 mm
Width
5 mm
Height
0.5 mm
Chip carrier material
Aluminium Oxide
Length
15 mm
Width
10 mm
Height
0.5 mm
Table 2.1: Sample and chip carrier material as well as dimensions used in the present design.
The electrical connections and arrangement for Van der Pauw method are explained
in more detail in the following section with reference to the schematic shown in
ﬁgure 2.12. The following section also describes the individual parts, dimensions and
additional apparatus required to build the above schematic in reality.
2.2
Experimental apparatus
To achieve the above mentioned experimental goals, an experimental setup consisting
of the following provisions and apparatus was designed.
1. A closed chamber
2. Sample heater
3. Sample holder
4. Temperature sensor (k-type thermocouples)
5. Connecting wires for electrical measurements and gating
6. Gas source (available in the lab)
7. Vacuum pumps
8. Current source and voltmeter
Following is a description of the above-mentioned individual components:
1. A closed chamber
A closed chamber as shown in ﬁgure 2.4 was chosen since it has provisions for
gas inlet (labelled as A), valves (labelled as B) and thin conducting wires (labelled
18
==PAGE:34==
2.2. EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS
as C) appropriate for electrical measurements. It also consists of a base (labelled
as D) and lid (labelled as E) to isolate the samples from outside atmospheric
conditions. The wires extend outside of the chamber through the base where
they are securely sealed and held via insulation. These wires make it possible to
interface samples with electrical and electronic components outside the chamber
like current and voltage sources, thermocouple reader and resistivity measure-
ments.
The lid (E) of of this chamber bends outwards towards it bottom where it touches
the base (D) and takes up to 30 mm of the base’s radius thereby reducing its
effective usable area. As mentioned later, the circular heater (see ﬁgure 2.6(a))
used in this experimental setup has a diameter greater than this reduced radius
and so does not ﬁt the base with the lid on. For this a stand was designed
which can be ﬁxed on the base, right on top of the gas inlet so that heater can be
conveniently placed inside the closed chamber.
Figure 2.4: A closed chamber for placing samples, carry out annealing and real time electrical
measurements in vacuum or gas. The radius of the chamber base is 125 mm. The base has 16
connecting wires (C) going inside out and additional provision for 4 more wires (besides the
wire bunch, C) suitable for gating.
Figure 2.5 shows a zoomed in view of the chamber base with a stand high enough
to surpass gas inlet (A) in the centre of the base and wide enough for the heater
19
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
to be placed on it. The dimensions of the chamber base, stand, heater, and sample
holder are mentioned later in table 2.3. Figure 2.5 also shows a sample stage on
the top of this assembly which is discussed in more detail post the ’2. Heater’
discussion.
Figure 2.5: Modiﬁcations on the chamber base to accommodate a stand with heater placed on
it, a new hole for heater cable to pass through and space to ﬁx D-type connectors used to link
’connecting wires (C)’ going in and out of the base with the wires coming from the samples.
These electrical connections are explained in more detail later in this section.
2. Heater
A heater shown in ﬁgure 2.6(a) is chosen to be placed inside the chamber. The
inner circular metallic plate (labelled as F) allows controlled heating to take place.
Temperature can be raised in steps up to a desired value and this information
is provided as the input to the controller of this heater. This heater-controller
system (see ﬁgure 2.6 (b)) also ensures that the desired temperature is maintained
over a time interval which can also be speciﬁed. The speciﬁcations of the heater-
controller model with dimensions and electrical parameters are tabulated in
table 2.2.
20
==PAGE:36==
2.2. EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS
(a) Top view of the heater.
(b) Heater connected to its controller.
Figure 2.6: For controlled annealing of the samples, a circular heater with a small circular
metallic plate (marked as F) shown in (a) is used along with its controller shown in (b). The
black outer disc is the insulation covering.
Model
KER3100-08S
Rated Power
220 V AC ±10% (45 Hz - 60 Hz)
Temperature
Range
Room temperature
to
400 °C
Maximum Heating Rate
Room Temperature to 100°C
in ≤40 seconds
Slowest Heating Rate
36 seconds/ °C, up to 400°C for 4 hours
Accuracy
±0.5°C
Insulation Panel Diameter
110 mm
Insulation Panel Material
Aluminium Oxide
Heat Panel (F) Diameter
32 mm
Table 2.2: Electrical power, heating and size speciﬁcations of COSSIM KER3100-08S
High-Precision Temperature Controller system.
3. Sample holder
As shown previously in ﬁgure 2.5, a sample holder sits on the central heating
plate of the heater. All three chip carriers along with samples cannot be placed
simultaneously on the heater due to its small area and so a sample holder/stage
is designed (see ﬁgure 2.7 ) with an extended plate.
21
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.7: (a) Top view of designed sample stage showing 3 sample beds and extended plate.
To enhance visual interpretation, a blue block representing a ceramic chip carrier is placed on
one of the sample beds. (b) Dimensions of extended plate, sample beds and chip carrier
placement are also shown. (c) Bottom part (radius = 14.8 mm) of the extended plate (diameter
= 70 mm) that sits on the heater plate directly. (d) A zoomed-in view showing a chip carrier
(green) placed on one of the sample beds.
22
==PAGE:38==
2.2. EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS
An actual version of the above shown design was built in the workshop that
is shown in ﬁgure 2.8(a) and an actual chip carrier shown in ﬁgure 2.8(b). A
summary of speciﬁcations of the chamber base, stand, heater and sample stage
is mentioned in table 2.3.
(a) Sample stage assembly built in workshop.
(b) Alumina chip carrier.
Figure 2.8: (a) Physical realization of sample stage based on previously mentioned
dimensions and design considerations consisting of three adjacent protruding blocks (sample
beds) to place chip carrier along with samples as well as a thermocouple station at the edge to
ﬁx three thermocouples to measure temperatures of three samples simultaneously. (b) ceramic
chip carrier with conducting pathways. The red rectangle marked in the centre of the image is
where a sample can be placed and electrically connected to measuring wires.
Component
Diameter
(mm)
Length
(mm)
Width
(mm)
Height
(mm)
Material
Chamber Base
250
Stand
140
50
Aluminium
Heater (insulating covering)
110
Aluminium Oxide
Heater (metallic plate)
32
Sample stage (bottom part)
29.6
6
Aluminium
Sample stage (extended part)
70
3
Aluminium
Sample bed
25
10
5
Aluminium
Table 2.3: Dimensions and material used to build individual apparatus assembled for
experiments as as shown in ﬁgure 2.5.
23
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Sample stage kept on heater with labelled parts is shown in ﬁgure 2.9 that
consists of three sample beds - rectangular protruding blocks adjacent to each
other (marked as G), a thermocouple station (labelled H) and a metallic block
diametrically opposite to it (labelled I). Thermocouple station contains three
slots which gives the provision of measuring surface/interface temperature of
three samples simultaneously. Since, the upper limit of temperature is chosen to
be 200°C and Type K thermocouples are suitable to be used in a range of –270°C
to 1260°C hence, they are chosen to be used in this case. Figure 2.9 also shows a
chip carrier (marked as J) to indicate its actual placement during an experiment.
Figure 2.9: Heater with the sample stage placed on it. The markings identify the different
parts of the sample stage assembly - sample beds, sample holder, thermocouple station and a
metallic block to keep measuring wires in place.
4. Connecting wires and electrical connections of all components
Though the entire experimental setup being discussed in this section can be used
for any samples, but STO is of particular interest with respect to the context
of further discussions. So, considering that some electrical measurements (like
resistivity measurements) are to be performed on such samples, some conducting
wires would be required to be bonded on to the samples. For instance, Van-der
Pauw method of resistivity requires 4 wires to be bonded at the corners of the
samples. The requirements for Van der Pauw arrangement are:
24
==PAGE:40==
2.2. EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS
• Contacts are at circumference of the sample
• The average diameters (D) of the contacts and sample thickness must be
much smaller than the distance (L) between the contacts since the errors
caused by having large values of D are directly proportional to D.
• Sample thickness should be homogeneous
• Sample surface must not have any holes
Figure 2.10(a) shows the ideal sample geometry while 2.10(b) is also acceptable
but having contacts elsewhere like edges or inside the sample is not accepted
and will lead to errors in measurement.
(a) Cloverleaf geometry of a sample
(b) Square geometry of a sample with contacts
at corners
Figure 2.10: Van der Pauw geometry for samples - (a) cloverleaf geometry. Though difﬁcult
to fabricate but this geometry is ideal to ensure lowest errors. Geometry in (b) is also
acceptable and relatively easier to fabricate.[1]
Upon ensuring the above mentioned conditions, Van der Pauw arrangement
can be used for resistivity measurement as well as Hall measurements for any
arbitrary shape. Considering ﬁgure 2.11, resistance (RAB,CD) is computed by
measuring the potential drop across contacts C and D upon passing a current
through contacts A and B and then similarly for RBC,DA.
25
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Figure 2.11: Van der Pauw arrangement with 4 contacts on the periphery of an arbitrary
shape[29].
Figure 2.12: A schematic showing the Van der Pauw arrangement for measuring R1. Upon
tweaking the connections, R2 can also be computed and resistivity can be obtained. It also
shows how the connections reach out to the measuring units placed outside the chamber via
D-type connectors that conveniently separate the chip carrier+sample assembly from the ﬁxed
wires on the chamber base.
Figure 2.12 shows connections for an un-biased sample however, for two of the
three samples, an extra wire for gating is also required. The other end of each of
26
==PAGE:42==
2.2. EXPERIMENTAL APPARATUS
these wires can be soldered or pasted using silver paste on one of the (yellow)
inner slots of the chip carrier which connects to the outer (dark grey) slots on
the periphery of chip carrier via conducting paths. Additional measuring wires
with insulation can be soldered to the outer slots which then pass through the
space between each sample bed and reach the female D-connector. The space
between each sample bed is just enough to allow these wires to pass through. To
keep the connections intact and clean, insulated wires after passing through the
space between the sample beds ﬁnally accumulate under a metal block (labelled
I in ﬁgure 2.9) which can be adjusted and tightened/loosened according to the
needs. The female D-connector can be conveniently attached/detached from the
male D-connector which has connecting wires coming from ’wire bunch’ from
the chamber base. These wires pass through the base and reach the measuring
and interfacing components placed outside the chamber.
In reference to the connections shown in schematic 2.12 A, B, C and D represent
the 4 contacts on the corners of the middle sample (un-biased). Here, R1 can be
deﬁned as follows:
RAB,CD = VCD
IAB
= R1
(2.1)
Similarly, R2 can be deﬁned as follows after tweaking the connections - contacts
B and C to be connected with the current source while contacts D and A to be
connected with the voltmeter:
RBC,DA = VDA
IBC
= R2
(2.2)
Using the Van der Pauw formula, resistivity (ρ) of the material of a sample (with
thickness d) can be calculated[29].
exp(−πdR1
ρ
) + exp(−πdR2
ρ
) = 1
(2.3)
Equation2.3 can be solved iteratively using iterative methods to obtain ρ.
27
==PAGE:43==
C H A P T E R
3
MODELLING
In order to arrive at optimal dimensions (thickness of sample stage bottom part,
extended plate and sample beds) and positioning of individual parts (for instance,
distance between sample beds) of the experimental setup design described in the pre-
vious chapter, temperature distribution in the sample stage geometry was simulated
with the aid of numerical analysis to ensure controlled annealing and temperature
distribution across the samples. This also made it possible to estimate surface temper-
atures of the samples by taking heat losses into account .
COMSOL Multiphysics 5.4 has been used to perform heat transfer modelling in the con-
structed sample stage geometry. This platform uses Finite Element Method to simulate
many different (and also combinations) physical studies by dividing the entire geome-
try in ﬁnite number of elements and then numerically solving the partial differential
equations associated with the speciﬁed physics.
Surface temperatures obtained for each sample through COMSOL modelling were
used as an input to further predict the distribution of oxygen vacancies as a function
of time. This simple analysis allows to evaluate the dynamics of diffusion proﬁle over
time in each sample and makes it possible to compare the diffusion landscape across
the three samples.
28
==PAGE:44==
3.1. COMSOL MODELLING
3.1
COMSOL modelling
3.1.1
Geometry of the model
A sample stage geometry with same dimensions as the sample stage in ﬁgure 2.7 was
created in the COMSOL model. Three sample beds, chip carriers and STO samples
were constructed on top of an extended Aluminium plate while thermocouple station
and metal block (to hold wires in place) were not included. A top, bottom and side
view of this geometry taken from COMSOL panel is shown in the ﬁgure 3.1.
(a) Top view of sample stage geometry.
(b) Bottom view of sample stage geometry.
(c) Side view of sample stage geometry.
Figure 3.1: Sample stage geometry used in COMSOL depicting (a) Top view showing three
STO samples and chip carriers placed on sample bed blocks (b) Bottom view. The inner circle
is the part that sits directly on the heater and (c) Side view of the sample stage geometry
showing, bottom plate, extended plate and sample beds with chip carrier and STO samples.
This geometry is based on dimensions shown in ﬁgure 2.7.
29
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. MODELLING
3.1.2
Materials applied on the geometry
Material used for sample stage was Aluminium while Alumina chip carrier had the
STO sample placed on it. Their material properties are given in table 3.1 and ﬁgure
3.2 shows the COMSOL geometry of the designed sample stage along with colored
portions that depict the material selected for that respective portion in COMSOL.
(a) Blue shaded portion depicting Aluminium.
(b) Green representing Alumina for chip carrier.
(c) Orange depicting STO.
Figure 3.2: Shaded regions showing the different materials that the sample stage geometry is
made of. (a) Aluminium was used for sample stage since it has a higher melting point than
the annealing temperature range while (b) Alumina chip carriers are used for placing the
samples and hence this is shown with green and (c) orange is used to represent STO samples.
30
==PAGE:46==
3.1. COMSOL MODELLING
Material
Thermal
Conductivity
(W/m·K)
Electrical
Conductivity
(S/m)
Melting
Point
(°C)
Density
(kg/m3)
Heat capacity
at
constant pressure
(J/Kg·K)
Aluminium
238
3.774×107
660.3
2700
900
Alumina
27
Insulator
2072
3900
900
STO
5.858
Insulator
2080[11]
5120
544.9977[11]
Table 3.1: Material parameters of Aluminium, Alumina and STO used in COMSOL.
3.1.3
Study and boundary conditions used by COMSOL
A time dependent heat transfer equation was utilized with the boundary condition
of constant temperature (Dirichlet condition) at the bottom of the sample stage. The
equations used by COMSOL is as follows which uses a dependent variable T as a
function of space and time:
ρCp
∂T
∂t + ρCpu · ∇T + ∇· q = Q + Qted
(3.1)
Conduction equation:
q = −k∇T
(3.2)
Convection equation:
−n · q = q0
q0 = h(Text −T)
(3.3)
radiation equation:
−n · q = εσ(T4
amb −T4)
(3.4)
where,
Cp=Speciﬁc heat capacity at constant pressure[J/Kg·K]
ε=Emisivity
h=Heat transfer coefﬁcient[W/(m2K)]
q = conductive heat ﬂux[W/m2]
q0 = Inward heat ﬂux[W/m2]
Q = Heat source[W/m3]
ρ = Density[Kg/m3]
σ = Stefan-Boltzmann constant = 5.67 x 10−8 W/(m2K4)
Tamb=Text= 293.15 K
31
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3. MODELLING
3.1.4
Physics module used
In order to simulate heat transfer from the heater along and across the entire geometry,
Heat Transfer in Solids module of COMSOL was used. Its sub-modules for Conduction,
Convection and Radiation were also added to the study. In order to simulate heat
supplied by heater, a constant temperature value was kept at the position where
sample stage comes directly in contact with the heater. Figure 3.3 shows this with
an input temperature, T0 of 200°C and table 3.2 shows the COMSOL parameters for
conduction, convection and radiation.
Figure 3.3: Heat input to the sample stage.
Parameter
Value
Unit
Heat transfer coefﬁcient (hc)
30
W/m2K
Emissivity of Aluminium (εAl)
0.18
Emissivity of Alumina slab (εAlumina)
0.8
Emissivity of STO slab (εSTO)
0.8
Ambient Temperature (Tamb)
293.15
K
Initial Temperature (Ti)
293.15
K
Table 3.2: Parameters which were taken from COMSOL.
All material parameters that are used in COMSOL modelling were constant i.e. inde-
pendent of temperature. This is because for the considered temperature range, effects
of temperature on these parameters is negligible and hence they can be considered
constant. Only exception being for the heat transfer coefﬁcient which is generally
difﬁcult to determine and rather needs to be adjusted experimentally. For instance, free
32
==PAGE:48==
3.1. COMSOL MODELLING
convection for gases has a range for the heat transfer coefﬁcient (hc): 2-35 W/(m2K).
Also surface temperatures of the samples are sensitive to change in heat transfer coefﬁ-
cient, hc which is shown in ﬁgure 3.4(a). It shows a variation of 2.25 K in the surface
temperature of the middle and its adjacent sample at hc = 35 W/(m2K). S2 refers to the
middle sample and S3 refers to one of the adjacent samples. Since, surface temperature
on both the adjacent samples is the same, the reasons of which are discussed later in
chapter 4, therefore surface temperature of only one of the side samples is shown in
the ﬁgures. Such a variation is very much possible in a practical setting since heat
transfer coefﬁcient is inﬂuenced by the choice of gas input in the heating chamber
and the ﬂow of the gas. For instance, a turbulent ﬂow will result in greater heat loss
(and lower surface temperature) as opposed to a natural ﬂow. Radiative losses on the
other hand at this temperature range can be neglected since the variation in surface
temperature is very low (ﬁgure 3.4(b) ).
(a)Temperature variation with hc over a short range
(b)Temperature variation with emissivity
Figure 3.4: Parametric variations to understand the sensitivity towards convection and
radiation.
3.1.5
Mesh choice and analysis
COMSOL divides the geometry in ﬁnite number of elements by creating a mesh on its
surface. By default, this is done automatically for a geometry but in order to determine
the optimal mesh size which is ﬁne enough yet does not require a long computational
33
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. MODELLING
time, mesh analysis is essential. Figure 3.5 shows an example of the 3D mesh of the
entire geometry. The size of the elements can be varied and made ﬁner or coarser
depending on its affect on the computational time and accuracy of results. Such a
mesh sensitivity analysis was performed to narrow down to the chosen mesh size
which was based on computational time and sample surface temperature with a heater
input of 200°C. It was assumed that heat transfer happens in an ideal geometry with
perfect thermal contacts.
Figure 3.5: Mesh covering the sample stage geometry.
It can be observed from ﬁgure 3.6(a) that considering mesh of different element sizes
does not alter surface temperature and therefore there is no need to choose extremely
ﬁne mesh which only increases the computation time without affecting the overall
temperature at the sample surfaces.
Figure 3.6(b) shows an increasing computational time as ﬁner mesh is employed.
From both these considerations, a User-controlled mesh of Normal size that consisted
of 10368 elements in the entire geometry was chosen since temperature more or less
settles at around 470.5 K and 469.2 K for middle and adjacent sample respectively
which is very close to heater temperature of 473.15 K (200°C). With this mesh, the
computational time was: 38 seconds.
34
==PAGE:50==
3.2. OXYGEN VACANCY DISTRIBUTION
(a) Temperature versus mesh size
(b) Computational time versus mesh size
Figure 3.6: Mesh sensitivity analysis to choose the appropriate mesh element size rendering
low computational time and most accurate sample surface temperature.
3.2
Oxygen vacancy distribution
Many properties of STO and STO based heterostructures greatly depend on oxygen
vacancy distribution and conﬁnement of these vacancies as discussed in chapter 1. It
is therefore essential to understand the distribution of oxygen vacancies throughout
the sample. Since, it is well established that a high concentration of oxygen vacancies
at/near the interface exists, the oxygen vacancies over time at elevated temperature
will diffuse towards a lower concentration in the bulk. This redistribution is also
affected by the surrounding charge carriers but for simplicity, that has been neglected
here. A schematic illustration of the initial positions of oxygen vacancies in a semi-
inﬁnite slab of STO is represented in ﬁgure 3.7. x=0 represents the interface with
high concentration (H.C) of oxygen vacancies while x>0 represents regions of lower
concentrations (L.C) before diffusion takes place.
Diffusion is temperature dependent and in this case the oxygen vacancy diffusion will
be greatly inﬂuenced by changes in temperature. To understand how far the oxygen
35
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. MODELLING
vacancies diffuse at a certain temperature and time, Fick’s second law can be used:
∂C(x,t)
∂t
= D∂2C(x,t)
∂x2
(3.5)
where,
C(x,t) = Concentration of Vo [/cm3]
D = self diffusion coefﬁcient [/cm2/s]
The motion of diffusing species of the same type without any compositional changes
refers to self-diffusion.
Figure 3.7: Initial distribution of oxygen vacancies conﬁned at the interface. This is the case at
t=0 i.e. before diffusion process starts and does not account for surrounding charge carriers,
drift and interfacial force. Once diffusion starts, oxygen vacancies will move from a high
concentration (H.C) at the interface to low concentration (L.C) in the bulk
A solution to equation 3.5 is given in equation 3.6 based on the following assumptions:
1. Vo travel only in the positive x-direction
2. The total concentration of Vo remains constant
3. The highest concentration (5×1021/cm3) is at the interface denoted by C0
4. Bulk concentration is ﬁxed at 5×1017/cm3 denoted by Cb
5. The distribution proﬁle is assumed to be divided in equal intervals along the
sample thickness with the initial (interface) interval denoted by x0 (0.2 nm).
36
==PAGE:52==
3.2. OXYGEN VACANCY DISTRIBUTION
C(x,t) =
M
2
√
4πDt
exp{−x2
4Dt } + Cb ;
0 ≤x ≤∞
(3.6)
where,
M = total constant concentration of Vo
= x0C0
= 1014/cm2
37
==PAGE:53==
C H A P T E R
4
RESULTS
This chapter shows ﬁrst the results obtained from executing COMSOL model of heat
transfer in sample stage geometry and thereafter, the results discussing about the
distribution of oxygen vacancies over time at different steady state temperatures.
Since, it is assumed that here redistribution of oxygen vacancies is happening only to
due to diffusion which is a temperature activated process, therefore, towards the end,
both results (COMSOL and oxygen vacancy modelling) are combined to understand
the implication of varying temperature on oxygen vacancy diffusion in STO samples
during the planned experiments.
Considering ﬁgure 2.1 as a reference for our understanding about the temperature
range where electron density does not change much, room temperature to 200°C can
be considered as the ideal experimenting temperature range. 200°C is considered as
the upper limit of this range because this is where noticeable change in conductivity
is observed. Christensen D.V. et al.[9] report that this conductivity change is majorly
attributed to the change in electron density and electron mobility has a very minor
contribution in this. Since, low temperature electron mobility is greatly inﬂuenced by
oxygen vacancies’ landscape at elevated temperatures therefore, this chapter aims to
present diffusion proﬁles of oxygen vacancies at elevated temperatures. The idea is to
keep electron density unchanged even at temperatures higher than room temperature
and the simulations too show an ideal elevated temperature for experiments to be
50°C.
38
==PAGE:54==
4.1. COMSOL MODELLING RESULTS
4.1
COMSOL modelling results
In chapter 2, experimental setup design for annealing experiments was discussed. It
is essential to understand time evolution and uniformity of temperature distribution
in each sample and also in between adjacent samples. This section shows the time
evolution of heat transfer throughout the sample stage geometry shown previously in
ﬁgure 3.1 with particular focus on the sample surfaces.
Time dependent simulations were performed where initially (t=0s), the setup was at
room temperature (Ti) and when input temperatures (T0) of 200°C and 50°C were
applied on the bottom-most part of the sample stage geometry, temperature changed
over time which is monitored by COMSOL model until the sample surface temper-
atures reach a steady state value. Temperature variation is seen along the z-axis i.e.
perpendicular to the heater plane as well as in-plane and parallel surfaces.
4.1.1
Temperature distribution
Consider ﬁgure 4.1. It shows the temperature variation from the bottom-most part of
the sample stage up to the samples’ surfaces. To simulate heater, temperature at the
bottom-most part is set to 473.15K or 200°C ﬁrst. There is heat loss as heat transfers
from bottom (heat source) to the top which can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1 (b) showing the
temperature at the bottom part to be 473.15 K while the top part (sample surfaces) is
at 470.25 K. It is also noteworthy that at every point along the out-of-plane direction
of the geometry, temperature distributes radially in-plane on all surfaces parallel to
the heater surface. This means that temperature is maximum at points along the
z-direction passing through the centre of the geometry and goes on to reduce along
the radius. This is the reason why sample beds are designed to be as close as possible
to each other as well as to the geometric centre of the sample stage. The ﬁgure shown
is when 25 seconds have passed and when all the contacts are perfectly thermally
conducting.
Figure 4.2 shows the x-z plane of sample stage where A and B are co-axial points
lying on the z-axis that passes through the middle of the sample stage geometry.
Point A also coincides with the centre point of the middle sample (S2) and point B
coincides with the geometric centre of the bottom-most circular part of the sample
stage geometry that is directly in contact with the heater.
39
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a) Top view of temperature
distribution in sample stage
geometry.
(b)Back view of the
geometry showing heater
temperature.
Figure 4.1: Temperature distribution across the sample stage. (a) shows surface temperature
variation across the samples and (b) shows the input heater temperature on the bottom-most
part of geometry.
Figure 4.2: x-z view of sample stage with marked points showing the top most and the
bottom most points along z-axis.
A plot (4.3) showing variation along the line segment AB depicts the scenario after 25
seconds in relation to ﬁgure 4.1. It can be observed that point B is at the steady state
heater temperature TB (473.15 K or 200°C) which reduces along the AB segment and
point A acquires a steady state temperature TA of 470.25 K with a net variation of 2.9 K
along AB.
40
==PAGE:56==
4.1. COMSOL MODELLING RESULTS
Figure 4.3: Temperature variation along the line segment AB.
Figure 4.4: Temperature variation at sample surfaces for different time stages for input
temperature of 200°C and geometry having perfect thermal contacts.
41
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Similarly, ﬁgure 4.4 depicts the temperature variation at centre point of each sample
surface at 5, 15 and 25 seconds. This variation is across the three samples as marked
in ﬁgure 4.5. It can be noted in ﬁgure 4.4 that with elapsing time, difference between
temperatures of the middle sample and adjacent samples reduces and settles at around
1.47 K after 25 seconds. This is a minor variation and temperature dependent processes
like diffusion of oxygen vacancies are expected to not be very different in each sample
under these conditions.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: Cut line marking across the three sample surfaces. (a) Top view of the marking
and (b) x-z view of the marking.
4.1.2
Time evolution of surface temperature
Having executed the time-dependent study it was observed that steady state temper-
ature at sample surfaces is not reached instantaneously on the surfaces of samples
since COMSOL solves for a time dependent heat conduction equation (see 3.1) where
change in internal energy per unit volume of the material is represented by change in
temperature with time. The sample stage geometry (3.1) in consideration is made of
42
==PAGE:58==
4.1. COMSOL MODELLING RESULTS
different parts and the interfaces between these parts are a major source of heat loss.
Three such contact interfaces are: metal/metal contact C1 (between extended plate
and sample beds), metal/oxide contact C2 (between sample beds and alumina chip
carrier) and oxide/oxide contact C3 (between chip carrier and sample).
In an ideal condition with perfect contacts, there are no heat losses at these inter-
faces and temperature takes about 25 seconds to settle at its steady state value on the
surfaces of STO samples as shown in ﬁgure 4.6(a). In this case, input temperature T0 is
set at 473.15 K or 200°C. In the plot, temperature evolution is shown at centre points
of each sample where, S2 represents the middle sample and S1 and S3 represent the
samples to its left and right. There is a small difference in the steady state temperature
of the S2 as compared to S1 and S3 and the temperature evolution as well as distribu-
tion is same in S1 and S3.
Figure 4.6(b) depicts the case of imperfect contacts. To simulate this, the thermal
conductivity κ at C1, C2 and C3 was varied. It shows that reducing thermal conductiv-
ity κ to 0.1% of its original value is not very different from the perfect contact situation
while lowering it down further by an order of magnitude - 0.01% represents the case of
a poor thermal contact which signiﬁcantly lowers the steady state temperature value
at the sample surfaces to around 440 K - a difference of ∼30K. Also, in this case, it
takes around 35 seconds for the temperature to reach its steady state. Additionally, the
curve corresponding to the middle sample closely follows the curve corresponding to
adjacent samples even at initial time intervals. This is not the case with perfect con-
tacts where there is a higher disparity between temperatures of middle and adjacent
samples in the initial stages. For instance, around 2.5s, S2 is at ∼450K while S1 and
S3 are at 420K.
43
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Settling time of steady state temperature at T0 = 200°C for (a) Perfect thermal
contacts and (b) Poor thermal contacts.
Figure 4.7: Settling time of steady state temperature at T0 = 50°C for perfect and poor
contacts.
44
==PAGE:60==
4.2. OXYGEN VACANCY MODELLING
Settling time for T0 = 50°C was also investigated in ﬁgure 4.7 since electrical conduc-
tivity (and also electron density) remains unchanged at this temperature (see ﬁgure
2.1). In the case of perfect contacts, the settling time is similar (∼25 s) as the case for
T0 = 200°C and, the steady state temperature is 322.48 K which is very close to T0 =
323.15 K (50°C). Also there is negligible disparity between S2 and S1/S3 temperatures
during the transient.
In case of poor contacts too, both curves lie close to each other and not much heat
is lost which is evident by the steady state value of 319.24 K which is only 3.91 K
lower than the desired input temperature T0. Based on the above considerations, the
case of T0 = 50°C seems more stable for settling of the sample surface temperatures
at the desired steady state value with a short transient time. Temperature difference
across the three samples is extremely negligible even during the transient time (0s<t<
25s). This indicates that all the three samples can be considered to be at the same
temperature all the way from transient to steady state. This is not the case for T0
= 200°C. This consideration is important since temperature has a huge effect on the
diffusion of oxygen vacancies in the sample and the overall proﬁle of donor and charge
carriers.
If there is a huge disparity between middle and adjacent sample temperatures as
observed in the case of T0 = 200°C, then the distribution proﬁle of donor and carriers in
the middle and adjacent samples will also be quite different and hence, they will not be
ﬁt for comparison. On the contrary, T0 = 50°C represents a good case for comparison
since there is no disparity between surface temperatures of the three samples.
4.2
Oxygen vacancy modelling
Equation 3.6 describes a Gaussian distribution of oxygen vacancies with time at a
particular input temperature T0. It is assumed that the distribution happens due to the
diffusion process which starts from the interface (x=0) and can extend to the length of
STO slab. The total number of oxygen vacancies is assumed to remain conserved and
at t=0, they are conﬁned to the interface (x=0) also depicted in ﬁgure 3.7. The diffusion
proﬁle plots are shown in ﬁgure 4.8.
45
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: Time evolution of oxygen vacancy diffusion in STO slab at input temperatures of
(a) 200°C and (b) 50°C
The narrowest peak refers to t=1 second i.e. right after the initial scenario when all
the oxygen vacancies are accumulated at the interface. As the time progresses, the
sharp and narrow curve corresponding to t=1 second ﬂattens out and vacancy spread
increases. This means that with the passage of time, oxygen vacancy concentration at
the interface decreases and they get deconﬁned from the interface to spread to further
46
==PAGE:62==
4.2. OXYGEN VACANCY MODELLING
distances into the bulk of STO. Moreover, temperature greatly affects the extent of
diffusion. This is clear by comparing the x-axis of both ﬁgures where it can be observed
that for 200°C in ﬁgure 4.8(a) diffusion occurs till ∼7µm while for 50°C it can be seen
from ﬁgure 4.8(b) that diffusion only happens until a length of ∼0.07µm.
To develop a clearer picture of the location where vacancies’ concentration starts
falling to bulk value, a term ’diffusion front’ is deﬁned as the inﬂection point (marked
with green pointer in ﬁgure 4.8(a)) on each curve where the curve turns to the bulk
value. These diffusion fronts are depicted in ﬁgure 4.9. It shows comparison between
two plots depicting the depth to which vacancies diffuse over a short span of time (60
seconds) and long span of time for several hours.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9: Depth of diffusion fronts for (a) Short and (b) Long time spans. On both plots,
right side y-axis in orange color represents diffusion depth range for 200°C while left side
y-axis in blue represents the same for 20°C and 50°C.
For higher temperature like 200 °C, vacancies diffuse to bulk (distance upto 1000 nm
from the interface) relatively faster while for lower temperatures, it takes a few hours
to reach a similar depth (6 hours to reach 0.9 µm at 50 °C - ’blue stars’ in ﬁgure 4.9(b)).
Similarly, when subjected to (20°C), oxygen vacancies remain relatively close to the
interface (0.1µm) and would require a prolonged time (a few days) to reach bulk. This
means the rate of diffusion is slow which is understandable since low temperature
implies a lower diffusion constant as described by the popular Arrhenius-like equation.
47
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
This can be understood by comparing the saturation of curves, for instance, room
temperature curve is much ﬂatter than the other two in both plots indicating a lower
rate of diffusion. This shows that elevated temperatures provide the driving force for
vacancies to diffuse to longer distances in the same time.
This can be understood better by analysing the trends of the depth curves for all
the three cases. On close observation, it can be seen that they resemble the trend of the
following equation describing the displacement (x) of diffusing species (here, oxygen
vacancies) in 1 direction (1D):
x =
√
2Dt
(4.1)
Equation 4.1 follows from the Einstein–Smoluchowski relation for 1D which relates
the mean square displacement of diffusing species to the Diffusion constant (D) at a
certain temperature and time evolution (t)[12]:
⟨x2⟩= 2Dt
(4.2)
In order to verify this, curves were ﬁt to the above mentioned function and the result
of 200°C case is presented in ﬁgure 4.10. Here, general form of the ﬁtting function used
is: y = axb analogous to equation 4.1: x =
√
2D t0.5. After curve ﬁtting, the coefﬁcient
’b’ came out to be ’0.4757’ which is very close to ’0.5’ and from the ﬁgure also it is clear
that depth curve as a function of time closely ﬁts the curve represented by equation
4.1. The slope of this curve represents the rate of diffusion over time which is directly
proportional to
√
D and inversely proportional to
√
2t which means that at constant
D (or temperature), slope will continuously decrease with time. For a higher value of
D (higher temperature), this decrease will be apparent at larger values in time.
48
==PAGE:64==
4.2. OXYGEN VACANCY MODELLING
Figure 4.10: Fitting the diffusion depth curve with function describing diffusion in
one-dimension.
This further validates the need for controlled and stable temperature conditions.
This also shows that subjecting STO samples to different ambient temperatures can
greatly affect the diffusion proﬁles. Apart from desiring a stable temperature, it is
also desirable to achieve at sample surfaces, the exact temperature or at least a value
close to input temperature. As seen before in ﬁgure 4.6, ideal case is not possible and
some heat loss is expected when heat is transferred from heater to the sample surfaces.
This difference in the desired temperature value and the actual temperature of the
surface can be as large as 23°C (seen in the case of 200°C, imperfect contacts) and can
impact depths to which oxygen vacancies diffuse because a lowered temperature at the
surface would also lower the diffusion depth of oxygen vacancies. This consideration
is shown in ﬁgure 4.11 where it can be seen that for samples that have acquired a
steady state temperature of 176.81°C when subjected to input temperature of 200°C
having poor contacts (0.01% of κ), do not show much variation in the diffusion depths
over time (5 seconds to 10,000 seconds). At 7200 seconds, oxygen vacancies reach a
depth of around 30µm having a steady state temperature of 176.81°C while in ideal
situation (with 200°C surface temperature) oxygen vacancies would have moved to
a depth of 42 µm. The difference in depths between ideal and non-ideal condition is
12µm which is negligible meaning that lowering of temperature by 23.19°C did not
create much difference in oxygen vacancy diffusion depths.
49
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.11: Comparison of oxygen vacancy diffusion for perfect and poor contacts at 200°C.
Figure 4.12: Comparison of diffusion front depth among the three samples. 174.78°C
corresponds to S2 and 176.81°C corresponds to S1/S3.
50
==PAGE:66==
4.2. OXYGEN VACANCY MODELLING
Additionally, with reference to ﬁgure 4.6(b), a similar analysis was performed among
S1/S3 and S2 surface temperatures at steady state subjected to input temperature
of 200°C and having poor contacts (0.01% of κ) which is shown in ﬁgure 4.12. It
was observed that a difference of 2.03°C between S1/S3 and S2 created negligible
difference between their diffusion depth proﬁles. It can be seen that the diffusion
fronts are closely aligned for both temperatures.
51
==PAGE:67==
C H A P T E R
5
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This work presented the design and construction of an experimental setup that can
be used to anneal and carry out in-situ electrical measurements on any microelec-
tronic samples or devices. In this study, particular focus was on Strontium Oxide
(STO) heterostructures since not much experimental work has been performed in
room temperature (and above) regime from the perspective of low temperature elec-
tron mobility enhancement. To understand the physics of STO heterostructures at
elevated temperatures, such an experimental setup can be very useful. This exper-
imental platform has many features like - annealing upto 400°C, option of using
a gaseous environment or vacuum, temperature monitor using thermocouples and
provision to apply gate voltages. All this can be done for three samples simultaneously.
Electron mobility at low temperatures (T<10K) is mainly limited by scattering with
ionized impurities like defects. So, in order to enhance low temperature electron
mobility, control over defects is essential. This can be achieved through annealing and
other techniques like gating the STO interface. Additionally, It has been observed that
at a scale of a few months, mobility is seen to be enhanced at low temperatures and
so time evolution of defect proﬁles is also necessary to study. The possible reasons
for this might be due to the natural processes of diffusion, drift and trapping energy
as discussed by A.F. Zurhelle et al.[31] and P. Schütz et al.[22]. Motivation behind
designing such experimental setup was to enhance mobility as well as optimize the
time taken for this enhancement. Additionally, it was interesting to also develop some
insight about operating temperatures for such experiments given the complex relation
among temperature and many electrical parameters of STO. For this reason, STO
52
==PAGE:68==
samples along with sample holder assembly were modelled to understand the effect
of temperature and its distribution on the oxygen vacancy proﬁles in the samples. It
was a basic model under some appropriate assumptions that helped to narrow down
to a good enough range of temperature where the experiments can be performed.
COMSOL modelling of the sample stage assembly showed that temperature dis-
tributes radially throughout the geometry and in order to ensure minimum surface
temperature differences among the three samples, it is also necessary to have the
samples placed as close as possible. Alternatively, other designs might also be used
where rather than placing the three samples side by side in a row, each can be symmet-
rically displaced by an angle of 120° relative to the others forming a ’
’ conﬁguration.
Such a conﬁguration would ensure symmetry of temperature distribution and also
minimize the distance from axis of the geometry where temperature is seen to be
highest. However, with the current geometrical considerations, it was found out
that at 50°C, temperature difference across sample surfaces was negligible. Also, not
much temperature is lost at the surfaces even when the geometry has poor thermal
contacts at this temperature. Additionally, previous studies show that electron density
remains constant at this temperature which is desirable for such experiments since the
aim is to separate the effects of electron density and mobility on conductivity of STO
heterostructures.
By utilizing this information, diffusion proﬁle of oxygen vacancies was studied for
different steady state temperatures and also transient times. The case of 50°C was
compared with 200°C and it was observed that in 1 hour, vacancies diffuse to around
400 nm and 30,000 nm respectively. With this change in concentration proﬁle, mobility
is also expected to change. Since, defects act as scattering sites, therefore, diffusion of
vacancies away from interface will cause hindrance for the electrons thereby reducing
electron mobility. In order to observe conﬁnement of vacancies to the interface while
also carrying out measurements conveniently, working around 50°C annealing tem-
perature would be beneﬁcial since at this temperature, vacancies don’t diffuse to very
large depths as compared to 200°C. In fact, vacancies remain much more conﬁned to
the interface and for a longer duration at room temperature and so a comparison be-
tween the mobility measurements in both cases can be performed easily. Even though
vacancies diffuse to some depth at 50°C, but this would not disrupt electron density
of the heterostructure, so a slow and stable increase in the annealing temperature
53
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
from 20°C to 50°C would only reveal the changes in mobility which is attributed to
the changing vacancy landscape. This can be done over 6 hours while continuously
monitoring the electron mobility because at 50°C, oxygen vacancies start to reach bulk
depths (1µm) in around 6 hours.
Being a thermally activated process, diffusion is known to be sluggish at low and room
temperatures and more so for STO since it has a high melting point which means that
there is stronger bond between its atoms and therefore higher activation energy is
required for vacancies to move from one lattice point to another. But results presented
here that are based on experimental values of diffusion coefﬁcients[12] show vacancies
reaching to signiﬁcant depths. This compels one to think that oxygen vacancies might
not be immobile at room temperature. The possible reasons for this as explained by
A. F. Zurhelle et al.[31] can be the positive space charge created due to accumulation
of oxygen vacancies at the interface that pushes them away from it and the pull from
the electrons that have travelled much further from the interface. In fact, this gives
incentive to include gating experiments to control the diffusion of oxygen vacancies by
negatively biasing the interface relative to the bulk side of the sample. By doing this
oxygen vacancies can be held at the interface even if temperature or other conditions
push them towards deeper depths.
Apart from diffusion, there might be some drift as well due to the movement of
electrons until an equilibrium is developed. Furthermore, oxygen vacancies prefer to
remain at the interface and over time, inevitably move towards the interface where
electron trapping might also take place. These considerations have also been neglected
rather results in this thesis take into account only the effect of diffusion. Moreover, in
an actual experiment results are not likely to match completely with theoretical calcula-
tions or modelling as shown here. In this case, it would be important to consider some
practical changes that might occur which may affect the results greatly. For instance,
the overall heat transfer coefﬁcient depends upon the choice of gas, its properties and
ﬂow. Here, it has been assumed that Nitrogen gas with free convection is ﬂowing in
the annealing chamber and so from a range of values, a value of 30 W/(m2K) was ﬁxed.
In case of a turbulent ﬂow or choice of another gas, this value would change drastically
thereby also changing the temperature steady state value at the surfaces of the samples.
In an actual experiment, when annealing and measurements are to be performed, the
chip carrier would have to be stuck on to the sample beds with conducting adhesives
54
==PAGE:70==
like Silver paste which would change the thermal conductivity at the contacts. The
smoothness of all the surfaces is also an unknown parameter which adds on to the
issue of heat loss from geometry surfaces and contacts. So calibrating a theoretical
model like the one presented here is essential to use it later for other future studies.
In conclusion, this work shows that convective and thermal contact heat loss must be
minimized during the experiments and must be accounted for in theoretical calcula-
tions and modelling. Radiative heat loss can be ignored here since it does not come
into effect at such low temperature ranges. A suitable temperature for mobility en-
hancement experiments is 50°C according to this work since it stabilizes quickly with
short transient time. It does not drive the vacancy defects too much into the bulk and
gives window of opportunity and ample time for gating experiments as well electrical
measurements. Additionally, it was observed that there was negligible variation across
the three sample surface temperatures and in fact each sample surface acquired a ﬁnal
steady state temperature close to 50°C. This means that the samples can be considered
to have identical defect-electron distribution and proﬁle. This creates a base scenario
for further experiments like the gating experiment where two of them are exposed
to a positive and a negative bias while the third one is under no bias. Having the
same initial landscape of defects and charge carriers, makes it sensible to compare the
response of redistribution after gating samples and observe the changed landscape.
Such experiments are expected to accelerate our understanding about interface physics
and tuning electrical parameters of STO heterostructures. They also make it possible
to tune the movement, conﬁnement/deconﬁnement of defects as well as 2DEG seen at
heterostructures like GAO/STO.
55
==PAGE:71==
==PAGE:72==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1]
Resistivity and hall effect measurements.
https://www.physlab.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/04/PresentationResistivity-and-Hall-Effect-
Measurements-min.pdf.
[2]
SrTiO3. https://lippmaa.issp.u-tokyo.ac.jp/gallery/lab/.
[3]
Strontium titanate ( SrTiO3 ) - properties and applications. https://www.azom.
com/article.aspx?ArticleID=2362.
[4]
M. Baldini and H. K. Jacobsen. Optimal trade-offs between energy efﬁciency
improvements and additional renewable energy supply: A review of international
experiences. In 2016 13th International Conference on the European Energy Market
(EEM), pages 1–5, 2016.
[5]
A. Brinkman, M. Huijben, M. Zalk, J. Huijben, U. Zeitler, J.C. Maan, W van
der Wiel, A Rijnders, H.A. Blank, and J Hilgenkamp. Magnetic effects at the
interface between non-magnetic oxides. Nature materials, 6(7):493–496, 6 2007.
doi:10.1038/nmat1931.
[6]
A. D. Caviglia, S. Gariglio, C. Cancellieri, B. Sacépé, A. Fête, N. Reyren, M. Gabay,
A. F. Morpurgo, and J.-M. Triscone. Two-dimensional quantum oscillations
of the conductance at LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett., 105:236802,
Dec 2010. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.236802,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.236802.
[7]
Y. Chen, N. Bovet, F. Trier, D. Christensen, F. Qu, N. Andersen, T. Kasama,
W. Zhang, R. Giraud, J. Dufouleur, T. Jespersen, J. Sun, A. Smith, J. Nygård,
L. Lu, B. Büchner, B. Shen, S. Linderoth, and N. Pryds. A high-mobility two-
dimensional electron gas at the spinel/perovskite interface of γ −Al2O3/SrTiO3.
Nature communications, 4:1371, 01 2013. doi:10.1038/ncomms2394.
57
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8]
D. V. Christensen, F. Trier, M. von Soosten, G. E. D. K. Prawiroatmodjo, T. S.
Jespersen, Y. Z. Chen, and N. Pryds. Electric ﬁeld control of the γ-Al2O3/SrTiO3
interface conductivity at room temperature. Applied Physics Letters, 109(2):021602,
2016. arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4955490, doi:10.1063/1.4955490.
[9]
D. V. Christensen, M. von Soosten, F. Trier, T. S. Jespersen, A. Smith, Y. Chen,
and N. Pryds. Controlling the Carrier Density of SrTiO3-Based Heterostructures
with Annealing. Advanced Electronic Materials, 3(8):1–7, 2017. doi:10.1002/aelm.
201700026.
[10] D.V. Christensen, Y. Frenkel, P. Schütz, F. Trier, S. Wissberg, R. Claessen, B. Kalisky,
A. Smith, Y. Z. Chen, and N. Pryds. Electron mobility in γ-Al2O3/SrTiO3. Physical
Review Applied, 9(5), 2018. doi:10.1103/PhysRevApplied.9.054004.
[11] D. De Ligny and P. Richet. High-temperature heat capacity and thermal expansion
of SrTiO3 and SrZrO3 perovskites. Physical review. B, Condensed matter, 53:3013–
3022, 03 1996. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.53.3013.
[12] R.
A.
De
Souza.
Oxygen
diffusion
in
SrTiO3
and
related
per-
ovskite oxides.
Advanced Functional Materials,
25(40):6326–6342,
2015.
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/adfm.201500827,
doi:10.1002/adfm.201500827.
[13] S. Etsuro, A. Kikuchi, and Y. Kodera. Dielectric Constant of Strontium Titanate
at Low Temperatures. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 17(10):1666–1667,
October 1962. doi:10.1143/JPSJ.17.1666.
[14] D. Ji, S. Cai, T. Paudel, H. Sun, C. Zhang, L. Han, Y. Wei, Y. Zang, M. Gu, Y. Zhang,
W. Gao, H. Huyan, W. Guo, D. Wu, Z. Gu, E. Tsymbal, P. Wang, Y. Nie, and X. Pan.
Freestanding crystalline oxide perovskites down to the monolayer limit. Nature,
570:87–90, 06 2019. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1255-7.
[15] F. Lan, H. Chen, H. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Yu, T. Miao, Y. Zhu, T. Z. Ward, Z. Gai,
W. Wang, L. Yin, E. W. Plummer, and J. Shen. Observing a previously hid-
den structural-phase transition onset through heteroepitaxial cap response.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(10):4141–4146, 2019. URL:
https://www.pnas.org/content/116/10/4141, arXiv:https://www.pnas.org/
content/116/10/4141.full.pdf, doi:10.1073/pnas.1819641116.
58
==PAGE:74==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[16] E. W. Lim and R. Ismail. Conduction mechanism of valence change resistive
switching memory: A survey. Electronics, 4:586–613, 09 2015. doi:10.3390/
electronics4030586.
[17] N. Nakagawa, H. Hwang, and David Muller. Why some interfaces cannot be
sharp. Nature materials, 5, 01 2006. doi:10.1038/nmat1569.
[18] A. Ohtomo and H.Y. Hwang. A high-mobility electron gas at the LaAlO3/SrTiO3
heterointerface. nature 427, 423-426. Nature, 427:423–6, 02 2004. doi:10.1038/
nature02308.
[19] V. Oikonomou, F. Becchis, L. Steg, and D. Russolillo. Energy saving and energy
efﬁciency concepts for policy making. Energy Policy, 37(11):4787 – 4796, 2009.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2009.06.035.
[20] I. Pallecchi, F. Telesio, D. Li, A. Fete, S. Gariglio, J. Triscone, A. Filippetti,
P. Delugas, V. Fiorentini, and D. Marré.
Giant oscillating thermopower at
oxide interfaces. Nature Communications, 6(1), 2015. ID: unige:104191. URL:
https://archive-ouverte.unige.ch/unige:104191.
[21] N. Reyren,
S. Thiel,
A. D. Caviglia,
L. Fitting Kourkoutis,
G. Ham-
merl, C. Richter, C. W. Schneider, T. Kopp, A.-S. Rüetschi, D. Jaccard,
M. Gabay, D. A. Muller, J.-M. Triscone, and J. Mannhart.
Supercon-
ducting interfaces between insulating oxides.
Science, 317(5842):1196–1199,
2007. URL: https://science.sciencemag.org/content/317/5842/1196, arXiv:
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/317/5842/1196.full.pdf, doi:10.
1126/science.1146006.
[22] P. Schütz, D. V. Christensen, V. Borisov, F. Pfaff, P. Scheiderer, L. Dudy, M. Zapf,
J. Gabel, Y. Z. Chen, N. Pryds, V. A. Rogalev, V. N. Strocov, C. Schlueter, T.-L. Lee,
H. O. Jeschke, R. Valentí, M. Sing, and R. Claessen. Microscopic origin of the mobil-
ity enhancement at a spinel/perovskite oxide heterointerface revealed by photoe-
mission spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. B, 96:161409, Oct 2017. URL: https://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.96.161409, doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.96.161409.
[23] A. Spinelli, M. A. Torija, C. Liu, C. Jan, and C. Leighton. Electronic transport in
doped SrTiO3: Conduction mechanisms and potential applications. Phys. Rev. B,
81:155110, Apr 2010. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.81.
155110, doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.81.155110.
59
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[24] A. Tebano, E. Fabbri, D. Pergolesi, G. Balestrino, and E. Traversa.
Room-
temperature giant persistent photoconductivity in SrTiO3/LaAlO3 heterostruc-
tures. ACS Nano, 6(2):1278–1283, 2012. PMID: 22260261. arXiv:https://doi.
org/10.1021/nn203991q, doi:10.1021/nn203991q.
[25] S. Thiel, G. Hammerl, A. Schmehl, C. W. Schneider, and J. Mannhart. Tun-
able quasi-two-dimensional electron gases in oxide heterostructures. Science,
313(5795):1942–1945, 2006. URL: https://science.sciencemag.org/content/
313/5795/1942, arXiv:https://science.sciencemag.org/content/313/5795/
1942.full.pdf, doi:10.1126/science.1131091.
[26] F. Trier, D. V. Christensen, and N. Pryds. Electron mobility in oxide heterostruc-
tures. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 51(29):293002, jun 2018. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1088%2F1361-6463%2Faac9aa, doi:10.1088/1361-6463/aac9aa.
[27] O. N. Tufte and P. W. Chapman. Electron mobility in semiconducting strontium
titanate. Phys. Rev., 155:796–802, Mar 1967. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRev.155.796, doi:10.1103/PhysRev.155.796.
[28] K. van Benthem, C. Elsässer, and R. H. French. Bulk electronic structure of
SrTiO3: Experiment and theory. Journal of Applied Physics, 90(12):6156–6164, 2001.
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1415766, doi:10.1063/1.1415766.
[29] L. J. van der PAUW.
A METHOD OF MEASURING SPECIFIC RE-
SISTIVITY
AND
HALL
EFFECT
OF
DISCS
OF
ARBITRARY
SHAPE,
pages 174–182.
URL: https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/
9789814503464_0017,
arXiv:https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/pdf/10.
1142/9789814503464_0017, doi:10.1142/9789814503464_0017.
[30] L. Yu and A. Zunger. A polarity-induced defect mechanism for conductivity and
magnetism at polar-nonpolar oxide interfaces. Nature communications, 5:5118, 02
2014. doi:10.1038/ncomms6118.
[31] Zurhelle, Christensen, Menzel, and Gunkel. Manuscript submitted to physical
review materials. 2020.
60
==PAGE:76==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 310
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
