==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
CycleGANs for Tissue Segmentation
Hyemee Sohn (s181323)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Manual segmentation of histology images requires evaluation by an expert, meaning it is
time-consuming and often of inconsistent quality. In this thesis, we implemented Gader-
mayr et al.’s unsupervised segmentation approach [1]. The approach requires generating
simulated label images, which are theoretical labels of the segmented tissue. The simu-
lated label images are then used as the Y domain in a CycleGAN training with domain
X being the original histology images. Using this approach, we successfully segmented
fat in liver tissue. When applied to slightly more complex tasks, such as segmenting
fat in pancreas tissue, the approach struggled. Instead we segmented the fat in the
pancreas using a U-net, a supervised approach [2]. Finally, we attempted to apply Ga-
dermeyr et al.’s approach on a very complex problem, attempting to segment four tissue
compartments in the pancreas simultaneously. When following the proposed approach
from Gadermayr’ et al.’s paper, it failed to segment the compartments simultaneously.
Consequently, we expanded upon their approach by abandoning the previous simulated
labels and instead generated more realistic label images with segmentation results from
separate U-nets for each tissue compartment. These realistic label images were then
used as the simulated labels in domain Y in the CycleGAN training. However, despite
having a highly realistic Y domain, the approach failed to segment the pancreas tissue.
Further expansion of the model is likely required to allow the method to be applied on
more complex tissue segmentation tasks.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis supervisor, Vanessa Jurtz from Novo Nordisk. Thank you
for all the advices, help, and inspiration for the thesis. Whenever I struggled, Vanessa
always steered me in the right direction. It has been astonishing work with Vanessa and
I learned a lot from her.
I would also like to thank Professor Ole Winther of the Department of Applied Math-
ematics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark. He suggested
many ways to improve the thesis.
Furthermore, I would also like to thank Novo Nordisk for all the support, including
office space, laptop, and access to the GPUs. Without the GPUs, it would have been
impossible to train the very large networks on the large images throughout this thesis.
Finally, I would thank all my family and friends who always support me to accomplish
my studies.
Sincerely,
Hyemee Sohn
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
4
2.1
Basic Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Activation Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.3
Residual block . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
U-net and Dice Coefficient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Generative Adversarial Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
CycleGAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Related Works
16
3.1
Gadermayr’s Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Revisting CycleGAN for Semi-supervised Segmentation . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Methods
21
4.1
Data Sourced from GTEx
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.1
Liver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.2
Pancreas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2.3
Calculating Fat Percentage from Segmentation Results . . . . . .
31
4.3
Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3.1
Naïvely applying Gadermayr’s Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3.2
Train CycleGAN with Label Images from U-net Results . . . . . .
34
5
Results
37
5.1
Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.1
CycleGAN Successfully Segments Fat in Liver . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.2
Pancreas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.1.3
Analysis of Fat Percentage in Pancreas and Liver
. . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:6==
Contents
iv
5.2
Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.1
Naïve Gadermayr Approach Fails Segmentation Task . . . . . . .
47
5.2.2
Gadermayr’s Approach with Labels Generated with U-net Fails
Segmentation Task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2.3
Analysis of Pancreas Segmentation Results by U-net
. . . . . . .
51
6
Discussion
54
6.1
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
Conclusion
61
A An Appendix
62
A.1 Code Availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.2 Method Extracting Cell Mask . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.3 Plots for Relation between Gender and Fat Percentage
. . . . . . . . . .
63
A.4 Training Curves of U-net for Different Annotations
. . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Bibliography
66
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In the last 50 years, our understanding of biological systems has advanced greatly. This
has allowed for more comprehensive drug discovery processes as we know increasingly
more of the molecular mechanisms behind each disease. Histology is the microscopic
study of tissue structure in organisms, which has become an essential tool to study
diseases and drug treatment effects [3], [4]. It works by staining the tissue with chemicals
in order to highlight the particular areas of interest for analysis. In pharmaceutical
studies, histology imaging is usually used to examine biopsies or surgical specimens
after the specimen has been processed, which can make it difficult to obtain a large
number of human histology images. One advantage of analyzing histology images is
that they are highly intuitive, one can interpret the results directly by just looking at it.
However, histology images have remained difficult to use in large scale studies. This is
due to the assessment of histology images, either qualitative or quantitative, requiring
manual assessment by an expert. Naturally, the expert’s beliefs and biases will affect the
assessment quality. To avoid this inconsistency in quality, an automated quantitative
assessment is needed, which requires segmentation of the histology image to begin with.
Segmentation of an image is a procedure of subdividing an image into multiple segments
to make an analysis of the image more meaningful and easier[5]. However, the size of
histology images are huge, so it is time-consuming and cost-expensive to segment them
manually.
Naturally, there have been several attempts to automate this manual segmentation task
[6], [7].
Many computer vision algorithms achieved somewhat successful results [4],
[8]. However, recently new deep learning methods outperform previous state-of-the-art
computer vision algorithm in other practical applications [9]. Specifically, we had three
goals for this thesis:
1. Explore unsupervised deep learning methods to automate the segmentation of the
histology images.
2. Segment fat in the histology images of pancreas and liver tissue
3. Segment multiple tissue compartments simultaneously in the histology images of
pancreas tissue.
Our goals aim the automated segmentation process of the histology images, which would
provide a pipeline to be used later in future studies using different setups with histol-
ogy images. The data used in this thesis is from the GTEx portal (Genotype-Tissue
Expression project), a public database with multi-omics data sets and histology images.
==PAGE:8==
1 Introduction
2
All GTEx data stem from deceased people, primarily from traumatic deaths in order to
avoid data from people suffering from possible related diseases. Most importantly for
this thesis, the GTEx portal contains histology images of various organs with all the
metadata.
In the following sections, we will first introduce the reader to the theoretical background
of the techniques used in this thesis. We begin by introducing basic knowledge such as
what is a neural network, then progress to more advanced applications such as U-net,
generative adversarial network (GAN), and CycleGAN. After introducing the theoretical
backgrounds of our analysis methods, we will shortly describe related literature. Finally,
we will explain our experiments in details and discuss the results.
Biological Background
In addition to segmenting the fat tissue in the pancreas, we chose to segment three
additional tissue compartments. We chose to do so, because the pancreas is especially
interesting in diabetes research and thus Novo Nordisk A/S. The pancreas is the or-
gan responsible for producing insulin, making it the key organ in diabetes. The tissue
compartments we will be segmenting are the pancreatic islets, pancreatic acinar cells,
adipose cells (fat), and ductal area, see in figure 1.1. The pancreas and these four tissue
compartments will all be introduced in the following paragraph.
The pancreas is an organ that is both parts of the digestive and endocrine system, with
the majority of the pancreatic tissue having a role in the digestive system [10]. The
white adipose tissue (white fat tissue, see figure 1.1) that is present in the pancreas
has no major function in either system. For the convenience of the readers, we refer
to the adipose tissue in the pancreas as fat throughout this thesis.
Meanwhile, the
pancreatic acinar cells are the functional units of the digestive exocrine function in the
pancreas which synthesizes, stores, and secretes digestive enzymes [10]. The ducts in
the pancreas supply and transport pancreatic juice, which contains various enzymes.
Another essential role of the pancreas is to regulate blood glucose levels. specifically, it
is pancreatic islets that are responsible for this process. When glucose level in the blood
becomes low, the alpha cells in the pancreatic islet secrete a hormone called glucagon.
Glucagon signals the body to raise glucose levels in the blood by breaking down stored
glucose in the body. Conversely, beta cells in pancreatic islet secrete insulin to decrease
the blood glucose levels.
Recently, studies have claimed that the fat in pancreas and liver are related to each
other [11]–[15]. Accordingly, we attempted to segment the fat in both organs to compare
and investigate these claims. To briefly explain to the reader who is not familiar with
biology, the liver helps the body metabolize carbohydrate and produces biochemicals
for digestion and growth, and synthesizes proteins [16], [17]. The majority of the liver
consists of hepatocytes cells, which control various biochemical reactions that happen
==PAGE:9==
1 Introduction
3
Acinar
Islets
Fat
Ducts
Vessels
Pancreas Tissue Segmentation
Figure 1.1: Pancreas tissue and results from a manual segmentation. The acinar cells
(normal cells of the pancreas), are marked in green. The islets that produce enzymes
such as insulin are marked in pink. The white adipose tissues (fat) are marked in yellow.
The ducts transporting fluids are shown in orange. Finally, the vessels supplying blood
to the tissue are segmented in grey.
in the liver. We will primarily be focusing on the fat tissue in the liver in this thesis.
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
In this chapter, we describe the important deep learning theories behind this thesis.
Section 2.1 presents the basic concepts of the neural network including forward and back-
ward propagation, activation functions, convolutional neural network, and residual block.
Note that we mainly describe theories related to this thesis. In section 2.2, we describe
well-known deep learning technique called U-net proposed by Ronneberger et al.[2]. U-
net is a convolutional neural network established to perform supervised segmentation of
biomedical images. Section 2.3 introduces a recently developed deep learning framework
called Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) proposed by Goodfellow et al.[18]. Lastly,
in section 2.4, we describe another deep learning framework called CycleGAN proposed
by Zhu et al.[19] used for image-to-image translation using GAN.
2.1
Basic Neural Network
The term neural network originated from the attempts to get mathematical representa-
tions of information processing in a biological organism[20]. Training a neural network
consists of forward propagation and backward propagation. To understand the basic
concept of the neural network, consider a simple fully-connected network architecture
with input, output layer and one hidden layer with M hidden units in figure 2.1.






Figure 2.1: An example of a simple two layer neural network described in [20].
Suppose we have input vector x = (x1, . . . , xD) with D variables, and consider M linear
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Basic Neural Network
5
combinations of the input variables as:
aj =
D
∑
i=1
w(1)
ji xi + w(1)
j0
(2.1)
when j = 1, . . . , M. The w(1) is a adaptable parameters in the first layer of the net-
work connecting input layer to the hidden layer. More specifically, we will refer w(1)
ji as
weights and w(1)
j0 as biases. Each output aj is then applied with differentiable, non-linear
activation function h1(·):
zj = h1 (aj)
(2.2)
This non-linear activation function for first layer h1(·) can be chosen based on the nature
of the input data and the ouput target vector. The second layer then takes the ouput
from the first layer as input, and computes:
ak =
M
∑
j=1
w(2)
kj zj + w(2)
k0
(2.3)
when k = 1, . . . , K.
K is a number of variables in output vector y = (y1, . . . , yK).
Output activation function h2 is applied to get output:
yk(x, w) = h2


M
∑
j=1
w(2)
kj h1
( D
∑
i=1
w(1)
ji xi + w(1)
j0
)
+ w(2)
k0


(2.4)
This process of proceeding input vector to output vector using weights and activation
functions is called forward propagation.
To train the neural network, the choice of the loss function plays a significant role. One
example of the loss function is sum of square loss:
E(w) =
N
∑
n=1
∥y (xn) −tn∥2
2
(2.5)
where {xn}, n = 1, . . . , N is a given set of training samples and {tn} is a target vector
we want to compare with our output vector y in supervised learning setup. This sum
of square error function is appropriate when the target vector is continuous, but not
appropriate for classification task when the target vector is discrete. In this case, we
can use cross-entropy loss function:
E(w) = −
N
∑
n=1
K
∑
k=1
{tnk ln ynk + (1 −tnk) ln (1 −ynk)}
(2.6)
where ynk = yk (xn, w). These are the two most basic loss functions, but much more
complex loss functions are available depending on the training task, model, and input
data.
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Basic Neural Network
6
To train the whole network, we should find a weight vector w that minimizes the chosen
loss function E(w). To do this, we utilize stochastic gradient descent to find a minimum
of E(w). The smallest value of the loss function E(w) can be found at the point in w
space that makes the derivative of the E(w) as 0. In mathematical expression:
∇E(w) = 0
(2.7)
Yet, the analytic solution of Equation 2.7 is not easy to compute. Hence we start with
choosing initial weights, w(0), and develop an iterative procedure to update weight vector
successively with:
w(τ+1) = w(τ) −η∇E
(
w(τ))
(2.8)
Here, η is so-called learning rate and τ indicates step. At each step, the weight vector
moves towards the direction that minimizes the error function.
Now, we can process backward propagation, commonly called as backprop. The backward
propagation is a simple calculation of gradients of the network architecture based on
chain-rule. For example, consider δj defined as:
δj = ∂E
∂aj
(2.9)
and δ is called error. With this δ, the derivative of loss function ∇E(w) can be written
simply as:
∂E
∂wji
= δjzi
(2.10)
The δ of output units of the network in figure 2.1 can be calculates as:
δk = yk −tk
(2.11)
The δ of hidden units can be calculated as:
δj = h′ (aj)
K
∑
k=0
wkjδk
(2.12)
Obtaining this δ is called the backward propagation, since δ is calculated backward
through the network. After the backward propagation, we can update the weight w
with formula combined with Equation 2.8 and 2.10:
wij = wij −η · δj · zi
(2.13)
The description of this simple neural network can be expanded to larger network archi-
tecture, yet the basic concept remains the same.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Basic Neural Network
7
2.1.1
Activation Functions
Activation functions are functions used in neural networks to compute the weighted sum
of input and biases, of which is used to decide if a neuron can be neglected or not[21].
The choice of the activation function depends on the task, input data type, and output
type, etc. There are linear and non-linear activation functions and the place of activation
function can also differ. We will briefly introduce some of the classic activation functions
used in this thesis.
First, Sigmoid function. Sigmoid function is usually used at the output layer for the
classification problem. The output of Sigmoid function can be considered as probability
since the range of Sigmoid is [0, 1]. The formula of Sigmoid function is:
f(x) =
1
1 + exp−x
(2.14)
Second, Hyperbolic Tangent function which commonly called as Tanh activation func-
tion. The range of the hyperbolic tangent function is [−1, 1]. The Tanh function often
results better performances compared to the Sigmoid function [21]. The formula of Tanh
function is:
f(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
(2.15)
Lastly, Rectified Linear Unit function also known as ReLU activation function proposed
in [22]. ReLU is widely used activation function in various deep learning framework. It
is commonly used for the hidden layers. Formula of ReLU activation function is:
f(x) = max(0, x) =
{
x
if x ≥0
0,
if x < 0
(2.16)
ReLU activation function rectifies the output value smaller than 0 by make them as 0.
2.1.2
Convolutional Neural Network
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is another well-known deep learning approach
that is commonly used for various fields and known to have better performances than
classical fully-connected neural network [23]. The major reason why CNN is better than
the fully-connected neural network is that CNN generalizes the feature of the input data
in an improved way. Three factors that make CNN as a powerful tool in deep learning is
presented in [23]. First, CNN used a concept of weight sharing, and this reduces a huge
amount of parameters to be trained. Because of fewer parameters to be trained, CNN
trains more smoothly and the chance of overfitting is also reduced much. Second, CNN
combines the classification part and feature extracting part. Lastly, CNN is easier to
implement a large scale network compared to fully-connected neural networks. General
CNN architecture has four elements - convolutional layer, pooling, activation function,
and fully connected layer. The simple CNN architecture is depicted in figure 2.2.
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Basic Neural Network
8





	



Figure 2.2: Simple architecture of a convolutional neural network with a convolutional
layer, pooling layer, and fully connected layer.
The convolutional layer is a layer that uses convolution operation. The weight sharing
concept of CNN comes from utilizing this convolution operation. The weight vector
w in the fully-connected neural network connects each input unit to each output unit.
Yet, in the convolutional layer, the weight vector w is shared throughout the whole
input units. This weight vector is commonly called as filter or kernel, and it slides over
the input vector vertically and horizontally to produce a feature map as output vector.
This process is called the convolution operation.
This convolution operation allows
CNN to catch the contextual information such as geometric features, not only pixel-
based information. The output from convolution operation is then applied to activation
function (most commonly, ReLU activation function).
The output from the convolutional layer is followed by a pooling operation. The domi-
nant advantage of pooling operation is that it reduces the amount of the parameters to
be trained and makes the computation of the network easier. Pooling operation slides
the window (with a certain size) through the output vector and applies selected pooling
method. The most common pooling method is max pooling, which only left the maxi-
mum in the sliding window. The last part of the CNN architecture is a fully-connected
layer described previously in this section. This fully-connected layer is applied only in
the last part of the architecture for classification. The training of the CNN is similar to
that of fully-connected networks. It performs stochastic gradient descent and updates
the parameters until the network converges.
2.1.3
Residual block
The concept of the residual block is proposed by He et al.[24] in deep residual learning
framework. They focused on the vanishing or exploding gradient problem when the net-
work consists of a deep amount of layers. Also, when a network is deep, the degradation
of the accuracy problem often happened. To overcome these problems, they proposed
the framework commonly called Residual block or ResNet block. The simple architecture
of a single residual block is depicted in figure 2.3.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 U-net and Dice Coefficient
9
Figure 2.3: An example of a residual network block as presented in [24].
Consider x as an input vector to the residual block, and F(x) is a residual function
approximated from H(x) −x, where H(x) is an underlying mapping. The term residual
comes from this approximation using residual difference between x and H(x).
The
output vector y is calculated as:
y = F (x, {wi}) + x
(2.17)
where wi is a weight vector of ith layer in residual block. The + operator in Equation 2.17
is combination of identity mapping and element-wise addition. The major advantage of
the residual block is that it makes the whole network easier to optimize and the network
can be deeper without gradient problems and degrading accuracy problem. The residual
function F(x) can use fully-connected layers and convolutional layers in practice.
2.2
U-net and Dice Coefficient
For semantic segmentation, deep convolutional neural networks (CNN) had have out-
performed results compared to other computer vision methods. U-net is a fully con-
volutional network that is a powerful tool for segmenting especially biomedical images.
U-net is highly efficient in the sense that it learns without a large set of data and results
in more precise segmentations than other fully convolutional networks.
The U-net architecture consists of roughly two big parts. First part is called contracting
path, which is the left half of the u-shaped network in figure 4.10.
Second part is
called expansive path, which is the right half of the u-shaped network in figure 4.10.
In contracting path, downsampling operators, which is repeated application of two 3x3
unpadded convolutions followed by a rectified unit (ReLU) as activation function and
2x2 max pooling with stride 2, are performed repeatedly.
With each downsampling
operator, the number of feature channels is doubled. In the expansive path, upsampling
operators which make the number of features to be half are repeatedly performed. The
core idea of this upsampling operator is to use successive 3x3 convolutional layers with
ReLU activation function after 2x2 convolution (also known as upconvolution) replaced
the usual pooling operators, which leads to the layers can have high-resolution output.
In the upsampling part, the feature channels that learned from previous convolutional
==PAGE:16==
2.2 U-net and Dice Coefficient
10
layers can be used in higher resolution layers.
This can be done by concatenating
the cropped feature map from the contracting path after each upconvolution in the
upsampling operator. This is why the whole network has a symmetric u-shape. The
example of U-net architecture can be seen in figure 4.10. The important feature of U-
net is that it has a comprehensive amount of features when the upsampling operator is
performed. This makes the network to localize and disseminate the context information
to the layer of higher resolution.
Figure 2.4: The U-net architecture from Ronneberger et al.[2]. The number on the top
of each box is the number of channels. The concatenated feature maps from contracting
path is denoted as white box in the expansive path.
Each colored arrow represent
different operations that are explained in the figure legend.
The energy function in the Ronneberger et al.[2] is computed with a combination of
a pixel-wise softmax as a final activation function and cross-entropy as a loss function
over the final feature map. However, in this thesis, we used sigmoid as a final activation
function and dice coefficient loss function instead, for better performances. Dice coeffi-
cient loss is a common loss function used for semantic segmentation tasks based on the
Sørensen-Dice coefficient. The original formula for Dice coefficient is defined as:
DC = 2|X ∩Y |
|X| + |Y |
(2.18)
where X and Y are two given sets and the operator | · | means number of elements of
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Generative Adversarial Network
11
the set. However, when this formula is applied to binary data, it can be defined as:
DC =
2TP
2TP + FP + FN
(2.19)
where TP is a number of true positive, FP is a number of false positive, and FN is
a number of false negative. More specifically, TP is the total number of pixels that
considered as positive (as 1 in boolean data) in both the ground truth segmentation
and the generated segmentation from the network, while FP is the total number of
pixels that considered as positive in the generated segmentation from the network, but
negative (as 0 in boolean data) in the ground truth segmentation. Likewise, FN is
the total number of pixels that considered as negative in the generated segmentation
from the network, but positive in the ground truth segmentation. In order to formulate
minimizing the loss function, 1 −DC is used as a final loss function combined with the
sigmoid activation function. For convenience, we will call the segmentation map which
is one-channel binary image as mask image or mask. In mask image, 1 means that the
pixel is segmented as object-of-interest we wanted to segment, and 0 means it is not
segmented as the object-of-interest.
2.3
Generative Adversarial Network
In order to analyze histology images of liver and pancreas, we will use deep learning
methods. Among all the different deep learning methods, we choose extensions of the
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN). GANs are one of the most promising deep
generative models, which do not have the same limitations as other generative mod-
els’ such as intractable probabilistic computations from maximum likelihood estimation.
The name Generative Adversarial Network(GAN) comes from its adversarial process in
training, there are two models that are simultaneously trained together to conflict with
each other. One model is called a generative model G, which generates samples from a
data distribution and another model is the discriminative model D, which discriminates
true samples from samples generated by the generator network, G. From now on, we
will refer to the generator network as G and the discriminator network as D.
The generator network generates new samples by transforming a chosen prior distribu-
tion pz(z) on input noise variable z, to learn a distribution pg of the generator G over
data x. The generator, G, is defined as a differentiable function with multilayer per-
ceptron with parameters θg, henceforth denoted as a mapping G(z; θg) : z →x′, where
x′ is in data space. The discriminator D is also defined as multilayer perceptron with
parameters θd. It can also be represented as a mapping D(x; θd) : x →p, which p is
a single scalar which represents the probability that x is from the data, not from the
distribution pg.
The two models in the GAN framework have different objectives. The objective of the
discriminator D is to discriminate between the sample from the generator G and true
==PAGE:18==
2.3 Generative Adversarial Network
12
data samples. This can be achieved to maximize the probability of the output of the
generator G. Meanwhile, the objective of the generator G is to generate fake samples
that can deceive the discriminator D, so D cannot discriminate against the fake sample
from G and the true data. This means that G produces high-qualified fake samples that
are analogous to true data. This can be achieved to minimize log(1 −D(G(z))).
The full objective for the GAN is:
min
G max
D
V (D, G) = Ex∼pdata (x)[log D(x)] + Ez∼pz(z)[log(1 −D(G(z)))]
(2.20)
This is also known as the GAN loss.
Optimizing this objective is often stated as a
minimax game of the GAN since the generator G tries to minimize the value function
V (D, G), while the discriminator D tries to maximize it simultaneously. The GAN is
trained by converging to the optimal saddle point of this minimax game. To find this,
the optimal discriminator D for any G should be considered. Goodfellow et al. suggest
that for any fixed G, the optimal discriminator D is:
D∗
G(x) =
pdata(x)
pdata(x) + pg(x)
(2.21)
To prove this, we can rewrite V (G, D) in Eq. 2.20 using definition of expectation:
V (G, D) =
∫
x pdata(x) log(D(x))dx +
∫
z pz(z) log(1 −D(g(z)))dz
=
∫
x pdata(x) log(D(x)) + pg(x) log(1 −D(x))dx
(2.22)
For a function y →a log(y) + b log(1 −y), where a, b ∈R\{0}, the maximum is at
y =
a
a+b in [0, 1]. If we set y = D(x) and a = pdata, b = pg(x), we got maximum at
a
a+b =
Pdata (x)
pdata (x)+pg(x). Since G is fixed, this value will be optimal discriminator D∗
G(x).
Now, we know the optimal discriminator D for any generator G, we can maximize this
optimal discriminator D. So, we can rewrite Eq. 2.20 as C(G):
C(G) = max
D
V (G, D)
= Ex∼pdata [log D∗
G(x)] + Ez∼pz [log (1 −D∗
G(G(z)))]
= Ex∼pdata [log D∗
G(x)] + Ex∼pg [log (1 −D∗
G(x))]
= Ex∼pdata
[
log
pdata (x)
Pdata (x) + pg(x)
]
+ Ex∼pg
[
log
pg(x)
pdata (x) + pg(x)
]
(2.23)
Goodfellow et al. also suggested that the global minimum of C(G) can be achieved if
and only if pg = pdata and then value of C(G) becomes −log(4). If pg = pdata, then we
can conclude D∗
G(x) = 1
2 from 2.21. Put this D∗
G(x) in Eq. 2.23, then we can get:
Ex∼ptan [−log 2] + Ex∼pg[−log 2] = −log 4
(2.24)
==PAGE:19==
2.4 CycleGAN
13
Of course this is ideal situation and hard to appear in practical experiments. So, subtract
Eq. 2.24 from C(G) = V (D∗
G, G):
C(G) = −log(4) + KL
(
pdata ∥pdata + pg
2
)
+ KL
(
pg∥pdata + pg
2
)
(2.25)
Here, KL is the Kullback-Leibler divergence. The Kullback-Leibler divergence measures
how different two probability distributions are from each other. The Kullback-Leibler
divergence is one-directional, thus we need one for the data distribution and one for
the generated distribution. The two Kullback-Leibler divergences in Eq. 2.25 can be
expressed as the Jensen-Shannon divergence. Jensen-shannon divergence is also a math-
ematical measurement that measures similarity between two probability distributions,
and it is based on Kullback-Leibler divergence. The definition of the Jensen-Shannon
divergence is:
JSD(P∥Q) = 1
2KL(P∥M) + 1
2KL(Q∥M)
(2.26)
where P, Q and M is all probability distributions. By this definition, Eq. 2.25 can be
rewrite as:
C(G) = −log(4) + 2 · JSD (pdata∥pg)
(2.27)
The GAN network is said to be optimizing the Jensen-Shannon divergence that attempts
to find the optimial saddle point for the minimax game of the GAN framework.
GANs are widely used nowadays in many real-world applications. The advantage of the
GAN is that it does not require any Markov chain, so it can produce nice and clear
output unlike other generative models using Markov chains. Furthermore, another ad-
vantage is that GANs are trained fully unsupervised. The disadvantage of the generative
adversarial network is that it can be somewhat difficult to train. At the beginning of
training, the discriminator is often more optimized since the generator network is not
very well trained, making it easy to distinguish between real and generated samples.
Also, it is hard to find the saddle point. The most significant cons is that there is no
certain way to evaluate the performance of GAN.
2.4
CycleGAN
CycleGAN is a framework of image-to-image translation in an unsupervised approach
using the GAN framework. Since it is difficult and time-consuming to pair images with
labels and sometimes even impossible, unpaired image-to-image translation, CycleGAN,
is highly desirable for many real-world implementations [19]. Especially, CycleGAN can
be a powerful tool for segmenting images such as medical images or histology images.
CycleGAN translates images between two domains, X and Y . The neural network learns
the mapping between two domains, G : X −→Y which outputs the ˆy = G(x), x ∈X and
F : Y −→X which outputs the ˆx = F(y), y ∈Y . The mappings are trained to translate
one domain to another domain, distributing the output of one domain as identical to
==PAGE:20==
2.4 CycleGAN
14
another domain. These mappings are done using the GAN framework, meaning that each
mapping consists of two adversarial discriminators DX and DY , which try to distinguish
between the image x ↔translated image ˆx = F(y) and y ↔translated image ˆy = G(x).
The critical factor that makes the CycleGAN so efficient is the loss function. There are
two different losses in the full objective function of CycleGAN. First, classical adversarial
loss is used during GAN training. Since we have two GAN frames in CycleGAN, there
are two different adversarial losses. For mapping G : X −→Y and discriminator DY ,
corresponding adversarial loss is:
LGAN (G, DY , X, Y ) = Ey∼pdata(y) [log DY (y)]
+ Ex∼pdata(x) [log (1 −DY (G(x))]
(2.28)
Likewise, for mapping F : Y −→X and discriminator DX:
LGAN (F, DX, Y, X) = Ex∼pdata(x) [log DX(x)]
+ Ey∼pdata(y) [log (1 −DX(G(y))]
(2.29)
While each mapping attempts to generate the translated images that are similar to
images from other domain, each discriminator tries to distinguish the difference between
the original image and the translated image. In this double GAN framework, the goal
for each mapping is to minimize the adversarial loss so the discriminator thinks the
translated images are from its domain. On the contrary, the goal for each discriminator
is to maximize the adversarial loss so that it can distinguish that the translated image
is the result from the mapping, not from its domain. This contrast makes GAN to learn
the mapping while playing minimax game between the mapping and discriminator, i.e.
:
min
G max
DY LGAN (G, DY , X, Y )
(2.30)
min
F
max
DX LGAN (F, DX, Y, X)
(2.31)
Second part of the total loss function is known as the cycle consistency loss. Since two
domains are not aligned with each other, there is infinite possibility of each mapping G
and F to translate each domain, and the results are not guaranteed to be meaningful
translation.
To regularize the mappings to be consistent with each other, the cycle
consistency loss is added to two adversarial losses. This is the reason why the second
loss is called cycle consistency loss. For each image in its domain, the two mappings
should return the original image when it is mapped twice (back to the original domain),
i.e. x →G(x) →F(G(x)) ≈x or y →F(y) →G(F(y)) ≈y. This two can be expressed
mathematically:
Lcyc (G, F) = Ex∼pdata (x) [∥F(G(x)) −x∥1]
+ Ey∼pdata (y) [∥G(F(y)) −y∥1]
(2.32)
==PAGE:21==
2.4 CycleGAN
15
Figure 2.5: A visualization of the cycle consistency loss. In figure 2.5a, we can see
two domains (X and Y ) and networks that the CycleGAN framework contains, two
generators (mapping G and F) and two discriminators (DX and DY ). In 2.5b and 2.5c
illustrates how the cycle consistency loss forces a 1:1 mapping [19].
It used the L1 norm which means that it compares the pixel-wise difference. Now, with
all these losses, the full objective can be defined as:
L (G, F, DX, DY ) = LGAN (G, DY , X, Y )
+ LGAN (F, DX, Y, X)
+ λLcyc(G, F)
(2.33)
The λ in the full objective is a hyperparameter that controls the importance of the cycle
consistency loss. If we have a large λ, it means that the mapping will strongly penalized
to difference between x −→F(G(x)) and y −→G(F(y)). All these formulations can be
simply described in figure 2.5.
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3
Related Works
In this chapter we will summarize the closest related work that has been published
previously.
In section 3.1, we begin with describing the unsupervised deep learning
framework for the segmentation of histology images presented by Gadermayr et al. in
their paper [1]. Throughout this thesis, we will refer to this unsupervised framework
proposed by Gadermayr et al.
as Gadermayr’s approach.
In section 3.2, we briefly
described the paper by Mondal et al.[25] that proposed some supervision to CycleGAN
framework.
3.1
Gadermayr’s Approach
The CycleGAN framework proposed by Zhu et al.[19] has been adopted and used for
various applications. Gadermayr et al.[1] proposed to use the CycleGAN to segment
histology images in a fully unsupervised manner. The motivation of Gadermayr et al. is
that an extensive amount of histology images without annotations are not utilized due
to time-consuming and cost-intensive manual labeling process.
The whole pipeline of Gadermayr et al.’s approach is described in figure 3.1.
Their
novel idea was to generate theoretically possible labeled images, meaning generated
images that contain objects of similar shape and distribution as expected of the object-
of-interest in the histology images.
We will refer to these as simulated label images.
These simulated label images were then considered to be the Y domain in the Cycle-
GAN training, see figure 3.1. In order to generate realistic simulated label images, they
developed an annotation model. This annotation model requires approximation or prior
knowledge of the underlying distribution and shape of the object-of-interest from do-
main X which contains original histology images. Knowing these parameters, the model
could then generate theoretically possible labeled images, the simulated labels. Since
these simulated label images form domain Y , it allows them to utilize CycleGAN to
translate between the domains. In their paper, Gadermayr et al. demonstrate their
framework by segmenting glomeruli within the kidney tissue, see figure 3.2. Here, they
assumed that the number of glomeruli follows a Gaussian distribution and glomeruli has
a roundish shape. In this thesis, we will refer to the whole labeled image as label image
(or label) and the label of each object-of-interest in the whole label image as annotation
i.e fat and cell annotation is part of the total label image.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Gadermayr’s Approach
17
. . .
. . .






Figure 3.1: Diagram of the Gadermayr’s approach. Domain X consists of histology
images, and domain Y is generated by using prior knowledge of the tissue to generate
theoretical possible labels images, simulated label images. A CycleGAN is then trained
to translate between the domains, effectively labelling the images.
glomeruli
nuclei
Figure 3.2:
An illustration of the data used in the Gadermayr’s paper [1].
(left)
The whole slide image with glumeruli marked in squares. (right) Images zoomed on
glomeruli and an example of a manual annotation of the glomeruli. Note you can see
the cell nuclei.
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Revisting CycleGAN for Semi-supervised Segmentation
18
Figure 3.3: The results from the experiment conducted in the Gadermayr’s paper [1].
The upper row shows the generated label images with the generator G, with original
histology images in the lower row. The glomeruli are successfully segmented (marked in
green color).
They made two annotation models, one generates annotation of only glumeruli, and other
generates glumeruli and nuclei. The results shows that experiment with only glumeruli
does not successfully segment the histology images. However, experiment with both
glumeruli and nuclei successfully labeled their histology images. The results from this
experiment can be seen in figure 3.3.
3.2
Revisting CycleGAN for Semi-supervised
Segmentation
Mondal et al.[25] proposed a semi-supervised framework for semantic image segmenta-
tion using CycleGAN. The main idea of their framework is to compel CycleGAN to
perform semantic segmentation with unlabeled data and limited labeled data. In their
framework, CycleGAN and the unlabeled data function as regularization of the super-
vised training with limited labeled data. The lack of labeled data hinders many deep
learning methods in being applied more widely. However, if a limited amount of labeled
data is available, their method can be applied to perform semantic segmentation. Also,
frequently getting partially labeled data is feasible in practice.
In their framework, they used CycleGAN to map from the image domain to the seg-
mentation label domain, and vice versa. They called the two generators GIS and GSI.
Generator GIS is the main generator, which translates image to segmentation label,
conversely generator GSI translates the segmentation label to the reconstructed image,
however, generator GSI is only utilized to improve training. The two discriminators DI
and DS are discriminators for image domain and segmentation label domain, respec-
tively. We will shortly introduce the loss functions used in their framework. Figure 3.4
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Revisting CycleGAN for Semi-supervised Segmentation
19
described the brief pipeline of their framework.
Figure 3.4: Pipeline of proposed framework from paper [25]. It shows different losses
used in their paper, including supervised segmentation loss and losses from the Cycle-
GAN framework.
They proposed two additional loss terms in their framework compared to the original
CycleGAN. These two loss terms add supervision to the whole framework and will be
referred to as the supervised losses. The first loss term is a supervised segmentation
loss. It evaluates the difference between the generated labels from labeled images XL
with ground truth labels YL. Here, we only have a small number of labeled data (XL
and YL), and far more unlabeled images (XU). The loss can be written as:
LS
gen (GIS) = Ex,y∼XL,YL [H (y, GIS(x))]
(3.1)
H is the cross-entropy loss function. The second loss is also considered as a supervised
loss. It evaluates difference between labeled images XL and reconstructed images of YL
with GSI:
LI
gen (GSI) = Ex,y∼XL,YL
[
∥GSI(y) −x∥2
2
]
(3.2)
After the supervised losses, we have the adversarial loss and the cycle-consistency loss,
both of which are unsupervised losses. Each adversarial loss for each mapping is written
as:
LS
disc (GIS, DS) = Ey∼YL
[
(DS(y) −1)2]
+
Ex′∼XU
[
(DS (GIS (x′)))2]
(3.3)
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Revisting CycleGAN for Semi-supervised Segmentation
20
LI
disc (GSI, DI) = Ex′∼XU
[
(DI (x′) −1)2]
+
Ey∼YL
[
(DI (GSI(y)))2]
(3.4)
The two cycle-consistency losses are:
LI
cycle (GIS, GSI) = Ex′∼XU [∥GSI (GIS (x′)) −x′∥1]
(3.5)
LS
cycle (GIS, GSI) = Ey∼YL [H (y, GIS (GSI(y)))]
(3.6)
With these losses, full objective function can be written as:
Ltotal (GIS, GSI, DS, DI) = LS
gen (GIS) + λ1LI
gen (GSI)
+λ2LS
cycle (GIS, GSI) + λ3LI
cycle (GIS, GSI)
−λ4LS
disc (GIS, DS) −λ5LI
disc (GSI, DI)
(3.7)
The additional supervised loss gives the whole framework a semi-supervised manner.
The novel idea of this framework is to use generator GIS as a segmentation model
and introducing the supervised losses.
The remaining parts of the model acts as a
unsupervised regularizer that helps the generator GIS to learn better segmentation with
only a limited number of labeled data. Note that this is not a histology segmentation
model, but since it shows promise, it could perhaps be applied to histology segmentation
tasks in the future.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
This chapter describes the methods used in this thesis. However, before doing so, we
have to define some of the terminologies used in this thesis to prevent confusion. The
term tile will be used to refer to the small images that are extracted from the whole
histology slide. The label of each tissue compartment in the tile is called an annotation.
The whole label image for one tile or one whole slide image is called label image or
label. For example, we can say annotation of an islet in the label image, as depicted in
figure 4.1. Also, we define the term mask as a one-channel binary segmentation image
containing only one annotation. In figure 4.1, an example of the islet mask can be seen.
Also, we defined the term simulated label as a generated fake label from the annotation
model with the prior knowledge of original histology images.
Acinar
Islets
Fat
Ducts
Vessels
Figure 4.1: The four tissue compartments we will be segmenting and vessels are shown
in the label image in their own color. Furthermore, an example of an annotation mask
for the islets is shown.
4.1
Data Sourced from GTEx
The histology images we analyzed were sourced from the GTEx portal. The Genotype-
Tissue Expression (GTEx) project is a comprehensive public database that contains
tissue-specific gene expression and gene regulation data. The purpose of the database
is to provide various resources for researchers to investigate human gene expression and
==PAGE:28==
4.2 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
22
regulation, and their relation with genetic variation. The GTEx Portal provides open
access to gene expression data, quantitative trait loci, and most importantly, histology
images. The histology images of pancreas and liver from GTEx are both stained using
Haemotoxylin and Eosin (H&E). H&E staining is designed to highlight the different
cellular components, particularly the border between the cell membrane, cytoplasm,
and the cell nucleus. A total of 594 images of liver and pancreas from 594 subjects were
analyzed in this thesis.
The available histology slide images are very large and have an average size over 1GB.
Thus for training, the images were divided into many smaller images, tiles, using the
OpenSlide package from Python. A zoom level of 14 in the OpenSlide package was used
to create the tiles, which resulted in around 200 to 600 tiles from each GTEx histology
slide. Each tile consisted of 512 by 512 pixels in each dimension, with the outer 6 pixels
overlapping with adjacent tile. Pure background tiles were removed manually, leaving
around 100 to 300 tiles per histology slide. In total, we ended up with 2248 liver tiles
from 17 histology slides and 3043 pancreas tiles from 19 histology slides for training. An
example of the extracted tiles can be seen in figure 4.2. Notice that the liver tissue (two
righter images) is much more homogeneous in nature, thus we expect it to be simpler to
analyze.
Figure 4.2: Example of extracted tile from histology slide images stained with Haemo-
toxylin and Eosin. The left two images are pancreas tissue images while the two to the
right are images of liver tissue.
4.2
Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
One of our goal was to segment fat in both liver and pancreas histology images in
fully unsupervised manner. To achieve this, we implemented Gadermayr’s approach[1]
explained in section 3.1 to both the liver and the pancreas tissue. Since the complexity of
liver tissue is lower than the complexity of pancreas tissue, we first applied Gedermayr’s
approach to segment fat in the liver. This is described in the following section, 4.2.1.
Then we applied Gadermayr’s approach to the pancreas as well, described in section 4.2.2.
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
23
However, since the results of Gadermayr’s approach applied to the pancreas tissue were
not satisfactory, we applied a U-net to segment fat in the pancreas, this process will be
described in section 4.2.2.2. Finally, we describe how we calculated the fat percentage
from trained model segmentation results in section 4.2.3.
4.2.1
Liver
To get unsupervised segmentation of the liver, we applied Gadermayr’s approach[1].
The main task in the Gadermayr’s approach was to use CycleGAN to translate images
from the histology domain into the label domain and vice versa.
The first step in
this process is to create the simulated label domain.
Gadermayr et al.’s annotation
model is insufficient and not publicly available [1].
However, they do mention that
their annotation model requires a prior assumption of the shape and the occurrence
distribution. From this information, we developed our own annotation model to create
these simulated labels. The required prior knowledge of the tissue was approximated by
analyzing the distribution of the annotations on 100 randomly selected tiles. Using the
approximated prior knowledge, we could automate the simulated label image generation
for histology tiles.
Figure 4.3: The upper row shows the simulated label images generated for the liver
tissue. The lower row shows the original tile images of the liver for comparison with the
label images in the upper row.
There are notable differences between the fat in the liver and the pancreas.
In the
pancreas, the fat clusters are dense and adjoined to each other, making it clearly distin-
guishable from the single fats (those not part of a cluster). From this, we categorized the
fat tissue into two types for our simulated labels, single fats and fat clusters or clusters
of fat. However, when it comes to the fat in the liver, we cannot easily separate single
fats and fat clusters. Compare the fat in the pancreas tissue from figure 4.1 and the liver
fat from figure 4.3. The fat in the liver is much more evenly spread out throughout the
==PAGE:30==
4.2 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
24
tissue, thus we will refer to the liver fat clusters as sparse fat clusters. The characteris-
tic of this sparse fat cluster makes segmentation of fat in the liver much simpler, since
the fat cluster and the single fats resemble each other a lot. From the approximated
prior distribution, we assumed there is maximum of two sparse fat clusters in each liver
tile. The shapes of each fat annotation was assumed to be elliptical. With these prior
hyperparameters of the fat in the liver tissue, we built our own annotation model.
0
1000
1000
-500
-500
(a) Boundary
main axis r
sub axis r
1
2
(b) Ellipse
(c) Two clusters
θ
d*cos(θ)*width
d*sin(θ)*height
(x, y)
(x, y)
^
width
height
^
(d) Adjacent center
Figure 4.4:
Figures to help understanding of how the simulated label images are
created. (a) Method for creating boundary (blue ellipse) in the label image (red box).
(b) Two axes are depicted within one ellipse, main axis r1 (green line) and sub axis r2 (red
line). (c) Example of two sparse clusters created within the label image. Two clusters
are roughly marked with blue dotted line for intuitive understanding. (d) Method for
obtaining adjacent center, (ˆx, ˆy), for given ellipse with center (x, y) in the fat cluster.
To generate simulated label images, our annotation model first generated the tissue
area in the tile, this is also known as the boundary.
The boundary is generated by
generating an ellipse centered at a point (x, y), where each x and y are drawn from a
uniform distribution between [−500, 1000]. This is ±500 to each side of the histology
tile (marked in blue in figure 4.4(a)). This ellipse functions as a mask on the generated
annotations, masking out any area not within the ellipse. The masked area takes value
0 (black color), while the non-masked area (within the ellipse) has value 255 (white
color). This boundary occurs with 50% probability in our simulated label image. Next,
fat annotations are generated within the boundary and the image borders (red box and
==PAGE:31==
4.2 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
25
blue ellipse figure 4.4(a)). If there is no boundary, annotations are generated anywhere
in the image (red box in figure 4.4(a)).
To generate fat annotations, we assumed that each fat takes elliptical shape.
Each
ellipse has a length for each of the two axes, main axis and sub axis, see figure 4.4(b).
We assumed the length of main axis, r1, follows a Gaussian distribution N(µr, σr). The
length of sub axis r2 is calculated as r2 = r1 · rδ, where rδ follows another Gaussian
distribution N(µδ, σδ). Finally, the rotation parameter α of the ellipse is drawn from a
uniform distribution between [0, 2π].
In order to generate the sparse fat clusters of the liver, we had to determine the number
of ellipses in each fat cluster. We assumed the number of ellipses in the cluster ga follows
a Gaussian distribution ga ∼N(µga, σga). In these sparse clusters, there is a small gap
between each ellipse. The first ellipse is randomly placed within the boundary, and the
center of the next ellipse is determined with a distance parameter d, see figure 4.4(d).
The initial ellipse is centered at (x, y) with height 1
2r1 and width 1
2r2. The center of the
next ellipse (ˆx, ˆy) is then calculated using the formula:
(ˆx, ˆy) = (x + d · width · cos θ, y + d · height · sin θ)
where θ is drawn from a uniform distribution between [0, 2π]. This process is repeated
until we end up with the desired number of fat ellipses. Note that the ellipses cannot
overlap to each other.
We assumed that there are at most two sparse clusters of fat per tile. The two clusters
appeared independently with a probability of 50% and 30% respectively. The first cluster
has fewer but larger ellipses that are more spread apart. The number of ellipses in the
first cluster follow a Gaussian distribution ga ∼N(µga = 80, σga = 20), in which each
ellipse follows r1 ∼N(µr = 7, σr = 2) and sub axis r2 = r1 · rδ. The rδ also follows
Gaussian distribution, rδ ∼N(µδ = 1.1, σδ = 0.1). A distance parameter of d = 7
was used to space out the individual small ellipses in the cluster. Finally, the rotation
parameter, α, of the sparse cluster was sampled from a uniform distribution over [0, 2π].
The second cluster contains more, but smaller, ellipses that are placed closer together
than in the first cluster. We assumed the number of ellipses in the second cluster follows
a Gaussian distribution ga ∼N(µga = 100, σga = 10). Each ellipses main axis, r1, follows
r1 ∼N(µr = 5, σr = 1) and their sub axis, r2, is calculated r2 = r1·rδ. The rδ again also
follows Guassian distribution, rδ ∼N(µδ = 1.1, σδ = 0.1).The rotation parameter, α, of
the ellipse is generated identically to the first cluster. The distance between each ellipses
is larger at d = 10. This is our annotation model that generate the fat annotation in
the simulated label image for liver. The color of the fat label is set to red. You can see
the final simulated label images with this annotation model in figure 4.3.
==PAGE:32==
4.2 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
26
4.2.1.1
CycleGAN: Training Details
In accordance with Gadermayr’s paper, we trained a CycleGAN to segment the histology
tiles. This was done by designating the original histology tiles as domain X, and having
the simulated label images as domain Y . This should allow the CycleGAN to translate
between the two domains, effectively segmenting the histology tiles. The network archi-
tectures for the generator and the discriminator are identical between the mapping F
and G.
The generator network architecture is shown in figure 4.5. As shown, the generator
network begins with three 2-strided convolutional layers with kernel size 4, followed by
six residual blocks with stride 1 and kernel size 4. Finally, three 2-strided transposed
convolutional layers with kernel size 4 were applied. Batch normalization and rectified
linear units (ReLU) activation function were applied between every layer, except for the
last layer, which used Tanh activation function instead and no batch normalization.
The discriminator led off with four 2-strided convolutional layers with kernel size 4,
followed by a 1-strided convolutional layer with a kernel size of 4, see figure 4.6. Next,
the output tensor was flattened into a 1-dimensional vector and sent into a linear layer
for the output. ReLU activation functions were applied between each layer except for the
last linear layer, which instead used a Sigmoid activation function. Batch normalization
was applied to each convolutional layer except for the first and last ones.
In domain X, we had 2248 liver histology tiles, and to have a similar number for both
512 x 512 x 3
. . .
512 x 512 x 3
256 x 256 x 64
128 x 128 x 128
64 x 64 x 256
64 x 64 x 256
128 x 128 x 128
256 x 256 x 64
6 ResNet Blocks
Figure 4.5: An overview of the architecture of the generator network of the CycleGAN.
Note that there are four downsampling convolutional layers, followed by six residual
blocks and followed by four upsampling layers to generate the samples.
==PAGE:33==
4.2 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
27
256 x 256 x 64
512 x 512 x 3
128 x 128 x 128
64 x 64 x 256
32 x 32 x 512
31 x 31 x 1
961
1
Figure 4.6: An overview of the architecture of the discriminator network of the Cycle-
GAN. Note that there are four downsampling convolutional layers, followed by a single
convolutional layer. Finally, a linear layer is applied to output the classification.
domains, we generated 2394 simulated label images for domain Y . Using this data, the
CycleGAN was trained for 100 epochs with a batch size of 6. To help the training along,
we augmented the data by random horizontally or vertically flipping the images. We
used an Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0002 with a decay of 0.1 every 10
epochs. The CycleGAN hyperparameter, λ, was set differently for two domains. For
domain X, λ = 10 was set to penalize difference between x ←→F(G(x)), and for domain
Y , λ = 30 was set to penalize difference between y ←→G(F(y)).
4.2.2
Pancreas
4.2.2.1
Gadermayr’s Approach
We also applied Gadermayr’s approach to segment the fat in the pancreas. The fat
annotation generation was done similarly to the fat annotation of the liver tissue. Again,
we began by counting 100 randomly selected pancreas tiles to approximate the prior
knowledge and generated simulated labeled images. However, in the pancreas, the fat
clusters are denser compared to those of the liver. Furthermore, each fat cell in the fat
clusters is attached to each other, causing them to often have a squeezed shape. We
divided fat annotation into fat cluster annotation and single fat annotation (fats that
are not adjacent to other fats). Also, we had two experiments with different annotation
models for the pancreas, see figure 4.7. All fat annotations are shown with a red color.
For every experiment, we began by creating the boundary of the tissue. The boundary
==PAGE:34==
4.2 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
28
(a) Experiment 1
(b) Experiment 2
Figure 4.7: Example of the simulated label images with different annotation models.
(a) Experiment 1. Example of simulated label images generated with only ellipses as
the fat annotation. The fat cluster was generated with a number of ellipses adjacent
to each other. (b) Experiment 2. Example of simulated label images generated with a
large rounded polygon as the fat cluster, and ellipses as the single fats.
was generated as we did previously in the liver tissue, meaning it is present in 50% of
the histology tiles. Then we generated single fat annotations. Note that we used the
same annotations for the single fats in both experiments. The approximation from the
counting of 100 tiles showed that the number of the single fats in one tile was approx-
imately a Chi-square distribution with 2 degrees of freedom, limited to a maximum of
6. These single fats were generated with elliptical shapes. The process of generating
ellipses was identical to the process in the liver in section 4.2.1. The single fats were
placed uniformly across the image with a size sampled from a Gaussian distribution.
The length of the ellipse’s main axis, r1, follows r1 ∼N(µr = 10, σr = 5). The length of
the sub axis, r2, was calculated as r2 = r1·rδ, where rδ also follows Gaussian distribution,
rδ ∼N(µδ = 1.1, σδ = 0.1). Finally, the rotation parameter α of the ellipse was drawn
from a uniform distribution between [0, 2π].
After generating the single fats, we generated the fat clusters. The initial experiment
(experiment 1) was done by generating fat clusters similar to those in the liver, meaning
we generated fat clusters by smaller ellipses inside them with a distance parameter
between the small ellipses. However, since fat clusters in pancreas are more dense, we
used a shorter distance parameter of d = 5 (in the liver we used d = 7 or d = 10).
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
29
Additionally, we allowed the ellipses to overlap each other by 100 pixels to represent
the squeezed cell shapes. The number of ellipses in each cluster follows ga ∼N(µga =
40, σga = 30). The size of each ellipse in the clusters was sampled identically to the
method we used to sample the size of the single fats in the previous section.
However, due to unsatisfactory results, we instead attempted to generate the fat clusters
as large rounded polygons to represent them better (experiment 2). Each polygon was
randomly generated and placed in the simulated label image. To generate this rounded
polygon, we first randomly placed the center of the polygon, (x, y), within the boundary
with an average radius, ravg, of 300 pixels, see figure 4.8. The coordinate of each vertex
of the polygon is calculated as:
(x + rv cos θ, y + rv sin θ)
(4.1)
where rv was chosen from a Gaussian distribution rv ∼N(ravg, σrv), and θ was chosen
from uniform distribution between [0, 2π]. Note that we clipped the value of rv so it
can be chosen within range of [0, 2ravg]. σrv is a parameter that controls how spiky
is the generated polygon. We fixed this spikiness parameter to σrv = 0.6. Once we
got coordinates of each vertex, we produced polygon and rounded the vertexes. The
polygon was generated and placed uniformly across the images without overlapping
other annotations, see figure 4.7(b). In both experiment, the fat clusters in the pancreas
were approximated to be appear with 15% probability.



Figure 4.8: Figure illustrating how to randomly generating large rounded polygons.
The vertexes around the center of the polygon are shown as red dots (left). These are
then rounded to create a rounded polygon (right).
These generated annotations were used as our simulated label images, which we trained
a CycleGAN to translate from and to. Domain X consisted of 3043 pancreas histology
tiles, and domain Y consisted of 3731 simulated labels. The same CycleGAN architecture
described previously in section 4.2.1.1 and shown in figure 4.5 and figure 4.6, was used.
All experiments were run for 100 epochs using a batch size of 8 without any use of data
augmentation. The network used an Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.0002
without a learning rate scheduler. The CycleGAN hyperparameter, λ, was set to 10 for
both domains.
==PAGE:36==
4.2 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
30
4.2.2.2
U-net Segmentation of Pancreas Tissue
Unfortunately, Gadermayr’s CycleGAN approach was not successful when applied to
the more complex pancreas tissue. Instead, we used a supervised approach, U-net. This
required us to manually annotate the histology images since U-net requires aligned data
for supervised training. We annotated 186 pancreas histology tiles, two examples are
shown in figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Examples of pancreas tile (left in each figure) and aligned manual segmen-
tation (right in each figure).
The U-net architecture consisted of blocks of convolutional layers, see figure 4.10. Each
block consists of two convolutional layers with kernel size 3, each followed by batch
normalization and ReLU activation function. At the end of the U-net block, either a 2×2
max-pooling operation or a 2 × 2 up-sampling is applied. The U-net blocks using max-
pooling at the end is called downsampling U-net block, and using up-sampling at the end
is called upsampling U-net block. The U-net architecture begins with four downsampling
U-net blocks and then followed by 4 upsampling U-net blocks. For each downsampling
block, the tensor before applying max-pooling is concatenated to the input tensor of
the corresponding upsampling block. In the end, two convolutional layers with kernel
size 3 followed by batch normalization and ReLU activation function are applied again.
Then a single channeled convolutional layer with kernel size 1 and a Sigmoid activation
function is applied to output the predicted mask of the fat segmentation, see figure 4.10.
The U-net was trained for 1000 epochs with an Adam optimizer and a learning rate of
0.01, decaying by 0.1 every 20 epochs. Note that since we were only training on the
186 manually annotated images, we had very few data points. Thus, to help facilitate
training, we would randomly flip the images either horizontally or vertically and apply
random brightness control. Note that random brightness control was only applied to
the histology tile, not the mask. This data augmentation would hopefully, create larger
diversity in the training data.
The model was trained with a evenly weighted loss
between dice coefficient loss and binary cross-entropy loss, weighted evenly.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
31
Conv 3x3, BN, ReLU
Max pool 2x2
Up sample 2x2
Copy and concatenate
Conv 1x1, Sigmoid
512
512
512
256
256
256
128
128
128
128
128
256
256
64
64
64
512
512
32
512
512
32
32
128
256
512
1024
64
64
512
256
64
512
128
128
256
128
128
256
256
128
256
512
128
256
512
512
64
512
1
3
64
64
64
64
64
Input image
Predicted 
mask
Figure 4.10: Diagram of the specific U-net architecture used in order to segment the
pancreas tissue. The U-net consists of 4 downsampling and upsampling steps.
4.2.3
Calculating Fat Percentage from Segmentation
Results
The fat percentage in the respective organs was calculated for each subject based on the
segmentation results. However, since our models were trained on the histology tiles, we
had to sum up the area of the fat and the area of cell from each tile to obtain a full fat
percentage for one whole histology slide. This was done to exclude the background area.
The cell area in each tile was calculated as the sum of the cell mask, which is a binary
image. The cell mask has value as 1 in areas segmented as cell, and 0 in areas segmented
as non-cell, meaning the sum of the cell mask indicates the number of pixels that are
segmented as cell. The cell mask in each tile can be obtained with a short computer
vision algorithm we developed which is described in appendix A.2. The cell mask can
be seen in the second image from the left in figure 4.11. The drawback of the algorithm
is that it consider the fat at the edge of the tile as background since it used the intensity
of the image to get mask image. In the example shown in figure 4.11, we can observe
this issue.
After we obtained segmentation results from the trained network, either CycleGAN or
U-net, we made a fat mask with the segmentation results. This fat mask can be seen
in the third image in figure 4.11. To reduce the incorrect segmentation between fat and
background, we removed the non-cell area from the fat mask. An example is shown in
figure 4.11, the non-cell area (black) from the cell mask is removed from the fat mask
(white area in fat mask of figure 4.11). The pixels segmented as fat in a final fat mask
can be seen as a red area in the last image from figure 4.11. Now the area of fat can be
==PAGE:38==
4.3 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
32
calculated as a sum of the final fat mask.




Figure 4.11: Figure illustrating how the final fat percentage is calculated. The cell
mask is subtracted from the fat mask to create the final fat label.
Once we have both the area of fat and the cell area, we calculated the total fat percentage
of the subject with results from each tiles as:
Fat percentage =
∑#tiles Fat area
∑#tiles Cell area
With this method, we calculated the whole area of fat and cell for one subject without
removing empty tiles manually. We then scaled the fat percentage we got from each
subjects to have well-distributed results as:
Scaled fat percentage =
Fat percentage
max(Fat percentage) −min(Fat percentage) ∗100
This scaled fat percentage will henceforth be referred to simply as fat percentage for the
rest of the thesis.
4.3
Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in
Pancreas
4.3.1
Naïvely applying Gadermayr’s Approach
Our next goal was to segment all 4 tissue compartments in the pancreas (acinar, islet,
fat, and ductal area) simultaneously in an unsupervised manner. An example made
by manual annotation of all 4 pancreas tissue compartments can be seen in figure 1.1.
Segmenting 4 tissue compartments simultenously is a much more complex task than what
Gadermayr et al.[1] did in their paper. We began by approximating the shape and the
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
33
distribution of each annotation by counting them in 100 tiles. Different annotation priors
were applied for each tissue compartment depending on their shape and distribution.
Before generating each annotations, we had to generate the boundary of the tissue.
The method of generating boundary is described in section 4.2.1.
According to the
counting, the boundary was generated with 50% probability. All the other annotations
were generated within this boundary.
Fat annotations were generated as ellipses as
described in experiment 1 in section 4.2.2.1.
For islets, we assumed that the number of islets is approximated by a Chi-square distri-
bution with 2 degrees of freedom. We created islets of elliptical shape. Thus, individual
islets were generated using the same method as fat annotation, which generates ellipses.
However, islets do not form a cluster, so they were placed uniformly across the image.
The size of an islet was also approximated by a Gaussian distribution. The length of
the main axis of the ellipse, r1, follows r1 ∼N(µr = 40, σr = 15).
The length of
sub axis, r2, was calculated as r2 = r1 · rδ. The rδ also follows Gaussian distribution,
rδ ∼N(µδ = 1.1, σδ = 0.2). Finally, the rotation parameter, α, of the ellipse was drawn
from a uniform distribution between [0, 2π]. The islet annotations are depicted in blue.
Note that the size of the ellipse for islet annotations are larger than that of fat, however,
they are less elongated.
The last remaining annotation is the duct annotation, which is the most complex to
generate. Ducts are not always circular in shape and vary greatly in size. Some ducts
are smaller than a single fat, and some ducts are so large that they fill up the entire tile.
Thus, we classified the ducts into three groups - small, medium, and large ducts. Since
small ducts all have an elliptical shape, we generated small ducts similar to islets and fats.
The number of small ducts follows the Chi-square distribution with 2 degrees of freedom
up to a maximum of 6 per tile. The size of the small ducts is approximated by a Gaussian
distribution. The length of the main axis of ellipse, r1, follows r1 ∼N(µr = 10, σr = 5).
The length of sub axis, r2, was calculated as r2 = r1 · rδ. The rδ also follows Gaussian
distribution, rδ ∼N(µδ = 1.1, σδ = 0.5). This means that the small ducts can be more
elongated than islets and fats.
Medium ducts and large ducts are not always circular in shape. So we generated polygons
with 6 rounded vertexes, similar to how we generated cluster of fat in section 4.2.2, see
figure 4.8. The number of the medium ducts was 0 for 70% of the histology tiles, 1
for 20% of the histology tiles, and 2 for the remaining 10% of the histology tiles. The
parameter ravg that controls the average size of the polygon, which was set to 100 (pixel)
for the medium duct. Large ducts were only present in 20% of the histology tiles. The
parameter ravg that controls the size of the polygon was set to 300 (pixel) for large duct.
All ducts were also generated and placed uniformly across the images, and the ducts
are marked in green in our label images. Full simulated label images generated with the
above annotation model can be seen in figure 4.12.
After generating the simulated label images, we trained a CycleGAN to translate between
==PAGE:40==
4.3 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
34
Figure 4.12: Simulated label images generated with all 4 tissue compartments in the
pancreas. First row shows the full simulated label images generated and the second row
shows original histology images to compare each annotation and actual tissue compart-
ments. In label images, red color indicates fat, blue color indicates islet, green color
indicates duct, and white color indicates acinar. The background is colored in black.
the domain X with 3043 tile images and domain Y with 3731 simulated label images.
We used the same network architecture as previously specified in section 4.2.1.1. The
CycleGAN is trained for 100 epochs with a batch size of 8.
An Adam optimizer is
used with a learning rate of 0.0002 without a learning rate scheduler. The CycleGAN
hyperparameter, λ, is set to 10 for both domains.
4.3.2
Train CycleGAN with Label Images from U-net
Results
Since the results from training CycleGAN using simulated label images with our own
annotation model were not translating histology images to label images in a satisfactory
manner, we decided to change this approach slightly. Since the network often confused
the different annotations with each other, we added more details would help the network
distinguish each annotation properly.
To achieve this, we decided to generate more
realistic label images using a U-net. We also added annotations for nuclei and vessel to
the label image in addition to the annotations for acinar, islet, fat, and duct.
We trained multiple U-nets to annotate each individual tissue compartment in order
to get more precise and more realistic annotations. The results from each U-net were
then combined into one label image and used for our CycleGAN training, see figure 4.13.
We hoped that more realistic labels would resemble the real histology images and thus
allow the CycleGAN to segment the tissue correctly. We trained separate U-nets on
244 manually labeled images to get duct, islet, and vessel annotations. The previous
succesful U-net fat annotations was used for fat. All U-net architectures and training
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
35








	

Figure 4.13: How to generate label images for CycleGAN training. For each tissue
compartment, a separate U-net was trained to segment the specific tissue compartment.
These segmentation results were then overlaid eachother into one label image.
details followed the previous description, section 4.2.2.2.
Beyond having more realistic shapes for the different tissue compartments, we chose to
add nuclei annotation to the label images. This was done because nuclei annotations
allow the network to distinguish between fat and ducts since fat does not have any nuclei
in it. Furthermore, the ducts have a unique pattern of nuclei (circular shaped series of
nuclei in the middle). It also allows the network to distinguish betwen islets and acinar
cells, since islets have slightly fewer nuclei compared to acinar cells. A U-net was used
to add these nuclei annotations. Since U-net is a supervised approach, we had to first
annotate images with nuclei annotations. However, unlike other tissue compartments, it
is difficult to annotate each cell nucleus manually. So instead, we used a blob detection
algorithm to roughly annotate nuclei, see figure 4.14. We used the difference of Gaussian
(DOG) to detect the blobs [26]. We used 186 pancreas tiles with aligned rough nuclei
annotation to train our U-net. The architecture and the training details are again the
same as we used for pancreas fat training, section 4.2.2.2.
Once we had all the U-net models for the fat, duct, islet, vessel, and nuclei, we made
==PAGE:42==
4.3 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
36



	


	
Figure 4.14: Figure displaying results of blob detection algorithm and the resulting
segmentation label from U-net segmentation.
new simulated label images with the segmentation results from those U-net models. Full
label image can be seen in figure 4.15.
Figure 4.15: Example of original histology image and their corresponding U-net seg-
mentation results. Each of the color in the label image indicates : background-black,
acinar-white, fat-red, vessel-green, duct-yellow, islet-blue, and nuclei-cyan .
With these new and more realistic label images from the U-nets as domain Y , we once
again trained a CycleGAN. The network architecture and training details followed the
liver fat segmentation CycleGAN, described in section 4.2.1.1. The only difference is the
number of residual blocks. Here, we used 9 residual blocks instead of 6. We expected
this more complex task to require more model flexibility, thus more residual blocks. The
number of tiles in domain X and number of label images in domain Y were both 3041.
The CycleGAN was trained for 100 epochs with a batch size of 6. The learning rate was
set to 0.00002 with no learning rate scheduler. The CycleGAN hyper parameter λ was
set to 10 for both domains.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Results
5.1
Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
5.1.1
CycleGAN Successfully Segments Fat in Liver
To segment the fat in the liver tissue, we applied Gadermayr’s approach, which involves
generating simulated label images and training a CycleGAN. The learning curves during
the training is shown in figure 5.1. The first plot in figure 5.1 depicted two discriminator
losses for each domain, and the second plot in figure 5.1 contains sum of two cycle
consistency losses and two adversarial losses described in the CycleGAN theory section,
2.4. If discriminator loss is 0, it means that the discriminator can distinguish if the
image is from original data, or generated image from the generator. The results from
the successfully trained CycleGAN can be seen in figure 5.2. The model we chose to
segment the fat is the one from epoch 66. This was based on qualitative screening since
the CycleGAN loss curve does not carry significant meaning. The original images and
label images shown in figure 5.2 are all from the test set. As we can see, the mapping
from image −→label learned to segment the fat (see figure 5.2(a)). However, the opposite
mapping from label −→image did not learn enough to reconstruct even close to all the
details of the original image (see figure 5.2(b)).
0
20
40
60
80
100
epoch
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Discriminator loss
for domain X
Discriminator loss
for domain Y
0
20
40
60
80
100
epoch
0
2
4
6
8
10
Sum of generator
and cycleconsistency losses
Figure 5.1: The CycleGAN training curves for liver segmentation.
==PAGE:44==
5.1 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
38
(a) Results of mapping: original image −→label
(b) Results of mapping: label −→original image
Figure 5.2: Results from CycleGAN fat segmentation of liver tissue. (a) First row
is original tile image, and second row is the segmentation results of each tile image.
The fat is annotated as red, the cell area is annotated as white, and the background as
black. The segmentation is rather succesful. (b) First row is automatically generated
label image, and second row is the results of reconstruction of original image from label
image. The reconstruction results are quite poor.
Using the chosen best performing model, we applied the segmentation across the whole
histology slide for all 594 subjects. The segmentation of high-fat, medium-fat, and low-
fat subjects were chosen and shown in figure 5.3(a), 5.3(b), and 5.3(c). Cell area is
marked in blue and the fat is shown in red (overlaid on the actual whole slide image).
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
39
(a) The whole liver histology slide of high fat subject
(b) The whole liver histology slide of medium fat subject
(c) The whole liver histology slide of low fat subject
Figure 5.3: The whole liver histology slide of each high, medium, and low fat subject
overlaid with the CycleGAN segmentation results. The blue area is non-fat and the fat
area is shown in red.
==PAGE:46==
5.1 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
40
5.1.2
Pancreas
5.1.2.1
Gadermayr’s Appoach Fails to Segment Fat in Pancreas
Next, we applied Gadermayr’s approach to a more complex data set, the pancreatic
tissue.
In this section, we will only focus on the mapping: original image −→label,
the opposite mapping is omitted from the following results. The results from the two
pancreas segmentation experiments described in section 4.2.2.1 is presented below.
Experiment 1
The complexity of the pancreas segmentation task primarily stems from having to seg-
ment both clusters of fat and single fats. These were similar in the liver, but in the
pancreas, they are not very similar. In our initial experiment, we used ellipses to mark
both in the simulated labels. Using these label images as the Y domain, the model
consistently misinterpreted the pancreatic tissue. In figure 5.4, the fat segmentation is
shown in red, background in black, and other cell tissue in white. Figure 5.4(a) highlight
an example of a model that only recognizes single fats, and not the clusters of fat. The
model is also frequently confusing larger clusters of white fat tissue with the background
since they share a white color. In figure 5.4(b), we observe confusion between ducts/ves-
sels and fat clusters. However, the model did show some promises in figure 5.4(c), where
it does recognize some fat clusters.
Experiment 2
Looking at figure 5.4(b), we can see that annotations for the fat clusters often do not
necessarily take circular shapes. Thus, in the second experiment, we changed the shape
of the simulated fat annotations for fat clusters into 6 edged rounded polygons. Note
that annotations for single fats remained elliptical. We hoped these more complex shapes
would allow the network to distinguish ducts and vessels from fat clusters. The results
from the experiment 2 can be seen in figures 5.5(a) and 5.5(b).
It appears like the
network recognizes the fat cluster as we expected. However, during the training, the
single fats are no longer recognized very consistently (figure 5.5(a)) and the fat cluster
is still often confused with the duct or vessel (figure 5.5(b)).
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
41
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.4: Results from Experiment 1, showing the results from the mapping: original
image −→label. (a) The network only learned single fat, not the fat cluster. It learned
fat cluster as background. (b) The network confused duct or vessel as fat cluster. (c)
We can see there is possibility for the network to learn fat cluster.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: Results from Experiment 2, showing the results from the mapping: original
image −→label. (a) It shows the network only learns cluster of fat, but does not learn
single fat. (b) The network confused ductal area or vessel as fat cluster.
==PAGE:48==
5.1 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
42
5.1.2.2
U-net Successfully Segments Fat in Pancreas
Since the results with Gadermayr’s approach were not satisfactory, we trained a U-
net to segment the fat in the pancreas. U-net is a powerful deep learning framework
for segmenting biomedical images even when only a small amount of data is available.
Unlike CycleGAN, U-net has a meaningful loss measure, our losses are shown in figure
5.6. The training loss is consistently decreasing, indicating the model is learning properly.
The test loss is often smaller than the training loss during initial training (roughly before
the epoch 200). This is because U-net segments the entire histology tile as non-fat (0 in
a binary mask) in the early epochs since the majority of the histology tiles are non-fat,
making the loss decrease the fastest. This makes the test loss smaller than the training
loss in the early epochs, simply due to the test set randomly having more non-fat area.
Note that the test error swings widely, due to the very low number of samples in our
test set. Labeling the histology tiles was very time consuming, thus only 186 images
were labeled, and only 18 of these were used in the test set. The best performing U-net
model was chosen based on the combination of test loss and training loss, which is from
last epoch 1000. The results from this model can be seen in figure 5.7. Note that all the
images in the figure are from the test set. We can observe that the U-net successfully
segments both the fat clusters and the single fats of the pancreas.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
epoch
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Learning Curve for U-net Training (Fat)
test loss
training loss
Figure 5.6: Learning curve of U-net.
The results of whole slide segmentation of one subject can be seen in figure 5.8, 5.9,
and 5.10. Similar to previously, section 5.1.1, we chose a high-fat, a medium-fat, and
a low-fat subject to demonstrate the segmentation. A color overlay has been added on
top to highlight the results. The fat is indicated in red and the cell area is indicate in
blue. U-net successfully segments all fat in the pancreas tissue.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
43
Original Tile
Original Mask
Predicted Mask
Original Tile
Original Mask
Predicted Mask
Figure 5.7: Training results from U-net to segment fat in pancreas tissue. The model
successfully segments the fat tissue. First row is the original tile images we wanted to
segment, second row is the ground truth segmentation, and third row is the predicted
segmentation with trained U-net.
Figure 5.8: The whole pancreas histology slide of high fat subject overlaid with the
CycleGAN segmentation results. The blue area is non-fat and the fat area is shown in
red.
==PAGE:50==
5.1 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
44
Figure 5.9: The whole pancreas histology slide of medium fat subject overlaid with the
CycleGAN segmentation results. The blue area is non-fat and the fat area is shown in
red.
Figure 5.10: The whole pancreas histology slide of low fat subject overlaid with the
CycleGAN segmentation results. The blue area is non-fat and the fat area is shown in
red.
5.1.3
Analysis of Fat Percentage in Pancreas and Liver
From training a CycleGAN on the liver tissue and a U-net on the pancreas tissue, we now
have two models that are able to segment the fat in the liver and the pancreas respectively.
We applied these two models to all 594 subjects in GTEx with histology images available
for both liver and pancreas. From these segmented images, we calculated the percentage
of fat within each subject as described in methods section 4.2.3. The scatter plot of the
predicted results can be seen in figure 5.11(a), showing that there is a low correlation
between fat percentage in the liver and the pancreas (Pearson correlation coefficient =
0.09). Additionally, we divided the subjects into two groups, low-fat group and high-fat
group. Subjects in the top 10% fat percentage in their respective organs are considered
to be high-fat group and the bottom 90% are considered to be low-fat group, see figure
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Fat Segmentation in Pancreas and Liver
45
5.11(b). The high-fat group is colored under the graph in figure 5.11(b), and the dotted
line denotes the 90% cutoff. The cutoff was decided since there is a second high bump
around the 90% in the distribution of both liver and pancreas.
20
40
60
80
Liver
0
20
40
60
80
Pancreas
Fat Percentage in Liver and Pancreas
(a)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fat percentage
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Distribution of Fat Percentage
Liver
Pancreas
(b)
Figure 5.11:
(a) Scatter plot of the predicted fat percentage in the liver and the
pancreas. The x-axis indicates the fat percentage of the liver and the y-axis indicates
the fat percentage of the pancreas. (b) Distribution plot of the predicted fat percentage
in the liver and the pancreas, showing each high-fat group and low-fat group.
After dividing the high-fat group and the low-fat group, we investigated the relation
between fat percentage and gender. We investigated the gender ratio within the two high-
fat groups. The gender distribution was similar to the overall population distribution,
see appendix A.3. This indicates that gender does not carry a significant role in pancreas
and liver fat percentage.
We also investigated the relation between age and the fat percentage in each organ
in figure 5.12. From this, we can conclude that the elderly population tends to have
higher fat percentage than the younger population. This was observed in both liver and
pancreas and to be expected. However, the 50-59 age group in the liver tends to have
the highest liver values. We assumed this is due to randomness and not a special trend.
The GTEx metadata contains all the pathology categories of each subject, which we
assumed to be the diseases that each subject is suffering from. In figure 5.13(a), we can
compare the number of diseases depending on if they are in the high-fat or low-fat group.
There is no apparent difference between high fat and low-fat group in both the liver and
the pancreas. However, in figure 5.13(b), we can see the number of diseases does appear
to be correlated with age.
==PAGE:52==
5.2 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
46
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
Age Bracket
0
20
40
60
80
Fat percentage
Liver
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
Age Bracket
0
20
40
60
80
Pancreas
Figure 5.12: Box plot of predicted fat percentage in the liver and the pancreas accord-
ing to age.
Low
High
Fat
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Number of diseases
Liver
Low
High
Fat
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Pancreas
(a)
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
Age Bracket
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Number of diseases
(b)
Figure 5.13: (a) Box plots show number of disease according to the high- and low- fat
group in the liver and the pancreas. (b) Box plot shows number of diseases according
to the age.
5.2
Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in
Pancreas
Next, we were interested in segmenting multiple tissue areas in the pancreas simultane-
ously. This time we are segmenting the acinar area (normal pancreas cells), the pancre-
atic ductal area (duct) that contains pancreatic juice, the islets that secrete hormones
such as insulin, and again the fat area.
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
47
5.2.1
Naïve Gadermayr Approach Fails Segmentation
Task
We initially attempted to apply Gadermayr’s approach once again. We trained a Cy-
cleGAN model to translate between the X domain, containing original histology tile
images, and the Y domain, which contains the simpler simulated label images described
in section 4.3.1. This high complexity segmentation task turns out to be too difficult
for the Gadermayr approach, see figures 5.14, 5.15, and 5.16. In these figures, we only
showed results from the original image −→label mapping, and the reverse mapping is
omitted. In the label images, the acinar area should be segmented as white color, the fat
as red color, the ductal area as green color, the islet as blue color, and the background
as black color.
During training, we observed that the network alternately learns acinar, ductal area, fat,
and vessel randomly. For instance, in figure 5.14, the ductal area is recognized as islet
and the vessel area is recognized as duct. Also in figure 5.15 and figure 5.16, clusters
of fat are identified as ductal area. The vessel/ductal area is identified to be islet in
figure 5.15, and vessel is identified to be fat in figure 5.16. Moreover, islets were never
recognized very well, the network almost always identified the islets as acinar cells. We
assumed this is because the color of the islet is similar to that of acinar cells.
Furthermore, single fats and clusters of fat were never recognized at the same time. In
figure 5.14, only single fats are recognized and the clusters of fat are determined to be
background. The figure 5.15 and figure 5.16 shows example of models that are not able
to recognize both single fats and clusters of fat as fat simultaneously.
Figure 5.14: Results during training CycleGAN. The vessel is learned as the ductal area
(green label) and the ductal area is learned as islet (blue label). We can see that single
fat is segmented better than other labels, but still, the cluster is learned as background.
==PAGE:54==
5.2 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
48
Figure 5.15: Result during training CycleGAN. We can see that the cluster of fat is
learned as ductal area (green label). Ductal area and vessel is learned as islet (blue
label). This case was the most common case that happened during the training.
Figure 5.16: Result during training CycleGAN. The fat cluster is learned as ductal
area (green label), and the vessel is learned as fat (red label). The single fat and some
of the white area is learned as islet (blue label).
5.2.2
Gadermayr’s Approach with Labels Generated
with U-net Fails Segmentation Task
We theorized that the previous results were disappointing due to the lack of details in the
simulated label images. Thus, we decided to annotate each of the previous four labels
using four individual U-nets. These annotations would be used as the simulated label
images, providing a lot more realistic shapes for each tissue compartments. Additionally,
we decided to add annotations of cell nuclei similar to what Gadermayr et al. did in
their paper. The cell nucleus is a membrane-bound organelle that contains most of the
cell genome [27]. The motivation behind adding the cell nuclei annotations is to allow
the network to distinguish the different tissue compartments. After including nuclei, it
is no longer only the slight color difference separating islets and acinar cells, since islets
have a lower density of cell nuclei they are more easily separable. Furthermore, ductal
area is different from vessel and fat, since it has a unique circular pattern of nuclei in the
middle. The process of generating these new realistic simulated label images is described
in detail in section 4.3.2.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
49
Unfortunately, this method did not improve our performance significantly. The Cycle-
GAN loss curves are shown in figure 5.17. The first plot shows losses from each discrim-
inator, and the second plot shows sum of the generator losses and two cycle consistency
losses from each mapping. The results from mapping G : original image −→label can be
seen in 5.18, 5.19, and 5.20. During the training process, we again observed that the
network randomly learned each of the tissue compartments, similar to what we observed
without the nuclei annotation previously in section 5.2. In figure 5.18 and 5.19, the
ductal area is recognized as fat. In figure 5.19, the fat is recognized as vessel. Also, we
observed that the fat cluster is not recognized at all in figure 5.18 and 5.20. And again,
the CycleGAN never learned to recognized both the cluster of fat and the single fat as
fat simultaneously.
0
20
40
60
80
100
epoch
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Discriminator loss
for domain X
Discriminator loss
for domain Y
0
20
40
60
80
100
epoch
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Sum of generator
and cycleconsistency losses
Figure 5.17:
The CycleGAN training curves for pancreas segmentation using labels
from U-net results.
Figure 5.18: Results from mapping G : original image −→label during training of the
CycleGAN with labels from U-net. The ductal area is learned as fat (red label). The
vessel (green label) is learned fairly well. Yet, the fat is not learned at all, and just
recognized as the background.
==PAGE:56==
5.2 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
50
Figure 5.19: Results from mapping G : original image −→label during training of the
CycleGAN with labels from U-net. The ductal area is learned as fat (red label) and the
fat is learned as vessel (green label).
Figure 5.20: Results from mapping G : original image −→label during training of the
CycleGAN with labels from U-net. The vessel (green label) and the ductal area (yellow
label) are learned fairly good. Single fat is learned as islet (blue label), and fat cluster
is recognized as background.
The reconstructed images from mapping F : label −→original image can be seen in
5.21. Compared to the reconstructed images from all the previous results using the
CycleGAN, we can observed that the quality is much better. The acinar area now has
more details including nuclei, and in the reconstruction of the ductal area (yellow-colored
annotations in the label image), we can observe the distinct series of nuclei in the middle
of the duct. We can also deduce how the network segmented each of the annotations
in the label images with corresponding reconstruction. For example, we can see that
the annotation of islet (blue color) in the label images are not segmented properly since
the reconstruction of it has white color, which actual islets never have. Additionally,
annotation of fat (red color) is not recognized as fat since the reconstruction of it does
not has white color of actual fat.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
51
Figure 5.21:
Result of reconstructed images from the mapping F
: label −→
original image during training of the CycleGAN with labels from U-net.
5.2.3
Analysis of Pancreas Segmentation Results by
U-net
In section 5.2.2, separate U-nets were trained to generate realistic label images used for
training a CycleGAN. However, the result of this approach was not successful enough to
properly segment the four tissue compartments in the pancreas simultaneously. Instead,
we used the U-nets segmentation results and analyzed them together with the metadata
from the GTEx portal. All 594 subjects’ pancreas histology images were segmented
using U-nets. The training curves of the U-nets for islet, duct, and vessel can be found
in appendix A.4. The training curve for the nuclei is omitted since the training of the
nuclei only took less than 30 epochs. We presented the combined segmentation results
of each U-net overlaid on the whole slide histology image with different colors in figure
5.22. The acinar area is indicated in cyan (greenish-blue color), the vessel in green, the
islets in blue, the ducts in yellow, and the fat is shown in red. The U-nets for each
annotation are selected based on the combination of test loss and training loss. For fat,
we used same model chosen in section 5.1.2.2. The U-net model for islet is chosen from
epoch 921, for duct is from 526, and the model for the vessel is from epoch 571.
Once we got the segmentation results, we extracted coordinates of the bounding boxes of
every islet and duct from each subject and counted the number of islet and duct present.
The coordinate of the bounding box means coordinates of the minimum-area rectangular
border that encases an object-of-interest. From the bounding box, we calculated the area
of each islet and duct. The process of obtaining bounding boxes and the area is done by
==PAGE:58==
5.2 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
52
Figure 5.22: Result of whole histology slide segmentation on one subject.
python package scikit-image. We then investigated the relationship between the number
and size of the islets/ducts and the each subject’s age and their pancreas fat percentages.
The results from the analysis can be seen in figure 5.23. Figure 5.23(a) and figure 5.23(b)
indicate that there is no significant correlation between the number of ducts/islets with
age.
However, we do observe that the average area of both duct and islet tends to
decrease with age. In figure 5.23(c), we have scatter plots between the number and area
of each duct and islet, also showing low- and high- fat group.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Segmenting 4 Tissue Compartments in Pancreas
53
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
Age Bracket
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Number of Ducts
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
Age Bracket
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Average Area of Ducts
(a) Box plot of duct with age bracket. Left plots are about number of the duct,
and right plot are about average area of the ducts
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
Age Bracket
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Number of Islets
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
Age Bracket
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Average Area of Islets
(b) Box plot of islet with age bracket. Left plots are about number of the islets,
and right plot are about average area of the islets
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Number of Duct
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Average Area of Duct
Low fat
High fat
0
200
400
600
Number of Islet
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Average Area of Islet
Low fat
High fat
(c) Scatter plot showing relation between number and average area of each duct
and islet. Each of them are colored with corresponding high- or low- fat group
Figure 5.23: Analysis of duct and islet in the pancreas associated with age and fat
percentage of pancreas.
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
In this thesis, we tried to segment histology images by applying deep learning techniques
to avoid the time consuming manual segmentation process. We attempted to automate
this process by using the fully unsupervised approach proposed by Gadermayr et al
[1]. We had three main objectives. First, explore unsupervised deep learning methods
to segment histology images automatically.
Second, perform segmentation of fat in
pancreas and liver. Third, perform segmentation of four tissue compartments (acinar,
fat, islet and ductal area) in pancreas. In the following sections, we will discuss the
results in detail. Afterwards, we will highlight possibilities for improvements, and how
current issues may be solved in future works, and how our results can be utilized.
The Gadermayr’s Approach Successfully Segment Fat in Liver but
Not in Pancreas
Gadermayr’s approach successfully segmented fat in the liver tissue.
From the liver
segmentation results, we see that Gadermayr’s approach is highly flexible and robust.
It is also easily adaptable to other tissue compartments since it is simple to change
the parameters of the annotation model. Furthermore, the staining method should not
have a large impact on performance, since the algorithm only considers the shape and
the distribution of the object-of-interest. This means that if the network can segment
images with one staining method, it should also be able to segment images stained with
other methods, even without any additional manual labeling. This is assuming that the
tissue compartment of interest is stained so that it is distinguishable from the remaining
tissue, since different staining methods highlight or hide different tissue compartments.
However, their approach does have some drawbacks when it comes to more complex
segmentation tasks. One drawback is that the shape of the object-of-interest has to be
very homogeneous throughout the tissue. If it varies a lot, it becomes difficult for the
model to recognize all occurrences of the object. Furthermore, it is also difficult to create
simulated annotations similar enough for the model to make the connection between
the two. We will refer to this as the homogeneity problem. Another issue is that the
annotation of each object-of-interests in the tissue has to be unique and distinguishable
from each other.
If each annotation is not unique, then the network fails to find a
one-to-one matching between the object-of-interest and the annotations in simulated
label images, we will call this the uniqueness problem. The homogeneity problem causes
==PAGE:61==
6 Discussion
55
the network to be unable to catch all occurrences of the object-of-interest, while the
uniqueness problem causes the network to confuse the object with other objects.
Gadermayr’s segmentation approach likely worked well in the liver, due to the fact that
the fat in the liver has a very homogeneous shape and color that are unique to fat. The
white color and roundish shape are not shared by any other tissue compartment in the
liver. This allows the network to easily associate the simulated fat annotations to the
fat in the histology images without experiencing either the homogeneity problem nor
the uniqueness problem.
However, the network experienced both problems when segmenting fat in the pancreas.
The network is only able to recognize either the single fats or the clusters of fat, it is
never able to recognize both consistently. Unlike the liver fat, fat in the pancreas does
not have a unique color or a unique shape, and this causes the uniqueness problem. In
figure 6.1, there are examples of the shape of the fat cluster being very similar to the
shape of the duct, vessel, or even with the background in the pancreas. The color of
the fat is also not unique since the background shares the same color. These shared
properties cause the network to confused tissue compartments with each other, and thus
to suffer from the uniqueness problem.






Figure 6.1: Comparison of the fat cluster in the pancreas with other tissue compart-
ments that has similar characteristic in terms of color and shape.
Furthermore, the diverse characteristics of fat clusters in pancreas tissue cause the homo-
geneity problem. In the liver, the fat clusters are almost single fats placed very closely
together, meaning they have a very homogeneous shape even if the fat is in a cluster
(see figure 6.2(a)). This allows for the model to easily recognize both clusters of fat and
single fats in the liver. However, in the pancreas, fats in the cluster are adjoined to each
other, so each of them has a squeezed shape different from the single fats. Also, the
annotations of the whole fat clusters vary greatly in shape (see figure 6.2(b)). These
characteristics of the pancreas fat cluster lead to the homogeneity problem, which causes
the network to be unable to recognize the fat clusters and the single fats consistently.
We attempted to solve these problems of fat in the pancreas with two different approaches
(described in methods section 4.2.2.1). However, despite our best efforts to add more
homogeneous shapes and uniqueness to allow the network to distinguish the fat from
the other tissue, the network failed to do so.
==PAGE:62==
6 Discussion
56
(a) Liver
(b) Pancreas
Figure 6.2: Comparison of the fat clusters in the pancreas and the liver. Note how the
liver fat is clearly composed of smaller elliptical single fats, while the pancreas fats are
not as clear due to being adjoined.
To conclude, Gadermayr’s approach works for segmenting fat in the liver since it does
not suffer from either the homogeneity problem or the uniqueness problem. However,
fat in the pancreas is more complex and thus the network suffers from both problems,
resulting in the CycleGAN being unable to segment the pancreas tissue correctly. From
the segmentation results, we observed that the single fats in the pancreas are easily
distinguishable from other tissue compartments.
We assume this worked since it is
similar to the liver fat, highly distinguishable from other tissue compartments, and is
homogeneous in shape and color.
Prior Knowledge of Annotations does not have Major Impact in
Gadermayr’s Approach
When we applied Gadermayr’s approach to the liver tissue, we experimented with differ-
ent distributions and different sizes of the fat annotations. However, all these different
labels ended up in successful segmentation of the liver fat. Since fat is so unique in
the liver, the network performance was not affected greatly by a poorly estimated prior
during the generation of the simulated labels. We noticed that the distribution and the
shape of the object-of-interest do not have considerable influence on the final segmen-
tation performance, it is rather robust as long as it is uniquely detected as a realistic
annotation in the simulated label images.
Uninformative Loss Measurement
We observed that the loss curve of the CycleGAN does not reflect the quality of the
segmentation results. Since we were primarily interested in the mapping from histology
image to label:
G : X(histology images) −→Y (simulated labels)
we expected that if the mapping G successfully segments the histology images from
domain X, then the discriminator loss for domain Y would converge to around 0.5, since
this would mean that the discriminator, DY , cannot distinguish the difference between
==PAGE:63==
6 Discussion
57
the generated GAN labels and the labels in domain Y .
However, in our successful
segmentation (segmenting fat in the liver described in section 5.1.1), the discriminator
loss did not converge to around 0.5 (see orange line in loss curve in figure 5.1). Instead,
the discriminator loss tended to converge towards 0.5 early in training and subsequently
dropped to close to 0.
Despite the discriminator loss trending towards 0, we observed improvements to the
segmentation during this latter part of the training. We hypothesize that this is due
to the network learning to generate more realistic segmentation label than our simple
simulated label in domain Y . The resulting labels generated by the generator network
from the later epochs are not analogous to labels in domain Y , since it is closer to the
actual segmentation of the fat (see figure 6.3). Yet, the discriminator DY considered
these better segmentation labels as fake labels. Note, that this means that during this
part of the training, the discriminator network does not really help the generator network
to learn, since the generated labels are always considered fake. To test this hypothesis,
we could train a U-net to segment the liver tissue and use the highly realistic U-net
segmentation labels as the Y domain. In this test, we should no longer observe the
discriminator DY loss drops to 0, since the Y domain is now also highly realistic. If the
loss still drops to around 0, it would mean that the low loss is not due to more realistic
label output from the generator network. Furthermore, note that the late improvements
are likely not relying on adversarial training, but likely cycle consistency loss, since we
see qualitative improvements in fat annotations during this part of the training. This
was not tested since the segmentation was successful, so our priority was to attempt to
segment the pancreas instead.




	


	
Figure 6.3: Comparison between generated labels from the networks and simulated
label image. We can see that the label generated from epoch 4 (right) has elliptical
shape like simulated labels in domain Y (middle), yet the label generated from epoch
82 (left) has more realistic shape correspond to actual shape of fat.
We also observed that the discriminator loss for image domain X (blue line in training
curve in figure 5.1) quickly converges to 0 and remains there.
This means that the
discriminator for image domain X always identifies whether the image is from the original
==PAGE:64==
6 Discussion
58
domain or generated image from the mapping:
F : Y (simulated labels) −→X(histology images)
We conclude that the mapping F does not learn much from the beginning and the
discriminator for image domain X is much stronger than the generator F. This was to
be expected. The simulated label image does not have enough information other than
the boundary of cell and fat, so the generator F cannot reconstruct all the small details
of the original histology images, see figure 5.2(b) for reconstruction images. The cell in
the figure 5.2(b) has a similar color of the actual cell, but does not represent any other
small details. This poor reconstruction leads to easy classification for the discriminator,
and also to a high cycle consistency loss, making the whole training worse. From this, we
conclude that additional information is needed to obtain successful translation between
the image domain and the label domain.
To confirm the loss curve of the CycleGAN does not reflect the quality of the segmen-
tation results, we compare the successful liver fat segmentation described above with
the unsuccessful segmentation of the four tissue compartments in the pancreas, see sec-
tion 5.2.2. The loss curve of the unsuccessful training (see figure 5.17) resembles the loss
curve of the successful one, except for the loss from the discriminator of image domain X.
Since the network had additional information to work within the simulated label image,
the generator F learned to generate better reconstruction images to fool the discrimina-
tor. Other than that, all the losses converge similarly. We conclude that convergence
of the CycleGAN losses does not guarantee good segmentation performance, confirm-
ing the non-informative loss functions of GAN networks. Instead, manual qualitative
assessments are required.
Additional Information for Simulated Label Images
We applied two different approaches to segment the four tissue compartments in the pan-
creas. Similar to previously, we initially attempt to segment the tissue fully-unsupervised
and used the CycleGAN as proposed by Gadermayr et al. The simulated labels were
generated similar to in the liver experiment, a prior of 4 theoretical shapes. However,
here we again observe the uniqueness and homogeneity problem, in which mappings are
non-unique and tissue compartments get confused with each other.
In order to obtain more unique labels that are more easily associated with the correct
tissue compartment, we instead generated the labels using U-net segmentation results
of the tissue. Each of the four annotations was generated with separate U-nets. This
should allow for close to photo-realistic simulated labels, that hopefully allows for a more
unique mapping. In order to allow the network to more easily distinguish the different
tissues, we added additional information in forms of nuclei annotation and blood vessel
annotation.
These were also added by U-net segmentation.
This should allow the
network to distinguish each tissue compartment from each other. All six annotations
==PAGE:65==
6.1 Future Works
59
were combined into one image and used as the simulated label images for CycleGAN
training, see section 4.3.2 for details.
Unfortunately, even with the more realistic labels and the additional information, the
network still did not learn to segment the four compartments properly. From the result,
it appears that the uniqueness and homogeneity problem still existed. The performance
might have improved compared to naïve Gadermayr’s approach, but it is not a significant
improvement to call the results as a success. So, we conclude that additional information
with nuclei and vessel annotations was not enough to make the annotations in the
pancreas unique.
6.1
Future Works
More Advanced Network Architecture
When building the network architecture for CycleGAN, we used the convolutional neural
network combined with 6 or 9 residual blocks as our generator network. As presented
throughout chapter 5, this network did not successfully segment the pancreas histology
images properly. We considered more advanced network architecture to give the net-
work more capacity to detect more features in the data. Since we observed that the
U-net architecture is highly effective in the sense that it preserves the context of infor-
mation during the training process, we attempted to adopt the U-net architecture as
the generator of the CycleGAN. However, this network was very large, and due to a
lack of computational power, it was not possible to actually implement this. If there is
sufficient computational power, more advanced network architecture could be used for
training, which may improve the segmentation result of the pancreas histology images.
More Training Data
Furthermore, we used 3043 pancreas tiles from 19 histology slides for the training process,
since preprocessing of the whole slide histology images took a long time. This is roughly
3% of all available whole histology slides from the GTEx portal. It is commonly known
that more training data often leads to more accurate training of the network [28]. Hence,
utilizing much larger training data might help the network to improved significantly, and
hopefully segment the pancreas histology images properly.
Apply Gadermayr’s Approach to Other Segmentation Tasks
We successfully segmented the fat in the liver tissue with Gadermayr’s approach because
the fat in the liver tissue is easily distinguishable and homogeneous. Furthermore, poor
prior estimation for the annotation model did not affect the results. This clearly shows
==PAGE:66==
6.1 Future Works
60
the potential of the Gadermayr’s approach. This could be expanded and used on other
tissue segmentation as long as they remain rather simple.
Another possible avenue of expansion would be to apply the Gadermayr’s approach to
histology images stained differently. Our work so far has been done on H&E staining.
Since we successfully segmented the fat in the liver histology images stained with H&E
staining, we can apply Gadermayr’s approach to other liver histology images stained
differently.
Also, one could expand the approach on other tissue and possibly also
investigate the CycleGANs ability to generalize. This is all only possible due to the
CycleGAN only considering shape and occurence distribution of the object-of-interest.
Semi-Supervised Approach
The framework proposed by Mondal et al.[25] described in section 3.2 is semi-supervised
framework for segmentation task using CycleGAN. It requires partially labeled data set,
and uses this labeled data set for additional supervised loss, compelling the CycleGAN
to perform better.
We can use the segmentation results from this thesis and apply
this semi-supervised approach to segment pancreas histology images with the additional
supervised losses. Our results from training CycleGAN with realistic label images from
U-net results show somewhat promising results, so adding supervised manner may lead
the network to successfully segment the histology images. However, since this network
has yet to be applied to histology images, we are unsure how well it will perform.
Associate Histology Segmentation with Data Difficult to Interpret
The segmentation results obtained from this thesis can be quantified in terms of organ
fat percentage, number/average size/coordinate of the tissue compartments. This data
is easily interpretable, however, most of the biological data is not. These obtained data
can be associated with more difficult to interpret data to analyze in unison. This could
be genetic mutations, RNA sequencing, or proteomics data. All these data sets have a
degree of uncertainty associated to them, since much of the biological mechanisms are
not completely understood. Associating them with phenotypic data such as histology
segmentation results, e.g. organ fat percentage, could lead to novel discoveries.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this thesis, we attempted to segment histology images by applying deep learning
techniques to avoid the time-consuming manual annotation process. We had three main
objectives: First, to explore unsupervised deep learning methods to automate the seg-
mentation of the histology images. Second, to perform segmentation of fat in the pan-
creas and the liver. Third, to perform segmentation of four tissue compartments (acinar,
fat, islet and ductal area) in the pancreas using a single model.
We implemented the fully unsupervised approach proposed by Gadermayr et al [1]. and
successfully segmented the fat in the liver. However, it failed to segment the fat and
the four tissue compartments in the pancreas histology images.
Thus, we applied a
supervised approach, U-net, to the pancreas histology images and successfully segmented
the fat and other tissue compartments using separate models for each of them. These
segmentation results were then combined into one label image and used as the Y domain
in the CycleGAN training of the Gadermayr approach. We expected these highly realistic
labels to result in better segmentation, but unfortunately, the network could still not
segment the pancreas histology images correctly. We also conducted analysis between
the segmentation results from 594 whole histology slides and metadata from GTEx. We
hypothesized that there might be a correlation between the fat in the pancreas and the
liver [11]–[15], but we observed to no correlation between the two organs.
To conclude, we explored deep unsupervised learning techniques for tissue segmentation,
and successfully segmented the fat in the liver tissue fully unsupervised. Furthermore,
we segmented the fat and four tissue compartments in the pancreas. However, we had
to apply supervised methods to segment the pancreas tissue.Gadermayr’s unsupervised
approach we applied to the pancreas tissue does show potential, however, we expect a
more flexible model architecture is required successfully segment the tissue.
==PAGE:68==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
Code Availability
All the scripts that we created for this thesis will be shortly updated after the submission
of the thesis in GitHub repository.
A.2
Method Extracting Cell Mask
The cell mask in each tile can be obtained based on the intensity value of the image.
Note that in the one-channel gray image, the intensity value of the black color is 0, and
the white color is 255. To separate cell area from the white background, we first convert
the RGB tile image to the one-channel gray image. Then only remain the pixel with
the value under than 230. Then fill the holes to get the full mask. The drawback of
this intensity-based method is that the cell with white color at the edge of the tile is
considered ad background. For better understanding, see the figure below.
Figure A.1: Illustration of the method extracting cell mask.
==PAGE:69==
A.3 Plots for Relation between Gender and Fat Percentage
63
A.3
Plots for Relation between Gender and
Fat Percentage
female
male
Sex
0
20
40
60
80
Fat Percentage
Pancreas
female
male
Sex
0
20
40
60
80
Liver
(a)
20
40
60
80
Liver
0
20
40
60
80
Pancreas
Fat Percentage in Liver and
Pancreas According to Sex
male
female
(b)
Figure A.2: Plots for relation between gender and fat percentage. (a) Box plot between
gender and fat percentage in pancreas and liver. (b) Scatter plot of fat percentage in
liver and pancreas colored with gender. x-axis indicates fat percentage in liver, and
y-axis indicates fat percentage in pancreas.
male
female
Sex
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Count
Liver
Low
High
male
female
Sex
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Pancreas
Low
High
Figure A.3: Count plot of predicted fat percentage in the liver and the pancreas divided
with high fat group and low fat group.
==PAGE:70==
A.4 Training Curves of U-net for Different Annotations
64
A.4
Training Curves of U-net for Different
Annotations
0
200
400
600
800
1000
epoch
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Learning Curve for U-net Training (Islet)
test loss
training loss
Figure A.4: Training curve of U-net for segmenting islet in the pancreas.
0
100
200
300
400
500
epoch
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Learning Curve for U-net Training (Duct)
test loss
training loss
Figure A.5: Training curve of U-net for segmenting duct in the pancreas.
==PAGE:71==
A.4 Training Curves of U-net for Different Annotations
65
0
200
400
600
800
1000
epoch
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Learning Curve for U-net Training (Vessel)
test loss
training loss
Figure A.6: Training curve of U-net for segmenting vessel in the pancreas.
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[1]
M. Gadermayr, L. Gupta, B. M. Klinkhammer, P. Boor, and D. Merhof, “Unsu-
pervisedly Training GANs for Segmenting Digital Pathology with Automatically
Generated Annotations,” pages 1–5, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1805.10059.
[2]
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformat-
ics), volume 9351, pages 234–241, 2015, issn: 16113349. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
319-24574-4{\_}28.
[3]
V. Tamizhazhagan, “Histological Methods in Life Science,” International Journal
of Biomedical Materials Research, volume 5, number 6, page 68, 2017, issn: 2330-
7560. doi: 10.11648/j.ijbmr.20170506.11.
[4]
H. Irshad, A. Veillard, L. Roux, and D. Racoceanu, “Methods for nuclei detec-
tion, segmentation, and classification in digital histopathology: A review-current
status and future potential,” IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, volume 7,
pages 97–114, 2014, issn: 19411189. doi: 10.1109/RBME.2013.2295804.
[5]
L. Shapiro and G. Stockman, Computer Vision. New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2001,
pages 279–325, isbn: 9780130307965. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.
dk/books?id=FftDAQAAIAAJ.
[6]
J. Borovec and J. Kybic, “Fully automatic segmentation of stained histological
cuts,” International Student Conference on Electrical Engineering, pages 1–7, 2013.
[Online]. Available: ftp://cmp.felk.cvut.cz/pub/cmp/articles/borovec/
Borovec-Poster2013.pdf.
[7]
M. Veta, P. J. van Diest, R. Kornegoor, A. Huisman, M. A. Viergever, and
J. P. Pluim, “Automatic Nuclei Segmentation in H&E Stained Breast Cancer
Histopathology Images,” PLoS ONE, volume 8, number 7, pages 1–12, 2013, issn:
19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070221.
[8]
A. M. Khan, N. Rajpoot, D. Treanor, and D. Magee, “A nonlinear mapping ap-
proach to stain normalization in digital histopathology images using image-specific
color deconvolution,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, volume 61,
number 6, pages 1729–1738, 2014, issn: 15582531. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2014.
2303294.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
67
[9]
M. Lai, “Deep Learning for Medical Image Segmentation,” 2015. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.02000.
[10]
B. Young, G. O’Dowd, and P. Woodford, Wheater’s Functional Histology, 6th
Editio. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2013, page 464, isbn: 9780702047473.
[11]
D. Wang, X. p. Yu, W. m. Xiao, X. p. Jiao, J. Wu, D. l. Teng, K. y. Wu, M.
Zhang, Q. t. Zhu, X. n. Liu, Y. b. Ding, and G. t. Lu, “Prevalence and clinical
characteristics of fatty pancreas in Yangzhou, China: A cross-sectional study,”
Pancreatology, volume 18, number 3, pages 263–268, 2018, issn: 14243911. doi:
10.1016/j.pan.2018.02.004. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.pan.2018.02.004.
[12]
N. S. Patel, M. R. Peterson, G. Y. Lin, A. Feldstein, B. Schnabl, R. Betten-
court, E. Seki, C. B. Sirlin, and R. Loomba, “Insulin resistance increases MRI-
estimated pancreatic fat in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and normal controls,”
Gastroenterology Research and Practice, volume 2013, 2013, issn: 16876121. doi:
10.1155/2013/498296.
[13]
Z. Dong, Y. Luo, H. Cai, Z. Zhang, Z. Peng, M. Jiang, Y. Li, C. Li, Z. P. Li,
and S. T. Feng, “Noninvasive fat quantification of the liver and pancreas may
provide potential biomarkers of impaired glucose tolerance and type 2 diabetes,”
Medicine (United States), volume 95, number 23, pages 1–7, 2016, issn: 15365964.
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000003858.
[14]
C. Della Corte, A. Mosca, F. Majo, V. Lucidi, N. Panera, E. Giglioni, L. Monti,
L. Stronati, A. Alisi, and V. Nobili, “Nonalcoholic fatty pancreas disease and
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: More than ectopic fat,” Clinical Endocrinology,
volume 83, number 5, pages 656–662, 2015, issn: 13652265. doi: 10.1111/cen.
12862.
[15]
E.-J. van Geenen, M. M. Smits, M. T. C. M. A. Schreuder, D. L. van der Peet, and
C. J. J. Bloemena Elisabeth Mulder, “Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is related
to nonalcoholic fatty pancreas disease,” Pancreas, volume 39(8), pages 1185–1190,
2010. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e3181f6fce2.
[16]
T. R. Martini FH Timmons MJ, Human Anatomy, 7th Editio. Pearson, 2012, isbn:
9780321688156.
[17]
S. R. Abdel-Misih, “Liver Anatomy,” Surg Clin North Am., volume 90(4), pages 643–
653, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.suc.2010.04.017.
[18]
I. J. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley, S. Ozair,
A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial nets,” Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems, volume 3, number January, pages 2672–2680, 2014,
issn: 10495258. doi: 10.3156/jsoft.29.5{\_}177{\_}2.
[19]
J. Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired Image-to-Image Trans-
lation Using Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Networks,” Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, volume 2017-Octob, pages 2242–
2251, 2017, issn: 15505499. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.244.
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
68
[20]
C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition And Machine Learning. Springer, 2006, isbn:
978-0-387-31073-2.
[21]
C. Nwankpa, W. Ijomah, A. Gachagan, and S. Marshall, “Activation Functions:
Comparison of trends in Practice and Research for Deep Learning,” pages 1–20,
2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.03378.
[22]
V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, “Rectified Linear Units Improve Restricted Boltz-
mann Machines,” ICML, pages 807–814, 2010. [Online]. Available: https://www.
bibsonomy.org/bibtex/2059683ca9b2457d248942520babbe000/dblp.
[23]
S. Indolia, A. K. Goswami, S. P. Mishra, and P. Asopa, “Conceptual Understanding
of Convolutional Neural Network- A Deep Learning Approach,” Procedia Computer
Science, volume 132, pages 679–688, 2018, issn: 18770509. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.
2018.05.069. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.05.
069.
[24]
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recogni-
tion,” Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, volume 2016-Decem, pages 770–778, 2016, issn: 10636919.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
[25]
A. K. Mondal, A. Agarwal, J. Dolz, and C. Desrosiers, “Revisiting CycleGAN for
semi-supervised segmentation,” 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1908.11569.
[26]
R. T. Collins, “Mean-shift blob tracking through scale space,” Proceedings of the
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
volume 2, 2003, issn: 10636919. doi: 10.1109/cvpr.2003.1211475.
[27]
B. Alberts, A. Johnson, and J. Lewis, Molecular Biology of the Cell, 4th editio.
New York: Garland Science, 2002, isbn: 0-8153-3218-1. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK21054/.
[28]
M. Banko and E. Brill, “Scaling to Very Very Large Corpora for Natural Language
Disambiguation,” in Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, Toulouse, France: Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, 2001, pages 26–33. doi: 10.3115/1073012.1073017. [Online]. Available:
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/P01-1005.
