==PAGE:1==
IT Vulnerabilities with Timing
from Global Navigation Satellite
Systems
Sveinbjörn Guðjohnsen
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Over the recent years, attacks on systems that rely on GNSS for navigation
and precise time have become more prominent. This poses an increasing risk to
the critical time services of countries around the world, as such systems rely on
GNSS signals as part of their infrastructure.
The goal of this thesis is to research and examine the diﬀerent time service
solutions and the vulnerabilities that are involved in such systems. The thesis
will investigate the diﬀerent solutions from the neighboring countries, followed
by a design proposal for a state-of-the-art time service infrastructure for the
country of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering (M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineer-
ing).
Lyngby, 18-July-2020
Sveinbjörn Guðjohnsen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Time in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
The Importance Of Time and Time Infrastructure
. . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
European Regulation - MiFID II . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
Traceability of Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Fundamentals
9
2.1
Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Time Standards
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.2
Time Dissemination Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.1.3
Satellite Time Transfers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Time Services
27
3.1
Time in Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.1
Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.1.2
Time dissemination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.2
Time in Finland
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.1
Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.2.2
Time dissemination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Time in United Kingdom
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.1
Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.2
Time dissemination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.4
Time in Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
3.4.1
Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4.2
Time dissemination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.5
Time in France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.5.1
Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.5.2
Time dissemination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
53
4.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2
System Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.2.1
Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2.2
Dissemination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.3.1
Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.3.2
Availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.3.3
Resilience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
4.4
Risk Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.4.1
Introduction to CORAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.4.2
Preparation for the Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.4.3
Presentation of the Target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
4.4.4
Reﬁning the Target Description Using Asset Diagrams . .
70
4.4.5
Approval of the Target Description . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.4.6
Risk Identiﬁcation & Estimation Using Threat Diagrams
74
4.4.7
Risk Evaluation Using Risk Diagrams
. . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.4.8
Risk Treatment Using Treatment Diagrams . . . . . . . .
77
5
Conclusion
81
A Appendix
83
B Appendix B
87
Bibliography
93
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In recent years, attacks on GNSS systems have become more prominent, ranging
from nation state warfare such as the case of Russian attacks on ships in the
Black Sea [Bur19], to attacks on personal vehicles such as the case of the Tesla
Model 3 which was found to be vulnerable to GPS hijacking[Sal19].
Attacks such as these pose a severe risk to many nations timekeeping systems,
which are the topic of this thesis, as they rely on GNSS signals as part of their
timekeeping infrastructure.
Over the years many countries have gradually realized the importance of having
a reliable and accurate source of time; putting eﬀort into upgrading or further
securing the critical infrastructure of these kind of systems. On the 19th of
February 2020, the British government published an article that states that the
economic impact of an large scale GNSS failure would result in a £1 billion loss
per day[uk-].
As an example of how the lack of an accurate and reliable time source can aﬀect
real life situations, lets look at the peculiar case in the history of Sweden. In
2003, the Swedish Minister for Foreign Aﬀairs Anna Lindh was assassinated
in broad daylight in a shopping center.
During the investigation, the police
investigators were able to track the suspect through the mall with twenty-one
diﬀerent video cameras. It however soon became clear, that the timestamps of
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
the security cameras were either wrong or out of sync; with no traceability to
a single time reference, the investigation became quite troublesome as they had
to piece together the scenario of events based on data collected from diﬀerent
witnesses puzzled together with receipts from the cash registers[Gun16].
The purpose of this thesis is to research and examine precise time service so-
lutions and the vulnerabilities that are involved in such systems; to present a
solution that can maintain and distribute precise time signals in a secure man-
ner, based on research from neighboring countries.
The following chapters will start by looking at some of the fundamental concepts
related to theses systems, both how they work in general and how GNSS as a
source of time plays into these kinds of systems.
After some of the fundamentals have been examined, the diﬀerent time infras-
tructures of the neighboring countries will be explored, highlighting the diﬀerent
strengths and characteristics. Data gathered from the survey was used to lay
foundation for the subsequent design proposal for a state-of-the-art timekeeping
infrastructure for Denmark.
1.1
Time in Denmark
After the standardization of UTC as international civil time in 1972, most coun-
tries have gradually taken action to update laws and legislations to follow the
new standard. Many of those countries have additionally put in eﬀorts to cre-
ating their own timekeeping systems. Countries such as Sweden, Finland and
Germany which are neighboring countries to Denmark, have established impres-
sive systems for timekeeping.
However, for some reason, Denmark has fallen behind the rest of the world.
Currently, there is no oﬃcial timing infrastructure for the country.
Organi-
zation and other entities that rely on accurate time must either consult with
independent organizations or rely on some external source for an accurate time
signal; a time signal that is additionally based on the "wrong" time standard.
The current law regarding time in Denmark is an old law that dates back to
1893 which states that the legal time in Denmark should be synchronize or
set to follow Greenwich Solar Time. While this legislation might have been a
reasonable good choice back then, it is far from being relevant today. To better
understand why this is a bad choice, lets take a closer look at what current law
states:
==PAGE:11==
1.2 The Importance Of Time and Time Infrastructure
3
"For alle dele af landet med undtagelse af Færöerne skal tiden herefter bestemmes
lige med Middelsolditen for den 15de længdergrad öst for Greenwich.
This
roughly translates to "For all parts of the country with the exception of Faroe
Islands, time should follow the mean solar time on the 15th eastern longi-
tude"[noao].
By modern standards, this system of mean solar time isn’t particularly good,
as it is based on the sun’s position and the Earths rotation to determine time.
More speciﬁcally, time is deﬁned to be exactly 12:00, when the sun reaches its
highest point at a certain longitude.
This creates a problem, as it is hard to determine when the sun is exactly at
its highest point, making it next to impossible to deﬁne time with nano-second
precision. This eﬀectively leaves Denmark behind the rest of the world, and at
the time of writing this thesis, the country of Denmark is approximately 240ms
behind.
Moving forward, the biggest problem that Denmark currently faces is arguably
the lack of awareness and attention by the government. A few years ago, Mikkel
Schou Nielsen a scientist working at the National Metrological Institute (DFM)
in Denmark started a petition with the goal of the government to update the
old legislation. Although the petition didn’t pass, it did open the discussion and
raise awareness of the problem [Nyv18].
To conclude this section, it is clear that the current state of legal time in Den-
mark is subpar. With no local infrastructure, the country solely depends on
GNSS or other wireless broadcasts such as the DCF77 as a source of accurate
time, making it particularly vulnerable as there is no backup plan.
1.2
The Importance Of Time and Time Infras-
tructure
While the role and purpose of a timekeeping infrastructure might be obvious,
to keep and distribute time. The reasons for establishing such infrastructure
might however not be as apparent. One might wonder, is there any reason for a
country such as Denmark invest in such a system? What rationalizes investing
in costly equipment capable of maintaining high precision when we can already
tell time?
To answer these questions we can examine some of the time critical systems and
other services that rely on accurate time, in the context of Denmark. A 2019 re-
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
port conducted by London Economics at the request of the Danish Government,
identiﬁes three main sectors that depend on accurate time[Fly19]:
Telecommunication sector
Telecommunication companies require accurate
timing for a number of things, the main example being time slot management
for telephone networks, which is the basis for allowing phone call to be made.
Energy sector
The energy sector relies on precise time mainly for timestamp-
ing and monitoring. Accurate timestamps are required by the SCADA system
which is responsible for identify and detect faults in the grid.
Finance sector
The ﬁnance sector relies on time for a similar purpose which
is timestamping. As Further discussed in subsection 1.2.1, a recent European
legislation requires all stock trades to be timestamped and traceable to UTC.
To summarize the current situation in Denmark; large organizations in the
telecommunication, energy and ﬁnance sector must either implement ad-hoc
solutions or rely on a third party as a source for accurate timing. The lack of
a central infrastructure leaves the public of Denmark uncoordinated and with-
out any sort of backup in case of a catastrophic event, which might lead to an
economic loss.
1.2.1
European Regulation - MiFID II
In 2014 the European Union published a directive MiFID II, that enforces regu-
lations on ﬁnancial markets in the European Union. The directive allows Regu-
latory Technical Standards (RTS) and Implementing Technical Standards (ITS)
to be imposed on ﬁnancial businesses trading on the European market[Ger16].
RTS-25, one of the 28 diﬀerent RTS’s contained in the legislation, is particu-
larly interesting. It imposes technical standards that are meant to regulate the
accuracy of business clocks and timestamps on trading venues, in addition to
requiring time to be veriﬁably traceable to UTC[Par17].
The following is a summary of four out the ﬁve total articles speciﬁed in RTS-25:
• Article 1 - Reference time The ﬁrst articles states that operators of
trading venues and their members or participants shall synchronize their
==PAGE:13==
1.2 The Importance Of Time and Time Infrastructure
5
business clocks to UTC. The article additionally states that business clocks
may be synchronized to UTC using satellite dissemination, only provided
that any oﬀset from UTC is accounted for and removed from the times-
tamp.
• Article 2 - Level of accuracy for operators of trading venues
Deﬁnes the actual requirements of the the level of accuracy required by
business clocks of the trading venue. The maximum allowed divergence
from UTC is 1ms where gateway-to-gateway latency is > 1ms and 100µs
when GtG ≤1ms.
• Article 3 - Level of accuracy members or participants of a trading
venue Imposes requirements for the participants of the trading venue.
The article speciﬁes diﬀerent levels of accuracy depending on the type
of trading. One example is "Activity using high frequency algorithmic
trading technique" which requires divergence from UTC to be less than
100µs.
• Article 4 - Compliance with the maximum divergence require-
ments The fourth article is arguably the most interesting one. It requires
both the operators and their members/participants to establish a system of
traceability to UTC. It further requires that "They shall be able to demon-
strate traceability to UTC by documenting the system design, functioning
and speciﬁcations" in addition "They shall be able to identify the exact
point at which a timestamp is applied and demonstrate that the point
within the system where the timestamp is applied remains consistent."
Circling back to the situation in Denmark, we can see that this regulation cre-
ates quite an obvious problem; any Danish shareholders that want to participate
in stock exchange on European trading venues must synchronize their clocks to
UTC, contradicting the Danish legislation. Additionally, individuals or busi-
nesses must establish a system of traceability, forcing them to either rely on a
third party solution or to re-invent the wheel by implementing their own system.
However, it is noted that this problem is luckily bypassed in Denmark’s case, as
all transactions in the Nordic stock markets clear in Stockholm[Fly19]. While
the problem coincidentally solved in this particular case, it still highlights how
irrational the current situation is.
A complete overview of the technical requirements of the legislation can be found
in tables A.2,A.3, in the appendix.
==PAGE:14==
6
Introduction
1.2.2
Traceability of Time
To illustrate the problem of the lack of traceability, let’s take a second and think
back to the receipts from the cash registers during the Swedish police investi-
gation; this tedious problem of gathering multiple pieces of random timestamps
and trying to piece it all together. Now, lets imagine the same thing but on a
national, or better yet a global scale. It’s pretty easy to see why regulations such
as the MiFID II have been established; with computers performing enormous
amounts of trades on a microsecond scale.
Traceability of time is obtain through a series of comparison, extending from
the source down to the timestamp. As time is passed down from the source it
propagates through a series of diﬀerent links, with a certain amount of uncer-
tainty. Therefore, a timestamp is said to be traceable, if it can be traced back
to its source through "a documented unbroken chain of calibrations" [MLL18]
This is why establishing a timekeeping infrastructure is important, as they are
a key component in a system of traceability. Such a system would provide a
single, regulated and a trusted source of time with a documented uncertainty.
To demonstrate this, let’s brieﬂy consider the UK’s current infrastructure; end-
users of the time service only have to demonstrate traceability to that particular
time service in order to be fully compliant with regulations.
To contrast this, lets consider the same example but with a end-user that relies
on GNSS as a source of accurate time. In this case demonstrating traceability is
much harder as the chain from the timestamp to the source is longer, resulting
in more uncertainty. An example of such uncertainties can be found in ﬁgure
2.7.
1.3
Scope
Before heading further it is important to realize the scope of the thesis. Initially,
the scope of this project was smaller with a greater focus on investigating the
more technical aspect of vulnerabilities involved in using GNSS as source of
accurate time. However due to the extenuating circumstances that followed in
early 2020 the direction of the project had to be slightly altered, as access to
necessary equipment was restricted.
While the main focus of the project remains essentially the same, the whole
scope of the project will be wider. It will focus less on the technical aspect of
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Outline
7
the vulnerabilities in GNSS, instead diving more into a solution for a precise time
infrastructure for Denmark in addition to surveying the solutions in neighboring
countries.
1.4
Outline
The thesis is organized in the following way:
• Chapter 2 - Fundamentals examines some of the fundamental concepts
and ideas related to time, time realization and distribution of time.
• Chapter 3 - Time Services investigates the diﬀerent time services that
the some of the neighboring countries have implemented.
• Chapter 4 - Developing a Time Service for Denmark presents
design proposal for a time service for Denmark, followed by an evaluation
of the design and a risk analysis of the system.
• Chapter 5 - Conclusion contains the conclusion of the thesis.
==PAGE:16==
8
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Fundamentals
This chapter will examine some of the theory and concepts in relation to time,
time realization and dissemination in order to better understand the inner work-
ings behind the systems as later examined.
The chapter will additionally glance over some of the fundamental concepts of
GNSS and how satellite systems play a major role in realization, steering and
distribution of time.
2.1
Time
In our day-to-day life we constantly rely on time in some way or another.
Whether it is setting a timer on the microwave, keeping appointments or simply
having a conversation over the cell phone, time is almost always involved.
But how exactly does our modern timekeeping system work? Who is responsible
for the time? What is involved in the process of timekeeping? How does the
world stay synchronized? To try to answer some of these questions, lets start
by looking at the integral components of time standards.
==PAGE:18==
10
Fundamentals
2.1.1
Time Standards
To be able to keep time we need some sort of a system, a time standard. In order
to make this system useful it has to be able to perform some basic tasks: to
somehow quantify time, possibly perform some basic arithmetic operations such
as addition, and ﬁnally it has to allow two time units to be compared. Therefore,
a typical time standard consists of all three: a unit of measure, a time scale that
utilizes said unit in a uniform matter and a starting point, commonly referred
to as an epoch.
One such standard is UTC, which most nations have adopted as the basis for
legal time in the country. Before we examine the inner workings of UTC, lets
start looking at its predecessor in order to get a better picture of what makes
it preferable.
2.1.1.1
Universal Time
Universal Time (UT) is a time standard that is based the Sun’s location and
earths rotation. To be more speciﬁc, it is deﬁned as the mean solar time at
the Greenwich Meridian, located at 0◦longitude. However, because of this the
system is not very accurate, since it assumes that both that the Sun’s travel and
the rotation of the earth are uniform. This requires corrections to be applied to
the time standard to keep it synchronized to apparent solar time[noaq].
As a way to handle this, four diﬀerent version of Universal time are kept. How-
ever, for the purpose of this thesis, only two version of the four relevant:
UT0
This version is as the one just described; No corrections are added and
therefore time drifts.
This version is only historically signiﬁcant and is not
generally used.
UT1
The common version UT1, adds corrections for the earths rotation. This
version is what is generally referred to as UT, and is eﬀectively the same as GMT.
UT1 is kept in sync with UTC to within a second, and as time starts to drift
as a result of earths rotation, leap seconds are added or subtracted to steer it
back to within 0.9 seconds.
The other versions which are rarely used, introduce further corrections and
introduce "smoothing"[noab].
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Time
11
2.1.1.2
International Atomic Time
Today, the international standard for accurate time is TAI or International
Atomic Time. The TAI scale is far more accurate than UT as it is based on the
SI deﬁnition of a second. With a collaborative eﬀort of multiple laboratories
and other organizations, the time scale is steered to be as close to the SI second
as possible with the help of atomic clocks.
The International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) in France is ulti-
mately responsible for the realization TAI. To steer the time scale the institute
gathers time data from over ﬁve hundred atomic clocks located in laboratories
worldwide[noaa]. Despite being highly accurate, each atomic clocks has a dis-
tinct characteristic and drifts at a certain rate. To combat this, TAI is calculated
using a weighted average of all the gathered measurements. This allows data
from clocks that are more accurate to be prioritized over data from unstable or
faulty clocks.
TAI is a ﬁxed time scale and therefore corrections for the earths rotation are
not added [noaa]. Such as the case with UT0, the time scale will go out of sync
with solar time and therefore wouldn’t be practical for civil use. To solve this,
a second time scale UTC is realized where leap seconds are added. At the time
of writing, TAI is 37 seconds ahead of UTC.
2.1.1.3
Coordinated Universal Time
Shortly after the invention of the cesium atomic clock in 1955, work began
on establishing an atomic based time scale. Five years later, on January 1st
1960 ﬁve observatories ﬁrst began to coordinate their time and frequency, which
eventually lead to the creation of UTC in 1965 and its adoption as a standard
for civil time in 1973[NMM+01].
UTC is observed to be the same anywhere in the world, which in eﬀect makes
time the same everywhere in the world, leading to obvious problems. Countries
therefore are divided into time zones based on their relative oﬀset to the center
point at 0◦longitude. Time at a certain country is then express as an oﬀset
to UTC. As an example, Denmark which is located between 0 and 15◦would
therefore express time as UTC+1.
This means that countries that use UTC as a basis for standard time, must
realize their own local version of UTC in order to be able to adjust time ac-
cordingly. For example, many countries follow summer time which has to be
==PAGE:20==
12
Fundamentals
manually added or subtracted.
2.1.2
Time Dissemination Protocols
Time dissemination refers to the distribution of time to the user. In order to
fully appreciate the diﬀerent architectures of the infrastructures examined in
later sections, this subsection will brieﬂy go into the fundamentals of some of
the most common network based time distribution protocols.
2.1.2.1
NTP
Network Time Protocol or NTP was initially introduced in 1985 (RFC 5905).
It is one of the oldest internet protocols, even predating the popular HTTP
protocol which was introduced in 1991. Despite being dated, NTP is the most
common way of distributing time over the internet. The idea behind NTP is to
allow clients to synchronize their time against a hierarchical system of precise
clocks which are synchronized to UTC with an accuracy that is typically within
milliseconds.
This hierarchical system is divided into a collection tiers or stratums that are
assigned a number starting at stratum-0, which contains the most precise time
references. Each stratum then synchronizes their time with the devices in the
stratum above and are said to be synchronized to stratum n + 1, i.e. a device
synchronized to a stratum-1 clock is considered stratum-2. The numbers for
each stratum do however not represent the quality or accuracy of the device,
just their role in the hierarchy.
Stratum-0
Stratum 0 is a collection of high precision reference clocks such
as atomic clocks. The time reference can also come from other sources such as
GNSS satellites or radio waves. These devices cannot be queried directly and
are only connected or synchronized to stratum-1 time sources.
Stratum-1
Stratum-1 devices are considered the root or primary time servers
and have their own clocks synchronized to UTC with very high accuracy, typ-
ically in the microsecond range. Despite being the most accurate, stratum-1
devices are commonly not queried directly as access is often limited to stratum-
2 or lower.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Time
13
Figure 2.1: A typical NTP hierarchy. The lower half gives an overview of the
synchronization process.
Stratum-2
Since there are generally more of servers in stratum-2 and lower,
they are generally more queried. This is because they are likely to be closer
to the querying computer (possibly hosted by ISP) which oﬀers lower latency.
The servers in this stratum are usually accurate to a few milliseconds which is
accurate for most general purposes.
A NTP network can have up to ﬁfteen hierarchical layers, where stratum-16 is
used to indicate that a devices is not synchronized. Devices in each stratum
then periodically sync their time with the devices in both the same stratum
and the stratum above (stratum-0). This allows the devices to measure and
calculate the oﬀset of their own clock.
NTP utilizes a relatively simple clock synchronization algorithm: to synchronize
a client clock with a clock inside the domain, the time oﬀset between the two
is calculated, which can then be subtracted from the time of the unsynchro-
nized clock. To correctly ﬁgure out the oﬀset, two things must be taken into
consideration and computed: around trip delay and a time oﬀset.
The time oﬀset is the diﬀerence in absolute time between two clocks and is
calculated using
θ = 1/2 ∗[(t1 −t0) + (t2 −t3)]
The round trip delay is the time which it takes a packet to go from the client
==PAGE:22==
14
Fundamentals
to the server and back again to the original sender. It can be calculated using:
δ = (t3 −t0) −(t2 −t1)
• t0 A timestamp recorded by the client at the ﬁrst transmission (Client→Server)
as shown in ﬁgure 2.1.
• t1 A timestamp recorded by the server at the arrival of the initial trans-
mission from client.
• t2 A timestamp recorded by the server before sending a response back to
the client (Server →Client).
• t3 A timestamp recorded by the client at the arrival of the response from
server transmission.
The values obtained from the calculations are then ﬁltered and further enhanced
in an attempt to gain better accuracy. After the oﬀset has been processed the
obtained values are used to gradually correct the inaccurate clock.
2.1.2.2
PTP
An newer, better alternative to NTP is the Precision Time Protocol or PTP
(IEEE 1588). The protocol which was originally introduced in 2002, oﬀers far
more precision than NTP, typically in in the microsecond range given under the
best conditions [noa20b]. The PTP protocol introduces a hierarchical system
similar to the NTP but instead of tiers or stratums, the nodes are organized
into certain roles.
The hierarchy consists of masters and slaves, where a slave synchronizes with
its master. This dynamic creates a sort of networked domain, where a better
clock can have a subnet of slaves which they are synchronized to. The three
roles than a clock can have are:
Grandmaster (GM)
Grandmaster Clocks are the top, most precise time
references. These like stratum-0 devices are high precision time devices such as
atomic clocks. It is common for these GM clocks to be expensive commercial
devices and there are currently many vendors that oﬀer IEEE 1588 hardware
solutions.
These kind of devices often come equipped with alternative time
reference support such as GNSS.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Time
15
Figure 2.2: Depicted is a typical PTP hierarchy, consisting of a GM clock with
two BC slaves.
Boundary Clock (BC)
Boundary Clocks are devices that are both slaves
and a master clock for another node. A boundary clock not peer with other
boundary clocks, it can only query them as a slave.
Ordinary Clock (OC)
Ordinary Clocks are the end nodes of the PTP net-
work that often sit at the edge of a network acting as a more general time
synchronization node.
Transparent Clock (TC)
Transparent Clock nodes have more of a meta
purpose and don’t perform any time synchronization. Transparent Clocks are
typically network switches that aid other nodes with time synchronization; they
often sit between a master and a slave node providing time delay measurements.
To synchronize time, the PTP protocol starts by choosing a master source of
time.
It utilizes the Best Master Clock or BMC algorithm.
The algorithm
chooses the best, or most accurate clock from a PTP domain. The selection
is based on a few properties such as: quality, priority, variance and a unique
identiﬁer. The algorithm is fairly simple, it uses a hierarchical selection based
on these properties. The properties have a certain order that the protocol looks
at in order to determine the best clock:
• 1.
Priority I - This allows the end user to specify a certain clock by
giving it a certain priority over other clocks in the domain.
==PAGE:24==
16
Fundamentals
• 2. Class - The before mentioned roles. Each role has a speciﬁc priority,
e.g. GM clocks are often certainly more accurate than OC clocks.
• 3. Accuracy - The accuracy or oﬀset between the clock an UTC.
• 4. Variability - The variability of the clock. A quantiﬁer that indicates
how much a clock signal drifts from the original signal.
• 5. Priority II - A second priority selection property. This is generally
used if the other properties above are not met.
• 6. Unique identiﬁer - Some unique identiﬁer for a clock. This is typi-
cally the device MAC address.
After the best master clock has been determined for both the domain and each
sub-network in the domain, each of the clocks calculate the oﬀset between their
local clock and their master. The oﬀset is calculated by simply subtracting the
two timestamps:
θ = slave(t) −master(t)
To synchronize time between a master clock and a slave clock, the two follow
a similar synchronization protocol as PTP. As shown in the lower half of ﬁgure
2.5, the master clock (depicted as WR Master) starts oﬀthe process with a
Syncmessage, recording the timestamp of the time t1 of transmission. The sync
message is then received by the slave, which records the timestamp t2 at the
arrival of the message[noa20b].
Depending on the hardware on the network, the sync message is either followed
by Follow_Up message which contains the timestamp t1, or the timestamp is
embedded in the previous Sync request.
Typically, a Follow_Up is used to
pass the timestamp if the hardware of the sender does not support hardware
timestamping. This is because a software produced timestamp could introduce
inaccuracies if it lacks the hardware power to simultaneously process both the
timestamp and the message [noa20b].
This is then followed by a Delay_Req which contains t3 which is the recorded
timestamp at the time of transmission. When the master clocks then records
the ﬁnal timestamp t4, which is the arrival of the Delay_Req message. The
timestamp t4 is then sent back to the slave, who now has enough information
to calculate the path delay and oﬀset[noa20b].
The delay can be calculated using [noaf]
θ = [(t2 −t1) + (t4 −t3)]/2
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Time
17
And the oﬀset using [noaf]
δ = (t2 −t1) −θ
2.1.2.3
White Rabbit Project
The White Rabbit Project (WRP) is an open source timing distribution network
that builds on the PTP protocol and can achieve synchronization at a nanosec-
ond level. More formally, the goal of the project is to create an "ethernet-based
network with low-latency, deterministic packet delivery and network-wide, trans-
parent, high-accuracy timing distribution" [LWSA11].
Initially created at CERN to improve the general timing systems for the Large
Hadron Collider, the WRP is the result of a collaborative eﬀort between multiple
companies and laboratories including CERN and GSI.
Figure 2.3: An overview of a typical WRP network.
(image source:
[LWSA11])
Although it is generally referred to as a protocol, WRP is more than "just a
timing protocol". To be pedantic, it is a collection of hardware and software
that together forms a synchronized ethernet network which at the core relies on
an extension of PTP for time synchronization on the network.
==PAGE:26==
18
Fundamentals
To get a better insight into the idea behind WRP and how it can achieve it’s
high accuracy, let’s examine it’s three main features[LWSA11]:
Ethernet Synchronization (SyncE)
The WRP relies on ethernet, more
speciﬁcally the IEEE 802.3z (1000Base-LX) for communication on the network.
The IEEE 802.3z standard requires a full duplex Gigabit ethernet over an op-
tical ﬁber connection. Requiring the use of ﬁber optic connections instead of
copper has two primary beneﬁts: It virtually eliminates any problems with elec-
tromagnetic interference and allows for a simpler modulation of the ethernet
messages.
The nodes on the network are then synchronized using an extension to the
ethernet stack. In a typical ethernet network the nodes on the network can
transmit and receive in an asynchronous manner, i.e. nodes are not blocked
while other nodes are transmitting.
Additionally in a typical network, each
node has its own local oscillator, which in brief is a device/component that
generates a constant signal at a certain frequency in a closed loop.
In order for two nodes to be able to communicate on the network, the two must
share the same frequency to correctly modulate the data that is transmitted.
This leads us to the one of the fundamental problems with ethernet; as each
node on the network oscillates at a very similar but diﬀerent frequency, which
is typically solved by preﬁxing ethernet frames with an preamble, which is then
used to syntonize the two nodes.
Figure 2.4: Ethernet Synchronization from a shared timing reference. (image
courtesy of Maciej Lipinski, White Rabbit presentation.)
However, WRP takes another approach to this synchronization problem. In-
stead of preﬁxing ethernet frames with a preamble, a time signal from the mas-
ter reference source is passed over the ethernet medium and shared between the
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Time
19
nodes. Allowing all of the network nodes to syntonize their local frequency to a
single point, that is the timing source.
Time Synchronization (WR-PTP)
As previously mentioned, the WRP is
based on PTP. To make WRP more useful and more likely to be used, a lot of
eﬀort has been put into assuring that white rabbit solutions are fully compatible
with PTP. In order to ensure compatibility, WR-PTP or White Rabbit PTP
was created, which is an extension to the PTP protocol.
On a WRP network, a network switch acts as a PTP Boundary Clock and nodes
or clocks that have a single PTP port act as an Ordinary Clock. This forms a
network of Master-to-Slave (M-to-S) links that are independently synchronized
as shown in ﬁgure 2.3 (red-blue arrows). Otherwise, the WR-PTP protocol more
or less follows and behaves as the PTP protocol.
Figure 2.5: A overview of the white rabbit synchronization process. The lower
half shows the synchronization process of PTP. (image source:
[LWSA11])
==PAGE:28==
20
Fundamentals
Phase Frequency Detection using DDMTD
To better estimate the round
trip time between nodes, the white rabbit project relies on phase frequency de-
tection using Digital Dual Mixer Time Diﬀerence (DDMTD). In brief, DDMTD
allows for a very precise phase measurement between two signals[MAS+10],
speciﬁcally the phase between a master clock and a slave. This in part allows
the round-trip-delay between the two nodes to be resolved down to a picosecond
level[DWF+16].
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Time
21
2.1.3
Satellite Time Transfers
Time transfer via satellite has become the standard way for time comparison. It
allows clocks to be compared using simple equipment over long distances with
great accuracy. While this mean of time transfer has its beneﬁts, it does come
at the cost of security as wireless signals are subject to spooﬁng and jamming
attacks.
As later examined, all time services depend on satellite links in one way or
another, either as a part of the time realization process or in the contribution
to UTC. Therefore, this subsection will look at the three most common satellite
based time transfer methods.
2.1.3.1
One Way Time Transfer
One Way Time Transfer is the most conspicuous way of doing time transfer. In
abstract it is the method of transmitting a time signal over a one-way communi-
cation channel. An obvious example of a one way time transfer is a user utilizing
a GNSS receiver, to acquire time from a satellite, i.e. time is transferred one
way down from the satellite in space and to the receiver.
While this method is the most simple way to transfer time, it does lack in
performance or more speciﬁcally accuracy. To understand the inherent problem
with One Way Time Transfer and to better appreciate how the more advanced
methods solve this problem, lets take a more concrete look at method works.
To perform one way time transfer, a satellite A transmits its local time, which
is typically derived from an atomic clock onboard the satellite. The electro-
magnetic waves that make up the transmitted signal have to travel through the
earths atmosphere before it hits the ground station receiver of user B. The path
that the signal must travel introduces both noise and more importantly delay
dab, that the receiver must try to account for[noak].
Figure 2.6: One Way Time Transfer overview. (Image source: [nis])
However, one of the advantages to satellite broadcasts is that there is no ob-
struction to the signal. Opposed to terrestrial radio such as the DCF-77 where
==PAGE:30==
22
Fundamentals
the signal might pass have to through buildings or other objects before reaching
the receiver.
This allows the receiving end to calculate the propagation de-
lay and other errors with decent accuracy, which is roughly in the microsecond
range[Lom12].
Figure 2.7: Overview of time uncertainties of a simple GNSS receiver. (Image
source: [Lom12])
As shown in ﬁgure 2.7 the uncertainties in a signal path can quickly add up.
As communication is strictly one way, any delays to the signal as it propagates
down to earth can be hard to cancel out.
This is further demonstrated in
subsection2.1.3.3
2.1.3.2
Common View Time Transfer
Building on the previous concept of transferring time from a satellite to a re-
ceiver, common view time transfer uses the same idea of one-way transfer but
adds a link for two-way communication between the two nodes that are to be
synchronized.
To compare time between clocks A and B as shown in ﬁgure2.8, the two nodes
receive a time signal from the same satellite in space. Each node then compares
==PAGE:31==
2.1 Time
23
Figure 2.8: Overview of a Common View Time Transfer.
(Image source:
[pam16])
its local clock to the time that was received from the satellite and then calculates
the propagation delay[pam16], just as in the previous one-way time transfer
example. To further cancel out any delay and other disturbances, the two nodes
now exchange their observations over some communication method, where the
two results are subtracted.
Before simply subtracting the two times to ﬁgure out the oﬀset, the distance
between the two nodes must be taken into consideration. If the two nodes are
spaced far apart, the signal will travel two diﬀerent paths to reach the two
receivers. This can cause one signal to be delayed since they might not travel
through the diﬀerent ionospheres at diﬀerent angles.
The diﬀerence can be
calculated using [pam16]:
A −B −(dA −dB) = [A −GPS −da] −[B −GPS −dB]
where A, B are the local times of the two nodes, GPS is the local time of the
==PAGE:32==
24
Fundamentals
satellite and dA, dB is the signal delay of each path.
2.1.3.3
Two-Way Satellite Time and Frequency Transfer
The most accurate way of doing clock comparisons is via a Two-Way Satellite
Time and Frequency Transfer (TWSTFT)[WSHH14]. It is the current stan-
dard of doing time and/or frequency transfer and is the preferred method of
the BIPM institute for comparing local timescales UTC(k) to TAI/UTC. The
method in itself is relatively simple but, does require expensive equipment since
both ground stations need a transmitter and a receiver.
Under ideal conditions the time diﬀerence between two nodes can be determined
with a very low uncertainty of around one nanosecond [BPF].
Figure 2.9: Overview of the TWSTFT process. (Image source: [BPF])
In short, to calculate the time diﬀerence between two clocks in separate ground
stations, a time signal is transmitted back and forth between the two until the
diﬀerence can be computed. The process starts with ground station 1 transmit-
ting a timing signal at a pre-determined time.
==PAGE:33==
2.1 Time
25
The timing signal transmitted by the station is Binary-Phase-Shift keying (BPSK)
modulated and synchronized to a timing reference from the local clock with a
1PPS pulse. The signal additionally contains a PRN code speciﬁc to the ground
station[noal].
The 1PPS signal then travels from station 1 into space where it is instantly
rebroadcasted back to earth where it is received by the second ground station.
When the signal is received by the second station it is demodulated back into
a 1PPS signal, which is then passed to a Time Interval Counter where it is
compared to the local clock. The time of the signal arrival is also recorded and
kept[noal].
The second ground station then rebroadcasts the signal back to the ﬁrst station,
in addition to its own timing signal based on its local clock such as ground
station 1. The stations then continue this exchange of information, repeating
the process typically the course of a few minutes.
The diﬀerence in time between the two stations can then be calculated by sub-
tracting the two times.
Additionally, things must be accounted for in order
such as the delay between two ground stations, among other things such as
ionospheric delays and the rotation of both the earth and the satellite.
==PAGE:34==
26
Fundamentals
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Time Services
This section will investigate how the diﬀerent countries that are in close prox-
imity to Denmark have implemented their timekeeping systems. We will take a
close look at the diﬀerent infrastructures and designs, highlighting some of the
interesting characteristics of each architecture.
It is important to keep in mind, that both the amount of information available
and the detail of the provided information varies greatly between the countries.
While some of the surveyed countries provide extensive and detailed descriptions
of their systems, others oﬀer only partial or no information.
Later on in the design section, some of the key design goals for the system will
introduced which the design must strive to meet.
While these goals will be
discussed further later on, it is still important to keep these concepts in mind
while examining diﬀerent systems.
To better illustrate how these design goals play into the diﬀerent systems, a brief
summary at the end of the chapter will provided which is meant to highlighting
some of the most interesting takes on the goals from the diﬀerent countries.
Accuracy
Assigning a single discrete number that correctly represent the ac-
curacy of the whole system is very hard, as there are many sub-factors that
==PAGE:36==
28
Time Services
must be considered.
Therefore, to give a rough idea of the accuracy of the
whole system, the following factors will be used to establish some sort of a base
line:
• The oﬀset between the local time scale and UTC [UTC −UTC(k)] ac-
cording to BIPM’s circular T, issue No.389 (May 2020). The average of
the seven oﬀset values as given in Circular-T will be used.
• The available method of clock comparison via satellites, e.g. TWSTFT vs
Common View
• The best (most accurate) available dissemination method, e.g. PTP >
radio broadcast.
Availability
Availability of the system refers to how available the system is
to the end users. To give an idea of the factor of availability, each system will
be evaluated simply by the number of diﬀerent means of time dissemination,
among other things that might aﬀect the availability of the system.
Resiliency
Resiliency of the system will be estimated by a couple of factors
namely, the level of redundancy of both:
• The redundancy of the system as whole.
• The redundancy of the system services.
Security
The following factors will be used to give a rough image of the state
of security for the system:
• Availability and prioritization of secure dissemination protocols.
• Reliance on wireless communication such as GNSS or radio waves.
• Physical security of the facilities
While the obviously better approach to estimating security for a system is to use
a risk analysis framework, such as the one in later sections; it would drastically
change the scope of the thesis.
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Time in Sweden
29
3.1
Time in Sweden
In 2013 the Swedish Post and Telecom Authority (PTS) issued recommenda-
tions for upgrades to Sweden’s existing time infrastructure [noai].
The PTS
pointed out that telecom providers require accurate time in order to be able to
operate correctly, and thereby deciding to "strengthen the national time source
availability as a general national service"[EHJS19].
In a collaborative eﬀort, the PTS, Netnod Internet Exchange and the National
Metrological Institute (RISE) developed a distributed time infrastructure that is
redundant and highly robust. The upgraded system has been operational since
December 2015, continuously distributing the national time scale UTC(SP).
As a result, Sweden has quite an impressive time distribution system consisting
of a total ﬁve time nodes that are distributed throughout the country, each
containing two cesium clocks that continuously realize two time scales in parallel.
In total there are 28 atomic clocks in Sweden’s arsenal[BEJH14]:
• 11 High performance cesium standards.
• 8 Standard performance cesium standards.
• 9 Active hydrogen masers.
3.1.1
Infrastructure
The ﬁve nodes which are strategically located in Malmö, Göteborg, Stockholm,
Sundsvall and Luleå, are geographically distributed in order to provide redun-
dancy in case any of the cities were to become isolated. If one of the node fails
or faces loss of connectivity, the other four can still provide accurate time. It
is noted that only four out of ﬁve nodes are operational, where work is still
ongoing on the ﬁfth node. Figure 3.1 shows the location of the ﬁve nodes.
The time nodes are located in secure, physically strong facilities that can main-
tain the necessary environment required for the equipment. To ensure the relia-
bility and uptime of the system, the nodes are all equipped with uninterruptible
powers supplies (UPS) and diesel power generators. The equipment is addition-
ally stored inside an EMP proof container.
The crucial timekeeping equipment is connected to a dedicated 24 vDC battery
(through a UPS) which hinders noise and other interference from the mains
==PAGE:38==
30
Time Services
Figure 3.1: The location of the ﬁve time nodes in Sweden.
power supply that might aﬀect the performance timing equipment. On battery
power the system can last up to three days.
In each of the nodes two versions of UTC(SP) are realized in parallel. Figure 3.2
shows the structure of the node. The output from two Cesium clocks is piped
into two High-Resolution Oﬀset Generators (HROG) which allows for the time
to be steered by adjusting the frequency and phase of the signal. Both time
scales are then used and directly distributed[EHJS19].
Each node is equipped with an GNSS receiver for clock comparison via satellites.
Using Common View Time Transfer the diﬀerence between the local time scale
of each node and the master time scale is measured.
The measured data is
then distributed to the nodes and is then used to steer the time[EHJS19]. The
nodes are calibrated bi-annually to account for any delays which might skew the
accuracy of the measurements, using a mobile GNSS calibration station.
All of the nodes are connected to the facilities in Stockholm via ﬁber optics,
allowing time transfer to be performed using PTP (1588v2) via ﬁber connections
as a backup in case of failure[EHJS19].
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Time in Sweden
31
Figure 3.2: Overview of the time nodes in Sweden. (image source: [EHJS19])
3.1.2
Time dissemination
NTP
The main method of dissemination is via NTP. Each time node contains
two NTP servers that are directly connected to the output from two HROG’s,
and use both signals for distribution, prioritizing between the two sources.
Interestingly, the NTP servers are implemented on Field Programmable Gate
Array or FPGA’s, which in short are fully programmable hardware devices that
allow for very low-level bare metal implementations. This allows for a lower
latency implementation of the service since less overhead is included (such as
an OS).
According to Netnod, each of the servers are connected via four 10 Gb/s ethernet
links, which can "handle full wire speed NTP traﬃc on all ports"[EHJS19]. The
servers are measured to be accurate to within ±100ns.
In October 2019, Netnod announced the launch of one of the ﬁrst NTS enable
NTP services in the world. The service is free to use and only requires an NTP
client that supports NTS[noaj]. The three new servers are:
• nts.ntp.se (for users anywhere in the world)
• nts.sth1.ntp.se (for users close to Stockholm)
• nts.sth2.ntp.se (for users close to Stockholm)
==PAGE:40==
32
Time Services
PTP
Each node is additionally equipped with two PTP grandmaster clocks
for added redundancy. Much like the NTP servers, the two grandmaster clocks
are connected to both time scales and can switch between the two in case the
primary time scale fails. The PTP service is is connected using 1 Gb/s syn-
chronous ethernet, and is provided to end-users via either dark ﬁber or using
optical alien wavelength [EHJS19].
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Time in Finland
33
3.2
Time in Finland
Since 1976, the MIKES institute has been the authority for realization and
maintenance of legal time in Finland. MIKES which is a part of VTT Tech-
nical Research Centre in Finland guarantees that the oﬃcial time standard
UTC(MIKES) is accurate to within 10ns compared to UTC.
The national time scale UTC(MIKES) is realized by a single hydrogen maser,
steered by a collection of six clocks[MWM]:
• 3 Active hydrogen maser.
• 2 Cesium clocks.
• 1 Passive Hydrogen maser.
Figure 3.3: The location of the time node in Espoo
Despite being geographically similar to Sweden, Finland has not yet taken the
same fully geographically distributed approach; but seem to be moving towards
the same direction of a decentralized network. According to a 2018 paper, the
clocks have been divided and placed in four separate nodes[MWM].
Since 2013 the institute has conducted experiments with PTP-WR time transfer
over long distance links. As a result, a long distance ﬁber link was established
==PAGE:42==
34
Time Services
between the timing lab in Espoo, extending 950 km to a second lab in Kajaani.
At the time this was the longest White Rabbit link ever reported.
The experiment involved estimated the accuracy of time transfer using WRP
over the 950 km link, compared to traditional GPS time transfer. The results
of the experiment showed that the use of WRP technology is feasible for clock
comparisons/time transfer over long distance. During the study the agreement
between the two measurements of WRP and GPS remained within ±2ns over
three months [DWF+16].
A few year later, a similar research project was conducted in collaboration with
ministry of defence in Finland (MATINE). The study, tested time transfer be-
tween two hydrogen clocks over a 280 km Distance. Results of the study showed
that the time delay between the link was estimated to be ±1ns. The data gath-
ered from the study was then used in simulations which concluded that the
method could work on a nationwide scale[MWM].
3.2.1
Infrastructure
The laboratory building was speciﬁcally designed and built to create the best
environment for the equipment. For example, both the location and the design
of the building itself are speciﬁcally chosen to minimize vibrations or electro-
magnetic interference, among other factors. Humidity and temperature levels
are also closely monitored and steered[LKK+11].
The power for the building itself comes from two diﬀerent, single megavolt-
ampere transformers, where one provides electricity to equipment such as air
conditioning, lighting and other equipment that can be considered "dirty". The
other transformer provides power to "clean" equipment such as computers or
other laboratory equipment[KMMI10].
The atomic clocks and necessary equipment are powered by an uninterruptible
power supplies (UPS) that are additionally connected to diesel power genera-
tors in case of power failure. Requiring the equipment to be connected to an
UPS provides a couple of beneﬁts: it further ensures that the electricity to the
equipment is clean, since it is essentially just a big battery, and it provides more
redundancy since it wont immediately shut down if the power fails.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Time in Finland
35
3.2.2
Time dissemination
Currently, the main method of time dissemination to the public seems to be via
NTP. The institute maintains two sets of NTP servers; one set free of charge
and the other subject to charge.
3.2.2.1
NTP
MIKES runs two sets of NTP servers, one public and the other set is private.
The set of private servers are considered the oﬃcial NTP servers and consist
of four stratum-1 servers. Users that require more accuracy can access these
private servers for a fee of e500 per year. The private servers currently serve
approximately 200 users, which are primarily organization such as universities,
public municipalities and other companies [noap].
The other set are public NTP servers which are open to anyone and free of
charge. The public servers consist of four stratum-2 servers which are synchro-
nized to the stratum-1 private servers. The public servers receive requests from
about 500.000 unique IPv4 address per day. The following is a list of the four
public servers:
• time.mikes.ﬁ
• time1.mikes.ﬁ
• time2.mikes.ﬁ
• time3.mikes.ﬁ
3.2.2.2
PTP
Although no public information is provided on the PTP service at MIKES,
a response to an email inquiry revealed that the laboratory does oﬀer time
synchronization via PTPv2. The lab runs a single PTPv2 grandmaster that
currently serves only a few users.
However, as noted in the same response,
MIKES expects a future growth in users coming from 5G test-networks, smart-
grid laboratories and other time critical infrastructures.
==PAGE:44==
36
Time Services
3.2.2.3
MIKES - Radio Broadcast
MIKES now maintains two radio transmitters that continuously broadcast a
time signal from the MIKES facility in Espoo. Initially the ﬁrst transmitter was
added as a result of the digitalization of TV links, which were previously used
to disseminate time. The digitalization eﬀort made the accuracy considerably
worse, as it introduced random delays into the system.
The available public information only contained information on the older trans-
mitter which is a 100W transmitter connected to vertical dipole antenna. The
transmitted signal has a carrier frequency of 25MHz and uses the same method
of modulation and time code as the DCF77. However, there are slight modiﬁ-
cations to the signal such as an added 1kHz amplitude modulation. The carrier
wave is generated via a signal generator that is locked to the frequency output
from a cesium atomic clock.
An email inquiry to VTT MIKES revealed that there is a second transmitter
and that it has a carrier wave of 89 kHz, which is longwave radio. No further
information on the transmitter equipment is provided, but it is assumed to
be same or similar to the older transmitter. Using longwave radio allows for
better signal propagation and therefore the "newer" transmitter has a much
better range of about 200Km. The older transmitter has an eﬀective range of
approximately 10Km which is enough to cover the intended area which is the
capital region inside "Kehä III" [KMI].
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Time in United Kingdom
37
3.3
Time in United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom the national time scale UTC(NPL) is kept and main-
tained by the National Physical Laboratory (NPL). NPL is a public entity that
is owned by the Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS).
The NPL institute is one of the leading research institutes in the ﬁeld of atomic
clocks; The cesium based atomic clock which is used by the majority of time-
keeping labs and institutes was actually invented by two scientists working at
the NPL in 1955.
The realization of the national timescale is based on the output of a hydrogen
maser, which is steered with the help of two cesium fountains (NPL-CsF2) that
are designed and built by the institute.
A 2011 study which examined the
accuracy of the cesium clock concluded that it was in fact twice as accurate
than previously though [Pal11].
Figure 3.4: The location of the NPL lab in London
3.3.1
Infrastructure
In an online webinar in May 2020, Dr. Leon Lobo the head of the National
Timing Centre (NPL) discussed the future of the NPL timing lab and the new
plans to improve the infrastructure in the UK. This is following the news from
earlier that year, where the government announced plans to invest 36 million
==PAGE:46==
38
Time Services
pounds in the national timing center[uk-].
Dr. Leon discussed some of the key goals for the future of UK’s time infras-
tructure, which is to improve the resilience of the system. In brief, the pro-
posed future plans focus on improving the resilience by adding new nodes to
the existing infrastructure with improved interconnectivity, i.e creating a geo-
graphically distributed system with improved connectivity that forms a mesh
network[noam].
The plan involves establishing a minimum of four diﬀerent realizations of the
time scale, each based on diﬀerent clocks and other hardware. Each scale will
be steered independently to cesium fountain measurements, such as the current
steering method does. This will allow for automatic fail-over switching between
the four time references[WEL+19].
3.3.2
Time dissemination
NPL is responsible for dissemination of time to both the private sector and to
the public. The institute does this over a couple of diﬀerent mediums: radio
broadcast, using classic internet protocols and using ﬁber links.
3.3.2.1
MSF - Radio Broadcast
The main way of distributing time in the UK is via a transmitter located in
Anthorn.
The transmission is relatively powerful with an eﬀective power of
15kW. For reference the DCF77 transmitter in Germany has an eﬀective power
around 30 −35kW. The antenna is "substantially omnidirectional"[Laba] with
a range of approximately 1000km. To be more speciﬁc, the institute states that
the eﬀective signal strength is around 10mV/m at 100km and around 100µV/m
at 1000 km[Laba].
In practice this means the signal should reach all of the UK and neighboring
countries such as Belgium, the Netherlands and a good portion of Denmark,
Germany and France.
The longwave signal is broadcasted at 60 kHz and is backed by three atomic
clocks, where one is the main time source used to generate the pulse and the
other two for backup. The atomic clocks are steered and monitored from the
NPL institute over a PSTN link[Labb]. The reference signal from the atomic
clock is passed to a unit that is responsible for generating the time code.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Time in United Kingdom
39
3.3.2.2
NTP
Not much information is provided on NPL’s NTP servers other than the institute
provides two stratum-2 servers to the public [Gre]. The servers are connected
to the atomic clocks at the institute and receive a direct 1PPS signal from the
output of the distribution switch.
The two servers which run version three of the protocol are:
• ntp1.npl.co.uk
• ntp2.npl.co.uk
3.3.2.3
PTP (NPLTime)
The NPLTime service is a commercial service provided by the NPL institute.
At the core, the service utilizes PTP to distribute time to users and organiza-
tions. The service is popular among British ﬁnancial organizations as it provides
a complete solution that includes service-level agreements on accuracy, trace-
ability and security; providing customers with a guarantee of compliance with
regulations such as MiFID II.
An interesting note on the NPLTime service is that it is not limited to the
United Kingdom; in collaboration with other companies the service has been
extended Milan, Frankfurt and Stockholm over long distance ﬁber links.
==PAGE:48==
40
Time Services
3.4
Time in Germany
In Germany, the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB) is responsible
for both keeping the oﬃcial time and distributing it to the public. Since 2010
the oﬃcial time scale UTC(PTB) is steered by an active hydrogen maser atomic
clock synchronized to UTC. The time scale is the basis for legal time and other
activity in Germany. Additionally PTB is one of the many laboratories that
contribute to UTC.
The oﬃcial legal time in Germany as deﬁned in the German Time Act is Central
European Time (CET), later adding Central European Summer Time (CEST).
CEST is observed from the last Sunday in March to the last Sunday in October,
when it switches back to CET. The two time zones are deﬁned as UTC plus
some oﬀset: CET = UTC(PTB) + 1h and CEST = UTC(PTB) + 2h.
Figure 3.5: The location of the PTB lab in Braunschweig, Germany
3.4.1
Infrastructure
The PTB institute operates a total of ten atomic clocks: two cesium fountain
clocks, two calcium beam clocks, three commercial cesium clocks and three
active hydrogen masers. However as previously mentioned, UTC(PTB) has been
primarily steered by an Active Hydrogen Maser since the system was partially
upgraded in February 2010[BSPY11a].
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Time in Germany
41
The work in 2010 upgraded the steering mechanism for the time scale. It moved
away from relying on a single cesium clock to a system that has two AHMs;
one master and one for redundancy, in addition to that it uses a clever steering
method that takes input from all of the available clocks, among other references.
This allows the older less reliable hardware to still be eﬀectively used.
The
updated steering method introduces sanity checks to the process and triggers
alarms if it detects any large deviations [BSPY11a].
Figure 3.6: Overview of the steering of the output from the hydrogen maser.
(image source: [BSPY11a])
Figure3.7 shows an overview of the UTC(PTB) realization process. The Active
Hydrogen Maser which is the main frequency reference generates a 5 MHz pulse
which goes into a Phase Micro Stepper (PMS). The role of the PMS is to shift the
5MHz pulse by some relative oﬀset δfsteer, allowing the realization of UTC(PTB)
to be adjusted [BSPY11b].
The oﬀset consists of three additive components which make up the total oﬀset:
δfsteer = (δfRef + δfRate) + δfOﬀset
The ﬁrst component δfRef adjusts the frequency of the hydrogen maser using the
calculated oﬀset from BIPM’s Circular-T. The second component δfRate is used
to represent the rate of each individual reference clock in oﬀset to TAI. The ﬁnal
component δfOﬀset is used to control the long term steering of UTC(PTB) and
is calculated using the time diﬀerence at "the last reported day day in the most
recent issue of Circular T" [BSPY11b], where LRD indicates last remaining
day:
δfOﬀset = {UTC −UTC(PTB)}LRD/60
To better ensure the availability of the system, a second time scale UTH(PTB)
==PAGE:50==
42
Time Services
Figure 3.7: Overview of the realization of the two time scales. (image source:
[BSPY11a])
is realized in parallel. As the realization of UTC(PTB) is based on a reference
from a single hydrogen maser, output can be switch over the second time scale
UTH(PTB) acting as fail-over. It is however noted that manual intervention is
required to switch the signal sources[BSPY11b]. Figure 3.7 shows an overview
of the system and the duplicate timescales.
3.4.2
Time dissemination
The are three oﬃcial ways of time dissemination in Germany: a longwave radio
broadcast, Telephone Time service over the public telephone network and over
the internet using NTP.
3.4.2.1
DCF77
DCF77 is a special time synchronization protocol that was developed at PTB,
similar to the MSF radio signal in the United Kingdom.
The DCF77 radio
station which is located in Mainﬂingen constantly transmits a signal generated
from three separate atomic clocks. It is estimated that over 100 million receivers
are in operation and depend on DCF77. It is important to note that the trans-
mitted signal is in accordance to legal time in Germany, which means that the
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Time in Germany
43
oﬀset for summer/winter time is added [bau08].
Figure 3.8: Overview of the DCF77 station and the monitoring in Braun-
schweig. (image source:[bau08])
Figure3.8 shows an overview of the the DCF77 facility. The timing signal is
generated from the three atomic clocks and then passed over to the hands of
Media Broadcast GmbH who handle the transmission. The signal is transmitted
using a 50kW transistor radio that consists of 48 modules, each capable of a 1kW
transmission. Additionally, there is an older vacuum tube based transmitter that
can take over the transmission in case the other fails[bau08].
The two radios are each connected to a vertical omnidirectional antenna that
are 150m (main) and 200m (secondary) in height. It is estimated that this setup
emits approximately 30-35Kw of Equivalent Isotropic Radiated Power, which is
a measurement of the maximum amount of power that can be radiated from the
antenna-transmitter setup[bau08].
The timing signal is transmitted over long wave radio with a carrier frequency
of 77.5kHz. The signal is amplitude modulated and encapsulates a time code
that is pulse-width encoded. At the start of each minute a new time code is
transmitted containing a complete date time reference (minute, hour, day, day
of week, month, and year) for the following minute[noa20a].
This time string is binary coded where each bit is represented by lowering the
amplitude of the signal to about 15% for a given period[noa17a]. The amplitude
==PAGE:52==
44
Time Services
Figure 3.9: The encoding scheme of the DCF77 time code.
(image source:
[bau08])
is lowered for 100ms for a binary zero and 200ms for a binary one. Figure[4.6]
shows the encoding scheme of the time code.
While this means of time dissemination is in way ﬂexible and does provide
more availability, it still faces inherent problem that is the lack of security. The
signal is obviously transmitted in clear-text and no other security mechanism is
provided, e.g. MAC authentication.
3.4.2.2
NTP
PTB’s NTP servers all run on the newest version of the protocol NTPv4, more
speciﬁcally software version 4.3[noa20d]. One interesting thing to note is that
according to PTB’s website, the NTP servers are synchronized independently
of GNSS. As the depicted in ﬁgure 3.10 the NTP server is directly connected
to the output reference from PTB’s atomic clock over a ﬁber optic connection.
Additionally, it takes input from a radio clock that is tuned to the DCF77
broadcast, this is done for added control [noa17b].
Additionally, PTB oﬀers authenticated time synchronization over NTP for a
fee. The authentication mechanism is assumed to be the basic authentication
system as deﬁned in the protocol speciﬁcation, which is based on symmetric
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Time in Germany
45
Figure 3.10: Overview
of
PTB’s
NTP
dissemination
system.
(image
source:[noa20c])
keys. Users that require secure transmission of time information to ensure both
the authenticity and integrity of the message can apply for keys, which are gen-
erated by PTB and then shared via some channel. According to the information
pamphlet the messages are signed using AES-128-CMAC with SHA1 keys[ptb].
Previously, the system relied on MD5 keys but fortunately this is to be phased
out. As of April 2020, MD5 keys are no longer generated, however any previ-
ously issued keys will still remain valid until their expiration date (1 year from
date of generation)[ptb].
The following is a list of PTB’s public NTP servers:
• ptbtime1.ptb.de
• ptbtime2.ptb.de
• ptbtime3.ptb.de
==PAGE:54==
46
Time Services
3.5
Time in France
The oﬃcial time scale in France UTC(OP) is realized and maintained at the
Observatoire de Paris (OP). The laboratory is one of the many that contribute
to UTC, while additionally acting as a pivot for the French contribution to
UTC[noag]. This means that all contributions from approximately 30 diﬀerent
atomic clocks from about ten diﬀerent laboratories, are aggregated by OP via
GPS common view and then passed on to the BIPM[noar].
Figure 3.11: The location of the Paris Observatory, France
In 2012, the method for the realization of UTC(OP) was redesigned and rebuilt.
The new approach moved from the traditional method of steering based on a
Cesium reference, to a steering based on active hydrogen masers[RBC+16]. This
is similar to the upgrade approach taken in Germany3.4.1. This updated steering
method drastically improved the accuracy as can be seen in ﬁgure 3.12.
The ﬁgure shows the time diﬀerence between UTC and UTC(OP). The upgraded
steering mechanism deployed at MJD 56229, resulted in a sharp increase in
accuracy. According to a 2016 paper, the average time diﬀerence between the
two time scales had remained the same for the last three years, with an average
diﬀerence of 0.33 ns[RBC+16].
==PAGE:55==
3.5 Time in France
47
Figure 3.12: Time diﬀerence between UTC and UTC(OP) before and after
the upgrade (MJD 56229). (image source: [RBC+16])
3.5.1
Infrastructure
The upgraded steering infrastructure consists of two diﬀerent output scales,
SKK1 (old) and SKK2 (new 2012). The two scales are realized in parallel based
output from two diﬀerent hydrogen masers, which in turn allows for swapping
between the two scales in case one were to fail[RBC+16].
The older cesium clocks which were previously in charge of realizing the time
scale, were put to good use. As shown in ﬁgure 3.13 the four clocks FO1, FO2-
Cs, FOM and FO2-Rb are still used to help steer and monitor. The four clocks
which are phase locked to one of the hydrogen masers, continuously compare
their frequency to the hydrogen maser allowing it to be steered as it very slowly
drifts out of sync [RBC+16].
What is unique about this system is the switching mechanism, which allows
for the switching between the time scales in addition to being able to switch
between the four hydrogen masers.
This allows for choosing between which
hydrogen maser is used to realize the time scale and the hydrogen maser that is
use in the oscillator loop to compare to the output[RBC+16].
The output switch shown in ﬁgure 3.13 (depicted in green as "SWITCH"), is
what ultimately decides which output scale should be used to output UTC(OP)
[RBC+16].
==PAGE:56==
48
Time Services
Figure 3.13: A system overview of the precision timing system
3.5.2
Time dissemination
Time dissemination is mainly provided via NTP and Longwave radio. Time dis-
semination is additionally oﬀered via a speaking clock over the public telephone
network.
3.5.2.1
NTP
LNE-SYRTE in collaboration with OP, runs two sets of NTP servers, one public
and the other set are reserved internal servers. The servers run NTP version 3
(RFC1305) with the current software version of 4.2.8. The servers are all located
on the campus of the Paris Observatoire[noae].
==PAGE:57==
3.5 Time in France
49
Not much further technical information is provided on the NTP servers, other
than it is noted that the servers are set up to use multiple reference servers,
to provide redundancy in case of failure. An overview of LNE-SYRTE’s NTP
servers can be seen in table3.1.
Server
Type
Access
Software
ntp.obspm.fr
Stratum-2
Public
ntpd 4.2.8p12
ntp-p1.obspm.fr
Stratum-1
Public
ntpd 4.2.8p13
ntp-p7.obspm.fr
Stratum-1
Internal
ntpd 4.2.8p13
ntp-p2.obspm.fr
Stratum-2
Internal
ntpd 4.2.8p12
Table 3.1: Overview of LNE-SYRTE NTP servers
3.5.2.2
ALS162 (TDF Time Signal)
One of the main means of time dissemination in France is via a longwave radio
broadcast from the ALS162, located in Allouis. The signal is broadcasted via
fairly powerful transmitter with a output power of 800 kW[noa20e].
The long wave radio signal which is is amplitude modulated, with a carrier
frequency of 162kHz, encapsulates a time code that is pulse-width encoded. At
the start of each minute a new time code is transmitted containing a complete
date time reference (minute, hour, day, day of week, month, and year) for the
following minute. The signal is then monitored by three diﬀerent laboratories
LNE-SYRTE, LNE-LFTB and France Horlogerie.[noan].
==PAGE:58==
50
Time Services
3.6
Summary
Now that the ﬁve countries have been examined, a brief summary of the notable
systems, that in some way adhere or demonstrate interesting characteristics that
meet the goals, as described in the beginning of the chapter 3.
Figure 3.14: Overview of the time labs from surveyed countries and their ap-
proximate locations.
Accuracy
The United Kingdom was determined to be "the most accurate",
purely based on the proposed guidelines:
The average oﬀset for the seven days was calculated based on the data from
issue 389 of Circular-T. The full issue can be found in Appendix B.
Oﬀset was calculated to be:
0.2 + (−0.9) + (−1.1) + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 1.3
7
= 0.1ns
The lab is additionally equipped with TWSTFT satellite equipment and sup-
ports time dissemination via PTP and WRP which are two of the most accurate
methods.
==PAGE:59==
3.6 Summary
51
Availability
The availability factor of between the ﬁve diﬀerent systems is
approximately the same. While the United Kingdom oﬀers the greatest amount
of diﬀerent dissemination services, both Sweden and Finland have incorporated
redundancy mechanisms into their systems which in turn aid with availability.
Resiliency
The Swedish system is arguably the most resilient out of the sur-
veyed countries. As previously examined, the time nodes each maintain a dual
setup of every crucial service and therefore all need to fail simultaneously in
order to cause a complete system outage.
Security
Swedish system presents the strongest level of security. The facilities
that houses the time nodes are "secure and physically strong"[EHJS19] and oﬀer
EMP protection for the crucial equipment.
In partnership with netnod, the Swedish time service was one of the ﬁrst in the
world to oﬀer NTS secured NTP, which provides a new level of security to the
end-users of the service.
However, the system does depend satellite links for the time transfer between
the nodes by default.
Before concluding this section, it is important to note that while some countries
have been estimated to have a better level of accuracy or any of the other factors,
it does not imply that the other systems are somehow weak or otherwise ﬂawed.
==PAGE:60==
52
Time Services
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4
Developing a Time Service
for Denmark
In the previous chapter we examined the characteristics of diﬀerent timekeeping
infrastructures. In this chapter we want to use some of the ﬁndings to help with
the design of a good timekeeping infrastructure for Denmark.
As previously discussed, the current state of Denmark’s timekeeping system (or
the lack thereof) is a concern. In the following sections will go into the details
of a design proposal for a new state-of-the-art system for Denmark. First, the
design will be presented and compared to some of the systems that were seen in
the previous chapter, followed by an examination of the security aspect of the
system.
When designing a timekeeping infrastructure such as this one there are many
things that need to be considered such as time, cost, robustness, accuracy and
especially security. How do you keep a public system such as this one, or any
system for that matter, from being attacked?
A way to do this is to use some sort of a risk assessment tool that can help
with identifying security risks in a system. There are many diﬀerent methods
and frameworks out there to choose from, such as OCTAVE, STRIDE, PASTA,
NIST or the CORAS method. Some of the systems are designed for use in large
organizations with huge number of assets and scenarios, while others are more
==PAGE:62==
54
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
simple and more visual.
To conduct the risk analysis for the proposed design, the CORAS method was
chosen. This is simply because the CORAS method is very visual and requires
information to be visually modeled, and would compliment the thesis. Addi-
tionally it is relatively simple and doesn’t involve much of any business related
procedures and tasks meant to appeal to larger organizations. More detail is
provided on the CORAS method in the risk analysis section.
4.1
Requirements
Before diving into the system design we must ﬁrst establish some fundamentals.
What are the goals and desired outcomes for the system? How can we design
a "good system" without knowing what a "good system" is? This section will
look at some of the assumptions and requirements that the system must meet.
Lets start with the goals, what are we building the system for and what do we
expect from it. By looking at some of the pros and cons of the systems from
the analysis chapter we can get some hints to what the requirements should
be. Following are the proposed non-functional requirements that the design will
focus on (in no particular order):
Accuracy
In the most simplest form, the system has to be accurate in regards
to time. To be more speciﬁc the system must be accurate in two contexts:
• In the context of realization: time diﬀerence between the local time of the
system UTC(DFM) and UTC is minimal. I.e. any drift in time should be
minimal.
• In the context of dissemination: the system has to be able to deliver a
time signal to the end user with a certain accuracy.
As accuracy is a relative concept, it can be hard to quantify in terms of a discrete
number. Therefore to help establish base guidelines for the range of accuracy,
two things will be used for reference: The baseline requirements from BIPM
and the results from the surveyed countries.
The proposed requirements for accuracy are as follows:
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Requirements
55
• As a basis for outer boundaries, the diﬀerence between UTC(DFM) and
UTC can not exceed ±100ns as per BIPMS recommendations.
• As a basis for optimal boundaries, the diﬀerence between UTC(DFM) and
UTC, should be in the range of ±1-20ns
• At least one of the available dissemination methods must meet the re-
quirements of the MiFID II.
Availability
Since we are designing a public system that is intended to be used
by the public of Denmark, it has to be available to the people. This means that
the methods of time dissemination must be utilized in a way that ﬁts Denmark.
e.g. Denmark has a relatively good network infrastructure and therefore using
internet protocols to distribute time is arguable more eﬀective than longwave
radio.
However, it must be taken into consideration that Denmark has a very particular
geography. The kingdom of Denmark consists of a single peninsula which is
Jutland and then the rest consists of 443 islands. In addition, Denmark includes
two autonomous territories that are Greenland and the Faroe Islands. For the
purpose of this thesis, the two countries are considered separate entities and are
therefore out of scope and will not be taken into consideration.
To summarize, the system must be designed to use the proper methods of time
dissemination that best align with the environmental or other factors situation.
Thereby maximizing the amount of people that are able to access the system.
Resilience
The system must be able to withstand things such as hardware
failures, loss of connectivity, power outages amongst other unexpected events.
The main services of the system should still be at least somewhat functional if
any of the sub-system fail. Therefore the system design should be conducted
in a way that maximizes resilience. To do this we want to enforce redundancy
where it is possible and avoid any designs that introduce a single point of failure.
If we look back at Sweden’s infrastructure we can see a good example of this. The
time nodes are strategically distributed throughout the country, thus avoiding
a single point of failure.
Additionally, each node has two atomic clocks for
redundancy. If we examine Denmark’s geography this is something that applies
very well. Considering that Denmark consists mostly of small islands it is not
radical to consider the event of parts becoming isolated from each other.
==PAGE:64==
56
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
Security
The system should utilize any best practices when available, for ex-
ample by minimizing the use of unsecure wireless connections or using encrypted
channels to ensure safe communication.
To help set some requirements and summarize, we can take some of good and
bad things observed in the analysis chapter and compile it into a list.
• Communication should go over secure channels whenever possible.
• Physical connections should be prioritized over wireless connections.
• Access to the system should be restricted and require authentication when-
ever possible, this includes:
– All physical access to the system e.g. facilities, equipment, networks.
– All virtual access to the system e.g. limiting remote access, general
access controls.
– Use of default credentials should be forbidden e.g.
web interface
access for calibration equipment, FTP, etc.
• Software and hardware should follow latest standards and should be kept
up to date.
– Software services should be actively monitored for vulnerabilities.
– Use of secure software should be prioritized, e.g. using SFTP over
standard FTP, NTS over NTP.
4.2
System Design
This section examines the design details of the proposed infrastructure of a
time realization system for Denmark. The formal roles and responsibilities of
the system are:
• The realization of a national time scale UTC(DFM).
• The distribution of the national time scale UTC(DFM).
• Participation in the computation of UTC.
The oﬃcial authority for the realization of the time scale and contributions
to UTC is chosen to be in the hands of Denmarks Nationale Metrologiinstitut
(DFM A/S).
==PAGE:65==
4.2 System Design
57
4.2.1
Infrastructure
Figure 4.1: Geographic distribution and interconnectivity of the nodes for
Denmark. Dotted arrows depict possible peering connections with
Sweden.
Having examined the beneﬁts of Sweden’s geo-distributed system and with
NPL, one of the most esteemed timing institutes moving towards further re-
silience3.3.1, we can make some assumptions on future trends of these kind of
systems.
Therefore to build towards a state-of-the-art system, the proposed
design consist of a total of four nodes each located in Denmark’s largest cities:
København, Århus, Odense and Ålborg. Figure4.1, shows a topological overview
of the system infrastructure.
As the results from Finland’s experimentations with WRP-PTP have shown
that the method is feasible for synchronization over long distance, we want
to utilized this for the design of the system. Therefore, the nodes should be
interconnected via dedicated dual ﬁber links as shown in ﬁgure 4.2, allowing
for time synchronization between the nodes using WRP-PTP.
This would additionally open up the possibility for an extension to the time
service network. Both the node located in Århus and the one in Copenhagen
are well within a reasonable distance to the two time nodes in Göteborg and
Malmö. This would allow peering between the nodes, allowing for comparisons
to be made between multiples of clocks and the possibility of a fail-over in case of
catastrophic events. The node in Odense is also reasonably close to the border
==PAGE:66==
58
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
of Germany, allowing for the possibility of future peering with PTB or other
institutes.
Figure 4.2: The connectivity between nodes
By choosing the WRP synchronization over physical links the attack vector for
wireless attacks is greatly reduced. This does not completely mitigate the risk
of spooﬁng or jamming attacks, as the nodes will still have to rely on GNSS for
calibration in addition to be able to contribute to UTC.
However, as the nodes are geographically distributed, attacks such as these
become increasingly hard to carry out, to the point of being virtually eliminated
as it would require an attack on each point at the same time.
4.2.1.1
Time Control System
Before continuing further into this subsection, it is important to keep in mind
that the concept of steering for precise timing systems such as this one, is some-
what out of the scope of this thesis and somewhat out of the ﬁeld of expertise
==PAGE:67==
4.2 System Design
59
of the author.
Figure 4.3: High-level component diagram of Time Control System.
During the research on the surveyed countries, a number of interesting takes on
diﬀerent steering methods were encountered, many of which based on extensive
research from experts in the ﬁeld. Therefore the proposed steering mechanism
for the national time scale UTC(DFM) is based on the steering control for
UTC(OP) in France.
This particular design shown in 3.13 oﬀers quite a few advantages, mainly:
Redundancy/Resilience
By having the system continuously realize the two
scales SKK1 and SKK2 in parallel, it has a much greater tolerance for failure.
A special switch allows for switching between the two signals in real time, thus
minimizing any downtime, for example if the master clock was to fail.
Flexibility
The switching mechanism for the two time scales, in addition to
the selectable connection mechanism for the diﬀerent clock, allows for great
ﬂexibility. If required, active hydrogen masers can be added, without modifying
the infrastructure. Additionally, the level of switching allows for clocks to be
swapped out or worked on, without disrupting the time scale.
==PAGE:68==
60
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
Stability
As examined in the case of France, after the new (proposed) steering
mechanism was introduced in 2012, the realization of UTC(OP) remained as
one of the best for three years, with a time diﬀerence remaining close to 2
ns[RBC+16].
While the two systems are not identical, a similar amount of
stability is still expected.
Overview of the proposed steering mechanism is shown in ﬁgure 4.4. The design
is a copy of the French architecture except that the number of both the active
hydrogen masers and the oscillator clocks have been shrunk down to two. The
number of clocks has been reduced since the idea is to have a number of time
nodes that are geographically distributed, therefore requiring less redundancy
for each node.
Realization and Steering of Local Time Scale
To provide more insight
into the steering and realization of the local time scale of each node, a brief ex-
planation of the main components, tracing the signal path of the time reference
is as follows:
The basis of the signal and the source of UTC(DFM) is (from the perspective of
each node) based on a single active hydrogen maser (AHM1) shown in ﬁgure 4.4.
Both the main hydrogen maser AHM1 and the secondary AHM2, are connected
to a phase comparator and a tick interval counter. The output reference signal
from both fountains then propagates throughout the system until it reaches the
ﬁnal switch, which ultimately decides which of the two time scales is to be used.
The two atomic fountains (FO1 and FO2) connected by an oscillator are phase
locked to either of the hydrogen masers, which are selectable using the switch
(depicted as an SPDT switch). This allows the two fountains to achieve very
high accuracy [RBC+16].
The fountains then measure the frequency of the
hydrogen maser, recording the data over a certain period.
The data gath-
ered can then be used to further steer and correct the realization of the time
scale[RBC+16].
Additional data is also gathered from the tick interval counter and the phase
comparator, which measure the diﬀerence between the two masers[RBC+16].
4.2.1.2
Facilities
A paper on MIKES’s steering control algorithm discusses the importance of the
facilities and the environment of the laboratory for the timing equipment. The
==PAGE:69==
4.2 System Design
61
Figure 4.4: Overview of proposed steering for time realization
building which was specially designed and built to adhere to the strongest stan-
dards, maintains a stable environment of 23◦C with a relative humidity of 41%.
The paper further discusses the importance of maintaining these conditions, in
addition to other factors such as proper airﬂow and "clean" electrical power, in
order to attain the long term performance of the clocks [KMI+12].
This is consistent with the paper on the construction of SP facilities, which
discusses similar ambient conditions (23◦± 0.1◦C, 45 ± 5% RH) in addition
to redundant climate control system, backed by a redundant power supply
system[BEJH14].
The proposed facilities for housing the timing equipment follow the same exam-
ple. Each of the timing node facilities should be equipped with:
• Proper climate control equipment, capable of maintaining the appropriate
ambient conditions.
==PAGE:70==
62
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
• Critical timing equipment should be connected to a UPS, capable of main-
taining battery power for a couple of hours.
• Facilities should be backed by a diesel generator, with enough fuel to
provide power to the lab for a couple of days to a week.
• "Dirty" electrical equipment (e.g. AC) should be kept on a separate power
circuit, away from ﬁne equipment.
• Critical equipment should be EM-shielded to protect from external inter-
ference.
4.2.1.3
Time Transfer & Equipment Calibration
Each of the four nodes are equipped with a GNSS link, as shown in ﬁgure4.2.
The main responsibility of the satellite link is to aid in the calibration of the ﬁber
link/WRP backbone. In order to achieve the highest possible accuracy of time
transfer for the WRP equipment, the link must be calibrated for asymmetry; in
order to carry out such calibrations, a second link is required for comparison.
The GNSS links can also act as fail-over in case all three ﬁber connections lose
connection.
Secondly, the satellite link will be used in the contribution to UTC, as the
BIPM institute requires GNSS receivers for time transfer to the institute[bip].
The node in Copenhagen is responsible for aggregating the data (oﬀset, steering,
calibrations, etc.) from the other nodes, and for the time transfer/calibrations
against BIPM.
4.2.2
Dissemination
Time is distributed to the end users via two main methods, PTP and NTS
secured NTP. Again referring to Sweden’s approach, each of the nodes should
be equipped with primary and a secondary server for both protocols, i.e. each
node contains two PTP servers and two NTP servers. The servers are public
facing and time is distributed directly from each node, via a network link that
is separate from the backbone ﬁber link. An overview of the time dissemination
services can be seen in ﬁgure 4.5.
As previously discussed in the requirements section 4.1, the geographical land-
scape of Denmark is quite complex. Derived from that, it is assumed that some
parts such as small islands could lack the required internet infrastructure to
==PAGE:71==
4.2 System Design
63
access the time system. Therefore the last subsection (4.2.2.4) proposes the use
of longwave as an possible extension to cover areas such as described.
4.2.2.1
NTS Secured NTP
Historically, time and security have not had the best relationship. Subjectively
speaking, after roughly 35 years, NTP is just now getting the proper security
mechanism that it needs. Therefore, as an attempt to further enable the adop-
tion of the new and secure protocol, the system should oﬀer NTS secured NTP
services as a default.
The recommended distribution of the protocol is the NTPsec implementation, as
per Netnod’s recommendation [noah]. In addition to NTS support, the NTPsec
implementation oﬀers further security improvements, such as the removal of the
Autokey and other legacy features[noad].
The NTP service should be implemented according to the IETF RFC8633, which
is the current standard for best practices for the secure operation of NTP [RSS].
Each node should contain two NTS secured NTP servers, one master and one
secondary that are directly connected to the output time reference from the
distribution switch.
4.2.2.2
PTP
Similar to the NTP servers, each node should contain two PTPv2 servers directly
connected to the time reference.
The servers should only support hardware
timestamping, in order to achieve the best possible accuracy.
The ﬁnal conﬁguration of the roles is left up to implementation, that is the fail-
over/redundancy setup. The two can be conﬁgured as either two grandmasters
or in a slave-master relationship.
While there is no standard best practice currently available for PTP, such as
the one previously mentioned for PTP, the servers should still try to follow any
available best practices.
==PAGE:72==
64
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
4.2.2.3
WRP (Extension)
As the backbone of the system is supported by a WRP switch such as depicted in
ﬁgure 4.2, it provides an fairly easy way of extending the dissemination services
to support time distribution to the end user via WRP-PTP. In theory, this
should be as simple as adding a second WRP switch acting as a boundary
clock with the backbone switch acting as the grandmaster clock, thus creating
a secondary time synchronization network that the client can connect to.
However, an ad-hoc setup is required to be able to deliver time synchronization
with full performance and accuracy.
As, for example, a dedicated ﬁber link
would need to be established from the end user to the timing node. Calibration
of equipment and the connection is required, thus making it hard to oﬀer as
an open and public service. Additionally, further research is necessary to con-
clude the possible security and performance impact that this could have on the
backbone of the time infrastructure.
Thus, it is only presented here as an possible extension to the two time dissem-
ination services.
4.2.2.4
Longwave radio (Extension)
A second extension method is via the use of longwave radio. It is provided as an
possible extension to the availability of the system. Looking back at the problem
of availability in the context of Denmark, it would be possible that some parts
of the country would not be able to access the internet based dissemination
methods due to geography or other reasons.
An implementation of a longwave broadcast such as the DCF77 or ALS162,
would allow time synchronization in remote places. However, as such a system
is not particularly accurate and proven to be insecure, allowing it to be easily
spoofed, it is only presented as a possible extension. Further research, such as
market analysis is required to conclude whether such a service is necessary.
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Evaluation
65
4.3
Evaluation
This section will evaluate the proposed design, to ensure that the system meets
the goals and requirements as proposed in section 4.1.
4.3.1
Accuracy
As proposed earlier, the three goals set for accuracy:
• As a basis for outer boundaries, the diﬀerence between UTC(DFM) and
UTC can not exceed ±100ns as per BIPMS recommendations.
• As a basis for optimal boundaries, the diﬀerence between UTC(DFM) and
UTC, should be in the range of ±1-20ns
• At least one of the available dissemination methods must meet the re-
quirements of the MiFID II.
Estimating if requirements for accuracy are fulﬁlled for a theoretical system is
quite challenging. In order to fully ensure that the system does meet this, real
life measurement need to be taken in order to perform necessary calculations.
Therefore, the best evidence available is anecdotal, based on observations of the
other system that were examined.
Based on the fact the average oﬀset (UTC(k) - UTC) of all the surveyed countries
remained within approximately 10ns according to issue 389 of Circular-T. It
can be assumed that the resulting accuracy of the proposed system should be
in the same range, as the realization process is fairly similar.
As the system oﬀers PTP synchronization in addition to the possible extension of
a WRP-PTP service, which can theoretically deliver time to the end-user in the
nano second range, it can be safely assumed that the two meet the requirement
of MiFID II, which are in the micro second range.
Based on this, it is assumed that the system does meet the requirement for
accuracy.
==PAGE:74==
66
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
4.3.2
Availability
According to a 2014 case study, 74% of Denmark had "next generation access" to
the internet in 2012[Yoo]. Next generation access refers to a internet connection
that is fully or partially connected via ﬁber. It is safe to assume that this number
has increased over the past eight years. Based on this, at least 74% of Denmark
should be able to access and utilize the system using the IP based dissemination
methods.
In cases where internet access is unavailable or limited, for example in rural
areas or islands, the service could be extended to include a longwave radio
transmission. However, this would be under special circumstances as the service
does not provide any security and does not provide the same level of accuracy.
Therefore, the system is believed to meet the availability requirement.
4.3.3
Resilience
The proposed design takes a couple of diﬀerent measures to maximize its re-
silience, mainly:
• The system as a whole is designed in a way that minimizes single points
of failure. For a complete system outage, all four nodes need to fail at the
same time.
• Each node realizes two separate versions of the same local time scale, in
addition to having two set of each dissemination service, thus maximizing
redundancy.
• The system design prioritizes physical connections over wireless, thus min-
imizing the risk of losing connection.
• The facilities provide redundancy power to all devices via a UPS that is
additionally backed by diesel generators.
These design factors should more than meet the proposed goal of resilience.
==PAGE:75==
4.4 Risk Analysis
67
4.4
Risk Analysis
This section details the method of risk analysis for the proposed system design.
Risk analysis is an essentials step in the design of every system. In short, the
ultimate goal of the risk analysis is to identify and model the threats and risk
involved, evaluate which one need to be treated, and then ﬁnally identify the
treatments that can prevent the risks.
It is critical to keep in mind that this is a public system and that it has to be
designed in a way that ensures the security of the public. We also want the
system to stand up to real life threats and other unexpected scenarios. We can
do this by looking at the system from the perspective of an adversary and trying
to come up with diﬀerent ways of attacking the system. To help capture and
model these ideas, the CORAS risk analysis will be utilized.
4.4.1
Introduction to CORAS
CORAS, generally referred to as the CORAS approach, is a model-driven risk
analysis framework that actively relies on graphical modeling of systems using
special diagrams. The CORAS approach consists of the CORAS language which
is the core component that allows for the modeling and data capture, and the
CORAS method which gives a structured approach to risk identiﬁcation and
analysis in concrete steps[LSS11].
The CORAS approach is based on the ISO 31000 risk management standard[LSS11],
which in abstract can be seen as a repeating three step process of: establish-
ing context, assessing risk and ﬁnally risk treatment. The ISO 31000 standard
which provides no actual guidance and only deﬁnes the general process of risk
management, is then encapsulated and extended forming the eight step method.
In short the eight steps provide a guided, methodical approach to risk analysis,
using a asset-driven approach to risk modeling. In this context, asset-driven
refers to the fact that assets are the basis for the analysis, i.e. the goal of the
analysis is to identify and protect any assets belonging to the target.
The following risk assessment tries to adhere to these steps as much as possible.
However, some of the steps have been left out or combined as they are deemed
unnecessary for the purpose of this thesis. Table 4.1 gives an overview of the
steps, while additionally acting as an reference index.
Overview of the CORAS terminology can seen in table A.1 in the appendix.
==PAGE:76==
68
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
Step
Description
Purpose
1
Preparation for the analysis
Establish context
2
Customer presentation of the target
Establish context
3
Reﬁning the target using asset diagrams
Establish context
3.1
Presentation of the target by the analysis team
-
3.2
Asset identiﬁcation
-
3.3
High-level analysis
-
4
Approval of the target description
Establish context
5
Risk identiﬁcation using threat diagrams
Assess risk
6
Risk estimation using threat diagrams
Assess risk
7
Risk evaluation using risk diagrams
Assess risk
8
Risk treatment using treatment diagrams
Treat risk
Table 4.1: The eight steps of the CORAS method.
The table shows the terms and the respective icons that represent them in a
diagram.
4.4.2
Preparation for the Analysis
This step of the analysis typically involves documenting information on the cus-
tomer or requestor of the analysis. This often includes face-to-face meetings and
documentation things such as contact information, size, schedule, etc. In short,
this step allows both parties to come to an agreement on goals and objectives
and out any particular concerns. This step will therefore be omitted.
4.4.3
Presentation of the Target
This objective of this step is twofold: the customer presentation of the target
system, and to present the CORAS terminology.
During this the customer
gives a presentation of the target, providing the analysis team with an general
overview of how the system functions. The scope of the target is decided and
any assumptions or other concerns are also documented.
Figure 4.5 shows a high-level overview of the system. The red colored nodes
indicate services that are public facings and therefore pose a greater risk. The
blue colored nodes are internal components that rely or generate internal data.
As a description of the system has has already been provided in section 4.2.1
this part of will be further omitted.
==PAGE:77==
4.4 Risk Analysis
69
Figure 4.5: A conceptual view of the system
The next step is to decided the focus of the analysis is. The risk analysis will
focus on the whole system and its sub-systems, this includes:
• Time realization services
• Time dissemination services
• Time calibration services
Finally, any assumptions and concerns regarding the analysis are formally stated.
The subsequent risk analysis is based on the following assumptions:
• All assets belong to a single party.
==PAGE:78==
70
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
• The designated party of the risk analysis is the government of Denmark .
• The integrity and stability of UTC on a global scale are considered out of
scope, e.g. attempts to contribute erroneous data to the BIPM institute
or attacks on the FTP servers used for data exchange.
• Possible extensions as proposed in section4.2.2.3, 4.2.2.4 are considered
out of scope of the risk analysis.
4.4.4
Reﬁning the Target Description Using Asset Dia-
grams
During this part, the analysis team and the target party identify the assets of
the system, followed by a high-level analysis. The following subsection explain
the process further.
4.4.4.1
Asset identiﬁcation
Here, the assets of the target system are identiﬁed and categorized into two
types: Direct assets and Indirect assets. An asset can be anything the party
deems valuable, this can include physical-, human- or any organizational assets.
Additionally, assets are not required to be concrete and can therefore include
non-physical things such as reputation, knowledge or availability.
Indirect assets are any assets which can only be harmed through other assets
via a harm relation, e.g. harm to the integrity of PTP service (direct asset)
causes indirect harm to the public’s trust in the infrastructure (indirect asset).
The identiﬁed assets and the corresponding harm-relationships of the target
systems are shown in ﬁgure 4.6. The time control system depicted includes all
the necessary steering equipment such as the TIC, oﬀset generator and other
required equipment.
4.4.4.2
High-level Analysis
Now that the assets have been identiﬁed and modeled, the next step is to per-
form a high-level analysis of the target. This involves roughly identifying any
vulnerabilities or other weaknesses of the system that could pose as a threat
==PAGE:79==
4.4 Risk Analysis
71
Figure 4.6: Asset diagram for the system. Indirect assets are shown in white.
and ultimately leading to a unwanted incident. This part of the step is typically
performed via a brainstorming session between the two parties [LSS11].
The identiﬁed risks in this preliminary high-level analysis are some of the most
apparent or obvious that come to mind. The results are shown in ﬁgure4.2.
4.4.5
Approval of the Target Description
This is the ﬁnal step before the actual analysis is conducted.
The analysis
team and the customer come to a ﬁnal agreement on the target description,
scope and other assumptions. The analysis team starts by presenting the ﬁnal
representation of the target system, which the customer must then accept.
==PAGE:80==
72
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
Who/what causes
it?
How? What is the inci-
dent? What is harmed?
What makes it possible?
Adversary
DDOS attack on PTP/NTP
servers
Lack of protection mecha-
nisms. Software ﬂaws.
Adversary
Physical break in
Lack of protection mecha-
nisms at facilities
Adversary
Social engineering attack
Lack of protection mecha-
nisms, training or internal
procedures
Employee
Incorrect
calibration
of
GNSS equipment or time
links
Insuﬃcient training. Lack of
procedures.
Employee
Misconﬁguration of equip-
ment or services
Insuﬃcient training. Lack of
procedures.
System failure
WRP time transfer fails
Insuﬃcient
maintenance,
loss of connectivity
System failure
Failure
in
time
control
equipment
Insuﬃcient
maintenance.
Lack of procedures.
Table 4.2: High-Level analysis risk table
4.4.5.1
Ranking of Assets
After an agreement has been reached between the two parties, the customer is
asked to rate the identiﬁed assets from the asset diagram. The customer ranks
each asset using a ﬁve point scale, allowing the customer to further decide the
focus of the analysis. Table 4.3 shows the ranked assets.
After the assets have been ranked, the likelihood and consequence scales for the
relevant assets are deﬁned.
4.4.5.2
Setting the Likelihood & Consequence Scales
This part is generally performed in two separate sub-steps, however they have
been combined into a single step. The likelihood scale indicates how frequent
or likely a unwanted incident may occur. Table 4.4 shows the deﬁned likelihood
==PAGE:81==
4.4 Risk Analysis
73
Asset
Importance
Asset type
Time Control System
1
Direct
WRP backbone
1
Direct
Local time scale
1
Indirect
National time scale
1
Indirect
Availability of NTP
2
Direct
Integrity of NTP
2
Direct
Availability of PTP
2
Direct
Integrity of PTP
2
Direct
Facilities
2
Direct
GNSS time transfer equipment
3
Direct
Steering data
3
Direct
Environmental stability
3
Indirect
Stability of atomic clocks
3
Indirect
Trust in public service
4
Indirect
Table 4.3: List of assets and the respective rank, where 1 is very important
and 5 minor importance"
scale.
Likelihood
Description
Certain
Is certainly going to happen at least once.
Likely
Will likely occur given the possibility.
Possible
Could possibly happen under normal circumstances
Unlikely
Is unlikely to happen under normal circumstances
Rare
Will probably never occur, but not impossible.
Table 4.4: The likelihood scale
Now that the likelihood scale is deﬁned, the consequence scale must be set. In
the context of CORAS, a consequence is deﬁned as "the impact of an unwanted
incident on an asset in term of harm or reduced asset value"[LSS11]. Tables
4.5,4.6 show the consequence scales deﬁned for the availability of assets and the
integrity of assets, respectively.
4.4.5.3
Deﬁning the Risk Matrix
The ﬁnal subtask of this step is to deﬁne the risk matrix for the identiﬁed assets,
either once for all assets or for each asset independently. The matrix is used to
==PAGE:82==
74
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
Consequence
Description
Catastrophic
Complete system wide outage, no availability,
catastrophic failure.
Major
Partial system outage, none or sporadic availabil-
ity of system.
Moderate
Partial system outage, availability is somewhat
impaired but still available.
Minor
Minor system or sub-system outage, could impact
the availability in some way.
Insigniﬁcant
Minor or partial outage of none critical compo-
nents, wont aﬀect availability noticeably
Table 4.5: The Consequence scale for availability of assets.
decide whether or not a certain risk should be further evaluated. The deﬁned
risk matrix is shown in table 4.7.
As the system consists of four separate nodes, the responsibility and weight of
each service is distributed. In addition, there are a number of redundancy mech-
anisms built in. Therefore, the scope or evaluation criteria is more accepting
(shown in green), as the impact of an attack is in many cases less, as it is divided
by the the nodes.
4.4.6
Risk Identiﬁcation & Estimation Using Threat Dia-
grams
This step is the combination of steps ﬁve and six. The aim of the ﬁrst step is
to create threat diagrams for the target system, modeling the threats, vulner-
abilities, threat scenarios and unwanted incidents that can cause harm to the
assets.
As the second step (step six) involves deﬁning the likelihood and consequences
of the identiﬁed threat scenarios and unwanted incidents of the same diagram,
the two steps will be performed simultaneously.
During this phase two diagrams were created: Figure 4.7 shows the modeled
risks and threats related to the dissemination services, and ﬁgure 4.8 shows the
diagram for the time control system.
==PAGE:83==
4.4 Risk Analysis
75
Consequence
Description
Catastrophic
Complete or semi-complete system wide loss of
integrity, catastrophic failure, beyond recovery
Major
Integrity of crucial assets is lost, possibly one or
more. partially or beyond recovery
Moderate
Integrity of vital assets is lost, but still recover-
able
Minor
Partial or full loss of integrity of non crucial as-
sets, still recoverable
Insigniﬁcant
Partial or full loss of integrity of non vital assets,
wont aﬀect integrity on larger scale
Table 4.6: The Consequence scale for integrity of assets.
Consequence
Insigniﬁcant
Minor
Moderate
Major
Catastrophic
Rare
Unlikely
Possible
Likely
Certain
Table 4.7: The risk evaluation matrix. Red indicates that a risk should be
further evaluated. Green indicates that a certain risk is acceptable.
4.4.7
Risk Evaluation Using Risk Diagrams
The main goal of the risk evaluation step is to decide which of the identiﬁed
risks are acceptable and which are unacceptable. The ﬁrst step towards this is
to model the harm to direct and indirect assets using consequence diagrams.
Figure 4.9 shows the modeled consequence diagram for direct and indirect assets
harmed by unwanted incident, in the context of time realization.
Figure 4.10 shows the consequence diagram in the context of time dissemination.
With the help of the consequence diagrams, the consequences of the identiﬁed
risks on the identiﬁed assets are estimated. The risks are then given ID’s (e.g.
R-IT1) and plotted on the risk matrix from the previous step. The risk matrix
==PAGE:84==
76
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
Figure 4.7: Threat diagram for dissemination services.
then provides a clear overview of which of the risks are acceptable and which
are not, as shown in table 4.8.
Consequence
Insigniﬁcant
Minor
Moderate
Major
Catastrophic
Rare
Unlikely
R-UI2
R-UI1,R-UI3
D-UI1,D-UI2
Possible
Likely
R-UI4
Certain
Table 4.8: Risk matrix showing the identiﬁed risks from the risk diagram
The identiﬁed risks are then modeled using risk diagrams, which give a clear
overview of the threats and the harmed assets. The risks that were identiﬁed
to be acceptable in the risk matrix are marked accordingly.
Figure 4.11 shows the modeled risks and that harmed assets, in the scope of
realization services.
Figure 4.12 shows the modeled risks and that harmed assets, in the scope of
dissemination services.
==PAGE:85==
4.4 Risk Analysis
77
Figure 4.8: Threat diagram time realization services.
4.4.8
Risk Treatment Using Treatment Diagrams
The ﬁnals step of the risk analysis involves modeling a treatment diagram for
the identiﬁed risks. Figure 4.13 shows the treatment diagram for the risks or
vulnerabilities that were deemed unacceptable in the previous step, and thus
requiring treatment.
==PAGE:86==
78
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
Figure 4.9: Consequence diagram for realization services.
Figure 4.10: Consequence diagram for dissemination services.
==PAGE:87==
4.4 Risk Analysis
79
Figure 4.11: Risk diagram for realization services.
Figure 4.12: Risk diagram for dissemination services.
==PAGE:88==
80
Developing a Time Service for Denmark
Figure 4.13: Treatment diagram for dissemination services.
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
The goal of the thesis was to conduct research on timekeeping infrastructure
and the vulnerabilities that might stem from the reliance of GNSS in such sys-
tems. After surveying the diﬀerent systems from other countries, researching the
strength and weaknesses, it soon became clear that better alternative solutions
exist which depend less on the use of satellite links. Based on the research and
data gathered, a state-of-the-art solution for a timekeeping system in Denmark
was created.
The proposed solution is a geographically distributed time infrastructure that is
built to maximize accuracy, availability, resilience and security. By distributing
or more speciﬁcally dividing the system into four timekeeping nodes where each
node is able to operate independently, the system can still continue to function,
even if the other three nodes fail. At the core, the system relies on the White
Rabbit Protocol to synchronize time between the nodes over long distance ﬁber
links, as apposed to a satellite link, thus minimizing the attack vector of wireless
attacks.
The system can hopefully act as a foundation for a future, real life time system
for the country of Denmark.
==PAGE:90==
82
Conclusion
==PAGE:91==
Appendix A
Appendix
==PAGE:92==
84
Appendix
Term
Description
Party
The requestor or stakeholder of the
risk analysis.
Asset
Something that the party deems
valuable, and therefore requires pro-
tection.
Vulnerability
A ﬂaw or weakness which can be ex-
ploited by a threat and used to harm
an asset.
Deliberate
Human
Threat
A human threat actor that can cause
an unwanted incident, e.g. an adver-
sary trying to gain access
Accidental Human
Threat
A threat accidentally caused by a
human actor, e.g. an untrained em-
ployee accidentally drops a database
schema.
Non-Human
Threat
A threat caused by a non-human
event, e.g. power failure due to bad
weather.
Threat Scenario
A chain of events caused by a threat,
leading to an unwanted incident.
Unwanted Incident
An event that can cause an harm to
an asset.
Treatment
A measure or action that can be
taken to mitigate or reduce the level
of risk.
Table A.1: Overview of CORAS terms
==PAGE:93==
85
Gateway-to-gateway latency time of the
trading system
Maximum
di-
vergence
from
UTC
Granularity
of
the timestamp
> 1 millisecond
1 millisecond
1 millisecond or
better
≤1 millisecond
100 microseconds
1 microsecond or
better
Table A.2: Level of accuracy for operators of trading venues. (Source: [noac])
Trading Activity
Description
Maximum
divergence
from UTC
Granularity
of the times-
tamp
Activity
using
high
fre-
quency algorithmic trading
technique
High frequency algo-
rithmic trading tech-
nique.
100 microsec-
onds
1 microsecond
or better
Activity
on
voice
trading
systems
Voice
trading
sys-
tems as deﬁned in
Article 5(5) of Com-
mission
Delegated
Regulation
(EU)
2017/583 (1)
1 second
1
second
or
better
Activity on request for quote
systems where the response
requires human intervention
or where the system does
not allow algorithmic trad-
ing
Request
for
quotes
systems as deﬁned in
Article 5(4) of Del-
egated
Regulation
(EU) 2017/583
1 second
1
second
or
better
Activity of concluding nego-
tiated transactions
Negotiated
transac-
tion as set out in
Article
4(1)(b)
of
Regulation (EU) No
600/2014.
1 second
1
second
or
better
Any other trading activity
All other trading ac-
tivity not covered by
this table.
1 millisecond
1
millisecond
or better
Table A.3: Level of accuracy for members or participants of a trading venue.
(Source: [noac])
==PAGE:94==
86
Appendix
==PAGE:95==
Appendix B
Appendix B
==PAGE:96==
CIRCULAR T 389
ISSN 1143-1393
2020 JUNE 09, 10h UTC
BUREAU INTERNATIONAL DES POIDS ET MESURES
THE INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION ESTABLISHED BY THE METRE CONVENTION
PAVILLON DE BRETEUIL F-92312 SEVRES CEDEX TEL. +33 1 45 07 70 70 tai@bipm.org
The contents of the sections of BIPM Circular T are fully described in the document " Explanatory supplement to BIPM Circular T "
available at ftp://ftp2.bipm.org/pub/tai/publication/notes/explanatory_supplement_v0.3.pdf
 1 - Difference between UTC and its local realizations UTC(k) and corresponding uncertainties. From 2017 January 1, 0h UTC, TAI-UTC = 37 s.
Date 2020 0h UTC
APR 30
MAY 5
MAY 10
MAY 15
MAY 20
MAY 25
MAY 30
Uncertainty/ns
Notes
MJD
58969
58974
58979
58984
58989
58994
58999
uA
uB
u
Laboratory k
[UTC-UTC(k)]/ns
AOS
(Borowiec)
-2.6
-2.6
-2.7
-2.9
-3.4
-3.6
-4.3 0.3
2.9
2.9
APL
(Laurel)
3.5
4.1
0.9
0.2
0.7
-0.4
0.7 0.3
20.0
20.0
AUS
(Sydney)
-409.2
-406.3
-405.4
-412.8
-415.2
-418.4
-432.3 0.3
6.6
6.6
BEV
(Wien)
25.8
38.2
39.9
39.4
38.6
37.0
29.8 0.3
3.5
3.6
BFKH
(Budapest)
746.3
771.3
787.8
812.1
828.8
846.2
867.5 1.5
20.0
20.1
BIM
(Sofiya)
12727.5
12764.7
12813.8
12843.0
12857.9
12875.0
12916.4 0.7
7.1
7.2
BIRM
(Beijing)
-6.5
-6.4
-6.1
-2.8
-9.2
-13.8
-9.1 0.5
2.8
2.8
BOM
(Skopje)
-3484.7
-3501.7
-3513.6
-3525.6
-3544.8
-3554.3
-3563.5 1.5
8.6
8.7
BY
(Minsk)
1.2
0.9
1.5
1.4
1.1
1.0
1.6 1.5
12.2
12.3
CAO
(Cagliari)
-19232.8
-19329.7
-19434.3
-19548.9
-19661.3
-19772.1
-19882.8 1.5
20.0
20.0
CH
(Bern-Wabern)
-2.1
-1.7
-1.0
-1.1
-0.7
0.9
1.5 0.3
2.3
2.4
CNES
(Toulouse)
5.2
8.6
12.4
14.7
16.3
13.2
9.6 0.3
3.0
3.0
CNM
(Queretaro)
3.4
-4.2
1.0
3.0
2.5
-5.7
0.5 2.5
11.2
11.5
CNMP
(Panama)
-
-19.8
-7.5
2.3
5.4
-5.2
-12.7 0.7
7.5
7.6
DFNT
(Tunis)
2827.0
3066.0
3307.0
3528.6
3779.8
4035.4
4277.4 0.7
20.0
20.0
DLR
(Oberpfaffenhofen)
183.5
66.2
-
-6.6
2.8
11.8
27.0 0.7
3.6
3.6
DMDM
(Belgrade)
-22.7
-9.3
2.9
11.1
13.9
12.3
14.9 0.3
3.5
3.6
DTAG
(Frankfurt/M)
6.6
2.1
-0.1
-
-8.9
-4.1
-0.8 0.3
2.8
2.8
EIM
(Thessaloniki)
9.7
6.8
2.8
17.9
-4.6
4.0
7.1 4.0
11.2
11.9
ESTC
(Noordwijk)
-1.2
-1.6
0.0
1.7
3.0
3.7
4.1 0.3
3.3
3.4
HKO
(Hong Kong)
339.2
358.2
366.9
371.3
383.6
392.4
393.6 0.4
3.1
3.1
ICE
(San Jose)
-33.6
-29.3
-
-15.2
-19.9
-13.7
-13.0 3.0
20.0
20.2
IDN
(Serpong-Tangerang)
1966.3
1998.5
2004.2
2029.2
2043.6
2037.0
2042.5 0.3
2.8
2.8
IFAG
(Wettzell)
-841.2
-823.3
-804.3
-802.9
-808.6
-810.5
-813.8 0.3
3.2
3.2
IGNA
(Buenos Aires)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
IMBH
(Sarajevo)
-1.9
-0.3
2.1
3.6
0.9
-1.8
-0.9 0.4
2.8
2.8
INCP
(Lima)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
INM
(Bogota D.C.)
-18.9
-17.0
-
-22.5
-25.0
-31.9
-34.2 1.5
20.0
20.1
INPL
(Jerusalem)
-43.4
-48.9
-60.6
38.9
33.9
43.1
44.8 0.3
7.4
7.4
(1)
INTI
(Buenos Aires)
28.8
40.7
-
31.5
30.2
45.6
34.9 2.5
20.0
20.2
INXE
(Rio de Janeiro)
-21.1
-20.8
-23.8
-22.0
-19.3
-12.4
-17.4 0.3
20.0
20.0
IPQ
(Caparica)
212.1
218.8
224.6
232.6
232.8
235.5
229.4 0.5
20.0
20.0
IT
(Torino)
-3.7
-2.1
0.0
1.0
-0.3
0.9
2.6 0.3
1.2
1.2
JATC
(Lintong)
-1.5
-1.5
-1.6
-1.6
-1.5
0.1
2.0 0.3
2.9
2.9
JV
(Kjeller)
15.0
3.2
-13.0
-7.0
0.4
-2.7
-2.5 0.3
4.3
4.3
KRIS
(Daejeon)
25.2
28.5
32.7
35.5
37.9
40.1
36.5 0.3
3.2
3.3
LRTE
(Sao Carlos)
1.4
-7.8
-12.6
-16.4
-19.1
-23.3
-30.7 0.3
20.0
20.0
LT
(Vilnius)
971.1
970.0
974.5
951.7
920.1
908.0
908.4 0.3
2.9
2.9
LUX
(Belvaux)
-7.7
-13.7
-17.0
-12.6
-13.2
-7.4
-6.4 0.3
3.1
3.1
MASM
(Bayanzurkh)
-314.8
-335.8
-366.4
-391.8
-422.9
-445.4
-479.5 0.4
2.9
2.9
MBM
(Podgorica)
-
689.2
714.7
744.8
769.0
795.1
750.8 0.7
20.0
20.0
(2)
pp
p
1 of 5
7/18/2020, 2:16 PM
==PAGE:97==
MIKE
(Espoo)
4.0
3.7
3.8
3.9
3.8
4.2
4.9 0.3
2.6
2.6
MSL
(Lower Hutt)
-42.0
-40.3
-30.9
-21.1
-7.2
-2.9
10.3 1.5
20.0
20.1
NAO
(Mizusawa)
37.1
29.6
31.5
30.5
36.0
32.6
37.1 2.0
20.0
20.1
NICT
(Tokyo)
-11.4
-9.7
-8.3
-7.3
-5.9
-5.3
-4.8 0.3
2.2
2.2
NIM
(Beijing)
3.6
3.5
3.3
2.8
2.6
2.8
2.6 0.3
2.0
2.1
NIMB
(Bucharest)
9133.5
9172.1
9212.7
9262.3
9305.1
9353.5
9396.0 0.4
7.6
7.6
NIMT
(Pathumthani)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
NIS
(Cairo)
14.8
19.7
23.4
27.3
32.5
45.2
44.7 0.7
20.0
20.0
NIST
(Boulder)
-1.7
-1.9
-2.3
-2.7
-2.4
-2.1
-2.4 0.3
1.9
1.9
NMIJ
(Tsukuba)
2.7
3.5
4.2
4.1
4.3
2.0
-1.3 0.3
3.8
3.8
NMLS
(Sepang)
-2646.2
-2697.1
-2728.9
-2775.2
-2749.3
-2721.3
-2697.9 1.5
4.3
4.6
NPL
(Teddington)
0.2
-0.9
-1.1
0.0
0.5
0.7
1.3 0.3
2.6
2.7
NPLI
(New-Delhi)
-1.1
-0.4
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
-0.6
-0.6 0.3
3.0
3.0
NRC
(Ottawa)
-26.8
-21.1
-18.1
-18.3
-10.0
-1.0
13.2 0.3
3.1
3.1
NRL
(Washington DC)
5.5
5.1
8.3
6.7
7.2
-2.7
-2.3 0.3
20.0
20.0
NTSC
(Lintong)
-0.4
-0.7
-1.7
-1.2
-0.1
2.0
3.9 0.3
2.8
2.8
ONBA
(Buenos Aires)
453.5
466.9
463.8
466.5
-
-
- 2.0
11.2
11.4
ONRJ
(Rio de Janeiro)
-0.7
3.7
-1.5
3.6
6.6
6.0
-3.4 0.4
20.0
20.0
OP
(Paris)
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.3
-0.2
-0.4
-0.2 0.3
1.1
1.2
ORB
(Bruxelles)
1.4
0.9
0.1
-0.1
0.1
0.2
0.3 0.3
3.3
3.3
PL
(Warszawa)
2.4
3.6
4.6
4.5
4.5
4.2
3.2 0.3
2.8
2.9
PTB
(Braunschweig)
0.2
0.4
0.5
0.4
0.5
0.8
1.0 0.1
0.6
0.6
ROA
(San Fernando)
-2.5
-2.7
-1.8
-2.3
-2.5
-2.6
-1.6 0.3
1.2
1.2
SASO
(Riyadh)
-1308.9
-1322.1
-1327.1
-1330.5
-1348.0
-1362.0
-1379.2 0.5
3.2
3.2
SCL
(Hong Kong)
33.8
34.8
32.1
25.2
16.9
12.3
6.3 1.0
3.1
3.2
SG
(Singapore)
-3.5
20.4
23.3
24.2
20.6
14.3
11.1 0.3
2.8
2.8
(3)
SIQ
(Ljubljana)
20.7
21.1
47.2
33.9
19.6
27.9
25.6 0.3
3.6
3.7
SL
(Colombo)
-
-
135.7
140.7
140.7
152.5
154.1 0.3
2.8
2.8
SMD
(Bruxelles)
-2.2
-0.3
-4.4
-3.4
-9.0
-6.0
-0.4 0.3
3.2
3.3
SMU
(Bratislava)
-
-
-103.3
-107.2
-104.1
-101.2
-107.7 1.5
12.2
12.3
SP
(Boras)
2.2
2.5
2.8
2.8
2.7
3.0
3.0 0.3
1.1
1.1
SU
(Moskva)
0.3
-0.4
-0.2
-0.2
0.4
0.0
-0.2 0.7
2.0
2.1
TL
(Chung-Li)
-1.3
-0.6
0.1
0.8
1.4
1.9
2.1 0.3
2.3
2.3
TP
(Praha)
1.4
-0.2
-9.0
-7.1
-5.9
-8.5
-6.3 0.3
2.8
2.8
UA
(Kharkov)
-11.1
-1.4
11.6
-1.8
1.5
4.7
2.9 1.5
9.5
9.6
UAE
(Abu Dhabi)
16.7
14.1
11.3
19.1
21.0
13.7
19.3 4.0
8.9
9.8
UME
(Gebze-Kocaeli)
2.8
3.9
2.4
0.9
-1.8
-4.4
-6.7 0.3
3.5
3.6
USNO
(Washington DC)
1.4
1.7
1.7
1.2
1.1
0.4
0.2 0.2
1.3
1.3
VMI
(Ha Noi)
-50.8
-33.6
-18.5
-4.3
3.3
2.9
-4.8 0.3
7.1
7.1
VSL
(Delft)
2.3
-5.1
-2.4
-6.2
-5.2
0.4
-6.0 0.3
1.7
1.7
ZA
(Pretoria)
-2.2
-3.7
-6.3
-4.6
1.7
4.6
0.3 0.3
2.9
2.9
- Notes on section 1:
(1) INPL : Time step of -100 ns on MJD 58980.55.
(2) MBM : Apparent time step of about +73 ns near MJD 58997.5.
(3) SG : Apparent time step of about -18 ns on MJD 58973.99.
2 - Difference between the normalized frequencies of EAL and TAI.
Interval of validity
f(EAL)-f(TAI)
Steering correction
58969 - 58999
6.493x10-13
(2020 APR 30 - 2020 MAY 30)
New correction
58999 - 59029
6.493x10-13
(2020 MAY 30 - 2020 JUN 29)
New correction foreseen
59029 - 59059
6.493x10-13
(2020 JUN 29 - 2020 JUL 29)
3 - Duration of the TAI scale interval d.
Table 1: Estimate of d by individual PSFS measurements and corresponding uncertainty.
pp
p
2 of 5
7/18/2020, 2:16 PM
==PAGE:98==
All values are expressed in 10-15 and are valid only for the stated period of estimation.
Standard
Period of
d
uA
uB
uA/Lab uB/Lab ul/Tai
u
uSrep
Ref(uS) Ref(uB) uB(Ref) Uptime LastRep Nrep3y Steer Note
Estimation
%
PTB-CS1
58969 58999 -3.26 8.00 8.00
0.00
0.00
0.07 11.31 PFS/NA
T148
8.
100
T388
36
Y
(1)
PTB-CS2
58969 58999 -1.29 5.00 12.00
0.00
0.00
0.07 13.00 PFS/NA
T148
12.
100
T388
35
Y
(1)
METAS-FOC2 58969 58999 -1.85 0.06 1.40
0.01
0.04
0.20 1.42 PFS/NA
T371
1.99
99.3
T388
5
Y
(2)
IT-CsF2
58964 58974 -0.76 0.66 0.17
0.22
0.01
0.53 0.89 PFS/NA
T318
0.19
83.0
T388
8
Y
(3)
IT-CsF2
58989 58999 -1.80 0.67 0.17
0.14
0.01
0.53 0.88 PFS/NA
T318
0.19
90.0
T388
8
Y
(3)
NRC-FCs2
58969 58994 -0.13 0.11 0.39
0.11
0.00
0.23 0.48 PFS/NA
[1]
0.23
95.7
N/A
0
Y
(4)
NRC-FCs2
58939 58969 -0.70 0.11 0.54
0.12
0.00
0.20 0.60 PFS/NA
[1]
0.23
90.7
N/A
0
Y
(4)
NRC-FCs2
58904 58939 -0.51 0.09 0.39
0.12
0.00
0.17 0.45 PFS/NA
[1]
0.23
87.3
N/A
0
Y
(4)
NRC-FCs2
58879 58904 -0.74 0.09 0.31
0.11
0.00
0.23 0.41 PFS/NA
[1]
0.23
96.0
N/A
0
Y
(4)
NRC-FCs2
58844 58879 -0.65 0.08 0.35
0.10
0.00
0.17 0.41 PFS/NA
[1]
0.23
97.0
N/A
0
Y
(4)
NRC-FCs2
58814 58844 -0.97 0.10 0.33
0.12
0.00
0.20 0.41 PFS/NA
[1]
0.23
85.0
N/A
0
Y
(4)
NRC-FCs2
58784 58814 -0.43 0.10 0.22
0.10
0.00
0.20 0.33 PFS/NA
[1]
0.23
98.0
N/A
0
Y
(4)
NRC-FCs2
58754 58784 -0.33 0.10 0.21
0.10
0.00
0.20 0.32 PFS/NA
[1]
0.23
98.0
N/A
0
Y
(4)
SYRTE-FO1
58969 58989 -0.98 0.20 0.32
0.06
0.00
0.28 0.47 PFS/NA
T301
0.37
96.7
T388
27
Y
(5)
SYRTE-FO2
58969 58999 -0.50 0.20 0.21
0.05
0.00
0.20 0.35 PFS/NA
T301
0.23
95.7
T388
32
Y
(5)
PTB-CSF1
58969 58999 -0.18 0.07 0.28
0.03
0.01
0.07 0.30 PFS/NA
T371
0.28
93.2
T388
25
Y
(6)
PTB-CSF2
58969 58999 -0.45 0.11 0.17
0.02
0.01
0.07 0.21 PFS/NA
T370
0.17
94.7
T388
38
Y
(6)
SU-CsFO2
58969 58999 -0.11 0.32 0.22
0.13
0.00
0.46 0.61 PFS/NA
T315
0.50
36.0
T387
27
Y
(7)
Notes:
(1) Continuously operating as a clock participating to TAI
(2) Report 04 JUN. 2020 by CH
(3) Report 08 JUN. 2020 by INRIM
(4) Report 04 JUN. 2020 by NRC
(5) Report 04 JUN. 2020 by LNE-SYRTE
(6) Report 04 JUN. 2020 by PTB
(7) Report 02 JUN. 2020 by SU
[1] Beattie S. et al., First accuracy evaluation of the NRC-FCs2 primary frequency standard, Metrologia 57 (2020) 035010 (15pp)
Table 2: Estimate of d by the BIPM based on all PSFS measurements identified to be used for TAI steering
over the period MJD58609-58999, and corresponding uncertainties.
Period of estimation
d
u
58969-58999
-0.45x10-15
0.13x10-15
(2020 APR 30 - 2020 MAY 30)
4 - Relations of UTC and TAI with predictions of UTC(k) disseminated by GNSS.
[UTC-UTC(USNO)_GPS] = C0', [TAI-UTC(USNO)_GPS] = 37 s + C0'
[UTC-UTC(SU)_GLONASS]= C1', [TAI-UTC(SU)_GLONASS]= 37 s + C1'
For this edition of Circular T, σ0'= 0.7 ns, σ1'= 6.5 ns
2020
0h
UTC
MJD
C0'/ns
N0
C1'/ns
N1'
APR 30
58969
3.5
89
27.0
89
MAY 1
58970
2.4
90
27.8
87
MAY 2
58971
2.0
89
28.7
87
MAY 3
58972
4.0
89
28.4
87
MAY 4
58973
4.2
89
28.6
89
MAY 5
58974
2.2
90
27.5
89
MAY 6
58975
4.0
89
23.4
86
MAY 7
58976
5.1
89
23.0
88
MAY 8
58977
3.5
90
25.1
89
MAY 9
58978
3.2
91
25.8
81
MAY 10
58979
2.3
90
26.2
73
MAY 11
58980
3.4
89
26.3
85
MAY 12
58981
4.0
89
25.5
88
MAY 13
58982
2.7
90
24.6
87
MAY 14
58983
2.6
89
24.1
86
MAY 15
58984
2.2
89
25.0
89
pp
p
3 of 5
7/18/2020, 2:16 PM
==PAGE:99==
MAY 16
58985
2.4
89
26.3
89
MAY 17
58986
2.4
90
27.2
90
MAY 18
58987
1.8
89
26.9
83
MAY 19
58988
2.6
89
27.2
88
MAY 20
58989
3.0
89
27.7
82
MAY 21
58990
2.9
90
27.9
90
MAY 22
58991
2.6
89
26.7
86
MAY 23
58992
2.1
89
25.7
86
MAY 24
58993
2.0
89
26.7
89
MAY 25
58994
2.2
90
26.3
89
MAY 26
58995
1.3
89
25.6
84
MAY 27
58996
1.1
89
28.1
88
MAY 28
58997
0.7
89
28.8
87
MAY 29
58998
-0.3
90
27.6
89
MAY 30
58999
1.0
89
27.2
88
5 - Time links used for the computation of TAI, calibrations information and corresponding uncertainties.
Link
Type
Equipment
Cal_ID1
/ Cal_ID2
uStb/ns
uCal/ns
uAg/ns
Al/ns
YYMM
AOS /PTB
GPSPPP
AO_4 /PT13
1014-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.8
1.3
APL /PTB
GPSPPP
AP02 /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
0.3
20.0
AUS /PTB
GPSPPP
AU04 /PT13
1002-2010
/ 1001-2018
0.3
6.6
4.4
BEV /PTB
GPSPPP
BE1_ /PT13
1012-2016
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.5
2.4
BFKH/PTB
GPS MC
MK01 /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
1.5
20.0
BIM /PTB
GPSPPP
BM51 /PT13
2007-2019
/ 1001-2018
0.7
7.1
0.9
BIRM/PTB
GPSPPP
BI41 /PT13
1016-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.5
2.7
0.9
BOM /PTB
GPS MC
MABM /PT13
NA_Al
/ 1001-2018
1.5
8.6
5.0
+4.4
2003
BY /PTB
GPS MC
BY46 /PT13
2001-2008
/ 1001-2018
1.5
12.2
10.0
CAO /PTB
GPS MC
CA__ /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
1.5
20.0
CNES/PTB
GPSPPP
CS21 /PT13
1015-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.9
1.4
CNM /PTB
GPS MC
CN00 /PT13
NA_Al
/ 1001-2018
2.5
11.2
10.0
-27.3
0804
CNMP/PTB
GPS P3
MP1_ /PT13
NA_Al
/ 1001-2018
0.7
7.5
2.7
41.7
1807
DFNT/PTB
GPS P3
DN__ /PT13
NC_Al
/ 1001-2018
0.7
20.0
10.3
1507
DLR /PTB
GPS P3
DL05 /PT13
1012-2016
/ 1001-2018
0.7
3.5
2.5
DMDM/PTB
GPSPPP
ZM68 /PT13
1011-2016
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.5
2.5
DTAG/PTB
GPSPPP
DT05 /PT13
1012-2019
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.7
0.8
EIM /PTB
GPS MC
EI__ /PT13
NA
/
4.0
11.2
10.0
ESTC/PTB
GPSPPP
ES04 /PT13
1019-2016
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.3
2.1
HKO /PTB
GPSPPP
HKO2 /PT13
1011-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.4
3.0
1.6
ICE /PTB
GPS MC
CE1_ /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
3.0
20.0
IDN /PTB
GPSPPP
KI01 /PT13
1017-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.7
1.1
IFAG/PTB
GPSPPP
IF14 /PT13
1016-2017
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.2
1.7
IGNA/PTB
NL
IMBH/PTB
GPSPPP
BH02 /PT13
1011-2019
/ 1001-2018
0.4
2.7
0.9
INCP/PTB
NL
INM /PTB
GPS MC
IC__ /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
1.5
20.0
INPL/PTB
GPSPPP
IL06 /PT13
2003-2016
/ 1001-2018
0.3
7.4
2.3
INTI/PTB
GPS MC
IN__ /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
2.5
20.0
INXE/PTB
GPSPPP
NXRA /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
0.3
20.0
IPQ /PTB
GPSPPP
IP05 /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
0.5
20.0
JATC/PTB
GPSPPP
JA01 /PT13
1201-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.8
1.3
JV /PTB
GPSPPP
JV02 /PT13
1101-2017
/ 1001-2018
0.3
4.3
1.7
KRIS/PTB
GPSPPP
KRG1 /PT13
1017-2017
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.2
2.1
LRTE/PTB
GPSPPP
LRRC /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
0.3
20.0
LT /PTB
GPSPPP
LT02 /PT13
1014-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.8
1.3
LUX /PTB
GPSPPP
LU01 /PT13
1012-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.0
1.6
MASM/PTB
GPSPPP
MN__ /PT13
1019-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.4
2.8
1.2
MBM /PTB
GPS P3
ME01 /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
0.7
20.0
MIKE/PTB
GPSPPP
MI04 /PT13
1016-2019
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.6
0.8
pp
p
4 of 5
7/18/2020, 2:16 PM
==PAGE:100==
MSL /PTB
GPS P3
MS0_ /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
1.5
20.0
NAO /PTB
GPS MC
NAT2 /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
2.0
20.0
NICT/PTB
GPSPPP
NC4S /PT13
1001-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.2
1.4
NIM /PTB
GPSPPP
IM06 /PT13
1001-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.1
1.3
NIMB/PTB
GPSPPP
MB02 /PT13
NA_Al
/ 1001-2018
0.4
7.6
3.0
32.2
1611
NIMT/PTB
NL
NIS /PTB
GPS P3
IS__ /PT13
NC_Al
/ 1001-2018
0.7
20.0
+16.4
1303
NMIJ/PTB
GPSPPP
NM0D /PT13
1001-2014
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.8
3.3
NMLS/PTB
GPS MC
LSM1 /PT13
1013-2017
/ 1001-2018
1.5
4.3
3.3
NPL /PTB
GPSPPP
NPL1 /PT13
1015-2019
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.6
0.8
NPLI/PTB
GPSPPP
LI2P /PT13
1013-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.0
1.6
NRC /PTB
GPSPPP
NRC4 /PT13
1019-2017
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.1
1.9
NRL /PTB
GPSPPP
RL2_ /PT13
NC
/ 1001-2018
0.3
20.0
NTSC/PTB
GPSPPP
NTP1 /PT13
1001-2016
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.9
2.4
ONBA/PTB
GPS MC
ON__ /PT13
1002-2004
/ 1001-2018
2.0
11.2
10.0
ONRJ/PTB
GPSPPP
RJ03 /PT13
NC_Al
/ 1001-2018
0.4
20.0
-11.7
1912
ORB /PTB
GPSPPP
OR5Z /PT13
1018-2017
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.3
2.1
PL /PTB
GPSPPP
PL_3 /PT13
1014-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.8
1.3
SASO/PTB
GPSPPP
SAS0 /PT13
1020-2017
/ 1001-2018
0.5
3.1
1.7
SCL /PTB
GPS P3
SC05 /PT13
1011-2018
/ 1001-2018
1.0
3.0
1.6
SG /PTB
GPSPPP
SG02 /PT13
1019-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.7
1.1
SIQ /PTB
GPSPPP
SI01 /PT13
1013-2019
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.6
0.8
SL /PTB
GPSPPP
SL01 /PT13
1017-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.7
0.9
SMD /PTB
GPSPPP
SD01 /PT13
1014-2017
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.2
2.1
SMU /PTB
GPS MC
SM00 /PT13
NA_Al
/ 1001-2018
1.5
12.2
10.0
57.8
0908
SU /PTB
GPS P3
SU31 /PT13
1001-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.8
2.2
1.5
TL /PTB
GPSPPP
TLT1 /PT13
1001-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.3
1.5
TP /PTB
GPSPPP
TP02 /PT13
1015-2019
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.7
0.9
UA /PTB
GPS MC
UA04 /PT13
2003-2011
/ 1001-2018
1.5
9.5
6.4
UAE /PTB
GPS MC
AE__ /PT13
2001-2016
/ 1001-2018
4.0
8.9
5.5
UME /PTB
GPSPPP
UM01 /PT13
1011-2016
/ 1001-2018
0.3
3.5
2.5
VMI /PTB
GPSPPP
VM02 /PT13
2001-2019
/ 1001-2018
0.3
7.1
0.9
ZA /PTB
GPSPPP
ZA02 /PT13
1018-2018
/ 1001-2018
0.3
2.8
1.2
Link
Type
Equipment
Cal_ID
uStb/ns
uCal/ns
uAg/ns
Al/ns
YYMM
CH /PTB
TWGPPP
CH01 /PTB05
0284-2012
0.3
2.3
1.8
IT /PTB
TWGPPP
IT02 /PTB05
0502-2019
0.3
1.0
0.1
NIST/PTB
TWGPPP
NIST01/PTB05
0393-2015
0.3
1.9
1.4
OP /PTB
TWSDRR
OP51 /PTB55
0517-2020
0.3
1.0
0.0
ROA /PTB
TWGPPP
ROA01 /PTB05
0504-2019
0.3
1.0
0.0
SP /PTB
TWGPPP
SP01 /PTB05
0496-2019
0.3
1.0
0.1
USNO/PTB
TWGPPP
USNO01/PTB05
0395-2016
0.3
1.6
1.0
VSL /PTB
TWGPPP
VSL01 /PTB05
0295-2015
0.3
1.6
1.1
pp
p
5 of 5
7/18/2020, 2:16 PM
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[bau08]
PTB Mitteilungen. PTB Mitteilung, 2009:1–23, 2008.
[BEJH14]
Glenn Bideberg, Sven-Christian Ebenhag, Kenneth Jaldehag, and
Per Olof Hedekvist.
Construction of a secure clock location for
alternative realization of UTC(SP). In 2014 European Frequency
and Time Forum (EFTF), pages 498–501, Neuchatel, Switzerland,
June 2014. IEEE.
[bip]
Technical requirements for the time laboratories for the partici-
pation in UTC. https://www.bipm.org/utils/common/pdf/CC/
CCTF/CCTF-WGMRA-Guideline_8.pdf.
[BPF]
Andreas Bauch, Dirk Piester, and Miho Fujieda. Directive for opera-
tional use and data handling in two-way satellite time and frequency
transfer (TWSTFT). page 26.
[BSPY11a] A. Bauch, E. Staliuniene, D. Piester, and W. Yang. New realization
strategy for UTC(PTB).
In 2011 Joint Conference of the IEEE
International Frequency Control and the European Frequency and
Time Forum (FCS) Proceedings, pages 1–5, May 2011. ISSN: 2327-
1949.
[BSPY11b] A. Bauch, E. Staliuniene, D. Piester, and W. Yang.
New real-
ization strategy for UTC(PTB). In 2011 Joint Conference of the
IEEE International Frequency Control and the European Frequency
and Time Forum (FCS) Proceedings, pages 1–5, San Francisco, CA,
USA, May 2011. IEEE.
==PAGE:102==
94
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Bur19]
Matt Burgess.
To protect putin, russia is spooﬁng gps sig-
nals on a massive scale.
https://www.wired.co.uk/article/
russia-gps-spoofing, March 2019.
[DWF+16] Erik F. Dierikx, Anders E. Wallin, Thomas Fordell, Jani Myyry,
Petri Koponen, Mikko Merimaa, Tjeerd J. Pinkert, Jeroen C. J.
Koelemeij, Henk Z. Peek, and Rob Smets. White Rabbit Precision
Time Protocol on Long-Distance Fiber Links. IEEE Transactions
on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, 63(7):945–
952, July 2016. Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Ultrason-
ics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control.
[EHJS19]
Sven-Christian Ebenhag, Per Olof Hedekvist, Per Jarlemark, and
Ragnar Sundblad. Redundant Distributed Timescale Traceable to
UTC(SP).
In 2019 Joint Conference of the IEEE International
Frequency Control Symposium and European Frequency and Time
Forum (EFTF/IFC), pages 1–4, Orlando, FL, USA, April 2019.
IEEE.
[Fly19]
Rasmus
Flytkjær.
Denmark’s
economic
vul-
nerability
to
a
loss
of
satellite-based
pnt.
https://ufm.dk/publikationer/2019/filer/
le-dtr-denmarks-economic-vulnerability-to-a-loss-of-satellite-based-pnt-fi
pdf, February 2019.
[Ger16]
Heiko
Gerstung.
Miﬁd
ii
compliance:
The
meinberg
faq.
https://blog.meinbergglobal.com/2016/07/26/
mifid-ii-faq-meinberg/, July 2016.
[Gre]
Sam Gresham.
A USER’S GUIDE TO THE NPL INTERNET
TIME SERVICE. page 5.
[Gun16]
Maria Gunther. Nu behöver sverige inte importera tid. pages 20–21,
March 2016.
[KMI]
Kalevi Kalliomäki, Tapio Mansten, and Ilkka Iisakka. 25 MHz stan-
dard frequency and time transmitter of MIKES. page 1.
[KMI+12]
K. Kalliomäki, T. Mansten, I. Iisakka, T. Fordell, and M. Merimaa.
Control algorithm of UTC(MIKE).
In 2012 European Frequency
and Time Forum, pages 365–367, April 2012.
[KMMI10] K. Kalliomaki, T. Mansten, M. Merimaa, and I. Iisakka. Mainte-
nance of UTC(MIKE) in Finland by using a delay generator as a
micro stepper. In EFTF-2010 24th European Frequency and Time
Forum, pages 1–7, Noordwijk, Netherlands, April 2010. IEEE.
==PAGE:103==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
95
[Laba]
National Physical Laboratory. Time & frequency services. pages
1–2.
[Labb]
National Physical Laboratory. The time from NPL – the new ser-
vice. page 1.
[LKK+11]
A. Lassila, M. Kari, H. Koivula, U. Koivula, J. Kortström,
E. Leinonen, J. Manninen, J. Manssila, T. Mansten, T. Meriläi-
nen, J. Muttilainen, J. Nissilä, R. Nyblom, K. Riski, J. Sarilo, and
H. Isotalo. Design and performance of an advanced metrology build-
ing for MIKES. Measurement, 44(2):399–425, February 2011.
[Lom12]
Michael A. Lombardi. Microsecond accuracy at multiple sites: is it
possible without GPS? IEEE Instrumentation Measurement Mag-
azine, 15(5):14–21, October 2012. Conference Name: IEEE Instru-
mentation Measurement Magazine.
[LSS11]
Mass Soldal Lund, Bjørnar Solhaug, and Ketil Stølen. Model-Driven
Risk Analysis. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.
[LWSA11]
Maciej Lipinski, Tomasz Wlostowski, Javier Serrano, and Pablo Al-
varez. White rabbit: a PTP application for robust sub-nanosecond
synchronization. In 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Preci-
sion Clock Synchronization for Measurement, Control and Commu-
nication, pages 25–30, Munich, Germany, September 2011. IEEE.
[MAS+10]
Pedro Moreira, Pablo Alvarez, Javier Serrano, Izzat Darwezeh, and
Tomasz Wlostowski.
Digital dual mixer time diﬀerence for sub-
nanosecond time synchronization in Ethernet. In 2010 IEEE Inter-
national Frequency Control Symposium, pages 449–453, Newport
Beach, CA, USA, June 2010. IEEE.
[MLL18]
Demetrios Matsakis, Judah Levine, and Michael Lombardi. Metro-
logical and Legal Traceability of Time Signals. pages 59–71, Reston,
Virginia, February 2018.
[MWM]
Mikko Merimaa,
Anders Wallin,
and Vtt Mikes.
TIIVIS-
TELMÄRAPORTTI (SUMMARY REPORT). page 14.
[nis]
oneway.gif
(GIF
Image,
480
x
123
pixels).
https:
//www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/styles/480_x_480_
limit/public/images/2017/05/30/oneway.gif?itok=1dF9rsjk.
[NMM+01] R A Nelson, D D McCarthy, S Malys, J Levine, B Guinot, H F
Fliegel, R L Beard, and T R Bartholomew. The leap second: its
history and possible future. Metrologia, 38(6):509–529, December
2001.
==PAGE:104==
96
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[noaa]
BIPM
-
TAI.
https://www.bipm.org/en/bipm-
services/timescales/tai.html.
[noab]
A Brief Note on Time Systems.
http://www.astronomy.ohio-
state.edu/ pogge/Ast350/timesys.html.
[noac]
Commission
delegated
regulation
(eu)
2017/574.
https://
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:
32017R0574&from=EN#d1e32-151-1.
[noad]
Diﬀerences from NTP Classic.
[noae]
Diﬀusion de l’heure par internet - NTP: Network Time (...).
https://syrte.obspm.fr/spip/services/ref-temps/article/diﬀusion-
de-l-heure-par-internet-ntp-network-time-protocol.
[noaf]
emWhitepapers:
Transparent versus Boundary clocks (PTP) in
Broadcast environment. https://www.embrionix.com/resource/
transparent_boundary_clock_ST2059_in_broadcast.
[noag]
The French timescale UTC(OP). https://syrte.obspm.fr/spip/
science/references-micro-ondes-et-echelles-de-temps/
activites-138/activites-139/article/
the-french-timescale-utc-op?lang=en.
[noah]
How to use NTS | Netnod.
https://www.netnod.se/time-and-
frequency/how-to-use-nts.
[noai]
Netnod’s
NTP
service.
Keeping
Sweden
in
sync.
Guaran-
teed.
https://www.netnod.se/ntp/network-time-protocol-%
28ntp%29-services-.
[noaj]
Network Time Security | Netnod.
https://www.netnod.se/time-
and-frequency/network-time-security.
[noak]
NIST Time and Frequency Transfer using One-Way GPS. https:
//tf.nist.gov/time/oneway.htm.
[noal]
The operational use of two-way satellite time and frequency transfer.
page 25.
[noam]
Protecting Critical Infrastructure with Resilient Timing & Synchro-
nization.
[noan]
Provision
of
the
legal
time
by
ALS162
signal.
https://syrte.obspm.fr/spip/services/ref-temps/article/mise-a-
disposition-du-temps-legal-par-le-signal-als162.
==PAGE:105==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
97
[noao]
Retsinformation. https://www.retsinformation.dk/eli/lta/1893/83.
Library Catalog: www.retsinformation.dk.
[noap]
Time
of
Finland:
NTP
-
network
time
service
|
VTT.
https://www.vttresearch.com/en/ourservices/time-ﬁnland-ntp-
network-time-service. Library Catalog: www.vttresearch.com.
[noaq]
Universal Time | chronology. https://www.britannica.com/science/Universal-
Time. Library Catalog: www.britannica.com.
[noar]
UTC(OP),
the
basis
of
French
legal
time.
https:
//syrte.obspm.fr/spip/services/ref-temps/article/
two-time-references-are-generated-and-disseminated-by-rnt-service?
lang=en.
[noa17a]
DCF77 amplitude modulation. https://www.ptb.de/cms/en/ptb/fachabteilungen/abt
44/ag-442/dissemination-of-legal-time/dcf77/dcf77-amplitude-
modulation.html, May 2017. Library Catalog: www.ptb.de.
[noa17b]
Time
dissemination
via
the
Internet.
https://www.ptb.de/cms/en/ptb/fachabteilungen/abt4/fb-
44/ag-442/dissemination-of-legal-time/time-dissemination-via-
the-internet.html, May 2017. Library Catalog: www.ptb.de.
[noa20a]
DCF77 time code. https://www.ptb.de/cms/en/ptb/fachabteilungen/abt4/fb-
44/ag-442/dissemination-of-legal-time/dcf77/dcf77-time-
code.html, June 2020. Library Catalog: www.ptb.de.
[noa20b]
IEEE Standard for a Precision Clock Synchronization Protocol for
Networked Measurement and Control Systems. page 499, 2020.
[noa20c]
Is time information also available online?, June 2020. Library Cat-
alog: www.ptb.de.
[noa20d]
Time
synchronization:
Further
technical
hints.
https://www.ptb.de/cms/en/ptb/fachabteilungen/abtq/gruppe-
q4/ref-q42/time-synchronization-further-technical-hints.html,
January 2020. Library Catalog: www.ptb.de.
[noa20e]
What is the time signal?
https://www.anfr.fr/en/gestion-des-
frequences-sites/signal-horaire/quest-ce-que-le-signal-horaire/,
February 2020. Library Catalog: www.anfr.fr.
[Nyv18]
Mads Nyvold.
På tide:
Minister overvejer at indføre nøjagtigt
dansk
klokkeslæt.
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/
worlds-first-timing-centre-to-protect-uk-from-risk-of-satellite-failur
December 2018.
==PAGE:106==
98
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Pal11]
Jason Palmer.
UK atomic clock is most accurate.
BBC News,
August 2011.
[pam16]
pamela.corey@nist.gov.
Common View GPS Time Transfer.
https://www.nist.gov/pml/time-and-frequency-division/
atomic-standards/common-view-gps-time-transfer,
May
2016.
Last Modiﬁed:
2019-11-15T19:42-05:00 Library Catalog:
www.nist.gov.
[Par17]
European Parliament.
Commission delegated regulation (eu)
2017/574.
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg_del/2017/
574/oj, March 2017.
[ptb]
Merkblatt:
Allgemeine
bedingungen
zur
teilnahme
an
der
"authentiﬁzierten
zeitsynchronisation".
https:
//www.ptb.de/cms/fileadmin/internet/fachabteilungen/
abteilung_q/q.4_informationstechnologie/q.42/PTB-Q.
42-MB01-WirkbetriebAuthNTP-V33.pdf.
[RBC+16]
G D Rovera, S Bize, B Chupin, J Guéna, Ph Laurent, P Rosenbusch,
P Uhrich, and M Abgrall. UTC(OP) based on LNE-SYRTE atomic
fountain primary frequency standards. Metrologia, 53(3):S81–S88,
June 2016.
[RSS]
D. Reilly, H. Stenn, and D. Sibold. Network Time Protocol Best
Current Practices. https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8633.html. Li-
brary Catalog: www.rfc-editor.org.
[Sal19]
Jim Salter.
Claims of tesla hack wide of the mark — we dig
into gnss hacking.
https://arstechnica.com/cars/2019/06/
claims-of-tesla-hack-wide-of-the-mark-we-dig-into-gnss-hacking/,
June 2019.
[uk-]
World’s
ﬁrst
timing
centre
to
protect
UK
from
risk
of
satellite
failure.
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/
worlds-first-timing-centre-to-protect-uk-from-risk-of-satellite-failure.
Library Catalog: www.gov.uk.
[WEL+19] Peter Whibberley, Elizabeth Laier English, Conway Langham,
Krzysztof Szymaniec, and Richard Hendricks. Improvement of the
UTC(NPL) Time Scale Recent Upgrades and Future Plans. In 2019
Joint Conference of the IEEE International Frequency Control Sym-
posium and European Frequency and Time Forum (EFTF/IFC),
pages 1–2, April 2019. ISSN: 2327-1949.
==PAGE:107==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
99
[WSHH14] Wu Wenjun, Dong Shaowu, Li Huanxin, and Zhang Hong. Two-
way satellite time and frequency transfer: Overview, recent devel-
opments and application. In 2014 European Frequency and Time
Forum (EFTF), pages 121–125, June 2014.
[Yoo]
Christopher S Yoo.
U.S. vs. European Broadband Deployment:
What Do the Data Say? page 65.
