==PAGE:1==
Deep Learning for Predictive Maintenance
A Survey and Comparative Analysis
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Kristoﬀer Scott Bates Michelsen (s153463)
Mikkel Valentin Rønnelund (s153160)
Mads Brixtofte Johansen (s153257)
Supervisors:
Ole Winther, DTU Compute
Andreas Schack Fabricius, Novozymes
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Deep Learning for Predictive Maintenance
A Survey and Comparative Analysis
M.Sc. Thesis
June, 2020
By
Kristoﬀer Scott Bates Michelsen
Mikkel Valentin Rønnelund
Mads Brixtofte Johansen
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The goal of this thesis is to make a survey of diﬀerent machine- and deep learning
models for predictive maintenance. The project is conducted in cooperation with
Novozymes who has provided data and guidance. This project utilizes vibration
data from decanter bearings as the machine transitions from a healthy state to a
faulty state. This is done to avoid halting production if a machine breaks down
and to optimize the uptime such that the machine only undergoes maintenance
when it is truly necessary.
The project explores three aspects of predictive maintenance and each aspect
introduces and implements several relevant models. The ﬁrst aspect is Anomaly
Detection which utilizes unsupervised learning to detect machine issues. These
models consider only healthy data and can therefore be considered novelty de-
tection approaches. Another aspect uses binary classiﬁcation as a means for
Time Frame Prediction. The models herein follow a supervised learning strat-
egy, aiming to predict whether a machine is approaching a failure state. Lastly,
the usage of regression for RUL Prediction is explored, hoping to predict the
exact days expected until maintenance is required.
Some models achieve promising results with the available data and could there-
fore be prospects for Novozymes’ future development. In contrast, for diﬀerent
reasons, some models did not achieve the same results, however, they could po-
tentially beneﬁt from having more events in the data set. For the data provided
by Novozymes, the anomaly detection models would be the easiest to implement
and maintain as the number of recorded events is limited. As more events are
documented and more data is collected, the RUL predictions would likely be the
most beneﬁcial. This is due to the RUL providing the most precise predictions
==PAGE:4==
ii
and thereby helping Novozymes schedule the maintenance with the least cost to
production.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Målet for denne afhandling er at lave en undersøgelse af forskellige maskinlærings
og dyb lærings-modeller der bedst egner sig til brug i prædiktiv vedligeholdelse
baseret på data fra Novozymes’ dekantere. I denne afhandling fokuseres der på
vibrationsdata fra kuglelejer, for at se hvordan vibrationerne i maskinen udvikler
sig fra normal operation til operation hvor en fejl er opstået. Dette gøres for at
undgå at igangværende produktion må kasseres hvis maskinen går i stykker og
for at undgå at vedligeholdelse udføres for ofte.
I denne afhandling udforskes tre aspekter af prædiktiv vedligeholdelse og for
hvert aspekt implementeres og testes en række modeller. Det første aspekt om-
handler Anomaly Detection som gør brug af uovervåget selvlæring til at kun-
ne registrere forestående og igangværende fejl. Et andet udforsket aspekt gør
brug af binær klassiﬁkation til Time Frame Prediction. Modellerne hertil bruger
overvåget selvlæring til at forudsige om en forestående fejl vil opstå inden for en
given tidsperiode. Det sidste aspekt gør brug af regression til RUL Prediction
og bruges til at estimere antal dage indtil reperation er nødvendig.
Visse modeller opnår lovende resultater for den anvendte data og disse modeller
kunne derfor videreudvikles til brug i Novozymes’ prediktive vedligeholdelses
initiativ. Hvorimod andre modeller af forskellige årsager ikke opnår de samme
resultater, men potentielt kunne forbedres med mere fejl data. For den givne
data hos Novozymes vil anomaly detection metoden være nemmest at imple-
mentere og vedligeholde da antallet af registrerede fejl er begrænset. Når ﬂere
fejl er blevet registreret og yderligere data er samlet ville RUL prediction være
mest anvendelig, da planlægning af vedligeholdelse bedst ville kunne udføres ud
fra denne type prædiktiv vedligeholdelse.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with machine- and deep learning approaches to the predictive
maintenance initiative. The idea is to survey a wide range of implementations
and compare the results and usefulness of each.
The thesis consists of a basic background section followed by a thorough de-
scription of the development process.
Each area of implemented methods is
also described in detail along with the results. Lastly, the ultimate ﬁndings are
discussed and several future developments are presented.
==PAGE:8==
vi
Kristoﬀer Scott Bates Michelsen - s153463
Signature
Date
Mikkel Valentin Rønnelund - s153160
Signature
Date
Mads Brixtofte Johansen - s153257
Signature
Date
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
Andreas Schack Fabricius, Data & Digitalization Specialist, Technical advi-
sor at Novozymes
Ole Winther, Professor at DTU Compute, Technical advisor at DTU
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.3
Data description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.4
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.5
Milestones and learning objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Work distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Background
9
2.1
Decanter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Vibration theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Data acquisition and description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Bearings and Bearing Faults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Related Work
23
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
4
Development Process
29
4.1
Iteration 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Iteration 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Iteration 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Statistical Analysis
37
5.1
Vibration Data and Feature Extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2
Initial Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Principal Component Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Anomaly Detection
53
6.1
Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.1.1
Mahalanobis Distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.1.2
Isolation Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.1.3
Local Outlier Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.1.4
One Class Support Vector Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.2
Deep Learning for Anomaly Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.2.1
Auto Encoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.3
Anomaly detection Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
7
Time Frame Prediction
91
7.1
Labeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
7.2
Machine Learning for Time Frame Prediction . . . . . . . . . . .
93
7.2.1
Support Vector Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
7.2.2
Stochastic Gradient Descent Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . .
95
7.2.3
K Nearest Neighbour Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7.2.4
Decision Tree Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
7.3
Deep Learning for Time Frame Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
7.3.1
Feed Forward Neural Network Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . 102
7.3.2
LSTM Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
7.3.3
CNN classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
7.4
Time Frame Prediction Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
8
Remaining Useful Lifetime
111
8.1
Labelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
8.2
Machine Learning for RUL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
8.2.1
Support Vector Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
8.2.2
Random Forest Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
8.2.3
KNN Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
8.3
Deep Learning for RUL
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
8.3.1
Feed Forward Neural Network for RUL prediction
. . . . 121
8.3.2
LSTM for RUL prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
8.3.3
Combined Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
8.4
Remaining Useful Lifetime Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
9
Discussion
127
9.1
Further Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
10 Conclusion
135
A A1
137
Bibliography
139
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The task of predictive maintenance is becoming a broadly discussed topic within
large companies. This is due to the fact that current failure handling methods
often mean that production may halt abruptly when an error occurs, or mainte-
nance is scheduled too regularly. This results in higher maintenance costs than
required or costly downtime if a machine reaches a critical point and precludes
production.
This means that systems which can automatically detect ﬂaws
such that maintenance can be planned eﬃciently before failure, are increasingly
sought after. A full description of the motivation behind this project can be
found in the following section; 1.1.
This project aims to provide a survey of accurate machine- and deep learning
techniques which can be used for predictive maintenance. The project explores
three diﬀerent aspects of predictive maintenance including anomaly detection,
time frame prediction, and remaining useful lifetime prediction. This was done
in collaboration with Novozymes who provided vibration data which could be
used to train and test the implemented models.
Each aspect of predictive maintenance explored in this project will be intro-
duced in its corresponding chapter. Each chapter also introduces the theory
behind a number of diﬀerent machine- and deep learning models which can be
used to accomplish the given predictive maintenance task. Each of the models
introduced in this project has been implemented, trained, and tested using the
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
vibration data provided by Novozymes. The models are then compared using
a ﬁtting accuracy measure and the chapter concludes with a short summary of
the accomplishments within the respective chapter.
The entire project is concluded with a discussion of the diﬀerent aspects of
predictive maintenance explored in this project along with a suggestion of how
the models could be applied at Novozymes.
This report also presents a project description which describes the overall goal of
this project. Furthermore a project plan and a description of the development
process is presented which describe the thought process and the engineering
work that went into the development of this project.
1.1
Motivation
Predictive maintenance is the task of predicting machine failure such that main-
tenance can be planned in advance. This means that the operating uptime of
machinery can be maintained more eﬃciently as maintenance can be scheduled
in pockets of downtime.
The theory behind vibration analysis and monitoring of machine health indi-
cators lends itself well to a predictive maintenance initiative. This is because
the factors will individually or in combination indicate certain faults in the ma-
chines. This is especially valuable as it may register certain impending issues
before otherwise noticeable. Slight trends in variations of data may indicate
machine damage at early stages. Within the industry, the approach of main-
tenance is split into several methodologies. The ﬁrst approach to maintenance
is the "run-to-failure" management. This maintenance approach is a reactive
based management where the machine is simply run until it fails [40]. When
this inevitably happens, the machine is repaired and, typically, the job of the
machine at the time of failure is simply lost. This is certainly the case for de-
canters as the contents require continuous input to remain healthy and sanitary.
A true run-to-failure maintenance approach is rarely implemented in factories
as general tasks such as lubrication and other frequently required maintenance
is typically performed. This approach may still be the one with the highest po-
tential expenses as it requires the factory to be prepared for any type of failure
at any given time as downtime will otherwise be prolonged [40]. Either way,
this maintenance strategy may become quite expensive as both maintaining a
vast inventory and production downtime is costly.
Another approach is a preventive maintenance (also referred to as; planned
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Motivation
3
maintenance) strategy. This revolves around a scheduled interval of machine
inspection and repair based typically on operational time or machine usage [40].
Preventive maintenance is very ﬂexible in the deﬁnition in terms of the fre-
quency and depth of maintenance performed in each iteration. However, all
deﬁnitions of preventive maintenance are centered around the same idea of reg-
ular and scheduled maintenance. Unfortunately, preventive maintenance also
introduces issues similarly to the run-to-failure approach. One issue created by
frequent inspections and maintenance is the introduction of problems shortly af-
ter machine downtime and modiﬁcation. This can be illustrated in the so-called
bathtub curve [36] as seen in ﬁgure 1.1 depicting the increased risk of issues at
the early stages of a machine. Another drawback is that the preventive mainte-
nance approach relies on a regular set of machine issues to arise over a planned
time period.
The frequency of faults is quite diﬃcult to pinpoint especially
due to unanticipated or abrupt issues and variations in machine components.
Therefore the plan either has to be very pessimistic or the strategy may still
allow spurious machine failures. This increases the operational time spent in
the initial phase of the bathtub curve which results in sub-optimal performance
similar to the run-to-failure approach. In addition to simply spending more time
in high failure rate phases, the repair expenses also reach a sub-optimal level.
This is due to the likelihood of components being replaced earlier than required
and thereby costing the company more than necessary [40].
Figure 1.1: Bathtub curve of failure frequency. Source: [36]
The ﬁnal approach to maintenance is the predictive strategy. Similarly to pre-
ventive maintenance, predictive maintenance also varies from company to com-
pany though the general ideas and theories remain the same. For the purpose
of this project, the predictive maintenance strategy revolves around a compi-
lation of machine health indicators and vibrations to predict incipient failures.
The general goal however for all predictive maintenance strategies, no matter
the type of data recorded, is to optimize the interval of scheduled maintenance
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
while also raising early alerts of sudden changes in trends of health indicators
[40]. Essentially, the predictive maintenance approach is the optimal philoso-
phy between regular preventive maintenance and the run-to-failure approach to
management. Predictive maintenance is by nature ﬂexible and proactive but of
course also comes at a cost. The cost of the predictive strategy stems from the
necessity of accurate and reliable instruments to continuously monitor the con-
ditions of machinery, as well as a deep understanding of the correlation between
components and health indicators. This deep understanding also introduces an
interesting aspect of artiﬁcial aid by utilizing statistical analysis. This area is
the primary goal of this project, utilizing machine- and deep learning methods
to model and employ the vast range of data available of machine health indi-
cators. The advantage of automatic or artiﬁcial aid in this department is an
increased ﬂexibility and likely much lower maintained cost as compared to a
manual approach.
1.2
Project Description
1.2.1
Motivation
The motivation behind the project is to construct a strong prediction model to
help the predictive maintenance initiative at Novozymes.
1.2.2
Problem Statement
A survey of deep learning methods for fault detection in predictive maintenance.
Comparing and analyzing network performance relative to computational cost.
1.2.3
Data description
The data comes from a set of decanters and contains information of several
variables regarding operation from the past year. This data is split into two
categories; vibration values and machine variables. The vibration values are
taken from sensors installed on each of the drives of each decanter in the factory.
This comprises the majority of data points as it has the highest resolution of all
data inspected. The machine variables are descriptive of the operation of each
decanter, including values such as temperature, pressure, and product ﬂow.
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Project plan
5
1.2.4
Methods
The project will revolve around exploring and implementing various deep learn-
ing strategies to construct and maintain a strong predictive model. This will
require extensive analysis of modern approaches to the subject and the appli-
cation of those deemed relevant and promising. The project will also include
learning the basics of signal processing such that signiﬁcant information can
be extracted from the raw and/or pre-processed data. The main scope of the
project will however still be on the development of several predictive models
based on the readily available data.
1.2.5
Milestones and learning objectives
The ﬁrst milestone will revolve around conducting an initial literary evaluation
on the current state of predictive modelling methods.
This will give insight
into a suitable initial approach to the ﬁrst implementation. The next milestone
will then be to implement a working anomaly detection algorithm based on
standard machine learning to use the performance as baseline for future deep
learning approaches. The next set of milestones will be iterative development
and testing of various promising deep learning models to build an accurate com-
parative analysis of the performance. Once a set of strong candidates with the
ability to fulﬁl the desired application have been found, additional experimental
approaches will be explored. This would include the use of generative models
and more custom variations of standard networks in an attempt to better utilize
the speciﬁc data available. Lastly, the overall performance of the implementa-
tions will be compared both in terms of accuracy and ability, and in terms of
computational cost.
1.3
Project plan
The original project plan (found in then Appendix A) has been revised and the
ﬁnal project plan can be seen in Tables 1.1 and 1.2.
==PAGE:20==
6
Introduction
Project Week
Calender
Week
Task
Week 1
5
Work on project plan. Research vibration theory
and background knowledge.
Week 2
6
(Finalize project plan.) Find and research gen-
eral useful machine learning methods. Familiar-
ize with data.
Week 3
7
(Finalize project plan.) Choose ML approaches
for anomaly detection and start implementing
the chosen method.
Week 4
8
(Finalize project plan.) Work on initial ML ap-
proaches.
Week 5
9
Hand in project plan 27/2.
Finalize ML ap-
proaches for anomaly detection and explore deep
learning options.
Week 6
10
Start
implementation
of
deep
learning
for
anomaly detection.
Week 7
11
Finalize deep learning for anomaly detection and
compare models. Explore other options for pre-
dictive maintenance tasks.
Week 8
12
Chose other predictive maintenance task and do
background research. Chose ML approaches for
the new task.
Week 9
13
Implement ML approaches for the second pre-
dictive maintenance task.
Week 10
14
Explore options for deep learning approaches
and chose deep learning approach.
Week 11
15
Implement chosen deep learning approaches.
Table 1.1: Final project plan part 1.
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Work distribution
7
Project Week
Calender
Week
Task
Week 12
16
Finalize implementation of deep learning for the
second predictive maintenance task and compare
models. Explore further options for predictive
maintenance and chose a ﬁnal aspect.
Week 13
17
Do background research for the ﬁnal task and
explore ML options.
Week 14
18
Chose ML approaches and start the implemen-
tation of those.
Week 15
19
Finalize the implementation of the ML ap-
proaches for the ﬁnal aspect of predictive main-
tenance.
Week 16
20
Explore options for deep learning approaches
and chose deep learning approach for the ﬁnal
task.
Week 17
21
Start implementation of deep learning for the ﬁ-
nal task.
Week 18
22
Finalize deep learning implementation and com-
pare models.
Week 19
23
Finalize report. (And potential buﬀer for imple-
mentation and further testing)
Week 20
24
Finalize report.
Week 21
25
Finalize report.
Week 22
26
Finalize report.
Table 1.2: Final project plan part 2.
1.4
Work distribution
The work has been attempted to be distributed equally such that all members
have contributed equally to the project. The author of each assigned section of
the report is also the primary person responsible for that implementation. Still,
it should be noted that throughout the development process of all sections, all
members collaborated as needed.
Mikkel Valentin Rønnelund (s153160): Summary (DK), Introduction, Develop-
ment Process, Statistical Analysis, Anomaly Detection (DL), Remaining Useful
Lifetime (DL), Discussion
==PAGE:22==
8
Introduction
Mads Brixtofte Johansen (s153257): Background (Decanter, Bearing and Bear-
ing Faults), Related Work, Statistical Analysis (Initial Analysis), Anomaly De-
tection (ML), Time Frame Prediction (DL), Discussion
Kristoﬀer Scott Bates Michelsen (s153463): Summary (US), Introduction, Back-
ground (Vibration Theory, Data Acquisition and Description), Time Frame Pre-
diction (ML), Remaining Useful Lifetime (ML), Discussion, Conclusion
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter is meant for the reader to become acquainted with some of the
background theory used for this report. The chapter introduces the most im-
portant terms along with some of the background theory which has been used
throughout the project. This includes decanter theory, vibration theory, data
acquisition, and so on.
2.1
Decanter
The decanter centrifuge also known as solid-bowl scroll-discharge centrifuge is
used to separate components with diﬀerent densities from each other, e.g. solids
from liquids, by using high rotational speeds. The separation principle of the
decanter is sedimentation. Sedimentation causes solids suspended in liquid to
separate from the liquid due to the higher density of the solid similar to sand
settling at the bottom of a river or a body of water due to gravity.
If the
diﬀerence in density is high, gravity would be suﬃcient but in many industrial
situations using only gravity would take too long or simply be impossible. Thus
a decanter is used to speed up this process.
There are several diﬀerent kinds of solid-bowl sedimenting centrifuges and the
==PAGE:24==
10
Background
decanter is one of them. The basic design of a decanter includes a solid bowl
rotating at a high speed and inside it; a scroll which rotates at a slightly diﬀerent
speed. This speed diﬀerence causes a conveying motion like a screw conveyor.
Through one end of the decanter is a tube which is used to feed a slurry of liquid
and suspended solids to a ﬁxed position inside the decanter. When the slurry
has been fed into the decanter, it is immediately accelerated outwards and held
by the bowl wall due to the centrifugal force. This force also cause the solids to
settle at the bowl wall. Because of the rotation the settling process is drastically
sped up compared to gravity alone. Furthermore due to the conveying motion,
the solids settled at the bowl wall is brought to one end of the decanter where
the bowl is narrowed. This part of the bowl is called the beach. The solids are
conveyed to the top of the beach from where it is extracted. At the opposite
end of the decanter the excess liquid is removed through a kind of weir which
regulates the maximum amount of liquid by setting the level of the liquid surface.
An illustration of a Novozymes decanter can be seen in Figure 2.1. The ﬁgure
shows the center part of the decanter, where the tube feeding slurry into the
decanter can be seen coming in from the right. The red seen at the right top
and bottom is the wall of the decanter which continues outside the ﬁgure. More
speciﬁcally what is seen at the right top and bottom is the beach. The product
is collected through the holes at the right top and bottom.
Figure 2.1: Decanter illustration. Source: Novozymes
2.2
Vibration theory
Vibration is deﬁned as back and forth movement of an object from its rest-
ing position. "Mechanical Vibration" is a term which is used to describe the
movement in mechanical parts as an eﬀect of internal or external forces. The
movement is periodic and repeats itself after some time interval known as the
period T. The maximal value of displacement is referred to as the "amplitude",
and the frequency is the reciprocal of the period:
f = 1
T
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Vibration theory
11
which is measured in cycles per second (cps) or Hertz (Hz). For rotating equip-
ment, the frequency is often expressed as vibrations per minute [40].
There exist three types of vibration; "Free vibration", "Forced vibration", and
"Damped vibration". Free vibration occurs when a system is set in motion with
an initial force and then vibrates freely and then damps till the system no longer
vibrates. An example of free vibration can be seen when hitting a tuning fork
and letting it ring. Forced vibration occurs when a force is repeatedly applied
to the system. An example of forced vibration is when a washing machine is
shaking.
This is due to a repeated disturbance due to imbalance.
Damped
vibration is when the energy of the vibrating system is wasted due to diﬀerent
resistances such as friction. The vibration intensity is reduced until the system
becomes motionless. This type of vibration can be found in vehicular suspension
which is dampened using a shock absorber [40].
Furthermore, vibrations can also be "harmonic" or "non-harmonic". Harmonic
vibrations are pure sine waves whereas the non-harmonic is a sum of diﬀerent
pure sine waves.
Inside a machine there is a number of diﬀerent sources of
vibration thus the result is a non-harmonic vibration [40].
Continuous vibration is an analog signal and is measured in Hertz (Hz). This
type of signal can be observed in many environments e.g. vibration transducer
output. The analog signal has to be converted into a digital signal for analysis.
The digital signal is how the analog signal looks after a digitizing process. The
digitizing process converts the analog voltage from a sampling into digital num-
bers. The sampling time is a ﬁxed ∆T and the sampling frequency is described
as:
fs =
1
∆T
Vibration curves all have common elements which can be used to analyze them.
These elements include "peak-to-peak", "zero-to-peak", and "root-mean-square"
(RMS). Peak-to-peak describes the total amplitude of the vibration. In a har-
monic vibration, the peak-to-peak value is equal to two times the amplitude.
The Zero-to-peak value, or simply peak value, is equal to one half of the peak-
to-peak value. For a harmonic vibration, the zero-to-peak value is equal to the
amplitude. For a machine vibration, the RMS is calculated as the statistical
average value of the generated amplitude. RMS is not used to track and detect
incipient machine faults but instead gives an indication of the general progres-
sion of faults over a longer period of time [54]. While monitoring RMS, it is also
possible to monitor delta RMS. Delta RMS calculates the diﬀerence between
consequent RMS values and may give an indication of gear damage over time.
==PAGE:26==
12
Background
If gear damage is done to the machine, the delta RMS value will increase more
rapidly than normal [54].
The shape of vibration signals can also be analyzed, and several variables can be
derived from this. The ﬁrst such variable is called kurtosis. Kurtosis describes
how ﬂat or peaked a vibration signal is. The normal range of kurtosis for a
vibration signal lies around 3 which indicates a Gaussian-like signal [54]. The
formula to derive kurtosis can be seen below.
kurtosis = N ∗PN
i=1(si −¯s)4
PN
i=1{(si −¯s)2}2
where N is the number of points in the history of the signal, si is the i-th point
in the time history of the signal, and ¯s is the mean over the time history of the
signal.
Kurtosis can be used as an indicator of sharp and soft peaks in the signal. As
the machine gear is damaged, the kurtosis should reﬂect this via sharper peaks
thus serving as a potential health indicator [58].
Another useful indicator of machine health is the crest factor of a vibration
signal. The crest factor refers to the ratio of the single side peak value of the
input signal to the RMS value [54]. This can be seen in the formula below.
CrestFactor = Sss_peak
SRMS
Crest factor is especially useful to indicate faults at an early stage. Impulsive
vibrations will directly aﬀect this value which could suggest tooth breakage on
a gear of the machine [58].
In addition to the shape of the vibration signal, several methods can also be used
to identify anomalous behaviour related to bearing faults. The damages which
can be located based on these values are induced by pitting, spall, cracking and
other bearing related incidents [58]. There are four condition indicators typically
used to analyze bearing faults which are: ball energy, cage energy, inner race
energy, and outer race energy. It is important to note that the bearing related
health indicators require a synchronized vibration signal to be analyzed. As the
recordings for this project start at any given time within a revolution and is not
continuous between samples, a phase trigger is used to align the signals before
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Vibration theory
13
these methods are applied. The phase trigger is an induced signal added to the
vibration signal to indicate a speciﬁc stage of a rotation.
Shaft indicators can also be analyzed on the basis of the vibration signal. These
can be monitored to detect shaft faults including shaft imbalance, misalignment,
etc. Shaft revolutions per minute (RPM) can give an indication of a potential
rotor shaft imbalance. This is done by monitoring the trend of the RPM over a
longer period of time [58]. The shaft orders can also be separated and analyzed
to monitor a variety of machine faults including the potential of mass imbalance,
a bent shaft, or coupling failures.
Each shaft order suggests a set of issues
if raised above a warning threshold, allowing the user to cross reference and
potentially detect the source of an issue. The shaft order one phase angle which
is the four-quadrant inverse tangent of the complex conjugate FFT transform
(which is described later) of the vibration signal can also be used as an indicator
of imbalance [58].
Finally, the health of the machine gears can also be monitored and evaluated
based on the vibration signal. The residual signal is one condition indicator
which can be extracted from the vibration by removing the shaft harmonics
and the gear mesh frequency from the time synchronous average signal. This
analysis is eﬀective for detecting gear scuﬃng, tooth pitting, and cracked teeth
[58]. Energy ratio can also be monitored to get insight on the condition of the
gear and can be calculated based on the formula below [54]:
ER = σ(d)
σ(r)
where σ(d) is the standard deviation of the diﬀerence signal and σ(r) is the
standard deviation of the original signal.
The energy ratio is especially useful in displaying the overall health progress of
the gear. The trend of the ratio will approach 1 as a fault becomes imminent.
This is most indicative when the damage concerns more than a single tooth
[58]. In addition to these methods for monitoring the health of the gear of a
machine, several other condition indicators may be used to derive an overview
of the progress of the machine. These will not be described in detail but may
be included in the toolbox of the predictive maintenance implementation.
This paper explores the eﬀects of wear and tear on vibration and this vibration
data is used in the predictive maintenance initiative.
The vibration level of
a new machine should be consistent as there is no looseness or wear yet, and
the stiﬀness and damping factors are still high.
The exciting forces should
==PAGE:28==
14
Background
also be low since the machine should still be free of mechanical errors.
As
the machine runs, the machine deteriorates, the parts wear out and loosen,
and larger exciting forces may occur due to imbalance and misalignment. This
aﬀects the mechanical vibration thus the vibration data can be used to detect
various machine ﬂaws [16]. Vibration analysis is often used for maintenance
and may help reduce the costs and downtown of a system ﬂaw.
Vibration
analysis is especially used in predictive maintenance as it can be used to detect
ﬂaws including imbalance, misalignment, and so on, in rotating equipment at a
proactive time [40].
The vibration data used in this paper was measured using a specialized trans-
ducer called a "Piezoelectric accelerometer".
The data collected by the ac-
celerometer can be used to form a "time waveform".
Time waveform is an
amplitude-time plot and can be used throughout the vibration analysis. An
example of this can be seen in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Time waveform example.
"Fourier transform" states that the time waveform can be reconstructed from
a sum of pure harmonic sine and cosine frequencies. "Fast Fourier Transform"
(FFT) is used to obtain the "Discrete Fourier transform" (DFT) and make an
amplitude-frequency plot. This can be used to extract the diﬀerent pure fre-
quencies of the time waveform meaning that it is possible to extract the diﬀerent
pure sine waves which combined make the complete time waveform. These pure
sine waves are aﬀected by ﬂawed equipment and are therefore essential to pin-
point faulty components. Commonly, the individual pure sine frequencies can
be linked directly to speciﬁc components and are therefore very useful when
determining the faulty component.
The key idea of Fourier transform is to "wrap" the time waveform graph around
a circle at a given frequency referred to as the "winding frequency", e.g. 0.5
cycles/second. The resulting graph describing this is written as:
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Vibration theory
15
g(t) ∗e−2πift
where i is an imaginary component, g(t) is a function describing the intensity at
time t, and f is the winding frequency. The resulting graph will be referred to
as the "wrapped graph". It is possible to change the winding frequency which
then also changes the wrapped graph. It is then possible to ﬁnd the center of
mass of the structure within the wrapped graph. The center of mass is found
using the following formula:
1
t2 −t1
Z t2
t1
g(t) ∗e−2πiftdt
where t1 to t2 is the considered time interval (in theory the bound of the integral
is −∞to ∞). The center of mass will typically stay around the origin until the
winding frequency matches the frequency of one of the pure sine waves that
made up the vibration signal. Thus by changing the winding frequency it is
possible to ﬁnd all the pure sine waves exactly when the winding frequency
matches one of the pure sine frequencies that made up the original vibration
signal. This is seen as a spike in the amplitude-frequency plot. The ﬁnal Fourier
transform is then written as:
ˆg(f) =
Z t2
t1
g(t) ∗e−2πiftdt
The output of the function is a complex number which describes the strength
of the frequency f in the original signal [15]. An example of the FFT can be
seen in Figure 2.3. In this plot only the real values are plotted.
Figure 2.3: Real values of FFT example.
==PAGE:30==
16
Background
The downside of using FFT is that the time aspect of the time waveform is
lost. This means that if the speed of the equipment changes then so does the
frequency. This may be accounted for using Wavelet transformation or by nor-
malizing the pure sine frequencies with regards to the speed of the equipment.
Other problems of FFT includes "aliasing", "window eﬀect" (or "leakage"), and
the "picket fence eﬀect". Aliasing is the eﬀect that some signals may become in-
distinguishable such that high frequencies may be interpreted as low frequencies.
This problem can be avoided with a low-pass ﬁlter which prevents the maximum
frequency greater than the "Nyquist" frequency (half of the sampling frequency)
is not passed. In this way, high frequency components can be cancelled out [16].
It should also be noted that this means that the sampling frequency needs to
be high enough to support proper accuracy of the data after transformation.
The window eﬀect occurs when the sampling frequency is not a direct multiple
of the signal length and the time signal is ﬁtted in a ﬁnite length. The prob-
lem is that the energy at a single frequency spreads into adjacent frequencies
with the same characteristics [45]. This is referred to as sidelobe generation.
This problem is avoided by using a window function which allows minimal side-
lobes in the frequency [16]. The window function alters the signal so that it is
near zero at the beginning and at the end. Diﬀerent window functions can be
used and may be optimized for diﬀerent end goals. One window function is the
"Kaiser" function which is balanced between diﬀerent goals such as amplitude
accuracy, side lobe distance, and side lobe height. This window function typi-
cally reveals signals that are close to the noise ﬂoor that other functions may
obscure.
Another window function is the "Hanning" window function.
The
Hanning function results in a wide peak, low sidelobes, and alters the signal
so that the signal reaches zero at both ends. Another function similar to the
Hanning function is the "Hamming" function. The Hamming window function
stops just before zero, better cancels the nearest sidelobe, but does a poorer job
of cancelling the rest. Both the Hanning and Hamming function operates at a
very high speed and are suﬃciently eﬃcient. The "Flat top" window function
crosses the zero line and results in a very wide peak. This peak is closer to the
actual amplitude and are therefore very useful when amplitude accuracy is the
top priority. The downside of the Flat top window function is that it squeezes
out a lot of data and therefore requires more samples [3].
Picket fence eﬀect is a result of the fact that the discrete FFT is incapable
of perceiving the spectrum as a continuous function with an inﬁnite number
of lines, since there is only a ﬁnite number of lines to represent the continuous
spectrum. This means that the actual behaviour can only be observed at discrete
points. A major peak may lie between two of the discrete points and would
therefore not be detected. A picket fence correction technique can be used to
solve this problem, where the true frequency and amplitude are preserved from
the analysis data.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Data acquisition and description
17
2.3
Data acquisition and description
Several readings have been compiled to construct an overview of the health of
any given decanter. These data sources will be utilized in a variety of ways
to create predictive and classifying models.
The data sources relate to the
operation state of the machines as well as the status of various parameters such
as pressure and temperature of diﬀerent sections of the decanter. These values
have a direct correlation to certain faulty behaviour of the machines and can
therefore be used to aid the model in classifying and predicting the approach of
such a state.
The ﬁrst signiﬁcant data type is the pressure inside of the operating machine.
This is measured in pascal and is recorded on an interval dependent on delta
values. An unusual amount of pressure can cause direct damage to the contents
of the decanter and to the decanter itself. Therefore it is highly valuable to detect
the status of the pressure. In addition to utilizing pressure in a combination
with other sensory data, the pressure should also always be monitored to detect
sudden unanticipated changes in the pressure levels.
Temperature of machinery is another relevant data source when compiling an
overview of the decanter’s health. The temperature levels relate directly to the
operation and contents of the decanter but, with those parameters in mind, can
still be used to form a baseline of a normal range. If the temperature is to
increase or decrease outside of those limits, damage can be done to both the
contents and the decanter itself once again. Similarly to pressure, temperature
on its own should be monitored to detect and react to sudden unanticipated
changes at an instant, but temperature variations over longer periods of time
could also give indications of an underlying issue with the machinery.
Vibrations of the machine also show a direct correlation to the health status of
the decanter. As explained in the previous section, there are many modiﬁcations
and analysis tools available when inspecting the vibration signal of a machine.
For the decanters examined in this project, the data is collected in two modes.
The ﬁrst mode is the maximum interval mode. The local software installed at
the factories containing the decanters is set to collect data from the machines
on a maximum interval of ﬁve minutes. This means that no matter the state of
the machine, a sample of the vibrations of the decanter will be collected every
ﬁve minutes. The second way that the system can collect data based upon this
is a reactive approach. Within the software, there is a dynamic threshold for
the diﬀerent values being recorded. This will take into account the previous
readings and will save a new reading if it drifts far from the previous value
recorded. This means that the interval is likely to be smaller when the machine
==PAGE:32==
18
Background
is in an operating state. It also means that if an issue is to arise which can be
seen in the readings of the vibrations, the resolution of data throughout those
events is likely to be greater than otherwise. This is ideal for the purpose of this
project as it increases the scale of the usable data while retaining an eﬃcient
approach to the overall data storage. A sample consists of 2048 readings with
additional unique ﬂag readings indicating a start and an end to the reading
as well as some other information such as a phase trigger. Such a sample is
recorded over 0.4 seconds meaning that the sampling rate is at 5120 samples
per second. This is suﬃcient for deep analysis of the vibration data. It should be
noted that even though the algorithm to select new readings is eﬃcient in terms
of the storage, and prioritizes data in case of unanticipated events, the nature of
the readings also introduces some limitations with regards to the analysis and
handling of the data. Since the data is acquired in non-continuous manner, the
data must be synchronized to be properly analyzed. This is where the phase
trigger becomes very helpful as it can be used to align the data of diﬀerent
samples.
2.4
Bearings and Bearing Faults
Several kinds of faults can occur on machinery such as a decanter. To correctly
monitor all the diﬀerent parts of the machine requires several diﬀerent sensors
monitoring vibration, temperature, and pressure as well as other factors such as
the ﬂow of the slurry being provided for the decanter. Diﬀerent kinds of faults
can be discovered with these diﬀerent measurements but the focus of this report
will be faults visible from vibration measurements. Thus pressure, temperature,
and such measurements will be disregarded. Since bearing faults are the main
fault type of this project and because of the placement of sensors, vibration data
is what will be used throughout to develop the models.
Bearing faults can occur diﬀerently both because there are diﬀerent kinds of
bearings but also because there are several parts in the construction of the
bearings that could fail. The structure of a rolling element ball bearing can be
seen in Figure 2.4. Other kinds of rolling element bearings exist but the ball
bearing is the most common and either way they all use the same principal.
Some of the other types of rolling element bearings would e.g. use cylindrical
rolling elements instead of the balls and are known as roller bearings. Figure 2.4
shows the main parts of a ball bearing where the balls are the rolling elements
which are kept in place by the cage, to make sure they do not move about and
only roll inside this cage. On both the inside and outside of the balls there are
rings known as races. The balls ensure that the inner and outer rings can rotate
freely.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 Bearings and Bearing Faults
19
Figure 2.4: The structure of a rolling element ball bearing.[57]
The main fault present in the data set used in this project has been investigated
through a visual inspection.
The source of the inspection is a report from
Novozymes and has not been referenced due to NDA. Thus speciﬁc details are
limited, but some general pictures of the wear and tear of some diﬀerent parts
of the bearing can be seen below.
The bearing has been disassembled and
investigated visually by a professional. The pictures are provided to give an
idea of which kinds of faults can occur on the bearings and how these might
impact the vibration of the machine.
Figure 2.5a shows the ball elements of a bearing where pittings are clearly visible
on both balls and mostly on the right one. Figure 2.5b shows the pittings of the
right ball and it is clear that ﬂaking as seen on the surface of a ball can cause
additional vibrations in the bearings and depending on the size of such faults,
cause further damage to the machine.
Figure 2.6a shows the inner ring of the bearing and again it is clear that the
equipment has been damaged during runtime. As with the ball elements the
inner ring has suﬀered from ﬂaking on the surface. Figure 2.6b shows a close
up of the large ﬂakings of the inner ring. Again it is plausible that increases or
irregularities in the vibrations of the machine would occur when such faults are
present on parts of the bearings.
The faults seen on Figure 2.7a are again pittings but this time on the outer ring
of the bearing. Again these irregularities on the race of the bearing will likely
impact vibration measurements and may cause further damage over time if not
immediately handled.
In general the visual inspection showed that many parts of the bearing had
==PAGE:34==
20
Background
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.5: (a) shows the ball bearings which suﬀered from pittings and (b) is a
closer look at the fault on the bearings.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.6: (a) shows the inner ring with pittings and (b) is a closer look at these.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.7: (a) shows the outer ring and (b) is a closer look at the faults on this.
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Bearings and Bearing Faults
21
suﬀered from both micro and larger pittings. The larger pittings which is seen as
the ﬂaking on the bearing parts, where a part of the surface is missing, could very
well cause extra vibration in the bearing and over time cause further damage
to the machine. Micro pittings are also present on many of the parts. Micro
pittings are common in bearings and makes the surface of bearing elements
look gray and matte. These can occur from the rough surface of the bearing
elements because even though the surface of the elements look quite smooth
they are actually rough on the microscopic scale and thus; improper lubrication
can cause micro pittings from local contact between those microscopic rough
edges of the bearing elements [2].
The analysis conducted by Novozymes as presented via the images above is
an example of another important step in predictive maintenance namely; root
cause failure analysis (RCFA). This should be used in conjunction with any of
the previously described maintenance strategies and allows for shorter downtime
period and better continuous performance of any strategy. RCFA is used to
detect exactly what is the cause of a failure such that the same event can be
detected earlier or even completely avoided in the future. This also helps the
maintenance itself as it ensures that the workers are repairing and solving the
speciﬁc cause of the failure rather than simply ﬁx what has become broken.
This could be especially useful if an operational component is causing other
components to fail, as without a proper RCFA, the cause of the issue would not
be resolved, leading to potentially repeating failures.
==PAGE:36==
22
Background
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3
Related Work
Throughout the project several diﬀerent sources have been used for inspiration
as well as proof of concept for choosing the methods and procedures used when
developing the predictive maintenance models. This chapter will introduce the
work of the sources which are mostly within the area of predictive maintenance
and vibration analysis using both machine learning and deep learning methods.
Each of the reviewed papers will be brieﬂy described and compared to the
problem of this project.
In [17] it is demonstrated how ﬂexible non-linear models can make accurate and
robust predictions using temperature sensor data from turbine components. The
merits of diﬀerent models are tested on data from a large set of turbines op-
erating in diﬀerent conditions. Furthermore, the predictive models are tested
and the output is ultimately used to identify mechanical faults in rotor bear-
ings. Data from 22 actual rotor bearing failures are used and evaluated using a
framework that provides the required metrics for a ﬂeet wide monitoring setup.
The data used for training of the models is no-fault state data, meaning that
the data contains no states with faults in the system. By doing so, the fault
detection can be carried out as a novelty detection problem. Furthermore this
means that no data with actual failures are required. The input data for the
models is based on thermal energy ﬂow for the bearing assembly and comes
from a variety of diﬀerent sensors. The data inputs are; active power output,
generator speed, gearbox oil temperature, ambient temperature, and nacelle
==PAGE:38==
24
Related Work
temperature. Together they enable a predictive model of the bearing temper-
ature to capture the thermal dynamics of the system where the gearbox is the
main heat source. All data is normalized and they use a sliding window ap-
proach for solving the predictive task. A linear model is developed as a baseline
at ﬁrst to better evaluate more advanced models. Non-linear models were also
developed to determine if the machine conditions exhibit non-linear dynamics
where the linear models would likely be too restrictive. Exogenous models were
also compared to auto-regressive (AR) models, ﬁnding the prior to be superior
as detection and prediction of faults was closely linked. Ultimately, the models
reached a robust estimate, predicting the fault 45 days in advance based on the
temperature values.
As in [17], [18] also focuses on fault detection in wind turbine components, but
in contrast to [17], [18] uses supervised learning with fault data from 251 wind
turbine bearing failures instead of unsupervised learning. The 251 bearing faults
are from 3 diﬀerent types of faults; 85 rotor bearing faults, 63 planetary stage
bearing faults, and 103 helical stage bearing faults. They consider only bearing
faults as these are a typical cause for machine downtime, but at three diﬀerent
locations; rotor, planetary, and helical stage bearings. Only turbines from one
turbine family were considered to ensure similarity in the mechanical conﬁgu-
rations although there were two diﬀerent subgroups of gearbox conﬁgurations
within this family. Three diﬀerent models are trained for predicting the bearing
faults. These are logistic regression, fully connected neural network (FCNN),
and deep convolutional neural network (CNN). The logistic regression model
is used to get a baseline of the predictive models, using a sigmoid function to
determine the posterior fault probability. The FCNN consists of two layers with
a tanh activation function on the hidden layer of 60 units, and a sigmoid acti-
vation function on the second layer. The number of hidden units are chosen to
approximately match the number of free parameters of the deep CNN. The deep
CNN is more complex but a brief overview will be presented. There are four
diﬀerent processing pipelines. The ﬁrst three are used for each of the spectral
feature maps and the fourth is for the combined envelope spectral feature map.
Each of the ﬁrst three pipelines consists of four convolutional layers followed by
max pooling layers and ends with a 128 node fully connected layer. The fourth
pipeline has one more fully connected layer than the previous three and also ends
with a 128 node fully connected layer. Finally all of the four fully connected lay-
ers are merged to a 1024 node fully connected layer followed by a logistic output
layer. Transfer learning is also tested with each of the three models. Transfer
learning (multi-task training) is a concept where related predictive tasks are
solved simultaneously and weights are shared between tasks. This concept can
in some cases improve the performance of the learning algorithms compared to
single-task training. To evaluate the performance of the models a human expert
has performed a detailed analysis of the data and determined a point in time
where the fault is ﬁrst visible in the data. This point is denoted as the expert
==PAGE:39==
25
retrospective changepoint (ERC) and the results of the models are evaluated
using this point to see if they detect the fault before or after. Another point is
denoted the EXC which is where the repair or replacement of the faulty com-
ponent is carried out. Across all three fault types the deep CNN, both single-
and multitask, performs better than the logistic regression and both the single-
and multitask version of the FCNN. In some cases the deep CNN versions reach
near-perfect detection accuracy where the area under curve (AUC) is above 0.9
at the ERC while there are cases where the shallow models (logistic regression
and FCNNs) do not even reach this at the EXC. The receiver operating charac-
teristic (ROC) is also calculated for the logistic regression model and the deep
CNN at diﬀerent points in time. This again shows that the deep CNN is more
accurate than the shallow models.
In [57] a survey of diﬀerent machine learning and deep learning techniques on
bearing faults have been conducted. The article summarizes the results of many
diﬀerent papers. They start by brieﬂy introducing diﬀerent popular datasets
used by most of the papers in the survey. Most of the reviewed literature use the
"Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) Dataset", but they also introduce
the "Paderborn University Dataset", the "PRONOSTIA bearings accelerated
life test dataset", and the "Intelligent Maintenance Systems (IMS) Dataset".
All four datasets contain vibration data, but the Paderborn dataset also con-
tains motor current, while the PRONOSTIA and the IMS datasets on the other
hand include temperature measurements. Both the PRONOSTIA and the IMS
datasets are excellent for predicting remaining useful life (RUL) but the survey
focuses entirely on fault detection rather than RUL prediction. Another diﬀer-
ence between the ﬁrst three datasets and the IMS dataset is that the faults of
the ﬁrst three datasets are artiﬁcially induced by scratching or drilling on the
surface of the bearing races or by exerting a shaft current for accelerated life
testing. On the other hand the IMS dataset contains natural bearing defects
where the bearing has been operating for a period of time with a radial load
applied to the shaft and bearing until it ends up with a defect. This diﬀerence
is signiﬁcant as an artiﬁcially accelerated machine fault will likely diﬀer from a
natural development.
The diﬀerence between the aforementioned datasets and the dataset used for
this project is that the data used in this project is from an actual machine used
in production where a defect has occurred. Thus it is a completely natural defect
caused from standard operation. This means that the fault will likely develop
at an irregular speed. Due to being based on real faults, the dataset used in this
project also suﬀers from a lack of numerous signiﬁcant errors. This is because
the decanters monitored for this project undergo regular maintenance and thus
are less likely to reach a critical condition. This means that the dataset as a
whole is highly biased for healthy data over faulty.
==PAGE:40==
26
Related Work
The machine learning based approaches reviewed in [57] include artiﬁcial neu-
ral networks (ANN), principal component analysis, k-nearest neighbor (k-NN),
support vector machine (SVM), and others. There is not much in depth analysis
of these approaches but instead brief descriptions of the beneﬁts of these and
how they are used.
A much more in depth analysis has been made on the deep learning based
approaches. The deep learning approaches reviewed include convolutional neural
networks (CNN), auto-encoders, deep belief networks (DBN), recurrent neural
networks (RNN), generative adversarial networks (GAN), deep learning based
transfer learning, and some others e.g. combinations of those mentioned. All
of these methods show good results where many of the reviewed models gain
an accuracy above 90%. Furthermore they are generally better than the basic
machine learning approaches.
A systematic comparison of the accuracy of diﬀerent machine learning methods
using the CWRU dataset mentioned earlier have also been made in [57]. This
shows that all of the 26 compared algorithms have a test accuracy of above 90%
with several getting above 99%. This of course shows that using deep learning
for fault detection is very promising but there are some important factors that
should be mentioned along with those results. First of all; the results are at-
tained on a very speciﬁc dataset. Only one of the datasets mentioned earlier
contained natural defects while others were made by drilling or scratching the
machine parts. Because of this, the dataset is gathered in laboratory conditions
with motor settings set to speciﬁc RPM and horse power and in the real world
there would be a signiﬁcant amount of noise and variation in the data meaning
that the accuracy will suﬀer a great deal. Furthermore, because so many of the
algorithms attain such high accuracy even the simpler versions of the compared
deep learning methods also indicates that the features which are extracted from
the dataset are relatively simple. This might again be because of the laboratory
conditions the dataset is made in, i.e. the unnatural defects drilled into the ma-
chine. The artiﬁcially accelerated faults also pose a simpler continuous machine
degradation than discovered in the real world. The development of an artiﬁcial
fault can be controlled and manipulated to represent a perfect-world example
of an error. In a natural development of faults, the damage can develop in a
vast variety of ways.
In [29] an Azure ML team from Microsoft describes how diﬀerent aspects of
predictive maintenance can be solved with the use of deep learning. The team
selects a single aspect and provides a thorough solution which can be used for
predictive maintenance. The articles focus on some main techniques used to
predict when a machine will fail such that maintenance could be planned in
advance.
==PAGE:41==
27
The team uses data from a simulated aircraft engine run-to-failure events for
three diﬀerent modelling tasks. These tasks include regression, binary classiﬁ-
cation, and multi-class classiﬁcation. The regression task revolves around the
prediction of Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) or Time to Failure (TTF) such
that the model should be able to predict the number of days, cycles, or weeks
until failure. The team does this by labelling the data according to a prede-
termined failure cycle. Then, for each cycle, the remaining cycles until failure
is counted and used as the label. This is very similar to one of the focuses in
this project which uses RUL prediction to determine the number of days until
failure.
Binary classiﬁcation is used for the task of predicting whether the machine will
fail within a given time window e.g. days, cycles, or weeks or not. This is also
similar to one of the focuses of this project where binary classiﬁers are used to
determine whether the decanter will fail within ﬁve weeks.
The multi-class classiﬁcation is used to predict whether an asset will fail within
diﬀerent time windows w1 and w2 e.g.
fails in window [1,w0]; fails in the
window [w0+1, w1]; does not fail within w1 days.
This can be scaled to a
various number of classes and serves as a midpoint between a regressive and
classiﬁcation approach.
The Microsoft team then uses diﬀerent machine- and deep learning models in-
cluding, Decision Forests, Boosted Decision Tree and artiﬁcial neural networks
to accomplish the diﬀerent tasks.
Lastly, the Microsoft team presents the idea of utilizing machine- and deep
learning models including Decision Forests, Boosted Decision Tree and artiﬁcial
neural networks to help the predictive initiative. This may allow a better model
performance when operating on a less manipulated dataset.
==PAGE:42==
28
Related Work
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4
Development Process
The development of this project would follow an agile development process which
could be split in to a number of steps for diﬀerent iterations. The ﬁrst step was
to fully deﬁne the problem which was done in collaboration with supervisors Ole
Winther and Andreas Fabricius from Novozymes. The full problem deﬁnition
is found in the project description and revolves around the implementation and
test of diﬀerent AI models to make a survey of models that could be used for
predictive maintenance.
Once the problem had been deﬁned, the iterative development process would
begin. The ﬁrst step of each iteration was to do background research in order
to explore already existing methods which would help brainstorm a variety of
available models for the predictive maintenance task. For each iteration the
group would then research the background theory of diﬀerent available machine
learning models in order to understand how they work and whether they would
be suitable for the given task.
The group would then start the implementation of some of the suitable machine
learning models as described in Chapter 6, 7, and 8. Each model was trained on
a predetermined set of training data and would then be tested on the remaining
test data and a test analysis was conducted to allow for comparison of the
diﬀerent models. If a model would not perform close to what was expected, the
model was refactored in order to achieve the best results for that model. This
==PAGE:44==
30
Development Process
meant that all of the best performing versions of the models would be compared.
After implementation of the machine learning models diﬀerent suitable deep
learning models aiming to do the same task was implemented. These models
would go through the same training, optimization, and evaluation process as
the initial machine learning models.
Finally a short conclusion of the given iteration was made which would give a
general idea of what had been achieved for the given iteration together with a
general idea of which models was considered to be the best for the given task.
The following sections introduce the most important iterations of the develop-
ment process and concludes with a short description of what was achieved for
the given iteration.
4.1
Iteration 1
The ﬁrst major iteration would mark the beginning of the project along with
the implementation of solutions for one aspect of predictive maintenance and
would aim to reach the ﬁrst milestone of this project. The ﬁrst iteration mainly
focuses on getting acquainted with the data, data cleaning, feature selection,
and anomaly detection for fault detection.
The initial step of the development process for this iteration was to do back-
ground research. A lot of time went into researching and understanding vibra-
tion theory along with predictive maintenance methodologies. This would be
useful in order to be able to implement and test diﬀerent models using vibration
data as input. A lot of time was also used to acquire the data and to get ac-
quainted with the given data. Furthermore, the data was initially cleaned such
that outliers caused by outside factors were removed and lastly; only data from
when the machine was running was used throughout the project.
From the initial background research, the group realised the importance of well
deﬁned features. It was therefore decided to base most of the feature selection
on the features for vibration data described in [39]. These initial features would
then be experimented with and used for this entire project.
It was then decided to focus on unsupervised anomaly detection which could
be used to determine whether a machine is failing.
The documentation at
Novozymes showed that a vibration-related error had occurred during April
2019 and was not ﬁxed until May 2019. Using this data it was expected that
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Iteration 1
31
most models would detect an increasing amount of anomalies leading up to
that time period and the models could therefore be compared based on that
information.
The next step included researching a variety of diﬀerent anomaly detection
methods and applications. The Scikit Learn library oﬀered a vast number of
readily available machine learning options. The group would explore how most
of these models work, how they had been applied in other projects, and whether
they would be suitable for the task of anomaly detection for vibration data. The
group also explored other options for anomaly detection including the method
described in [28]. This method did not initially provide any promising results
as it would not detect any anomalies for the expected data points. While there
could be many reasons for this, it was decided to substitute the data with rolling
averages such that each data point in the data set would be represented by the
average of itself and a set of previous data points. This immediately seemed to
aﬀect the results in a positive way as the initial anomaly detection method would
now detect an increasing amount of anomalies around the faulty data. This also
proved that the selected features together with PCA did indeed provide a good
starting point.
A number of unsupervised anomaly detection methods was chosen from the
Scikit Learn library to do the anomaly detection for the vibration data. Each
model was trained on healthy data such that they should be able to recognise
healthy data, and thus detect faulty data. Most of the implemented models
would show the same pattern with an increasing anomaly score leading up to
the failure as expected.
This showed that an error could be detected using
machine learning models and marked the ﬁrst milestone.
Most models also
showed a spike during February, which might suggest that other factors had
aﬀected the vibration sensors during that time.
The next step was to begin the implementation of deep learning models. Based
on other work and the fact that auto encoders (AEs) works very well for anomaly
detection, it was decided to implement and test diﬀerent semi-supervised arti-
ﬁcial neural network utilizing the AE structure. The implemented AEs showed
the same pattern as the machine learning models and was able to roughly detect
the same amount of anomalies. This meant that yet another minor milestone
had been reached.
The AE model together with a manually set threshold showed the most anoma-
lies for the expected data points and may thus be the best model to use for
anomaly detection.
This iteration marked the completion of one aspect of predictive maintenance
and showed that it was possible to use AI fault detection for the decanter ma-
==PAGE:46==
32
Development Process
chine.
It is important to note that a lot of time was also spent on researching and test-
ing various unsupervised clustering methods in an attempt to separate healthy
and faulty operation data.
In a perfect world these methods would cluster
healthy and faulty data in separate groups and could thus be used in predictive
maintenance for fault detection. The resulting models would not be able to sep-
arate the data points and it was ultimately decided to leave out the clustering
analysis.
4.2
Iteration 2
The second major iteration would follow immediately after the completion of
the ﬁrst iteration. This iteration would focus on another aspect of predictive
maintenance referred to as time frame prediction. Time frame prediction uses
supervised learning methods to teach AI models to predict whether the machine
will fail within a given time period e.g. cycles, days, or weeks. The main idea
in this project was based on the work done in [29] which describes how binary
classiﬁcation can be used to complete the time frame prediction task.
The initial step would again include background research to explore possible AI
models and other projects also aiming to do time frame predictions using binary
classiﬁers. Binary classiﬁers require labeled data for training which meant that
the acquired data had to be manually labeled. This was done based on the
labelling in [29] such that the time frame would be a time period of ﬁve weeks
which seemed to be a good starting point.
Scikit Learn again provided a number of binary classiﬁcation models from which
the most prominent classiﬁers were chosen and implemented during the imple-
mentation step. Each model would use supervised learning hence a number of
data points from each month were randomly selected for the training set. This
meant that both healthy and faulty data would be part of the training set as
well as the test set.
The accuracy was calculated for each model along with a conﬁdence interval for
the accuracy which would allow for comparison of the diﬀerent models. Confu-
sion matrices were used to further elaborate on the accuracy of a given model
and would also allow for further comparison of the implemented models. This
showed that many of the implemented models were able to make accurate pre-
dictions especially the K nearest neighbour (KNN) and decision tree classiﬁer.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Iteration 3
33
The following step was to explore deep learning models for time frame prediction.
The background research showed that feed forward neural networks could be
applied to achieve an accurate binary classiﬁer for many diﬀerent applications.
The initial implementation would provide somewhat accurate predictions but
the model was expected to do better. The group then found great inspiration
from [55] and the ﬁnal feed forward neural network structure would thus be
similar to the one described in [55].
The new structure would immediately
perform much better and only a few tweaks were needed to achieve optimal
structure.
Next a long short-term memory LSTM model was used for the binary classiﬁ-
cation and the test analysis also showed good results although not as good as
the feed forward neural network.
It was later decided to attempt another approach utilizing raw data as input for
a convolutional neural network (CNN). CNNs require 2D inputs which meant
that the data had to be restructured into a 2D image.
Once this had been
achieved, the images were fed to a CNN which was able to achieve promising
results similar to the other ANNs.
This iteration was concluded by comparing all of the implemented classiﬁers to
see which model would be the most accurate. The feed forward neural network
was able to outperform all of the other models although the KNN and decision
tree classiﬁer was also able to achieve an accuracy score very close to the feed
forward neural network.
This iteration marked the completion of another aspect of predictive main-
tenance, namely time frame prediction, and another big milestone had been
reached.
4.3
Iteration 3
The third major iteration would focus on yet another aspect of predictive main-
tenance referred to as Remaining Useful Lifetime, or RUL for short. RUL tells
exactly how long the machine is able to run until failure or until maintenance is
needed, and can be measured in cycles, weeks, or days. RUL prediction also uses
supervised learning to teach AI models to predict how long until the machine
needs repair. Background research showed that this could be achieved using
regression models. The main diﬀerence between the regression models and the
classiﬁcation models is that the output variable is continuous for regression and
discrete for classiﬁcation. This meant that the data had to be relabeled such
==PAGE:48==
34
Development Process
that the new labels would now be continuous rather than discrete. The acquired
data would already contain the start date for each sample which meant that once
a failure date had been selected, it was easy to determine the number of days
until failure. Hence it was decided to use number of days as the measure for the
RUL label.
The background research again lead to a selection of diﬀerent regression models
which were believed to be able to do the RUL prediction. The sampling for
the training set was done in a similar way as for the time frame prediction,
such that data points were randomly selected from each month in the data set.
This meant that the training and test set would contain randomly selected data
points both close to and far from the selected failure date.
The R2 score was used to compare the performance of the implemented models
as it should describe how well the model predictions ﬁts the target values. This
would allow for quick performance evaluation and model comparison.
The initial models would again be based on machine learning and would result
in a long optimisation process. Each machine learning model would initially
perform poorly which meant that a lot of time was spent on testing diﬀerent
hyper-parameter values.
Furthermore, the background research showed that
some models might beneﬁt from removing highly correlated features as they
might hide valuable information. The test analysis showed that this was not the
case for any of the implemented models since any removal of highly correlated
features would result in a lower R2 score. It was thus decided to keep the initial
features.
Not a lot of time went into researching the theory behind deep learning models
for regression as the group had already familiarized themselves with the mod-
els during earlier iterations. Only a few modiﬁcations were needed to get the
deep learning models running and make predictions. The feed forward neural
network did not require much rework to achieve accurate RUL predictions and
would result in the best performing model. A lot more time went into the imple-
mentation of the LSTM model and optimising the hyper-parameters as it was
diﬃcult for the model to achieve a high R2 score.
For experimental purposes it was decided to combine the feed forward neural
network model and the LSTM in an eﬀort to achieve an even better performing
model. The combined model would perform better than the LSTM model but
still not as good as the feed forward neural network and model training would
take much longer. The increase in model complexity also meant that the model
could be tweaked in many ways, which made it increasingly more diﬃcult to
optimise the model. This means that the model may still be able to achieve a
better performance if further parameter optimizations were conducted.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Iteration 3
35
The third major iteration was concluded with a comparison of the implemented
models, which again showed that the feed forward neural network would achieve
the most accurate predictions, while the KNN regression model would perform
almost as well.
The third major iteration marked the completion of yet another useful aspect of
predictive maintenance. The iteration would also mark the completion of this
project as the ﬁnal milestones had been reached.
==PAGE:50==
36
Development Process
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Statistical Analysis
This chapter will describe the statistical analysis performed before applying ML
techniques and, later on, DL techniques to the data. This analysis is performed
to see how big the diﬀerences in data are when there is a fault compared to
when the machines are working properly in relation to the theory described
previously. It is performed to see what the data from the chosen data set looks
like, since having a good understanding of the data set will be good to better
evaluate the performance of the diﬀerent models. Furthermore the data will
have to be prepared for use in some of the diﬀerent machine learning and deep
learning models.
The ﬁrst part of the chapter will describe how diﬀerent features have been
extracted from the data. Then, a simple analysis of the data is conducted to
give an overview of how the data looks and to see how it changes over time.
After the initial analysis there will be a principal component analysis (PCA) to
do dimensionality reduction and to remove potentially correlated features.
Although there is access to a variety of data types, this project will solely re-
volve around vibration data as it poses the most valuable problem.
Due to
the complexity of the correlation between machine vibrations and faults, sim-
ple statistical models may not be suﬃcient for accurate predictions of machine
degradation.
==PAGE:52==
38
Statistical Analysis
5.1
Vibration Data and Feature Extraction
The data used for most of the initial machine learning methods consists of
samples gathered from six diﬀerent months; January, February, March, April,
May, June, and July in 2019. The data set would, once cleaned, be distributed
as shown in Table 5.1. Additional information about the data set was given by
Novozymes, most importantly; that a machine error had occurred mid April,
and that this error was ﬁxed in start may. As the machine underwent repairs
during May, a lot of data from this period was ﬁltered away as it was considered
misrepresenting.
Month
Number of samples
January
721
February
584
March
497
April
699
May
105
June
2845
July
6747
Total
12.198
Table 5.1: Table showing the number of samples in the data set and how it is
distributed over the months
A raw vibration data sample would consist of a sequence of points in one-
dimension. This can be written as:
x(x1, x2, ..., xn)
Here x is the sample, and xi is a sample point. The mean can then be calculated
as:
ˆx = 1
n
n
X
i=1
xi
All data points are zero-scaled to make ˆx ≈0. This is done by extracting the
mean of each sample from each data point within that sample. This can be done
as the vibrations are only relevant in the relative vibrations since the signal is
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Vibration Data and Feature Extraction
39
representing an electric input. Once the raw data has been zero scaled, key
features are extracted to determine the machine condition.
A key element when doing machine learning and deep learning is to extract
useful features which can be used to describe the data.
These features act
as the input for diﬀerent machine learning and deep learning algorithms and
are essential for achieving good performance.[8] For most of the implemented
models, features from both the time domain, and the frequency domain are
used. Features extracted from the time domain can be derived directly from the
cleaned raw data, while features from the frequency domain are derived from
the FFT (see background for more information on FFT) values. For the initial
machine learning approach, a total of fourteen features were used and include
ten features from the time domain and four from the frequency domain. All
features are listed in table 5.2. These features were mainly chosen due to the
success in [39].
Vibration Features
Time Domain
Frequency Domain
Zero-scaled Mean
Max Peak
FFT Mean
FFT Max Peak
RMS
Skewness
FFT Variance
FFT Kurtosis
Crest Factor
Shape Factor
Clearance Factor
Max Peak Square Root
Kurtosis
Peak To Peak
Table 5.2: Extracted features for the initial machine learning approach.
Absolute mean is calculated after the zero scaling and describes the absolute
average of each sample. Max peak is simply the point with the largest absolute
amplitude of a given sample. Root Mean Square (RMS) is deﬁned as the square
root of the mean of the squared values: [11]
RMS =
r
1
n(x2
1 + x2
2 + ... + x2n)
Skewness is calculated as the Fisher-Pearson coeﬃcient of skewness and de-
scribes how much the sample distribution diﬀers from a normal distribution.
Skewness for a sample can be calculated with the median using the formula:
Skewness = 3(ˆx −Md)
s
==PAGE:54==
40
Statistical Analysis
where ˆx is the mean, Md is the median, and s is the standard deviation of the
sample.[4]
Another feature is the Crest factor which is deﬁned as the ratio of the sample
peak amplitude value xp to its RMS value. This is calculated as:
Crest =
xp
RMS
The shape factor feature is deﬁned as the ratio of the RMS value to the average
of the absolute raw vibration value. The shape factor value is expressed as:
Shape_Factor =
RMS
1
n
Pn
i=1 |xi|
Clearance factor can be deﬁned as the maximum sample value to the mean
square root of the absolute raw vibration values. This is expressed as:
Clearance_Factor =
xmax
( 1
n
Pn
i=1
p
|xi|)2
The max peak square root is self explanatory as it is simply expressed as the
square root of the max peak value of the given sample.
The last time domain feature is the kurtosis value. Kurtosis is another statistical
measure which can be used to describe the distribution of the vibration data.
Samples where the tails of the distribution exceed those of a normal distribution
will generally have a higher kurtosis value.
Samples where the tails of the
distribution are less extreme than those of a normal distribution will generally
have a low kurtosis value. The kurtosis value is expressed as:
Kurtosis =
Pn
i=1(xi −ˆx)4
n ∗s4
The number of selected features result in a relatively high dimensionality, and
may result in overﬁtting of some of the implemented models. Overﬁtting means
that the model is incapable generalizing data beyond the examples in the train-
ing set. This problem may be prevented with the use of principal component
analysis.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Vibration Data and Feature Extraction
41
Figure 5.1: Correlation matrix of data features. A correlation value close to 1
means highly correlated, a value close to -1 means highly correlated
negatively. A value close to 0 means not correlated.
Furthermore, a correlation matrix can be constructed to display the statistical
diﬀerence between the aforementioned features. This can be seen in ﬁgure 5.1
and may indicate which groups of features could become redundant. From the
ﬁgure it is clear that RMS, P2P, Max Peak, Max Peak Square Root are highly
correlated. This makes sense since Max Peak Square Root is the square root of
Max Peak, RMS is simply the square root of the mean of squared values which
is roughly 0.7 · Max_Peak. Furthermore since P2P is the distance from the
highest peak to the lowest valley it makes sense that this is also highly correlated
with those features.
From the correlation matrix in Figure 5.1 it is also seen that there is a group of
features from the FFT which have a relatively high correlation with the features
mentioned before. Again this is expected as the FFT features are FFT Max
Peak, FFT Mean, and FFT Variance. It is also seen that Clearance Factor is
negatively correlated with all the features mentioned before but mostly the non-
FFT features. Other features such as Mean, Shape Factor, and FFT Kurtosis
show almost no correlation with the other features.
==PAGE:56==
42
Statistical Analysis
5.2
Initial Analysis
Before doing the Principal Component Analysis and Machine Learning methods
a simple initial analysis was made to give an overview of the data and to inves-
tigate the diﬀerent features described above. This should give an idea of which
features could be useful when making the Machine Learning models when not
relying on the components found in the PCA.
The features are investigated mainly by looking at how they change during the
time period covered within the data set, since there is a known fault in mid
April. Because of the fault and because of the knowledge of both when the fault
was discovered and when it was ﬁxed, it should be possible to distinguish how
the machine operates up until failure and after repair.
Some features regarded as being more descriptive based on the trend of the
data are shown ﬁrst in separate ﬁgures while the rest of the features are shown
together in a couple of combined ﬁgures afterwards with less detailed explana-
tions.
Figure 5.2: Boxplots showing the distributions of the skewness of each sample
for each month.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Initial Analysis
43
Figure 5.3: Boxplots showing the distributions of the FFT kurtosis of each
sample for each month.
The ﬁrst of the more descriptive features is skewness, shown in Figure 5.2,
which is interesting because of the increasing trend when getting closer to the
time the decanter was ﬁxed. This is mainly seen through the medians of the
skewness which is increasing from January to May, and then drop even lower
than January in June and July. It is also interesting that despite having much
more data for June and July they are both much more compact than the other
months. So even though January is regarded as a month where the decanter
should be operating smoothly, the skewness is more varied than in June and
July.
The feature FFT kurtosis, shown in 5.3, which is the kurtosis of the FFT also
shows a slight upward trend when nearing the time of the repair. This is not
quite as clear compared to the skewness since March seems to be the highest.
It should however be noted that June and July do clearly diﬀer from the other
months as they are notably lower.
The crest factor feature is seen in 5.4 again has a slight upward trend from
January to May, but, instead of drastically decreasing in June and July, the
values are drastically increasing.
But June and July still show a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence compared to the other months. This particular pattern with a slight
increasing trend and then a drastic increase in June and July is seen in many
of the other features as well, as described below.
Clearance factor is seen in Figure 5.5a and is similar to crest factor but inverse.
Instead of having the slightly increasing trend in January to May, and then
==PAGE:58==
44
Statistical Analysis
Figure 5.4: Boxplots showing the distributions of the crest factor of each sam-
ple for each month.
a drastic increase to June and July, there is a slight decrease from January to
May, and then a drastic decrease to June and July, depicting the inverse of most
other features. Furthermore it is seen that there are a lot of outliers in June and
July. This is partly because there is signiﬁcantly more data for those months
compared to the others. As can be seen from the box plots, the majority of
the data is below the data of the previous months but the speciﬁc variation is
hard to distinguish. To better see this diﬀerence, the box plot is cropped in
5.5b, removing some of the outliers to allow better comparison of the majority
of data.
As seen for the features; skewness, FFT kurtosis, and crest factor, the months
January to May are similar and sometimes with a slight upward trend in the
data, and the months June and July are very diﬀerent from the ﬁve months prior.
This becomes even clearer when looking at the rest of the features. These are all
shown in Figure 5.6 and Figure 5.7. In many of the other features shown in those
ﬁgures there is an upward trend in the data as well but instead of drastically
decreasing when reaching June and July, the values increase dramatically.
One feature which stands out compared to the rest of the features is the shape
factor seen in Figure 5.8a. Notably there are outliers with values below and
outliers with values above where the majority of data is located. Again it is
important to note that there is much more data for June and July which can to
some extent explain the number of outliers. It is also seen that there are many
more outliers for July compared to June which extend even further away from
the majority of the data. Even though the pattern of the shape factor stands
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Initial Analysis
45
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: Boxplots showing the distributions of the clearance factor of each sample
for each month. (a) shows all data points and (b) shows a zoomed in
or cropped version to better see the boxplots of the ﬁrst ﬁve months.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.6: Monthly boxplots for extracted features.
==PAGE:60==
46
Statistical Analysis
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.7: Monthly boxplots for extracted features
==PAGE:61==
5.3 Data preparation
47
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8: Boxplots showing the distributions of the shape factor of each sample
for each month. (a) shows all data points and (b) shows a zoomed in
or cropped version to better see the boxplots of the ﬁrst ﬁve months.
out, there are also similarities compared to the other features. This is mainly
seen in the slightly increasing trend in the data from January to May and then
a decrease in June and July which is similar to the features mentioned in the
beginning, i.e. skewness and FFT kurtosis. But again the distribution of the
data is more spread out both below and above the median for months; January
to May just similarly to June and July. A cropped version of the shape factor
boxplots can be found in Figure 5.8b to show the data distribution more clearly
for months January to May.
5.3
Data preparation
Before the data was passed as input to the diﬀerent models in this report, the
data was cleaned. This was done in an eﬀort to achieve better performance and
to remove any unnatural disturbances within the data.
One of the steps in the data cleaning was to remove statistical outliers caused
by outside factors. This was done based on diﬀerent features by removing data
points which would diﬀer more than three times the standard deviation of the
mean. It is important to note that this would not remove a signiﬁcant amount
of the data and was therefore considered a safe procedure.
Furthermore, it was decided to use rolling averages such that each data point
would be represented by an average of itself and a set of other data points. This
meant that each new data point would represent a general representation of a
==PAGE:62==
48
Statistical Analysis
short time period thereby slightly ﬂattening outliers.
In addition to this, a variety of normalization methods were used including the
Standard Scaler, and the Min Max Scaler to normalize the input to the diﬀerent
models.
5.4
Principal Component Analysis
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is an unsupervised technique which can
be used to reduce the high dimensionality of a data set. The procedure uses
orthogonal transformations and aims to convert a set of possibly correlated
variables into a set of uncorrelated variables.
These variables are known as
principal components.
PCA aims to ﬁnd the maximum variability in the data set and make it more
visible by creating and rotating axes. PCA establishes a list of principal axes
to describe the data set before the best axis is found based on the amount of
variance captured.
The orthogonal transformation is deﬁned in a way such that the ﬁrst principal
component has the largest possible variance so that it accounts for as much
variability in the data as possible. Each succeeding component has the highest
variance possible with the constraint that the component is orthogonal to the
preceding component.
Finding the line that maximises the variance within the data once it is projected
onto the data space is also equal to ﬁnding the line that minimizes the distances
from the data to that line. This can be seen in Figure 5.9.
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Principal Component Analysis
49
Figure 5.9: Maximising variance and minimizing distances.
Source can be
found in [53]
Maximising the variance is done by ﬁnding the distance from each point pro-
jected on the line to the origin and then calculating the sum of squared distances.
The line is then rotated in order to ﬁnd the direction of the line that results in
the largest sum of squared distances. This line is then deﬁned as a principal
component and the sum of squared distances for this component is known as
the eigenvalue for that component. Scaling the principal component to be of
length 1 results in the eigenvalue for the principal component.
Principal components can then be expressed as:
PC1 = w1,1(Feature_A) + w2,1(Feature_B)
+ w3,1(Feature_C) + ... + wN,1(Feature_N)
PC2 = w1,2(Feature_A) + w2,2(Feature_B)
+ w3,2(Feature_C) + ... + wN,2(Feature_N)
PC3 = w1,3(Feature_A) + w2,3(Feature_B)
+ w3,3(Feature_C) + ... + wN,3(Feature_N)
The ﬁrst principal component (PC1) is called a synthetic variable and is con-
structed as a linear combination which determines the magnitude and the di-
rection of the maximum variance within the data set. PC1 contains the highest
variability and therefore explains the most information.
PC2 is the second
principal component and is also a synthetic variable. PC2 is also a linear com-
bination which captures some of the remaining variance within the data set and
==PAGE:64==
50
Statistical Analysis
is not correlated with PC1. The third principal component (PC3) aims to cap-
ture more of the remaining variance without being correlated with any of the
previous components. This also means that the correlation between each princi-
pal component should be zero as succeeding components capture the remaining
variance. It is possible to have additional principal components which will then
be used to further describe the remaining variance.[30]
The direction and the magnitude of the variation captured by each axis can
be quantiﬁed with the use of eigenvectors and eigenvalues. The eigenvector de-
scribes the direction of the axis through the data space while the eigenvalue
describes the magnitude of the variance within the data on the axis. The cor-
relation between any of the eigenvalues or eigenvectors is also zero as the axes
are orthogonal.
The result of applying the PCA to the data set can be seen in Figure 5.10. Since
the PCA were only used for anomaly detection all features except the zero-
scaled mean were used as input for the PCA. The test and training data split
is therefore also the same as for the anomaly detection models where January,
June, and July are used for training and the rest for testing.
Figure 5.10: The explained variance of the diﬀerent components of the PCA.
In Figure 5.10 the ﬁrst ten principal components are shown. It can be seen that
the two ﬁrst components, with 76% and 16% explained variance respectively,
explain more than 90% of the variance. The rest of the components explain less
than 3% each and when reaching the 9th and 10th component the explained
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Principal Component Analysis
51
variance is less than 0.1%.
==PAGE:66==
52
Statistical Analysis
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 6
Anomaly Detection
This chapter describes how anomaly detection methods were used to do predic-
tive maintenance. The main goal of these methods was to detect data which
diﬀered from healthy data and would therefore be classiﬁed as novelty data or
anomalous data. Although the data was unlabeled, it was expected that most
anomalies would be found in April and May as a machine error had occurred
during that time.
Most of the machine learning methods in this project were implemented using a
python machine learning library known as Scikit Learn. Scikit Learn features a
lot of diﬀerent useful algorithms and does all of the heavy lifting which makes it
much easier to implement and compare various machine learning methods [1].
6.1
Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection
This section introduces the explored machine learning methods including how
the diﬀerent algorithms work as well as the underlying theory. The results of
using each algorithm on the data set is found within the respective sections and
all show some trend around the faulty data.
==PAGE:68==
54
Anomaly Detection
6.1.1
Mahalanobis Distance
The ﬁrst anomaly detection method would use the Mahalanobis distances to
ﬁnd novelties within the data. Mahalanobis distance can be used to classify and
cluster datapoints and is deﬁned as a measure of distance between a point p and
a distribution. The distance is zero if p is at the mean of the distribution and
grows when p moves away from the mean along each principal component. The
Mahalanobis distance can be calculated using the following formula [43]:
D2 = (x −m)T · C−1 · (x −m)
where,
• D2 is the squared Mahalanobis distance.
• x is the data point/vector of the given sample (a row in the data set).
• m is the vector consisting of mean values (the mean of each column).
• C−1 is the inverse covariance matrix.
In this project the Mahalanobis distances were used to classify the datapoints
as either being "healthy" or "anomalous". In this case the training set con-
tains only data points for normal machine operating conditions which is used
to calculate the covariance matrix. The training set would contain the principal
components of all samples from January, June, and July which was considered
to be healthy data. The test set contained the principal components from both
healthy and faulty machine operating conditions. The test set contained sam-
ples from February, March, April, and May. When the Mahalanobis distance
was calculated, a data point would be classiﬁed as an anomaly if the calculated
distance is above a predeﬁned threshold [28].
The threshold was found using the following formula:
threshold = mean(dist) · k
where k = 2 if no extreme values are allowed or k = 3 if extreme values are
allowed. Using this formula the thresholds were t1 = 3.00 when k = 2, and
t2 = 4.49 when k = 3.
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection
55
This method of ﬁnding the threshold assumes a normal distribution, although
this may not be the case for the vibration data used in this project. The square
of the Mahalanobis distance to the centroid of the distribution would ideally
follow a χ2 distribution given the assumption of normally distributed input
variables. The distribution of the Mahalanobis distance is visualized to verify
that the found threshold is reasonable to use to determine anomalies as the
distribution seems to be somewhat similar to the χ2 distribution.
Figure 6.1: The Mahalanobis squared distances for the training data.
Figure 6.2: Mahalanobis distances for the training data.
Figure 6.1 shows the squared Mahalanobis distances which should ideally follow
a χ2 distribution. Figure 6.2 shows the Mahalanobis distance distribution. From
Figure 6.2 it is clear that both thresholds are reasonable to use, since most of
the Mahalanobis training distances stays below the thresholds.
Figure 6.3 visualises all of the Mahalanobis distances and the thresholds. The
plot shows a small trend leading up to and around the machine error in April
==PAGE:70==
56
Anomaly Detection
where the Mahalanobis distances generally increase until the machine is re-
paired. The Mahalanobis distance around February also shows an unexpected
peak which may be a result of external factors aﬀecting the machine.
Figure 6.4 shows the average Mahalanobis distance for each month and it is
clear that the average distance is higher near the faulty data points.
Figure 6.3: All Mahalanobis distances with thresholds t1 and t2.
Figure 6.4: The average Mahalanobis distance of each month.
The anomalies detected by the mahalanobis distance method was then found
using the thresholds t1 and t2 shown in Figure 6.3. The anomaly classiﬁcation is
visualised in Figure 6.5 which shows the anomalies found using t1 and t2. Table
6.1 further elaborates on this and shows the percentage of anomalies found in
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection
57
each month. It is clear that the t2 threshold does not capture many anomalies
whereas t1 captures a more accurate depiction of what was expected.
Figure 6.5: Mahalanobis anomaly detection using t1 (left) and t2 (right).
Month
t1 Anomaly Percentages
t2 Anomaly Percentages
January
36.48%
5.83%
February
50.68%
17.64%
March
23.14%
3.02%
April
53.79%
14.74%
May
69.52%
10.48%
June
0.49%
0.0%
July
2.06%
0.07%
Table 6.1: Mahalanobis anomaly percentages for each month in the data set
using the diﬀerent thresholds.
6.1.2
Isolation Forest
Isolation forest is another unsupervised anomaly detection method which was
used to determine bad machine condition data. The isolation forest method is
built on the basis of decision trees [34]. Decision trees follow a tree like graph,
containing nodes, edges, and leaves. Each node represents a question regarding
a selected feature. Edges represent the answer to a given question and is based
on a value between the minimum and maximum value of the given feature. The
leaves represent the actual decision. Figure 6.6 shows a simple decision tree for
determining whether to play tennis or not, based on the weather conditions [14].
==PAGE:72==
58
Anomaly Detection
Figure 6.6: A very simple decision tree to determine whether to play tennis
or not, based on the weather. Source: [14]
In isolation forests, the trees create partitions by ﬁrst selecting a random feature
and then selecting a random split between the minimum and maximum value of
the selected feature. The general idea behind this technique is that anomalies
normally lie further away from normal data points and should be more suscep-
tible to isolation, hence the anomaly should be easier to single out with shorter
paths within the trees. This means that when collections of random trees, all
make relatively short paths for a given data point, the data point is more likely
to be an anomaly. Figure 6.7 shows an example of this idea. In Figure 6.7, (a)
shows the isolation of a normal data point, and it is clear that this requires a
lot more partitions than the isolation of the anomaly shown in (b) [52].
Figure 6.7: Isolation examples. Source: [52]
==PAGE:73==
6.1 Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection
59
Some main deﬁnitions of isolation forests have to be described to get a better
understanding of how the isolation forest works. The ﬁrst deﬁnition is Isolation
Tree. An isolation tree is a binary tree and consists of nodes and edges similar to
the decision tree. Let N be a node of an isolation tree. N must either be a leaf
(an external node) with no children, or an internal node containing a question
and exactly two children (NL, NR). The question consists of a feature q, and a
split value p such that q < p splits the data points into NL and NR which are
connected to the parent with an edge [52].
The goal of the anomaly detection method is to ﬁnd some ranking which reﬂects
the degree of anomaly. One way of doing this is to sort the data points according
to their path lengths. A path length h(x) of a data point x is deﬁned as the
number of nodes in the isolation tree that has to be traversed until reaching
a leaf node.
Since the isolation tree is a binary tree, the tree consists of n
internal nodes, and n −1 leaf nodes, thus the total number of nodes is 2n −1.
This means that the maximum height of the tree grows in order of n, while the
average height grows in order of log(n). Thus normalization of h(x) using any
of these terms cannot be done since they are either not bounded, or cannot be
compared directly. Therefore the data points may be ranked using an anomaly
score instead of using the path lengths directly [52].
Since an isolation tree has the same structure as a binary search tree (BST), it
is possible to estimate the average h(x) for leaf node terminations in the same
way as an unsuccessful search in the BST. Thus the average path length can be
estimated as:
C(n) = H(n −1) −(2(n −1)/n)
where H(i) is a harmonic value which can be estimated using ln(i)+0.5772156649
(Euler’s Constant). Since C(n) is the estimated path length average given n, it
can be used to normalise h(x). The anomaly score s can then be deﬁned for a
data point x as:
s(x, n) = 2−E(h(x))
C(n)
where E(h(x)) is the average of h(x) from a set of isolation trees. From this
equation it is clear that:
• when E(h(x)) →C(n), then s →0.5.
• when E(h(x)) →0, then s →1.
==PAGE:74==
60
Anomaly Detection
• when E(h(x)) →n −1, then s →0.
and the following assessments can be made regarding the anomaly score s [52].
• When s is close to 1, the data point x is an anomaly.
• When s is much smaller than 0.5 it is safe to assume that the data point
is a normal observation.
• When s is close to 0.5, then the data point have no distinct anomaly.
An isolation forest can then identify anomalies as data points with short path
lengths, and contains a collection of isolation trees which are able to target dif-
ferent anomalies. The isolation method works best for small sample sizes since
a larger number of healthy data points may hinder the ability to isolate an
anomaly. This problem can be split into two sub-problems known as Swamping,
and Masking. Swamping is deﬁned as identifying normal data points as anoma-
lies due to the normal data point being too close to anomalies. When normal
data points are close to anomalies, the number of partitions needed to separate
anomalies increases and it becomes increasingly more diﬃcult to distinguish
anomalies. Masking is when a large number of anomalies conceals their own
presence due to anomaly clusters. This also increases the number of partitions
needed to isolate each anomaly. Both problems result in longer path lengths,
thus it becomes more diﬃcult to detect anomalies. Both problems are the eﬀect
of having too large of a sampling size [52].
The characteristics of the isolation trees enable the isolation forest to alleviate
the problems by building a partial model with the use of sub-sampling. The
reason for this is that sub-sampling controls the data size, and each isolation tree
can be specialised since the sub-samples may include diﬀerent sets of anomalies
or no anomalies at all. Hence it is possible to use sub-sampling to create a
favorable environment for the isolation method [52].
The use of isolation forests for anomaly detection requires two steps; training
and testing. The training step builds the isolation trees using sub-samples of
the given training set. During the testing step, the test set is passed through the
isolation trees to obtain the anomaly scores [52]. In this project, the training set
would contain the principal components for samples from January, June, and
July, while the test set contained the principal components for samples from
February, March, April, and May. The implementation of the isolation forest
is based on the Scikit Learn library which automatically determines the sub-
sampling size and does all of the calculations. Contrary to the method described
==PAGE:75==
6.1 Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection
61
above, the packaged implementation calculates negative anomaly scores, hence
the scores are calculated using the formula:
s(x, n) = −2−E(h(x))
C(n)
This means that data points with an anomaly score closer to -1 are more likely
to be an anomaly.
Figure 6.8 shows the anomalies found using the isolation forest method. As
with the Mahalanobis distance method, it is clear that more anomalies are found
around April and May. This was to be expected due to the machine error during
April and May. The method also seems to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant number of anomalies
during February. Table 6.2 further elaborates on the anomaly classiﬁcation and
shows the percentage of anomalies found for each month. This shows that not
a lot of anomalies were found and that the data from February would contain
the most anomalies. This means that the isolation forest model may not be the
most optimal to use.
Figure 6.8: Isolation forest anomalies. -1 = anomaly, 1 = normal data point.
Month
Anomaly Percentages
January
4.44%
February
13.70%
March
2.41%
April
11.44%
May
5.71%
June
0.11%
July
0.55%
Table 6.2: Isolation forest anomaly percentages for each month in the data set.
==PAGE:76==
62
Anomaly Detection
Figure 6.9 shows the exact anomaly scores, which also show some trend leading
up to and around April, and May.
It is clear that data points from April,
and May generally are more likely to be anomalous compared to most of the
remaining data points. It is also clear that when the machine has been repaired,
the scores lie closer to 0 as expected. The same is seen in Figure 6.10 which
shows the average anomaly score for each month.
Figure 6.9: Isolation forest anomaly scores where scores closer to -1 are more
likely to be anomalies.
Figure 6.10: Isolation forest score averages per month.
6.1.3
Local Outlier Factor
Local Outlier factor (LOF) is another machine learning method which can be
used to ﬁnd anomalies. The LOF method explores k neighbours of a given data
point to ﬁnd its density and then compares it to the density of other data points.
This section introduces the theory behind the LOF method, how it works, as
well as the results of applying it to the data set.
==PAGE:77==
6.1 Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection
63
The basic idea behind LOF is to explore local densities where the k-nearest
neighbours are used to estimate the density. LOF computes the local density
of a data point and compares it to the local densities of its neighbours. This is
done to identify regions of similar densities. Data points which cannot easily be
allotted into a region due to having a much lower density than their neighbours
can then be classiﬁed as anomalies [10].
For the LOF method, k is a natural number and is deﬁned as the number of
neighbours that the LOF method has to consider.
With this in mind, it is
possible to deﬁne k-distance. k-distance(p) is deﬁned as the distance d(p, o) of
a data point p ∈D to the k′th closest data point o ∈D such that:
• it holds, for at least k data points o′ ∈D\{p}, that d(p, o′) ≤d(p, o)
• it holds, for at most k −1 data points o′ ∈D\{p}, that d(p, o′) ≤d(p, o)
where D is the data set [38].
The k-nearest neighbours (knn) is then all the data points q whose distance to
data point p is smaller than or equal to k-distance(p) [38]:
knn(p) = {q ∈D\{p}|d(p, q) ≤k-distance(k)}
The average knn distances for each vibration sample is seen in Figure 6.11. From
this plot it is clear that the data is much less dense around the faulty data and
should therefore be easier to detect as anomalies by the LOF method.
Figure 6.11: Average KNN distances of each vibration sample.
==PAGE:78==
64
Anomaly Detection
The reachability distance is calculated using the k-distance and is simply deﬁned
as the maximum of the distance between two data points a and b and the k-
distance of the second data point:
reach_dist(a, b) = max{dist(a, b), k-distance(b)}
This means that if a ∈knn(b) then reach_dist(a, b) = k-distance(b) otherwise
reach_dist(a, b) = dist(a, b). This is used as a smoothing factor, and is done
to reduce the statistical ﬂuctuations of d(p, o), for data points p that are close
to data point o [38].
The reachability distance is used to calculate the local reachability density (lrd).
Lrd is deﬁned as the inverse of the average of the reachability distances of data
point p to all of its k-nearest neighbours:
lrd(p) = 1/(
P
o∈knn(p) reach_dist(p, o)
|knn(p)|
)
This is a measure of how far one has to travel to reach the next data point or
cluster of data points. When lrd is low, it means that the area is less dense, and
the further one has to travel [7].
The outlier factor of a point p can then be calculated using the following formula:
LOF(p) =
P
o∈knn(p)
lrd(o)
lrd(p)
|knn(p)|
This value is used to determine the degree to which p is an anomaly by comparing
the density of a data point to the density of its neighbours.[34] If the density of
a data point is much smaller than the densities of its neighbours; LOF(p) >> 1,
it means that the data point is far from a dense area and is thus identiﬁed as
an anomaly. If LOF(p) ≈1, then p is identiﬁed as a normal data point [7].
The implemented model was ﬁtted on the principal components for all samples
from January, June, and July. The model was then used to identify each data
point in the data set using their principal components. The identiﬁcation of each
point is visualised in Figure 6.12. Similarly to the other machine learning meth-
ods, the results show that there are more anomalies during April as expected.
A signiﬁcant amount of anomalies are also found for some of the other months
==PAGE:79==
6.1 Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection
65
which might suggest that a modiﬁed LOF method using a manual threshold
would be better such that the distribution of anomalies would be closer to what
was expected.
Figure 6.12: LOF anomalies. -1 = anomaly, 1 = normal data point.
Month
Anomaly Percentages
January
0.0%
February
11.99%
March
6.84%
April
13.16%
May
5.71%
June
0.0%
July
0.09%
Table 6.3: LOF anomaly percentages for each month in the data set.
Figure 6.13 shows the negative LOF values and it is clear that the values for April
and May are diﬀerent from the remaining healthy data. Figure 6.13 also shows
the previously discussed trend regarding April and May. This is understandable
due to the machine repair in these months and suggests that the LOF method
is detecting the correct pattern.
==PAGE:80==
66
Anomaly Detection
Figure 6.13: LOF values where values further from -1 are more likely to be
identiﬁed as anomalies.
Figure 6.14: LOF score averages per month.
6.1.4
One Class Support Vector Machine
One class support vector machines (SVMs) are in theory perfect for the problem
of this report. This is because one class SVMs are used for one-class classiﬁcation
problems where there is a lot of training data representing normal operation,
but little data representing faulty operation. Thus, one class SVMs are used
for novelty detection or anomaly detection to determine states where something
is wrong during operation based on a lot of data where everything is working
correctly.
Before going into the details of the one class SVM, regular two-class SVMs will
brieﬂy be described as these are the basis of one class SVMs. The objective
of an SVM is to ﬁnd a hyperplane in an N-dimensional space which distinctly
==PAGE:81==
6.1 Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection
67
classiﬁes the datapoints, i.e. a decision boundary, and where N is the number
of features.
Consider a data set Ω= {(x1, y1), (x2, y2), ..., (xn, yn)}, where xi ∈Rd and d is
the dimension of the data, i.e. the number of features. xi is the i’th data point
and yi ∈{−1, 1} which is the output indicating the class of the data point.
SVMs can create a non-linear decision boundary by projecting data through a
function φ to a space with a higher dimension. This means that data which
can’t be separated by e.g. a line in the original space are lifted to a feature
space F where a "straight" hyperplane can separate the data. Projecting that
hyperplane back to the original feature space would yield a non-linear curve.
The hyperplane is represented by the equation:
wT · x + b = 0
where x ∈F, b ∈R, and w is the normal of the hyperplane.
The constructed hyperplane separates the data into a positive and a negative
class. To ﬁnd out how well the hyperplane separates the classes, the quality of
the hyperplane is measured. The measure used is the length of its margin. The
best separating hyperplane has the largest margin. The geometric margin of a
data point xi to the hyperplane is the shortest distance from the point to the
hyperplane. Therefore; maximizing the margin means maximizing the distance
from the closest points of each class to the hyperplane [56, 33].
To prevent overﬁtting, slack variables ξi are introduced which allow some data
points to lie within the margin. Furthermore, a variable C > 0 determines the
trade-oﬀbetween maximizing the margin and the number of data points which
can be within the margin. The objective function ends up being the following
quadratic programming minimization problem [56]:
minimize
1
2 ∥w ∥2 +C
n
X
i=1
ξi
where
yi(wT φ(xi) + b) ≥1 −ξi,
for all i = 1, · · · , n
and
ξi ≥0,
for all i = 1, · · · , n
Solving the quadratic program with Lagrange multipliers yields the following
decision function for a data point x:
==PAGE:82==
68
Anomaly Detection
f(x) = sgn(
n
X
i=1
αiyiK(x, xi) + b)
In the above equation αi are the Lagrange multipliers which in many cases will
be zero but those αi > 0 will be weighted in the decision function. Furthermore,
the function K(x, xi) is the kernel function written K(x, xi) = φ(x)T φ(xi). This
function is very important and used to perform the kernel trick. The trick is
that, since the outcome of the decision function only relies on the dot-product
of the vectors in the feature space F it is not necessary to make an explicit
projection of the data to that space. The kernel function is used instead as
it gives the same results.
This trick makes the SVMs very powerful as the
feature space can have unlimited dimensions which can make the constructed
hyperplane extremely complex and the trick reduces this complexity [56].
There are a few diﬀerent kernel functions such as linear, polynomial, sigmoidal,
and Gaussian Radial Base Function. The latter is the one used for the model
further down and looks like this:
K(x, x′) = exp(−∥x −x′ ∥2
2σ2
)
where σ ∈R is a kernel parameter and ∥x −x′ ∥is the dissimilarity measure.
The above formulas make it possible to separate a data set into two classes with
a non-linear decision boundary. But to do this with only one class is diﬀerent.
The one class SVM is an extension of the two class SVM. For two class SVMs,
the classes are known when training, i.e.
supervised learning, but one class
SVMs are unsupervised and trained only with data of one class and therefore
requires a diﬀerent approach. Since there is only one class represented in the
data set the diﬀerence is to treat some of the data from the positive class as if
it belonged to the negative class. Thus the decision boundary found by the one
class SVM separates the majority of the positive data from anomalies. Instead
of the constant C used in the two class SVM, one class SVM uses an important
parameter ν, which is both an upper bound on the fraction of anomalies and a
lower bound on the number of training examples used as support vectors. Thus it
deﬁnes the trade-oﬀbetween the percentage of data points treated as the positive
class and the negative class and because of the importance of the parameter a
one class SVM is also referred to as ν-SVM. The objective function for one class
SVMs is the following quadratic programming minimization problem [56]:
==PAGE:83==
6.1 Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection
69
minimize
1
2 ∥w ∥2 + 1
v · n
n
X
i=1
ξi −ρ
where
yi(w · φ(xi)) ≥ρ −ξi,
for all i = 1, · · · , n
and
ξi ≥0,
for all i = 1, · · · , n
This gives the following decision function for one class SVMs:
f(x) = sgn((w · φ(xi)) −ρ) = sgn(
n
X
i=1
αiK(x, xi) −ρ)
Now that the basics of the one class SVM have been described, the results of
using it on the chosen data set will be discussed.
The one class SVM were
trained using data from January, June, and July, and the test data was from
the remaining February, March, April and May. This is because June and July
are regarded as healthy data where the machine runs as it should and because
January is "far" from the point of failure it has been used as healthy data as
well to try and generalize the model.
Figure 6.15 shows the result of training the one class SVM on the data using
four features based on the pattern of the results. These features are skewness,
crest factor, clearance factor, and FFT kurtosis. Each blue dot is a data point
and because of the amount of data it is diﬃcult to distinguish the data points.
Thus to make it as readable as possible Figure 6.15 shows the results when
using a low value of ν at 0.005. The ﬁgure shows an important pattern which
is that the number of anomalies seems to be increasing from January to May
which is promising as the fault of the bearing was discovered in mid April and
not ﬁxed until May. Although there are some anomalies in June and July, the
percentages of anomalies for those months are very small.
==PAGE:84==
70
Anomaly Detection
Figure 6.15: One Class SVM anomalies shown for Nu = 0.005, where -1 is an
anomaly and 1 is a normal data points.
The scores calculated for the datapoints of the One Class SVM can be seen in
6.16. The lower the score of a data point, the higher chance it has of being an
anomaly. It is seen that there seems to be a trend where scores get lower from
January to May which emphasizes what Figure 6.15 also shows. Again it is seen
that there seems to be several anomalies in June and July but this is once again
a very low percentage of the total amount of data points.
Figure 6.16: One class SVM scores where lower values are more likely to be
anomalies.
Figure 6.17 shows the percentage of anomalies for each month and also for
diﬀerent settings of the ν parameter.
Compared to the previous ﬁgure it is
more clear that the number of anomalies is indeed high for April and May, and
very low for June and July. From Figure 6.17 it is also seen that there is an
unexpected spike in the number of anomalies for February. This spike is seen in
the results of many of the other models indicating that some event or outside
==PAGE:85==
6.1 Machine Learning for Anomaly Detection
71
factors might have aﬀected the vibration in that period. Furthermore, despite
March being closer to the point of failure it seems to be very similar to January
in terms of percentage of anomalies. Lower values of ν shows a slightly diﬀerent
pattern compared to higher values as May shows a lower percentage of anomalies
compared to April, but on the other hand the amount of anomalies in June and
July is very small. Thus the overall pattern seems to be more or less equivalent.
Diﬀerent combinations of features were evaluated when developing the one class
SVM and several combinations showed a pattern similar to that in Figure 6.17.
Which means that several combinations of features could work but they should
still be selected carefully. The principal components of the PCA were also tested
but showed poor results, where the percentages were inverted, i.e. the lowest
anomaly percentages were in March, April, and May. This is likely because of
how the PCA is computed, since it ﬁnds the components describing the most
variance. This results in March, April, and May data to be within the region of
the data of all the other months. As stated in [35] the goal of the one calss SVM
is not to discriminate between diﬀerent samples in the training set, instead, the
training set contains data from a single class which should be kept together. I.e.
the goal is to discriminate the training set data from other data. Thus in [35]
they propose to remove the components describing large variation in the data
and instead use the minor components. For the one class SVM it was therefore
decided to use speciﬁc features and disregard the principal components.
Figure 6.17: Percentage of anomalies for each month with diﬀerent settings of
the ν parameter, using four chosen features.
The one class SVM was also trained with a diﬀerent sampling of test and train-
ing data. For this sampling January was moved from training to test compared
to the initial separation. I.e. June and July were training data and the rest was
test data. The results using the same features as above yielded a pattern much
cleaner and better than the previous. This is also true for the results using the
principal components from the PCA. Before, using those components gave poor
==PAGE:86==
72
Anomaly Detection
results but using the diﬀerent sampling gives a very similar pattern for both the
four chosen features and the top three principal components. This pattern is
as mentioned also better than the pattern for the previous test-training separa-
tion. The results for the percentage of anomalies using the top three principal
components can be seen in Figure 6.18.
As seen in Figure 6.18 the results show a much more clear separation between
June and July, and the rest of the months. The increase in the percentage of
anomalies is still there but not as steep. The dip in anomalies in march is also
still present. Furthermore February has a very high percentage of anomalies
and June has fewer than July. Overall, the percentages of anomalies are higher
for all months except June and July which are close to the same as before.
Figure 6.18: Percentage of anomalies for each month with diﬀerent settings
of the ν parameter, using principal components and excluding
January from training data.
For the alternate data split all values of ν notably yields percentages very close
to each other. From this ﬁgure it is clear that including January in training
does generalize the model more because the machine is still working and will
continue to do so for a while. Not including January in training will thus result
in overﬁtting since the model is not generalized enough to detect that January
data is actually still healthy. Using only June and July as training shows that
January has a very high percentage of anomalies already compared to June
and July which might incorrectly suggest that something is wrong. The less
generalized data in the alternate split is likely also the reason why the principal
components yield results so close to the chosen features.
When January is
not included the data becomes more dense as June and July seem to be quite
diﬀerent from January even though the machine is working correctly for all those
months.
==PAGE:87==
6.2 Deep Learning for Anomaly Detection
73
On the other hand training the model using data shortly after a ﬁx assuming
that the machine runs close to optimally might give a good foundation moving
forward as wear and tear will generally not happen instantly but instead slowly
build up over time although some faults could happen quickly.
Although the two lowest values of ν for the primary data split have a diﬀerent
pattern compared to the two higher values, it seems that for both data splits
the models show the same trends within the data splits. I.e. the assignment of ν
seems to aﬀect mainly the percentage of anomalies rather than the distribution
of them. The overall distribution seems to depict an increase in the amount
of anomalies going from January to May and shows that June and July have a
very low number of anomalies comparatively.
6.2
Deep Learning for Anomaly Detection
Various unsupervised deep learning approaches can also be used for anomaly
detection. Some of these methods will be introduced along with the results of
using those methods.
All of the deep learning methods described in this project are based on artiﬁcial
neural networks which can be used to make a machine learn how to perform
diﬀerent tasks. A very simple feed forward artiﬁcial neural network is shown in
Figure 6.19.
This network consists of an input layer, a hidden layer, and an output layer.
Figure 6.19 shows how the network is composed of connected nodes.
These
nodes imitates the biological neurons in a human brain and how they interact
with each other. The input layer represents the input features which in this
case are the previously described features shown in Table 5.2.
Each link in
the network is associated with some weight and determines the strength of a
particular node. Figure 6.20 shows an illustration of a single node known as a
perceptron.
==PAGE:88==
74
Anomaly Detection
Figure 6.19: Simple ANN structure. Source: [44]
Figure 6.20: Node structure. Source: [26]
b (as seen in Figure 6.20) is the bias and is used to shift the activation function.
In this simple case the input is multiplied with their respective weights, then
summed and fed to an activation function which produces the output [26].
The activation function decides whether a neuron should be activated or not and
the main purpose is to transform some input to an output which is used in the
next layer of the artiﬁcial neural network. The activation function also allows
the network to learn non-linearity, and is thus able to learn complex functions
for producing a useful output. Furthermore some activation functions may also
be used to regulate the network so that large values do not overrule other lower
==PAGE:89==
6.2 Deep Learning for Anomaly Detection
75
values [26, 41].
The most simple activation function is a binary activation function. In this case
the node is activated if the input value is above some threshold and the exact
same signal is sent to the next layer. This can be useful for binary classiﬁcation
but cannot be applied to multi-class classiﬁcation [26].
Another activation function is the sigmoid activation function.
The sigmoid
function follows an "S-curve" and produces outputs between 0 and 1 and is
therefore used for models aiming to predict the probability as an output. A
drawback of the sigmoid activation function is that it may get stuck during
training when fed with very negative inputs [26].
The Hyperbolic Tangent Function (tanh) is another activation function which
produces outputs between -1 and 1. This function is non-linear by nature hence
it can be used to stack layers. Another advantage of this function is that strong
negative values can be mapped to a negative output, and it is thus less likely to
get stuck during training [26].
The last important activation function is the Rectiﬁed Linear Units activation
function (ReLU) which ranges from 0 to ∞. The ReLU activation function is
also non-linear by nature and should be applied to hidden layers of the artiﬁcial
neural network. A problem with the ReLU function is that some weight update
may cause a node never to activate again. This problem is ﬁxed using Leaky
ReLU which introduces a small slope to keep the nodes alive and ranges from
−∞to ∞[26].
Once an output has been produced by the artiﬁcial neural network, it is com-
pared to the desired value and an error is calculated using a cost function. This
error is then backpropagated through the network which adjusts the weights so
that the error is minimized. This is repeated in an attempt to reach a minimal
error [26].
The weights are updated using an optimizer. When stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) is used as the optimizer, diﬀerentiation is used to ﬁnd the slope of the
cost function. The aim is to approach the minimum on the cost function, thus
if the slope is negative, the weights should be updated to move down the curve,
and do nothing if the slope is positive. Stochastic gradient descent can then be
used to avoid getting stuck at a local minima.[26] SGD led to the development
of other popular optimizers such as the Adam optimizer. The Adam optimizer
is a great alternative to the SGD optimizer and is often suggested as the default
optimizer for most deep learning tasks. The Adam optimizer is a popular choice
in the ﬁeld of deep learning as it is able to achieve good results and is very fast
compared to some of the other optimizers [21]. The Adam optimizer will also
==PAGE:90==
76
Anomaly Detection
be the most used optimizer for this project.
Training an artiﬁcial neural network can then be split into steps [26];
1. Initialize weights close to zero.
2. Zero gradients.
3. Input an iteration of data.
4. Forward propagate by going through the network left to right until a
predicted value is calculated.
5. Compare the actual value to the predicted value using the cost function.
6. Backpropagate from right to left and update the weights accordingly.
7. Repeat step 2-6 and update weights accordingly.
8. Once the whole training set has been passed trough the artiﬁcial neural
network, that makes one epoch. Repeat for some number of epochs.
This theory has made the foundation for many diﬀerent artiﬁcial neural network
structures including the ones described in this report.
It is important to note that the Pytorch library was used in this project which
automatically updates the weights during the backpropagation, which generally
makes the implementation of an artiﬁcial neural network much easier.
To determine the error a number of diﬀerent loss functions can be used includ-
ing the Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss function, Mean Squared Logarithmic
Error Loss (MSLE), the Mean Absolute Error Loss (MAE), and so on. MSE is
calculated as the average of the squared diﬀerences between the target values
and the predicted values;
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)
n is the number of data points, yi is the i’th true value and ˆyi is the i’th predicted
value [20].
The squaring means that large errors will be punished more than small errors
which may not be desired in all cases. MSE is the most common choice for most
==PAGE:91==
6.2 Deep Learning for Anomaly Detection
77
deep learning models and was thus used for the majority of the deep learning
models introduced in this report [23].
The following sections introduces the theory behind diﬀerent artiﬁcial neural
network models which was used to do the anomaly detection.
6.2.1
Auto Encoder
The main idea of Auto Encoders (AEs) is to do dimensionality reduction to
the latent space using an encoder and then use a decoder to reconstruct the
initial input from the latent space. The goal is then to learn the best encoding-
decoding scheme through iterative optimization using artiﬁcial neural networks
as the encoder and decoder. During each iteration an input is fed to the AE,
the encoder does the dimensionality reduction and compresses the input into a
latent space. The decoder decompress the latent space value and attempts to
reconstruct the initial input. Then the error is calculated and backpropagated
through the network. The error value is minimised using an optimizer, in this
case The Adam optimizer [46].
Figure 6.21 shows a simpliﬁed version of an AE. It is clear that the AE archi-
tecture creates a bottleneck which ensures that only the main structure of the
input information comes through the bottleneck.
Figure 6.21: Simple AE structure. Source: [46]
The goal is to ﬁnd samples that are more likely to be anomalies. This is done
by calculating the error value. The error value should be lower for healthy data
as the model is trained on healthy data, while the error value for faulty data
should be signiﬁcantly higher.
The result of running the test samples through the AE is shown in Figure 6.22
==PAGE:92==
78
Anomaly Detection
and the average of the loss for each month is shown in Figure 6.23. It is clear
that the error value generally is higher around the faulty data, hence these are
more likely to be classiﬁed as anomalies.
Figure 6.22: AE loss running the test samples through the network.
Figure 6.23: AE average loss for each month in the test set.
Figure 6.24 shows the anomaly classiﬁcation for each of the calculated thresh-
olds. Table 6.4 further elaborates on the classiﬁcation and shows the percent of
anomalies detected for each month. Table 6.4 shows that the AE model ﬁnds a
signiﬁcant amount of anomalies for February. This is quite unexpected as the
data points from February were expected to be healthy. As discussed earlier
this might be due to external factors aﬀecting the vibration.
Using the manual threshold the AE model captures a signiﬁcant amount of
anomalies and may thus be better for fault detection.
==PAGE:93==
6.2 Deep Learning for Anomaly Detection
79
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.24: AE anomaly detection using the calculated thresholds. (a) uses normal
anomaly threshold, (b) uses extreme anomaly threshold, and (c) uses
the manual anomaly threshold.
Month
Anomaly
Percent-
ages
Extreme
Anomaly
Percentages
Manual
Threshold
Anomaly
Percent-
ages
February
15.58%
0.68%
41.44%
March
3.62%
0.0%
24.95%
April
13.30%
1.43%
47.78%
May
28.57%
1.90%
57.14%
June
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
Table 6.4: AE anomaly percentages for each month in the data set using the
diﬀerent thresholds.
6.2.1.1
LSTM AE
Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) is a type of recurrent neural network (RNN)
which is able to use reasoning about previous inputs to make a new reasoning
about the current input. This means that recurrent neural networks often has
big success when modelling sequential data such as speech, vibrations, or text
[42].
==PAGE:94==
80
Anomaly Detection
RNNs contains loops which allows logic to persist. For simplicity the recurrent
neural network can be seen as a series of the same neural network as shown in
Figure 6.25.
Figure 6.25: Unfolded recurrent neural network. Source: [42]
The components in Figure 6.25 are:
• x: The input to the RNN.
• O: The output of the RNN.
• h: The main block of the RNN which contains the weights and the acti-
vation functions of the RNN.
• v: The communication from one time step to another. This is the hidden
state and acts as the memory of the RNN.
In this case h is shown as multiple blocks but it is important to keep in mind
that this is the same block, it simply sends information back to itself [42].
This type of structure suﬀers from the problem of retaining information when the
input sequence is too long. This means that the RNN may leave out important
information from the beginning of the sequence and thus perform worse. This
is a result of the vanishing gradient problem when the gradient shrinks during
the backpropagation through time. When the gradient becomes too small it
does not contribute to the learning and the aﬀected layer stops learning. This
is especially a problem for the early layers in the RNN, hence the RNN may
forget what it has seen [41].
LSTMs were invented to accommodate for this problem. LSTMs contain in-
ternal gates which regulate the ﬂow of information. These gates learn what
information in a sequence is important and which information can be forgotten.
==PAGE:95==
6.2 Deep Learning for Anomaly Detection
81
Figure 6.26: LSTM block. The red curve is sigmoid activation. The blue curve
is tanh activation. X is pointwise multiplication. + is pointwise
addition. Source: [41]
This enables the network to forget non relevant information and to pass im-
portant information to make predictions even when given a long sequence [41].
Figure 6.26 shows an LSTM cell and how the gates are structured.
The ﬂow through a LSTM network is very similar to the ﬂow of a RNN, the
main diﬀerence lies within the block. Figure 6.26 shows the cell state along
with the various gates. The cell state transfers relative information down the
sequence chain and may for simplicity be thought of as the memory of the LSTM
network. Information is added and removed from the cell state via the gates.
Gates learn what information to keep or forget, during training. This is done
using the sigmoid activation function which squishes the value to be between 0
and 1. This is helpful since unimportant information will then be multiplied by
zero and thus forgotten while important information is multiplied by 1 and is
thereby kept the same [41].
The forget gate decides what information should be kept or forgotten. Both
information from the previous hidden state and the current input is passed
through the sigmoid function [41].
The input gate is also used to update the cell state. In the input gate, the hidden
state and the current input is passed through a sigmoid function which again
is used to decide what information is important to keep. The previous hidden
state and the current input is also passed through a tanh function which help
regulate the network. Then the sigmoid output and tanh output is multiplied
thus the sigmoid function decides what information from the tanh output is
==PAGE:96==
82
Anomaly Detection
important and what information is less relevant [41].
Within the block, the cell state is ﬁrst multiplied by the forget output which
may cause some values to be multiplied by 0 and thus forgotten. Then pointwise
multiplication is applied to the input gate and cell state which updates the cell
state values according to what the network ﬁnds relevant. This is then the new
cell state. The output gate then determines the current hidden state which is
passed to the next block. To determine the hidden state, the previous hidden
state and the current input is passed through a sigmoid function. Then, the
new cell state is fed to the tanh function. The outputs are multiplied, hence the
sigmoid is again used to decide what information to keep in the hidden state.
Finally, the output of the multiplication then becomes the new hidden state.
Both the new cell state and the new hidden state are carried over to the next
time step [41] .
An autoencoder containing LSTM layers was also used for anomaly detection
in this project by ﬁrst training on healthy data from January, and July, while
vibration sample features were used as both the input, and as the true value
which are compared to the network output. Then the network should be able to
predict outputs with relatively low error values for healthy data but high error
values for faulty data [24].
The error values would then be compared to a threshold to determine whether
the given data point should be classiﬁed as an anomaly. The threshold was
again found using the simple formula:
threshold = mean(dist) · k
where k = 2 or k = 3 if extreme values are allowed. Furthermore a manual
threshold was set which would capture a larger number of anomalies.
The resulting loss of running each test sample through the network is seen in
Figure 6.27 together with the calculated and manual thresholds. The average
of the loss for each month in the test set is seen in Figure 6.28. It is clear that
the error value generally is higher around the faulty data, hence these are more
likely to be classiﬁed as anomalies.
==PAGE:97==
6.2 Deep Learning for Anomaly Detection
83
Figure 6.27: AE LSTM loss running the test samples through the network.
Figure 6.28: AE LSTM average loss over each month in the test set.
Figure 6.29 shows the anomaly classiﬁcations of the test set, for each of the
given thresholds. Table 6.5 shows the percent of anomalies detected for each
month in the test set. As expected the number of anomalies detected for April
and May are generally higher than for the most of other months. Again an
unexpected peak is shown for the data points in February. Other than that the
model seems to be able to classify the faulty data as anomalies.
Month
Anomaly
Percent-
ages
Extreme
Anomaly
Percentages
Manual
Threshold
Anomaly
Percent-
ages
February
20.89%
10.45%
27.23%
March
6.84%
1.41%
11.67%
April
21.46%
8.01%
32.76%
May
36.19%
11.43%
55.24%
June
1.90%
0.0%
4.22%
Table 6.5: AE LSTM anomaly percentages for each month in the data set
using the diﬀerent thresholds.
==PAGE:98==
84
Anomaly Detection
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.29: AE LSTM anomaly detection using the calculated thresholds. (a) uses
normal anomaly threshold, (b) uses extreme anomaly threshold, and
(c) uses the manual anomaly threshold.
6.2.1.2
CNN AE
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are popular in the ﬁeld of computer
vision. CNNs take an image as input and the networks are capable of assigning
importance to diﬀerent parts of the image in order to diﬀerentiate images from
each other. In some methods as seen earlier the features are hand-engineered
for the model but with enough training CNNs are capable of learning these
features, i.e. the input is raw data. Furthermore the two dimensional aspect of
the CNNs is very important, since if the image was ﬂattened and passed to e.g.
a feed forward neural network, the spatial dependencies would be lost and the
prediction accuracy would be poor [47].
The ﬁrst important aspect of a CNN is the input image. The input image can
have a diﬀerent number of channels. For example a grayscale image will have
only one channel since it only consists of pixels with values between 0 and 255.
On the other hand a color image usually has three channels, for example an
RGB image has a channel for the red value, a channel for green and one for
blue, where each color value is between 0 and 255.
The architecture of CNNs consist of a number of diﬀerent layers which can be
repeated in groups. There is the convolutional layer and the pooling layer. The
==PAGE:99==
6.2 Deep Learning for Anomaly Detection
85
convolutional layer convolves the image by traversing all pixels in the image
with what is called a kernel and also known as a ﬁlter. The kernel can have
diﬀerent sizes (height and width) and the kernel will have the same depth as
there are channels in the image. The kernel uses matrix multiplication to output
a one-depth channel convoluted feature. The kernel traverses the image with a
given stride which is the number of pixels to jump each time it performs the
matrix multiplication, e.g. a stride of one means each pixel is traversed and
a stride of two means every other pixel is traversed and so on. Depending on
the size of the kernel the image is usually padded with zeros to avoid losing the
outer pixels of the image when convolving. So if a kernel has size 3x3 the image
is often padded with one row/column of zeros all the way around such that the
center of the kernel e.g. can be the top left pixel without going out of bounds
[47].
The convolutional layer is often followed by a pooling layer.
There are two
types of pooling called max pooling and average pooling, where max pooling is
most often used and usually the one which performs best. The pooling layer is
responsible for reducing the size of the convoluted feature from the convolutional
layer. Similarly to the convolutional layer the pooling layer traverse the output
from the convolutional layer using a pooling area similar to a kernel. For example
using a 3x3 pooling area and max pooling the result of the pooling will be the
maximum value in the 3x3 area. Average pooling will take the average of all 9
values in the 3x3 area [47].
Figure 6.30: Example of a CNN architecture. Source: [47]
The combination of a convolutional layer followed by a pooling layer is often
repeated a number of times. But the architecture may be diﬀerent. Finally the
==PAGE:100==
86
Anomaly Detection
output of the ﬁnal pooling layer is often ﬂattened and then passed to one or
more fully connected layers before the output [47].
An example of a CNN can be seen in Figure 6.30 where it is used to classify a
handwritten digit in a grayscale image. The network consists of two "blocks"
each with a convolutional layer followed by a pooling layer. The last part of the
network is two single fully connected layers.
Since the data used in this project is one dimensional time series data it needs
to be restructured before it can be used in the CNN. As mentioned earlier each
data sample is a sequence of 2048 values measured within a short time period.
These samples need to be converted to two dimensions. The conversion from one
dimension to two dimensions is simple. The 2048 values have been separated
into 32 chunks each containing 64 values. Each of these 32 chunks is a row in
the resulting 2D image. Thus the input image becomes 32 by 64 pixels. Since
there are only one value per pixel the image becomes a grayscale image meaning
it will only have one channel.
Figure 6.31: Input image examples from the used dataset.
The result of the restructuring can be seen in Figure 6.31. The examples seen in
Figure 6.31 are taken from the beginning and end of a subset of the dataset. The
left image is from early January and the right is from May. The two examples
represent some of the "cleaner" images as some are more noisy. But the majority
of the images should have relatively clear lines going through as seen in the two
examples in Figure 6.31. These lines show the rhythm of the vibration with
peaks and valleys.
For the anomaly detection, the CNN was used together with the AE structure
such that an encoder consisting of CNN layers would compress the 2D input
while a decoder would attempt to reconstruct the given input from the com-
pressed data. The idea is again that when the model has learned to compress
and reconstruct healthy data, the error of reconstructing faulty data should be
higher and those data points should thus be classiﬁed as anomalies.
==PAGE:101==
6.2 Deep Learning for Anomaly Detection
87
The model was trained on data from January, June, and July which were all
considered to be healthy.
The model was then tested on the data from the
remaining months, and the resulting loss for each of those data points is shown
in Figure 6.32. Figure 6.32 also shows the calculated thresholds and a manually
set threshold which attempts to better classify anomalies. Figure 6.33 shows
the average loss for each month in the test set. This clearly shows an expected
trend where the loss steadily increase over time.
Figure 6.32: AE CNN loss running the test samples through the network.
Figure 6.33: AE CNN average loss over each month in the test set.
Figure 6.34 shows the anomaly classiﬁcation using the diﬀerent thresholds and
Table 6.6 shows the percent of classiﬁed anomalies for each month in the test
set. This again shows that the number of anomalies increase over time and that
most anomalies are found near the faulty data.
==PAGE:102==
88
Anomaly Detection
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.34: AE CNN anomaly detection using the calculated thresholds. (a) uses
normal anomaly threshold, (b) uses extreme anomaly threshold, and
(c) uses the manual anomaly threshold.
Month
Anomaly
Percent-
ages
Extreme
Anomaly
Percentages
Manual
Threshold
Anomaly
Percent-
ages
February
0.0%
0.0%
30.31%
March
0.0%
0.0%
33.60%
April
0.86%
0.0%
57.51%
May
3.81%
0.0%
56.19%
Table 6.6: AE CNN anomaly percentages for each month in the data set using
the diﬀerent thresholds.
6.3
Anomaly detection Conclusion
The goal of this section was to make anomaly detection based on vibration data
which could be used for predictive maintenance to determine if the machine is
failing. The main idea was to train various unsupervised machine learning and
deep learning models on healthy data. This meant that the models should be
able to recognise healthy data and thus classify unrecognisable data points as
anomalies.
==PAGE:103==
6.3 Anomaly detection Conclusion
89
Most models would base their decision around an anomaly score, so that if the
anomaly score would exceed a given threshold the examined data point would
be classiﬁed as an anomaly. Most models showed a general trend where the
anomaly scores would gradually increase and peak during April or May. The
anomaly scores would then have decreased again during June. This makes sense
as the machine error was found the 17th of April and was not ﬁxed until the
5th of May.
This means that some of the models could potentially be used for fault detection
in predictive maintenance.
For this to work, one should not blindly trust a
single data point, instead, a number of sequential data points should be taken
into account. If a signiﬁcant number of those data points would be classiﬁed as
anomalies one would be more conﬁdent that the machine was actually failing.
Almost all of the anomaly detection models also show a spike during February
which may suggest that some other factors has aﬀected the vibration and is
captured by some of the models.
This type of predictive maintenance does not give much indication of how long
the machine is able to function properly before failure but is very easy to train
as the models only require healthy data for training. The following chapters will
explore other methods for predictive maintenance which will give an indication
of the remaining useful life of the machine.
==PAGE:104==
90
Anomaly Detection
==PAGE:105==
Chapter 7
Time Frame Prediction
Many predictive maintenance models aim to predict when the machine will fail
or whether the machine will fail within a given time frame, so that maintenance
could be planned in advance [29].
This chapter introduces a method for predictive maintenance where the imple-
mented models aim to predict whether the machine will fail within a given time
frame similar to the approach described in [29] using binary classiﬁcation. The
following sections introduce various machine learning and deep learning models
which aim to make the binary classiﬁcation of whether the machine will fail
within the given time frame, or not. The accuracy of each model is calculated
using the formula [22]:
accuracy = number_of_correct_classifications/number_of_samples ∗100
which allow for comparison of the diﬀerent models.
Then using the assumption of normal distribution, the radius of the conﬁdence
interval can be calculated using the formula:
==PAGE:106==
92
Time Frame Prediction
interval = z ∗
p
(accuracy ∗(1 −accuracy))/n
where z is the number of standard deviations from the normal distribution at a
given conﬁdence interval. In this project the 95% conﬁdence interval was used,
thus z = 1.96. [22] The upper and lower bound of the accuracy at the 95%
conﬁdence interval can then be found by: [22]
upper, lower = accuracy ± interval
which determines the range that is 95% likely to cover the true model accuracy.
[22]
Binary classiﬁcation uses supervised learning which meant that the data had to
be manually labeled, as described in the following section.
7.1
Labeling
Contrary to the anomaly detection methods, the models in this chapter would
need labeled data in order to work. The data was labeled manually using the
start date of the vibration samples and was based on a given failure date, in this
case the 5th of May. Each sample would then be labeled according to whether
the failure date would occur within ﬁve weeks after the given sample. Thus
the goal of each model introduced in this chapter, was to predict whether the
machine would fail within 5 weeks given a vibration sample, or not. The labeling
is visualized in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: The labeling for time frame prediction.
==PAGE:107==
7.2 Machine Learning for Time Frame Prediction
93
Figure 7.1 shows that some data points are labeled as 1 and others as 0. Label 1
means that the machine will fail within the next ﬁve weeks while label 0 means
that it will not. It can also be noted that data from June and July was no
longer used since the true remaining useful run time for these data points was
unknown.
7.2
Machine Learning for Time Frame Prediction
This section introduces various machine learning models used to make the bi-
nary classiﬁcation to predict whether the machine would fail within ﬁve weeks.
This section also gives a short introduction to the theory behind each machine
learning model, and shows the results of using those models, including accuracy
and confusion matrices.
7.2.1
Support Vector Classiﬁcation
Support vector classiﬁcation is classiﬁcation using a support vector machine
(SVM). The basics of SVMs are described earlier under Section 6.1.4.
But
because that was used as a basis for describing the One Class SVM, a brief
description is provided here.
The main diﬀerence of One Class SVM and the basic SVM is that One Class
SVM is unsupervised and basic SVM is supervised. One Class SVM uses the
distribution of the data points which are all from the same class and ﬁnds a
decision boundary where most of the data points are grouped together and
those which lie too far from this are classiﬁed as anomalies, thus it is used for
anomaly detection. Since the SVM is supervised it was necessary to label the
data as described above and the basic SVM was therefore used for classiﬁcation.
SVMs can be used with many classes but in this case there were only two. The
SVM will then ﬁnd the decision boundary between these two classes with the
method described under Section 6.1.4, where the quality of the boundary is
deﬁned by the size of the margin between the two classes and a larger margin
means a better decision boundary.
==PAGE:108==
94
Time Frame Prediction
Predicted
Actual
Failing
Healthy
Total
Failing
TP=47
FN=355
402
Healthy
FP=9
TN=893
902
Total
56
1248
Table 7.1: Confusion matrix for the SVM classiﬁer.
Figure 7.2: Support Vector predictions.
As seen in Figure 7.2 the performance of the SVM classiﬁer is very poor. It
classiﬁes almost all data points as healthy. The accuracy of the SVM classiﬁer
is 72.09% which is misleading when looking at the predictions in Figure 7.2. The
relatively high accuracy must therefore be due to a slightly imbalanced dataset
where the healthy data class is bigger than the data class where the machine
fails within ﬁve weeks. The same can also be seen in Table 7.1 which shows that
almost all data points are classiﬁed as healthy. In Table 7.1 it is also clear that
the healthy data class is more than twice as large as the faulty data class.
One positive element to take away from Figure 7.2 is that almost all of the
points where the model predicts failure within ﬁve weeks are at the end of the
data set. This is promising as the data should theoretically be at its worst at
this point as it is just before the maintenance is carried out. Thus one could
imagine that if the model could be improved, more failure predictions would be
made around the same time as it already predicts failures but hopefully also
earlier. If this was possible the result would be similar to other models, but as
of now, the model has poor results and is deﬁnitely inferior to others.
==PAGE:109==
7.2 Machine Learning for Time Frame Prediction
95
7.2.2
Stochastic Gradient Descent Classiﬁcation
The stochastic gradient descent (SGD) classiﬁer uses a gradient descent learning
routine similar to an artiﬁcial neural network, which supports a variety of loss
functions including the hinge loss function [12, 9]:
max(0, 1 −yf(x))
which is used by the SVMs.
The SGD classiﬁer implementation also supports a smoothed hinge loss function
referred to as modiﬁed huber loss. This loss is deﬁned as:
L(y, f(x)) =
(
max(0, 1 −yf(x))2,
for yf(x) ≥−1
−4yf(x),
otherwise
where y is the true label and f(x) is the predicted label, and max(0, 1 −yf(x))
is the hinge loss [9].
The log loss used by logistic regression was also experimented with during the
implementation of the SGD classiﬁer. For binary classiﬁcation, the log loss is
deﬁned as [6]:
−(y log(f(x)) + (1 −y) log(1 −f(x)))
To avoid overﬁtting, the implementation supports the use of various regulariza-
tion techniques including L1 regularization, L2 regularization, and Elastic net
regularization [12].
L1 regularization limits the size of the coeﬃcients by adding an L1 penalty which
is equal to the absolute value of the magnitude of the coeﬃcients [5].
L2 regularization shrinks the coeﬃcients by adding an L2 penalty which is equal
to the square of the magnitude of the coeﬃcients [5].
Elastic net regularization simply combines L1 regularization and L2 regulariza-
tion [5].
==PAGE:110==
96
Time Frame Prediction
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.3: The SGD predictions for the Hinge loss function (a), log loss function
(b), and Huber loss function (c).
For this project, the SGD Classiﬁer was ﬁtted on half the vibration data from
each month in the time period from January to May. The model was then tested
on the remaining data and the resulting predictions are visualised in Figure 7.3.
Table 7.2 further elaborates on the test evaluation and shows the accuracy of
the model and the upper, and lower bound at the 95% conﬁdence interval, using
each of the diﬀerent loss functions. Table 7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shows the resulting
confusion matrices.
It is clear that the model using the Hinge loss outperforms the others. The
model that uses the log loss function predicts more false negatives while the
model using the Huber loss function predicts more false positives, hence they
are less accurate than the model that uses the Hinge loss function. The model
using the Huber loss function predicts more false positives which means that this
model would indicate that machine maintenance should be conducted earlier
rather than later. Hence this model may be considered much better than the
model using the log loss function.
==PAGE:111==
7.2 Machine Learning for Time Frame Prediction
97
Loss Function
Accuracy
Upper
Lower
Hinge
59.13%
61.79%
56.46%
Log
78.07%
80.31%
75.82%
Huber
79.06%
81.27%
76.86%
Table 7.2: SGD classiﬁer accuracy.
Predicted
Actual
Failing
Healthy
Total
Failing
TP=382
FN=20
402
Healthy
FP=513
TN=893
902
Total
895
913
Table 7.3: Confusion using the Hinge loss function.
Predicted
Actual
Failing
Healthy
Total
Failing
TP=160
FN=242
402
Healthy
FP=44
TN=858
902
Total
204
1100
Table 7.4: Confusion matrix using the log loss function.
Predicted
Actual
Failing
Healthy
Total
Failing
TP=204
FN=198
402
Healthy
FP=75
TN=827
902
Total
279
1025
Table 7.5: Confusion matrix using the Huber loss function.
7.2.3
K Nearest Neighbour Classiﬁcation
K nearest neighbour classiﬁcation is a type of nearest neighbour classiﬁcation
which simply stores instances from the training data rather than constructing
an internal model. The classiﬁcation of a given query point is then calculated
with the use of majority vote of the nearest neighbours. The query point is then
assigned a class according to which class has the most representatives within
the nearest neighbours. K nearest neighbours classiﬁcation means that exactly
K neighbours are used to determine the class of a given query point [13].
==PAGE:112==
98
Time Frame Prediction
The basic nearest neighbour classiﬁer uses uniform weights. This means the
classiﬁcation of a given query point is simply calculated from a majority vote.
Other nearest neighbour classiﬁers may use weighted neighbours such that points
closer to the given query point contributes more to classiﬁcation decision [13].
The k nearest neighbours can be determined using various algorithms. The most
simple way to ﬁnd the k nearest neighbours is to use brute force. When the
brute force method is used, the distance between each pair of points in the data
set is measured. This means that for a data set of N samples in D dimensions,
the computational cost approaches O(DN 2). This becomes very ineﬃcient for
larger data sets [13].
A variety of tree based algorithms was invented to account for the computa-
tional ineﬃciencies of the brute-force method. These trees all aim to reduce the
computational requirements when ﬁnding nearest neighbours by reducing the
required number of calculated distances. The basic idea is that if it is known
that point A is far from point B, and that point B is close to point C, then
point A and point C must be far from each other as well [13].
One of the ﬁrst tree structures which adopted this idea was the k-d tree. The
k-d tree is a binary search tree where the data in each node is a K-dimensional
data point. Hence, a k-d tree is a data structure which organizes points in k-
dimensional space. The children of an internal node in the k-d tree divide the
space into two parts referred to as half-spaces. Points in the left sub-tree of a
node represents points that are left of the parent space, and the right sub-tree
represents points that are to the right of the space. Each node also determines
the alignment according to one of the dimensions. This means that if the root of
the tree is aligned according to the ﬁrst dimension, then points that are smaller
in the ﬁrst dimension will be in the left sub-tree and points that are larger in
the ﬁrst dimension will be in the right sub-tree. The children of the root node
will then be aligned according to the second dimension, the grandchildren of
the root will be aligned according to the third dimension, and so on. The nodes
at level k+1 will be aligned according to the ﬁrst dimension, and the alignment
starts over [19].
The exact algorithm for ﬁnding the nearest neighbours will not be described
in this report, but can be found in [50]. The k-d tree structure only requires
O(log(N)) distance computations to determine the nearest neighbours of a given
query point and are thus more eﬃcient than the brute force method [13].
The k-d tree approach is eﬃcient for low dimensionality (D < 20) but becomes
increasingly less eﬃcient when D grows. For this project, a maximum of fourteen
features are used and the k-d tree structure should therefore be feasible to use.
For data sets of higher dimensionality, the Ball Tree structure may be used as
==PAGE:113==
7.2 Machine Learning for Time Frame Prediction
99
this approach is more feasible for higher dimensional data.
For this project the KNN classiﬁer was ﬁtted on half vibration data from each
month in the time period from January to May, and was then tested on the re-
maining data. Figure 7.4 shows a visualization of the KNN classiﬁer predictions
using both uniform weights and weights based on distance.
Figure 7.4: KNN classiﬁer predictions.
The left plot shows results for the
uniform weights and the right plot shows results for the distance
based weights.
Weights
Accuracy
Upper
Lower
Uniform
87.27.33%
89.08%
85.46%
Distance
91.10%
92.65%
89.56%
Table 7.6: KNN classiﬁer accuracy.
Table 7.6 further elaborates on the test evaluation and shows the accuracy of
the KNN classiﬁer and the upper, and lower bound at the 95% conﬁdence inter-
val. The classiﬁer with distance based weights makes more accurate predictions
which indicates that faulty data is more similar to other faulty data, and that
healthy data is more similar to other healthy data.
Table 7.7, and 7.8 shows the resulting confusion matrices, which again shows
that the KNN classiﬁer performs well and makes accurate predictions.
Predicted
Actual
Failing
Healthy
Total
Failing
TP=285
FN=117
402
Healthy
FP=49
TN=853
902
Total
334
970
Table 7.7: Confusion matrix using KNN method with uniformed weights.
==PAGE:114==
100
Time Frame Prediction
Predicted
Actual
Failing
Healthy
Total
Failing
TP=319
FN=83
402
Healthy
FP=33
TN=869
902
Total
354
952
Table 7.8: Confusion matrix using KNN method with weights based on dis-
tance.
7.2.4
Decision Tree Classiﬁcation
Decision tree classiﬁcation is a supervised learning method used for classiﬁca-
tion. The basic theory behind decision trees was introduced in section 6.1.2 and
was deﬁned as a graph. Each node represents a question regarding a selected
input feature, while the edges represent the answer to the given question. Each
leaf node then represents a single classiﬁcation or a probability distribution over
the given classes such that the data has been classiﬁed into a speciﬁc class or
a speciﬁc probability distribution [48]. The goal of a decision tree is then to
predict a value by learning simple decision rules from the data features [14].
The decision tree is built by splitting the data set, at the root, into subsets
based on the value of a selected feature such that one moves to the left or the
right child node based on if xi < θ, where xi is the selected feature and θ ∈IR
is some threshold. This is done recursively on each derived subset until the tree
no longer beneﬁts from splitting [48] .
The best split at each node can be determined with a variety of diﬀerent methods
including the Train Error method, Gini Impurity, Information gain, and so on
[48].
It is important to note that if the tree is allowed inﬁnite depth it becomes
susceptible to overﬁtting as the tree would be able to make splits tailored to
individual inputs. Thus the maximum allowed depth should be limited [48].
This model was ﬁtted similar to the other classiﬁcation methods on half the
vibration samples from each month in the time period from January to May,
using the fourteen features introduced in Table 5.2. The model was then used
to predict the labels for the remaining data and the result is visualized in Figure
7.5.
==PAGE:115==
7.3 Deep Learning for Time Frame Prediction
101
Figure 7.5: Decision Tree classiﬁer predictions.
The model achieves an accuracy of 83.97% and upper bound 85.96%, and lower
bound 81.98% at the 95% conﬁdence interval, and thus makes quite accurate
predictions. Table 7.9 shows the confusion matrix which also clearly shows that
the model is fairly accurate in its predictions.
Predicted
Actual
Failing
Healthy
Total
Failing
TP=343
FN=59
402
Healthy
FP=48
TN=854
902
Total
391
913
Table 7.9: Confusion matrix using decision tree classiﬁcation.
7.3
Deep Learning for Time Frame Prediction
Deep learning models are other types of models that are widely used for classi-
ﬁcation tasks similar to the time frame prediction task. Contrary to the deep
learning models described earlier, the models for classiﬁcation does not output a
speciﬁc value, but rather values that are interpreted as probabilities. For multi
class classiﬁcation each output value is interpreted as a probability of belonging
to a speciﬁc class. For binary classiﬁcation the model aims to predict 1 or 0,
this means that the model outputs exactly one value which is interpreted as the
probability of belonging to class 1 [32].
A sigmoid node (σ)
==PAGE:116==
102
Time Frame Prediction
σ(z) =
1
1 + e−z
is used as the ﬁnal layer which forces the output to lie between 0 and 1, and
can thus be interpreted as a probability. The output probability can then be
converted to actual guesses in the sense that output values greater than 0.5 may
be interpreted as predicting class 1, and 0 otherwise [26].
As explained earlier, a loss function has to be used to determine the accuracy of
the model output. The binary cross entropy loss function is favorable for binary
classiﬁcation. The binary cross entropy loss function is deﬁned as:
Loss = L(y, ˆy) = −ylog(ˆy) −(1 −y)log(1 −ˆy)
where y is the true label and ˆy is the predicted probability of belonging to class
1. From this it is clear that the loss is highly dependent on y since:
L(y, ˆy) =
(
−log(ˆy),
if y = 1
−log(1 −ˆy),
if y = 0
This means that the model receives a high penalty when it is completely wrong
and that the loss should be zero when the model is correct. Thus the binary
entropy loss function is ideal for binary classiﬁcation [32].
This section introduces a number of deep learning models which utilize artiﬁcial
neural networks to do the binary classiﬁcation task of predicting whether the
machine will fail within the given time frame.
7.3.1
Feed Forward Neural Network Classiﬁcation
The model described in this section is similar to the feed forward neural network
described in section 6.2. The model consists of an input layer which represents
the features of a given data point. In this case the input consists of the fourteen
features described in Table 5.2. In each layer of the network, the input values
are associated with some weights which control the inﬂuence that each input
value has on the calculation of the following nodes.
==PAGE:117==
7.3 Deep Learning for Time Frame Prediction
103
This model’s hidden layers consist only of fully connected linear layers which
means that each hidden node uses the formula:
b + x1w1 + x2w2 + ... + xn + wn
where b is the bias, xi is the i’th input, and wi is the weight associated with
the i’th input. Thus the weights control the inﬂuence each input has in the
calculation of the next node. As explained earlier these weights are updated
during training in order to minimize the ﬁnal loss.
The implemented model also uses the ReLU activation function:
ReLU(z) = max(0, z)
This activation function simply outputs 0 for negative values and simply passes
the input if it is greater than 0. This means that ReLU is computationally very
cheap with no complicated mathematical formulas [37].
The use of ReLU results in a sparse model which may produce a model with
better predictive power and less overﬁtting.[37]
Although a sparse network may be desirable, the ReLU function also suﬀers
from a problem referred to as Dying ReLU. This problem has been discussed
earlier and revolves around the fact that some nodes may never activate due to
always being negative. This means that the output of ReLU for that node will
always be 0, and the node will therefore never contribute to the learning. This
problem is often a result of a very large learning rate or a large negative bias.
The problem can often be mitigated with the use of a lower learning rate or
using leaky ReLU as explained earlier [37].
The ﬁnal layer of the model is a sigmoid layer and the output can thus be
interpreted as a probability of belonging to class 1.
The model was trained using the binary cross entropy loss function while the
internal weights were updated using the Adam optimizer.
The vibration samples was split into a training set and a test set such that the
model was trained on half the vibration samples from each month in the time
period January-May. The model was then tested on the remaining vibration
data and the resulting probabilities can be seen in Figure 7.6.
==PAGE:118==
104
Time Frame Prediction
Figure 7.6: Feed forward model probability predictions.
These predictions were converted to actual label predictions such that:
label_prediction =
(
1,
if ˆy ≥0.5
0,
if ˆy < 0.5
The converted predictions are visualized in Figure 7.7. The model accuracy
was then found to be 89.34% with an lower bound of 87.70% and upper bound
91.05% at the 95% conﬁdence interval.
Figure 7.7: Feed forward model label predictions.
Table 7.10 shows the confusion matrix for the Feed Forward Neural Network
model. From the confusion matrix and the overall accuracy, it can be concluded
that the model makes fairly accurate predictions using the given vibration data.
==PAGE:119==
7.3 Deep Learning for Time Frame Prediction
105
Predicted
Actual
Failing
Healthy
Total
Failing
TP=309
FN=93
402
Healthy
FP=46
TN=856
902
Total
355
949
Table 7.10: Confusion matrix using Feed Forward Neural Network.
7.3.2
LSTM Classiﬁcation
Most artiﬁcial neural networks can be used for multiple purposes, this includes
the LSTM model. Section 6.2.1.1 described how LSTMs work and how it could
be used to do outlier detection. In this section the general theory behind LSTMs
introduced in Section 6.2.1.1 is combined with the theory behind binary classi-
ﬁcation in order to complete the task of time frame prediction.
As explained earlier, an LSTM is a type of a recurrent artiﬁcial neural network
which passes relevant information to itself and thus do calculations based on
both current and earlier inputs. Diﬀerent gates are used to regulate the ﬂow
through the network and to determine what information is kept throughout the
training.
Similar to the previous network, the ﬁnal layer of the implemented LSTM was
a sigmoid layer so that the ﬁnal output could be interpreted as the probability
of belonging to class 1. Furthermore the LSTM used the Adam optimizer to
update the internal weights based on the binary cross entropy loss function.
The LSTM would receive the fourteen features introduced in Table 5.2 as input
during training and the test evaluation. The model was trained on half the
vibration samples from each month in the time period January-May. The model
was then tested on the remaining vibration samples and the model output for
each test sample can be seen in Figure 7.8.
==PAGE:120==
106
Time Frame Prediction
Figure 7.8: LSTM probability predictions.
As before, the probabilities are then interpreted as actual label predictions such
that:
label_prediction =
(
1,
if ˆy ≥0.5
0,
if ˆy < 0.5
The ﬁnal label predictions are shown in Figure 7.9. When compared to the
actual predictions the LSTM model achieves an accuracy of 75.08% with upper
bound 77.42%, and lower bound 72.73% at the 95% conﬁdence interval.
Figure 7.9: LSTM label predictions.
Table 7.11 shows the confusion matrix of the LSTM model. From this table it
is clear that the model performs well compared to many of the other models.
==PAGE:121==
7.3 Deep Learning for Time Frame Prediction
107
Predicted
Actual
Failing
Healthy
Total
Failing
TP=315
FN=87
402
Healthy
FP=238
TN=664
902
Total
553
751
Table 7.11: Confusion matrix using LSTM Network.
7.3.3
CNN classiﬁcation
CNNs are often used for classiﬁcation tasks on images which is also what it is
used for in this project although in a diﬀerent way compared to the traditional
approach where one e.g. has pictures of dogs, cats, horses, and so on and need
to distinguish between them. In this section the CNN is used for time frame
prediction which is a simple binary classiﬁcation task. Thus the network will
be ﬁnding features present in the vibration images when the machine is running
correctly and when the machine is about to fail.
The model would utilize the theory described in Section 6.2.1.2 to do the clas-
siﬁcation using 2D vibration images as input. Furthermore, the data was re-
constructed as described in Section 6.2.1.2 to achieve the 2D vibration images
which could be used as input for the CNN classiﬁer model.
Diﬀerent versions of a CNN were tested and the results of the ﬁnal version can be
seen in Figure 7.10 and Figure 7.11. Multiple CNN models were tested. Firstly,
a relatively shallow version with one convolutional layer followed by a pooling
layer and then a fully connected layer. Additionally a deeper version was tested
with a convolutional layer, a pooling layer followed by another convolutional
layer together with a pooling layer, and ﬁnally a fully connected layer. The
testing showed that the shallow version performed better. The ﬁnal network
uses ReLU activation on the internal layers, and would again use a sigmoid
layer as the ﬁnal layer.
The models were tested on half of the vibration samples from January to May
and tested on the remaining samples from those months. Figure 7.10 shows
the output of the ﬁnal model for each sample. It is seen that more and more
samples are believed to indicate a failure when getting closer and closer to May.
==PAGE:122==
108
Time Frame Prediction
Figure 7.10: CNN model probability predictions.
Figure 7.11 shows the results of the predictions of the CNN. The average ac-
curacy is 77.76% with a 75.50% lower bound and 80.02% upper bound on a
95% conﬁdence interval. It should be noted that the predictions are worse for
predicting an upcoming fault compared to predicting healthy. This can also be
seen in Table 7.12.
Figure 7.11: CNN model label predictions.
Table 7.12 shows the confusion matrix for the CNN. Here it is clear that the
prediction of healthy is better than the prediction of failing.
==PAGE:123==
7.4 Time Frame Prediction Conclusion
109
Predicted
Actual
Failing
Healthy
Total
Failing
TP=209
FN=193
402
Healthy
FP=97
TN=805
902
Total
306
998
Table 7.12: Confusion matrix using CNN Network.
7.4
Time Frame Prediction Conclusion
The main goal of this chapter was to introduce a predictive maintenance method
which could be used to help determine when to conduct the next maintenance.
In order to achieve this goal, the chapter introduced the task of time frame
prediction similar to the task described in [29].
Time frame prediction was
introduced as a way to determine whether the machine would fail within a
given time frame, in this case; ﬁve weeks. This could be interpreted as a binary
classiﬁcation problem where the goal was to predict 1 if the machine would fail
within ﬁve weeks, or 0 if not.
The chapter introduced a number of machine learning and deep learning models
capable of making accurate predictions. The accuracy of each model was de-
termined based on the percentage of correct predictions, this was used together
with the confusion matrices to determine the performance of the diﬀerent mod-
els.
The test analysis showed that the feed forward neural network would make the
most accurate predictions, although many of the other models would also result
in very good performances for the given data.
==PAGE:124==
110
Time Frame Prediction
==PAGE:125==
Chapter 8
Remaining Useful Lifetime
Remaining Useful Lifetime (RUL) is a really interesting aspect used for pre-
dictive maintenance. RUL explains how long the machine can be used before
maintenance is required. RUL is determined based on current machine condi-
tion and approximates how long the machine is able to run until failure. In this
chapter, machine learning models and deep learning models are used to deter-
mine the remaining useful lifetime of the decanter machine based on a number
of features.
The implemented models would use regression analysis in order to predict RUL
of the machine based on the given features. Regression is simply a mathematical
relationship between an output referred to as the dependent variable (in this case
the RUL), and independent variables referred to as predictors. A very simple
example is:
dependent_variable = b0 + b1 ∗(predictor1) + ϵ
This simple equation allows for prediction of the dependent variable based on
a single predictor. b0 is referred to as the intercept and is interpreted as the
prediction when the predictor is zero. b1 represents the actual relation between
the dependent variable and the predictor and is some ratio/weight. ϵ repre-
sents the error that naturally occurs in the regression as the dependent variable
==PAGE:126==
112
Remaining Useful Lifetime
may also be aﬀected by other natural factors. When additional predictors are
used ϵ decreases, since more factors are taken into account when predicting the
dependent variable [31].
In this report several features are used as predictors for the prediction of the
RUL, thus the equation becomes more similar to:
dependent_variable = b0 + b1 ∗(f1) + b2 ∗(f2) + ... + bn ∗(fn) + ϵ
This equation can then be used for Linearregression although other methods
allows for non-linear regression [31].
To determine the accuracy of a given regression model a variety of error functions
can be used including R2 (R squared). R2 is a measure of the proportion of
variability in the data set, captured by the regression model and is deﬁned as:
R2 = 1 −SSerr
SStot
SSerr =
X
(yi −f(xi)2)
SStot =
X
(yi −ˆy)
where yi is the i’th actual value, f(xi) is the i’th predicted value, and ˆy is the
mean of the actual values. If a model ﬁts the actual data well, the R2 will be
closer to 1, and 0 otherwise [31]. One aspect to keep in mind when training the
regression models is that highly correlated features may hide valuable informa-
tion for some models. Some models may perform worse when highly correlated
features are used while others may not, thus highly correlated features were not
initially removed. Some models also account for irrelevant features such that
features that have no relevant meaning for the prediction, are somewhat disre-
garded. Other models may beneﬁt from removing these features entirely before
training as they may struggle to independently disregard the features otherwise.
In this project, all features were initially kept regardless of correlation and would
be experimented with throughout the implementation of the diﬀerent models.
The goal of the models described in this chapter is to use supervised learning
in order to learn the best ratio for each feature that most accurately predicts
the RUL value and thus ﬁnd a line or hyperplane that best ﬁts the data. These
models all require labeled data in order to work. As the vibration data was
originally unlabeled, it had to be manually labeled as explained in the following
section.
==PAGE:127==
8.1 Labelling
113
8.1
Labelling
The labelling for the RUL prediction was similar to that of time frame prediction,
and was done by ﬁrst selecting a failure date. Again the 5th of May was used as
the failure date as this is the day before the machine underwent maintenance.
A new column named RUL was added to each sample.
This column would
represent the actual RUL value of a given sample. The RUL value of a given
sample was simply found by counting the number of days until the 5th of May.
This meant that the RUL column for vibration samples originating from the 5th
of May would be 0, 1 for samples from the 4th of May, 2 for samples from the
3rd of May, and so on.
The label of each vibration sample is visualized in Figure 8.1.
Figure 8.1: The labelling for RUL prediction.
8.2
Machine Learning for RUL
This section introduces various machine learning regression models used to make
the RUL estimator. Each section also introduces some of the underlying theory
for each of the machine learning regression models.
8.2.1
Support Vector Regression
Support vector regression (SVR) uses the same principles as the SVM classiﬁ-
cation with only a few changes. The goal of the SVR model is deﬁned as ﬁnding
a ﬂat function f(x) that has at most ϵ (the speciﬁed margin) deviation from all
==PAGE:128==
114
Remaining Useful Lifetime
the given training targets.[51] f(x) then deﬁnes a line, or hyperplane, for higher
dimension that ﬁts the data [49].
Flatness means small coeﬃcients, hence the SVR aims to minimize:
1
2||w||2
Furthermore, the error is handled with the constraints such that the absolute
error is less than or equal to ϵ. This is expressed as [49]:
|yi −wi ∗xi| ≤ϵ
Which means that the distance to the furthest point (support vector) from the
hyperplane deviates at most ϵ.
A simple example of this is visualized in Figure 8.2.
Figure 8.2: SVR example. Source: [49]
For large data sets it becomes increasingly more diﬃcult to ﬁt a line or hyper-
plane which satisﬁes the given constraints. To account for data points that will
not ﬁt within the given margin a new set of slack variables are introduced. For
each data point that lies outside the margin, the deviation from the margin is
denoted as ξ. Although deviations may exist they should still be minimized,
thus the minimization problem becomes [49]:
==PAGE:129==
8.2 Machine Learning for RUL
115
Minimize(1
2||w||2 + C
n
X
i=1
|ξi|)
with new constraints:
|yi −wi ∗xi| ≤ϵ + |ξi|
This can then be visualized as in Figure 8.3.
Figure 8.3: SVR tolerance example. Source: [49]
This way C determines the tolerance, such that when C increases so does the
tolerance of points outside of ϵ [49].
The model then learns the optimal parameters that will make the resulting
hyperplane ﬁt the data.
The implemented model was ﬁtted on half the data from January to May. The
model was then tested on the remaining data and would achieve an R2 score of
38.54%. The model predictions are shown in Figure 8.4.
==PAGE:130==
116
Remaining Useful Lifetime
Figure 8.4: SVR predictions. The blue markers represent the predictions and
the red markers represent the actual RUL values.
To get a more generalized view of the predictions, the predictions would be split
into chunks of 25 and the mean of those values was then found. This resulted
in an R2 score of 56.52%. The generalised predictions are shown in Figure 8.5.
Figure 8.5: SVR generalized predictions. The blue line represent the predic-
tions and the red line represent the actual RUL values.
The highest possible R2 score when removing highly correlated features was
25.02%, thus the model would not beneﬁt from this. The reason why the model
performs better with all features despite the use of correlated features, may be
that features can be viewed as hints to make accurate guesses. If two highly
correlated features both provide good hints, it may be beneﬁcial to keep both.
==PAGE:131==
8.2 Machine Learning for RUL
117
8.2.2
Random Forest Regression
The structure of random forests for regression is similar to that of the isolation
forest. The random forest consists of a number of non-interacting decision trees
where nodes are split based on randomly selected feature subsets [27].
The
maximum number of features that can be split at each node is limited by some
hyperparameter which ensures that the ﬁnal model does not rely only on in-
dividual features, and that all potential predictions has a fair chance of being
used [25].
Each tree will use a random sample from the training data when the splits
are generated. This increases the randomness of the forest and should prevent
overﬁtting. Furthermore, the fact that only a maximum number of features can
be split on each node, and that trees generate split on random samples, means
that the trees should not be highly correlated [25].
The random forest also aims to account for irrelevant features such that an
importance score is calculated for each feature. These scores are based on im-
purity such as Gini Impurity. This means that the more a feature decreases the
impurity, the more important that features is [27].
When the random forest is used for classiﬁcation, each tree in the forest will
predict an output such that the probability of predicting a speciﬁc class given
the input features can be determined. This means that if four out of ﬁve trees
predict some output x, the probability of predicting x, given the input features,
is 4
5 [27]. When random forest is used for regression, each tree will output some
value and the ﬁnal forest prediction will be the mean of those values.[25]
The implemented random forest model was also ﬁtted on half the data from
January to May. The model was then tested on the remaining data and would
achieve an R2 score of 73.15%. The highest possible R2 score when removing
highly correlated features was 64.31%, hence the model would not beneﬁt from
this. The ﬁnal model predictions are shown in Figure 8.6 together with the
actual RUL labels of the test data.
==PAGE:132==
118
Remaining Useful Lifetime
Figure 8.6: Random forest predictions. The blue markers represent the RUL
predictions and the red markers represent the actual RUL values.
The predictions would be split into chunks of 25 and the mean was then found
for each of those chunks to get a more generalised view of the predictions. This
would result in an R2 score of 82.83%. The generalised predictions are shown
in Figure 8.7 and it is immediately clear that this model performs much better
than the SVR model.
Figure 8.7: Generalised random forest predictions. The blue line represent the
RUL predictions and the red line represent the RUL values.
==PAGE:133==
8.2 Machine Learning for RUL
119
8.2.3
KNN Regression
KNN regression is very similar to KNN classiﬁcation described in Section 7.2.3.
The KNN regression model ﬁnds the k nearest neighbours of a query point. Then
majority vote determines the classiﬁcation of the given query point. The KNN
regression method supports uniform weights and weights based on distance. If
weights are uniform each vote of the nearest neighbours contributes uniformly
to the classiﬁcation of the query point. When weights are based on distance,
neighbours closer to the query point contributes more to the classiﬁcation [13].
Two models were ﬁtted on half the data from January to May. One model would
use uniform weights whereas the other model would use distance based weights.
The models were tested on the remaining vibration data and the R2 scores of
the models are shown in Table 8.1.
Weights
R2
Uniform
72.95%
Distance
79.07%
Table 8.1: R2 scores for KNN regression models using uniform and distance
based weights.
Weights
R2
Uniform
85.65%
Distance
89.51%
Table 8.2: R2 scores for generalised KNN regression model predictions using
uniform and distance based weights.
Figure 8.8 shows the predictions for the two models, while Figure 8.9 shows
the generalised predictions. Table 8.2 shows the R2 scores of the generalised
predictions. Table 8.1 and 8.2 show that the models makes accurate predictions
according to the R2 score. Table 8.1 also shows that the KNN regression model
using distance based weights, is the best performing model when compared to
the other machine learning regression models.
==PAGE:134==
120
Remaining Useful Lifetime
Figure 8.8: KNN regression predictions. The left plot shows the results of the
uniform weights and the right one uses distance based weights.
Blue markers represent the predictions and the red markers rep-
resent the actual values.
Figure 8.9: KNN regression predictions for the generalized models. The left
plot shows the results of the uniform weights and the right one
uses distance based weights. The blue lines represent predictions
and the red lines represent the actual RUL values.
8.3
Deep Learning for RUL
This section introduces deep learning models which all aim to predict the number
of days until maintenance is needed.
The model reuses much of the theory
described in earlier sections in order to achieve a model which should be able
to make accurate predictions.
The input for each model would be normalized with a Min-Max-Scaler which
was modiﬁed to force the values to be between -1 and 1. The RUL labels were
also normalized using a modiﬁed Min-Max-Scaler, hence the ﬁnal layer within
the models was a tanh layer which forces the output of the model to also be
between -1 and 1. This also means that the output value would no longer be
interpreted as a probability but was rather a continuous value which would be
interpreted as the RUL prediction.
==PAGE:135==
8.3 Deep Learning for RUL
121
All of the models used for RUL prediction was trained using half the data from
January to May and was then tested on the remaining data. In addition to this,
all models were trained using the initial features introduced in Table 5.2, and
none of the models would beneﬁt from removing correlated features.
8.3.1
Feed Forward Neural Network for RUL prediction
The feed forward artiﬁcial neural network used for RUL prediction would use
the theory described in Section 7.3.1 and the structure would be very similar
to the feed forward model used for frame prediction except for the ﬁnal layer.
The ﬁnal sigmoid layer used for frame prediction would be replaced by a tanh
layer which would force the output to be between -1 and 1. This meant that
the output could be interpreted as an RUL prediction value rather than as a
probability. The inverse of the RUL Min-Max-Scaler was then used to receive
the actual RUL value from the model output value and the results are shown in
Figure 8.10.
The test analysis showed that the model was able to achieve and R2 score of
79.41% and thus being the most accurate model so far.
Figure 8.10: Feed Forward neural network RUL predictions. The blue mark-
ers are the predictions and the red markers are the actual RUL
values.
==PAGE:136==
122
Remaining Useful Lifetime
Figure 8.11: Feed Forward neural network generalised RUL predictions. The
blue line is the predicted values and the red line is the actual
RUL values.
Figure 8.11 shows the generalized predictions. Using the generalized outputs
the R2 score becomes 92.97%.
This, together with the feed forward model for time frame prediction, shows
that even a very simple feed forward artiﬁcial neural network can be used for a
variety of diﬀerent tasks and provide accurate predictions.
8.3.2
LSTM for RUL prediction
The LSTM model used for RUL prediction would use the theory behind LSTM
networks, introduced in Section 6.2.1.1, to do the RUL prediction. The model
would only consist of an LSTM network, a single linear layer, and a tanh layer.
The structure would be similar to that of the LSTM model used for time frame
prediction, except that the RUL prediction model would not output a probability
variable but rather a continuous variable interpreted as the RUL prediction
value.
The test analysis showed that the LSTM model was able to achieve and R2
score of 45.12%. The predictions plotted against the actual labels are shown in
Figure 8.12.
==PAGE:137==
8.3 Deep Learning for RUL
123
Figure 8.12: LSTM RUL predictions. Blue markers represent the predictions
and the red markers represent the actual RUL values.
Figure 8.13: LSTM generalised RUL predictions. The blue line represent the
predictions and the red line represent the actual RUL values.
Figure 8.13 shows the generalised predictions which achieves an R2 score of
67.07%. Figure 8.12 and 8.13 shows that the LSTM model does learn to predict
the RUL to some degree, but the model performs much worse when compared
to some of the other models. Although the model does not perform as accurate
as many of the other models, it was an important step that led to the combined
model described in the following section.
==PAGE:138==
124
Remaining Useful Lifetime
8.3.3
Combined Model
For testing purposes a combined deep learning model was implemented which
would combine the feed forward model and the LSTM model. The initial layers
of the model would be composed of the feed forward network, and the LSTM
network was used as the remaining part of the model. This also meant that the
ﬁnal layer would consist of a tanh layer which would force the ﬁnal output to
be between -1 and 1.
During the test analysis, the outputs were transformed into actual RUL values
using the inverse of the modiﬁed Min-Max-Scaler. The results are shown, to-
gether with the target RUL values, in Figure 8.14 and the generalised results
are shown in Figure 8.15.
Figure 8.14: Combined model RUL predictions. The Blue markers are the
RUL predictions and the red markers are the actual RUL values.
==PAGE:139==
8.4 Remaining Useful Lifetime Conclusion
125
Figure 8.15: Combined model generalised RUL predictions.
The blue line
represent the RUL predictions and the red line represent the
actual RUL values.
The test analysis showed that the combined model was able to achieve an R2
score of 71.28% and that the generalised predictions would result in an R2 score
of 89.94%. This is fairly similar to many of the other discussed models. What
is interesting though is that when the predictions are generalised by taking the
average of chunks of 25 predictions, the resulting R2 score becomes much better
than many of the other models.
8.4
Remaining Useful Lifetime Conclusion
This chapter introduced a useful task for predictive maintenance, known as RUL
prediction. The chapter also introduced a variety of machine learning models
along with deep learning models capable of making accurate RUL predictions.
In addition to this the chapter discussed how correlated features as inputs may
hide useful information when ﬁtting the models. Some models may beneﬁt from
removing some of these features while others may not. Features can be viewed
as hints and if two correlated features both provide very good hints to make
accurate predictions, it may be beneﬁcial to keep both.
The test analysis showed that none of the models introduced in this chapter
would beneﬁt from leaving out any highly correlated features, thus all initial
features were kept.
The R2 score, which can be described as a statistical measure of how well the
==PAGE:140==
126
Remaining Useful Lifetime
predictions approximate the target data points, was used to determine and
compare the performance of the models. The R2 scores showed that the Feed
Forward neural network was the best performing model although other models,
such as the distance based KNN, were also able to make accurate regression
predictions.
The predictions of each model were generalised by splitting the predictions into
chunks of 25 and then use the mean of the predictions as the new prediction.
This was done to provide a more general view of the predictions, since a single
point should not be used alone to make decisions.
The most accurate models might be used for predictive maintenance as they
should be able to provide an estimate of the remaining useful lifetime which
could be used to determine when to do machine maintenance.
==PAGE:141==
Chapter 9
Discussion
Throughout this report a total of three diﬀerent aspects of the predictive mainte-
nance task have been explored. AI models were used in an attempt to solve dif-
ferent tasks regarding predictive maintenance. Chapter 6 explores how anomaly
detection could be used for predictive maintenance for fault detection. The idea
behind this was to train the models on healthy data such that faulty data points
would stand out and thus be classiﬁed as anomalies, assuming that healthy data
is similar to other healthy data. This approach does not predict the remaining
time until failure which makes it more diﬃcult to plan maintenance, but these
types of models are much easier to train as they only require healthy data in the
training set to be able to detect faulty data. This also means that after main-
tenance has been conducted it would be relatively easy to re-train the model
by simply adding some of the new healthy data from after maintenance, to the
already existing training set.
Furthermore a slightly overﬁtted model would
simply detect anomalies before other models would and overﬁtting may thus be
less prevalent for this predictive maintenance approach. But it is still important
to keep overﬁtting to a minimum as small changes due to safe and natural wear
should not be classiﬁed as anomalies.
The anomaly detection approach could also be used in conjunction with multi-
class classiﬁcation models.
In this case the anomaly detection model would
detect a failure event and other models would then be used to determine the
exact failure type.
This would require multiple recorded failure events and
==PAGE:142==
128
Discussion
a lot of work would go into the development of the multi-class classiﬁcation
models. Initially, the multi-class classiﬁcation algorithm could also be replaced
with extensive vibration theory to apply thresholds of various levels to suggest
certain damage conditions. This would likely be outperformed in the long-term
by a more complex multi-class classiﬁcation model, but could serve as a good
addition to improve the usefulness of any lone anomaly detection algorithm
explored in this project.
The second predictive maintenance approach would be based on the work done in
[29] which uses binary classiﬁcation to determine whether the machine will need
maintenance within a predetermined time period. In this project the models
were trained to predict whether maintenance would be needed within ﬁve weeks.
In addition to this, the 5th of May was used as the date where maintenance was
needed and the data would be labeled accordingly. The 5th of May was chosen
since this was the date where maintenance was performed on the decanter from
which the data originates. This approach gives an indication of how long the
machine is able to run before maintenance is needed and could therefore be
better used for maintenance planning and may thus be preferred over anomaly
detection. One of the downsides to this approach is that it is much more diﬃcult
to determine a good training set after maintenance has been conducted as the
vibration data is never identical after maintenance has been performed. This
means that the training set has to be redeﬁned after each maintenance. Given
a small data set it also becomes very diﬃcult to label the data as it is diﬃcult
to know how long the machine will run after maintenance. Given a large data
set containing a lot of diﬀerent events, this becomes much less of a problem
as the model should be able to recognise diﬀerent failure events and thus need
less re-training. Still, due to the safe operation state sometimes shifting due
to maintenance modiﬁcations, the adaptation period required for this type of
approach to maintain robust results may become problematic.
The idea of
comparing machine conditions cross diﬀerent models could however present an
interesting solution to such an issue if there are enough similar machines to
continuously maintain a reliable baseline.
The ﬁnal approach would focus on RUL prediction which would be an ideal
approach to achieve an accurate estimation of time to failure. This approach
would also allow for planned maintenance based on the model predictions as it
should give a good indication of the remaining time to failure. The 5th of May
was again used as the date where maintenance was needed and the data was
labeled backwards accordingly. This meant that the models would aim to predict
how many days from the given input until the machine would need maintenance.
In this project, the models were able to achieve accurate predictions based on
the vibration data, using the R2 as a measure for accuracy. The downside to
this approach is that a lot of data from multiple events is needed to obtain an
ideal prediction. Given a large data set containing multiple events, diﬀerent
==PAGE:143==
129
models would be trained on each event and then used in conjunction to obtain
an estimated range of the remaining useful lifetime. Due to the limited number
of failure events in this project the trained models are not able to provide such
interval but still provide promising results even when working from just a single
major event.
Each of the predictive maintenance tasks described in this project present a
short introduction to some of the predictive maintenance options available to
Novozymes and how machine- and deep learning can be used to accomplish the
diﬀerent tasks. Given the current data available at Novozymes for the decanters,
the best option to explore would be the anomaly detection approach as the
models uses unsupervised learning which in this case does not require faulty
data for training. In this case the implemented model would alarm Novozymes
of occurring events and should be used as a suggestion of whether maintenance
should be conducted sooner rather than later. This stems from the massive
amount of both historic and continuous healthy data available at Novozymes.
Once more events have been recorded, Novozymes would be able to continue
the exploration of the other approaches. The ideal option for Novozymes would
be the RUL prediction approach as it gives the best indication of time-to-failure
and would thus allow for optimal planning of maintenance downtime to allow
ideal scheduling.
Even though several models yield promising results, it is clear that there are
some shortcomings in the chosen dataset.
The main one being the lack of
multiple major failure events. But this is not just a shortcoming of the chosen
dataset but for all of the available data.
Having more failure events should
make the models perform better as they would have more examples of how
faulty data may look. This limits the potential of the models and makes the
novelty detection approach more promising. This is because novelty detection
only relies on healthy data and can therefore be trained quite eﬃciently with
the data available. This is especially true as the data used for the project stems
from two diﬀerent lifetimes of the machine, thereby helping the model become
more generalized. After a thorough maintenance such as the one performed in
May, the machine vibrations will diﬀer from before the repair. This is one of
the challenges of creating these models as it is crucial that the model becomes
generalized enough to continue making accurate predictions after maintenance
is conducted.
Although there are these shortcomings of the data, there are also several beneﬁts
for what is available. The ﬁrst major beneﬁt is that the data depicts a naturally
developing fault in the machine. This is important as it allows the results to
translate more directly to the real-world application of the project. In contrast,
several experiments have been conducted utilizing synthetic or forced data to
==PAGE:144==
130
Discussion
emulate faults developing in machinery. This can introduce issues as the accel-
eration of a natural fault may not be accurately represented. Another beneﬁt
of the data provided by Novozymes is the scale of the healthy data. Although
this project limited the amount of data considered, there are vast amounts of
current and historic data available for future development. This also allows for
a stricter ﬁltering strategy to select only the most reliable and representative
data. In this project, the data was limited based on experimental results. As
June and July represented another lifetime of the machine, they vastly diﬀered
from the data prior to the event in May. As the data collection in this period
was still being iterated upon, there was also signiﬁcantly more data from the
two later months. Therefore, in an attempt to avoid over-representing the state
of the machine post repair, the data from these months was limited for many
models.
It should be noted that most models were tested with a variety of
compiled sets of data and as can be seen in the One-Class SVM section, the
outcome of using only June and July data was as expected. The model clearly
becomes overﬁtted to the data trained on, and this trend was seen in various
experiments where data from previous months was still utilized but in relatively
smaller sizes.
Additionally, as data is collected further from the repair, the labeling of the
data also becomes more uncertain.
It is safe to assume that the data from
June and July represent a healthy state, as it can be seen that the machine
would not break down in the following months. As time progresses, this same
statement can not as easily be made and thus the data becomes less reliable
for training purposes. Since there was no need for more data representing the
second lifetime of the machine in this project, and the data was potentially less
reliable, it was ultimately decided to focus on the months seen in this project. It
should be noted that Novozymes also collect data from several other decanters
which could potentially become an additional source of shared data for future
development. However, it was decided for this project that it was safer to focus
solely on a single decanter as it would help the models perform better with
the single event considered. Adding data from other decanters would also only
provide more healthy data as no major faults were documented in the given
time frame. Lastly, in contrast to some other types of machinery, the diﬀerence
between the decanters can be quite signiﬁcant even though they are based on
the same design.
This happens because the decanters undergo maintenance
independently making the parts within each machine diﬀerent from one another.
Another interesting topic is the priority of accuracy of diﬀerent labels. This
refers to the accuracy of true positives compared to true negatives. For a pre-
dictive maintenance initiative, it is typically more beneﬁcial to optimize models
based on the amount of true positives compared to false negatives. This means
that it is most important to be able to detect as many data points representing
anomalous data as possible at the cost of potentially increasing the number of
==PAGE:145==
131
incorrectly labelling healthy data as faulty. In comparison to something like
malware detection where it is much more important to detect all types of at-
tacks even if it means that the machine will sometimes incorrectly label a safe
action as unsafe, the strategy for this project is still much more balanced. The
reason behind prioritizing catching all the true positives is that even if a few
false positives are discovered, action will not be made until a trend is seen. This
means that the models must make several sequential incorrect labels before an
unwanted action is triggered (i.e. maintenance is scheduled). This makes it less
costly to incorrectly label data as faulty even though it is healthy, to a certain
point. Ultimately, the strategy of optimizing predictive models in this area of
work is favored to the detection of true positives compared to false negatives,
but still being more balanced than something like a malware detection software.
Some developed features were also removed from the ﬁnal version of this project
as they did not achieve the desired success. One of those features was the ad-
dition and creation of synthetic data. A method was developed which allowed
the introduction of certain theory-based irregularities to be synthesized onto
samples of real data to emulate the development of certain faults. This was
done with the inclusion of noise to make the synthetic data more realistic. The
idea was decided against as it removed some of the beneﬁts of the current data
as the argument for having natural and real data could no longer be made.
The performance of several models on the synthetic data was also massively
improved compared to utilizing real data for the same models, which indicated
that the noise adding technique was not strong enough and the samples became
too easily distinguishable. As the project revolves around comparing and ana-
lyzing diﬀerent models, it seemed more important to continue the development
and improvement of models rather than spending more time optimizing this
technique. This is however something that a company such as Novozymes could
look further into as the development continues.
In terms of the costs of each compared model, it is quite clear that the deep
learning approaches require more data and therefore may be considered more
expensive to maintain. This can be contrasted with models such as the machine-
learning novelty detection models which only require healthy data, thus lending
themselves better to the data available, and requiring less data overall to achieve
reliable results. It is quite diﬃcult to make a deep analysis of the diﬀerent com-
putational costs of each approach as the data is limited intentionally to achieve
a workable data set. Additionally, some models utilize diﬀerent approaches such
as PCA transformations which aﬀect the cost of the model. For this reason, it
would be inaccurate to describe an in-depth comparative analysis of the costs
at this stage of development. Still, some general ideas can be presented as they
relate directly to the availability of data. As starting point, the computational
costs of any of the presented models should not restrict the development deci-
sions for future implementations as the primary limiting factor currently resides
==PAGE:146==
132
Discussion
in the data.
9.1
Further Development
There are many options for realizing and advancing the features of this project.
One potentially interesting development could concern the utilization of syn-
chronized waveform data rather than the asynchronous waveform data as seen
in this report. The beneﬁts of having synchronous data is that each sample can
be shifted to align such that the samples can be more easily compared. This
could be especially useful if the implementation of a generator model was de-
sired. A generator model could utilize the complete sample to create artiﬁcial
samples similar to the real data. The synchronized data makes it quite a lot
easier to do this as the model can then utilize the raw data directly rather than
becoming conditional on certain features. In this project, it was decided to use
asynchronous data as it was more reliable for the historic data but for future
continuous monitoring, it might be beneﬁcial to transition to synchronous data
instead.
Another potential future development revolves around the usage of chained mod-
els to make more precise predictions.
With a larger number of documented
events, it could be possible to develop a multi-class classiﬁcation model to pin-
point which type of fault would be represented given an anomalous data point.
This could be used in conjunction with something such as the RUL or time
frame prediction models to ﬁrst detect when a fault is developing, and before
maintenance; attempt to classify which type of fault is developing. Currently,
the multi-class classiﬁcation model would be replaced by an expert inspection to
try and detect certain irregularities in the data based on vibration theory. This
could potentially also be automated with a manually constructed knowledge
base based on this same theory. However, the construction of such a knowl-
edge base becomes quite complex as there are many interconnected features in
vibration data.
The idea of oversampling is also a potential further development.
This is a
strategy enacted typically to help manufacture more data to represent under-
represented classes. Such a method could be quite useful due to the slightly
imbalanced data set available for this project. In contrast to the synthetic data
approach which was developed and discussed previously, oversampling remains
a strategy to merely help create data from the classes already available. This
could be done by adding noise to existing samples or by applying certain trans-
formations. The strategy is limited in that it can only be done on classes which
already exist in the data set but may still be useful to improve the picture of
==PAGE:147==
9.1 Further Development
133
a certain event by creating more data for the models to train through. This is
a potential development goal once a set of models is implemented and the data
continues to be quite skewed, continuing to favor healthy data. As an exam-
ple, if Novozymes’ decanters continue to operate appropriately, the amount of
healthy data will continue to scale while faults become less and less represented.
In such a case, this method should be considered.
==PAGE:148==
134
Discussion
==PAGE:149==
Chapter 10
Conclusion
The project explores a vast variety of diﬀerent approaches to the predictive
maintenance initiative and attempts to highlight and compare the beneﬁts and
drawbacks of each. The project also introduces several methods and explana-
tions behind the statistical analysis and feature extraction. Each feature was
analysed to determine which would be useful for the predictive models, and a
set of the most promising ones were comprised to be used for the further im-
plementations. The diﬀerent types of predictive maintenance approaches are
also grouped together and each present a diﬀerent way of tackling the problem
with various outcomes. The most beneﬁcial of these types are the RUL models.
These are ideal for a predictive maintenance initiative in a factory such as what
is needed for Novozymes. This is due to the ability to predict the time until
failure and thereby help schedule maintenance accordingly. In comparison, both
anomaly detection and timeframe prediction do help identify potential risks, and
might be more accurate in that task. However, they are both limited in useful-
ness as they can never fully optimize a predictive maintenance initiative. This is
not to say that these approaches would not be valuable for Novozymes as they
both can be modiﬁed to become more useful in diﬀerent aspects. The anomaly
detection approach can be further iterated upon as the dataset grows larger,
thereby introducing more varying events.
At that time, the anomaly detec-
tion models can help create a classiﬁcation protocol of diﬀerent machine faults.
Working in tandem with a model of either the timeframe prediction or RUL, the
anomaly detection classiﬁer could help determine how the maintenance should
==PAGE:150==
136
Conclusion
be conducted. The timeframe prediction models also become more interesting if
more classes are introduced. It may only be necessary for Novozymes to be able
to determine whether there are certain milestones of remaining useful lifetime of
a machine to schedule maintenance. As long as the timeframe prediction model
is accurate and reliable enough, it may have better results with less data than a
RUL model could achieve. Ultimately, each approach to predictive maintenance
was explored in depth, and an analysis for each implemented model was dis-
cussed thus giving a thorough overview of the potential options available with
data as provided by Novozymes. The project can still be iterated upon and
several methods for doing so have also been discussed, but the report succeeds
in the intended goal of delivering a survey of potential predictive maintenance
initiatives.
==PAGE:151==
Appendix A
A1
==PAGE:152==
138
A1
Project Week
Calender
Week
Task
Week 1
5
Project plan.
Research vibration theory and
background knowledge.
Week 2
6
(Finalize project plan.) Find and research gen-
eral useful machine learning methods. Familiar-
ize with data.
Week 3
7
(Finalize project plan.)
Choose simple ML
approach and start implementing the chosen
method.
Week 4
8
(Finalize project plan.) Work on initial ML ap-
proaches.
Week 5
9
Hand in project plan 27/2. Explore statistical
ML methods
Week 6
10
Research and implement more advanced statis-
tical ML methods
Week 7
11
Work on pipeline from data input to user output
on sample dataset.
Week 8
12
Complete pipeline.
Week 9
13
Ensure scalability and distributability of imple-
mented method.
Week 10
14
Research and select proven DL approaches ac-
cording to problem description.
Week 11
15
Implement selected DL approach and evaluate
performance.
Week 12
16
Implement selected DL approach and evaluate
performance.
Week 13
17
Tuning and optimization of implemented DL.
Week 14
18
Research alternative DL approaches.
Week 15
19
Implement alternative DL approaches.
Week 16
20
Analyze and compare performances.
Week 17
21
Finalize report draft. (And potential buﬀer for
implementation)
Week 18
22
Finalize report draft. (And potential buﬀer for
implementation)
Week 19
23
Finalize report. (And potential buﬀer for imple-
mentation)
Week 20
24
Finalize report.
Week 21
25
Finalize report.
Week 22
26
Finalize report.
Table A.1: Original project plan.
==PAGE:153==
Bibliography
[1] Scikit-learn Tutorial: Machine Learning in Python. https://www.dataqu
est.io/blog/sci-kit-learn-tutorial/.
[2] Micro Pitting, 2013 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://en.wikipedia.org
/wiki/Micro_pitting.
[3] Window Functions in Spectrum Analyzers, 2013 (Accessed June 8, 2020).
https://www.tek.com/blog/window-functions-spectrum-analyzers.
[4] Pearson’s Coeﬃcient of Skewness, 2014 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https:
//www.statisticshowto.datasciencecentral.com/pearsons-coeffi
cient-of-skewness/.
[5] Regularization: Simple deﬁnition, l1 & l2 penalties.
Statistics How To,
2016.
[6] Log Loss, 2017 (Accessed June 8, 2020). http://wiki.fast.ai/index.p
hp/Log_Loss.
[7] Local Outlier Factor for Anomaly Detection, 2018 (Accessed June 8, 2020).
https://towardsdatascience.com/local-outlier-factor-for-anom
aly-detection-cc0c770d2ebe.
[8] The Complete Guide to Machine Learning for Sensors and Signal Data,
2019 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://reality.ai/machine-learning-
for-sensors-and-signal-data/.
[9] Huber loss, 2020 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://en.wikipedia.org/w
iki/Huber_loss#cite_note-zhang-6.
==PAGE:154==
140
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] Local outlier factor, 2020 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://en.wikiped
ia.org/wiki/Local_outlier_factor.
[11] Root mean square, 2020 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://en.wikipedia
.org/wiki/Root_mean_square.
[12] 1.5. Stochastic Gradient Descent, (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://scik
it-learn.org/stable/modules/sgd.html#sgd.
[13] 1.6.2. Nearest Neighbors Classiﬁcation, (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://
scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/neighbors.html#classification.
[14] Decision Tree, (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://www.hackerearth.com/
practice/machine-learning/machine-learning-algorithms/ml-dec
ision-tree/tutorial/.
[15] 3Blue1Brown. But what is the Fourier Transform? A visual introduction.,
2018 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=spU
NpyF58BY&t=594s.
[16] J. Alsalaet. Vibration Analysis and Diagnostic Guide. (December), 2016.
[17] M. Bach-Andersen, B. Rømer-Odgaard, and O. Winther.
Flexible non-
linear predictive models for large-scale wind turbine diagnostics.
Wind
Energy, pages 1–20, 2016.
[18] M. Bach-Andersen, B. Rømer-Odgaard, and O. Winther. Deep learning for
automated drivetrain fault detection. Wind Energy, 21(1):29–41, 2018.
[19] A. Barnwal. K dimensional tree | set 1 (search and insert). Geeks for Geeks.
[20] M. Binieli. Machine learning: an introduction to mean squared error and
regression lines, 2018 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://www.freecodeca
mp.org/news/machine-learning-mean-squared-error-regression-l
ine-c7dde9a26b93/.
[21] J. Brownlee. Gentle Introduction to the Adam Optimization Algorithm for
Deep Learning, 2017 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://machinelearnin
gmastery.com/adam-optimization-algorithm-for-deep-learning/.
[22] J. Brownlee. Conﬁdence Intervals for Machine Learning, 2018 (Accessed
June 8, 2020). https://machinelearningmastery.com/confidence-in
tervals-for-machine-learning/?fbclid=IwAR2DCqjBkNTwnKMc9qS5Q1
Y1Vw_Stwdl5ll1fngovTaFcZs2bbas43xsHxs.
[23] J. Brownlee. How to Choose Loss Functions When Training Deep Learning
Neural Networks, 2019 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://machinelearn
ingmastery.com/how-to-choose-loss-functions-when-training-de
ep-learning-neural-networks/.
==PAGE:155==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
141
[24] M. Cerliani. Anomaly Detection with LSTM in Keras, 2019 (Accessed June
8, 2020). https://towardsdatascience.com/anomaly-detection-wit
h-lstm-in-keras-8d8d7e50ab1b.
[25] A. Chakure.
Random Forest Regression, 2019 (Accessed June 8, 2020).
https://towardsdatascience.com/random-forest-and-its-impleme
ntation-71824ced454f.
[26] N. S. Chauhan.
Introduction to Artiﬁcial Neural Networks(ANN), 2019
(Accessed June 8, 2020). https://towardsdatascience.com/introduct
ion-to-artificial-neural-networks-ann-1aea15775ef9.
[27] H. Deng. An Introduction to Random Forest, 2018 (Accessed June 8, 2020).
https://towardsdatascience.com/random-forest-3a55c3aca46d.
[28] V. Flovik. How to use machine learning for anomaly detection and condi-
tion monitoring, 2018 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://towardsdatasci
ence.com/how-to-use-machine-learning-for-anomaly-detection-a
nd-condition-monitoring-6742f82900d7.
[29] A. T. for Microsoft. Predictive Maintenance Template, 2015 (Accessed June
8, 2020). https://gallery.azure.ai/Collection/Predictive-Maint
enance-Template-3.
[30] H. Goonewardana. PCA: Application in Machine Learning. Apprentice
Journal, 2019.
[31] A. Kaw. Chapter 06.02 Introduction of Regression Analysis, 2016 (Accessed
June 8, 2020). https://learn.canvas.net/courses/1189.
[32] R. Khan. Nothing but NumPy: Understanding & Creating Binary Clas-
siﬁcation Neural Networks with Computational Graphs from Scratch, 2019
(Accessed June 8, 2020). https://towardsdatascience.com/nothing-b
ut-numpy-understanding-creating-binary-classification-neural
-networks-with-e746423c8d5c.
[33] J. Kun. Formulating the Support Vector Machine Optimization Problem,
2017 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://jeremykun.com/2017/06/05/for
mulating-the-support-vector-machine-optimization-problem/.
[34] E. Lewinson. Outlier Detection with Isolation Forest, 2018 (Accessed June
8, 2020). https://towardsdatascience.com/outlier-detection-wit
h-isolation-forest-3d190448d45e.
[35] H. Lian. On feature selection with principal component analysis for one-
class svm. Pattern Recognition Letters, 33, 2012.
==PAGE:156==
142
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[36] J. Lienig and H. Bruemmer. Fundamentals of electronic systems design.
2017.
[37] D. Liu. A Practical Guide to ReLU, 2017 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https:
//medium.com/@danqing/a-practical-guide-to-relu-b83ca804f1f7.
[38] J. S. Markus M. Breunig, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Raymond T. Ng.
LOF:
Identifying Density-Based Local Outliers. ACM sigmod record, 2000.
[39] F. H. Min Xia, Fanrang Kong. An Approach For Bearing Fault Diagnosis
Based On PCA and Multiple Classiﬁer Fusion. 1.Department of Precision
Machinery and Instrumentation University of Science and Technology of
China.
[40] R. K. Mobley.
An introduction to predictive maintenance.
2nd edition
edition, 2002.
[41] M. Nguyen. Illustrated Guide to LSTM’s and GRU’s: A step by step ex-
planation, 2018 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://towardsdatascience
.com/illustrated-guide-to-lstms-and-gru-s-a-step-by-step-exp
lanation-44e9eb85bf21.
[42] P. T. Perez. Deep Learning: Recurrent Neural Networks, 2018 (Accessed
June 8, 2020). https://medium.com/deeplearningbrasilia/deep-lea
rning-recurrent-neural-networks-f9482a24d010.
[43] S. Prabhakaran.
Mahalonobis Distance – Understanding the math with
examples (python), 2019 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://www.machinel
earningplus.com/statistics/mahalanobis-distance/.
[44] O. N. Putri. Titanic Prediction with Artiﬁcial Neural Network in R., 2018
(Accessed June 27, 2020). https://laptrinhx.com/titanic-predicti
on-with-artificial-neural-network-in-r-3087367370/.
[45] Robert Bond Randall. Vibration-based condition monitoring. Wiley, 2011.
[46] J. Rocca. Understanding variational autoencoders (vaes). Building, step by
step, the reasoning that leads to VAEs., 2019.
[47] S. Saha. A Comprehensive Guide to Convolutional Neural Networks — the
ELI5 way, 2018 (Accessed June 8, 2020). https://towardsdatascience
.com/a-comprehensive-guide-to-convolutional-neural-networks-
the-eli5-way-3bd2b1164a53.
[48] S. Shalev-Shwartz and S. Ben-David.
Understanding machine learning:
From theory to algorithms, volume 9781107057135. 2013.
==PAGE:157==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
143
[49] T. Sharp. An Introduction to Support Vector Regression (SVR), (Accessed
June 8, 2020). https://towardsdatascience.com/an-introduction-t
o-support-vector-regression-svr-a3ebc1672c2.
[50] G. Singh. Introductory guide to information retrieval using knn and kdtree.
Analytic Vidhya, 2017.
[51] A. J. SMOLA and B. SCHOLKOPF. A tutorial on support vector regres-
sion. Statistics and Computing, 14:199–201, 2004.
[52] F. Tony Liu, K. Ming Ting, and Z.-H. Zhou. Isolation Forest ICDM08.
Icdm, 2008.
[53] M. Udell. GENERALIZED LOW RANK MODELS. INSTITUTE FOR
COMPUTATIONAL AND MATHEMATICAL ENGINEERING, 2015.
[54] P. Večeř, M. Kreidl, and R. Šmíd. Condition Indicators for Gearbox Con-
dition Monitoring Systems. 45(6):35–43, 2005.
[55] A. Verma. Pytorch [tabular] — binary classiﬁcation. 2020.
[56] R. Vlasveld. Introduction to One-class Support Vector Machines, 2013 (Ac-
cessed June 8, 2020). http://rvlasveld.github.io/blog/2013/07/12/
introduction-to-one-class-support-vector-machines/.
[57] S. Zhang, S. Zhang, B. Wang, and T. G. Habetler.
Deep Learning Al-
gorithms for Bearing Fault Diagnostics - A Review.
Proceedings of the
2019 IEEE 12th International Symposium on Diagnostics for Electrical
Machines, Power Electronics and Drives, SDEMPED 2019, pages 257–263,
2019.
[58] J. Zhu, T. Nostrand, C. Spiegel, and B. Morton. Survey of condition in-
dicators for condition monitoring systems.
PHM 2014 - Proceedings of
the Annual Conference of the Prognostics and Health Management Society
2014, pages 635–647, 2014.
