==PAGE:1==
Master thesis in Transport and Logistics
Analysis of hydrogen and ammonia as
alternative low-carbon fuels for GHG
emissions reduction in maritime transport
Author: Luisa Katsambi
Supervisor: Prof. Harilaos N. Psaraftis
Denmark, 26th July, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Prof. Harilaos N. Psaraftis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Management Science Division
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
According to the third greenhouse gas (GHG) Study conducted by the International
Maritime Organization (IMO) in 2014, the total shipping carbon dioxide (CO2) emis-
sions in 2012 amounted up to 949 million tonnes and the forecasted scenarios demon-
strate that they will move upward by between 50% and 250% by 2050, depending on
future economic growth and energy developments.
The IMO at the 72nd session of the Marine Environment Protection Committee
(MEPC 72) in April 2018 has promoted the decision to adopt an Initial Strategy to
decrease GHG emissions by 2050 by at least 50% compared to the 2008 levels. In
order for this to come into realization, a wide variety of candidate measures have
been proposed, including a list of short-term, medium-term, and long-term candidate
measures.
This thesis focuses on the long-term measures, that are planned to be finalized and
agreed by the Committee beyond 2030, namely the replacement of the current fuels
by hydrogen and ammonia. In doing so, an economic and environmental analysis has
been conducted along with presenting the characteristics and the technical challenges
of both alternative fuels. By analyzing their behavior and multifaceted aspects in
more detail, this thesis identifies both the constraints and the benefits that come
with the alteration to hydrogen and ammonia as fuels.
This study has pursued to investigate in-depth their potential role as alternative
fuels in the maritime industry, as well as to contribute to the debate of the IMO
regarding the candidate measures for the reduction of the GHG emissions and provide
valuable information as far as the impact of the two alternatives is concerned.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared by Luisa Katsambi, a Master student at the De-
partment of Technology, Management and Economics at the Technical University
of Denmark (DTU) in partial fulfillment for acquiring a Master of Science in En-
gineering (MSc.
Eng) degree in Transport and Logistics, with a specialization in
the Logistics and Transport Optimization study line. The thesis was prepared in
the spring semester of 2020 with 35 ECTS. The project progressed from the 27th of
January 2020 to the 27th of July 2020.
The Thesis’ main objective is the decarbonization in the shipping sector by utiliz-
ing the two highly promising alternative low carbon fuels, hydrogen, and ammonia.
The study will contain a review of the characteristics of both fuels, a technological,
economic, and environmental analysis and finally, a comparison between the two
alternatives.
The topic came up in the Shipping and Port Logistics course at the Technical
University of Denmark and has therefore caught the author’s attention with the aim
to contribute to the research regarding the decarbonization in the maritime industry.
Kongens Lyngby, 26th July 2020
Luisa Katsambi
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisor, Professor Harilaos N. Psaraftis for his
continuous guidance throughout both the research and the writing process. His valu-
able and prompt input along with the information and sources he was providing me
with was highly beneficial and insightful.
Moreover, I would like to express my appreciation to my family that constantly
supported me in all the decisions I have taken throughout my student life and moti-
vated me to achieve more and evolve.
Finally, I would like to thank my friends both in Greece and Denmark who made
this journey easier for me and were always present to support me throughout the
duration of my studies in Denmark.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
ATR
Autothermal Reforming
CCS
CO2 Capture and Sequestration
CO2
Carbon Dioxide
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
H2
Hydrogen
HFO
Heavy Fuel Oil
IDLH
Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health
IMO
International Maritime Organization
ITCP
Integrated Technical Cooperation Programme
LCC
Life Cycle Costing
LCOE
Levelized Cost of Energy
LCOH
Levelized Cost of Hydrogen
LHV
Low Heating Value
MEPC
Marine Environment Protection Committee
MDO
Marine Diesel
MGO
Marine Gas Oil
N
Nitrogen
NG
Natural Gas
NH3
Ammonia
NOx
Nitrogen Oxides
PEMFC
Proton-exchange membrane fuel cells
==PAGE:10==
viii
Abbreviations
PSA
Pressure Swing Adsorption
PV
Photovoltaic
SMR
Steam Methane Reforming
SOx
Sulphur Oxides
Syngas
Synthetic Gas
TTP
Tank To Propeller
TTW
Tank To Wake
WTT
Well To Tank
WTW
Well To Wake
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations
vii
Contents
ix
I
Introduction
1
1
Introduction
3
2
Objectives
5
3
Structure
7
II
GHG emissions in Maritime Industry
9
4
Background and Current Situation
11
5
Candidate Measures
17
6
Engine Manufacturers’ presence
21
III
Hydrogen
25
7
Characteristics
27
8
Production Methods
31
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
9
Technical Challenges
35
10 Economic Analysis
37
11 Environmental Analysis
47
IV
Ammonia
55
12 Characteristics
57
13 Production Methods
59
13.1 Ammonia production through hydrogen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
13.2 Ammonia production through nitrogen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
14 Technical Challenges
63
15 Economic Analysis
65
16 Environmental Analysis
71
V
Conclusion
77
Conclusion
79
17 Limitations
79
18 Future Work
81
19 Final Remarks
83
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:13==
Part I
Introduction
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) produced by the shipping industry has been lately
a great challenge and one of the main objectives of the International Maritime Or-
ganization (IMO). According to some estimates provided by the Third IMO GHG
Study of 2014, international shipping released in 2012 796 million tons of CO2 which
represents around 2.2% of the total anthropogenic volume of that year’s emissions.
By comparison, international shipping is reported to have released 885 million tons
of CO2 in 2007, before the global economic crisis, and accounted for 2.8% of the total
CO2 emissions for that year.
Thereupon, that led the Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) of
the IMO to give substantial attention to the regulation of GHG pollution from ships
and to introduce a set of technological steps for new ships and operating cuts for all
ships in 2011. As of 2013, such mandatory measures come into force as a ”package”
under Annex VI of the International Convention on the Prevention of Ship Pollution
(the MAR POL Convention).
Additionally, some mid-range prediction scenarios were demonstrated, that had
taken all the estimates of the Third IMO GHG Study into account. These scenarios
indicate that, depending on potential economic growth and energy evolution, CO2
emissions from international shipping may rise by between 50% and 250% by 2050.
Hence, in order to mitigate this upward trend, in April 2018, IMO has developed
its own strategy, the so-called ”Initial Strategy” (IMO 2018), to progressively elim-
inate the GHG emissions from ships. Currently, this commitment is one of its top
priorities and is defined in levels of ambitions, as expressed followingly.
1. Reduction of the new ships’ carbon content through the implementation of
further phases of the EEDI
2. Decrease of the international shipping’s carbon content
3. Climax and decline of the international shipping’s GHG emissions
Furthermore, a list of candidate measures that will contribute to the abatement
of GHG emissions has been presented by the IMO. This list comprises short-term,
medium-term, and long-term measures, that are planned to be finalized and
agreed by the committee between 2018 and 2023, between 2023 and 2030 and be-
yond 2030 respectively.
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
The research of this Thesis has been mainly focused on the long-term measures
and more specifically on the development and implementation of zero-carbon and
fossil-free fuels, with the aim to ensure the decarbonization in the shipping industry
in the second half of the century.
More specifically, the objective of this thesis is to examine hydrogen and am-
monia as alternative fuels and provide a thorough analysis from a technological,
economic and environmental standpoint. This research will enable the assessment of
the potential replacement of the current fuels in maritime transport by hydrogen and
ammonia and will shed light on the feasibility of its realization.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Objectives
The main learning objectives of this thesis project are:
• To study the importance and essence of the reduction of GHG emissions overall
and even more specifically in maritime transport.
• To investigate hydrogen and ammonia as alternative fuels.
• To identify the characteristics of hydrogen and ammonia and their potential
strengths towards the current fuels in the maritime industry.
• To specify the challenges of both fuels that function as an impediment to the
alteration from the current fuels to hydrogen and ammonia.
• To examine the various way of hydrogen and ammonia production and take
them into account in the upcoming analysis.
• To perform an economic analysis of hydrogen and ammonia as alternative fuels
in comparison to the present fuels.
• To carry out an environmental analysis of hydrogen and ammonia that brings
them into comparison with the currently utilized fuels.
• To investigate the feasibility of replacing the current fuels with hydrogen and
ammonia.
==PAGE:18==
6
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Structure
This thesis deals with two main topics. The first one concerns the exploration of
hydrogen, and more specifically its characteristics, its technological aspects, its diverse
ways of production, its current economic presence, and its environmental behavior,
while the second part constitutes the respective points but with regards to ammonia.
In particular, the parts of this Thesis are structured and include the topics as shown
below:
• Part I - Introduction:
The current part gives the first impression of the introduction and the objectives
of this research, and what the output of the Thesis is expected to be. It also
presents the structure of the upcoming parts with a brief description of each of
them.
• Part II - GHG emissions in the Maritime Industry:
This part presents the 2018 decision by the IMO to adopt an ”Initial Strategy”
to reduce GHG emissions in the maritime industry in comparison to a baseline
year, in 2008, when the emissions seemed to have crested and have reached the
top. A brief presentation of the background and the past situation, along with
the current situation in terms of pollution in the maritime industry is attempted.
In addition to this, the diverse candidate measures that were outlined by the
IMO as alternative solutions to drop the GHG emissions will be highlighted
and followingly, the presence in the journey of decarbonization of some leading
engine manufacturers will be demonstrated.
• Part III - Hydrogen:
In the third part, a deep dive into the main objectives of the thesis will be
tackled, namely the hydrogen. First of all, the characteristics of hydrogen as an
element will be expressed, indicating its qualities, and its miscellaneous produc-
tion methods. Besides, the technical challenges, that hydrogen faces and can
constitute an obstacle for its further development, will be outlined. Moreover,
an economic analysis will be performed to illustrate the overall cost of such an
implementation in the maritime industry. Apart from that, an environmental
analysis will elucidate the impact of hydrogen in this aspect. The analysis will
take into account the current fuels and will present the results parallel to them.
==PAGE:20==
8
3 Structure
• Part IV - Ammonia:
The fourth part will follow an identical flow with the third one, but it will refer
to ammonia as an alternative fuel.
Hence, the characteristics, the technical
challenges, and the diverse ways of producing ammonia will be demonstrated,
followed by the corresponding economic and environmental analysis.
• Part V - Conclusion:
In the last and concluding part, the limitations, that come with the establish-
ment of hydrogen and ammonia as alternative fuels, will be presented, followed
by the potential future work that can be conducted in order to bring the replace-
ment of the current fuels by the investigating ones into realization. In addition
to that, all the aforementioned points will be taken into extensive consideration
and will present the trade-off qualities of the alternative and the current fuels.
This thesis aims to unfold all the aspects of such an alteration and to make
clear of the feasibility of its realization in the upcoming future.
==PAGE:21==
Part II
GHG emissions in
Maritime Industry
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 4
Background and
Current Situation
In 2008, the world experienced a financial crisis, which was considered the most crucial
crisis since the great depression. On a global scale, most countries were affected to a
different extent. For the IMO, as well, it is hailed as the baseline year as far as the
comparison to target values is concerned. More specifically, the 72nd session of the
Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC 72) of the IMO in April 2018
has determined the need of achieving by 2050 a reduction of at least 50% in maritime
GHG emissions versus the levels of 2008. According to mid-range forecast scenarios
presented in the third IMO GHG study (Smith et al. 2014), the CO2 emissions from
international shipping could grow by between 50% and 250% by the year 2050, based
on future economic growth and energy developments.
Nonetheless, the goal of assessing the CO2 emissions in 2008 is somewhat challeng-
ing, due to the fact that the essential data is not obtainable. Several estimations have
been carried out, though, and some valuable information could be approached. In
particular, two main methods can be implemented, the top-down and bottom-up
method. The former is based on the fuel sales statistics that are engaged in inter-
national shipping, while the latter is an activity-based method that defined the fuel
consumption by vessels allocated to international voyages. Generally, the top-down
process results are approximately 30-50% lower estimates than the bottom-up method.
Undoubtedly, for this reason, there should be a consensus of the applied methods in
the comparison between the under examination years.
The difference between the top-down and the bottom-up method can be evidently
illustrated by the graph presented in Figure 4.1, which shows the second IMO GHG
Study 2009 estimates of the annual fuel consumption of international shipping, along
with their uncertainty ranges, for the years 2007-2012.
It can be observed, that
for the baseline year 2008 the top-down method identified 200 million tons of fuel
per year, while the bottom-down method showed 294 million tons of fuel per year.
Undoubtedly, it is a significant difference between the two methods.
Additionally, in Figure 4.2, the results of the CO2 emissions of international ship-
ping are presented, using both the top-down and the bottom-up method. The analysis
with regard to fuel type assignment in the bottom-up model was performed using top-
down statistics as a guide, together with fuel allocation data. The reason is that the
==PAGE:24==
12
4 Background and Current Situation
Figure 4.1. Summary graph of annual fuel use by international shipping, estimated using the
top-down and bottom-up methods, showing Second IMO GHG Study 2009 estimates and
uncertainty ranges (Smith et al. (2014))
engine-specific data extracted from the IHSF database for large numbers of main
engines and almost all auxiliary engines on vessels from the second IMO GHG Study
2009 are not adequate pertaining to fuel type. The results of this graph, formed by
the top-down model, show that the international shipping’s CO2 emissions amounted
up to 624 million tonnes, whereas the bottom-up model estimation was way higher,
reaching 920.9 million tonnes.
Moreover, it is wise to get data for the share of the container ships, as the afore-
mentioned information allows for the international shipping overall. The pie chart in
Figure 4.3 depicts the share of CO2 emissions by ship class during the years 2013-2015.
Due to the fact that no information was provided for the year 2008, the assumption
that the share has remained steady over these years will be done. Therefore, based
on these estimates, the container ships account for 23%, following the highest share,
which is generally referring to other 19 ship classes by 45%. It is evident, that this
share is considerably high, bearing in mind that it includes only one ship type. The
third highest share of CO2 emissions acquire the bulk carriers with 19% and the
lowest percentage is derived by the oil tankers with 13%.
Furthermore, for 2008 some more specific data have been granted with respect to
the container ships per size category and this way, the fuel consumption and CO2
emissions, that have triggered, are presented. The table in Figure 4.4 delineates this
information in detail.
It is worth mentioning, that the assumption that was made regarding the share of
==PAGE:25==
4 Background and Current Situation
13
Figure 4.2. International shipping CO2 emissions 2007–2011, using top-down and bottom-up
methods (Smith et al. 2014)
Figure 4.3. Share of CO2 emissions by ship class for the years 2013-2015 (Olmer et al. (2017b))
==PAGE:26==
14
4 Background and Current Situation
Figure 4.4. Detailed results for the container ships in 2008 per size category (Smith et al.
2014)
the container ships in 2008 is confirmed also from this table since the summation of
the total CO2 emissions of all size categories amount up to 213.5 million tonnes, which
is almost 23% of the total international CO2 emissions in 2008 with the bottom-up
method, presented in Figure 4.2, namely 920.9 million tonnes.
As it has been mentioned earlier, it is somewhat complex to track down data
regarding the CO2 emissions for the year 2008, however, various useful estimations
have taken place and have presented some interesting information. The composition
of the identified estimates for the situation in the past (2008) can result in some
meaningful observations for the container ships.
To begin with, the combination of the fuel consumption per year and the annual
CO2 emissions for the international shipping in Figure 4.1 and Figure 4.2 respectively
with the share of CO2 emissions by ship class in Figure 4.3 can lead to the estimation of
the annual fuel consumption and CO2 emissions specifically for the container ships the
examining years. Both charts are depicted in Figure 4.5 and Figure 4.6 respectively.
For the fuel consumption column graph, the IMO Study 2014 was implemented, due
to the fact that it was more recent and was conducted for all the reviewing years.
From Figure 4.5 it can be observed, that for 2008 the total fuel consumption for
container ships was 46 million tons of fuel using the top-down method, and 68 million
tonnes with respect to the bottom-up model. It is evident, that in the case of the
latter model, the annual fuel consumption was the highest compared to the recent
previous and upcoming years of 2008.
Likewise, Figure 4.6 sketches out that the CO2 emissions caused by container
ships in 2008 using the top-down and bottom-up method are 143.5 and 211.8 million
tonnes respectively. Anew, the bottom-up model for 2008, as stated previously for
the annual fuel consumption, shows the highest value of CO2 emissions among the
examining years.
Furthermore, in Figure 4.4 from the previous data section, the average consump-
tion and the total CO2 emissions of container ships per size have been presented. It
has been deemed proper to focus on the three last categories of the container ships,
that is the ones that can transfer 8.000-11.999 TEUs, 12.000-14.500 TEUs and 14.500
TEUs and higher since they must produce the highest amounts of CO2 according to
their size. Nonetheless, this is not in line with the total CO2 emissions in the last
==PAGE:27==
4 Background and Current Situation
15
Figure 4.5. Container ships fuel consumption for 2007–2012, using top-down and bottom-up
methods
Figure 4.6. Container ships CO2 emissions 2007–2011, using top-down and bottom-up meth-
ods
==PAGE:28==
16
4 Background and Current Situation
column by virtue of the fact that the overall amount depends on the total quantity.
In particular, it can be noticed that there are no entries for the container ships of size
category 14.500 TEUs and higher and this is due to the fact that this type of ships did
not exist in 2008. In addition to this, container ships of size category 12.000-14.500
TEUs were only 8, hence in 2008 they were probably recently released, while the
smaller container ships that could transfer 1.000-1.999 TEUs were the most common
ones at that period.
On the other hand, for the current situation, the third IMO GHG Study has
presented Figure 4.7, which shows the CO2 emissions for several types of vessels. It
is evident, that the container ships are the ship types that have produced the highest
amount of CO2 amounting up to 205 million tonnes.
All in all, the aforementioned data show the immense need to find alternatives to
lower the GHG emissions for the maritime industry overall, and even more specifically
for the container ships that seem to be accountable for their negative environmental
footprint. For this reason, IMO has decided to present a list with candidate measures
that the maritime industry is challenged to implement in the oncoming years so as to
reach the target of having zero GHG emissions in 2050. These candidate measures
will be presented in the next chapter.
Figure 4.7. Shipping CO2 emissions from the 3rd IMO GHG Study (Smith et al. 2014)
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5
Candidate Measures
The next steps for the IMO to contribute to the reduction of the CO2 emissions were to
authorize a follow-up initiative in October 2018 (MEPC 73), which was expected to be
used as a preparation method for fulfilling the deadlines defined in the original IMO
Strategy. The operation sources described in the follow-up activities plan include,
among others, a list with the potential candidate measures connected to a specific
timeline. More specifically, the list is separated in the following sections:
• Short-term measures: they are expected to be finalized and agreed by the
Committee between 2018 and 2023. They pertain to the following list:
1. Further amelioration of the current system for energy efficiency framework,
with an emphasis on EEDI and SEEMP, taking into consideration the
outcomes of the analysis of EEDI regulations.
2. Establish technological and organizational energy efficiency strategies for
both new and current ships, by taking into consideration metrics in accor-
dance with the three-step methodology that can be used to demonstrate
and improve shipping energy performance.
3. Establishment of an Existing Fleet Improvement Programme.
4. Regard the use of speed optimization and speed reduction as an alternative
measure, which will not impede the service to the remote geographic areas.
5. Evaluate and examine steps to mitigate methane pollution, and further
develop policies to tackle Volatile Organic Compounds’ pollution.
6. Encourage the establishment and updating of national action plans to im-
plement foreign shipping policies and approaches to tackle GHG pollution
in accordance with the recommendations to be established by the Organisa-
tion, taking into account the need to prevent global or unilateral measures.
7. Continue and optimize technical cooperation and capacity-building prac-
tices within the ITCP system.
8. Consider and analyze measures to encourage port developments and global
activities to facilitate shipping GHG emissions reduction and further opti-
mize the logistics chain and its planning, including ports.
9. Initiate research and development initiatives on maritime propulsion, alter-
nate low-carbon and zero-carbon fuels, and emerging technology to further
==PAGE:30==
18
5 Candidate Measures
enhance ships’ energy performance, and appoint an International Maritime
Review Board to organize and monitor such RD efforts.
10. Incentives to build and leverage emerging technology for first movers.
11. Develop robust lifecycle GHG/carbon intensity guidelines for all forms of
fuels to allow for a successful deployment plan for alternative low-carbon
and zero-carbon fuels.
12. Working actively to promote the work of the Organization to the interna-
tional community, in particular, to stress that, since the 1990s, the Or-
ganization has established and implemented technological and operational
initiatives consistently planned to minimize air pollution from ships and
that steps may help the Sustainable Development Goals.
13. Carry out further GHG pollution tests and find more research to guide
policy choices, including modifying Marginal Abatement Cost Curves and
alternate low-carbon and zero-carbon fuels.
• Medium-term measures: they are expected to be finalized and agreed by
the Committee between 2023 and 2030. There are pinpointed below:
1. Implement a program for the effective uptake of alternative low-carbon and
zero-carbon fuels, including updates of national action plans to specifically
consider such fuels.
2. Take operational energy management steps for both new and current ships,
including three-stage process metrics that can be used to demonstrate and
boost ship energy performance.
3. Adopt new and innovative mechanisms for lowering pollution, likely in-
volving market-based measures (MBMs), to promote the reduction of the
GHG pollution.
4. Further continue and ameliorate technical cooperation and capacity-building
practices such as under the ITCP.
5. Create a feedback system for gathering and exchanging lessons learned on
the application of interventions through a potential exchange of ideas on
best practices.
• Long-term measures: they are expected to be finalized and agreed by the
Committee beyond 2030.
1. Pursue the development of zero-carbon or fossil-free fuels to allow the
shipping industry in the second half of the century to determine and expect
decarbonization.
2. Encourage and promote the general acceptance of more potential new and
innovative methods for lowering pollution.
==PAGE:31==
5 Candidate Measures
19
All the aforementioned suggestions are considerably auspicious and should be
really taken into account. Nevertheless, this thesis considers the field of long-term
measures that are focusing on the promotion and development of zero-carbon fuels
as the main subject of its study. A long list of alternative fuels can be derived and
examined, but hydrogen and ammonia have been considered the main focus since they
seem highly promising and the replacement of the currently utilized fuels by these
two alternative fuels is expected to contribute sublimely to the decarbonization.
However, there are economic and environmental challenges, that need to be ad-
dressed and analyzed further. The following parts will focus on the analysis of hydro-
gen and ammonia in these aspects.
==PAGE:32==
20
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 6
Engine Manufacturers’
presence
In order for the maritime industry to achieve the Initial Strategy’s target, various new
technologies and suggestions have been released. Similarly, several manufacturers are
promoting innovative methods and ideas on how best to attain the decarbonization
until 2050. Some of them are closely related to alternative fuels and the way the
replacement of the current fuels can more effortlessly be made.
Wärtsilä, a world pioneer in innovative engineering and complete maritime and
electricity life-cycle systems, is currently in the progress of developing the combustion
process to enable its gas engines to burn 100% hydrogen fuel. Wärtsilä has been
researching hydrogen as a fuel for 20 years, and testing its engines with mixtures of
up to 60% hydrogen and 40% natural gas. This creation is part of the company’s
plan to make its engine technologies future-proof in line with the global movement
of oil and maritime industry decarbonization. Many alternative green fuels are being
researched for possible uses in addition to hydrogen, and Wärtsilä engines are now
capable of consuming 100% synthetic carbon-neutral methane and methanol.
As Marco Wiren, the President of Wärtsilä Energy Business department, states,
we are globally on a journey to 100% decarbonization, and through work and produc-
tion in alternative energies such as hydrogen, Wärtsilä aims to help the process. The
hydrogen-fuelled power plant demand will arise along with legislation limiting the fos-
sil fuel burning. In its transition to 100% renewable electricity generation, Wärtsilä
is well positioned to serve the power industry since its turbines are able to operate on
a range of renewable fuels and hence, are offering a highly dynamic balancing power
for these future generating systems.
In addition to this, Wärtsilä is also experimenting on utilizing ammonia as a
marine fuel, which does not release any CO2 when it burns, and, therefore, shows
its potential for maritime applications. Wärtsilä’s combustion research department
is currently working on a special experiment, which involves ammonia.
It is commonly known that using ammonia as an alternative fuel is a promising
project, however, the applications, in which ammonia has been involved, are limited
owing to the major challenges of using it. This can be illustrated by the fact, that it
cannot ignite really well and its burning process is slow.
==PAGE:34==
22
6 Engine Manufacturers’ presence
Therefore, Wärtsilä scientists are at present working on feeding ammonia into
the standard engines with only some modifications.
For instance, as Kaj Portin,
the General Manager of Fuel & Operational Flexibility in Wärtsilä Marine claims,
ammonia can be mixed with LNG or diesel to get it to ignite. This being said, the
scientists will be testing the dual-fuel and spark-ignited gas engines, hoping to start
implementing on field tests with ship owners in 2022.
Another option, that Wärtsilä offers, is the fuel cells that convert the chemical
energy of a fuel and an oxidising agent into electricity. For hydrogen, it is a com-
mon idea, however, for ammonia the first implementation will be in the Norwegian
Eidesvik Offshore’s Viking Energy supply ship, which is the main focus of a signifi-
cant renewable energy project under the EU ShipFC initiative and a consortium of
companies including Wärtsilä.
Wärtsilä’s responsibility in the project is to develop and deliver the electronic and
control equipment, the necessary systems to store and distribute ammonia on board
and to integrate and design the new energy system. Once the Viking Energy ship gets
launched, it will be the world’s first zero-emissions supply vessel that uses renewable
ammonia as an alternative fuel.
Another striking example of a progressive technology, that seems highly promising
in terms of reducing the shipping’s environmental footprint until 2050, is the so-called
MAN B&W two-stroke engine from MAN Energy Solutions that can get operational
with multiple fuels. It is particularly suitable to digest any fuels with high efficiency
and good reliability. A representation of it is illustrated in Figure 6.1.
The system is now in use at MAN Diesel and Turbo. There have been established
various types of the MAN B&W 2-stroke engine, such as the ME/MC, the ME-GI,
ME-GA, ME-GIE, ME-LGIM, and ME-LGIP. These engines represent a combination
Figure 6.1. MAN B&W two-stroke multi fuel engine (Jacobsen 2020)
==PAGE:35==
6 Engine Manufacturers’ presence
23
of many years of work since the company in the 1990s installed its first prototype.
Lately, MAN Energy Solutions produced the ME-LGI dual-fuel engine for methanol,
heavy fuel oil (HFO), marine diesel (MDO), or marine gas oil (MGO) operations. The
engine is based on the tested ME-series of the business with its nearly 5,000 engines
in operation and works according to the Diesel concept, as methanol is a low-flash
point liquid fuel. The ME-LGI utilizes HFO, MDO, or MGO as a pilot fuel while
running on methanol greatly decreases CO2, NOx, and SOx pollution and prevents
methanol slips. A key feature of these engines technology is the great flexibility and
easy switching between gas and oil at any charge and without power loss.
Currently, the focus of MAN Energy Solutions has turned to the implementation
of energy-efficient technologies and the further development of fuel-flexible engines.
To date, the MAN B&W 2 stroke engine can support various fuels, such as diesel,
HFO, LNG, LEG (ethane), methanol, LPG, biofuels, whereas they are working on
implementing ammonia in the ME LGIP engine in the future. A historical timeline
of the evolution of the engines is depicted in Figure 6.2.
The ME LGIP engine, which is about to support NH3, is a dual-fuel engine that
consumes LPG and/or fuel oil. The diesel/HFO configuration with the same output
as the normal HFO engine is not affected. On the whole, burning ammonia in the
ME LGIP engine can to a high extent contribute to the 100% decarbonization in
the maritime industry, yet, there are still challenges that need to be reckoned. In
general, as already mentioned, ammonia is discussed as a potential marine fuel that
could ensure a 100% reduction of GHG emissions, however, that is only true if the
production is achieved through renewable energy. Furthermore, currently, there seems
to exist no commercial business case for ammonia as a marine fuel. Notwithstanding,
MAN will work the next years in proving that NH3 can be used as a marine fuel,
expecting to have the first engine results late 2021 and the first commercial results
between 2023 and 2024.
Figure 6.2. Historical timeline of the implementation of the MAN B&W two-stroke multi fuel
engines (Jacobsen 2020)
==PAGE:36==
24
6 Engine Manufacturers’ presence
Overall, it is conspicuous, that the IMO’s target to decarbonization until 2050 is to
a high degree considered of utmost importance by the manufacturers, that are already
working on concepts and projects to deliver innovative technologies that can live up
to these expectations. Indubitably, the manufacturer’s presence in decarbonizing is
vivid, offering most promising methods.
==PAGE:37==
Part III
Hydrogen
==PAGE:38==
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 7
Characteristics
To further examine the alternative case of utilizing hydrogen instead of the current
oil fuels, that the maritime industry is currently making use of, it is wise to study
hydrogen as a chemical substance and understand its behavior in the environment.
To begin with, the word of hydrogen itself derives from ancient Greek roots and
means ”water maker” and it has been identified as a base material by Henry Cavendish
(1731-1810). Its atom comprises a positively charged nucleus and one electron. The
molecule of hydrogen consists of two atoms of hydrogen, which is the most fundamen-
tal of all molecules. Hydrogen is a colorless, odorless, and non-poisonous substance
that is lighter than air and helium and burns in a nearly translucent, light blue blaze.
State-wise it remains in liquid form at concentrations below -253 °C.
In addition to this, it is considered as the universe’s most abundant base element,
which is the primary component present in the sun and the stars. In practice, on Earth
hydrogen is found in a compound shape with all the other elements. One of its basic
characteristics is that it responds very quickly to produce water with oxygen, which
leads to the fact that the water molecule is made of two atoms of hydrogen and one
atom of oxygen. Hydrogen is also a major component of all organic matter, including
food, vegetable, and fossil matter.
Furthermore, it can be contained naturally in
volcanic gasses in the atmosphere but its lightness helps it to survive and escape
through the tidal powers of the planet (Bjørnar Kruse 2002).
Hydrogen is a valuable energy carrier. It can be stored and shipped in e.g. fuel
cells, so it can be used as a battery or transformed into electrical energy. Hydrogen
can be environmentally sustainable depending on the energy source from which it is
obtained since it can be produced by water and then return to water after oxidation.
There are several explanations why hydrogen provides a rational and acceptable alter-
native as a chemical fuel to substitute the fossil fuels of today. The key explanation
is that hydrogen is an energy carrier supplementary to electricity (Scott 2007).
Both energy carriers, namely electricity, and hydrogen, are of high importance, on
the grounds of the fact that both of them can fulfill a number of demands for energy
supply, some of which the other can not accommodate. The benefits and inconve-
niences of hydrogen as a chemical fuel arise from its properties and characteristics. Its
most substantial key advantages, as many scholars have stated, are described below
(Rosen & Koohi-Fayegh 2016):
• Producible, since hydrogen may derive from hydrocarbon and, first and fore-
most, of non-hydrocarbon sources. The only other feed needed is water, which
==PAGE:40==
28
7 Characteristics
is a universally available commodity.
• Utilizable, provided that it can be used as a chemical fuel and as a chemical
feed-stock in many manufacturing methods, such as distilling metal ores and
upgrading heavy oils and tars, as well as in transport.
• Storable, because, unlike electricity, hydrogen may be contained in various
structures and in vast amounts. Choosing which type of hydrogen is better
handled for a particular application depends on a variety of considerations,
such as what the hydrogen is used for.
• Transportable, due to the fact that it can be transmitted in several ways,
such as road, rail, and ship. It is also carriable over long distances utilizing
modern pipeline technologies with losses less than those that were connected
to the electricity transport using high-voltage electrical lines. This means that
it is feasible to use the electricity from non-hydrocarbon energy sources found
at large distances from electricity users, in order to generate hydrogen and
therefore to move it quickly.
• Environmentally benign since the usage of hydrogen requires oxidation, and
water is the only immediate main component for oxidizing hydrogen. As hy-
drogen is combusted in air, a limited amount of nitrogen oxides are emitted
but these can be managed with cautious engine design (Wallace & Ward 1983).
The environmental effects in a hydrogen system’s life cycle of other processes are
identical to those of other energy systems and can be minor or high, depending
primarily on the source of hydrogen.
• Recyclable, given that as an energy carrier, hydrogen is recyclable so that
hydrogen oxidizes to carbon, and can be removed to create hydrogen.
• Synergistic, because hydrogen energy systems usually assimilate a number of
synergisms, meaning that certain demands of the system can also be addressed
by utilizing hydrogen as an energy carrier. This can be illustrated by the striking
example that hydrogen production utilizing electricity produced from nuclear
reactors CANDU (Canadian Deuterium Uranium) can create by-product heavy
water using the combined catalytic exchange electrolysis (CECE) cycle (Vasyan-
ina et al. 2008). In addition, the heavy water can be supplied to the reactor,
where it is needed as a moderator and refrigerant.
On the other side of the coin, hydrogen has also some unfavorable characteristics,
which are listed followingly.
• Storage of hydrogen has energy storage densities that are smaller than those
for storage of fuel on both mass and volume bases. Mass-wise, the maximum
amount of hydrogen energy storage is accomplished through a tank of liquid
hydrogen, whose energy storage capacity is about 80 % that of a fuel supply.
==PAGE:41==
7 Characteristics
29
The maximum amount of hydrogen energy storage is obtained on a volume basis
utilizing a form of metal hybrid storage, whose energy density is approximately
35% that of a gasoline tank.
No hydrogen storage solution typically has a
large energy storage capacity on both mass and volume. This is particularly a
problem with hydrogen as a fuel in automotive applications.
• Because of its low density and limited molecular size it can leak from contain-
ment vessels.
• Hydrogen may trigger some problems with the materials, as for instance, in the
presence of hydrogen some alloys seem to get fragile.
• It may be also costly to manufacture for use as an energy carrier, particularly
when contrasted with the current cost of fossil fuels.
==PAGE:42==
30
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 8
Production Methods
As far as the production of hydrogen is concerned, there are a wide number of ways
for producing it, some of which are supported by electricity that originates from re-
newable resources. It is also worth mentioning, that while it is considered plentiful as
an ingredient on Earth, hydrogen is contained almost exclusively as part of another
substance, such as water (H2O), and must be isolated from the substances that pro-
duce it until it can be used separately. The various ways it can be produced contain
electricity from diverse domestic resources, including fossil fuels, biomass, and water
electrolysis, however, its environmental effect and its energy efficiency depend on its
production way. More specifically, the different hydrogen production ways are listed
below.
1. Steam Methane Reforming (SMR) with natural gas: It is a method for
the production of synthetic gas (syngas) (hydrogen and carbon monoxide) by
hydrocarbon reaction with water, having commonly as feed-stock natural gas.
Steam reforming of natural gas is the simplest, most effective and the most
common way of producing hydrogen nowadays, adding up to the 95% of the
world’s hydrogen production. It is formed by reacting natural gas (NG) with
high-temperature steam (H2O(g)). This reaction emits a mixture of hydrogen
(H), carbon monoxide (CO) and a limited amount of carbon dioxide (CO2)
2. Steam Methane Reforming (SMR) with CO2 Capture and Sequestra-
tion (CCS): The term CO2 Capture and Sequestration, or CO2 Capture and
Storage (CCS), relates to collecting CO2 from large-scale electricity and manu-
facturing operations, transporting it and processing it under the soil prior to its
release in the aforementioned SMR process of producing hydrogen (Bennaceur
2014).
3. Coal Gasification (CG): It is a proven technique that has been used for
almost two decades for the manufacture of syngas and hydrogen making it
the oldest method to obtain hydrogen.
The gas produced in old gas plants
contains 60% hydrogen and large amounts of CO. This process generates 18%
of hydrogen production. Because of the high temperature requirement and the
pollution creation this method is less preferred. There are also several more
complicated methods of coal gasification, but the basic method is to extract
H2, CO, and CO2 by reacting at high temperatures from coal with steam and
oxygen.
==PAGE:44==
32
8 Production Methods
4. Coal Gasification (CG) with CCS: It is the aforementioned method, but
with the CCS deployed in order to capture the CO2.
5. Autothermal reforming (ATR): Autothermal reforming is the mixed par-
tial oxidation cycle and the mechanisms of steam reformation. This concept
describes the sharing of heat between the reforming of endothermal steam and
the partial exothermic oxidation reactions. The hydrocarbons are reacted with
the catalyst and the oxygen with steam in a ”thermo reactor.”
6. Biomass Pyrolysis: It is a process that generates a liquid similar to the
petroleum called bio-oil.
The difference from petroleum, though, is that it
contains very reactive oxygenated compounds due to carbohydrates and lignin
present in the biomass. In fact, these compounds are decomposed by heating
in the absence of oxygen and may be transformed into different products.
7. Biomass gasification: The partial oxidation of particles from biomass pro-
duces gas and charcoal. In the process, the charcoal is transformed to H2, CO,
CO2, and CH4. The difference between the gasification and the pyrolysis is, in
this case, that a solid biomass gasification is carried out in the presence of O2,
while also the gasification aims to produce gas products, whereas the pyrolysis
aims to produce the bio-oil and coal. One of the most essential problems of
biomass gasification is that during the process, tar is being formed.
8. Direct Biophotolysis: It is a biological process that involves the use of mi-
croalgae so as to produce hydrogen under anaerobic conditions from the sunlight
and from water.
9. Indirect Biophotolysis: Here, the O2 vulnerability of the process generating
H2 is reduced in indirect biophotolysis by isolating O2 and H2 by one another.
The CO2 is cut, emitted, and serves as an electron carrier between O2-generating
(water-splitting) reactions and O2-sensitive reactions in this process.
Algae
allow the CO2 fixation in the stocks of carbohydrates, and this is accompanied
by their conversion to H2 in their dark fermentation.
10. Dark Fermentation: It is a process under anoxic and anaerobic environ-
ments. The preferred carbon source for this process are carbohydrates, and
especially glucose, which increases H2 conversion along with acetic and butyric
acids. While it has the fast conversion speeds, the production efficiency of H2
via the fermentation cycle is lower than that of other chemical or electrochemical
processes.
11. Photofermentation: Photofermentation process is an extremely promising
method because of the gentle reaction conditions, the great hydrogen produc-
tion, the use of solar energy, and the conversion of organic waste to hydrogen.
However, the drawbacks of this method are the low light conversion efficiencies,
namely the ratio of H2 energy generated to the supplied light energy, and the
high energy demand from nitrogenase. (Zhang & Zhang 2018)
==PAGE:45==
8 Production Methods
33
12. Electrolysis: An electric current splits water into oxygen and hydrogen. If
the energy is derived by sustainable sources, such as solar photovoltaic (PV),
solar thermal or wind, the resultant hydrogen can, therefore, be deemed green
and has several savings in pollution. However, it is not widely implemented
since only 4% of the population worldwide utilize this method. Another way of
producing H2 via electrolysis is using nuclear energy as a source (Kayfeci et al.
2019).
13. Thermolysis: Thermal cracking method of creating hydrogen is called as ther-
molysis or thermal decomposition of water, as a consequence of the thermal
cracking of the water at high temperature. When hydrogen is obtained by this
method, water and one or more reactants are subject to chemical change at
high temperatures in the thermochemical decomposition of water. As a conse-
quence of the transition, both hydrogen and oxygen gases are produced along
with other chemical compounds. As in the electrolysis, the decomposition of
the water can be both nuclear and solar thermal.
Overall, it comes without saying that hydrogen incorporates some very interesting
characteristics, and on the other part some particularly complex ones, that should
draw equally our attention. Still and all, a further investigation could be deemed
intriguing and might offer some new insight on the realization and launch of hydrogen
in the maritime industry as an alternative fuel.
==PAGE:46==
34
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 9
Technical Challenges
Running a vessel on pure hydrogen means that it must be able to safely, compactly,
and cost-effectively store hydrogen onboard.
This is a major technical challenge.
More specifically, for transport, the main technical problem for storage hydrogen
is how to store the amount of hydrogen needed for a conventional driving range
under vehicle weight, distance, capacity, protection and cost constraints. Durability
of such systems over their service lifespan must also be checked and confirmed, and
appropriate refueling times must be obtained. Off-board bulk storage requirements
are generally less restrictive than onboard requirements.
For instance, no or less
restrictive weight requirements may exist, but requirements for volume or ”footprint”
may exist. Some of the important obstacles include (DOE 2011):
• Weight and Volume: Currently, the weight and volume of hydrogen storage
systems are too high, resulting in insufficient vehicle range compared to con-
ventional petroleum fuelled vehicles. Materials and components are needed to
enable compact and lightweight hydrogen storage systems. This limitation is
felt most strongly in the area of onboard storage, but it is also burdensome in
the delivery and distribution of hydrogen.
• Efficiency: Energy conservation remains a problem for all solutions to hydro-
gen storage. The energy required to bring in and out hydrogen is a problem
for reversible solid-state materials. Energy performance in the life-cycle is a
problem for chemical hydride transport, in which the byproduct is regenerated
off-board. Furthermore, compression and liquefaction-related resources for com-
pressed and liquid hydrogen systems must be addressed.
• Durability: The hydrogen storage facilities are deficient in reliability. Materi-
als and components are required to permit 1500 cycle lifetime hydrogen storage
systems.
• Refueling Time: The time spent refueling is too long.
Hydrogen storage
systems need to be developed, with refueling times of less than three minutes
over the lifespan of the network.
• Cost: The cost of onboard hydrogen storage systems is too high, particularly
compared to traditional petroleum-fuel storage systems.
Low-cost materials
==PAGE:48==
36
9 Technical Challenges
and components are required for hydrogen storage systems, and low-cost, high-
volume processing methods are needed.
• Codes and Standards: There has been no development of appropriate codes
and specifications for hydrogen storage systems and design interfaces that will
promote implementation, marketing, and ensure protection and public accep-
tance. It requires standardized hardware and operating procedures, and appli-
cable codes and standards.
• Safety: It is highly flammable, with an ignition energy that is 20 times lower
than that of natural gas or gasoline. It can be ignited by cell phones or by
electrical storms located miles away.
Regarding storage, research efforts have concentrated primarily on identifying
materials that have the highest possible ability for hydrogen storage. Meeting this
goal on its own is a considerable obstacle, accentuated by the reality that in device
installation, up to half of the storage space by weight is always wasted. The quest for
ultra-high-capacity materials has culminated in the development and characterisation
of increasingly exotic and reactive compounds, many of which exhibit large potential
storage capacities, but are short on a range of other targets. Methane, natural gas and
methanol, among the major rivals to hydrogen as an energy carrier, provide strong
advantages in terms of energy efficiency and transport networks, but suffer from their
inherent carbon content increasing CO2 pollution.
As an alternative solution, ammonia serves for the transport industry as the only
carbon-free chemical energy carrier alternative.
Since it is not a greenhouse gas
(GHG), combined with a high density of hydrogen, NH3 could be an interesting alter-
native to carry hydrogen. Moreover, there is already a highly established system for
ammonia, with a consolidated, coal-based processing of ammonia and simultaneous
sequestration of the CO2 generated (Klerke et al. 2008).
Overall, there is no doubt that applying H2 as a fuel in the maritime industry
should draw attention since various technical challenges of the fuel come into realiza-
tion, primarily regarding the storage. Nonetheless, several actions have been taken
to prevent them and to find solutions to mitigate them.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 10
Economic Analysis
Bearing in mind all the aforementioned characteristics of hydrogen, it might be to
a high degree useful to additionally consider other facets of this fuel. An economic
analysis is the first step that in this thesis will be attempted in order to thoroughly
examine this alternative fuel’s engaging aspects.
In the first place, it is worth mentioning, that one of hydrogen’s greatest benefits
is that it doesn’t emit any CO2 when combusted. The emissions from the combustion
of the fuel are the so-called ”Tank to Wake” (TTW) or similarly called ”Tank To Pro-
peller” (TTP) emissions, while the emissions from the production to the tank of the
ship are called ”Well To Tank” (WTT). For this indubitable advantage of hydrogen,
it is hailed highly favorable and prevails over other alternative fuels, presenting a
very promising opportunity to really annihilate the CO2 emissions in the maritime
industry. However, the fuel cannot be completely considered as green, if it brings
about WTT emissions when produced unless it is generated in an absolute green way,
as, for instance, by electrolysis that makes use of energy by sustainable sources.
Nonetheless, nowadays there is a number of alternative ways and solutions that
have been presented to achieve the target of IMO by utilizing hydrogen.
One of
the things that stands as a burden between the proposal of the idea and the im-
plementation of hydrogen as an alternative fuel is the economic part since most of
the progressive production methods are either pretty new or still under development.
Hence, this could raise the cost of the production in an extreme way and for this
reason, it is regarded as a major obstruction.
As shown previously in the chapter of Background and Current Situation, the
container ships are the type of ship that accounts for the highest amount of CO2
emissions, based on the Third IMO GHG Study, and still keeps this place for the
time being. As a deduction, it has been regarded the most relevant type of ship to
be examined further in this thesis.
It is worth mentioning in that point, that hydrogen has been differentiated in
colors, depending on its production method and the respective emissions that it brings
about. Grey hydrogen is generated using fossil fuels such as natural gas and accounts
for nearly 95% of the world’s hydrogen created today, whereas blue hydrogen follows
the low carbon requirement which is generated using non-renewable energy sources
such as nuclear.
However, the most desirable of all three is the green hydrogen,
which not only reaches the low carbon requirement but is produced by renewable
energy sources such as solar or wind. An illustration of this division is depicted in
==PAGE:50==
38
10 Economic Analysis
Figure 10.1.
Figure 10.1. Division of H2 in colors (http://www.certifhy.ca/Green & H2.html 2020)
Furthermore, there is a wide number of production methods for hydrogen. Cur-
rently, the steam methane reformer (SMR) is the leading technology for H2 production
from natural gas. In Table 10.1, the list of the various processes of hydrogen produc-
tion, as they were introduced and described in the previous chapter of the production
methods, along with the respective cost is presented. The table was initially released
in the chapter ”Hydrogen Production” by Kayfeci et al. of the book ”Solar Hydrogen
Production” in 2019 as a range of costs, however, in this thesis, the average cost
of hydrogen has been calculated and demonstrated further below. It can be clearly
deduced that, depending on the production method, the price can fluctuate in a wide
range.
According to the table, steam methane reforming, coal, and biomass gasification
are the most financially favorable methods for hydrogen development. The nuclear
thermochemical processes often tend to be economic and competitive to the costs
of fossil fuel and biomass. Wind and solar electrolysis, on the other hand, offer the
highest cost of output per kilogram of hydrogen. It is also worth mentioning anew
that the CO2 emissions can be strongly reduced by CO2 capture and sequestration
(CCS), that refers to a set of technologies that can be used to remove carbon dioxide
(CO2) from vessel exhaust gas or the atmosphere and store it for subsequent use and
could be used onboard in ships to further reduce their carbon emissions. Therefore,
it goes without saying that it is more costly when incorporated.
Nonetheless, the hydrogen fuel price including also the hydrogen production cost
and the overall prices range from $12.85 to more than $16 per kilogram (kg). The
reason why the average hydrogen fuel price is higher than the individual cost of hy-
drogen production is that the former includes the latter and, therefore, it is increased.
Thus, it is wise to investigate the two extreme scenarios, namely the best case that
==PAGE:51==
10 Economic Analysis
39
Table 10.1. Comparison of different hydrogen production methods (Kayfeci et al. 2019)
Process
Average
Cost
of
Hydrogen
($/kg)
SMR without CCS
2.08
CG without CCS
1.34
SMR with CCS
2.27
CC with CCS
1.63
ATR of methane with CCS
1.48
Nuclear electrolysis
5.58
Nuclear thermolysis
2.40
Biomass pyrolysis
1.73
Biomass gasification
1.91
Direct bio-photolysis
2.13
Indirect bio-photolysis
1.42
Dark fermentation
2.57
Photofermentation
2.83
Solar PV electrolysis
14.53
Solar thermal electrolysis
7.80
Wind electrolysis
5.96
Solar thermolysis
8.19
Photo-electrolysis
10.36
hydrogen fuel is priced at $12.85 per kilogram and the worst-case that it amounts up
to $16 per kilogram.
The fuels, to which the hydrogen should be compared, in order to obtain a good
impression of what the economic transition from the current situation would be in
case of utilizing hydrogen as an alternative fuel, are the most common fuels of the
maritime industry to date, the HFO (Heavy Fuel Oil) and the MGO (Marine Gas
Oil).
The HFO is a type of tar-like quality fuel oils and is labeled as a ”worst-case
product”. It is also referred to as bunker fuel or residual fuel oil, which comes from
the crude oil distillation and cracking cycle as a component or residue. On the other
hand, MGO refers to the marine fuels that consist exclusively of distillates. Marine
Gas Oil (MGO) defines maritime combustibles composed exclusively of distillates.
Distillates are all those components of crude oil that evaporate during fractional
distillation and are then condensed into liquid fractions from the gas phase. The
MGO is typically a mixture of various distillates and resembles diesel fuel, but has
greater densities. Unlike HFO, there is no need to heat the MGO during preparation.
Prior to the economic analysis, though, the hydrogen equivalent to the current
fuels should be defined. In Table 10.2 it is presented the low heating value (LHV) of
==PAGE:52==
40
10 Economic Analysis
HFO and MGO, which defines the amount of heat released during the combustion of
a specified amount of it. The data have been drawn from the Engineering Toolbox
(ToolBox 2003).
Table 10.2. Low Heating Value of HFO and MGO (ToolBox 2003)
Fuel
LHV
(MJ/kg)
HFO
39
MGO
42.8
Based on the aforementioned values of HFO and MGO, and given that the LHV of
hydrogen is 120 MJ/kg, the equivalent of hydrogen to both fuels has been accordingly
estimated, as shown further below in Table 10.3. The rationale behind these calcula-
tions is that, since 1 kilogram of hydrogen produces 120 MJ of energy, 1 kilogram of
HFO has an output of 39 MJ of energy and 1 kilogram of MGO generates 42.8 MJ
of energy, then in order to receive the same thermal output as the one derived by 1
kilogram of hydrogen, it is needed the respective amount of the other fuels, as demon-
strated below in Table 10.3. This implies that less amount of hydrogen is needed to
bring about the same thermal output as derived by HFO and MGO. This is also clear
in the 4th column of Table 10.5, Table 10.6, and Table 10.7, in which the attempt of
calculating the cost change of hydrogen compared to HFO and MGO is being made.
Practically, the fuel consumption in tons per day, that was calculated for HFO, MGO
and MGO based on the historical data of the port of Rotterdam, has been divided
by the hydrogen equivalents in Table 10.3. For instance, the vessel with 3000 TEUs
size that travels with 22 knots and uses HFO as a fuel consumes 100 tons of HFO per
day. Then, in case of using H2 as a fuel and in order for the vessel to have the same
thermal output and be able to operate for the same trip, the respective hydrogen
consumption would be 32 tons per day. This is mainly due to the fact that hydrogen
has a very high LHV and a small amount of hydrogen can have a high amount of
thermal output.
Table 10.3. Hydrogen equivalent to HFO and MGO in terms of thermal output
Hydrogen equivalents
1ton of Hydrogen
Is equivalent to
3.08 tons of HFO
2.81 tons of MGO
In reliance on the hydrogen equivalents, it was convenient to make an analysis of
the cost difference as a percentage if the maritime industry substitutes the currently
used fuels with hydrogen. As previously mentioned, this is calculated for the best and
the worst scenario of the hydrogen fuel price and a percentage of the cost difference
==PAGE:53==
10 Economic Analysis
41
for the most common container ship sizes and the most common speed has been
inferred. The data for the diverse fuel consumption per speed and ship size have been
acquired by the paper ”The effect of high fuel costs on liner service configuration in
container shipping” by T. Notteboom and B. Vernimmen (Notteboom & Vernimmen
2009). The referring figure is depicted below in Figure 10.2. It is assumed that in
that graph, HFO has been taken into consideration as a fuel. Therefore, it is also
wise to compute the HFO to MGO equivalent based on their LHV. It derives that 1
ton of HFO is equivalent to 0.92 tons of MGO. This will mainly affect the 2nd column
of Table 10.6 and Table 10.7 that demonstrates the daily fuel consumption of the
vessels, which, in the case of utilizing MGO as a fuel, will be slightly lower versus the
case utilizing HFO due to the higher LHV of MGO.
Table 10.4. HFO to MGO equivalent
HFO equivalent to MGO in terms of thermal output
1ton of HFO
is equivalent to
1.09 tons of MGO
Figure 10.2. Daily fuel consumption for four types of container ships at different service speeds
(Notteboom & Vernimmen 2009)
As delineated in Figure 10.2, there are data for the daily fuel consumption of the
ships that can carry 3000, 5000, 8000, and 10000 TEUs. It is apparent that the bigger
the ship is, the more fuel it consumes. Accordingly, the higher the speed, the more
==PAGE:54==
42
10 Economic Analysis
fuel consumption emerges. For the purposes of the report, only some key service
speed values, that stand out, have been considered. These are the 14 knots, that
is regarded extremely slow steaming, the 16 knots, as slow steaming, the 18 knots,
which is nowadays a common speed for the vessels, the 20 knots, that is reckoned
normal to high speed and at last, the 22 knots, as a high speed.
As far as the fuel cost is concerned, the data have been initially derived by the
World Bunker Prices (World Bunker Prices 2020) that are being updated on a daily
basis. For this reason, the prices can fluctuate tremendously, and especially due to
the coronavirus COVID19 situation the prices have dropped dramatically. Hence, for
both HFO and MGO an average price from March 2020 has been deemed, a period
when the prices were only to a certain degree affected by the coronavirus COVID19
and more or less are similar to the pro-COVID19 period costs. More specifically, for
HFO 342 $/metric ton has been hailed the average price, while for MGO 435 $/metric
ton. Bearing in mind these two prices and having as given the fuel consumption per
day, the daily fuel cost can be evidently inferred, as indicated in the third column of
Table 10.5 and Table 10.6. It is worth mentioning, that the average price for both
fuels is based on the average of 20 major global bunkering ports globally, which to-
gether are responsible for a vast majority of global volumes. These are the following:
Busan, Colombo, Durban, Fujairah, Gibraltar, Hong Kong, Houston, Istanbul, LA/-
Long Beach, Las Palmas, Mumbai, New York, Panama, Piraeus, Rotterdam, Santos,
Shanghai, Singapore, St. Petersburg, Tokyo.
In the light of these calculations, and given the hydrogen equivalents, as outlined in
Table 10.5. Cost change of hydrogen compared to HFO based on World Bunker Prices (2020)
==PAGE:55==
10 Economic Analysis
43
Table 10.3, then the equivalent hydrogen consumption as tons per day and kilograms
per day (columns 4 and 5 in Table 10.5, Table 10.6 and Table 10.7) can be computed.
Consequently, the best-case scenario and the worst scenario of the daily hydrogen cost
(12.85$ and 16$ respectively) can be calculated (columns 6 and 7 accordingly). By
comparing the daily cost of the fuels (HFO and MGO respectively) and of hydrogen,
the cost difference between them can be brought about in both scenarios.
The results are presented in Table 10.5 for the case that hydrogen is compared to
the currently used HFO and in Table 10.6 for the alternative case that hydrogen is
compared to the currently used MGO. As can be clearly seen, compared to HFO, the
cost of H2 will in total increase by 92-93%, while compared to MGO, the cost will
rise by 90-92%, which is roughly the same.
Alternatively, historical data from the port of Rotterdam have been drawn for the
period from January 2019 until May 2020. For the most commonly used types of
HFO, namely IFO, the average price is 342 $/metric ton, as considered also based on
the World Bunker Prices. This means, that for HFO Table 10.5 is still relevant and
the cost change of hydrogen compared to HFO is 92-93% higher.
However, for MGO, the average price for the same period, namely from January
2019 until May 2020, is progressively greater. It has been reported that a pretty
accurate average price of MGO amounts up to 525 $/metric ton.
The respective
results for this case have been sketched out in Table 10.7. It should be noted, that for
this view, the change of hydrogen compared to MGO yields up to 89-91% higher. It
must be pointed out here that in case of an unprecedented and uncommon incident,
like for instance nowadays the coronavirus COVID19 event, the hydrogen cost might
Table 10.6. Cost change of hydrogen compared to MGO based on World Bunker Prices (2020)
==PAGE:56==
44
10 Economic Analysis
not be affected to the same degree as the HFO and MGO, which are widely used in the
maritime industry and the change of cost between the hydrogen and the alternative
fuels will change. Nevertheless, this kind of situation cannot be easily predicted.
Taking all the aforementioned information into consideration, it can be evidently
deduced that switching to hydrogen from either HFO or MGO will be costly for all
ship sizes at all the diverse speed levels. The percentage of the cost change, howbeit,
can vastly vary in the future based on the market prices. As seen below in Figure 10.3,
a forecast of the hydrogen’s cost change made for the UK by Abad et al. (Abad et al.
2017) shows the prediction for the variations of hydrogen levelized cost by the most
common production methods for a horizon of 30 years, namely until 2050, the year,
until when the CO2 emissions are targeted to have dropped by the IMO. Essentially,
the levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH) method is used to measure the unit cost of
producing hydrogen over its economic lifespan. This is defined as the hydrogen price
which allows the present value from all hydrogen sales (including additional revenue
from electricity sales) over the plant’s economic lifetime to be equal to the present
value of all construction, maintenance and operation costs of the plant over its lifetime.
The calculation method is based upon an analysis of discounted cash flow. That is
close to how the LCOE is measured in other studies, only that the profits from the
sale of electricity as a co-product have to be taken into account (Collodi et al. 2017).
The levelized cost of energy (LCOE) method is widely used in the renewable energy
sector where the life cycle costing (LCC) of renewables is presented in terms of cost
per energy output unit.
Table 10.7. Cost change of hydrogen compared to MGO based on historical data of the
Rotterdam port
==PAGE:57==
10 Economic Analysis
45
In the first case, presented in Figure 10.3, however, no CO2 tax is taken into
account and it is interesting to note that SMR and coal gasification present the lowest
prices. CCS versions of each technology are, as may be predicted, more costly than
the unabated plants. Quite small cost cuts are expected by innovation, which are
typically offset by higher feed-stock costs. Figure 10.4, on the other hand, indicates
the effect of levying a carbon tax on hydrogen production, rising from £50t/CO2 in
2020 to £250/tCO2 in 2050. Unabated plants are slightly more costly than plants
with CCS, as tax rises. Biomass CCS moves from the most costly to the cheapest
alternative as carbon tax rises since this adjustment is supposed to be charged by
extracting fuel from the environment with negative greenhouse pollution successfully
because ambient CO2 is sequestered underground. Last but not least, the electrolysis
method, which is the most desired one, since it is the most ”green” production process,
is gauged to remain at the same levels more or less and moderately change in 2030
in both cases.
All in all, it is indubitable, that hydrogen fuel is more expensive and will induce
cost growth, compared to the currently utilizing fuels, HFO and MGO, yet it provides
some benefits, that make hydrogen be superior to them. These advantages are mostly
linked to the environmental aspect, that will be presented in the next chapter.
Figure 10.3. Levelised cost of hydrogen production forecasts for the UK, without a CO2 tax
(£/kg) (Abad et al. 2017)
==PAGE:58==
46
10 Economic Analysis
Figure 10.4. Levelised cost of hydrogen forecasts for the UK, with a CO2 tax increasing from
£50/tCO2 in 2020 to £250/tCO2 in 2050. No tax is levied on electricity in this diagram
(Abad et al. 2017).
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 11
Environmental Analysis
After having investigated the economic facet of H2, an environmental analysis was of
high interest to be conducted. As mentioned previously in the chapter in regards to
the economic analysis, H2 is vastly known for emitting nearly zero emissions during its
combustion. These are the so-called tank-to-wake (TTW) emissions and they refer to
all the downstream emissions generated during the journey of the vessel. Nonetheless,
the emissions that are being generated during the production of H2 should also be
considerably reckoned when indicating its emissions. These are the known as well-to-
tank (WTT) and they contain all the upstream emissions from processing the fuels
and the transportation needed to get them into the fuel tanks of the ships. For a
conventional fuel, this includes oil production, processing and transport to the refinery,
the oil refining at the refinery, transport to the ship, and the bunkering operation.
There is regarded also a third group, that incorporates both WTT and TTW resulting
in the so-called well to wake (WTW) emissions, defining the total life cycle emissions
during the whole journey of the fuel from its production to its combustion. Practically,
it is the sum of WTT and TTW. Hence, it is wise to examine various methods of H2
production and make an overall comparison as far as their environmental impact is
concerned.
Based on the already mentioned color discernment of H2 in the production meth-
ods chapter, this research presents in Table 11.1 the carbon emissions in tons of CO2
per ton of H2 and indicates in colors the degree of the CO2 emissions. With reference
to the list of the various potential production methods of hydrogen illustrated in Ta-
ble 10.1, only a limited sub-list is presented in Table 11.1, due to the fact that these
methods are the most common ones and data for them are available. It can be explic-
itly observed, that SMR with natural gas and SMR on-site, as grey H2 technologies,
are liable for the largest amount of CO2 emissions, while SMR with biogas and CCS
outline a substantially decreased amount of CO2 emissions, as blue H2 production
methods. It is also noteworthy, that the green method, namely the electrolysis from
renewable energy, generate zero carbon emissions. This data table reveals that the
selection of the production method of hydrogen in terms of the CO2 capture is of
paramount importance and must not be neglected.
On the other hand, the respective data table for the currently most utilized fuels
by the maritime industry, HFO and MGO, towards which the comparison with H2 is
made, is sketched out in Table 11.2. It is crystal clear, that the carbon emissions of
HFO and MGO lie marginally at higher levels than those produced by blue hydrogen
==PAGE:60==
48
11 Environmental Analysis
Table 11.1. Carbon emissions of different hydrogen technologies (Cantuarias-Villessuzanne
et al. 2016)
H2 technology and transport
Carbon
emissions
(tons
CO2
per
ton
H2)
SMR + natural gas
9.23
SMR on-site
9.42
SMR + biogas
2.93
SMR + CCS
2.54
Electrolysis from renewable energy
0.00
from Table 11.1, but no juxtaposition between them and the green hydrogen could
be made since the latter ones are basically nonexistent.
Table 11.2. Carbon emissions for HFO and MGO (Smith et al. 2014)
Fuel
type
Carbon emissions
(tons CO2 per ton
of fuel
HFO
3.114
MGO
3.206
As a next step in the analysis, it is prudent to make use of the data with reference
to the daily fuel consumption per ship size and speed, as delineated in the economic
analysis section in Tables 10.5, 10.6, and 10.7. Combining those data with the CO2
emissions factors for the various fuels, as expressed in Table 11.1 and Table 11.2, the
calculations of Table 11.3 can be triggered, which show the daily CO2 emissions that
are generated by each fuel, categorized in ship sizes and speeds. As also aforemen-
tioned, in order for the ship to have the same thermal output, they consume different
amounts of fuels in the case of the current fuels and the case to hydrogen. Hence,
the second column presents the fuel consumption in case of utilizing HFO, while the
third column demonstrates the essential fuel consumption when using hydrogen. Fur-
thermore, in the case of hydrogen, as mentioned also previously, some of the most
remarkable production methods, in terms of the CO2 emissions output, have been
represented.
In order to comprehend the comparison visually, there is merit to examine only a
specific level of speed, on the grounds of the fact that the variations will be depicted
in a respective manner. For this reason, the extra slow steaming of 14 knots has
been selected to be illustrated as a graph for all ship sizes and all fuels, including the
diversified H2 production methods. This is sketched out in Figure 11.1.
==PAGE:61==
11 Environmental Analysis
49
Table 11.3. CO2 emissions for H2 per fuel and production method (tons/day)
As expected, it is lucid, that the highest amounts of CO2 emissions are being
produced by grey hydrogen with the SMR on-site and the SMR with natural gas
technologies, which are slightly lower than those of HFO and MGO. On the contrary,
the lowest amounts of CO2 emissions are being caused by green and blue hydrogen.
More specifically, the electrolysis from renewable energy does not produce any CO2
emissions, while the SMR with CCS and SMR with biogas methods lie in moderate
levels in opposition to the outliers. Nonetheless, HFO and MGO are still the fuels
that bring about the highest amounts of CO2 emissions, even if the hydrogen is
being produced in a ”grey” manner. Additionally, according to the bar figure, it is a
fact that the bigger ships in size, namely the ones that carry 8000 and 10000 TEUs,
generate more emissions compared to the smaller ones.
Another metric, that considers the contribution to climate change is the global
warming potential (GWP), which computes the amount of heat a greenhouse gas
traps in the atmosphere, compared to carbon dioxide, up to a given time period.
More specifically, it relates to the amount of heat trapped by a specified mass of
the gas to the amount of heat that is trapped by a similar mass of CO2 and it
is represented as a CO2 component, whose GWP is normalized to 1. Additionally,
GWP gives negative weights to exhaust gases and particles that have a cooling effect,
and positive weights to those that have a warming effect. It is also usually integrated
over 20 or over 100 years. The so-called GWP20 measures the effect over 20 years,
while the GWP100 the effect over 100 years. Besides, a high GWP correlates with a
==PAGE:62==
50
11 Environmental Analysis
Figure 11.1. CO2 emissions for H2 per fuel and production method (tons/day) for extra slow
steaming speed (14 knots)
large infrared absorption and a long atmospheric lifetime.
The variance for each of the fuels in Figure 11.2 shows the disparity between the
steam reforming and the electrolysis. Practically, it presents the WTW emissions in
grams of CO2eq per kWh (GWP100). At the top of the figure (after MGO and LNG)
the WTW levels for hydrogen and ammonia produced with green fully renewable
electricity used for the electrolysis process can be found, whereas at the bottom the
WTW levels for hydrogen and ammonia without a green process are presented.
The key finding from Figure 11.2 is that whether hydrogen is derived from natural
gas or by non-green steam reforming or electrolysis, well-to-tank emissions on their
own surpass traditional fuels’ overall WTW emissions reaching circa 30% (for the
liquid hydrogen) to 68% (for the hydrogen 350 bar) increase.
By contrast, when
electricity is green, the use of ammonia or hydrogen reduces WTW emissions by
around 92% compared to MGO.
As compared to the values presented in Figure 11.1, for the green H2, that is
derived by electrolysis from renewable energy, the fall of the CO2 emissions versus
the MGO ones are 100% since it has been regarded that electrolysis emits 0 ton
of CO2 per ton of H2. However, in connection with the grey hydrogen, the results
do not show a leap from MGO to grey production, but instead still a drop, which
comes in contradiction with the results from Figure 11.2. Particularly, in Figure 11.1
the emissions derived by grey hydrogen (SMR on site and SMR with natural gas)
measures up to 12-14% lower than the ones caused by MGO. This great difference
might be due to the diverse ways of grey production considered and diverse data
sources.
Anyhow, the statement, that based on the production method, the levels of CO2
==PAGE:63==
11 Environmental Analysis
51
Figure 11.2. WTW CO2eq emissions per kWh (GWP100) (Lindstad 2020)
emissions greatly vary, points out that shipping decarbonization by low-carbon fuels
allows land-based energy to become entirely sustainable and not, as it is today, heavily
dependent on fossil fuel (Lindstad 2020).
Ultimately, regarding the CO2 emissions that could be generated by hydrogen, it
will be its WTT emissions that will make up their total WTW emissions. As already
mentioned, hydrogen is generated either by natural gas steam reformation or by water
electrolysis. Both processes are energy-intensive, where around one-third of the input
energy is lost through the conversion process. This means that in order to get one
ton of hydrogen oil equivalent (TOE) we need about 1.5 TOE of natural gas input.
Furthermore, the output difference may be much greater since, firstly, some ad-
ditional energy is required to pressurize or liquefy the hydrogen to a volume that
enables it to be transported at sea and, secondly, the present fuel cells (PEMFC)
in conjunction with the electrical configuration have a lower thermal energy capacity
than the diesel engine and therefore higher fuel consumption. This is visually depicted
in Figure 11.3 and Figure 11.4, which show the two cases of producing hydrogen from
electricity and from natural gas respectively with various ways of transporting them
to the vessel. The first one is to be transformed to ammonia and then back to hydro-
gen, the so-called ”ammonia carrier”, the second one is to liquefy hydrogen and then
==PAGE:64==
52
11 Environmental Analysis
transforming it back to its initial state and is mentioned as ”liquid hydrogen” trans-
portation method, the third one is to transform hydrogen to liquid organic hydrogen
carrier (LOHC), while the fourth and last method is to compress hydrogen. In all
four cases, there are some energy losses and they have been quantified.
Figure 11.3. Sankey diagram of energy losses when making hydrogen from electricity (Lindstad
2020)
Figure 11.3 and Figure 11.4 have been summarised in Table 11.4 by showing the
overall percentages of the loss of energy. It is worth paying attention that in both
hydrogen production methods, namely electricity and natural gas, the transportation
method with the greatest percentage of energy loss is the ammonia carrier, whereas
the transportation method with the lowest energy loss is the compressed hydrogen.
The LOHC method has relatively low energy loss, while the liquid hydrogen approach
is slightly higher.
All in all, it is to highlight that applying H2 in the maritime industry and replacing
the bunker fuels can turn out to be highly beneficial for the environment. Provided
the results from Table 11.3, it can be inferred, that only grey hydrogen cannot al-
ways achieve an amelioration with regards to the CO2 emissions. In particular, grey
hydrogen reaches up to 2-4% increase compared to MGO, while compared to HFO
it presents a 2-4% reduction. For blue hydrogen the CO2 emissions can measure up
to 70-74% compared to HFO and 68%-72% compared to MGO, whereas for green
hydrogen, 100% of fall is feasible. Therefore, it is vital to promote the production
of green hydrogen since otherwise it would be irrational to support the aspect that
grey hydrogen is equally advantageous as green. It is, though, unarguable that turn-
ing from bunker fuels to hydrogen will be pricey reaching up to 90-94% cost change.
This being said, a trade-off between the economic and environmental benefits and
drawbacks will be prudent to be made in order to follow a direction.
==PAGE:65==
11 Environmental Analysis
53
Figure 11.4. Sankey diagram of energy losses when making hydrogen from natural gas (Lind-
stad 2020)
Table 11.4. Loss of energy in % for the diverse ways of hydrogen production and transportation
Ways
of
producing
Hydrogen
Ways of transporting
Hydrogen
Loss
of
energy
(%)
Electricity
Ammonia carrier
79.84
Liquid Hydrogen
75.31
LOHC
71.35
Compressed hydrogen
69.70
Natural gas
Ammonia carrier
78.40
Liquid Hydrogen
73.96
LOHC
69.33
Compressed hydrogen
69.23
==PAGE:66==
54
==PAGE:67==
Part IV
Ammonia
==PAGE:68==
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 12
Characteristics
After the analysis of hydrogen as an alternative fuel in the maritime industry, it
would be prudent to follow the analysis of ammonia, a highly promising chemical, in
terms of greenhouse gas emissions. It has been broadly pushed forward as an efficient
substance compared to the current fuels, that could shift the environmental situation
on a positive side and could contribute to the reduction of the GHG emissions in the
shipping industry.
From a historical perspective, there are two versions of how the word ”ammonia”
itself derived. The first one by Murphy (2004) claims that it was inspired by the
salt ”hammoniacum” which was produced in the Roman province of Cyrenaica and
took its name from the Temple of Jupiter Amun (in Greek ”Ammon”) in the wider
area, but since the salt does not abide by the ammonium chloride properties, another
version has come to light. In a translated version of Agricola & Agricola (1912), it is
being alleged that it was plain sea salt. However, in any case, the name of ammonia
and the ammonium compounds were acquired by the salt.
Practically, it is a compound of nitrogen and hydrogen with the formula NH3 and
has a wide occurrence in nature. It is an essential basic chemical and it is produced at
a scale of 150 million tons per year. Half of the hydrogen production in the chemical
industry is used for ammonia production and ammonia is considered to contain 17.5
wt% hydrogen. As already mentioned, it is hailed as an ideal carbon-free fuel for
fuel cells (Lan & Tao 2014). Compared to hydrogen, ammonia has many advantages.
With respect to its properties at room temperature and atmospheric pressure, it is a
colorless gas with a distinctively pungent smell. However, it can be easily deodorized
by either sodium bicarbonate or acetic acid reacting with it and in both reactions,
an odorless salt of ammonium is formed. Furthermore, it has a very low density and
it is lighter than air, while, due to the tight hydrogen bond between molecules, it is
readily liquefied. Additionally, it is extremely water-soluble and has poisonous and
corrosive properties owing to its alkalinity. In case of exposure to ammonia, several
health side-effects could occur instantly, such as nasal discharge, dyspnoea, pain in
the upper airways, whereas in the case of ammonia water ingestion, caustic lesions in
the oropharynx, esophagus, and stomach could transpire (Meulenbelt 2007).
Moreover, there are a number of diverse uses for ammonia since the reactions of
it with other substances in nature vastly vary. Some of them are enumerated below:
1. Fertilizer: A great percentage of ammonia can be utilized as fertilizer either
as its salts, solutions, or anhydrously. It also helps to deliver increased yields of
==PAGE:70==
58
12 Characteristics
crops such as maize and wheat when it is applied to the soil. (Lassaletta et al.
2014)
2. Household cleaner: Household ammonia is an NH3 solution in water, and it is
used for many surfaces as a general purpose-cleaner. Because ammonia results
in a relatively streak-free shine, the cleaning of glass, porcelain, and stainless
steel is one of its most standard uses.
3. Antimicrobial agent for food products: Since the earlier years, NH3 has
been deemed to be strongly anti-septic and, therefore, it has been considered
safe to be used in food products to preserve them.
4. Refrigerant: Thanks to ammonia’s vaporization properties, it has been re-
garded as a useful refrigerant, and more specifically the anhydrous ammonia is
extensively used in industrial refrigeration applications, because it provides a
high energy efficiency and is inexpensive (Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial
Chemistry 2000).
5. Lifting gas: NH3 is less compact than the atmosphere at normal temperature
and pressure, as already mentioned, and has around 45-48% of the lifting power
of hydrogen or helium and, therefore, it can be used to fill balloons as a lifting
gas.
6. Energy carrier: Lately, there have been conducted studies to establish a
process that discharges hydrogen from ammonia and use that as a fuel for cars.
7. Fuel: This characteristic is what this thesis is basically analyzing since the
replacement of HFO and MGO fuels by NH3 is being highly promoted recently
due to its low emissions of GHG.
In comparison to hydrogen and with regards to their characteristics, ammonia is
much more energy-efficient compared to hydrogen as a fuel, and could be produced,
stored, and delivered at a much lower cost than hydrogen, which must be kept com-
pressed as a cryogenic liquid (Lan & Tao 2014). Additionally, the infrastructure for
ammonia already exists, whereas for hydrogen there is the need for building new
fueling stations, that, financially wise, is a big investment (Lan et al. 2012).
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 13
Production Methods
Ammonia is essentially the most important feed-stock for the production of fertilizers
and is one of the most widely produced chemicals worldwide.
The production of
ammonia in 2006 accounted for nearly 1.6% of the total use of fossil fuel. In 2012, the
production of ammonia reached a level of 198 million tonnes. Given the significant
rise in global demand for ammonia, seeking cleaner energy alternatives for ammonia
production is becoming extremely relevant.
Ammonia, as already presented for hydrogen, can be produced in a vast number
of methods.
Some of them are considered greener than other ones, but the eco-
nomic part of their production appears always as a burden for their development.
The most widely known method for producing NH3 is the so-called ”Haber Process”,
which basically combines nitrogen from the air with hydrogen derived from natural
gas, comprised mostly of methane, in a chemical reaction that operates at very high
pressure.
Figure 13.1. Ammonia production Haber-Bosch process (Singh et al. 2018)
Regarding the Haber Process, it is an exothermic process that combines hydrogen
and nitrogen in a 3:1 ratio to produce ammonia. The reaction is facilitated by a
catalyst and the optimal temperature in which it should be conducted is between
==PAGE:72==
60
13 Production Methods
500°C and 600°C. Figure 13.1 shows a schematic of the Haber-Bosch process. However,
ammonia production essentially depends on the methods of hydrogen and nitrogen
production and, hence, widely varies (Singh et al. 2018).
13.1
Ammonia production through hydrogen
As already analyzed in the previous part, hydrogen is generated using different meth-
ods.
There are two main routes, based on the type of process: the thermal and
electrical ones. The most common methods of production of fossil fuel-based hydro-
gen make use of methane, coal, or hydrogen sulfide as feed-stocks and as a source of
energy, as depicted in Figure 13.2.
Figure 13.2. Hydrogen production based on fossil fuels (Singh et al. 2018)
The reformation of steam methane is one of the most common routes for the
production of hydrogen and eventually ammonia. The second most popular approach
is to divide water using either thermal or electric control. Electrolysis is called high-
temperature electrolysis when it is heat-assisted and occurs at high temperatures.
Electrolysis may be based on sustainable energy like PVs or electrolysis dependent
on water, as Figure 13.3 shows.
In pure thermal processes, only heat is used for the splitting of water. The direct
separation of water, however, needs high temperatures which contribute to an inef-
fective operation. Thus, catalysts are used to aid split by reducing the temperature
needed for the method. This will help to extend the usage of discarded waste heat
==PAGE:73==
13.2 Ammonia production through nitrogen
61
Figure 13.3. Hydrogen production by water electrolysis (Singh et al. 2018)
from power plants and solar-based thermal systems, as seen in Figure 13.4 (Singh
et al. 2018).
Figure 13.4. Hydrogen production based on thermal water splitting (Singh et al. 2018)
13.2
Ammonia production through nitrogen
Nitrogen, as the second component of NH3, is also produced by a vast range of
methods. Currently, it is produced in large quantities through the cryogenic fractional
==PAGE:74==
62
13 Production Methods
distillation of liquefied air, accounting for 65% to 70% of the total production. In
plain terms, the process consists of four steps. The first one is to cool nitrogen, then
to isolate it, afterward separate it from the air and at last collect it. At a specific low
temperature, the nitrogen is getting liquefied and can, therefore, be extracted and
harvested for industrial processes.
Another way of producing nitrogen is through the separation of gaseous air using
pressure swing adsorption (PSA). These processes are power-intensive and require
high-grade energy (electricity). However, they are always the top option when higher
purity implementations are needed. They use a separation process that ensures an ex-
tremely high nitrogen purity, reaching 95% to almost 100%. They are also considered
secure and reliable systems to produce nitrogen.
Then, the third manner of nitrogen production is often by membranes separation,
which is regarded as an economic method. They achieve a very high concentration of
nitrogen, from 95% to 99.5%. Membrane systems are easier to maintain as well (He
et al. 2017).
All in all, it can be clearly deduced that the production of ammonia is highly
dependent on the production of its two components, namely hydrogen and nitrogen,
since their combination is the main method of producing NH3. Hence, to which extent
ammonia is considered green is very much reliant on the method with which hydrogen
and nitrogen have been generated.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 14
Technical Challenges
The usage of ammonia as a source of energy has many benefits, as already mentioned.
One of these is that most production and transportation technologies are well de-
veloped and already widely used on an industrial scale. Ammonia synthesis in the
Haber–Bosch process is one the greatest and best studied chemical processes in the
world. Annual ammonia production, mainly for agricultural use, exceeds 120 million
tons.
Despite that, ammonia is associated with some technical challenges that need
to be particularly contemplated. More specifically, regarding safety, the toxicity of
ammonia is an essential feature of health. Comparing the toxicity of liquid ammonia
to that of fuel and methanol, liquid ammonia is around three levels higher at room
temperature in ”apparent toxicity”, a measure that takes into consideration both
the concentration of IDLH (Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health), namely the
level to which a healthy person can be exposed for 30 minutes without suffering
irreversible health effects, and the vapor pressure. This is due to the fact that some
substances with low vapor pressure will have a small concentration of IDLH and yet
score better than substances with higher concentration of IDLH but higher vapor
pressure. (Klerke et al. 2008).
In particular, the health issues, that may result from exposure to extremely high
concentrations of gaseous ammonia can be lung disease and even death. In general,
ammonia is treated as a non-flammable product, but it is reckoned inhalation danger-
ous and requires a hazardous health permit when shipped in great amounts. Besides,
liquid ammonia is dangerous since it is hygroscopic and can cause caustic burns.
Moreover, small, but long-lasting ammonia releases due to leaks and ruptures of
hoses, for instance, can cause serious hazards at distances up to 150m away. This
requires additional technical safeguards to reduce the likelihood of these releases, but
also, provided that these safeguards are in place, safety distances should be no less
than 70m around these ammonia-refuelling stations (Duijm et al. 2005).
However, for ammonia contained in metal ammines, the apparent toxicity is below
that of both gasoline and methanol. The promising and closely researched borohy-
drides are reported to exhibit partial release during hydrogen desorption of extremely
flammable and poisonous diborane. Safety issues remain a major challenge for the
use of ammonia in the transportation sector, but the above considerations are in line
with reports stating that the use of ammonia as a transportation fuel would not pose
more risks than currently used fuels, provided that they are controlled by technical
==PAGE:76==
64
14 Technical Challenges
and regulatory options. When these safety systems are implemented, the risks of
using ammonia are similar, if not lower than for the other fuels, such as gasoline and
LPG (Klerke et al. 2008).
Taking all into consideration, it can be easily inferred, that ammonia comes with
significant safety issues in the transportation sector. It can be, though, mitigated to
a certain degree if essential precautions are being taken achieving a safety level equal,
if not better, to gasoline and LPG.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 15
Economic Analysis
This chapter will attempt to shed light on the economic aspect of the potential for
ammonia to be the alternative fuel in the maritime industry to replace the current
ones, the so-called ”bunker fuels”. Through this examination, it will become known to
which degree the replacement of the current fuels is realistic, reasonable and bearable
from the industry in economic terms.
Due to the fact that ammonia’s production mainly is reliant on the production
of its components, namely hydrogen and nitrogen, it goes without saying that the
economic analysis of NH3 is also to a high degree dependent on H2 and N. Hence,
there is a variety of NH3 production’s cost that needs to be addressed.
To begin with, regarding H2, there are various production methods, that discern
hydrogen to ”green”, ”grey” and ”blue”, based on the emissions that are being caused
throughout its generation. Respectively, ammonia can get the same categorization
based on primarily hydrogen’s production and, hence, the cost of each method will
fluctuate accordingly.
It is a well-known fact, that from 2016 to mid-2019, the price of NH3 on a global
scale amounted up to 10-20$/GJ, or in other metrics to 188-376$/ton, taking into
account the lower heating value of ammonia, which corresponded to 18.8 MJ/kg. On
the other hand, the production cost for renewable ammonia has been measured to
lie within the values of 7 and 23$/GJ, which equates to 132-432$/ton (Hansson &
Fridell 2020).
Table 15.1. Ammonia cost range in $/GJ and in $/ton (Hansson & Fridell 2020)
Ammonia
Lowest
Price
($/GJ)
Highest
Price
($/GJ)
Lowest
Price
($/ton)
Highest
Price
($/ton)
Global price of NH3
10
20
188
376
Renewable NH3
7
23
132
432
Renewable NH3 in 2040
20
35
376
658
Moreover, there has been a study by Hochman (Hochman et al. 2019), which has
forecasted the cost of renewable ammonia production in 2040 through an electrochem-
ical method and electrolysis of water succeeded by the Haber Bosch synthesis in large
==PAGE:78==
66
15 Economic Analysis
and small scale respectively. In this research, the cost of NH3 has been predicted to
reach circa 20 to 35$/GJ and is equal to 376-658$/ton, which is explicitly higher than
the current cost. All this information is summarized in Table 15.1.
As far as the sales price of NH3 is concerned, Wittrig (Wittrig 2015) claims that
the past 20 years it fluctuates in the amount of 300$/ton, and taking this into account
it can be instinctively predicted that since Wittrig’s estimation, the sales price has
remained steady to date. In addition to this, Ewing (Ewing 2019) depicts in Fig-
ure 15.1 the global ammonia prices from the end of 2018 until September 2019 and
it is crystal clear that the average price indeed oscillates about the value of 300$/ton.
Hence, it is fair to consider the aforementioned information as a reference point and
define as an approximate sales price for ammonia the 300$/ton.
Figure 15.1. Global ammonia prices for the period 2018-2019 (Ewing 2019)
Under the same circumstances with hydrogen’s analysis, the research will be con-
ducted on the focus of the container ships, which are considered the type of ship that
is accountable for the highest amount of CO2 emissions since it is considered wiser
to investigate the worst-case scenario and the emissions on its highest scale.
For this reason, the research will be based on the daily fuel consumption for the
four size-types of container ships at different service speeds, as it was previously
presented in Figure 10.2 in the economic analysis chapter of hydrogen’s part. It goes
==PAGE:79==
15 Economic Analysis
67
Table 15.2. Ammonia equivalents to HFO and MGO
Ammonia equivalents
1 ton of Ammonia
Is equivalent to
0.48 tons of HFO
0.45 tons of MGO
without saying that the former computations of the ammonia equivalents to HFO
and MGO have been estimated correspondingly to the hydrogen equivalents. To be
more specific, the LHV of HFO and MGO has been deemed to be 39 MJ/kg and 42.8
MJ/kg respectively, and shown in Table 10.2 in the respective chapter of hydrogen’s
part, whereas ammonia indicates an LHV of 18.8 MJ/kg (Hansson & Fridell 2020).
The calculations that derive from these values are demonstrated in Table 15.2. What
practically this table expresses is that, 1 ton of ammonia has the same thermal output
that 0.48 tons of HFO and 0.45 tons of MGO have. In this case, in order for ammonia
to have the same thermal output with HFO and MGO and give the required energy
to the vessels, it is essential to have almost double the amount of NH3 compared to
the current fuels. This is caused owing to the low value of the ammonia’s LHV.
Therefore, based on these ammonia equivalents, the cost change of ammonia com-
pared to HFO has been computed and is depicted in Table 15.3, whereas the respective
cost change of ammonia compared to MGO is presented in Table 15.4. The first and
second columns, that represent the ship size the daily fuel consumption of the ships,
derive, as in the respective chapter of hydrogen’s part, by Notteboom & Vernimmen
(2009), that shows the daily fuel consumption for four types of container ships at
different service speeds. In accordance with the graph and given the aforementioned
in the economic analysis chapter of the part of hydrogen cost of HFO and MGO, the
third column of the daily fuel cost is derived. For HFO, a price of 342$/ton has been
defined, while for MGO the price amounts to 435$/ton. It needs to be mentioned
anew that these prices derive by the World Bunker Prices (2020) in March 2020, a
period that was the beginning of the coronavirus COVID19 spread and has initiated
to affect these prices.
As far as the 4th column of Table 15.3 and Table 15.4 is concerned, the equiva-
lents of HFO and MGO to NH3 have been taken into consideration and hence, the
equivalent to ammonia daily consumption of the ships has been computed. Then,
given the ammonia sales price that amounts up to 300$/ton, the column that reflects
the daily ammonia cost per ship size and speed has been generated, resulting in the
estimation of the cost change of ammonia compared to HFO and MGO respectively.
It can be clearly stated that in the case that ammonia will replace HFO, the
higher cost of this substitute will measures up to 45%. On the other hand, in the
case of ammonia replacing MGO, the higher cost will amount to 35%. Indubitably, it
is considered a high-priced change, but at all events, it is still lower cost change than
the one of H2.
However, for HFO, the price has been deemed to be the same also before the
==PAGE:80==
68
15 Economic Analysis
Table 15.3. Cost change of ammonia compared to HFO based on World Bunker Prices (2020)
outburst of coronavirus COVID19, while for MGO it seems that the price has been
affected.
As a consequence, in Table 15.5 the cost change of ammonia compared
to MGO based on the historical data of the Rotterdam port is presented.
It is
apprehensible, that the cost change dropped as against to the commencement of
coronavirus COVID19-period. This means, that under the usual conditions, the price
change totals up to circa 21%, which is apparently a more advantageous increase
compared to the respective change of ammonia based on the World Bunker Prices
(2020) in March 2020. Definitely, this is caused to the collapse of the bunker oil prices
that exceeded the demise of the global financial crisis in 2008 and oil crash in 2014.
Additionally, vis à vis to the corresponding price increase of hydrogen, ammonia is
much more economical and favorable. However, this is paradoxical on the grounds of
the fact that H2 is one of the two components of NH3 and the production of ammonia
is established on the production of hydrogen. This is yet dependent on the sales prices
of the fuels.
All in all, unquestionably, the alteration from bunker oil fuels to ammonia will
be pricey and this was anyhow expected. In terms of the future prices, though, it is
not always easy to foresee since unexpected situations can always occur or the devel-
opment of the price levels might turn to a different direction than what is predicted.
Nonetheless, as shown previously in Figure 15.1, the prices of NH3 are expected to
step up by almost 100-350$/ton. Another source states that the price of NH3 will
==PAGE:81==
15 Economic Analysis
69
Table 15.4. Cost change of ammonia compared to MGO based on World Bunker Prices (2020)
be increased to 40$/GJ until the year 2050 (Hinkley J & K 2016). The correspond-
ing forecast is depicted in Figure 15.2.
Still and all, the report was published in
2016 and the forecast shows that the price of ammonia in 2020 will be circa 32$/GJ,
which is not accurate since currently the production price of ammonia measures up
to 10-20$/GJ. Definitely, the forecasts might come true or they could also deviate
sublimely from the real value. It is, though, wise to bear in mind all the predictions
in order to result into an average value.
On the whole, what should be taken into account beyond the price change of
ammonia against the bunker oil fuels, is the benefits that NH3 brings with, which
are environmentally related. This section will be expanded thoroughly followingly.
Hence, a trade off between the benefits and the drawbacks of the fuels replacement
should be settled.
==PAGE:82==
70
15 Economic Analysis
Table 15.5. Cost change of ammonia compared to MGO based on historical data of the
Rotterdam port
Figure 15.2. Projected ammonia price forecast until 2050 (Hinkley J & K 2016)
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 16
Environmental Analysis
An environmental analysis is a rational continuity of the economic analysis since these
two fields are the ones that express the benefits and challenges of ammonia and are to
a certain degree interconnected. More concretely, the GHG emissions are the focus
of the IMO’s initial strategy and their multifaceted aspects should be profoundly
considered. It is a well known fact that NH3 is being commonly marketed for its
”zero-carbon-emissions” behavior, yet, there are several other variables, that play an
imperative role, such that one can really reach to the assumption that ammonia does
not produce any GHG.
As aforementioned in the environmental analysis section of H2, the GHG emissions
are being distinguished in well-to-tank (WTT), that refers to the interval between the
production of NH3 and its transportation to the vessel, the tank-to-wake (TTW) that
pertain to the emissions during the combustion of the fuel during the operation of the
vessel and lastly, the well-to-wake that adds up the WTT and the TTW reflecting
the total amount of the emissions during the life cycle of the fuel. In other words,
ammonia can be appropriately entitled ”zero-carbon” only if the WTW emissions
have been reckoned (Sharafian et al. 2019). An indicative representation of the WTT,
TTW and WTW emissions for MGO and HFO, LNG, NH3 and H2 is sketched out
in Figure 16.1.
On this ground, the various production methods of ammonia should be borne in
mind in terms of generating GHG emissions. Therefore, the diverse technologies are
discriminated in brown, blue and green indicating the level of the GHG emissions.
Due to the fact that NH3 is being manufactured with the Haber-Bosch method unify-
ing H2 and nitrogen, the degree of the GHG, that the production of NH3 emits, can
closely rely on the production of its components.
To begin with, brown ammonia is considered the one that emits the highest
amount of carbon and it is made using a fossil fuel as a feed-stock.
The current
development of industrial ammonia is primarily focused on the Haber-Bosch method,
that includes the hydrogen and nitrogen at elevated temperature and heavy pressure
catalytic process.
Regarding hydrogen, its production almost exclusively depends
on the fossil-fuel steam reformation. For the time being, most ammonia plants rely
on the steam reformation of natural gas to produce hydrogen and carbon dioxide.
Alternative fuels that can be used are coal, heavy fuel oil and naphtha but they
generate higher carbon dioxide emissions (between 2.5 and 3.8 tons CO2/ton NH3
against 1.6 tons CO2/ton NH3 for natural gas). With respect to the nitrogen, its
==PAGE:84==
72
16 Environmental Analysis
Figure 16.1. Well-to-Wake emissions for conventional fuels, LNG, ammonia, hydrogen. (Lind-
stad 2020)
production is conducted from compressed air or an air separation unit.
On the other hand, blue ammonia is classified as ammonia created by this conven-
tional method but with the introduction of CCS to sequester all the carbon dioxide
emitted instead of allowing it to reach the atmosphere throughout the method. More
specifically, the most common blue ammonia is generated by SMR with CCS, the in-
corporation of which has been modelled and demonstrates a rise in the use of natural
gas and a consequent improvement in the running costs of hydrogen production as
opposed to the current procedure.
Lastly, green ammonia is firstly achieved through the green hydrogen from water
electrolysis, which is considered a well established process, and secondly through
nitrogen obtained directly from air using an air separation unit that accounts for
2–3% of the process energy used. This way, ammonia is produced using sustainable
electricity powered by the Haber-Bosch process and results in no CO2 emissions. A
representation of this process is depicted in Figure 16.2.
Appertaining to the discrimination of NH3 in colors in terms of the GHG emis-
sions that its production and combustion bring about, Table 16.1 delineates the CO2
emissions for different NH3 production technologies. The table is accordingly colored
indicating the methods with reference to the level of their CO2 emissions. In partic-
ular, the coal unabated along with the natural gas unabated method are considered
brown ammonia production methods, while the coal and natural gas with CCS are
regarded as blue ammonia technologies.
Lastly, NH3 made using the electrolysis
method is reckoned the green option, provided that the electricity that is utilized
for the electrolysis is via renewable resources. There was no doubt, that going from
brown to green ammonia the carbon emissions will substantially fall.
Regarding the respective carbon emissions factors for HFO and MGO, they were
==PAGE:85==
16 Environmental Analysis
73
Figure 16.2. Green ammonia production and use (Dixon et al. 2020)
Table 16.1. Carbon emissions of different ammonia technologies (Birol 2019)
NH3 technology
Carbon emissions (ton-
s/ton NH3)
Coal unabated
3.9
Natural gas unabated
2.3
Coal with CCS
2.1
Natural gas with CCS
1.3
Electrolysis
0.0
presented in Table 11.2 of the hydrogen environmental analysis. Characteristically,
HFO accounts for 3.114 tons of CO2 per ton of fuel, while MGO answers for 3.206
tons of CO2 per ton of fuel.
Taking into account the aforementioned CO2 emissions factors per fuel and pro-
duction technology, and combining them with the fuel consumption of the container
ships per size and speed, as outlined in the economic analysis of NH3 section, the
calculations of Table 16.2 emerge.
The table data shows that turning from brown ammonia to green ammonia the
CO2 emissions take a nosedive and literally get annihilated. Nevertheless, in order to
make these computations explicitly comprehensible and visual, Figure 16.3 presents
information about the slowest speed, which was intuitively chosen.
Categorically
speaking, it could be plainly noticed that the HFO and MGO are both accountable for
the largest amount of CO2 emissions. It is worth noticing that even brown ammonia
==PAGE:86==
74
16 Environmental Analysis
derived both from coal and natural gas still produces lower CO2 emissions than the
current fuels. Indubitably, blue ammonia with coal and natural gas generates even
less GHG, while green ammonia is not producing CO2 emissions whatsoever.
On top of that, it should be pointed out, that the respective emissions from
grey hydrogen, which should correspond to the brown ammonia due to the fact that
both represent the level of CO2 emissions that they generate, are much higher. This
probably lies on the fact that the CO2 emissions factor for H2 amounts up to nearly
9 tons of CO2 per ton of H2, while for brown ammonia the respective amount comes
down to a maximum of 3.9 tons of CO2 per ton of NH3. This might be in the wake
of the diverse sources that provide the CO2 emissions, because otherwise in practical
terms NH3 derives from H2, hence the CO2 emissions should more or less fluctuate
on the same levels.
Getting back to the details of Figure 16.3, it is additionally worth noticing that
if either blue or brown ammonia is generated by coal, the CO2 emissions are higher
compared to the ones that derive by natural gas, which is not surprising since natural
gas has a relatively lower CO2-to-energy content.
Broadly speaking, the CO2 emissions, that arise by NH3, are only the WTT
emissions in view of the fact that only ammonia’s production can give rise to GHG,
whereas its combustion is completely green. Therefore, summing up, the WTT emis-
sions are equivalent to the WTW emissions for ammonia. Additionally, in Figure 11.2
Table 16.2. CO2 emissions of NH3 per fuel and production method (tons/day)
==PAGE:87==
16 Environmental Analysis
75
from the environmental section of hydrogen, which was generated by Lindstad (2020),
there is also a most indicative diagram showing the comparison of the WTW emis-
sions between the diverse fuels, including HFO and MGO. It is clear from the data,
that, in the event that ammonia is brown, the CO2 emissions can be circa 35-75%
higher than the emissions from MGO. Otherwise, in the green ammonia case, the
CO2 emissions are negligible and thus, the emissions are 89% lower than the ones
derived by MGO. Nevertheless, based on Table 16.2, the MGO is accountable for the
highest CO2 emissions in any case, even if the ammonia’s production is brown. In
Table 16.3, the CO2 emissions change of the various ammonia production methods
versus MGO is delineated. It is crystal clear, that in any case, ammonia seems to be
more advantageous in terms of the emissions compared to MGO reaching a 64-100%
decrease. This contradiction may lie on the fact that different production methods
and diverse sources have been taken into account. Another interpretation could be
that Birol (2019) has taken into account low CO2 emissions factors since for brown
ammonia the maximum value, that is given, is 3.9 tons per ton of NH3, whilst the
respective grey hydrogen value, that was derived by Cantuarias-Villessuzanne et al.
(2016), is subject to 9.42 tons per ton of H2, which is almost double the value.
Figure 16.3. CO2 emissions of NH3 per fuel and production method (tons/day) for extra slow
steaming speed (14 knots)
Furthermore in terms of the energy loss that is caused during the process of
==PAGE:88==
76
16 Environmental Analysis
Table 16.3. CO2 emissions change between the diverse ammonia production methods and
MGO
Production Method
CO2 emissions change com-
pared to MGO
Brown Ammonia with Coal
64%
Brown Ammonia with NG
79%
Blue Ammonia with Coal
80%
Blue Ammonia with NG
88%
Green Ammonia
100%
producing, transporting, and combusting NH3, the same holds as for H2. This means
that, since it is mainly made either by natural gas or from the electrolysis of water
and both processes are energy-intensive, around one-third of the input energy is
lost through the conversion process.
Nonetheless, as mentioned previously in the
corresponding chapter of H2’s part, the energy losses can be even higher than one
third by virtue of the additional required energy for the ammonia synthesis and the
cracking losses of NH3.
On this basis, it can be concluded that NH3 is a remarkably promising alternative
fuel for the maritime industry in terms of decarbonizing, albeit costly. Notwithstand-
ing, it is of utmost importance that the production method of ammonia is greatly
taken into consideration by reason of the fact that, depending on the NH3 technology,
it can end up emitting on the whole a large amount of greenhouse gases. It should be
always remarked that ammonia’s combustion is totally green and can contribute to
achieving the IMO’s target of decarbonizing the shipping industry until 2050, how-
ever, ammonia’s production should equally be taken into account bearing in mind
that the processes utilized can have a negative impact on the environment.
==PAGE:89==
Part V
Conclusion
==PAGE:90==
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 17
Limitations
After conducting the economic and environmental analysis of both hydrogen and
ammonia and after gaining insight into their technical challenges, the limitations
that are linked to both fuels are more perspicuous and transparent. Therefore, in this
chapter, the limitations concerning the research and the analysis, that was conducted
through this thesis, will be expanded.
As far as hydrogen is concerned, although it offers some highly gainful benefits, it is
associated with some drawbacks as well. To begin with, hydrogen’s weight and volume
storage systems are to date extremely high, making the storage and distribution
of hydrogen challenging. Besides that, due to the fact that the implementation of
hydrogen as a fuel is still under development, it is reckoned a pricey fuel that requires
for the maritime industry a large investment to switch to hydrogen from the bunker
fuels that are currently in use. In particular, the cost change might reach almost
90-94% increase as compared with the current fuels. Moreover, it came to light that
hydrogen’s combustion is utterly environmentally friendly since it does not emit any
CO2. However, in order to be able to assert that, the emissions that are brought
about during the production of the fuel should be borne in mind. Therefore, with the
aim of decarbonization, only the green, or at least blue, production methods should
be taken into account since the grey ones might not make any difference between the
current fuels, namely HFO and MGO, and hydrogen in terms of the emissions. Last
but not least, the infrastructure for using hydrogen as a fuel does not currently exist.
Therefore, building new fueling stations is an essential step that, financially wise, can
be considered a major project and investment.
When it comes to ammonia, undoubtedly the benefits are of great importance, but
the limitations are also not negligible. In the first place, safety-wise, ammonia can
turn out to be extremely dangerous since exposure to high concentrations of gaseous
ammonia can effectuate severe diseases and even death. In order for ammonia to be
used in such wide applications, as e.g. in the maritime industry as a fuel, a hazardous
health permit is imperative. Additionally, provided that ammonia is produced via the
Haber-Bosch method and hence, generated by hydrogen and nitrogen, the limitations
in the economic and environmental aspects are to a high degree similar to the ones of
hydrogen. Thus, the replacement of the bunker fuels by ammonia can reach 21-45%
increase, which is indisputably lower than the cost change of hydrogen compared to
the same fuels. Moreover, similarly to hydrogen, the various production methods are
accountable for different levels of CO2 emissions. Brown ammonia, for instance, can
==PAGE:92==
80
17 Limitations
achieve a 64% reduction in CO2 emissions compared to MGO, while green ammonia
can accomplish a 100% drop.
Overall, it is evident, that the results, that derive from the hydrogen and ammonia
analysis, slightly differ. This might stem from the fact, that diverse sources have been
taken into account, and hence, the factors and values that have reckoned might have
been computed in a dissimilar way. In order for all the aforementioned aspects to get
clearer, additional and more in-depth research would be necessary to shed light.
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER 18
Future Work
The limitations that were mentioned in the previous chapter, can serve as a basis
for the future work and recommendations that will render to the alleviation of the
challenges.
Before all else, it is of paramount importance to highlight the difference between
the green and grey -in case of hydrogen- or brown -in case of ammonia- production of
the fuels. It must become clear that the WTT emissions exceptionally contribute to
the generation of CO2 emissions and therefore cannot be surmised as an alternative
that will aid in decarbonization. Therefore, all attention should be drawn exclusively
on the green production methods, such as electricity by renewable sources or at least
blue production methods, such as steam reforming of natural gas with carbon capture
technology (SMR with CCS).
Additionally, regarding the storage challenge of hydrogen, it is insinuated to estab-
lish materials and components that allow compact and lightweight hydrogen storage
systems. An alternative solution might be ammonia to be served as a carrier for
hydrogen, that already has in place an established system and infrastructure.
Furthermore, with respect to the safety risks, that ammonia is linked to, safety
systems and precautions must be implemented to extenuate any issues. This way,
the safety performance of ammonia will fluctuate to similar levels with gasoline and
LPG.
Moreover, further research on how to optimize the efficiency of these fuels and
make them more viable would be greatly valuable.
Besides, establishing credible
business cases could also contribute to laying the foundations of the potential evolu-
tion and promotion of these fuels, persuading owners to focus, support and use these
fuels.
Last but not least, it is important for the maritime industry to be willing to make
large investments in case the decision to switch the bunker fuels to either hydrogen or
ammonia is made. Undoubtedly, a trade-off between the environmental and economic
aspects of both fuels should be made, in order to be able to reach a conclusion of
what is, in the final analysis, more desirable and achievable.
==PAGE:94==
82
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 19
Final Remarks
The objective of this Thesis was the investigation of hydrogen and ammonia as al-
ternative fuels and gain insight into their potential role in the decarbonization for
the 2030 time horizon. In particular, an examination of the characteristics, the tech-
nical challenges, and the economic and environmental impact that these fuels have,
has been made. The research was mainly driven by the limited existing knowledge
concerning their overall behavior, their economic and environmental prospect.
Taking everything into consideration, it can be deduced that both hydrogen and
ammonia offer some highly promising chances to accomplish IMO’s target to decar-
bonize shipping by 2030. Their green, or as a worst-case scenario the blue, production
methods are certainly the only alternative solution to achieve that purpose. However,
the decarbonization through this way can come only with some big investments since
the technology to make both fuels the main ones are still under development.
When it comes to comparison between the two fuels under investigation, it can be
inferred that ammonia seems to be to a certain degree more favorable on the grounds
of the fact that it is far more energy-efficient as a fuel, and it could be produced,
stored, and delivered at a much lower cost than hydrogen. Additionally, ammonia’s
infrastructure already exists, while hydrogen needs the development of new fueling
stations that should be costly. From the economic analysis of both fuels, as well, has
been inferred that switching to ammonia is more economical.
All in all, smart policy for industrial applications is needed to establish low-cost
and low-carbon hydrogen and ammonia production on a larger scale, and that in paral-
lel stimulates new sources of demand and connects markets. As with the development
of all new technologies, there are sure to come into being additional opportunities and
challenges along the way. Exploiting the opportunities, that these alternative fuels
can offer, could place them to play a crucial role in achieving a clean, secure, resilient,
and cost-effective global energy system in the long-term global effort. Overall, their
potentially critical role is progressively recognized on a global scale and hopefully, ef-
forts to that direction will be made with the positive outcome of the decarbonization.
To conclude, there is a good possibility that there will be a new and reliable pathway
to renewable, sustainable, and universal usage of hydrogen and ammonia in global
energy systems, as long as such resources are pursued by states, businesses, and other
actors.
Taking all the aforementioned facts into account, it can be clearly stated that
switching to hydrogen and ammonia, as the main fuels in the maritime industry, is
==PAGE:96==
84
19 Final Remarks
achievable and feasible, albeit with some additional efforts and retreat.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
Abad, A. V., Steinberger-Wilckens, R., Radcliffe, J., Al-Mufachi, N., Dodds, P. E.,
Jones, O. & Kurban, Z. (2017), ‘The role of hydrogen and fuel cells in delivering
energy security for the uk’.
Adams, D. (1980), The hitchhiker’s guide to the galaxy, Hitchhiker’s Guide to the
Galaxy Series, Harmony Books.
Agricola, G. & Agricola, G. (1912), Georgius Agricola De re metallica, tr. from the 1st
Latin ed. of 1556, with biographical introduction, annotations and appendices upon
the development of mining methods, metallurgical processes, geolo, The Mining
magazine.
Armijo, J. & Philibert, C. (2020), ‘Flexible production of green hydrogen and am-
monia from variable solar and wind energy: Case study of chile and argentina’,
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 45(3), 1541–1558.
Bennaceur, K. (2014), CO2 capture and sequestration, in ‘Future Energy’, Elsevier,
pp. 583–611.
Bicer, Y. & Dincer, I. (2018), ‘Clean fuel options with hydrogen for sea transportation:
A life cycle approach’, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 43(2), 1179–1193.
Birol, F. (2019), ‘The future of hydrogen, seizing today’s opportunities, report pre-
pared by the iea for the g20, 82-83, japan’.
Bjørnar Kruse, Sondre Grinna, C. B. (2002), Hydrogen: Status og muligheter, The
Bellona Foundation.
Bouvart, F., Saint-Antonin, V. & Gruson, J.-F. (2014), ‘’well-to-tank’carbon impact
of fossil fuels’.
Bracker,
J. & Timpe,
C. (2017),
‘An outline of sustainability criteria for
synthetic
fuels
used
in
transport’,
Policy
paper
for
Transport
&
En-
vironment.
Freiburg:
Öko-Institut.
Verfügbar
unter
https://www.
oeko.
de/fileadmin/oekodoc/Sustainabilitycriteria-for-synthetic-fuels.
pdf,
zuletzt
abgerufen am 8, 2018.
==PAGE:98==
86
Bibliography
Caban, J., Gniecka, A. & Holeša, L. (2013), ‘Alternative fuels for diesel engines’,
Advances in science and technology research journal 7(20).
Cantuarias-Villessuzanne, C., Weinberger, B., Roses, L., Vignes, A. & Brignon, J.-M.
(2016), ‘Social cost-benefit analysis of hydrogen mobility in europe’, International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy 41(42), 19304–19311.
Collodi, G. (2010), ‘Hydrogen production via steam reforming with co2 capture’,
Chemical Engineering Transactions 19, 37–42.
Collodi, G., Azzaro, G., Ferrari, N. & Santos, S. (2017), ‘Techno-economic evaluation
of deploying CCS in SMR based merchant h2 production with NG as feedstock and
fuel’, Energy Procedia 114, 2690–2712.
Delft, C. (2016), ‘Assessment of fuel oil availability’, Final Report. CE Delft, Delft,
NL .
Dincer, I. & Zamfirescu, C. (2016), Hydrogen production by electrical energy, in
‘Sustainable Hydrogen Production’, Elsevier, pp. 99–161.
Dixon, R., Oldroyd, G., Prosser, J., Harberd, N. & Swaminathan, M. (2020), ‘Am-
monia: zero-carbon fertiliser, fuel and energy store’, The Royal Society .
DNV, G. (2016), ‘Maritime, methanol as marine fuel: Environmental benefits, tech-
nology readiness, and economic feasibility’, IM Organization, Editor .
Dnv, G. (2018), ‘Assessment of selected alternative fuels and technologies’, Guidance
paper 5.
DNV, G. (2019), ‘Comparison of alternative marine fuels’, For SEALNG, DNV GL
rep (2019-0567).
DOE, U. (2011), ‘Fuel cell technologies office, multi-year research, development and
demonstration plan: Planned program activities for 2011-2020’, US Department of
Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Hydrogen, Fuel Cells
and Infrastructure Technologies Program (HFCIT) pp. 1–34.
Duijm, N. J., Markert, F. & Paulsen, J. L. (2005), ‘Safety assessment of ammonia as
a transport fuel’.
Edmund G. Brown Jr., G. (2015), ‘Joint agency staff report on assembly bill 8: Assess-
ment of time and cost needed to attain 100 hydrogen refueling stations in california’.
Endresen, ￿., Eide, M. S. & Longva, T. (2019), ‘Energy transition outlook 2019 -
maritime forecast to 2050’, DNV GL .
Evans-Nguyen, K. & Hutches, K., eds (2019), Forensic Analysis of Fire Debris and
Explosives, Springer International Publishing.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
87
Ewing, R. (2019), ‘Tfi’ 19: Global ammonia prices’, Independent Commodity Intelli-
gence Services (ICIS) .
Gielen, D. (2018), ‘Hydrogen from renewable power technology outlook for the energy
transition’.
Gilbert, P., Walsh, C., Traut, M., Kesieme, U., Pazouki, K. & Murphy, A. (2018),
‘Assessment of full life-cycle air emissions of alternative shipping fuels’, Journal of
Cleaner Production 172, 855–866.
Gkonis, K. G. & Psaraftis, H. N. (2009), ‘Some key variables affecting liner shipping
costs’.
Gül, T., Kypreos, S., Turton, H. & Barreto, L. (2009), ‘An energy-economic scenario
analysis of alternative fuels for personal transport using the global multi-regional
MARKAL model (GMM)’, Energy 34(10), 1423–1437.
Hansson, J., Brynolf, S., Fridell, E. & Lehtveer, M. (2020), ‘The potential role of
ammonia as marine fuel—based on energy systems modeling and multi-criteria
decision analysis’, Sustainability 12(8), 3265.
Hansson, J. & Fridell, E. (2020), ‘On the potential of ammonia as fuel for shipping,
a synthesis of knowledge’, IVL Swedish Environmental Research Institute Selma
Brynolf, Chalmers University of Technology .
Hansson, J., Fridell, E. & Brynolf, S. (2020), ‘On the potential of ammonia as fuel
for shipping: a synthesis of knowledge’.
Hansson, J., Månsson, S., Brynolf, S. & Grahn, M. (2019), ‘Alternative marine fuels:
Prospects based on multi-criteria decision analysis involving swedish stakeholders’,
Biomass and Bioenergy 126, 159–173.
He, Z., Yuan, R., Zhang, Y., Wang, W., Gao, J., Chen, C., Wu, H., Liu, X. & Zhan,
Z. (2017), ‘A novel energy-efficient process for production of nitrogen from air via a
reaction-driven membrane reactor’, Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research
56(49), 14604–14609.
Hewat, A. W. & Riekel, C. (1979), ‘The crystal structure of deuteroammonia between
2 and 180 K by neutron powder profile refinement’, Acta Crystallographica Section
A 35(4), 569–571.
Hinkley J, Hayward JA, M. R. E. J. & K, L. (2016), ‘Concentrating solar fuels
roadmap – final report’, CSIRO, Australia. .
Hochman, G., Goldman, A., Felder, F. A., Mayer, J., Miller, A., Holland, P. L.,
Goldman, L., Manocha, P., Song, Z. & Aleti, S. (2019), ‘The Potential Economic
Feasibility of Direct Electrochemical Nitrogen Reduction as a Route to Ammonia’.
==PAGE:100==
88
Bibliography
Hopwood, J. M. (2001), The next generation of candu technologies: profiling the
potential for hydrogen fuel, Technical report, Atomic Energy of Canada Limited.
http://www.certifhy.ca/Green & H2.html, B. (2020).
IMO (2018), ‘Report of the marine environment protection committee on its seventi-
eth session, road map for developing a comprehensive imo strategy on, reduction
of ghg emissions from ships, mepc 70/18/add.1,annex 11, page 1,’.
URL: https://www.mardep.gov.hk/en/msnote/pdf/msin1707anx3.pdf
Jacobsen, D. (2020), ‘Future fuels’, MAN Energy Solutions’ presentation at Danmarks
Tekniske Universitet .
Karagöz, Y. (2019), ‘Analysis of the impact of gasoline, biogas and biogas hydrogen
fuels on emissions and vehicle performance in the WLTC and NEDC’, International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy 44(59), 31621–31632.
Kayfeci, M., Keçebaş, A. & Bayat, M. (2019), Hydrogen production, in ‘Solar Hydro-
gen Production’, Elsevier, pp. 45–83.
Kirstein, L., Halim, R. & Merk, O. (2018), Decarbonising maritime transport—
pathways to zero-carbon shipping by 2035, in ‘Paris, France: International Trans-
portation Forum’.
Klerke, A., Christensen, C. H., Nørskov, J. K. & Vegge, T. (2008), ‘Ammonia for
hydrogen storage: challenges and opportunities’, Journal of Materials Chemistry
18(20), 2304.
Lan, R., Irvine, J. T. & Tao, S. (2012), ‘Ammonia and related chemicals as potential
indirect hydrogen storage materials’, International Journal of Hydrogen Energy
37(2), 1482–1494.
Lan, R. & Tao, S. (2014), ‘Ammonia as a suitable fuel for fuel cells’, Frontiers in
Energy Research 2.
Lassaletta, L., Billen, G., Grizzetti, B., Anglade, J. & Garnier, J. (2014), ‘50
year trends in nitrogen use efficiency of world cropping systems: the relationship
between yield and nitrogen input to cropland’, Environmental Research Letters
9(10), 105011.
Lindstad, E. (2020), ‘Fuels and engine technologies with focus on ghg and energy
utilization’, SINTEF Ocean AS .
McGill, R., Remley, W. & Winther, K. (2013), ‘Alternative fuels for marine appli-
cations’, A Report from the IEA Advanced Motor Fuels Implementing Agreement
54.
Meulenbelt, J. (2007), ‘Ammonia’, Medicine 35(11), 583–584.
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
89
M.I., L., C.G., R., J., T. & J.D., R. (2015), ‘Numerical analysis of emissions from
marine engines using alternative fuels’, Polish Maritime Research 22(4), 48–52.
Molnarne, M. & Schroeder, V. (2019), ‘Hazardous properties of hydrogen and hydro-
gen containing fuel gases’, Process Safety and Environmental Protection 130, 1–5.
Murphy, T. (2004), Pliny the Elder's Natural History, Oxford University Press.
Notteboom, T. E. & Vernimmen, B. (2009), ‘The effect of high fuel costs on
liner service configuration in container shipping’, Journal of Transport Geography
17(5), 325–337.
Olmer, N., Comer, B., Roy, B., Mao, X. & Rutherford, D. (2017a), Greenhouse gas
emissions from global shipping , 2013-2015 detailed methodology.
Olmer, N., Comer, B., Roy, B., Mao, X. & Rutherford, D. (2017b), ‘Greenhouse gas
emissions from global shipping, 2013-2015’, The International Council on Clean
Transportation pp. 1–38.
Pan, F., Cheng, X., Wu, X., Wang, X. & Luo, P. (2019), ‘Transient performances of
the gas turbine recuperating waste heat through hydrogen rich fuels’, International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy 44(56), 29743–29751.
Psaraftis, H. N., ed. (2019), Sustainable Shipping, Springer International Publishing.
Psaraftis, H. N. & Kontovas, C. A. (2009), ‘Co 2 emission statistics for the world
commercial fleet’, WMU Journal of Maritime Affairs 8(1), 1–25.
Raucci, C. (2017), The potential of hydrogen to fuel international shipping, PhD
thesis, UCL (University College London).
Rosen, M. A. & Koohi-Fayegh, S. (2016), ‘The prospects for hydrogen as an energy
carrier: an overview of hydrogen energy and hydrogen energy systems’, Energy,
Ecology and Environment 1(1), 10–29.
Saito, N. (2018), ‘The economic analysis of commercial ships with hydrogen fuel cell
through case studies’.
Scott, D. S. (2007), Smelling Land : The Hydrogen Defense Against Climate Catas-
trophe.
Sharafian, A., Blomerus, P. & Mérida, W. (2019), ‘Natural gas as a ship fuel: As-
sessment of greenhouse gas and air pollutant reduction potential’, Energy Policy
131, 332–346.
Singh, V., Dincer, I. & Rosen, M. A. (2018), Life cycle assessment of ammonia produc-
tion methods, in ‘Exergetic, Energetic and Environmental Dimensions’, Elsevier,
pp. 935–959.
==PAGE:102==
90
Bibliography
Smith, M. J., Alabi, O., Hughes, N., Dodds, P., Turner, K. & Irvine, J. T. (2017), ‘The
economic impact of hydrogen and fuel cells in the uk’, H2FC Supergen, London,
UK .
Smith, T., Jalkanen, J., Anderson, B., Corbett, J., Faber, J., Hanayama, S., O’Keeffe,
E., Parker, S., Johansson, L., Aldous, L., Raucci, C., Traut, M., Ettinger, S.,
Nelissen, D., Lee, D., Ng, S., Agrawal, A., Winebrake, J., Hoen, M. & Pandey, A.
(2014), Third IMO GHG Study 2014: Executive Summary and Final Report.
Staffell, I., Dodds, P., Scamman, D., Abad, A. V., Dowell, N., Ward, K., Agnolucci,
P., Papageorgiou, L., Shah, N. & Ekins, P. (2017), ‘The role of hydrogen and fuel
cells in future energy systems’, H2FC SUPERGEN, London, UK .
Staffell, I., Scamman, D., Abad, A. V., Balcombe, P., Dodds, P. E., Ekins, P., Shah,
N. & Ward, K. R. (2019), ‘The role of hydrogen and fuel cells in the global energy
system’, Energy & Environmental Science 12(2), 463–491.
Sustainable Shipping (2019), Springer-Verlag GmbH.
URL: https://www.ebook.de/de/product/35454007/sustainableshipping.html
ToolBox, E. (2003), ‘Fuels - higher and lower calorific values’.
URL: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/fuels-higher-calorific-values-d169.html
Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry (2000), Wiley.
Ursua, A., Gandia, L. M. & Sanchis, P. (2011), ‘Hydrogen production from water
electrolysis: current status and future trends’, Proceedings of the IEEE 100(2), 410–
426.
Vasyanina, T., Alekseev, I., Bondarenko, S., Fedorchenko, O., Konoplev, K.,
Arkhipov, E. & Uborsky, V. (2008), ‘Heavy water purification from tritium by
CECE process’, Fusion Engineering and Design 83(10-12), 1451–1454.
Waitzman, D. (1999), ‘IP over Avian Carriers with Quality of Service’, RFC 2549
(Informational).
URL: http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2549.txt
Wallace, J. & Ward, C. (1983), ‘Hydrogen as a fuel’, International Journal of Hydro-
gen Energy 8(4), 255–268.
Wittrig, D. S. (2015), ‘The ammonia economy global potential and possible pathways’,
Clean Air Task Force .
World Bunker Prices (2020).
URL: https://shipandbunker.com/pricesVLSFO
Zhang, Q. & Zhang, Z. (2018), Biological hydrogen production from renewable re-
sources by photofermentation, in ‘Advances in Bioenergy’, Elsevier, pp. 137–160.
==PAGE:103==
==PAGE:104==
