==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Master’s Thesis
Autonomous Systems
Operational Modal Analysis Using a
Consumer Grade Depth Camera
Author:
Johan Bavngaard Thrane
Study Number - s193433
Supervisors:
Lazaros Nalpantidis
Evangelos Katsanos
Sandro Diord Rescinho Amador
August 1st, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Theme:
Master’s Thesis
Project period:
01/02/2020 - 01/08/2020
Author:
Johan Bavngaard Thrane
Supervisors:
Lazaros Nalpantidis
Evangelos Katsanos
Sandro Diord Rescinho Amador
Copies:
Submitted Digitally
Pages:
30
Finished:
01/08/2020
i
==PAGE:3==
Nomenclature
SHM - Structural Health Monitoring
RGB - Red-Green-Blue (Colour Camera)
RGD-D - Red-Green-Blue-Depth (Colour and Depth Camera)
2D - Two Dimensional
2.5D - Two Dimensional with Depth Information
3D - Three Dimensional
OMA - Operational Modal Analysis
UAV - Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
PFH - Point Feature Histogram
FPFH - Fast Point Feature Histogram
SPFH - Simpliﬁed Point Feature Histogram
SHOT - Signature of Histograms of OrienTation
TLS - Total Least Squares
EVD - Eigen Value Decomposition
FDD - Frequency Domain Decomposition
SD - Spectral Density
PCL - Point Cloud Library
.pcd - Point Cloud Data ﬁle
.csv - Comma Separated Values ﬁle
ROI - Region Of Interest
PP - Point Path
KNN - K-Nearest Neighbour
CPU - Central Processing Unit
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Dette speciale har til form˚al at undersøge hvorvidt brugen af et aktivt stereo kamera, fra en forbruger-
prisklasse, er fodelagtigt til brug ved optagelse af bevægelsesdata for bygninger. Denne data skal bruges
til at identiﬁcere den naturlige frekvens af bygningen ved brug af Operational Modal Analysis (OMA). Til
dette form˚al er en algoritme udviklet der bruger 3D data til at spore et punkt i en video optaget af kamer-
aet. Resulaterne herfra bliver sammenlignet med resultaterne ved brug af accelerometere. Herefter følger en
diskussion om det foresl˚aede system, dets opførsel og begrænsninger samt overvejelser for videre udvikling
og til sidst en konklusion p˚a hvorvidt det forsl˚aede system giver fyldestgørende resultater.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Related Work
2
3
Theory
4
3.1
Depth Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.1.1
Passive Stereo
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.1.2
Structured Light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.3
Active Stereo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Camera Speciﬁcations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
3D Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
3D Feature Descriptors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4.1
Keypoint Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4.2
PFH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4.3
FPFH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.4.4
SHOT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5
Operational Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5.1
Fourier Transforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5.2
Frequency-Domain Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
System Architecture
16
4.1
Hardware Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
Software Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
Implementation
20
5.1
Choosing Feature Descriptor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.1.1
Experiment 1 - Descriptor Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Creating Laboratory Test Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Choosing Camera Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.1
Experiment 2 - Camera Parameters Comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
System Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4.1
Experiment 3 - Performance Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Discussion
27
6.1
System Behaviour and Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Further Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7
Conclusion
30
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
This section will give a brief introduction to the project. It will contain a problem analysis, sketching out the
motivation for the project, which will be condensed into a research question, which is the goal of the project.
Terms will be explained in Literature Review (section 3).
1.1
Problem Analysis
When doing structural health monitoring (SHM), state of the art methods use accelerometers, mounted on a
structure, in order to perform Operational Modal Analysis (OMA) of the structure. This analysis ﬁnds the
natural frequency of a structure, which is dependent on the stiﬀness and mass of the structure. If the natural
frequency of a structure changes between two measurements, either the mass or the stiﬀness has changed.
Assuming the structure has not lost any signiﬁcant mass, the stiﬀness must have changed. If this is the case,
the structure needs maintenance. The process of attaching accelerometers can be lengthy and diﬃcult, as the
placement point can often be hard to reach. Due to this, some part of the structure might need to be shut
oﬀfor use, which can be troublesome, especially for infrastructure. Vision based methods for displacement
measurement have been introduced, which limit the amount of required measuring devices. This is done by
tracking a feature on the structure - either a mounted high-contrast sticker or more low-contrast naturally
occurring features. The latter of which is a non-contact solution [10]. Such a solution, however, requires a
proper vantage point, which is not always given. To overcome this, researchers have mounted a vision based
system on a drone, allowing for any vantage point [13]. In such a system, the displacement of the structure
is measured, relative to the position of the drone, which is not completely static. For this, the ego motion of
the drone is measured and compensated for when calculating the actual displacement of the structure. When
making a vision based system, a very important factor is the camera. Higher frame rate, higher resolution
and a global shutter greatly improve the image quality, but also greatly increases the cost of the camera.
Some solutions use high end cameras [7], while others try to use consumer grade cameras and algorithmically
compensate for the lacking quality [10]. These vision methods are all based on regular RGB cameras, giving
a 2D image, from which one can infer the depth, either by using two cameras or having a known target in
the scene. Another option is to use infrared cameras. Though they provide less rich data, as the resulting
image lacks colour, depth can be inferred in exactly the same way as when using regular RGB cameras or
by using an infrared emitter, which projects a pattern onto the scene. The upside to using infrared cameras
is that they are cheaper, meaning a consumer grade camera can have high frame rate, high resolution and
a global shutter. Whereas a lot of research has gone into measuring displacement using RGB cameras, less
has gone into using infrared cameras. With increasing aﬀordability of reasonable consumer grade infrared
cameras, there is potential for aﬀordable and adequate systems for modal analysis of structures for SHM. This
is the motivation for this project; As current non-contact solutions use high end and expensive RGB camera
systems, this project examines the viability of using infrared depth cameras as an inexpensive alternative.
1.2
Research Question
Is using depth cameras for acquiring data for use in Operational Modal Analysis a viable option, how well
can a consumer grade depth camera perform and is this adequate for estimating the natural frequency of a
structure?
1
==PAGE:7==
2
Related Work
This section presents related work in order to provide a context for the work done in this project. This is
done to show where this project places itself in this ﬁeld of research. Terms relevant for this project will be
explained in Theory (section 3).
Currently, structural modal analysis methods use sensors mounted on the structure for system identiﬁ-
cation and modal analysis. In [1] it was shown that the parameters of a bridge could be identiﬁed using
mounted sensors and the natural excitation of the structure, without the need for a complete shutdown of
the bridge. A similar approach was taken in [2], where a more complex system was developed to monitor the
health of bridges in Hong Kong. However, mounting sensors on a structure is time consuming, could require
closing oﬀthe structure while measuring and could even be dangerous. With both monetary and safety
concerns in mind, research has gone into cheaper and safer solutions. To overcome this Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs) have been used to mount sensors on structures, either by perching on and moving along the
structure as in [5], by temporarily mounting a sensor using magnetism as in [4], or by using a robotic gripper
mounted on the UAV to install and uninstall sensors as in [3].
Another way the dangers and diﬃculties of mounting sensors has been overcome is by use of computer vision
systems. In [6] a motion capture system is introduced, which uses infrared markers, though these still required
mounting on the structure. A non-contact vision system was introduced in [7], using high-end global shutter
cameras. [8] used a consumer-grade camcorder for a similar non-contact solution to identify the dynamic
characteristics of bridge hanger cables, compensating for the rolling shutter eﬀect algorithmically. In [9] a
high speed camera was used for system identiﬁcation, applying motion magniﬁcation algorithms to better
observe the small displacement of a vibrating structure. [10] used consumer grade RGB cameras for modal
analysis, considering in-plane motion and using a known excitation of the observed structure. A similar
solution was developed by [11], using a consumer grade camera for modal analysis of in-plane motion, though
here considering white-noise excitation. The vision based solutions have shown that non-contact solution can
be developed, however these still require a proper point of view, which can be diﬃcult to acquire if a structure
is placed across a river or gorge, as is the case with bridges, or if placed amongst many other buildings, as is
often the case with high rises.
A solution to this is to mount a vision based system on a UAV. In [12] this is done using a consumer-grade
UAV and the onboard camera for modal analysis of in-plane motion relative to the UAV’s position, com-
pensating the rolling shutter eﬀect algorithmically. A similar appraoch was taken in [13], expanding with
compensation of ego-motion of the UAV.
A few issues are apparent from this research: Consumer grade cameras can be used for modal analysis, how-
ever, a stereo setup is required in order to achieve 3D tracking; High-end stereo camera setups are available
and have proven very precise, but are expensive; Mounting a camera on a UAV is a viable solution for achiev-
ing better points of view for a camera; The rolling shutter of consumer-grade cameras can be compensated
for. A suggestion might be to attach a high-end vision system on a UAV, however, mounting a costly and
slightly heavy system, requires a larger UAV. Flying such a costly system comes with higher risk, as a failure
of the UAV could be costly and potentially dangerous.
An approach could be to use a cheaper and lighter stereo vision system in order to minimize cost and risk. For
this, an infrared active stereo camera is suggested. Currently, consumer grade active stereo vision cameras
2
==PAGE:8==
(also called depth cameras) are available, which have high frame rate and a global shutter, at a fraction of
the cost of RGB cameras with similar speciﬁcations. The author could, however, ﬁnd no research on the use
of active stereo cameras for modal analysis. It is unknown why there is a research gap, however, the use of
cameras for modal data acquisition is a relatively new idea and it could be that the research community has
not started considering depth cameras. It is also possible that depth cameras have not previously been of
high enough quality to be considered for research or that researchers have previously not believed that depth
camera technology was not well suited for modal data acquisition. It should be noted that it is possible that
this is the case, that depth cameras are ill suited for the proposed task. This project seeks to investigate
these considerations and examine the viability of using depth cameras.
3
==PAGE:9==
3
Theory
This section seeks to explain the underlying concepts used for the work conducted in this project. The depth
of information in each section represents the weight of the respective ﬁeld in the project. Thus “Operational
Modal Analysis” will be a short surface level introduction, while “3D Descriptors” will be much more elaborate.
3.1
Depth Vision
When taking pictures using a camera, the result is a 2D projection of a 3D scene. If one wishes to get 3D
information from the scene, additional data is required. There are many methods for this, but only three will
be discussed here: passive stereo, structured light and active stereo. Common for all methods is that they
match a pixel representing a point in one frame with a corresponding pixel in another frame and calculate
distance using triangulation, when knowing the intrinsic and extrinsic parameters of the setup. Intrinsic
parameters are the parameters describing a single camera or projector, such as lens distortion. Extrinsic
parameters describe the relationship between components of a stereo setup, such as the distance between
them and any diﬀerence in orientation.
3.1.1
Passive Stereo
Two cameras looking onto the same scene is called passive stereo vision and concerns ﬁnding a pixel point in
one camera frame, and ﬁnding the matching pixel in the other camera frame, and then, using triangulation,
calculate the distance to that point [14]. In ﬁgure 1 below, this principle is presented. Here, it is assumed
that the cameras are placed in such a way, that the image planes are in the same plane (co-planar) and the
optical axes are parallel. O and O’ are the projection centers of the two cameras. The focal lengths f are
assumed to be identical and the baseline b - the distance between the cameras - and f are known from a
prior calibration.
Figure 1: showing the principle of passive stereo vision and 3D reconstruction1.
4
==PAGE:10==
Triangulation
Given a pixel coordinate x in one frame, the objective is to ﬁnd the corresponding pixel x’ in the other frame.
The diﬀerence between the pixel locations of the point is called disparity, and is calculated as d = x - x’. As
the cameras are placed with parallel axes, there is no disparity on the y axis. Knowing the disparity d, focal
length f and baseline b, the distance zc, can be calculated as:
zc = f · b
d
(1)
As can be seen in ﬁgure 1, Pc(xc, yc, zc) is calculated from the cameras’ common reference frame, which,
in this case, is right in the middle of the two optical axes. One can also calculate xc and yc:
xc = zc · (x0 −x′
0)
f
(2)
yc = zc · (y0 −y′
0)
f
(3)
These calculations assume that the cameras are coplanar, however, this is not always the case. Then,
the mathematics for calculating Pc becomes much more complex. An extrinsic calibration is required to not
only determine the relative translational diﬀerence between the cameras, but also the rotational relationship
between the cameras. It is, however, possible to take the image frames of two non-aligned cameras and
project them onto a common plane, thus creating two coplanar image frames (see ﬁgure 2). This process is
called image rectiﬁcation, and is used to simplify 3D reconstruction by circumventing some of the complicated
calculations of non-aligned image frames ([15] chapter 11.1.1).
1Image taken from [14] chapter 4.
5
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2:
Showing the principle of image rectiﬁcation.
(1) are image frames of
non-aligned cameras, which are then projected onto a common frame in (2)2.
3.1.2
Structured Light
One camera can be replaced with a projector (also called an emitter), which can project a known pattern onto
the scene (see ﬁgure 3), which will be distorted by the surface features [17] [16]. Measuring this distortion,
one can infer the shape of a surface. The projected pattern is also used for pixel matching, as the line of
projection from the emitter onto the scene is known, and each point of the pattern has some uniqueness,
therefore, ﬁnding the matching pixel in the camera frame is much easier. The uniqueness of a point can be
helped if the projection is dynamic, meaning there will be more observations under diﬀerent circumstances.
2Image taken from http://www.close-range.com/docs/Image rectiﬁcation.pdf
6
==PAGE:12==
Figure 3: Showing the principle of structured light vision3.
3.1.3
Active Stereo
Active stereo vision, combines passive stereo vision with structured light, using an emitter and two cameras
[16]. Here, both the pixel matching from stereo vision and the pattern recognition of structured light are
used to increase the precision of 3D reconstruction and depth mapping. The use of structured light helps
to simplify the pixel matching problem and helps with performance in low-light environments and with low-
texture scenes. However, in high-light environments, such as in direct sunlight, the projected pattern can
become less eﬀective, meaning the system will rely more on passive stereo vision. The principle of active
stereo is shown in ﬁgure 4
3Image taken from https://www.roboticstomorrow.com/article/2018/04/what-is-structured-light-imaging/11821
7
==PAGE:13==
Figure 4: Showing the principle of active stereo vision4.
To summarize: depth can be inferred with a stereo setup, either with an emitter and camera or several
cameras. For all the discussed methods, the goal is to ﬁnd a pixel from one frame (image or projection)
and match it with its corresponding pixel in the other frame. From this the distance to the point can be
calculated with simple triangulation, if the intrinsic and extrinsic parameters of the setup are known. For
non-aligned setups, the problem can be simpliﬁed mathematically, by use of image rectiﬁcation.
3.2
Camera Speciﬁcations
When estimating depth using vision, the speciﬁcations of the cameras used is directly linked to the perfor-
mance of the depth vision system. There are generally three parameters that have an eﬀect: the baseline,
focal length and resolution [15] pp. 68-77. A bigger baseline will create a larger blind spot close to the
system, but will increase the disparity at longer distances, thus increasing the depth range. With higher
resolution, more pixels are used to describe the scene, thus increasing the resolution of the disparity map and
the precision of depth estimation. Finally, magniﬁcation is increased with focal length, while ﬁeld of view of
the camera is inversely proportional. Increasing focal length also increases the depth range. When choosing
cameras there is also the question of the shutter. There are two types to choose between: rolling- and global
shutters. A rolling shutter will capture an image one pixel row at a time, whereas a global shutter captures
the entire image at one instance ([15] p. 74). Using a rolling shutter will result in a disparity in time between
the diﬀerent rows of the image, this is called the rolling shutter eﬀect. The eﬀect of this is very obvious when
taking images of cyclical scenes, such as rotor or a vibrating structure (see ﬁgure 5).
4Image taken from https://www.e-consystems.com/blog/camera/what-is-a-stereo-vision-camera/
8
==PAGE:14==
Figure 5: Presenting the rolling shutter eﬀect by comparison of pictures taken with
a global shutter (left) and a rolling shutter (right)5.
3.3
3D Representation
When taking images there are many ways to represent the world and each one has diﬀerent advantages.
Presented here will be the diﬀerence from depth maps (2.5D) to full 3D representations.
Depth Maps
A depth map is a 2D image, where the value of each pixel represents the distance to said pixel instead of a
colour intensity [15] pp. 534-535. This is often done in grayscale, with white being closest to the camera,
and black being the furthest away. Depth maps are sometimes referred to as 2.5D, as the resulting image is
technically still a 2D image and the depth is perspective dependent. As such, if a depth image is represented
in 3D space, the resulting image would still be a 2D plane. It is also possible to have depth maps combined
with RGB images, in so-called RGB-D images. This creates an image which is richer in information, which
can be used to increase uniqueness of image features.
Point Clouds
Another way to represent a 3D scene is by using point clouds. For each pixel in the depth image, a point
is created, representing the position of the pixel [15] pp. 534-537. The points are mono coloured, making
them diﬃcult to observe for humans. However, this representation is advantageous in computer vision, as
the representation is perspective independent. Because of this and the lack of texture, feature descriptors
in point clouds are diﬀerent from 2D descriptors. Instead of ﬁnding diﬀerences in pixel values, 3D feature
descriptors are based on surface normals. There are diﬀerent methods for calculating surface normals from
a point cloud, either a surface estimation is made, by creating a mesh between neighbouring points and the
a surface normal is calculated, or the surface normals can be approximated directly on the point cloud ([18]
p. 45). Much as how some 2D feature descriptors use change in image gradients, 3D descriptors use change
5Image taken from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dNVtMmLlnoE&feature=emb title
9
==PAGE:15==
in surface normals between the query point and its neighbours to describe a feature.
3.4
3D Feature Descriptors
When tracking a point in 3D, it is ﬁrst necessary to ﬁnd a distinct point to track, called a keypoint. once this
is done, one needs to select a feature descriptor for tracking. There are many diﬀerent 3D feature descriptors,
however, only three of these will be discussed here. These are:
• Point Feature Histogram (PFH) [19]
• Fast Point Feature Histogram (FPFH) [20]
• Signature of Histograms of OrienTation (SHOT) [21]
3.4.1
Keypoint Detection
When tracking a point, in 3D or otherwise, choosing which point to track is vital, as some points might be
indistinguishable from others. In 3D this is most apparent when trying to track a point on a plane. Since
one compares the surface normals surrounding the query point, and since all surface normals on a plane are
exactly the same, there is no way to distinguish two points from each other. A big challenge here is then
how to pick a distinct point. Doing it manually is time consuming and prone to error, as point clouds can
be quite dense, and picking exactly the right point can be diﬃcult. For this, a keypoint detector is used.
The principle is to compare topographical features around each point in a dataset and ﬁnd points that are
distinct due to topographical variation. [22]
3.4.2
PFH
PFH utilizes a histogram of normals of the query point and its neighbours as a feature descriptor (see ﬁgure
6). First, a neighbour search radius is set, any point within this radius is considered a neighbour. The
diﬀerence in direction of the surface normals between each point is computed. All of these diﬀerences are
put into a histogram and binned, most commonly in 125 bins, representing 125 diﬀerent orientations. This
histogram is then the descriptor for the query point. The computational time of PFH for an entire point
cloud is O(nk2), where n is the amount of points in the cloud and k is the amount of neighbours.
10
==PAGE:16==
Figure 6: Showing the principle of PFH, where pq (red) is the query point, pk1 −pk5
(blue) are neighbours, p6 −p11 (brown) are non-neighbours. The dotted line is the
neighbour search radius and the full lines are the considered relationships between
surface normals6.
In order to calculate the diﬀerence between two points and their associated normal vectors, a frame of
reference is ﬁrst made for one of the points (see ﬁgure 7).
Figure 7: Showing how a frame of reference is calculated7
Using this frame of reference, one can then calculate the diﬀerence between two normal vectors ns and
nt:
α = v · nt
(4)
φ = u · (pt −ps)
d
(5)
6Image taken from https://pcl.readthedocs.io/projects/tutorials/en/latest/pfh estimation.html#pfh-estimation
7Image taken from https://pcl.readthedocs.io/projects/tutorials/en/latest/pfh estimation.html#pfh-estimation
11
==PAGE:17==
θ = arctan(w · nt, u · nt)
(6)
where d is the distance between the two points ps and pt, d = ||pt −ps||2. The quadruplet ⟨α, φ, θ, d⟩is
computed for each pair of two points in the k-neighborhood.
3.4.3
FPFH
Built on top of PFH is FPFH, which seeks to bring down the computation complexity from O(nk2) to O(nk).
this is done by ﬁrst calculating the relationship between the query point and its neighbours as described for
PFH features above. This is called a Simpliﬁed PFH (SPFH). This is then repeated for each neighbour
with that point as the new query point (see ﬁgure 8). The SPFH of the query point and the SPFH of each
neighbour are then weighed together in a ﬁnal histogram, described as:
FPFH(pq) = SPFH(pq) + 1
k
k
X
i=1
1
ωk
· SPFH(pq)
(7)
Where pq is the query point, k is the number of naighbours and ωk is the distance from pq to its neighbour
pk
Figure 8: showing the principle of FPFH. pq is the query point, pk are the immediate
neighbours, p6 −p11 are secondary neighbours and p12 −p17 are non-neighbours. The
dotted line indicates the ﬁrst neighbour search radius and the coloured circles indicate
the secondary neighbour searches. The straight red lines indicate ﬁrst SPFH searches,
black lines indicate secondary SPFH searches for all k neighbours. Bold lines indicate
being counted twice (once for each of the points involved)8
3.4.4
SHOT
There are generally two approaches to 3D descriptors: signatures and histograms. Signatures use the ge-
ometrical shape of the neighbourhood around the query point pq, with a ﬁxed frame of reference, with an
origin in pq to compare features [21]. This is a very descriptive method, but small errors in deﬁning the
8Image taken from https://pcl.readthedocs.io/projects/tutorials/en/latest/fpfh estimation.html#fpfh-estimation
12
==PAGE:18==
frame of reference or small measuring errors in the geometrical data, can lead to signiﬁcant errors in the
signature. Histogram based methods encode local topological features (e.g. curvature or surface normals)
into histograms in order to describe the point. This makes histogram descriptors more robust, but also less
descriptive. SHOT is a combination of both types. As seen in ﬁgure 9, the neighbourhood around the query
point is divided into several areas. In each of these local regions, a histogram of orientation (surface normals)
is computed. In this way, the topological features are described through the histograms, while also describing
the geometrical relationship between local regions and their histograms. There are 32 local regions, 8 azimuth
divisions (only 4 shown in the ﬁgure), 2 distance divisions and 2 elevation divisions. On top of that, there
are 11 bins in the local histograms, resulting in a descriptor length of 352
Figure 9: Showing the azimuth divisions (vertical line on spheres), elevation divisions
(horizontal line) and the distance divisions (blue and grey spheres). Note that only 16
divisions are shown, while 32 exist9.
As SHOT is partly a signature based method, a local frame of reference is required. This is done by ”A
Total Least Squares (TLS) estimation of the normal direction is obtained [...] by Eigen Value Decomposition
(EVD) of the covariance matrix, M, of the k-nearest neighbors pi of the point” ([21] pg 360). Which, in [21]
is formulated as:
M =
1
P
i:di⩽R(R −di)
X
i:di⩽R
(R −di)(pi −p)(pi −p)T
(8)
Where d = ||pi −p||, R is the search radius, pi is the neighbour point with index i, and p is the query
point. In this formulation, distant points are assigned less weight and p is used as the centroid. However, the
axes of the reference frame found, need to be disambiguated, which is done by orienting the sign of each unit
vector with the majority of vectors it represents. The mathematics behind this will not be expanded upon.
For each point inside the search radius, a surface normal ni is calculated. The angle between the surface
normal of the query point nq and ni is then calculated as:
cos(θi) = nq · ni
(9)
9Image taken from [21] p. 363
13
==PAGE:19==
Where θ is the angle between nq and ni. By deﬁning the bins of the histograms in cosine of the angle
instead of just the angle, a ﬁner binning is achieved on angles that are closer to orthogonal to nq. The
result is added to one of the 11 bins pertaining to the histogram belonging to the local region in which the
neighbour point pi is located.
3.5
Operational Modal Analysis
The following section is based on [23], chapters 1, 10 and 11. OMA, can be summarized as: “OMA is the
process of characterizing the dynamic properties of an elastic structure by identifying its natural modes of
vibration from the operating responses.” [Brincker, R, p. 3]. That is: Observing at which frequencies a
structure vibrates in order to identify which excitation frequencies will resonate with the structure. The
resonant, or natural, frequencies of a structure can be used for diﬀerent purposes. One is to ensure that a
building is suitable for the environment in which it is build as for example with a bridge: a bridge must not
resonate with the wind blowing on it, the traﬃc moving across it or with potential earthquakes in the region
it is built. If a bridge resonates with any of these, the bridge could start to swing violently and potentially
collapse. Another use is in SHM, where the natural frequency of a structure is used as a metric for changes
in the condition of the structure. As the natural frequency of a structure is dependent on its stiﬀness and
mass, any change in any of these will change the natural frequency. Thus, if the natural frequency changes
in a structure it requires maintenance.
In OMA accelerometers mounted at diﬀerent locations are used to measure the movement of a structure over
time, while the structure is excited by white noise (or close-to white noise). This time series data is then
converted to the frequency domain, using Fourier transforms, in order to identify the natural frequency of
the structure. There are diﬀerent methods in OMA, which use diﬀerent combinations of Fourier transforms,
ﬁlters and other signal processing methods, but only the speciﬁc OMA method used in this project and the
principle of Fourier analysis will be presented below.
3.5.1
Fourier Transforms
A Fourier transform is used to move between the time and frequency domains. This is used to deconstruct
periodic signals as any continuous and periodic signal f(t) in the time domain can be represented as by a sum
of sinusoids. A Fourier transform from the time domain to the frequency domain (forward Fourier transform)
can be expressed as:
F(k) =
Z ∞
−∞
f(t)e−2πiktdt
(10)
Where k is the frequency of the component sinusoids, e−2πikt is the k-th sinusoid at time t.
In the
frequency domain, the contribution of a component signal will be represented by a high amplitude at the
corresponding frequency, which can be seen in ﬁgure 10.
14
==PAGE:20==
Figure 10: Showing the transformation of a time series (red) into frequency domain
(blue), where the component frequencies can be identiﬁed (blue peaks). It can be seen
that the higher frequency signals in this example contribute more to the time series
data (note that the amplitude units are arbitrary)10.
3.5.2
Frequency-Domain Decomposition
Frequency-Domain Decomposition FDD is an OMA method for modal (natural frequency) identiﬁcation -
estimating modal parameters - which builds on top of the classical OMA frequency domain method, which
had an issue in identifying diﬀerent modes when these were not well separated in the frequency domain ([23],
pg. 265).
When converting the time series data to frequency domain, it is represented as a matrix called the Spectral
Density (SD) matrix G(f). Using SVD on the SD matrix, resulting in:
G(f) = USU H
(11)
”the singular values s2
n in the diagonal matrix S should be interpreted as the auto spectral densities of the
modal coordinates, and the singular vectors – that is the columns in U = [u1, u2, . . . ] – should be interpreted
as the mode shapes” ([23] pp. 267)
10Image taken from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fast Fourier transform#/media/File:FFT of Cosine Summation Function.svg
15
==PAGE:21==
4
System Architecture
This section will present the architecture of the point tracking system by ﬁrst going over the hardware and
then presenting the components of the software and the pipeline of the point tracking algorithm.
4.1
Hardware Architecture
The physical system consists of:
• Laptop computer for data acquisition
• An Intel d435i depth camera [?] (see ﬁgure 11)
• Desktop computer for oﬄine data processing
The d435i was chosen as it has a good combination of high frame rate, a reasonable price and global shutters
on the infrared receivers.
Figure 11: Showing the Intel d435i camera11
The d435i uses active infrared stereo vision (see section 3.1.3) to infer depth. The camera consists of an
infrared emitter and two infrared receivers (cameras). The stereo infrared receivers can infer depth both by
way of regular stereo vision techniques, and using the emitter. This projects a static infrared pattern onto
the scene, allowing the camera to better infer depth, especially on surfaces with poor surface features. The
depth estimation occurs internally in the camera, why the exact methods used are unknown. The frame rate
of the receivers is dependent on the resolution, meaning a high frame rate requires low resolution (848x480
at 90 fps), while a high resolution requires a low frame rate (1280x720 at 30fps). The camera also includes
a regular RGB receiver, however, this was not used in this project.
In the experimental setup, the camera was controlled from a laptop. This was only used to interface with
the camera in order to start and stop a recording, and to store the recorded video ﬁle. All processing of the
video data was done oﬄine. Therefore, there would be no issue with controlling the camera with a micro
controller, such as a Raspberry Pi.
For data processing a computer with an AMD Ryzen 5 3600X 6-Core 3.80 GHz processor was used.
4.2
Software Architecture
The software for processing the depth video is compiled by the author, using the open source library called
Point Cloud Library (PCL) [24] and two diﬀerent Python implementations of this: pclpy [25] and python-pcl
11Image taken from https://www.intelrealsense.com/depth-camera-d435
16
==PAGE:22==
[26]. pclpy was initially used, however, due to a missing function, python-pcl was also used.
Before the point tracker can be started, the depth video must ﬁrst be converted to point cloud data as
described in section 3.3. This is a simple, but time consuming process, where the depth video is converted
into a .pcd ﬁles, which are then numbered chronologically according to their appearance in the video. Once
the depth video data has been converted to point clouds, the point tracker can be started.
There can be said to be two phases of the point tracker. The ﬁrst phase concerns picking a point one
wishes to track and the second phase concerns ﬁnding this point in subsequent frames. A ﬂow chart of the
point tracker is presented in ﬁgure 12.
First, .pcd0 is loaded and displayed. The user then manually selects a point which the user wants to
track. The algorithm selects a region of interest (ROI) around the chosen point. In the ROI, keypoints are
computed (see section 3.4.1). the user then selects a keypoint which will be used as the search point (p0). p0
is appended to the point path (PP). A feature descriptor is then computed for p0, which is called the search
feature (f0). Phase 1 is now complete.
With i ranging from 1 to the amount of .pcd ﬁles: .pcdi is loaded. An ROI centered in the coordinates of p0 is
created. For each point (pn) in the ROI, a feature descriptor fn is computed. Each of these are then compared
against f0 using K-Nearest Neighbour (KNN) search. The point pn for which fn best corresponds to f0 is
appended to PP. Once all .pcd ﬁles have been considered, PP is saved as a .csv ﬁle, and the code terminates.
17
==PAGE:23==
Figure 12: Showing a ﬂow chart of the process of computing the point path. Note
that process steps are in yellow, data objects are in purple, decisions are in blue and
in- and outputs are in grey with dashed arrows (arrow direction depends on whether
it is an in- or output).
PP contains a position over time. In order to do OMA (see section 3.5), this needs to be converted to
acceleration over time. This is calculated as ﬁnite diﬀerences:
v(ti) = pi −pi−1
ti −ti−1
(12)
18
==PAGE:24==
a(ti) = vi −vi−1
ti −ti−1
(13)
Note that for each iteration of ﬁnite diﬀerences, the time series becomes one time step shorter. The
acceleration time series is also saved as a .csv ﬁle and can then be loaded into a pre-existing OMA script
for FDD as described in section 3.5.2. The FDD script [27] follows the principles described in [23] chapter
10.3. In the script, the acceleration time series is transformed into frequency domain and the main response
frequencies are identiﬁed as described in section 3.5.1. The output of this is a few frequencies which, if the
tracking system performs adequately, are the natural frequencies of the observed structure.
19
==PAGE:25==
5
Implementation
This section will present the remaining decisions which require attention for the system to be ready for use.
First, a feature descriptor needs to be chosen, as many are available. Then the camera parameters need to
be set. Both of these decision will be based on empirical data, the gathering of which is presented below along
with a thorough description of each issue. Lastly, a system performance test will be presented, which is used
to compare the proposed camera based system against the state of the art method, the latter of which are used
as a ground truth.
5.1
Choosing Feature Descriptor
There are many available 3D feature descriptors, each with their own strengths and weaknesses. Choosing
one is the essential. There are many parameters to measure the descriptor on:
• Computation Time
• Precision
• Accuracy
• Drift
As the dataset which are considered in this project are at about 100 seconds, at either 30 or 90 frames
per second, resulting in 3000 to 9000 frames, even a few seconds per frame, can result in hours of extra
computation time. A descriptor also needs to be precise, meaning there should be little noise when tracking
a point. Otherwise, even a completely static point will be seen as constantly vibrating. Accuracy is a measure
of how far from the actual position, a point is measured to be. One can also consider the overall drift of
a descriptor, if this is present, then a static point will appear to, over time, move further and further away
from its actual position.
5.1.1
Experiment 1 - Descriptor Comparison
In order to test the feasibility of diﬀerent feature descriptors, an experiment was conducted. A static dataset
was created, meaning the camera was set to ﬁlm a static structure, which has distinct features. On this
dataset, each feature desriptor was used to track three diﬀerent points. For each point tracked, the descriptor
was measured on:
• Computation time - how long it takes to compute the feature for a single frame.
• Mean Error - how much each measurement deviates from the chosen tracking point.
• Mean Noise - how much each measurement deviates from the previous measurement
• Drift - how much the last measurement deviates from the tracking point
Measuring computation time is used to remove descriptors that are too time consuming. The mean error
is used to measure accuracy, while mean noise is used to measure precision. Drift is measured to ensure that
the mean result of the tracker does not change over time. For each descriptor a search radius can be set,
20
==PAGE:26==
which determines how many points around the query point are considered. The results can be seen in ﬁgure
13.
Figure 13: Showing the results of one the descriptor comparison test for on of the
three points. Descriptors marked in green perform satisfyingly on all parameters, de-
scriptors marked in yellow have a slight problem in one or more parameters, descriptors
marked with orange have a major performance issue, descriptors marked in red have
critical performance issues
Of all the feature descriptors, only SHOT performed satisfyingly in accuracy, precision and drift. Of the
SHOT descriptors, only SHOT with a radius of 0.03 meters performed the tracking in a timely manner.
Results
Feature descriptor chosen: SHOT with radius = 0.03
Discussion on Results
This test was conducted with a frame rate of 90 fps and a resolution of 848x480 and the system can only track
a single point at a time. Furthermore, the computation time varies even when run on the same computer
without changing any parameters. Therefore, tracking a single point across 100 seconds quickly takes over 8
hours to compute.
5.2
Creating Laboratory Test Data
With a feature descriptor chosen, the system is ready to be used in a laboratory environment. For this, a
new testing environment was used (see ﬁgure 14). A metal structure, consisting of four legs and a horizontal
plate stands in front of the camera. Pointed at two of the edges of the metal plate are three air nozzles,
which are used to excite the structure. On the edges opposite the nozzles are mounted four accelerometers,
two on each side. These measure acceleration along a single axis, perpendicular to the side they are mounted
on. On the table is also mounted a steel block.
For the setup of the environment, the metal block was moved closer to the accelerometers at the bottom
right of the structure shown in ﬁgure 14. Each dataset created in this environment will consist of a depth
21
==PAGE:27==
Figure 14: Showing the laboratory experiment, with the camera (red), air nozzles
(blue), accelerometers (green), metal block (purple). note that not all accelerometers
and air nozzles are shown.
video and a corresponding accelerometer measurement, for later comparison.
Each dataset will last 100
seconds.
Due to time constraints and the closing of DTU labs during the COVID-19 pandemic, limited access to
and time in the lab was available. Due to this and the long processing time of a single video, only four
datasets were created:
• 848x480 resolution at 90 fps - 0.5 meters from the scene
• 848x480 resolution at 90 fps - 0.75 meters from the scene
• 1280x720 resolution at 30 fps - 0.5 meters from the scene
• 1280x720 resolution at 30 fps - 0.75 meters from the scene
These datasets are used in both experiment 2 and experiment 3.
5.3
Choosing Camera Parameters
Another set of parameters still need to be chosen. These are the resolution of the camera and the distance
from the camera to the scene. This will help in identifying some of the limitations of the system, and help in
identifying the optimal setup for the system. Testing performance of the point tracker on all four datasets,
the setup which yields the best results is used for the later performance test.
22
==PAGE:28==
5.3.1
Experiment 2 - Camera Parameters Comparison
In order to test the performance under diﬀerent camera parameters, a single point in each dataset was tracked.
The point chosen was the closest corner of the metal block. This was chosen as a corner is a strong keypoint,
and because a point along the edge of structure (i.e. accelerometer locations) will be more prone to noise,
due to the large disparity between the edge and the background, which would be the ﬂoor or wall behind the
structure.
From the point path computed on each dataset, the acceleration of the tracked point is calculated as shown
in equations 12 and 13 in section 4.2. This is then used for OMA to estimate the modal response of the
structure. This is then compared against the results of OMA, using accelerometer data in ﬁgure 15.
Figure 15: Showing the modal response calculated from each dataset. with 1280x720
- 0.75m (top left), 1280x720 - 0.5m (bottom left), 848x480 - 0.75m (top middle),
848x480 - 0.5m (bottom middle) and accelerometer data (top right)
The goal is to ﬁnd the main modal responses, identiﬁed by the peaks in the graphs. as can clearly be seen
when comparing accelerometer data (right graph in ﬁgure 15) against low resolution camera data (middle
graphs), the low resolution datasets resulted in a very noisy frequency response, from which no modes can
be identiﬁed. The high resolution datasets (left graphs) resulted in less noisy data, but only in the 0.5 meter
dataset could a peak be seen. Even for high resolution datasets, the noise level was too high, as only the peak
should exceed an amplitude of 0 dB, which is not the case. During these tests it was also observed that the
frame rate of the camera is unstable, especially at high frame rates. With a frame rate set to 30, the average
frame rate was around 27 fps, while only 45 fps when set to 90. As a ﬁxed sampling rate is important in
the OMA calculations, the high frame rate setup cannot be used. For the high resolution setups, the system
performed better at 0.5m.
23
==PAGE:29==
Results
The best available camera parameters are 1280x720 resolution at 30 frames per second with a distance of 0.5
meters to the scene.
Discussion on Results
This experiment was only designed to be a pointer towards which camera parameters performed the best. A
more thorough examination could be conducted, with more distances and diﬀerent resolution, however, such
an endeavour would take a considerable amount of time, and will not be pursued. It is also important to
note that OMA would require tracking of at least three points in order to provide proper results, while only
a single point is tracked here. However, tracking three points on all four datasets could take over a week of
continuous computation.
5.4
System Performance
With the camera parameters selected, a full test can be conducted, tracking three points, calculating the
acceleration of each point and using this data for OMA to potentially identify the main response frequencies.
5.4.1
Experiment 3 - Performance Test
For this test, three points are tracked, each located near one of the corners at which accelerometers are
mounted. The tracked points can be seen in ﬁgure 16. It should be noted that two of these points are further
from the camera than 0.5 meters. It is also important to note that the points tracked are weaker keypoints
than the one tracked in experiment 2.
Figure 16: Showing the approximate locations of the three tracked points: PointO
(red), PointX (green) and pointY (blue).
System parameters:
• Resolution: 1280x720
• Frame rate: 30 fps
24
==PAGE:30==
• Distance to PointO: 0.42m
• Distance to PointX: 0.69m
• Distance to PointY: 0.60m
• Feature descriptor: SHOT with radius = 0.03m
In order to reduce noise, a ﬁlter was created and applied to the camera data. First, a mean m and standard
deviation σ of the dataset was calculated. Then, any point P[i] more than 3σ from m was changed to a mean
value of the preceding and succeeding points like so:
if |P[i]| > mean(P) + 3σ :
P[i] = P[i −1] + P[i + 1] −P[i −1]
2
(14)
The results of OMA using the camera data can be seen in ﬁgure 17 while the results using accelerometer
data can be seen in ﬁgure 18. From the resulting graphs, one can read the natural frequencies as the peaks
that rise above 0 dB. For the accelerometer data, this is 2.926Hz and 4.934Hz. However, as the camera data
is very noisy, many peaks in the graph are above 0 dB, while the only distinct peak is at 0.9287 Hz
Figure 17: Showing the results of experiment 3. Note that the noise level is high
enough that most values are above 0 (marked with a red line). The only peak is at a
frequency of 0.9287
25
==PAGE:31==
Figure 18: Showing the results of OMA on the accelerometer data, used for compar-
ison against camera data. The peaks are at frequencies of 2.926 and 4.934. 0 dB is
marked with a red line
Results
The results of OMA using camera data proved too noisy to properly identify the response frequencies. The
only distinct peak was at 0.9287 Hz, which is far from the actual frequencies of 2.926 Hz and 4.934 Hz.
Discussion on Results
From these results, it is clear that the system, in its current form, is inadequate for use in collecting data for
OMA. It can be seen from the resulting graph that the camera data is too noisy, meaning no results from
this can be trusted. The reason for the noise and a discussion on how to overcome this issue will follow in
the next section.
26
==PAGE:32==
6
Discussion
In this section, the methods, observations and ﬁndings of this project will be discussed. It will include re-
ﬂections on the work conducted in this report; observations on the behaviour and performance of the point
tracking system; how the system could be improved and the results of the experiments and what these mean
6.1
System Behaviour and Performance
The camera had issues with reﬂections in the observed scene. Any reﬂection of light on a surface would
result in an empty or noisy reading for the respective pixel. This was a larger problem with more reﬂective
surfaces, but also depending on the angle of observation of the surface, as a higher angle (measured from
the surface normal) results in more reﬂected light. Furthermore, as the structured light part of the camera
relies on the reﬂection of emitted light, a suﬃciently high angle of observation will result in none of the emit-
ted light being reﬂected, meaning the surface can not be measured. From this, it can be concluded that a
surface is easiest to measure when it is parallel to the image plane (meaning perpendicular to the camera axis).
It was also observed that the camera had issues when measuring points along the edge of an object. This
is an inherent problem of stereo vision, as one camera lens can see things the other can not. Any point
observed by one lens but not the other is not measured, resulting in holes in the depth map. This makes
points along edges harder to measure.
During use of the system it was ﬁrst found that the computation time of the feature descriptors vary
greatly depending on which feature descriptor was used, the search radius of the descriptor, and the size of
the search space. Due to its superior performance, the SHOT descriptor was used, even though it was one
of the slower descriptors. Because of this, the search radius could be set to no larger than 0.03 m, as any
larger radius would result in a infeasible computation time on the computer used. With a more powerful
processor, this radius could possibly be increased, thus increasing the precision of the system, as was seen in
experiment 1 (section 5.1.1). The search space was reduced by setting an ROI around the query points. The
radius of this ROI was set so as to be larger than required to ensure it would not interfere with the point
tracking. However, one could empirically determine an optimal ROI radius, which would likely be smaller
than the one used here, thus reducing computation time.
Like the ROI radius, many parameters were not optimized, as the tests required for this would be too
time consuming. Running such tests and ﬁnding optimal parameters could improve system performance,
however, the impact of such an optimization is unknown.
During experiment 2 (see section 5.3.1) it was observed that the frame rate of the camera was unstable.
When set to 30fps, the average frame rate would be 27fps, while set to 90fps, the average frame rate was
45fps. This meant that the high frame rate datasets could not be used for OMA, as a ﬁxed sampling rate is
important here. As the problem was observed late in the project there was no time to thoroughly examine
the source of the issue. Form observations, the author believes that the issue most likely stems from both an
issue during conversion from depth map to point cloud data and from the camera itself.
27
==PAGE:33==
It was found, during the camera parameter test (section 5.3.1) that the system performed best at high
resolution and low frame rate. However, when testing feature descriptors in section 5.1.1, the camera pa-
rameters were set opposite. repeating the test with the optimal settings might yield diﬀerent results. This
should also be considered if the camera is replaced, as the shortcomings of the d435 might have had an eﬀect
on the performance of the feature descriptors.
It was found that the positional time series resulting from the point tracker gave a noisy signal. The
reason for the noisy could be attributed to many factors, however exactly which and how much each factor
contributes would take a very large amount of testing. As seen in experiment 3 (section 5.4.1), the noise of
the signal was reduced using a simple ﬁlter, changing values of outlier datapoints. Improving the ﬁlter would
help to reduce the noise of the signal.
As was mentioned in section 2, no research could be found concerning the use of depth cameras for modal
analysis. It is still unclear why this research gap exists, however, the author believes that depth cameras have
potential in this ﬁeld. Though the results of this project did not compare against state of the art methods,
it is believed that this is not an inherent issue of active stereo vision, but a question of inadequate camera
speciﬁcations and the issues presented above.
6.2
Further Development
Though the system did not yield adequate results, this does not mean that the core idea - using depth cam-
eras for data acquisition for OMA - should be discarded. If one is able to overcome the major issues found
in this project, the suggested system could potentially work.
There were many behaviours and issues observed during usage of the system and many suggestions on
what to do to improve the performance of the system. Choosing which one to consider ﬁrst is important, as
the impact of ﬁxing minor issues will be diﬃcult to observe if the major issues persist. In this work the three
main issues are considered to be, in descending order of importance: the unstable frame rate, the precision
and noise of the system, the computation time.
To overcome the sampling rate issue, the conversion of depth map data to point clouds should be exam-
ined thoroughly, as there appears to be some frame rate drop in this. It should also be examined whether the
camera itself has issues with the frame rate, as the only way to improve this would be to use a diﬀerent cam-
era. Research should go into whether such a camera exists, and whether it exists within the same price range.
Considering the issue of noise, there are many areas to examine. Firstly, a higher point cloud density
appears to improve the performance of the point tracker. This can be achieved by either moving the camera
closer to the scene or by increasing the camera resolution, the latter of which would require another camera.
Secondly, further examining the feature descriptor and its parameters could improve precision of the tracker.
Both of these options could increase computation time. Thirdly, ﬁnding a better ﬁltering method could help
to reduce noise further, since the current method is quite simple.
28
==PAGE:34==
In order to reduce computation time many things could be considered. The ﬁrst and most obvious would
be to reduce the search ﬁeld by reducing the ROI radius. Secondly, a mid range consumer grade CPU was used
for this project and using an industrial grade CPU could greatly decrease computation time. Thirdly, one can
choose to sacriﬁce precision in order to reduce computation time by reducing feature descriptor search radius.
29
==PAGE:35==
7
Conclusion
In this project an active stereo vision camera based system for data acquisition for use in operational modal
analysis was proposed. The system consisted of a consumer grade camera, called an Intel d435i depth cam-
era. This was combined with an algorithm written by the author, using python implementations of the Point
Cloud Library (python-pcl and pclpy). The proposed system was used to track several points on a structure,
creating a time series of the position of the points over time. This time series was then diﬀerentiated into
acceleration time series, which was then used as input for a Frequency-Domain Decomposition. The goal
of this project was to examine whether the acceleration time series were adequately precise to estimate the
natural frequencies of the observed structure. In order to measure the performance of the system, it was
compared against a state of the art method, using accelerometers to create a similar acceleration time series.
When choosing which feature descriptor to use, SHOT was chosen, as this proved to have the highest
precision and accuracy, while showing minimal drift over time, as described in section 5.1. a search radius of
0.03m was used as this was considered the best balance between precision and computation time.
In section 5.3 it was found that the system had an unstable frame rate, which was less stable at higher
frame rates. Therefore, a low frame rate was used. Lower frame rates also allowed for higher resolution.
It was also found that the system performed best when the camera was placed closer to the scene, which
was assumed to be due to the larger point cloud density. Therefore, the camera parameters were set to a
resolution of 1280x720 at a frame rate of 30fps with the camera placed approximately 0.5 m from the closest
corner of the observed structure.
In section 5.4 it was found that the output acceleration time series was too noisy to properly identify any
response frequency of the structure. This meant that the system could not adequately measure the position
time series of a point for use in OMA.
A reﬂection on the behaviour and issues of the system and ideas for how to address these issues followed
after in section 6. It was found that the major issues of the system was, in descending order: an unstable
frame rate, a noisy position signal when tracking the point, and the computation time. In order to improve
the system, it was suggested that more research go into ﬁnding a camera with a more stable frame rate
and ensuring that there is no frame drops when converting the depth video to point cloud data; examining
whether a higher point cloud density could help mitigate the issue of noisy position measurements; examining
how to better ﬁlter the position data; optimizing all system parameters; reducing the search space; and using
industrial processors for computation.
To summarize and to answer the research question in section 1.2: it was found, through experimentation,
that the proposed system was unable to gather data at a level where the data could be used in OMA to
identify natural frequencies of an examined structure. Some critical issues with the system were identiﬁed and
the authors suggestions for how to overcome these issues were presented. Furthermore, minor issues, mostly
pertaining to improper optimization were identiﬁed and suggestions for what to optimize were presented.
30
==PAGE:36==
References
[1] Doebling, Scott and Farrar, Charles and Cornwell, Phillip; (1996) A statistical comparison of impact and
ambient testing results from the Alamosa Canyon Bridge; United States: N. p., 1996. Web.
[2] Wong, Kai-Yuen; (2004); Instrumentation and health monitoring of cable-supported bridges; Structural
Control and Health Monitoring 11: p. 91–124.
[3] Zhou, Hao and Hirose, Mitsuhito and Greenwood, William and Xiao, Yong and Lynch, Jerome and
Zekkos, Dimitrios and Kamat, Vineet; (2016); Demonstration of UAV deployment and control of mobile
wireless sensing networks for modal analysis of structures; Proceedings of the SPIE, Volume 9803, id.
98031X 7 pp.
[4] Na, Wongi S., and Baek, Jongdae; (2017); Impedance-Based Non-Destructive Testing Method Combined
with Unmanned Aerial Vehicle for Structural Health Monitoring of Civil Infrastructures.; Applied Sciences,
7, 15.
[5] Wan Cheol Myeong and Kwang Yik Jung and Sung wook Jung and Yong Hun Jeong and Hyun Myung;
(2015); Drone-Type Wall-Climbing Robot Platform For Structural Health Monitoring; 6th International
Conference on Advances in Experimental Structural Engineering.
[6] Oh, Byung Kwan and Hwangab, Jin Woo and Kim, Yousok and Chob, Tongjun and Hyo Seon Park;
(2015); Vision-based system identiﬁcation technique for building structures using a motion capture system;
Journal of Sound and Vibration, Volume 356, Pages 72-85.
[7] Feng, Dongming; Feng, Maria Q.; Ozer, Ekin and Fukuda, Yoshio; (2015); A Vision-Based Sensor for
Noncontact Structural Displacement Measurement; Sensors 2015, 15(7), 16557-16575.
[8] Kim, Sung-Wan and Kim, Nam-Sik; (2013); Dynamic characteristics of suspension bridge hanger cables
using digital image processing; NDT and E International, Volume 59, Pages 25-33.
[9] Chen, Justin and Wadhwa, Neal and Cha, Young-Jin and Durand, Fr´edo and Freeman, William and
Buyukozturk, Oral; (2015); Modal identiﬁcation of simple structures with high-speed video using motion
magniﬁcation; Journal of Sound and Vibration, Volume 345, pages 58-71
[10] Yoon, Hyungchul and Elanwar, Hazem and Choi, Hajin and Golparvar-Fard, Mani and Spencer, Billie
F. Jr.; (2016); Target-free approach for vision-based structural system identiﬁcation using consumer-grade
cameras; Structural Control and Health Monitoring, Volume 23-12, pages 1405-1416
[11] Choi, Insub and Kim, JunHee and Kim, Donghyun; (2016). A Target-Less Vision-Based Displacement
Sensor Based on Image Convex Hull Optimization for Measuring the Dynamic Response of Building Struc-
tures.; Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), 16(12), 2085.
[12] Yoon, Hyungchul and Hoskere, Vedhus and Park, Jong-Woong and Spencer, Billie F. Jr.; (2017); Cross-
Correlation-Based Structural System Identiﬁcation Using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.; Sensors (Basel,
Switzerland), 17(9), 2075.
==PAGE:37==
[13] Yoon, Hyungchul and Shin, Jaeho and Spencer, Billie F. Jr.; (2017); Structural Displacement Measure-
ment Using an Unmanned Aerial System; Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, Volume
33-3, pages 183-192.
[14] Anderson A. S. Souza, Rosiery Maia and Luiz M. G. Gon¸calves; Current Advancement in Stereo Vision;
IntechOpen; (2012).
[15] Szeliski, R; Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications; Springer; (2010 Draft).
[16] O’ Riordan, Andrew and Newe, Thomas and Toal, Daniel and Dooly, Gerard; (2018); Stereo Vision
Sensing: Review of existing systems; 10.1109/ICSensT.2018.8603605.
[17] What is structured light imaging?; (2018);
Retrieved
from:
https://www.roboticstomorrow.com/article/2018/04/what-is-structured-light-
imaging/11821
[18] Rusu, Radu Bogdan; (2009); Semantic 3D Object Maps for Everyday Manipulation in Human Living
Environments; Dissertation from Institut f¨ur Informatik der Technischen Universit¨at M¨unchen
[19] Rusu, Radu Bogdan; Marton, Zoltan Csaba; Blodow, Nico; Beetz, Michael; (2008); Learning Informa-
tive Point Classes for the Acquisition of Object Model Maps; 10th International Conference on Control,
Automation, Robotics and Vision; Hanoi; pp. 643-650
[20] Rusu, Radu Bogdan; Blodow, Nico; Beetz, Michael; (2009); Fast Point Feature Histograms (FPFH) for
3D registration; IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation; Kobe; pp. 3212-3217
[21] Tombari, Federico; Salti, Samuele; Di Stefano, Luigi; (2010); Unique Signatures of Histograms for Local
Surface Description; Computer Vision - ECCV 2010 (pp.356-369)
[22] Guo, Yulan; Bennamoun, Mohammed; Sohel, Ferdous; Lu, Min and Wan, Jianwei; (2014). 3D Object
Recognition in Cluttered Scenes with Local Surface Features: A Survey; IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence.
[23] Brincker, Rune; Ventura, Carlos E.; Introduction to Operational Modal Analysis; publisher: Wiley; 2015;
[24] Point Cloud Library; (2020);
Retrieved from: https://pointclouds.org/
[25] davidcaron/pclpy: Python Bindings for the Point Cloud Library; (2020);
Retrieved form: https://github.com/davidcaron/pclpy
[26] strawlab/python-pcl: Python Bindings for the Point Cloud Library; (2019);
https://github.com/strawlab/python-pcl
[27] Frequency Domain Decomposition - Matlab Code; Provided by Sandro Diord Rescinho Amador (super-
visor).
