==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Master Thesis Report
Breaking the cycle of Addiction by Design
Margarita Genova(s183214)
Nermen Ghoniem (s173583)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
Supervisors: Kevin Doherty, Jakob E. Bardram & Per Bækgaard
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
As the smartphone has increasingly transcended from a communication- and pro-
ductivity device to a popular source for entertainment, it is now increasingly part of
our everyday usage and routines. This is raising questions about the role technology
plays in our lives and our relationships to our mobile devices. This research study
reflects on the possibility of addiction in engaging user experiences and the related
design challenges put forward.
University students’ use of, and relationship to, their smartphones are at the
center of this design research.
As part of a mixed-methods approach, qualitative
and quantitative methods were adopted to allow a richer understanding of the daily
narratives and personal incentives underlying students’ engagement with their mobile
devices as well as the areas potentially promoting problematic engagement in their
smartphone usage.
This rich understanding was further embodied into actionable insight shaping the
conceptualisation and further development of a technological solution to the challenge
of realising healthier relationships to our mobile devices.
This is reflected in our
final prototype solution, the Alone Mode (see Explainer Video), aiming to increase
individuals’ capacity to shape their own behaviour and mode of interaction with their
smartphone, as an act of autonomous choice within the frame of mindfulness.
Areas shaping the design choices leading to the final proposal were also discussed,
particularly research participants’ ecology of personal values as well as the reflexive na-
ture of our primarily qualitative insights. In conclusion, this research study describes
five distinct phases of design research leading us step-by-step to an empowering tech-
nological solution, recognizing the complex human and subjective experience of device
usage.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master of Science in Engineering degree in Human-Centered
Artificial Intelligence.
This study has been supervised by Kevin Doherty, Jakob
Bardram and Per Bækgaard during the spring semester of 2020.
Kongens Lyngby, July 18, 2020
Margarita Genova, s183214
Nermen Ghoniem, s173583
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First of all, we would like to acknowledge and express our most sincere grati-
tude to Kevin Doherty, PostDoctoral Researcher in Human-Computer Interaction
and our advisor through this research project. His conscientious guidance, support
and encouragement motivated us immensely in the writing of our Master Thesis. Ad-
ditionally, his extensive knowledge on the research subject elevated the quality of our
final report.
We would also like to thank the Copenhagen Center for Health Technology (CA-
CHET) committee, therein the Director Jakob Bardram, as his perceptive remarks
and stimulating questions allowed us to reach deeper within our research study.
This study would also not have been possible without our articulate research
participants that showed flexibility and sensibility throughout the distinct phases of
design research and helped us shape our design research.
We also want to recognise Megumi Arita’s hard work, as she helped us communi-
cate and realize our vision through animation. Her patience and versatility allowed
a successful collaboration.
Finally, we would like to express our appreciation for our family and close friends,
who directly or indirectly, supported us through the completion of this research study.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Problem Definition
5
3
Methodology
7
4
Related Work
11
4.1
Addiction by Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Immersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.3
Addiction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4
How do technology developers hold themselves accountable? . . . . . .
14
4.5
In Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Design Process
21
5.1
First Iteration: Initial User Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2
Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
. . . . . . . .
65
5.4
Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
. . .
95
5.5
Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
5.6
Final Prototype Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
6
Discussion
135
6.1
Learnings: Factors Shaping the Individual User’s Experience
. . . . . 135
6.2
Reflections: What shaped our design choices?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
6.3
In Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
7
Future Work
149
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
7.1
Technical development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
7.2
Personal Informatics System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
7.3
Additional modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
7.4
Visibility and accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
7.5
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
8
Conclusion
151
A Additional Design Material
153
A.1 Ring Limiter Video . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
A.2 Digital Friend Video . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
A.3 Content Digest Video
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
A.4 Alone Mode: Initial Wireframes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
A.5 Alone Mode: Final Prototype Wireframes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155
B Interview Transcripts
163
B.1
First Iteration: Initial User Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
B.2
Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 291
B.3
Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
. . . . . . . . 324
B.4
Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
. . . 414
B.5
Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 457
C Additional Interview Quotes
475
C.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 475
C.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 493
C.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 495
C.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 497
C.5 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 500
Acronyms
507
Bibliography
509
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Sixty percent of young people aged 18 - 34 today report feeling that they use their
smartphone too much [17]. Seven out of every ten of us now sleep with our phones,
and up to two-thirds demonstrate signs of addiction to our devices [4]. Debate rages
over the role technology plays in our lives, our relationships to our mobile devices,
and even the possibility of addiction [32]. These are important points of reflection
which pose significant design challenges for those of us building these systems.
In the dictionary, ‘addiction’ is characterized as a condition in which an individ-
ual is unable to control the consumption of a product or certain behaviors despite
knowledge of their negative consequences [63]. While at times a contested term in the
context of technology use (See Section 6), addiction, and addictive behaviours can
undoubtedly impact many parts of a person’s life [2]. Herein, repercussions comprise
psychological, behavioral, and performance issues [37], with extensive burden on our
mental health and quality of life [10] [19].
University students are often at the center of studies on smartphone addiction,
as they are considered among the largest and most important consumer group of
cell phone technology [31][53] [64]. Furthermore, evidence, on addictive behaviors
stemming in adolescence and young adulthood [48], further points university students
as a suitable representative population for the study of problematic smartphone usage
[3].
Habit-forming design plays a large factor in encouraging users to spend more time
with the technologies we create [43]. The problem of excessive smartphone usage
is therefore created and exacerbated by technology developers’ need to engage users.
Hence, current interfaces are consciously designed to keep us engaged and entertained
through their infinite content loops; leveraging a desire for social interaction through
addicting illusions of control and bright distracting colors [28].
Research studies often aim to either predict the development of addictive behav-
iors in university students or identify reactive measures for the potential aftermath.
Thereby, research focus varies between studying the cause, the indicators and/or the
effect of smartphone addiction among university students and their learning environ-
ments. Heretofore, studies have attempted to link smartphone addiction to academic
performance, life satisfaction, cyber-loafing, the field of study, age, gender and social
stress [5] [58] [29] [24].
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
A human- and design-centred approach to research in contrast strives to under-
stand the relationship between design choice and user behaviour, as exemplified in
the work of O’Hara et al. around WhatsApp [55]. This angle highlights a need for
a forward-looking and design-centred approach within this research area, as we lack
a rich understanding of the role of design within the complex human and subjective
experience of device usage.
This is further exemplified by the limited versatility of university students’ so-
lution strategies for overcoming smartphone addiction [51]. Currently, smartphone
users have select simple built-in device alternatives at their disposal (i.e grayscale dis-
play, app limits, remove notifications, change app positioning). Yet, the choice and
effectiveness of any one strategy may well depend upon the point at which smartphone
usage becomes problematic for the individual; and all points in between (Figure 1.1).
In moderate and severe cases, these simpler strategies might only address the
problem within a limited scope and time frame (Figure 1.2).
Thereby, more tar-
geted methods may be more valuable in the attempt to break the cycle of addictive
smartphone behaviors by design.
Therefore, this report aims to perform design-oriented research on university stu-
dents’ smartphone usage, in order to enable a richer understanding of students’ rela-
tionships to their devices and the creation of alternative design solutions. Throughout
this creative process, we conduct 5 design research iterations to collect input from
university students. The first and second iterations attempt to determine the daily sit-
uations and personal incentives which promote university students’ smartphone usage,
with an emphasis on the areas that university students find problematic. Thereby,
we identify the daily narratives that encapsulate the effects of interface design in
Figure 1.1: Degree of addictive behavior
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
Figure 1.2: Degree of addictive behavior
practice and that could potentially promote an addictive smartphone behavior. Here,
narratives represent concise definitions of the roles smartphones play in mediating
and determining students’ lived experiences. This helps guide the creative process of
the research. Throughout the remaining iterations, we design, develop and evaluate
alternative concepts in a co-creative process with the university students to attempt
to break the cycle of addictive smartphone behavior by design. This design process
results in the creation of a final solution, the Alone Mode, which aims at reshaping
our mode of interaction in our state of aloneness to potentially promote a healthier
relationship with our smartphone devices.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Problem Definition
“I have a lot of unhealthy relationships with this device like when I go to
sleep is the last thing I look at, when I wake up is the first thing. When I
am outside - it is in my hand.“
- Participant 20
The primary aim of this research study is to gain insight into students￿use of, and
relationship to, their smartphones to identify in which areas and respects they find
usage problematic. During this design research process, we employ the term ‘problem-
atic’, as ‘addiction’ could be perceived as a potentially controversial or deterministic
term, which might impact research participants’ stance and contributions during this
process of design research. Where we employ the term ’addiction’, we do not do so
in a clinical sense but to support understanding of problematic habitual behaviours
as encouraged by design.
Thus, as part of a design-oriented approach, the focus is, more specifically, on
identifying potentially problematic engagements in university students’ smartphone
usage. This led the formulation of the following research question:
Which aspects of their daily smartphone usage do university students view
as problematic?
We defined three sub-questions to further guide the design research process, in
light of the main research question. The first sub-question was directed towards the
themes and reasons underlying students’ engagement with their mobile devices. We
wanted to gain a rich understanding of the daily narratives and personal incentives
that could potentially promote addictive smartphone behaviors amongst university
students.
Sub-question 1: Which daily situations and personal incentives promote
addictive smartphone behaviour?
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Problem Definition
Next, the second sub-question allowed us to develop a richer understanding of
university students’ personal experiences with their smartphone usage. Here, it was
important to understand at what point their smartphone usage begins to be perceived
as problematic.
Sub-question 2: How do university students feel about their own smart-
phone behavior?
Finally, the third sub-question helped us frame our findings within a broader
context for increased impact. Thereby, we aimed to gather actionable insight for the
conceptualisation and further development of a technological solution to the challenge
of realising healthier relationships to our mobile devices. These insights would be
iterated upon to fully embody students’ reflections and needs as well as maximize the
relevance of the final prototype solution.
Sub-question 3: Can a digital or tangible, prototype technology promote
a healthier smartphone relationship amongst university students?
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
This design research adopts a mixed-methods approach, by combining qualitative
and quantitative insights. The purpose of this mixed-methods approach is to triangu-
late a richer and more complete understanding, as the results from the online survey
will be used to clarify findings from the qualitative interviews [13]. Additionally, the
insights collected from the online survey, in combination with those from the initial
user studies, serves as the foundation for the subsequent creation and analysis of
several novel design solutions to participants’ challenges.
Population and Sample
The term population applies to individuals and communities investigated in the
broader context of the research question, whilst the term sample addresses the selec-
tion of this population, actively studied in the frame of this specific research study
[7]. As noted in the problem definition, we wish to investigate the student popula-
tion’s use of, and relationship to, their smartphones. Due to limited resources, the
selected sample will primarily consist of university students in Denmark, both locals
and internationals, with occasional outliers from other universities around the world.
The anonymity of the research participants and survey respondents were preserved
throughout the documentation of this process of design research.
Additionally, a
number system was established to assign a number to each research participant by
their order of appearance. Thereby, participants that had appeared more than once
in the qualitative interviews would keep their number.
Sampling Strategy
Participants for the five distinct phases of design research were reached through
a non-probability sampling strategy [11], as students were exclusively targeted. More
precisely, a convenience sampling was adopted, as this would facilitate the access
to and recruitment of research participants, as our closest contacts belonged to this
demographic group.
Qualitative Methods
In-depth qualitative interviews were performed to develop a rich understanding of
the challenges smartphone use poses for students today through elaborate discussions
(Figure 3.1). This type of methodology allowed us to fully understand the research
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Methodology
Figure 3.1: Diagram of how the different methods contributed to design process
==PAGE:19==
3 Methodology
9
participants’ personal experiences as well as worldviews [44].
In the first phase of the design research process, individual interviews were em-
ployed as part of the initial user studies to gain initial insight into daily situations
and personal incentives underlying students’ engagement with their mobile devices.
Then, in the third and fourth phases of this process of design research, focus group
interviews were conducted to gain actionable insights for the conceptualisation and
further development of our final proposal for a technological solution to the challenge
of realising healthier relationships to our mobile devices. We combined the individ-
ual interviews in the initial user studies with the subsequent group interviews to
complement further the depth and richness of the qualitative insights [39]. Finally,
Think-Aloud usability tests were adopted in the last phase of this process of design
research to easily test and evaluate the prototype solution in terms of its user experi-
ence before realising its final form [69]. An ensuing qualitative retrospection further
affirmed the challenges addressed and embodied in the prototype solution [69].
Quantitative Survey
As part of this mixed-methods approach, we also chose to extend and validate
our understanding of our qualitative insights by conducting an online survey. An
online survey was chosen in this second phase of this process of design research, as
it allowed easy access to a larger and more diverse sample of the student population
in a short amount of time [70]. Prior to the execution of the online survey, a pilot
test was conducted with a Postdoctoral researcher to simplify the phrasings in the
questionnaire and eliminate potential ambiguity in the questions.
Insights from 114 respondents were collected in the context of this online survey.
These primarily quantitative insights allowed us to gain a richer understanding of the
daily situations and personal incentives promoting university students’ smartphone
usage.
Furthermore, it enabled us to approach a closer definition of ‘smartphone
addiction’ or at least ‘potentially problematic engagements’ in the words of research
participants.
==PAGE:20==
10
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 4
Related Work
What alternatives are there to habitual and addictive
forms of smartphone behavior?
Initial efforts to address these questions have been undertaken across both industry
and academia, and within the fields of Human-Computer Interaction, Sociology, and
Psychology, in particular [46] [6] [22] [41] [47]. In this chapter, we provide an overview,
and specific examples, of approaches to understanding the problems which exist and
approach their resolution through design.
4.1
Addiction by Design
Thanks to advancements in technology, smartphones have now become smaller
and cheaper, making them the preferred tools for everyday life use, ranging from
entertainment-focused to communication- and productivity-driven interactions. As a
matter of fact, according to comScore’s 2017 report, people between 18 and 24 spend
over 3 hours on their smartphones every day [45].
This overexposure to the smartphone drives short attention-spans amongst their
users, as each month, a user accesses up to 30 applications in total [54]. Moreover,
based on comScore’s 2017 report, 21% of individuals aged 18-24 even delete appli-
cations because they didn’t like how they look on their Home Screen [45].
Thus,
designing immersive smartphone experiences for user retention has become increas-
ingly important for technology developers. This new focus area is also clear in the
surge of diverse articles and studies, aiming to explain different approaches for a more
engaging design of smartphone applications [28][14] [65] .
Business Insider’s Your Brain on Apps report separates these tactics into different
categories - from sending dozens of push notifications each week to using specific colors
in order to grab users’ attention [9]. Ultimately, an engaging design helps technology
developers create valuable and sustainable customer relationships through immersive
experiences.
==PAGE:22==
12
4 Related Work
4.2
Immersion
The key for user retention through design depends on the level of immersion. Al-
though the term immersion is still vaguely defined, it is commonly used by gamers
and those who study the gaming world [8]. Here, immersion refers to a mental state,
in which players lose awareness of their surroundings and day-to-day concerns [35].
One research article, published in 2008, suggests that the experienced level of immer-
sion is closely related to how addictive or engaging people find videogames [62]. More
recently, another research has also shed light on the compelling link between on- and
offline social connections, in the form of an online questionnaire which asks respon-
dents to reflect on their social media usage, by addressing “Facebook” as “spending
time with friends”. [60].
This research was motivated by the ethnographic work of Natasha Schull in par-
ticular within the context of addictive behavior in the world of gambling.
Shull
spent more than a decade in and around Las Vegas observing the design of ‘addic-
tion’ through the gambling environments, its technologies and players’ interactions
[33]. In her book “Addiction By Design”, Schull introduces the theory of “the zone”,
which she later describes as a dissociative trance-like state where everything seems to
disappear [61]. The zone describes a mental state of hyperfocus, in which gamblers’
are fully immersed in playing the game, causing them to forget about their social de-
mands and daily worries. Here, the notion of ‘losing yourself’ appears to be regarded
in a positive light, both within the context of gambling and video games. Still, Schull
argues that gamblers are not playing to win. The reward system might play some
role in attracting people to play, but repeated interaction with the device is what
drives players to keep playing, as this encourages them to stay in their “zone” as long
as possible [61]. Here, comparisons can be drawn between the design of smartphone
interfaces and slot machines, as elements like colors, sounds and “the spinning wheel
effect”, when loading new content, encourage people to stay in their “zone” and lose
track of time.
In alignment with this, in 2016, Tristan Harris, co-founder of the Center for Hu-
mane Technology, compares smartphones to pocket slot machines - driven by colors,
sound, and a Fear of Missing Out (FOMO) [28]. Harris explains that these elements
are widely used by designers in order to influence people’s behavior without them
realizing it [28].
In summary, immersion is often discussed within the frame of addictive behaviours,
in which it is closely connoted to a heightened level of engagement. Therefore, the
immersive experience is a relevant factor to recognize in the study of problematic
smartphone usage.
==PAGE:23==
4.3 Addiction
13
4.3
Addiction
In alignment with the widespread use of cell phone technology, individuals are
increasingly developing a dependency on communication devices, as a means to escape
feelings of stress, anxiety and discomfort [36]. As users become accustomed to these
immersive experiences, they start showing signs of addictive behavior, which are
formally defined as habits turning into obligations [2]. According to comScore’s 2017
report, millennials are most prone to showing signs of app addiction. This is further
supported by 74% of participants between 18 and 34 indicating an ‘urge’ to open an
app on their smartphones as soon as they feel bored. [45]
Many different methods and resources have been used for the identification of
addictive behavior in smartphone users. In 2013, a self-diagnostic Smartphone Addic-
tion Scale (SAS) was designed and developed to identify smartphone addicts on the
basis of data collected from 197 participants, with ages ranging from 18 to 52 years
old [38]. Furthermore, in 2014, a system called SAMS (Smartphone Addiction Man-
agement System) was developed in order to monitor users’ application usage. The
study was conducted with 14 users ranging from 19 to 50 years old [40]. This study
suggests that social network and messaging applications play a key role in addictive
behaviours since they have frequent but short usage time.
Additionally, in 2014, a pattern analysis was conducted with 60 anonymous users
on the basis of their smartphone usage patterns. The SAMS (Smartphone Addic-
tion Management System) application continuously monitored and stored the users’
application usage and their usage records [1]. This study underlines the temporal
characteristics of addictive smartphone behaviors, as ‘addicts’ demonstrated a con-
siderably higher usage around nighttime, whereas ‘non-addicts’ mainly used their
smartphones in the afternoon. [1]
Also, in 2017, emotion regulation strategies were studied within 262 high school
students as a method to predict internet and smartphone addiction in adolescents
[71]. This study suggests that smartphone addiction amongst young people might be
increasing because they are not able to regulate their emotions against daily stressors,
and in order to avoid negative emotions. In 1999, Dr. Kimberly Young described
behaviors associated with Internet use, as means of preventing problems and providing
mental escape in the same way as involved in alcohol, substance and gambling [72].
Mark Griffiths, a behavioral addiction researcher, at the same time suggested that
individuals who are using their smartphone to regulate their emotions normally do
not notice the time they have spent on their devices [27].
These studies are a small part of what has been conducted in the area of smart-
phone addiction, but at the same time show that research is actively being performed
to explain and identify potential causes of addictive smartphone behavior.
==PAGE:24==
14
4 Related Work
4.4
How do technology developers hold themselves
accountable?
Thereby, as studies demonstrate the addictive nature of user experiences designed
to be immersive, the question is: how do technology developers hold themselves
accountable for these design choices? This will further be investigated by studying
the digital wellbeing tools offered by some of the most popular smartphone-based
apps. According to a report by Sensor Tower, the mobile apps which users spent the
most time on in 2019 are WhatsApp, TikTok, Facebook and Instagram [68]. These
applications therefore form the basis of this small case study (Table 4.1).
4.4.1
WhatsApp
WhatsApp is a text and voice messaging app owned by Facebook that allows both
messages and calls on desktop and mobile devices. The app is available for iPhone
and Android smartphones 1.
The application provides its users with communication-based features. Users pri-
marily use the application to initiate conversations with individuals or a group of
people, wherein elements such as their activity status, contacts, images and videos
appear [18]. Other prominent options in the application also include the opportunity
to share your location [18]. By default, the user is always logged into the application,
so whenever somebody wants to contact them, the app sends them a notification and
informs them about incoming messages or calls. These features appear to address
particular user needs, since WhatsApp is ranked as the most downloaded app in 2019
with more than 250M downloads [68].
Despite an increasing number of individuals using WhatsApp, the app does not
provide an option for its users to manage their time spent on the application. Mainly
strategies in the smartphone’s built-in settings can be used to minimize their smart-
phone usage on Whatsapp. Strategies range from switching off their WhatsApp no-
tifications; removing the WhatsApp shortcut icon from their home screen, to muting
their WhatsApp chats [59]. An external application has also been developed to help
users create a time schedule for their Whatsapp usage to restrict it 2.
However, these strategies heavily rely on users’ willpower, as users must themselves
be willing and able to identify and take measures to counteract behaviours they find
as problematic.
1https://www.whatsapp.com/
2https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.shutsapp&hl=en
==PAGE:25==
4.4 How do technology developers hold themselves accountable?
15
Apps
Description
Addictive design fea-
tures
Digital wellbeing features
Whatsapp
Text and voice mes-
saging app that al-
lows both messages
and calls on desktop
and mobile devices
• Illusion of avail-
ability
Does not provide additional option for
managing screen time on the application
TikTok
Application
for
making and sharing
short videos
• Infinite scroll and
endless content
• Leveraging a de-
sire for social in-
teractions
• Screen time management lets the
user to limit their screen time per
day
• Restricted Viewing Mode feature
where users can limit the appear-
ance of content
Facebook
Social
networking
site
that
allows
people
to
connect
with
other
people
worldwide
• Infinite
scrolling
and endless con-
tent
• Leveraging a de-
sire for social in-
teractions
• Illusion of avail-
ability
• Activity dashboard shows users
their average time on the app for
specific days
• Daily reminder allows individuals
to set daily reminders for alert-
ing them when they have reached
the desired amount of time they
wanted to spend on the app.
Instagram
Platform
where
people
can
upload
photos
and
videos
and share them with
other people
• Endless content
• Leveraging a de-
sire for social in-
teractions
• Illusion of avail-
ability
• Activity dashboard shows users
their average time on the app for
specific days
• Daily reminder allows individuals
to set daily reminders for alert-
ing them when they have reached
the desired amount of time they
wanted to spend on the app.
Digital
Wellbeing
(Android)
Android
tool
that
gives a daily view of
how
often
individ-
uals
have
checked
their
phones
and
how frequently they
have used different
apps
-
• Set applications limits
• Activity
dashboard
displaying
users’ average time
• Provide
different
experiments
that cover different parts of users’
smartphone usage activities
Screen Time
(iOs)
iOS tool that aim to
make people aware
of their time spent
on their devices
-
• Set applications limits
• Activity
dashboard
displaying
users’ average time
• Schedule downtime
• Block inappropriate content
Table 4.1: Case Study: Addictive features in most used applications of 2019
==PAGE:26==
16
4 Related Work
4.4.2
TikTok
TikTok is an entertainment-focused application for video-based content creation and
sharing. Challenges and hashtags shape the individual experience of the application.
Additionally, the interface design of TikTok incorporates a frictionless experience with
infinite scrolling, as users navigate through the never-ending content by scrolling up
or down 3. TikTok is ranked as the second most downloaded app for 2019 with nearly
220M installs [68].
Currently, TikTok provides its users with a “Digital Wellbeing” feature, in which
the user has two different options - Screen time management and Restricted Viewing
mode [67]. Within the Screen time management feature, users have the opportunity
to limit their screen time per day according to their preferences. When their time
limit has been reached, individuals are required to enter the password of their TikTok
account to continue using the app. Hereby, users have the option to incorporate design
frictions [16] in the originally frictionless interaction design of TikTok.
On the other hand, within the Restricted Viewing Mode feature, users are able
to filter and control their content streams by limiting the appearance of content that
they find inappropriate. This feature is again activated by entering the password
of the user’s TikTok account [67]. According to the company, this feature was de-
signed, in partnership with a number of family-oriented safety organisations, such as
Family Online Safety Institute 4, the National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil-
dren 5 and the National Parent Teacher Association 6, to ensure safety and privacy
standards.
4.4.3
Facebook
Facebook is a social networking site, which allows users to connect with other
people, as well as share pictures, videos, articles and their own thoughts 7. According
to Sensor Tower, Facebook is the third most downloaded application in 2019 with
more than 150M installations [68].
Similar to TikTok, Facebook displays their content in the form of infinite scrolling.
Once the user opens their Facebook Home Page, endless content is provided to the
user, which could potentially hold their attention for hours. The company had origi-
nally included different settings and features to allow users to manage what type of
notifications they receive and from whom. In 2018, Facebook introduced an activity
dashboard and a daily reminder to help users manage their time better [20]. Accord-
ing to the company, they developed these tools based on collaboration with mental
health experts and organisations [20]. The activity dashboard shows users an average
3https://www.tiktok.com/
4https://www.fosi.org/
5https://www.icmec.org/
6https://www.pta.org/
7https://www.facebook.com/
==PAGE:27==
4.4 How do technology developers hold themselves accountable?
17
of their weekly activities on the app, with an additional option to check a specific
day’s screen time. Below the dashboard, individuals can also set daily reminders to
alert them when they have reached their desired amount of time spent on the app.
The company has shared that they hope that these tools will help people further
understand their smartphone behavior on the platform to help them manage their
experience more effectively [20].
4.4.4
Instagram
Instagram is a platform where users can upload photos and videos to share with their
followers or browse through the uploaded content 8. Instagram is part of the top five
most downloaded applications for 2019 with more than 100M worldwide downloads
on iPhone and Android devices [68].
Instagram belongs to Facebook, so they initially shared the same digital wellbeing
tools - the activity dashboard and the daily reminder - to help users manage their
time better on the platform [20]. However, in 2018, the platform also introduced
the “You’re All Caught Up” feature to people’s feeds [34]. This component conveys
to the user that they have seen every post shared by their followers within the last
two days. This element is challenging the regular frictionless design of Instagram, by
creating design frictions encouraging the user to stop scrolling. This has the potential
to reduce users’ smartphone usage on the platform, but, as noted in our process of
design research, this can also push users to explore content through the platform’s
other features (See Section Entertainment or People 5.1.2.5).
4.4.5
Digital Wellbeing (Android)
Google provides Android users with a tool supporting the creation of healthy smart-
phone habits to help them achieve their personal goals. The Digital Wellbeing tool
gives a daily overview over the user’s screen time on the device and individual apps.
Moreover, this tool also allows the user to set daily app limits according to their
needs as well as disconnect from their phone at night or during the day through
productivity- and mindfulness- focused modes [26].
In 2019, Google also introduced a set of digital wellbeing experiments, designed
to help users reduce their screen time and be more aware of their smartphone usage
[25]. The experiments cover different challenges of users’ smartphone relationships
such as:
• Frequent smartphone usage (Unlock Clock);
• Fear of missing out and spending too much time on your phone (Screen Stop-
watch, We Flip and Activity Bubbles);
8https://www.instagram.com/
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Related Work
• Infinity scroll loop (Anchor and Digital Detox);
• Having difficulties staying focused (Desert Island, Morph and Post Box).
These Android based experiments are open sourced to inspire more developers
and designers to consider digital wellbeing in their future technological solutions [25].
4.4.6
Screen Time (iOS)
Similar to Google’s Digital Wellbeing tool, Apple has addressed the growing concern
around increased smartphone usage with their Screen Time tool [50]. The goal of this
feature is to make people aware of how much time they are spending on their devices,
which applications they are using the most and how many times they have picked their
iPhones up in a given time. The tool is accessible through the smartphone built-in
settings. This feature also allows users to set app limits, schedule downtime, disable
or enable apps as well as block inappropriate content. Similar to Google’s Digital
Wellbeing, Screen Time aims to help users understand and control their smartphone
behavior and activities [50].
4.5
In Summary
Smartphones offer a wide range of functionalities and are therefore popular amongst
university students. Amidst the competitive app market, smartphone activities are
increasingly designed to be engaging to ensure user retention [28]. Many different
elements are used by designers to grab users’ attention - from colors and sound to
infinite scrolling, etc [28]. These immersive experiences can easily lead to addictive
smartphone behaviors, which have been found to correlate with high levels of anxiety,
depression, poor time management and sleep issues [10].
Technology developers have started to provide different in-app tools for users to
limit their screen time and promote meaningful interactions. Of these attempts, Insta-
gram’s recent “You’re all caught up” feature is the most notable, as it revolutionizes
the typically frictionless user experience of social media apps. Still, a majority of
the remaining strategies created by Facebook, TikTok, Google and Apple are not
easily visible or accessible through the interface design, as they are usually hidden in
the settings section. Furthermore, Facebook’s, TikTok’s and Instagram’s features are
solely focused on their own in-app interactions.
Additionally, despite Google’s efforts at establishing healthier smartphone rela-
tionships through their Digital Wellbeing Experiments, their solutions are more con-
centrated on creating additional innovative platforms, rather than adjusting existing
platforms to healthier standards. Also, Google’s and Apple’s attempts at creating
smartphone-based modes of interaction are still premature, as the productivity- and
==PAGE:29==
4.5 In Summary
19
mindfulness- focused modes are not customisable to users’ needs and preferences, and
the modes do not prevent users from accessing any of their smartphone apps.
Despite these initial attempts to support digital wellbeing, many young people and
students continue to report concerns relating to the time spent in interaction with
these devices [51]. Therefore, there is more potential to shape the individual’s inter-
action with the smartphone according to their personal context of smartphone usage,
as this could lead to better experience of the technology and healthier smartphone
relationships.
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 5
Design Process
Analysis of the literature and industry approaches therefore suggests a need for strate-
gies based on a rich understanding of users’ needs and values. We undertook five dis-
tinct phases of design-oriented research to enable a richer understanding of students’
relationships to their devices in order to create alternative design solutions to the
challenge of realising healthier relationships to our mobile devices.
5.1
First Iteration: Initial User Studies
The main goal of the first iteration is to gain initial insight into students￿use of, and
relationship to, their smartphones to identify areas that the university students find
problematic. We adopt this angle, as part of a user-centric approach, to gain a richer
understanding of the daily narratives that could potentially promote an addictive
smartphone behavior amongst university students.
Thus, we ask thirteen students from Danish and international higher education
institutions to describe and reflect upon their daily smartphone behavior as well as
their screen time.
5.1.1
Methods
5.1.1.1
Before the interview
Harris’ research on ethics of human persuasion by design [28] was adopted in the
preparation of the initial user studies. Therein, Harris explains that the smartphone is
designed to “keep us hooked”. He proposes a set of concrete revisions to selected design
elements within the smartphone for a more mindful interaction with our devices 1.
These design revisions will be employed as experiments for the research participants
ahead of their qualitative interviews.
• Turning off non-human notifications, as these type of notifications can leverage
the desire for social interactions
1https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NUMa0QkPzns
==PAGE:32==
22
5 Design Process
• Grayscaling the screen, as the regular bright colors of smartphone apps can be
distracting
In extension to these aforementioned suggestions, we generated two supplemen-
tary design revisions in accordance with Harris’ statements on the addictive design
elements of the smartphone. For instance, Harris compares slot machines to the “pull
to refresh” feature to demonstrate how certain design features provide an addictive
illusion of control. Harris further explains that it is important to restrict the home
screen to everyday tools, by filtering out apps that use infinite scrolling as they reduce
a user’s sense of control and make it harder to stop consuming content.These design
features are very prominent in social media, which is the category of application most
used by individuals in the same age group as the research participants [45]. Hence,
the following design revisions were added.
• Setting daily time limits for their most-used apps, as these apps can potentially
leverage an addictive illusion of control
• Changing the position of their most used applications on their smartphone, as
this will make these potentially distracting apps with no built-in endpoint less
accessible
These experiments were presented as an optional one-week challenge to the re-
search participants, as it would serve as a retrospective exercise for the follow-up
qualitative interview. Additionally, this would allow a study of the advantages and
disadvantages of current solution strategies targeting additive smartphone design.
8 participants accepted to perform this one-week challenge, whilst the remaining
5 participants dismissed it due to lack of time. Therein, the first half were given
the freedom to choose their one-week challenge, whereas the other half were asked to
perform a specific challenge to ensure the diversity of the empirical data. The day
before the challenge started, each participant was asked to document their current
weekly screen time. iOS users were able to use the “Screen Time” [50] feature available
in their Settings and Android users had to download the same application through
their built-in app store 2.
Due to the coronavirus outbreak, the majority of the interviews were scheduled
online through video calls on Facebook Messenger 3. Each interview lasted around
one hour and participants were asked a group of questions according to a structured
interview guide. At the beginning of the session, the overall project idea was presented
and participants were informed that they have the possibility to skip a question in
case they felt uncomfortable. All of the interviews were recorded with the knowledge
and agreement of the students and later used for further analysis.
2https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.ezlapp.screen.time&hl=en
3https://www.messenger.com/
==PAGE:33==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
23
5.1.1.2
During the interview
First, the participants were provided with a timeline template and asked to describe
what an average day in their life looks like. Then, they were asked to mark in a
different color when the phone is a central part of their day. As the interviews were
moved online, the interviewer performed this timeline activity in accordance with the
participant’s explanations (Figure 5.1).
Following this exercise, the researchers followed an interview guide to structure
the rest of the qualitative interview. The questions started off by asking the partic-
ipants to describe and reflect on their phone usage throughout the day as well as
communicate their subjective experience of their devices. Finally, their opinions on
their screen time as well as their preferred smartphone apps were asked.
5.1.1.3
After the interview
The first iteration resulted in 8 hours and 8 seconds of audio recordings. The
audio recording of participants 4, 7 and 9’s interviews unfortunately failed to save and
therefore the researchers relied on the notes taken during the interview to account for
their insights.
The audio recordings were, first, fully transcribed.
Then, these transcriptions
were subject to close reading by both researchers. Key themes and categories were
identified and developed, in which the approach was both inductive and deductive. We
identified selected quotes that best represented each theme. This process facilitated
the documentation and formulation of the first iteration.
5.1.2
Findings
The information gathered from the initial interviews shed light on students’ everyday
routine and their feelings about their smartphone usage.
5.1.2.1
Routines
The smartphone accommodates several needs for the participants, communication-
, productivity- and entertainment-focused interactions. These various use cases for
the smartphone are often incorporated into specific daily routines. This insight is
important to identify opportunities for impact through design.
Morning routine
Almost all participants used their smartphone’s alarm function to wake up, and
in prolongation with turning off their alarm, they described a longer wakeup process,
in which they check their notifications, mainly from social media.
An interesting
detail that was observed during the interviews was that most of the participants
immediately referred to social media, when describing their smartphone activities.
==PAGE:34==
24
5 Design Process
Figure 5.1: Daily timeline example
Thereby, participants implicitly connotes the smartphone to frequently performed
smartphone activities.
“It actually plays a role in my wake up process (...)
so first, I open
my eyes, I’m really tired and then while checking Instagram, the news,
Facebook, Reddit and all this stuff then in that half an hour, I slowly wake
up so that’s basically supplement for my waking up”
- Participant 1
Only one participant opted the smartphone’s alarm functionality out of their morn-
ing routine. Instead this participant incorporated their reliance on their smartphone
in their morning routine in an alternative manner:
==PAGE:35==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
25
“I need a phone call from my parents so they wake me up. I won’t be able
to start the day otherwise”
- Participant 3
Evening and bedtime routine
An important insight that was noted is that the smartphone plays a more im-
portant role in the evening for all of the participants, as this is the time for them to
entertain themselves until they fall asleep. Another interesting observation is how the
following research participant speaks in such excited terms of a routine he describes
himself as ’horrible’, ‘useless’ and ‘scattered’. This routine is clearly a meaningful
part of the participant’s day, and therefore it is significant to question how ‘horrible’
it actually is.
“And then I have a really long going to bed process because I check crazy
amounts of useless information on my phone like, okay, I take on my PJs,
then I do something on my phone then I go and brush my teeth then I do
something on my phone then. I don’t know - I go to the shower and then
do something on my phone like it’s really scattered. Yeah, my bedtime
routine is is horrible”
- Participant 1
Additionally, all international students mentioned that the evening represents an
important time for relationship maintenance (c.f.. Section - 5.1.2.4) with friends and
family abroad:
“Between 19:00-20:00 I am calling my family, friends or my roommates.”
- Participant 5
Break time routines
When describing their daytime routines at school or work, the participants referred
to ‘phone breaks’, in which they would dedicate a set amount of time throughout the
day to check their notifications and scroll through their social media feeds, as a way
to take a break from work or studying.
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Design Process
“I think Instagram is something that I can’t live without. I like to see
photos of what other people post and take a break. I can’t work without a
break, I am not productive without a break - if there is an alternative - like
sometimes I make tea and I am not looking into Instagram. (or talking
with somebody else). I have this kind of routine to use it for 10 mins. I
usually don’t exceed these 10 minutes.”
- Participant 5
Again, the personal experience described by the above participant is another ex-
ample of how something described in ’addictive terms’ plays a useful role.
5.1.2.2
Habits
As the participants start associating their smartphone activities with their daily rou-
tines, increased repetition of these routines allows their behavior to become instinc-
tive and thereby, habits are formed over time, as more needs get satisfied through
the smartphone. Hereby, a habit is formally defined as “a routine of behavior that is
repeated regularly and tends to occur unconsciously” [15].This is also visible through-
out the interviews, as participants use the expression ‘habit’ very often to explain
their smartphone usage and behaviour:
“I do check my phone. I think out of habit sometimes. Like if I receive the
message, then I check it but mostly I think it’s out of habit just to check
(...) if I’ve gotten a message even though I don’t have any notification
or if you know something new pops up on Instagram or Facebook. (...) I
would just take it just to do something different.”
- Participant 13
Comfort zone
As the routine turns into a habit, a bubble of comfort also flourishes around the
participants’ smartphone usage, as they continue to personalize their interface and
interactions according to their preferences for their own convenience. Therefore, the
participants showed signs of reluctance and meticulousness with regards to changing
their smartphone behavior as part of their smartphone-related challenges (c.f. Section
- 5.1.1).
==PAGE:37==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
27
“Because I love my phone to be organized. If I have like everything is on
one side or the other. Yeah, [changing the apps positioning] will be (...)
annoying”
- Participant 2
Additionally, in terms of the grayscale challenge, participants expressed a clear
desire of wanting to be attracted to their devices, which seems to be partially satisfied
by the colors. Therefore, one respondent points out the need for a sustainable solution
strategy on a long-term basis, as changing or removing the colors were perceived as
an unsuitable decision. This highlights an important aim to consider for later design
work.
“[The grayscale challenge] (...) it’s uncomfortable. It would decrease the
screen time but it’s not sustainable”
- Participant 9
“My challenge was to have my colors on my phone like black and white
for a week, so Thursday when I put the colors off, and I was like ’Oh, my
God, this is so strange. I don’t know if I can do it for one week’. (...)
’if my colors are not on, I will not be attracted to my phone anymore’. I
was like that the first day I was like ‘my phone is not attractive to me
anymore. I hate it. It’s so boring. I don’t know what to do on it when it
has no colors.’”
- Participant 12
Nevertheless, their strong attachments to their devices allowed certain participants
to develop new habits around their smartphone usage:
“I put them like two or three screens after. And at the beginning it was
just like, Oh, it’s not been where [the position of the app] it used to be, it’s
in the new one and then after one day I just got used to it”
- Participant 6
“But then I got used to it, and then on Sunday, I think after I send you
the screenshot of the screen time, I turn the colors on, and I was like these
colors are too much, maybe I was used to it so much to be black and white.
And the colors were awful for me. But then I realized that it makes sense
for the screen time to be higher, since it’s easier for my eyes. The first
==PAGE:38==
28
5 Design Process
day they got used to the colors. And then the other days, it was easier for
me to look at the screen because it doesn’t have that many colors to give
me a headache, you know?”
- Participant 12
Alone
This comfort zone enhances the participants’ attachment to their smartphone.
Correspondingly, participants’ commentary centred more often on situational or con-
textual antecedents of loneliness than the subjective experience of loneliness itself.
Terms such as ‘distract’, ‘escape’, ‘relax’, and ‘support’ are used to describe the pur-
pose of their smartphone usage in those cases:
In the case of being alone due to their situational state, it is mostly related to
situations in which they have to eat alone or when they are alone during their commute
to school or work.
“A few months ago - taking the train to go home [alone]. I thought I lost
the phone. Everything was on my phone - the phone is essential during
travel. I was outside my comfort zone. I lost my connection to the world
at the moment I needed it. I needed to solve things differently to have the
day how I wanted it to be.”
- Participant 3
Therein, an interesting observation to note in one participant’s statement is the
conflation of ’need’ and ’desire’ in the context of smartphone usage. The following par-
ticipant describes a desire to listen to music, when she is commuting alone. Yet, when
expressing herself, she uses the term ‘need’ to describe her smartphone behaviour.
“(...) When I’m in the metro, my face and my eyes are on the phone.
Sometimes I even see people who are like in the metro, and I know them,
but I’m so focused on my phone and I don’t even see them and then I have
to be sorry: ’sorry, guys.’ (...) because there I’m alone. For example, if
I’m at school and I’m around people, I sometimes forget about my phone
(...) when I’m home, I also forget about my phone because I’m putting the
TV on and someone is talking to me, you know ”
- Participant 12
Likewise, participants also described how a variety of subjective experiences, in-
cluding loneliness, anxiety and discomfort, frequently motivated their smartphone
usage. Here, the interrelated nature of situational and psychological antecedents of
smartphone usage are seen.
==PAGE:39==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
29
“(...) when I am bored, I go to Instagram, just for the sake of going there.
Sometimes I have seen everything on Instagram and I would scroll through
because I am bored (...) [social media] is good as a distraction when you
are bored. I am also used to it, but I want to change it.”
- Participant 11
“I think.. so maybe when I feel alone you know. Not conversating with
someone or not having someone to talk then I would go on my phone.
I think some people choose to read a book, but I just choose to be on
my phone (...) Other than that, I think when I’m home and I just need
something to do. (...) I wouldn’t know what to do by myself, I think to be
honest, yeah.”
- Participant 13
“I think when I am in public, and (...) I don’t feel like talking with people,
I don’t feel comfortable with them. Then I’ll be on my phone. (...) I
would just browse social media (...) Just to have something to do, I guess..
to feel busy. (...) I don’t remember the first time but I remember (...) a
specific time where it made me think that I could rely on my phone (...) I
was in the bus. And for some reason, I started to feel very anxious. And I
felt like people were maybe staring or judging or I didn’t know what to do
or who to call so I just tried to focus on my phone and use it as much as
I could at that time. (...) I can focus on that rather than people around
me. (...) ”
- Participant 13
For one participant, their smartphone usage at home plays into a larger ecosystem,
with the TV and the laptop, as a way to feel less alone:
“Usually when I get home, the first thing is to put the TV on (...) And
maybe sometimes I’m watching Netflix, sometimes I’m just listening to
the news and start cooking”
- Participant 12
Temporal illusion
Thereby, especially when being or feeling alone, the smartphone acts as a tangible
escape room, in which participants can penetrate this alternative virtual dimension
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Design Process
to escape reality. Herein, a distinct characteristic is the temporal illusion that the
participants experience when on social media, which results in them losing track of
their screen time.
”(...) that’s just my feeling and the screen time shows something different”
- Participant 1
“Sometimes, I can not keep track of everything I do, but mostly I am
trying to set up some limits (...) sometimes I lose complete track of how
much time I spend on my phone, but around 45 min.”
- Participant 8
“I think I lose track of the time in a sense where like, I can always see
how much time I’ve spent on it, but I don’t get a sense of reality. Like if
an hour passes by I don’t go ’oh, I’ve been on my phone for a whole hour’,
it’s not like that. I know how much time I spent on it. But I don’t really
put in perspective and say ’Oh, that’s too much’.”
- Participant 13
Procrastination tool
Yet, despite some benefits of this online escapism in distressful situations, in the
case of lack of motivation, the smartphone becomes a procrastination tool for the
participants. This is the point where smartphone usage begins to be perceived as
problematic. This is highlighted by a majority of the participants’ statements:
“Because sometimes it distracts me. Like while I’m studying and I don’t
want to study if I receive a notification immediately I will go on my phone.
So it’s just like an excuse to not study.”
- Participant 2
“(...) when I am studying, not as productive [because of the smartphone]
(...) less interesting to study and can get very theoretical (...) I’d rather
focus on easier things”
- Participant 3
==PAGE:41==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
31
“I feel like I need to study a lot of things and I’m just procrastinating
those things and I’m just doing something that (...) is funnier, and it’s
less boring (...) because I need to prepare for the interviews and stuff and
that’s something that it’s not motivating me and it should.”
- Participant 6
A participant explained further that, despite the smartphone allowing one to
escape reality momentarily, it can’t replace actual human connection (c.f. Digital
Intimacy 6.1.3.2), which allows one to process, accept and thereby actually escape
this reality on a long-term basis:
“(...) for me, the phone would be a way to escape but a conversation with
a human being, or just interacting with a human being would be a way
for me to accept the reality and talk about it. I can’t talk to my phone
and receive advice. Of course, I can Google it, but it’s not the same thing
as maybe needing someone to hear your thoughts or what you’re going
through. At the time it helps in a different way. I feel like”
- Participant 13
Furthermore, these tendencies to use the smartphone as a procrastination tool
has a physical impact on the participants’ everyday life, such as sleeping later or
having eyesight problems. Interestingly, the participants seem well aware of these
consequences, especially in terms of their sleeping schedules.
“So the thing is that whenever it turns out that I [am] actually kind of
addicted to my phone and use it more, I always feel bad so that would
be guilt again. But I’m yeah, I’m really bad at getting rid of bad habits,
actually. I’m really bad. And, I don’t know I always feel guilty.”
- Participant 1
“Because after being on the phone for a long time, I just cannot sleep like
my sleep goes away and then I cannot sleep (...) I don’t know if it’s the
blue light or something and it’s just like changing the patterns of sleeping.”
- Participant 6
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Design Process
“I stay up on the phone because I am not that tired. Or maybe this is what
I think”
- Participant 11
Yet, they don’t exhibit a conscious attitude in response to these problem areas,
as they choose to ignore it. This is reflected in the quote that follows, as the research
participant explains how she often goes through periods of deleting Facebook, when
she feels it becomes problematic in her everyday life, then re-downloading it again
because of boredom.
“I normally delete the [Facebook] app and then coming back sometimes
(...)”
- Participant 6
Nonetheless, the smartphone as a procrastination tool very often also turns into
a vicious cycle of bad habits, as the participants describe the experience of chronic
feelings of guilt, stress and performance anxiety, as their own willpower balances
necessity and distraction.
“So in general, I really feel like I’m procrastinating almost everything
and I think using the smartphone plays a lot, a huge role in that. And,
since I really feel bad because of procrastination, I feel bad for using my
smartphone as well. (...)Because I feel like I have much more potential.
And I feel like I could do much more with my life (...) ”
- Participant 1
Herein, the participant specifically expresses dissatisfaction with themselves, as
they understand their weakened sense of control as a personal shortcoming. Yet, this
reduced sense of control is actually a conscious design choice, as smartphone features
such as infinite scrolling aims at creating frictionless experiences to keep users on
their smartphone [28].
5.1.2.3
Connectivity
The concept of connectivity and disconnectivity is often directly or indirectly referred
to, during the qualitative interviews. The on-the go element of the smartphone device
is interpreted by the participants as a constant state of needing to be available:
==PAGE:43==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
33
“ I usually shut it down. Since I am not in a position to be available at
night, this is why I turn it off. If I had to help somebody during the night
or my job needed me - I would have kept it on.”
- Participant 5
Urgency
Thereby, this perpetual availability attributes a feeling of urgency to the smart-
phone, which is further illustrated by the fact that the participants always keep their
smartphone at close proximity (i.e. always smartphone at hand and/or smartphone
close to their beds when sleeping).
“My phone is next to me, not under my pillow. The phone is always on,
however, it is disconnected from the network. The sound is on vibration,
so if somebody needs me for something important, it wakes me up.”
- Participant 4
“Maybe sometimes I feel anxious just to check my phone if I receive some-
thing (...) If I don’t have my phone, it’s like ‘Oh, I need to go and get
my phone and see if I receive anything’ (...) It’s that feeling of missing
something that you need to check (...)
I guess I just got so used to it
to have the phone next to me and just check. It is something that I’m
doing [subconsciously] without thinking (...) like contact with friends and
family.”
- Participant 6
One respondent further exemplifies this, by explaining that smartphone-based
content, and especially communication, provokes impulsivity traits in them, allowing
frequent cognitive interference to happen [12].
“(...) it would be weird - because I am used to being able to check the
messages relatively often (...) especially in student organizations, urgency
is important (...) For urgent stuff, we talk through messenger. For less
urgent, it is on slack but the fact that it is on my phone makes it feel
urgent”
- Participant 9
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Design Process
Real-life disconnectivity
Connectivity is originally expressed in terms of the virtual dimension brought on
by the smartphone’s online connection but has also transcended to a revised meaning
in certain situations from the participants’ everyday life. For instance, participants
often describe a lack of attention during real-life conversations, due to the smart-
phone. These cases can be interpreted as online connectivity in exchange of real-life
disconnectivity. Thereby, there are blurred lines between reality and online, as terms
previously describing online behavior can be used when characterizing current real-life
behavior.
“I’m trying not to because I want to talk to my friends. Yeah, since we’re
all together and having lunch, but sometimes I just cannot resist because I
really like sending memes to my friends and like, seeing interesting things
showing up on my Facebook newsfeed and yeah (...) [it’s] friends from
back home! Because they are Bulgarians, but they’re also international
students.
Some of them are studying in England.
Some of them are
studying in the Netherlands.”
- Participant 12
“[With friends] I would maybe look at my screen a couple of times, but
because we’re talking I try to not look at it too much. But again out of
habit. I find myself reaching for my phone”
- Participant 13
F.O.M.O Nonetheless, the participants express a need for connectivity, primarily
in relation with F.O.M.O., as participants feel the urge to be available and updated
on-the-go.
“(...)there’s definitely a part of the fear of missing out in the morning
because, mostly with the news, I’m quite interested in what was happening
in the world and if if something happens during the night like something
big like, I don’t know, the President of the United States dies or something
like that then I would feel really really stupid ‘Oh, I I went all the way
until three o’clock and I didn’t know about this thing’. And that that makes
me feel a little bit strange”
- Participant 1
“I would like to say no but there might be cases where I feel this way -
mostly in connection with life from back home or family gatherings and I
==PAGE:45==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
35
am not part of it. Happy to see they are having a good time but I am not
there. But no stress or anxiety.”
- Participant 3
“When friends from back home are meeting; I am more prone to check the
phone (...) Especially with friends back home, when I was in Asia because
I couldn’t be involved in my circle in Spain - more sad than anxious.
Homesick”
- Participant 9
All things considered, as seen in one participant’s statement in regards to F.O.M.O,
there seems to be a dichotomy here between how smartphone usage gives rise to a
need to feel connected and at the same time can diminish connections.
“(...) sometimes I feel like that because I haven’t done like the things (...)
then I cannot go there because I thought I have waste my time on my
phone or in Netflix or those things, and then I felt need to finish these
things and then I cannot go to this event because I need to finish this and
I didn’t do that I felt like missed out of consequence. (...) Because I see
that it was fun afterwards”
- Participant 6
5.1.2.4
Relationship maintenance
As mentioned in the previous sections, participants lean more towards apps and
in-app features supporting their relationships with friends and family.
Especially,
all international students mentioned that their smartphone usage is centered around
relationship maintenance, as they primarily use it to stay in touch with friends and
family from their home countries or their international community.
“The fact that I moved to another country challenges me to be more on
the phone: keep relationships with parents cause I have to but not using it
as much with friends and can clearly see the effect/prefer to see them in
real life. (...) nice with a smartphone to mimic the everyday interactions
(...) [social media] is nice to check up on international friends”
- Participant 3
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Design Process
“Since I am not from here, it is very necessary for me to keep in contact
with my family. I feel homesick and I feel less sad when using the phone to
contact them (...) [If I couldn’t use my smartphone] I would be devastated
because I would miss them. I would mainly feel anxious because of the loss
of contact with the family. Especially cause now it’s the only way to see
your family and this is why I would feel like that.”
- Participant 8
“It takes time [to maintain relationships through the smartphone] but I
do it because, in the long term, I see myself living in Spain so I want
to maintain the meaningful relationships there..
keep up with them so
everything would be the same.. fill the gap (...) allow contact for friends
that are not physically there”
- Participant 9
As these interactions are more communication-based, the primary smartphone
functions utilised are the classical phone calls as well as Messenger and Whatsapp,
allowing online and easy-to-access alternatives for texting, audio and video calls. Sev-
eral participants describe the smartphone as the only way to keep in touch and one
participant even compares these interactions as an alternative to everyday interac-
tions.
“(...)because I cannot meet them [with my friends abroad] all the time (...)
you can meet only with a really limited group of people right? So yeah,
let’s let’s take me as an example. I think I made like 10 or maybe 15
people regularly but then I’m still in touch with more than 50 at least on
Instagram and Messenger”
- Participant 1
“[I can’t give up Whatsapp] Because it helps me to keep in touch with
many people from around the world. Yeah, sometimes I only have them
on Whatsapp. And I have pictures like we share pictures and stuff like
that. So for example, I changed my phone and I lost some pictures, some
conversation on WhatsApp and I was really pissed. And I still have my
old phone because I’m trying to find a way to put them in the new.”
- Participant 2
==PAGE:47==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
37
“I talk to my family, so I have to use it for video calls and contact my
friends as well.
I usually don’t text people, but I can’t see them on a
regular basis”
- Participant 11
Social norms
An interesting insight noted is the fact that participants’ choices are strongly
shaped by social norms, as they are following their close friends’ and/or family’s
preferences in terms of platforms, both for communication and general entertainment.
“I use Messenger because everybody uses it here in DK, I actually didn’t use
it 2 years ago before moving and WhatsApp because back home everybody
uses it”
- Participant 5
“I have few friends that don’t have Facebook and we just use Instagram to
chat (...)[I can’t give up on]Viber (...) because this is the only way for me
to communicate with my family.”
- Participant 8
“[I use Instagram the most because] (...) because it’s one of those platforms
that other people use the most.”
- Participant 13
This is also seen on a larger level, as their smartphone behavior is also impacted
by their current geographical location and life situations. Two participants describe
an increase in smartphone usage during their exchange semester abroad, as they are
dependent on new applications to fit in, in addition to the existing ones to keep in
touch with their friends and family back home.
“(...) because sometimes when we receive like, message from CBS or from
like, exchange group on Facebook, if (...) there’s like an event or something
(...) we have like a group chat on Nimbus (...) so sometimes ’oh party
on the fourth floor’, stuff like that (...) it’s true that here I use it more
because yeah, I just want to have news from my family.”
- Participant 2
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Design Process
“(...) in China, they used the phone much more (...) everything is done
through the phone, since coming back I have been using it less”
- Participant 9
5.1.2.5
Content
The participants were quick to distinguish between the smartphone as a whole
and the content. Every app and every in-app feature represents a different type of
content. Thereby, the participants enter each environment with different goals and
expectations.
“I use Chrome and Twitter to check the news. I use them because on Twit-
ter there are journalists that I follow and I like to read discussions, which
sometimes I find interesting. Chrome, just use a browser but it’s basically
where I search all my news (...) [it is] the one I need the most tho, to find
something, to learn about something, to read news about coronavirus”
- Participant 5
“YouTube I use the explore page. Twitter is through the feed. Messenger
is 80% messages and 20% video calls. Instagram is mainly stories and
explore/search.”
- Participant 10
Entertainment or People
Common denominators between their different smartphone usages were the seek
for fun content, read news and/or get life updates - with people-centered content being
more important. Thereby, their smartphone usage was further aligned in accordance
with their values and daily routines, as the participants leaned towards apps and in-
app features supporting their relationships with friends and family more than others.
Notifications
Despite the fact that notifications can act as a distraction, by calling for their
attention, when the participants’ concentration is low, they still agree that the noti-
fications are not the real issue, as the habit of checking their phone is so embedded
into their smartphone behavior that they automatically reach for the specific app’s
content stream, regardless of the notifications:
==PAGE:49==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
39
Figure 5.2: Entertainment or People
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Design Process
”(...) it’s not because it [removing notifications] would decrease the access
to these applications”
- Participant 2
“Instagram is when I see a notification or when I feel horny”
- Participant 10
“I would still go but less because there were no notifications so I would go
when I had time.”
- Participant 11
Infinite content loop
When asked about whether they lose track of time on their smartphone, the
majority of the participants answered that they sometimes feel trapped in this infinite
content loop, especially on applications such as YouTube and Instagram, and end up
spending more time than initially expected.
“(...)
most of the time it’s opening Reddit, or YouTube and you just
click on one link after another because everything is interconnected. (...)
[it]prevents me from from being (...) useful for hours sometimes because
I just lost myself in YouTube videos and Reddit and stuff like that.”
- Participant 1
“ I watch this one YouTube video and then I continue watching and I end
up like watching 5-10 videos. I lose like 30-40 minutes of my life doing
this.”
- Participant 10
Above statements heavily employ terms related to a loss, when describing their
experience with the infinite content loop. These feelings are mainly born out of a
purely retrospective judgment but they are motivated by a sense of guilt over what
they perceive as a weakened sense of control. Again, participants understand their
inability to stop consuming content as a personal shortcoming instead of a conscious
design choice by the app developers.
This infinite content loop is not only limited to entertainment-related content, as
some participants describe this same phenomenon when performing communication-
based interactions. This further highlights how the design of all our app interactions
are aimed to keep the participants glued and hooked to the content on their screens:
==PAGE:51==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
41
“So I opened up in every I don’t know in every hour maybe, or something
like that and then I saw that Okay, I got messages from four or five people
and then I started replying them back and out of the five usually one started
replying me back instantly. So I caught up with the discussion. And then
in the meantime one of the other from the five also started replying to me
back so it started being a never ending circle.”
- Participant 1
Passive consumerism
The power of the infinite content loop is further emphasized by the applications’
interaction design, inciting low effort engagement and passive consumerism. This is
further seen in the participants’ smartphone usage, as several of them describe a silent
behavior on entertainment apps. Thereby, the participants describe experiences of
‘brain-dead entertainment’, in which they aimlessly consume content, without con-
sciously absorbing any, on a blind search for meaningful content.
“(...)like it’s not interactive what I do on the phone usually. It’s just like
looking at news or videos.”
- Participant 1
“It is probably more after lunch because I need to relax for a little bit. Also,
when I come back, I just scroll through some news. It is relaxing because
I don’t have to think that much, I am just reading.”
- Participant 5
“I use Youtube late at night when I am the most tired because it’s garbage/-
trash tv. But it is accessible (...) Twitter has been meaningful even though
it is 90% garbage, 10% meaningful. But I don’t think that there is an ap-
plication I can not give up from.”
- Participant 10
As seen in this section, their overall app interactions accentuates the blurry lines
within the broad diversity of entertainment apps. This ambiguity is expressed by
participants’ apparent lack of smartphone vocabulary, when describing their smart-
phone usage, more specifically for social media. Despite the majority of participants
commonly understanding social media as content-sharing platforms, when describing
their social media behavior, communication-based platforms (i.e. Messenger, What-
sapp) as well as more streaming-based platforms (i.e.
YouTube, Netflix) are also
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Design Process
mentioned within this spectrum. Thereby, all behaviour and meaning is social and
interconnected.
Scoping their smartphone usage further down also allowed the identification of
interactions that participants find the most problematic. It is very clear in the par-
ticipants’ statements that streaming-based platforms, especially YouTube, are most
often promoting what the research participants perceive as problematic usage pat-
terns. Therein, a plurality of research participants further argues that this problem
is a result of a design that heavily revolves around concepts of low-effort engagement
and brain-dead entertainment.
“I am not spending too much time but more than I want to. An app is
disproportionately increasing my screen time. I would like to reduce it but
I sound addicted. I can’t remove it because I enjoy the app on my phone,
so this is why I am trying to reduce my time there. Humans are visual, all
the pleasure they get from literature would be more long-lasting or exciting
if the mechanism is in action. With YouTube, you don’t have to rest, you
are getting something from the visual input.”
- Participant 10
Thus, these findings on low-effort engagement and passive consumerism seem to
approach a definition of ‘smartphone addiction’ or at least ‘potentially problematic
engagement’ in the words of the users.
Content saturation
A worthy mention amidst the current worldwide pandemic situation is the satura-
tion of coronavirus-related content. According to Oxford (2020), saturation is meant
as ““the state or process that happens when no more of something can be accepted or
added because there is already too much of it or too many of them” ”4. In the context
of online content, this is expressed by different content streams being overflowed with
similar content.
The last two user studies of this first iteration, which coincided with the early
stages of Denmark’s lockdown measures, shows the impact of this content satura-
tion on the participants’ mental health. The participants describe their entertain-
ment apps, especially their social media, as being overcrowded with content pieces on
COVID-19. This saturation evoked feelings of anxiety and panic, as platforms initially
intended for relaxation were now induced with mass fear. Yet, paradoxically, they
also felt the need to be up-to-date with the evolving situation, stay connected with
others and, in general, they had much more free time to spend on their smartphone
and online entertainment as a result of staying at home and boredom.
4https://www.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com/definition/english/saturation
==PAGE:53==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
43
“Sometimes yes, especially now with all this Coronavirus and literally like
I don’t want to put my phone on because it’s everywhere. Like you open
Facebook, you open Instagram, you open everything - everywhere it’s just
like Corona and this is a lot stressful because we all know that this is
going.. This is viral now. We all are stressed, we all are concerned about
our health. But when it’s like all the time in your head, like Coronavirus
is here, it’s too much it’s overwhelming.”
- Participant 12
Content anxiety:
“Not because of the smartphone, but because of the news right now. The
corona.(...) Every five news pages that were on my Facebook every time I
opened it was related to the corona.”
- Participant 13
5.1.3
In Summary
5.1.3.1
Smartphone challenges
As mentioned earlier, 8 out of the 13 participants participated in a one-week challenge
prior to their individual qualitative interviews. They were asked to document their
screen time and their most used application before and after the challenge. During
their interviews, they were asked to reflect on their screen time before and after the
challenge. As documented in the screenshots, only the participants who performed
the grayscale mode challenge saw a decrease in their overall screen time (Figure 5.3).
The participants who performed the time-limit challenge admitted that whenever they
received a notification that their scheduled time was over, they would just ignore the
warning and continue using their smartphones.
“during the challenge(...) I tried to limit myself in certain areas, but then
also because I had the opportunity to extend it sometimes. Then I realized
that I use this platform a lot (...) and it’s not really necessary. I think
there were a lot of times where I extended it.(...)at first it started off like
15 minutes and then an hour and then I think I had two days where I just
canceled it for the day.”
- Participant 13
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Design Process
(a) Before the challenge
(b) After the challenge
Figure 5.3: Screen time
The participants who removed the notifications or changed the positioning on
their most used apps did not see a difference in their behaviour, as their smartphone
activities had become a routine and therefore, the challenges did not impact them.
However, despite the greyscale being the most effective strategy, it was also voted as
the most unsustainable strategy. All of the participants chose the app limiter as the
hardest strategy but also the one with the most potential, as it removed completely
the access to their preferred apps.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
45
“For YouTube, I would have definitely needed to put a screen time limit.
Yeah. Because I think for YouTube, that’s the only way to stop it, just to
have a limit and boom. After that there’s no more.”
- Participant 1
“(...)the hardest cause the others you still have access”
- Participant 5
Nonetheless, a few participants still made sure to accentuate that keeping them-
selves busy in real life and/or finding offline hobbies would be of greater value than a
smartphone strategy, as less willpower would be necessitated to stay away from their
smartphones:
“One thing that it will make me lower it down is having more work to do
and another thing to do is find another hobby that fits my free time.“
- Participant 4
Lack of reflection
All participants got the opportunity to reflect on their smartphone usage for the
first time, throughout this interview process and despite some being aware of tools to
monitor screen time, the majority had never noticed these digital wellbeing features
in their devices or apps. Yet, those that knew about these strategies showed no major
interest in checking their screen time, underlying their lack of proactiveness when it
comes to establishing a healthier relationship with their smartphone.
“I didn’t think about it (...) I don’t care (...) Don’t want it to be lower
or higher (...) because I know that some days it will be like, two hours.
Sunday eight hours. It depends so [it balances out]. “
- Participant 2
“I’m usually not checking my screen time, even if I have this function”
- Participant 12
The majority of the participants said that they would consider more than 2 hours
a day as too much. Still, most of the students exceeded these 2 hours. Despite some
participants feeling shocked, embarrassed and guilty, the majority felt rather neutral
about their screen time.
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Design Process
“I am surprised, it makes sense but never thinks about it timewise; don’t
feel guilty or sad about it”
- Participant 3
“In general, I expected that I spent less time on my phone (around 10h
weekly). I didn’t expect that - I don’t know how I feel.”
- Participant 4
“Very shocked by the actual result”
- Participant 9
Yet, when they were confronted with their screen time on their most used apps, the
participants that previously felt neutral seemed taken aback. Despite being aware of
which applications they were ‘wasting’ their time on, they were not conscious of how
much time they actually spent there. Some participants were even slightly surprised
or simply shocked to see some applications rank higher than expected.
“[Surprise about Instagram’s high placement] Yeah. Because when I go on
Instagram, it’s like 10 seconds and then you know, so it’s crazy (...) Like
what the fuck?”
- Participant 2
“Facebook is surprising - 33 mins for Facebook, I would never have said
it, because I don’t even like Facebook.”
- Participant 5
“Kind of reflect on what I chose to spend my time on.(...) it’s not some-
thing I’m proud of. (...)I think I don’t have other ways to entertain myself
(...) or that’s the easiest way to entertain myself sometimes, yeah. So
I choose to go on YouTube instead. Because it’s easier and it’s in my
reach.”
- Participant 13
Within this context, an interesting statement on defining ’use’ was made by one
research participant, as she questioned the appropriate term to describe her activities
on YouTube. As such, this viewpoint could be linked to the low-effort engagement
and elements of passive consumerism associated with apps such as YouTube.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
47
“I completely forgot about YouTube. I didn’t consider it as an application
that I use that much. I use it mainly for listening to music.”
- Participant 8
Interestingly, this newfound reflection also made two of the participants raise
questions on a potential smartphone addiction, as they described feelings such as
guilt and embarrassment but still, they expressed a lack of courage in giving up these
same apps that made them feel these negative feelings.
“[Why don’t you give them up?] Good question, I don’t know. I have to
let these things sit through my head so I can feel that the decision was
mine instead of feeling like it’s addictive through this interview.”
- Participant 10
“I think it made me realize that I might have a phone addiction. That
I didn’t need to be on the phone that much and how much of that time
throughout the day because that’s a lot of hours throughout the day. And
it just got me thinking like, what could I have done within these six hours
instead of constantly being on the phone.”
- Participant 13
Initial insights
One of the key takeaways from these user studies is the need to avoid black-and-
white discourse around students’ use of technology.
These initial insights helped
develop a richer understanding of students’ smartphone usage as well as the daily
situations and personal incentives which promote addictive smartphone behaviour,
as summarized below:
• Daily routines, mainly their morning and bedtime process
• Feeling or being alone
• Procrastination due to performance anxiety
• F.O.M.O
• Infinite content loop
• Relationship maintenance, mainly international community (both friends and
family)
These findings were used as the foundation for the structure of the smartphone
usage survey conducted in the second iteration.
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Design Process
5.2
Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
The first iteration of this design research process pointed to reasons underlying stu-
dents’ engagement with their mobile devices. As part of a mixed-methods approach,
we next chose to extend and validate our understanding of these themes by conduct-
ing a survey with a larger and more diverse student sample. The results presented in
this second iteration are therefore more quantitative in nature.
The findings from the first iteration on low-effort engagement and passive con-
sumerism also seemed to approach a definition of ‘smartphone addiction’ or at least
‘potentially problematic engagement’ in the words of research participants. In accor-
dance with the initial user studies, the survey aims to gain a richer understanding
of the daily situations and personal incentives, which promotes university students’
smartphone usage, with emphasis on the areas that the university students find prob-
lematic.
We also conduct this second iteration to nurture the ideation process of alternative
concept strategies, aimed at fostering healthy relationships to and throughout the
smartphone.
5.2.1
Methods
5.2.1.1
Before and during the interview
An online survey using Google Forms 5 was created and shared with a large group
of students from Denmark and abroad. Charlton’s questionnaire was employed as the
basis for the creation of the online survey [62], as the 45 statements on the immersive
experience of playing video games also proved relevant to technology more broadly.
Additionally, the 37 statements from the Offline-Friend Addiction Questionnaire also
inspired the formulation of the online survey [60].
Selected statements from both sources were modified and adapted to relate to
this research focus on smartphone usage, which resulted in a total amount of 48
statements. The observation also included general demographic questions alongside
questions related to users’ screen time and their associated emotions.
Questions related to the current coronavirus outbreak were also included to en-
able reflection upon the difference between normal everyday smartphone usage and
the increased usage pattern during these social distancing measures. In the end, re-
spondents were informed as to our means of complying with GDPR (General Data
Protection Regulation)6 requirements and asked to leave their email address if they
were interested in participating in a group or individual interview. The survey was
open for responses for one week.
5https://www.google.com/forms/about/
6https://gdpr-info.eu/
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
49
5.2.1.2
After the interview
Data from 114 respondents was collected in the context of this online survey. The
results of the online survey were collected through a Google Sheets document, after
closing it down for responses. In order to comply with GDPR requirements, the email
addresses collected were separated from the remaining data set.
The graphical summary provided by Google Forms was on the basis of the majority
of the findings and analysis. No further analysis method was utilized to dissect the
collected data. Thereafter, the qualitative comments left by respondents at the end
of the survey were assembled into one document. These comments were then subject
to close reading by both researchers. Similar to the first iteration, key themes and
categories were identified with consideration to the quantitative findings from the
graphical summary as well as the key themes and categories developed in the first
iteration. Herein, the approach was mainly deductive. We identified selected quotes
that best represented each theme, which helped frame the documentation and writing
of the second iteration.
5.2.2
Findings
5.2.2.1
Demographics
As mentioned previously, the survey gathered 114 responses.
The average age
was 24 years old and 59 (51.6%) identified themselves as male and 53 (46.5%) as
female (Figure 5.4). According to their education, 37.3% are current Bachelor stu-
dents, 58.8% are Master students, 2.0% are recently graduated and 2.0% fall into the
group of “Not studying” (Figure 5.5). Furthermore, 35 nationalities were represented
across the dataset. There is a slightly larger male representation and due to conve-
nience sampling, a majority of the respondents have similar educational degrees to
the researchers.
5.2.2.2
Students’ Phone Usage
All respondents who answered the questions have a smartphone.
When asked
about when was the last time they used their smartphone, 74 referred to messaging
and social media/internet browsing.
Moreover, the majority (57%) describe their
smartphone usage to be a few times an hour, 15.8% use their phone once an hour
and 18.4% - every few minutes (Figure 5.6). Additionally, this smartphone usage is
further confirmed with the frequent need for charging - 78.4% reported a need to
charge their smartphone at least once a day and 17.5% - twice a day (Figure 5.7).
5.2.2.3
Applications
Moreover, when asked about which applications respondents use the most, social
media applications such as Facebook and Instagram, and contact applications such
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Design Process
Figure 5.4: Gender identity
Figure 5.5: Education level
as Messenger and WhatsApp were heavily mentioned (Figure 5.8). This matches the
results from the first iteration.
5.2.2.4
Duration
Daily average screen-time, as reported by respondents, varied between between 2
and 5 hours, with some respondents appearing to be outliers with screen times at
30 minutes and 17 hours (Figure 5.9). When asked about how they feel about their
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
51
Figure 5.6: Smartphone usage
Figure 5.7: Smartphone charging need
screen time, most respondents’ reactions were neutral, but some of the respondents
expressed surprise, shock, and embarrassment. As seen in the first iteration as well,
the majority (54.4%) do not use strategies to decrease their screen time, but when
they do, they mainly remove notifications (32.5%) or put an app limit (14%). The
respondents explain this by expressing a pressure to be constantly available, due to
the on-the-go nature of the smartphone. Therefore, their position in regards to their
screen time is conflicted, as they are balancing meaningful and wasteful interactions
with their smartphone.
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Design Process
Figure 5.8: Most used applications
“I have heard from many people, who would like to use their smartphone
less. However, on the other side, no one wants to feel like missing out
on something. So in order to always know what is going on, you need to
check your message (whatsapp, messenger) and constantly keep in contact
with other people. For me personally, I feel anxiety about this issue.”
- Survey respondent
5.2.2.5
Students’ Subjective Experience of their Behaviors
After the general smartphone usage questions, a series of statements were presented
to the respondent, with respect to which they were asked to rate their response on a
five point scale from strongly disagree to strongly agree.
Connectivity and F.O.M.O
As mentioned in the previous iteration, university students express a need for
connectivity, majorly in relation with F.O.M.O., as respondents either feel the urge
or are required to be available and updated on-the-go. For 57% of university stu-
dents, it is important to be up to date with their smartphone activities, especially on
contact applications such as Messenger, WhatsApp, Slack, Gmail but also on news
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
53
Figure 5.9: Summary of the most frequent responses concerning daily average screen
time
applications. Some of them also mentioned social media applications in general such
as Facebook and Instagram.
“My previous boss bought a smartphone for me, just so I can have access
to my emails all the time. I find it very stressful the fact that people want
immediate response from me. I wish I did not have a smartphone, but in
Denmark it is not something that I can do.”
- Survey respondent
Relationship maintenance
As noted in the first iteration, university students lean more towards apps and
in-app features supporting their relationships with friends and family abroad. This
is also visible in the results from the online survey, as 96.5% of the respondents use
their smartphones to stay in touch with friends and family (Figure 5.10).
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Design Process
Figure 5.10: Use smartphone to stay in touch with friends and family
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
55
Alone
Another dimension previously described in the first iteration is the respondents’
attachment to their smartphone when being or feeling alone. The majority of the
students (78.1%) agreed that smartphones are important in their university student’s
life (Figure 5.11). At the same time, 58.8% reported that they used their smartphones
to relax and 65.8% believed that their smartphone is good for overcoming boredom
(Figure 5.12). When asked about their feelings and emotions, 57% agree that they do
not feel anxious about using their smartphones. Thereby, as seen in the first iteration
as well, their smartphone represents a comfort zone and tangible escape for alone
time.
Figure 5.11: Smartphones are unimportant in my life
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure 5.12: Using smartphone for overcoming boredom
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Design Process
In contradiction to the initial user studies, respondents have marked that they
don’t often use their smartphones during mealtime.
It could be assumed that, if
the researchers had added “alone” to the phrase, the responses would be different
(Figure 5.13).
Figure 5.13: Smartphone used during meal time
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Smartphone vs. content
Interestingly, despite 57% noting that smartphones do not make them anxious,
46.5% express worry about their self-image on social media applications (i.e. Face-
book, Instagram, Snapchat, Twitter), dating applications (i.e. Tinder) and during
larger-scale virtual calls/message groups on WhatsApp and Skype (Figure 5.14).
Some respondents have further marked that they feel uncomfortable using social
media applications (mainly Facebook) but also up-and-coming TikTok and dating
applications as Tinder.
Certain respondents also expressed a hard time tolerating social media applica-
tions, therein Facebook, Instagram, and TikTok are the most mentioned application
that they find hard to tolerate. This accentuates the distinguishment between the
smartphone as a whole and social media for the respondents.
“On social media, I feel I have less to tell, yet there’s a slight pressure of
posting and on some days, when you see how productive/ creative/ cheerful
others are makes me even more anxious.”
- Survey respondent
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
57
Figure 5.14: Worrying about self-image when using certain smartphone applications
==PAGE:68==
58
5 Design Process
“I feel more impacted by the way people around me use their phone, as
opposed to my own use.”
- Survey respondent
This is further highlighted by the fact that 57% of university students find smart-
phone activities addictive (Figure 5.15), but a plurality (39.5%) don’t believe that
they are addicted to their smartphones (Figure 5.16). Therein, it can be suggested
that the addictive smartphone behavior is promoted by respective apps’ conscious
design decisions to promote a frictionless experience for increased engagement and
user retention, rather than the smartphone in itself, which acts as an intermediate
between the respondent and these apps.
Figure 5.15: Find smartphone activities addictive
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Coronavirus outbreak
• New routines
It is important to put the coronavirus outbreak in perspective, when describing
the insights collected on the university students’ smartphone usage. The lockdown
situation introduces a ‘new normal’ in the respondents’ everyday lives and, as a
result, a lack of structure and a change of routine. Thereby, their regular smartphone
routines and their expectations to these are shattered, leading to a heightened screen
time overall.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
59
Figure 5.16: I think I am addicted to my smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:70==
60
5 Design Process
“I was not sure whether to answer the questions according to my normal
smartphone use or recent smartphone use (which is drastically different
given the situation)”
- Survey respondent
“screen time increased with like 20%”
- Survey respondent
“I am using my phone around 5 more hours for sure”
- Survey respondent
• Boredom
Yet, a majority of the respondents don’t believe that the nature of their smart-
phone activities have changed. Instead, the respondents describe a disproportionate
time distribution on their usual smartphone activities, as there is a drastic increase
in their entertainment- and communication-focused interactions.
“before corona I tried to limit my usage.. It has now skyrocketed compared
to before (...) I use it way more for brain dead entertainment. Facebook
videos are my weakness”
- Survey respondent
“I use it much more, and can now spend hours on tiktok (...)”
- Survey respondent
This rise is explained by the increase in situational or contextual antecedents of
loneliness. As the majority of the respondents are primarily alone during the lockdown
period, they explained a need to cope with feelings related to being alone, therein
boredom primarily, through their smartphone.
“Due to isolation, my on screen time has significantly increased, because
I am pointlessly scrolling through applications to kill time.”
- Survey respondent
==PAGE:71==
5.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
61
“More free time leads to more time wasting, sometimes on the phone”
- Survey respondent
The respondents perceive this elevated smartphone usage negatively, as exhibited
by respondents’ feelings of anxiety around this. This viewpoint is further accentuated
by the respondents expressing being “more tired of using my smartphone”.
“I spend more time with my smartphone than before (...)
I feel more
anxious based on the increasing usage of my smartphone”
- Survey respondent
Some respondents also mention that the lockdown measures has introduced slight
changes in terms of their app usage, as a result of online schooling and work from
home situations:
“I used to use mainly skype, now I also use discord, facebook video call,
skype business, whereby”
- Survey respondent
“I was procrastinating with Netflix last days, but strangely podcasts (Youtube)
allowed me to concentrate for work. Sometimes in the middle of the day,
I am calling to my friends or family to get to know how they are doing.”
- Survey respondent
• New sense of availability
Additionally, the respondents feel more the need to be up to date with the evolv-
ing coronavirus news. As the respondents are unable to stick to their regular time
schedules and routines amidst the stay-at-home situation, their sense of availability
is disoriented. Therefore, they feel a larger obligation to be connected and available.
“I use my phone more than ever. I’m always on except the work hours or
study hours (...)”
- Survey respondent
“FOMO. I feel there’s more going on in Whatsapp groups discussions, for
example.”
- Survey respondent
==PAGE:72==
62
5 Design Process
• Human connection
As the respondents are now isolated and no longer able to sustain their real
life relationships, another layer of relationships need to be maintained through their
smartphone. This adds another category of individuals for relationship maintenance,
increasing further their dependency on their smartphone to mimic everyday life in-
teractions.
“I think these circumstances have not changed the way I use my smart-
phone (I use the same apps as always), however they changed the time I
spend communicating with people that I used to meet in person.”
- Survey respondent
“The quarantine is boosting the current need of people to stay in touch more
than ever through digital communication platforms such as WhatsApp,
FaceTime, Facebook Messenger and so on. Which displays how important
these platforms are for our social life when we are unable to physically see
each other.”
- Survey respondent
Likewise, the lockdown situation further accentuates a greater need for human
connection with closed ones. Therein, FaceTime, Messenger and Whatsapp are heav-
ily shaping the respondents’ daily smartphone usage, as they are prioritizing apps
promoting digital intimacy over others. This also explains the increased popularity
of the new video calling app HouseParty during the coronavirus outbreak, amongst
the respondents.
“currently being confined in my apartment alone I use my phone a lot more
than I do usually, which makes answering these questions difficult (...) it
is almost my only source of communication with friends and family”
- Survey respondent
“I downloaded Houseparty and use it with my friends.”
- Survey respondent
==PAGE:73==
5.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
63
• Saturation of content
A significant percentage also mention that their social media content makes them
feel more anxious and stressed in general due to the prominence of coronavirus related
posts, with some respondents describing a conscious act to “avoid reading about
coronavirus”.
“(...) Because people are posting all kind of crap about the virus, which is
not useful information”
- Survey respondent
“(...) I feel that most of the content I follow is connected to coronavirus,
why I aim to spend less time on it”
- Survey respondent
This further points out the distinguishment between the smartphone as a whole
and social media, therein its content, for the respondents.
Addicted
In the additional comment section, one respondent compared smartphones to
drugs, illustrating the impact of addictive smartphone behavior on the respondents.
“Maybe smartphone usage could be compared to drugs usage “
- Survey respondent
Whereas, others explained that they have felt addicted to their phones in the past
and are actively using strategies to decrease their smartphone usage but they have a
hard time converting the newfound time to productivity, accentuating the limitations
of current smartphone strategies.
“I used to be very addicted to my phone, and I stopped that by deleting the
social media apps from it - and though the anxiety linked to using the apps
has reduced - I am not able to convert the time saved into a productive
activity as I just spend the same time gaming/watching YT videos instead”
- Survey respondent
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Design Process
As seen in above statements, several respondents straightforwardly use the term
‘addicted’ to refer to the areas that they find problematic in their smartphone. This
could be due to the heightened smartphone usage provoked by the coronavirus situ-
ation. Alternatively, this could indicate a difference in alertness and consciousness
amongst respondents in terms of their individual perceptions of their smartphone
usage.
Regardless, these supplementary comments in addition to the findings from this
second iteration continue to point to low-effort engagement and passive consumerism
as an approach to defining ‘smartphone addiction’ from a user-centric perspective.
Therein, YouTube’s and TikTok infinite scrolling features are continuously referred
to as potentially problematic engagement by the research participants.
5.2.3
In Summary
The quantitative findings expressed in this Chapter contribute to a mixed-methods
understanding of students’ relationships to their devices, and in particular highlighted
three primary paths to focus on for initial concept development - where change in
line with students’ values was most likely to be realised through design.
• Using the smartphone when alone (loneliness)
• Using the smartphone to connect with family and friends, mainly abroad (F.O.M.O)
• Using the smartphone to relax (phone break)
Amidst the unprecedented coronavirus situation, respondents’ daily smartphone
habits intensified in duration of usage, allowing pre-existing smartphone behaviors to
be perceived as problematic. Yet, it is important to note that, when reflecting upon
their smartphone behavior, respondents often seemed to lack conscious awareness of
its effect on themselves, despite being aware of their usage patterns.
The frequent occurrence of conflicting statements and results suggested the need
for even richer understanding of university students’ smartphone behavior. In the
next iteration, we aim to get a deeper insight into this as well as explore a series of
concept strategies in collaboration with university students, developed and designed
on the basis of the three aforementioned focus areas.
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
65
5.3
Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
The rich understanding gathered through the conduct of the first two iterations of
this work allowed us to next pursue the creation of several novel design solutions to
the challenges raised by participants.
Six different solutions ideas are conceptualised in the intent of follow-up evaluation
with research participants. We chose to conduct focus group interviews to gather
actionable insight relevant to these initial concepts. This would later facilitate the
prioritization, further conceptualisation and operationalisation of the selected solution
ideas.
5.3.1
Methods
5.3.1.1
Before the interview
The online survey allowed us to gain access to research participants for the third
iteration. We chose to conduct focus group interviews, as they allow the generation
of many different ideas and perspectives, which can serve as actionable insight for the
further development of potential solutions and ideas. Due to GDPR requirements,
there was no access to the individual respondents’ data and the focus group interviews
were coordinated according to their schedules and time slot preferences. Due to the
current coronavirus outbreak, the group interviews were conducted virtually through
Zoom 7, and the sessions were limited up to 4 participants, excluding the moderator
and minute taker.
A moderator was assigned to set the atmosphere, facilitate the conversation be-
tween the research participants and maximize the results from the focus group inter-
views [52]. At the beginning of the interview, the moderator emphasized the defini-
tion of a group interview and explained the focus and objectives of this session. Some
guidelines were also set to ensure an inclusive, respectful and diverse environment, so
that every respondent felt comfortable to share their feedback regardless of the other
participants’ perspectives.
5.3.1.2
During the interview
The first half of the group interview was focused on familiarising the participants
further with the overall subject, but also with the general observed trends and each
others’ opinions. Thereby, the group interview was initiated with a short introduction
round. Then, the research participants were asked to share their overall opinion on
the survey. Subsequently, the participants were presented with the main insights from
the study and asked to reflect upon them, collectively.
7https://zoom.us/
==PAGE:76==
66
5 Design Process
In the second half of the group interview, the focus was on feedback and idea
generation. The three concept frameworks were introduced alongside six different
concept ideas for the promotion of a healthier relationship with the smartphone. The
participants were prompted to consider how each of these concept ideas would work in
practice in their everyday life, what they would remove/add and if this was something
they would use for themselves or someone they know. Finally, participants were asked
to reflect on which parts of their own smartphone usage and relationship they found
unhealthy as well as which of the concept ideas they would use to address this or if
they had any personal strategy ideas.
5.3.1.3
After the interview
The third iteration resulted in 8 hours, 25 minutes and 36 seconds of au-
dio recordings. The audio recordings from these group interviews were, first, fully
transcribed. Thereafter, these transcriptions were subject to close reading by both
researchers.
We identified selected quotes that best demonstrated the breadth of
different options or perspectives for each of the concepts discussed.
Thereby, the
documentation and writing of the third iteration was framed around the selected
quotes.
5.3.2
Findings
5.3.2.1
Students’ Reflections on Smartphone Usage Survey Results
7 group interviews were conducted over the span of two days, with 17 participants
in total.
The session started off with a retrospective overview of the main findings from
the online survey. The majority agreed with the fact that the smartphone brought
them comfort, “killed time” and provided “brain dead” entertainment. Social media
in particular was perceived as a tool for relaxation.
“When I am on my phone I do this scrolling. This is how I try to relax.
My phone is a way for me to relax.”
- Participant 15
Nonetheless, the majority of the participants also agreed that social media does
produce negative feelings such as stress due to unproductivity or anxiety due to
self-image. Some participants hinted at the design of the user experience as at the
center of this duality, whereas others plainly described it as an ‘addiction’. Yet, several
discussions were also held about the proper term with which to describe this behavior.
Some argued that it was a ‘necessity’ considering today’s technologically connected
society (i.e. Google Maps, Apple Pay, Camera, Microsoft Outlook, etc.).
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
67
“Necessity. If you don’t have it, you feel how hard life is without it. Even
that being said, addiction - is it something almost as useful as wearing
shoes.”
- Participant 16
Still, a vast majority explained that it depends on the actual smartphone usage
behavior and more specifically the use case scenarios. The smartphone appears to
solve various functional needs for participants in terms of communication and produc-
tivity. Therefore, heavy reliance on the smartphone for entertainment purposes was
drawn as the limit, as these types of interactions were not perceived as functional nor
necessary but simply desirable and optional.
Research participants also emphasized that activities performed on the smart-
phone are possible on other electronic devices (e.g. the personal computer). There-
fore, it is important to always consider the individual’s overall technology behavior,
as this allows a richer understanding of what prompts a specific behavior: the smart-
phone or the specific activity. For instance, despite mainly accessing social media
through their smartphones, participants are very likely to also access it on their other
electronic devices. Thus, a participant argues that it is sometimes incorrect to use
the term ‘addicted’ in the context of the smartphone, as the behavior might actually
be provoked by a specific application, ordinarly sustained as a smartphone activity.
“No one’s strictly addicted to holding a smartphone; they’re addicted to
certain apps within this smartphone. (..) For example, you can go on
Instagram on your laptop. therefore you wouldn’t be addicted to your
smartphone you’d be more addicted to Instagram.”
- Participant 19
In general, participants’ perceptions of problematic forms of interaction aligned
with previous iterations. Above findings on the addictive elements of the design of
interface interactions, in alignment with prior findings on a frictionless experience with
low-effort engagement and passive consumerism seem to strengthen this research’s
definition of ‘potentially problematic engagement’, which are pertinent for breaking
the cycle of ‘smartphone addiction’ by design.
5.3.2.2
Students’ Feedback on Concept Strategies
In the second part of the session, the different narratives and concept strategies were
presented. As observed in the prior iterations, the three main narratives of smart-
phone usage identified through prior design research phases are the phone break(i.e.
taking a mental break from studying to scroll through social media), Fear Of Miss-
ing Out related to physical distance (i.e. keep in touch with friends or family abroad)
==PAGE:78==
68
5 Design Process
and loneliness (i.e. taking the train alone, eating lunch alone or feeling alone/awk-
ward in a unfamiliar social situation). Subsequently, each researcher generated 3 -
5 concept ideas for the respective narratives, which resulted in 21 concept ideas in
total. Finally, 6 concept solutions were chosen for further user evaluation based on
the RICE (Reach Impact Confidence Effort) prioritization matrix.
Concept Strategy: Ring Limiter
The first concept idea, Ring Limiter, arose from reflection and discussion of the
’phone break’ narrative described by research participants. This simple tangible de-
vice would allow real-time reports on how much time you spend on your device, as
this ring changes color in response to the wearer’s screen time (Figure 5.17). This
tech gadget can be used in the context of a phone break, an app or the overall screen
time to ensure the smartphone user doesn’t lose track of time.
Figure 5.17: Ring Limiter
The Ring Limiter received several positive responses from participants in terms
of its subconscious real-time reporting ability. The ongoing feedback provided by the
ring in a non-invasive manner nudges discreetly the research participants to reflect
upon their screen time. Two of the participants further compared the Ring Limiter
to Apple’s Screen Time feature, which allows users to check and monitor their device
usage.
==PAGE:79==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
69
Problem area
Losing track of time during phone breaks
Design hypothe-
sis
University students easily lose track of time, as they are not aware of their screen
time.
A tangible reminder of our screen time can help us make more mindful decisions in
terms of our smartphone usage. We chose to propose a tangible device as it could
make real-time reporting more easily accessible and efficient. Currently, we need
to use an app or the built-in features such as Screen Time or Digital Wellbeing to
check or monitor our smartphone usage. However, this ring would eliminate these
unnecessary additional interactions with the smartphone that could potentially be
distracting.
Usage scenario
Use Case 1:
A university student is studying with classmates for a written
exam. They want to take a 15 minutes break on their smartphone to relax. They
don’t want to lose track of the time, so they assign a screen time limiter to their
ring (see Further Possibilities for additional details).
The ring changes colors
according to the time spent on their smartphone. When the 15 minutes break is
over, the ring signifies to the university student to put down the smartphone.
Use Case 2:
A university student wants to limit their screen time on social
media, as the overload of content around the coronavirus makes them anxious but
they still feel the need to be up to date with their friends abroad. They connect a
timer of 2 hours to their ring on the specific social media apps. When the 2 hours
limit has been reached, the ring signifies to the university student to put down
their smartphone.
Use Case 3: A university wants to limit their overall screen time, as it affects
their eyesight and their sleep time at the end of the day. They put a screen time
limit of 4 hours on all of their smartphone interactions, therein social media, phone
calls, emails, etc. When the 4 hours limit has been reached, the ring signifies to
the university student to put down their smartphone.
Further Possibil-
ities
The ring could signify the end of the screen time slot through sounds, touch or
blinking colours.
The ring could be customised according to user’s style preferences.
The screen time limiter could be assigned through the ring directly or through an
associated smartphone application.
Table 5.1: Ring Limiter Overview
“(...) it’s not invasive, so you don’t feel like you’re being actively mon-
itored and stuff, but it might work. It’s similar to the screen time thing
in the iPhone, I guess, where you set a screen time and after that, it
just turns the screen blank and you have to select ‘Do you want to use
it more?’(...)Because if you make it harsher, you just throw it away alto-
gether.”
- Participant 21
==PAGE:80==
70
5 Design Process
“I don’t know if I would use it personally that much, but I could see it
being a helpful thing for other people.. to (...)be able to monitor what you
are doing.”
- Participant 23
“Having (...) something objective telling you exactly in the same way
screentime does when it comes up and gives you hours or whatever, but
on an ongoing basis, rather than once at the end of every week, [where]
you just ignore it. If it’s there (...) while you’re actually in the midst of
using it, I think that’d be a lot more helpful.”
- Participant 24
The respondents in favour of the Ring Limiter imagined using it as a tool to
allocate and monitor their phone breaks throughout the day, when they decide to
have one. One respondent emphasized that it was important that the Ring Limiter
was used to limit and frame the phone breaks, and not as a reason to encourage them
further.
“I would probably use it as a sort of cumulative thing throughout the day.
So it wouldn’t be like I’d want times of the day where I can use the phone,
but like having an allocated amount of time (...) [for] wasting time. And
that would be more for (...) social media apps (...) so that you can use
(...) your payment methods and all that whenever you wanted to. But
you could still limit the amount of time you’re spending using apps like
Facebook”
- Participant 24
“I think it should not let you know when you can have a phone break
because you should decide if you need one or not (...) otherwise I like the
idea. I really like everything which is tangible and wearable. I like these
tech gadgets.”
- Participant 1
Nevertheless, despite some participants comparing it to Apple’s Screen Time, they
were quick to distinguish it from the act of setting an app limiter or timer on one’s
phone for examples. These participants perceived challenges and opportunities related
to the fact that the solution was a tangible and wearable device, due to its tactile
and visual intimacy, along with its persistent presence in the participants’ sphere of
attention.
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
71
“If it is something like a ring, this means that it is kind of like a piece of
you. I see the potential, but I also see the challenge. “
- Participant 16
“This one sounds really intense to add another electronic gadget to your
life to decrease the usage of your smartphone. I don’t know if I’m that
convinced.”
- Participant 18
Meanwhile, other participants thought that the solution idea was too soft, as it
did not demonstrate any remarkable or serious consequences, in case the participants
decide to ignore the ring’s nudging. The participants believed it was too easy to
ignore it, and some suggested shutting down the smartphone screen or even executing
electroshock through the ring for higher efficiency.
“ I feel like it’s too easy to ignore so you can just always blink red but
whatever.”
- Participant 19
“I feel like you don’t necessarily need a ring to limit it. Like Can you if
it’s programmable into the app like, shutting it down?”
- Participant 22
“I don’t know if it helped that much unless it has electroshock or something
like that. Because you can always browse through the next story of Reddit
and even if it’s blinking (...) you can just hide it or ignore the color”
- Participant 25
One respondent further commented that it would be too much of a financial
investment to buy a tech gadget to promote a healthier smartphone relationship,
especially if the target group is university students, as their general budget is limited.
==PAGE:82==
72
5 Design Process
”(...) as a student. I think I probably would not pay for it because I don’t
have that money. Or depending on how much it cost I probably wouldn’t
pay for it.”
- Participant 22
Nevertheless, research participants seemed to come to the agreement that the
efficiency of the ring depended on the mindset of the person, and if they went to the
extent of purchasing a wearable device to monitor their screen time, then it should
be assumed that they would put effort into respecting their Ring Limiter.
“If you are using the ring, it means that you actually want to change
so(...) I assume that if you do have the ring, then you’re not [going to]
ignore [it]”
- Participant 4
This again also depends on how conscious the participants are of their smartphone
usage.
Setting unrealistic goals can also demotivate them from following through
with their phone breaks and the limits set by the ring as suggested by the frame-
work for SMART goals 8. One respondent described experiencing this phenomenon,
when using Apple’s Screen Time’s app limiter, in the first iteration, as part of the
smartphone-based challenges.
“When I was putting the timer [for the app limiter], like the restriction,
it wasn’t very realistic”
- Participant 13
This highlights another important aim to consider for later design work, as it could
be relevant to incorporate the SMART goals within this concept idea, and potentially
the other concept ideas as well. This would help frame goal-setting to become Spe-
cific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant and Time-based, facilitating its achievement
for participants.
Concept Strategy: Content Digest
Again, in line with reflection and discussion of the ’phone break’ narrative de-
scribed by research participants, the next concept idea, a Content Digest, was
developed. As the infinite content loop is a prominent variable in research partici-
pants’ ’phone break’ , this incited the idea of a tailored digest of users’ current content
8https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/career-development/smart-goals
==PAGE:83==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
73
streams to avoid the deteriorating effects of the design’s frictionless experience on the
user’s sense of control.
This concept idea could be implemented as a plugin or a separate application.
Additionally, it would target the gesture interactions of infinite content loop structure
(i.e. scrolling, swiping), by allowing the user to curate their news feeds based on pre-
selected filters. Thereby, the user can spend less time aimlessly looking for content
(Figure 5.18) by efficiently getting the desired information from a specific application
or across several applications.
Figure 5.18: Addiction spectrum
The participants seemed very intrigued but also sceptical in terms of the Content
Digest’s ability to curate the content efficiently. A general fear expressed by the par-
ticipants was the possibility of a potential information bubble shaping their content
streams, especially social media, as a result of the Content Digest along with general
ethical issues associated with the notion of tailoring news.
==PAGE:84==
74
5 Design Process
Problem area
Infinite content loops during phone breaks
Design hypothe-
sis
According to some university students, they spend too much time scrolling
through social media, looking for meaningful content.
A filter that allows the university student to personalise their content streams
according to their preferences in terms of categories.
Inspired by Instagram’s pop-up feature, displaying a “You’re All Caught Up”
message, this filter would also allow the university student to set a limit to their
scrolling [34].
These features can help the university student make more mindful decisions in
terms of their smartphone usage.
Usage scenario
Use Case 1: A university student always makes sure to scroll his Twitter feed be-
fore going to sleep. In a blind search for satisfying content on his favourite football
team, the university student keeps scrolling, losing track of time and accidentally
ending up spending over 2 hours on Twitter. Therefore, he ends up sleeping later.
The Content Digest would help him personalise his Twitter feed, so he can more
easily access content on his favourite football team, and by setting a limit to
20 posts, he can limit the amount of scrolling he can do on Twitter before bedtime.
Use Case 2: A university student is interested in fashion and uses both Insta-
gram and Pinterest for inspiration in the frame of her design studies.
Multiple
times a day, for 30 minutes, she scrolls through these applications to stay up
to date with the content and latest trends.
This increases her screen time
tremendously. The Content Digest app would help her access the content in one
place, and filter through it, according to her content preferences.
Additionally,
she puts a time limit of 30 minutes within the app, so she doesn’t lose track of time.
Use Case 3:
A university student studies journalism, and is always keeping
track of the newest trends on Twitter and several different news applications. The
university student often grows frustrated, as they find a lot of meaningless content
on these streams of content, either as spam or clickbait posts leading them into an
infinite content loop. The Content Digest app would help him filter the respective
platforms to reach the meaningful content according to their own interests and
limit the amount of clicking and scrolling from one content article to another.
Further Possibil-
ities
The Content Digest could be a separate application overlooking all content
applications or an optional add-on to respective content applications.
The Content Digest could limit the amount of scrolling, by limiting the amount
of posts, the duration of the entire interaction, or by limiting the amount of app-
based actions (scrolling, clicking, liking, commenting)
Table 5.2: Content Digest Overview
==PAGE:85==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
75
“Developing something like this (...) is full of ethical issues (...) I’ve
been to conferences where a lot of ideas like this have been kind of floated.
It’s just that notion of tailoring news. Or the ’you’re the censor’ of what
someone else receives is, it’s problematic. I mean, that’s not worse than
the problem of getting a continual loop of content”
- Participant 24
“Even if you give people access to decide the parameters of what gets
selected or doesn’t get selected, you still recreate (...) that kind of bubble
effect where they’re just seeing the same thing over and over again”
- Participant 24
“I think it’s quite dangerous (...) it’s called an information bubble or
something like that. Which is already present without these (...) Facebook,
Twitter and all these pages or applications, they are prioritizing the content
which fits you. And with that (...) you are not exposed to any other political
views or any other type of content (...) you can really easily find yourself
basically trapped in a really small pot of content.”
- Participant 1
Another issue raised by the respondents is the limitation of the diversity within
their content streams, which one described as being the whole appeal of social media.
This curation symbolized a bias, which went against the popular values of freedom of
expression, commonly associated with social media.
“The whole appeal of social media is that there is this vast amount of
information, you can choose what you want from it because if you’re
digesting something, [it] means someone or something is curating it for
you (...) here’s a sort of bias that comes in when you do that”
- Participant 21
An important variable affecting the potential of the solution is also the balance
between content from people they follow and interesting content creators, as the key
aim with social media is still mainly revolving around keeping in touch with friends
and family from around the world. Below comment thereby refers to the strength
of ties. Research shows that networks for strong and otherwise remote interpersonal
ties are valued, as they support social interactions and communication needs [30].
Whereas, weak-tie networks are dependent on protocols established by others, making
them more susceptible for a lack of engagement from users.
==PAGE:86==
76
5 Design Process
“I guess it would depend on how the filter is set to make sure that you
get content from people, you know, it’s not just the most popular, like the
most liked posts, for example”
- Participant 22
Still, one participant believed that university students were the perfect target
group for this solution, as they thought that this was a rising issue amongst her age
group, who increasingly sought meaningful and personalised content.
“I like the idea. I think it wouldn’t work for, for example, teens, because
I think they want to know everything, whether they’re interested in it or
not. But I think like, for our age and up, I think it’s very useful. (...) you
kind of find yourself like scrolling to find just like this one thing that is
interesting and that you can relate to. So I think it would be a nice thing
to have it filtered so you just see the things you’re interested in that day,
and you can kind of move on.”
- Participant 13
Another respondent further believed university students would rapidly get accus-
tomed to using the solution idea, as part of their smartphone use in their everyday
life.
“I think that it can work because most of the time at the beginning, we are
not ready for the changing but after like one month we are getting used”
- Participant 26
Additionally, despite the initial skepticism on the Content Digest’s efficiency from
other participants, one commented that social media platforms, such as Twitter and
Instagram, were already doing early-stage initiatives in curating and personalizing
the content streams of users, so this would just be a next step, targeting all social
media.
==PAGE:87==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
77
“This could be further inspired by a new thing that they introduced to
Twitter (...) you can just follow trends (...) it would just show me like
the most tweeted or like the hottest topics in the past, I don’t know, let’s
say 12 hours or whatsoever. So (...) you can actually combine them from
all the apps and filter just the most commented or the most viewed . So
this could work.”
- Participant 4
Concept Strategy: Bond Touch
In the context of the second narrative ‘F.O.M.O related to physical distance’, the
selected concept idea is a bracelet, intended to be shared with close friends or family,
which allows you to keep in touch through touch (Figure 5.19). When pressing on
the bracelet’s interface, a vibration or nudge is sent to the bracelet of the intended
recipient. This idea is inspired by the existing tech gadget BondTouch with similar
functionalities 9.
Figure 5.19: Bond Touch
In general, the BondTouch sparked more laughter than interest, as the research
participants seemed to agree on its lack of efficiency in terms of promoting a healthier
relationship with their smartphone devices. Several participants commented on the
9https://www.bond-touch.com/
==PAGE:88==
78
5 Design Process
Problem area
F.O.M.O. with international relationship maintenance
Design hypothe-
sis
University students spend a majority of their screen time for relationship mainte-
nance and human connection with friends and family abroad.
The bracelet allows the university student to maintain human connection and
digital intimacy, without using their smartphones.
As seen during the first and second phases of this research project, one interaction
with the smartphone often leads very quickly to more, due to the infinite con-
tent loop. Therefore, this bracelet would replace some of these smartphone-based
interactions to help make them mindful decisions in terms of their smartphone
usage.
Usage scenario
Use Case 1: A university student goes on exchange to South Korea and feels
homesick, as she is far away from her parents and close friends. Before she left,
she shared these BondTouch bracelets with them.
These bracelets would help
send and receive small signs of human contact from each other throughout the
day. This will minimise the microinteractions and its corresponding screen time
throughout the day or the week.
Use Case 2: A university student goes to Spain to study their Master’s degree
full time at a local university. Their romantic partner is still living in Denmark, so
they decide to get the BondTouch bracelets together. These bracelets would allow
them to send each other small acts of digital intimacy, which would decrease their
need to constantly stay on their phone to receive news from each other throughout
the day or week.
Further Possibil-
ities
The bracelet could send acts of digital intimacy through a vibration, a nudge or
a blinking color.
The bracelet could be customised according to the user’s style preferences.
Table 5.3: BondTouch Overview
solution’s air of novelty, which intrigued them to want to try the solution. Neverthe-
less, all seemed to agree that they would either not buy it or stop using it, after some
time.
“it has that kind of novelty sort of vibe to it where it would be something
people might use for a month, and then it’ll go in the drawer and never
be seen again.”
- Participant 24
“I think it’s nice and just cute. It’s you know, it’s nice to have a little
reminder that someone is thinking of you and to send it to someone, but
I don’t. I don’t think I would buy it though.”
- Participant 13
==PAGE:89==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
79
Furthermore, research participants did not believe that the bracelet could properly
replace an act of digital intimacy or reciprocate the human connection provided by
a simple phone call.
Therefore, they did not believe that it had the potential to
have any lasting effect on their smartphone usage. Thereby, it would only act as a
supportive gadget to the participants’ current smartphone usage:
“It can also hurt your feelings if someone forgets about you one day and
you get used to this buzzing thing”
- Participant 9
“I think it would confuse me because when I get a vibration (...) I would
immediately check my phone if this person has written me a message or
something (...).”
- Participant 17
“As much as the nudge is nice, I feel connected with someone when I
know what’s going on in their life. (...) it would have to be like, paired
with a (...) verbal communication”
- Participant 22
Within this discussion, an interesting insight noted from below is the primacy of
human connection beyond technology. The following participant appears to value
the active act of human contact, rather than the passive thought of it.
Therein,
McLuhan’s theory on “The medium is the message” comes to mind, as the comments
below refers to the importance of the nature of the medium rather than the content
of the message [49].
“It can also hurt your feelings if someone forgets about you one day and
you get used to this buzzing thing”
- Participant 9
Another interesting insight pointed by one participant’s comment is the inter-
related nature of each of these technologies, as one smartphone activity is believed to
potentially increase the likelihood of other activities being performed.
==PAGE:90==
80
5 Design Process
“How is it gonna keep you away from your phone? (...)I think that this is
gonna work the opposite way like this is actually gonna encourage people
to use their phones more.”
- Participant 4
One respondent also commented that the bracelet would be more appropriate for
elderly people in the context of healthcare management, as the wearable device did
not solve any immediate needs for herself or her surroundings.
“I think it could be a good idea for elderly people maybe to be in contact
with people (...) if there’s an emergency (...) I don’t think we need another
(...) physical object tool to be connected through”
- Participant 23
Concept Strategy: Challenge Application
Also in line with the theme of loneliness as a motivation for more frequent than
desirable phone use, the fourth idea is an application that will limit the user’s screen
time by challenging them to entertain their time differently and thereby become
less dependent on certain applications for entertainment (Figure 5.20). This could
be either through the smartphone (i.e. ‘listen to Radiolab’s latest podcast episode
instead’) or their surroundings (i.e. ‘go out on a run or a walk and create a heart-
shaped route on GPS apps such as MapMyWalk 10, Strava 11, and Runtastic 12.’).
The challenge application was met with different opinions. The majority of re-
search participants thought that the right mindset was needed to make the most
out of this solution idea. They explained that this solution would need a prior ac-
knowledgement of feeling alone as well as a realisation of being dependent on certain
applications. Therefore, the general consensus was that this would function better in
combination with a self-monitoring app.
“You really have to believe and you really have to trust your phone here.
That it knows what you should do”
- Participant 1
10http://www.mapmywalk.com/
11https://www.strava.com/
12http://runtastic.com/
==PAGE:91==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
81
Figure 5.20: Challenge Application
“The first step is to acknowledge that you’re lonely and then to (...)
combat it using these ideas. Because (...) [there] was some sort of anxiety
app [that I was using] and it was like, okay, go clean the room or something
like that. And I’ll just close the app and be like, Don’t tell me what to
do.”
- Participant 21
“I don’t know how long term it would be (...) in the end, it’s your own
decision (...) so it’s more of a self monitoring that would have a bigger
impact in my opinion on people’s addictive phone usage or other phone
usage.”
- Participant 23
All of the participants enjoyed that the challenge application would act as a re-
minder or means of brainstorming other entertainment options. By positioning the
solution within this mentality, research participants can perceive the solution as a
distraction rather than a strict cut-off or limit, which helped the participants feel
more motivated to respect their app limits instead of ignoring or removing it.
==PAGE:92==
82
5 Design Process
Problem area
Loneliness and lack of suggestions for entertainment alternatives in cur-
rent app limiters
Design hypothe-
sis
App limiters are not working for university students, because they don’t know
how to entertain themselves otherwise, especially when they are or feel alone, so
they just end up snoozing the pop-up message.
This challenge application will proactively divert the university students by
suggesting them different offline and online activities to replace the apps that
they are currently dependent on.
Diversifying their smartphone usage and their entertainment options can help them
be more mindful of their smartphone usage.
Usage scenario
Use Case 1: A university student is alone in the train, commuting to school.
They have used the challenge application to set a limit of 2 hours on all social
media platforms. The limit is reached on their way to school. When the pop-up
message is displayed, notifying the university student that the limit has been
reached, the application challenges the university student to count the number of
brown shoes in the train or to listen to a recommended podcast episode.
This
will decrease the chance of the university student ignoring the app limit.
Use Case 2: A university student is home alone and bored during the coronavirus
outbreak. He is scrolling through Instagram, watching funny memes to entertain
himself. He is trying to be more mindful of his smartphone usage, especially on
Instagram, so he has an app limit of 2 hours on. Later on, he receives a pop-up
message notifying him of the end of his app time. The app challenges him to go for
a run or for a walk and to create a heart-shaped route on a GPS app of his choice.
This will introduce the university student to alternative entertainment options.
Further Possibil-
ities
The challenge application could suggest either online or offline entertainment, or
both.
The challenge application could be integrated into the smartphone’s operating
system or act as a separate application.
Table 5.4: Challenge Application Overview
“I think it’s a nice reminder of the options because sometimes (...) it
may be obvious, but you can’t think of it.”
- Participant 13
“I mean, I feel like I could use this in some situations as a brainstorm
but it’s kind of like I downloaded this app that reminds you to drink water
you just kind of don’t care about it at some point”
- Participant 17
“It’s good having that kind of distraction rather than just having a cut off
zone(...)But (...) it doesn’t have the same kind of separation as the idea
==PAGE:93==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
83
of the ring(...) [which] you’re more likely to actually pay attention to (...)
than something that is still on the phone”
- Participant 24
Amidst the current coronavirus outbreak situation, two participants believed that
this solution could help bring some normalcy into everyday life through its incorpora-
tion into participants’ daily tasks. This could help control the increasingly bad habits
of procrastination, which the stay-at-home situation has promoted. Additionally, it
could help improve the mental health of participants that have been affected by the
lack of structure in their everyday lives.
“I actually just downloaded a to do list app because it’s very, very hard
to self motivate when you’re in confinement and you don’t actually have
any (...) things to do at any time. And as time goes on, it’s harder and
harder to motivate yourself to do really normal things.”
- Participant 23
“Maybe this app itself would not help from limiting your time from the
phone but would rather help you to (...) not be as depressed (...) not
(...) be stuck Facebook looking loop or on Instagram looking loop (...) that
could improve their mentality.”
- Participant 25
Despite some participants enjoying the idea of incorporating to-do lists into the
challenge application, one respondent believed it would cross some lines within his
smartphone relationship.
“If my phone started telling me to do things that I was supposed to be
doing, I would find that really annoying.”
- Participant 24
Concept Strategy: Alone Mode
In line with the theme of loneliness as a motivation for more frequent than desirable
phone use, the fifth idea is the Alone Mode - it is inspired by the current ‘sleep mode’
on smartphones, which immediately push down notifications and app interactions
(Figure 5.21). This Alone Mode builds on the narrative of “It’s okay” to be completely
alone with your phone, without having to be connected to the rest of the world.
==PAGE:94==
84
5 Design Process
Thereby, this concept is thought as a symbolic feature to promote an autonomous
choice of practicing ‘alone time’, away from the smartphone, in further situations
than simply ‘when going to sleep’ and ‘when being in the airplane’.
The Alone Mode is also intended to be fully customisable to allow the user to
control all interactions with their device in this mode. This is why the Alone Mode
can be used as a self-love, self-awareness or as a productivity tool, depending on the
user’s needs. Other than customising the allowed he precise details of this concept idea
were not developed, as we wanted to hear the individual participants’ perspectives on
their ideal Alone Mode to ensure a broad set of features for personalisation.
Figure 5.21: Alone Mode
The research participants generally provided positive feedback on the Alone Mode
concept. They enjoyed the alone’s mode tie to the practice of mindfulness and produc-
tivity, as well as the symbolic reminder of taking alone time, as an act of autonomous
choice.
“I think it’s a good tool for making people realize how beneficial it could
be to take some alone time to meditate.”
- Participant 9
==PAGE:95==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
85
Problem area
Loneliness and procrastination
Design hypothe-
sis
University students frequently comment that they do not know how to disconnect
from their smartphones when they are alone with it, because of its on-the-go
nature, promoting a feeling of urgency.
The Alone Mode, a new mode of interaction with the smartphone, encourages us
to disconnect from online content without turning off our smartphones completely.
Therein, it allows us to customise our alone time according to our personal
needs. The focus of the Alone Mode could, for instance, be on mindfulness and
productivity related interactions.
This Alone Mode would work as a built-in feature, similarly to the sleep and
airplane modes, which already exist in all our smartphones.
Usage scenario
Use Case 1: A university student is alone in the library studying. She often gets
distracted during her study session, as she keeps receiving Messenger notifications
from her friends but she can’t put the phone on Do Not Disturb mode, as she
waits for important information from her thesis supervisor.
She turns on the
Alone Mode and enables only notifications from the app Spotify to listen to music
and Outlook in case of school emergencies. This helps her stay more productive
during her alone time.
Use Case 2: A university student is alone at home on a Saturday morning. He
has had a stressful week and wants to take some time to disconnect before lunch.
He doesn’t want to get distracted by unimportant notifications, so he turns on
the Alone Mode. He decides to only keep interactions promoting mindfulness on
and by consequent, all the other apps are grayed out until the mode is turned
out. Thereby, he can still use his smartphone whilst fully focusing on himself this
morning.
Further Possibil-
ities
The Alone Mode could restrict or promote certain applications rather than others
when in this mode.
Table 5.5: Alone Mode Overview
==PAGE:96==
86
5 Design Process
“I like the idea.
I don’t really use the sleep mode just because I turn
off like the sound from my phone when I go to sleep. But I think it’s a
nice thing to have. So you are kind of forced to have like this moment
for yourself, really take the time for yourself and like a nice reminder as
well.”
- Participant 13
“(...) I think it’s a good reminder to have a like Alone Mode.”
- Participant 22
Nevertheless, several participants questioned the originality of the application, as
they compared it to other meditation apps and the current sleep mode, which is
found on all devices. They didn’t believe that the solution had a strong unique value
proposition to compete with these alternatives.
“That sounds very similar to just having a meditation app. But then if
you can change what you might be doing during those times to suit yourself
(...) [If] I start timetabling things that are just for myself, like exercise
meditation, they just go out the window because I don’t have time to fit
them in when I’ve allotted them.”
- Participant 24
“I feel like it kind of just sounds like the sleep mode or, you know, maybe
leave your phone at home if you’re going to do an activity.”
- Participant 23
“I think there are existent applications who are aiming for the same thing.
But (...)
of course, this one would be one level down and part of the
whole system (...) right now, only those people are aware of these modes
(...) But if the whole thing would be built into iOS or into the operation
system, then of course, all of a sudden a whole wider population would be
aware that it’s an important thing. So I think it’s a good way to spread
the word.”
- Participant 1
==PAGE:97==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
87
Nonetheless, two respondents suggested ideas for improving the potential of the
Alone Mode concept by making it fully customisable in terms of notifications and
app interactions.
One respondent suggested sending automatic reply messages to
individuals trying to contact them in the Alone Mode, as well as establishing trigger
keywords, which others could use to automatically turn on notifications again. The
other respondent also suggested including additional modes of interactions for the
future.
“(...) I think there should be more different modes and should be more
customizable.”
- Participant 17
“I have an idea about that. And this is actually something that I would
use (...) I would like to have a mode like this that would switch my phone
off like switch my notifications and stuff. But (...) allows me to filter (...)
my work email because of.. (...)an important email or something. But at
the same time(...) [when somebody messages me] (...)I would just send an
automatic reply saying that I’m focusing (...) But (...) I would like that
person to have the option to actually activate my phone (...) and actually
trigger my notification if it’s something important”
- Participant 4
Concept Strategy: Speech-Based Social Network
Finally, under the context of ‘loneliness’, the sixth idea is a Speech-Based Social
Network, inspired by the question-and-answer platform Quora 13 (Figure 5.22). This
concept idea intends to provide an alternative, more human and therefore meaningful
alternative to mindless phone usage.
It would function as a separate application, for which the user is prompted to
mark down a timeslot (i.e.
lunch break), a topic of interest as well as preferred
language. Thereby, this would allow a phone call or video call with interested friends
or strangers available in this same time slot instead of scrolling or browsing through
their smartphone due to loneliness. A supplementary dimension to this concept idea
could also be talking with a chatbot, in case no one is available and the user needs
to rant, brag or let some feelings out loud.
One of the participants enjoyed this solution as it reminded her of the traditional
pen pal system, which she finds relevant amidst the current coronavirus outbreak,
which has forced research participants to stay at home.
13https://da.quora.com/
==PAGE:98==
88
5 Design Process
Figure 5.22: Speech-Based Social Network
“I think it’s actually nice because I was thinking of the pen pal system.(...)
especially in the situation that we’re now [in] kind of got me thinking like,
how do you normally meet new people, you know, in social settings like
(...) I know people use Tinder, but what if you don’t want to, you know,
hook up with someone or for romantic purposes”
- Participant 13
Some confusion was raised around which elements of their smartphone relation-
ship this concept idea was aiming to improve and make healthier. One respondent
mistakenly believed that this concept solution was promoting a healthier relationship
with the smartphone by minimizing direct exposure to their screens.
“I think that the idea is good because at least it reduces the eye contact
that you have with the former.”
- Participant 26
Yet, within this research study, a healthier smartphone relationship will not and
can not be defined according to the screen exposure. Instead, the focus of this concept
idea is on establishing a meaningful alternative to mindless phone usage.
==PAGE:99==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
89
Problem area
Loneliness
Design hypothe-
sis
University students often report that they do not know how to entertain them-
selves, when they are alone, other than by engaging in interaction with their
devices of a form which they come to view as a loss of time and self in retrospect.
A Speech-Based Social Network would allow them to focus their alone time on
mindful interactions with people around the world, instead of aimlessly scrolling
through social media.
This Speech-Based Social Network application would allow the university student
to specify a timeslot, in which they know that they are alone as well as a topic
they would like to discuss, then they would be connected with someone from
around the world to discuss this.
Another dimension of this application would be to add a speech-based chatbot
feature to still allow the same option as above but with an AI based service in case
no one is available at the same time as the university student. Herein, the focus
would be more on talking about their day, rather than a specific topic.
Usage scenario
Use Case 1: A university student is eating lunch alone at their workplace because
their colleagues had an early meeting.
The university student doesn’t want to
aimlessly scroll through his social media, so he goes on to the Speech-Based Social
Network application and writes that he has a lunch break from 11.30 to 12.00.
He specifies the topic he is interested in discussing to be “What do people outside
of Denmark eat for breakfast?”, as he had recently found out that his Japanese
colleague ate rice and soup for breakfast, which surprised him a lot.
One user
in India has an available time slot at the same time as the university student,
so they start planning the logistics of their call.
They decide on a video call.
The university student enjoyed this interesting conversation with this complete
stranger instead of engaging in social media browsing on his device which he often
comes to view as a waste of time in retrospect due to his weakened sense of control.
Use Case 2: A university student is having dinner alone at home. She has had
a long day in front of the computer and doesn’t want to look at her smartphone
screen but she doesn’t want to feel alone at home.
She decides to go on the
Speech-Based Social Network to use the speech-based chatbot.
She talks about her day and her worries at school, until she is done with dinner.
After she is done, she feels relieved, as she got to let off some steam without
disturbing her friends or family and without wasting her time on meaningless
social media content.
Further Possibil-
ities
The Speech-Based Social Network application could be used by university students
amongst their close friends or strangers from around the world.
The Speech-Based Social Network could be more call or video call focused, or both.
Table 5.6: Speech-Based Social Network Overview
Still, a critique echoed by several participants in relation to this concept was that
it seemed like a classical social media application.
Thereby, they did not believe
that it would help promote a healthier relationship but instead reinforce the existing
problem areas, especially in terms of habit-making interactions:
==PAGE:100==
90
5 Design Process
“Seems like another app to get hooked on (...)”
- Participant 16
“So it’s like another social network application?”
- Participant 25
Several participants also raised suspicions in regards to the speech-based element
of the application, as it made them uncomfortable to spend lunch break talking with
strangers. They showed an inclination towards text-based communication. Further-
more, they explained that the smartphone symbolized a relaxing escape during breaks
and alone time. Therefore, they preferred if the solution was targeted towards their
friends to eliminate any potential level of unfamiliarity. Yet, in retrospect, if we chose
the focus to stay on text-based interactions with close friends and family, it would
embrace additional social media characteristics, which is not our aim.
“I think connecting to friends would be a better idea at least for me (...)
Because I think just talking to a random stranger would not make me feel
less lonely (...) let’s take the canteen at DTU. You are surrounded by
thousands of strangers. (...)you could also ask them something but you
would still feel lonely. Having the(...) deeper level of the connection or
relationship is definitely an important factor to feel not lonely (...)it’s a
little bit like talking to a customer service or something like that.”
- Participant 1
“I’m an introvert. So the very idea of like, calling someone on the phone
sounds like so draining. And yeah, I do not see myself using this. Even
when I’m alone, let alone in public. If it’s like text based, like a chat bot,
then maybe but speech based? I don’t see.”
- Participant 21
Certain participants further believed that the application would be more appropri-
ate to help promote cultural diversity and understanding. Nonetheless, the research
participants imagined this as a tool that would introduce new interest areas and
thereby, again, encourage a heightened smartphone usage.
==PAGE:101==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
91
“I think it’s a good idea because it sort of would break up your lunch for
example and yeah just promote sort of cultural diversity.”
- Participant 19
“I think it really depends on how it’s used, like for small things like
culture. I think it can be very interesting. But then I think there’s also
the possibility of like, making sure who’s answering because if it’s more of
a technical question, making sure there’s no misinformation if we think
about the pandemic.”
- Participant 22
Another problem area that one respondent raised is the air of novelty that this
solution presents, which would make it interesting to use a couple of times but would
not make it a sustainable solution on the long term basis.
“It’s like something you might enjoy using a few times. Then, just going
back to having lunch as you did before (...) and you have the issue where
you don’t want to talk to someone you’ve never spoken to (...)
that’s
private information that someone might not want you to know. If you
were looking for someone you already know, for instance, to fill that social
gap, and then you can replace that person with Siri anyway by just saying,
hey, Siri, what people in Denmark eat for breakfast? And she’ll tell you.”
- Participant 24
In conclusion, this solution idea was considered not to address the initial problem
area aptly, as it promoted a new smartphone usage scenario instead of promoting a
healthier relationship in the context of participants’ current smartphone usage sce-
narios.
5.3.3
In Summary
5.3.3.1
Students’ Subjective Experience of a Healthy Smartphone Relationship
Following feedback on the different concept strategies, the research participants
were asked to describe what they viewed as unhealthy in their current smartphone
relationship.
The trends generally described by the participants were:
• Infinite Content Loop and Losing Track of Time
==PAGE:102==
92
5 Design Process
“You are not even connected to your friends, you are seeing random
people and (...) you don’t realize how much time you spend on it because
you just (...) scroll infinitely”
- Participant 1
“just keep scrolling, switching through three apps (...) It’s a waste of
time watching videos of people making stuff that no way in hell I’m gonna
make.”
- Participant 21
“I think I have a hard time disconnecting with things. So I think it’s
once I get sucked into my phone, then I like then I go down like the rabbit
hole.”
- Participant 22
• Fear of Missing Out
“[hard time disconnecting] sociological issue of needing interaction and
how phones create this possibility for interaction with social media”
- Participant 23
“I feel like our generation has [made us] used to having the phone muted.
so I never hear when I have a notification I always have this pressure to
check my phone if something has happened [or] someone has texted”
- Participant 18
“If I have like 5 minutes free, I immediately grab my smartphone and
check something so yeah I think it’s way too intense in that regard.”
- Participant 17
==PAGE:103==
5.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
93
• Procrastination
“For me unhealthy means that I use it to (...) for example when I have
to study for exams I use it and I procrastinate instead of studying so I
just end up doing useless stuff like scrolling on social media.”
- Participant 15
“Normally for a distraction.
If I’m trying to learn something really
complicated. It’s an awful habit, just going on there every four or five
minutes but generally, anytime I get quite bad, I kind of notice it, you
know, just make an effort to stop it”
- Participant 24
Respondents 4, 25, 26 & 27 did not believe they had an unhealthy relationship
with their smartphone, as they believed that their screen time was below average and
that they used social media in a very limited manner. Therefore, they refrained from
answering this question.
5.3.3.2
Preferred solution idea
In general, different ideas were preferred and different perspectives added during
each session. However, the bracelet and Speech-Based Social Network in particular
provoked mixed reactions. The bracelet sparked laughter from the majority of par-
ticipants and they explained that it would be easier to just grab their smartphone
to contact close friends or family. The Speech-Based Social Network also triggered
several debates, as some felt uncomfortable having a conversation with a stranger
and others believed it would not solve the initial problem but only contribute to it.
In table 5.7, a summary of the preferred solutions of each respondent is outlined:
Thereby, the overall trend showed preference for the ring, the challenge application,
the Alone Mode and the Content Digest concepts in particular. This is not surprising,
as these are the solutions that primarily addressed problem areas that the research
participants personally felt were unhealthy in their own smartphone usage: ‘losing
track of time’ and the ‘infinite content loop’.
The Ring Limiter and the Content Digest were chosen for further development
during the fourth iteration of this project according to research participants’ feedback.
Whereas, the challenge application and the Alone Mode concepts were merged into a
third idea ‘Digital Friend’, as their respective unique value propositions were perceived
as too weak by a majority of the participants. The title ‘Digital Friend’ was chosen,
as this application would promote meaningful interactions with the smartphone in
==PAGE:104==
94
5 Design Process
Participant number
Preferred solution
1
Alone Mode + Ring Limiter
4
Alone Mode
9
Challenge Application
13
Challenge Application
15
Ring Limiter
16
Challenge Application
17
Content Digest
18
Content Digest
19
Challenge Application
20
Speech-Based Social Network + Content Digest
21
Alone Mode
22
Content Digest
23
Challenge Application
24
Ring Limiter
25
Challenge Application
26
Challenge Application
27
Speech-Based Social Network
Table 5.7: Summary of the preferred solution of each respondent
a divertive and friendly manner. Thereby, the concept ideas chosen for the further
development of lo-fi prototype are the following:
• The Ring Limiter
• Content Digest
• Digital Friend: a combination of Alone Mode and Challenge App
An important insight to note for the next iteration is that participants expressed
a need for the respective solutions of the combined third idea to be incorporated
within the smartphones’ operating systems in order to be useful. Therefore, the third
idea will specifically revise the smartphone built-in iOS ‘Screen Time’ and Android
‘Digital Wellbeing’ features to produce the lo-fi prototypes for the next iteration.
==PAGE:105==
5.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
95
5.4
Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final
Prototype Solution
The prior three phases of this process of design research allowed us to conceptualise
three distinctive proposals for a technological solution to the challenge of realising
healthier relationships to our mobile devices: The Ring Limiter, Content Digest and
Digital Friend, a combination of Alone Mode and Challenge App.
Further development of these concepts result in the creation of lo-fi prototypes,
which we would discuss and evaluate with research participants. We perform four
focus group interviews to obtain insights into which of the three concepts the partici-
pants would be most likely to use in their everyday lives and what kinds of potential
users would be most interested in the different solutions.
5.4.1
Methods
Focus group interviews were conducted with eight participants in total. Due to the
coronavirus outbreak, the group interviews were conducted virtually through a Zoom
video call where the participants were divided into four groups of two. All of them
were currently higher education students and it is important to note that half of the
participants did not participate in any of the previous iterations, i.e., the different
concepts were presented to them for the first time during the current concept strategy
group interviews. The main purpose of this decision was to compare the feedback
between participants who had already seen the concepts and whose suggestions from
previous interviews were included when improving the designs, with the feedback
from participants who would see the concepts behind these lo-fi prototypes for the
first time during this iteration.
5.4.1.1
Before the interview
Before the interviews, a short video presentation was created for each of the different
concepts, where the ideas were introduced with different scenarios. These scenarios
were presentations of the most common situations participants in previous interviews
found problematic and leading to smartphone overuse, i.e., endless content scrolling
leading to staying up too late, losing track of time when on their smartphones and
the current coronavirus outbreak leading to too much time spent on social media.
The group interviews were divided into three parts where each one of the different
concepts was presented individually. At the beginning of each interview, the partic-
ipants were given a short introduction where they were familiarized with the overall
subject of the current research and were asked to share their unbiased opinion. Some
guidelines were also set, where participants were asked to respect each other’s point
of view to ensure a respectful environment where each participant feels comfortable
sharing their perspective.
==PAGE:106==
96
5 Design Process
5.4.1.2
After the interview
The fourth iteration resulted in 5 hours, 33 minutes and 15 seconds of au-
dio recordings. Similar to the prior iterations, audio recordings from these group
interviews were, first, fully transcribed. Thereafter, these transcriptions were sub-
ject to close reading by both researchers. We identified selected quotes that best
demonstrated the breadth of different options or perspectives for each of the lo-fi pro-
totypes presented. Thereby, the documentation and writing of the fourth iteration
was framed around the selected quotes.
5.4.2
Findings
5.4.2.1
Concept Strategy: Ring Limiter
During the first part of the interview, the first concept strategy video was presented,
where the participants were able to see Tom, a student who is preparing for his exams
(Appendix A.1). While studying, he takes phone breaks once in a while and when he
does so, loses track of time on his smartphone, which leads to him feeling stressed and
unproductive. Further in the video, the first concept of the Ring Limiter is introduced
- a device that changes color according to the user’s screen time (Figure 5.23). For
example, when Tom takes a 15 minute break and wants to watch videos on YouTube,
he will go into the application which comes along with the ring and set a timer for
the desired time break. The ring will start changing its color from yellow to red and
when it turns red, Tom will know that his phone break is over and it’s time for him
to go back to studying.
Figure 5.23: Screenshot from Ring Limiter video
==PAGE:107==
5.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
97
After seeing the short video presenting the overall idea of the Ring Limiter, the
participants were asked to describe a person who would not use it and a person who
would definitely use the ring.
Unlikely Users
First, the participants described personas who were unlikely to have problems
with losing track of time on their smartphone and as a result would not be interested
in getting this Ring Limiter.
All participants agreed that people with dedicated hobbies and interests, requir-
ing them to be constantly active such as sport or dance, would not have problems
with their smartphone usage and therefore, they would be unlikely users of the Ring
Limiter.
“I imagine that this person is into sports so these kinds of people don’t
usually wear any kind of accessories, just because it is not comfortable to
be fully active while wearing them. “
- Participant 22
“I think that the person who will use it would have some kind of interactive
degree, some type of art, dance. Something that is different from the typical
textbook study.”
- Participant 9
Similarly, the participants described ‘workaholics’, as being unlikely users, as they
dedicate their time to their studies and/or work, and therefore, would not have prob-
lems with their smartphone usage.
“she’s interested in financing(...) basically a person that doesn’t doesn’t
really go on his phone or doesn’t really connect with anybody. So a person
like this is mainly focused on either studying or working”
- Participant 4
On the other hand, the participants also described personas who were on the
other side of the extreme, meaning they were too dependent on their smartphone
in their everyday lives. Therein, one persona was described to be dependent on the
smartphone for her personal entertainment and due to some degree of F.O.M.O ,
whereas another persona was dependent on the smartphone as a result of his travel-
related studies, which necessitates him to keep up with current trends.
==PAGE:108==
98
5 Design Process
“Abdullah Mohammed. He’s 22 years old. He studies at KEA and he
studies Hotel Management.
(...)
he uses it to (...)
keep up with the
latest developments in [the] travel industry. So he’s like checking out the
Instagram like on a non stop basis to kind of keep up with the trends and
keep up with his homies”
- Participant 16
“ my first person is called Britney. She’s 18 to 20 years old. She studies
(...) some sort of design or social media. And her interest is being cool
with their friends (...) she wants to keep up with the latest Tik Tok stories
(...) She’s dancing with her partner (...) to be cool.”
- Participant 16
Other personas that were mentioned to be unlikely users were also the less tech
savvy university students, who would maybe find the Ring Limiter too complicated
to use:
“person who is (...) not studying something tech (...) [who would find] a
little bit too complicated maybe to use with the app”
- Participant 31
Finally, one of the participants placed themselves as an unlikely user, as he be-
lieved that, despite the Ring Limiter being a good idea, it required a specific type
of personality, in which you enjoy timing and scheduling your everyday life, which
he didn’t have. Furthermore, the participant explained that the Ring Limiter could
easily be substituted with an alarm, which would make him even less inclined to
purchase the Ring Limiter.
“ myself as an example (...) It has no sense [to have] a device that is
going to tell me when I have to go back to do something, for example, I
could do that with my phone now, with like an alarm. I never do (...) I
don’t like to set times for everything I do.”
- Participant 30
Potential Users
Participants described people who may be experiencing difficulties concentrating
or are used to procrastinating as potential users, since this will be a device that
visually shows them when they are spending too much time on their phones.
==PAGE:109==
5.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
99
“Nikolai (...)
He studies management at CBS (...)
He would use it
so he can limit his time on the phone and focus more on his work (...)
[reminder] to go back to work, like stop distracting yourself and focus on
what’s more important.”
- Participant 4
Moreover, participants mentioned that people who are interested in being more
productive and focused will benefit from this kind of solution.
“He’s a 20 year old he studied some DTU biochemistry, he’s interested
in being successful (...) he’s using the ring to streamline his time use and
to be extremely efficient (...) [with] a really practical excel sheet function
where you can like time your (...) usage.”
- Participant 16
“ for people that they like to just schedule their time to know what they’re
going to do and to follow like some steps, this device will help them.”
- Participant 31
In addition, participants mentioned that probably more women will use it since
they are more likely to wear additional accessories.
“I still think that it will be generally girls who will use it. (...)”
- Participant 9
“maybe a girl or woman and she could be into like, the blogging world
(...) And she could be like studying at CBS or anything like management
wise and she’s into social media (...)”
- Participant 31
Strengths
Afterwards, participants were asked to highlight the strengths of the ring, which
would make it more interesting for the personas they described as potential non-
users and to point out weaknesses which might make the device less interesting for a
potential user.
As a strength, they mentioned that the ring is a small wearable technology that
is easily accessible.
==PAGE:110==
100
5 Design Process
“it’s not like a big device that it can be uncomfortable for you”
- Participant 30
“it doesn’t (...) take a lot of (...) space, it’s not a huge thing. It’s just
a little ring that can help you and it’s easy to look down and you’re using
your hand so you can just look at your finger whenever and I think it’s
cool that it changes color.”
- Participant 31
Another attractive strength mentioned by the participants is an extended battery
life, so that the Ring Limiter would only need to be charged once a week.
Furthermore, they concluded that it is a nice way to help you stay focused more
and not get easily distracted. One participant suggested that it should be customis-
able to different users’ needs, in terms of the ring’s aesthetic style, so that it doesn’t
limit its reach, but also in terms of the preferred degree of intensity for the notifier
on the Ring Limiter (pop-up text, color, lights, sounds).
“Some design features (...) make it customisable for each needs”
- Participant 16
“it could [also] be like a little rock and that rock could change color(...)
to make it more like, versatile”
- Participant 31
This same participant further suggested that the Ring Limiter could be made a
Linux based program, so that their community of users could access and contribute
to unique user-created personalizations of the Ring Limiter.
participants also emphasized that it should be introduced in the frame of a social
media trend for the personas that are currently too dependent on their smartphone.
“some functionality that can make it viral. Such as play a song after 15
minutes and then it could be like Rick Astley.”
- Participant 16
==PAGE:111==
5.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
101
Another interesting addition to the device suggested by one participant is “the
possibility of sharing achievements” (Participant 4), which would allow community-
building and potentially, a domino effect amongst the user’s closest contacts.
Weaknesses
On the other hand, participants mentioned the size of the ring as problematic,
since it is small and you can easily lose it.
Moreover, since the target group is
students, it might be expensive for them to afford it.
“You can lose it easily. Another point could be that it might be expensive.
And in order to use it, you need to use your phone. So this might lead to
using your phone more than expected. “
- Participant 9
Another weakness mentioned by participants is related to its tactile and visual in-
timacy, along with its persistent presence in the user’s sphere of attention, as the ring
is worn on your hand, making it visible at all times. Additionally, some participants
believe that the fact that it changes colors might add some extra pressure when using
it, since people might feel ashamed when the ring turns red in public (Table 5.8).
“The device might put us in much more pressure when using it. You’re
like a Christmas tree if you’re using it in a public place.”
- Participant 29
“come on, you’re kind of an adult and you walk outside go to work or to
school with like a glowing, childish looking ring.”
- Participant 4
Similarly, according to the participants, the fact that this is a ring limits its reach,
as it will only be university students that already like to wear rings that would be
interested in getting the Ring Limiter:
“it’s only useful for people that they like to wear rings.”
- Participant 30
==PAGE:112==
102
5 Design Process
“it’s meant for people who like to wear rings. So not all can use them.”
- Participant 31
Finally, participants believe that this Ring Limiter would only function if the user
had the necessary mindset when using it, as it doesn’t actively limit your smartphone
usage but ensures that you don’t lose track of time:
“it relies too much on the personal willpower of the user”
- Participant 16
5.4.2.2
Concept Strategy: Digital Friend
In the second part of the interview, the second concept strategy video was introduced,
during which the participants were shown Bob, who is socially distancing due to the
current coronavirus outbreak (Appendix A.2). He wants to be more productive amidst
his stay-at-home situation but he always ends up spending more time than desire on
social media. After the problem is presented, the second concept Digital Friend is
introduced - an application which Bob can use to regulate his screen time.
The
Challenge feature lets Bob choose which applications he wants to put an app limit.
When the limit has been reached, the feature gives him challenges and suggestions
for how to diversify his time on and off screen. Another feature that the application
offers is the opportunity to enter into Alone Mode which is intended as an autonomous
choice of practicing ‘alone time’ with your phone, without having to be connected to
the rest of the world. During this mode, only selected contacts will be able to reach
you and at the same time, you will be available to set up emergency keywords which
once used, you will be able to receive the message/email including these specific
keywords (Figure 5.24).
After seeing the short video presenting the concept, the participants were again
asked to describe two people - one a potential non-user and another who would use
the solution.
Unlikely Users
As potential non-users, participants described somebody interested in knowing
what is happening around the world, e.g., designers and influencers. In their opinion,
these personas will not want to limit their time on social media, since this will be
their main and most efficient way of receiving new information about their topic of
interest.
==PAGE:113==
5.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
103
Figure 5.24: Screenshot from Digital Friend video
==PAGE:114==
104
5 Design Process
Strength
Weakness
It can help you stay focused and avoid distrac-
tions:
“ It will allow you to focus more
on things that you love so it will
help you not get distracted. “
- Participant 22
It is small, so it is more prone to lose the tangible
device:
“You can lose it easily. Another
point could be that it might be ex-
pensive. “
- Participant 9
It is small and simple:
“(..) I want to highlight that it is
small and doable.”
-
Participant 9
It might be expensive for students:
“I think that it will be hard to
find students who want to use it
and afford it.
Because a lot of
students don’t have high paid jobs.
“
- Participant 22
It could have a long battery life:
“That it is free and it has to be
charged once a week.”
- Participant 29
It might lead to smartphone overuse because you
need to use an app to set the timer:
“And in order to use it, you need
to use your phone. So this might
lead to using your phone more
than expected. “
- Participant 9
It could be customisable in terms of design
features.
“Some design features (...) make
it customisable for each needs”
-
Participant 16
It might be too colorful and thereby,
create
additional pressure on users, whilst wearing it:
“Maybe a little bit nerdy and
down, because you’re like a Christ-
mas tree if you’re using it in a
public place.”
- Participant 29
“The device might put us in much
more pressure when using it. In-
side the brain, inside the mind
that some changes need to happen
first.”
- Participant 28
It is meant for people who likes to wearing rings
- additional devices
“People who don’t usually wear
any kind of accessories, just be-
cause it is not comfortable to be
fully active while wearing them.”
- Participant 22
Table 5.8: Ring Limiter strengths and weaknesses
==PAGE:115==
5.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
105
“I imagine somebody who is using social media a lot. Their interests are
online, they are comfortable there so they don’t question if they should use
their time in something else.”
- Participant 22
“always on social media and always has the urge to share everything”
- Participant 4
Similarly, one participant described a persona that has just started a romantic
relationship recently to be an unlikely user of the Alone Mode, as new relationships
generally enhance the need for constant human connection and digital intimacy.
“Zack (...) just got together with that new girlfriend of his. So he wants
to be in touch 24/7(...) stay connected and not miss a single call or single
message.”
- Participant 4
Another category of unlikely users are individuals that do not think their smart-
phone usage is problematic or simply do not care about their screen time.
“They don’t feel they need something to control them”
- Participant 29
Finally, another unlikely user described by participants was simply an individual
that does not use their smartphone a lot.
Herein, an example was given of the
participant’s brother, who prefers spending his leisure time on his computer instead.
“I think about actually my brother. I don’t think he would use it because
he’s not using his phone so much. And like he’s in high school (...) his
interest is a lot on like gaming [on the computer]”
- Participant 31
Potential Users
Furthermore, as a person who will definitely use the solution they described people
who are interested in personal growth and mindfulness alongside people who have
struggled with their concentration and want to change their behavior to be more
efficient, productive and meaningful.
==PAGE:116==
106
5 Design Process
“The person who I imagine is somebody who is trying to change their
personal habits and is interested in personal growth and mindfulness.”
- Participant 9
“Fatima.
She’s a 24 year old DTU student in data science (...)
she
does actively pursue these kind of opportunities [that] makes her use the
technology she loves and adores, but in a responsible sustainable manner.”
- Participant 16
“I would definitely, definitely use it myself (...) I study journalism (...)I’m
trying to like use my time a little bit more wisely. And I just deactivated
my Instagram account, for example, because I felt that I was spending
countless hours just scrolling into nothing.”
- Participant 31
In addition, all agreed that this solution is a nice way of encouraging people to
try different/new things through the Challenge App rather than spending their time
on their smartphones.
Afterwards, participants were asked to highlight the strengths and weaknesses of
the presented concept strategy.
Strengths
When asked to describe potential strengths of this solution, participants described,
in particular, the capacity of the Alone Mode to facilitate time spent in activities
related to their personal growth and mindfulness.
“I would highlight the mindfulness piece of it”
- Participant 31
“I would highlight is that every person has to take some time for themselves
(...) force yourself offline (...) and focus on something that you always
wanted to do.”
- Participant 4
==PAGE:117==
5.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
107
Moreover, the alert keywords feature, which allows users to specify keywords that
would re-enable notifications, was described by participants as an attractive detail.
They believed that this element would promote more meaningful interactions and
was well-suited for users who constantly feel the need to check their smartphones for
notifications in the case of emergencies.
“the idea of living without the phone, not being dependent on the phone.
So having an app that it’s able to just allow you to use the phone with a
good purpose”
- Participant 30
One participant suggested that the addition of “ some sort of risk and reward
system will be nice” (Participant 16), in order to add more power and weight to
the Alone Mode and to ensure users respect their alone time. An example of a useful
penalty, according to the participant, for disrespecting the set alone time is that the
“phone could turn off itself” or “some sort of like really annoying sound” (Participant
16).
Furthermore, a participant emphasized the importance of
the visibility of this
tool, as digital wellbeing features are currently not very prominent in the interface
design of their smartphone, which limits their reach.
“have (...)this app or this feature kind of more prevalent, and more kind
of just featured. For instance, in the phone settings itself (...) When you
sign up to what time zone, for instance or language, you could immediately
start setting up some parameters [on] how to use [the Alone Mode].”
- Participant 16
Weaknesses
On the other hand, as potential weaknesses, participants talked about how the
application might not recognize certain activities in social media as working activities.
For example, if you use Facebook for work, the application will still count your time
there as social media screen time.
“The weakness could be that if I use Facebook for work, the app would
not recognize it as a work activity.”
- Participant 29
==PAGE:118==
108
5 Design Process
Furthermore, they mentioned that they might feel embarrassed performing specific
challenges when around people. For this, they suggested that users define the tasks
they want to accomplish through the day and that the application notify them of the
percentage they have completed (Table 5.9).
Nevertheless, a plurality of the participants did not believe that the solution had
any weaknesses, as they believed it served a clear purpose for a specific target group.
“I personally can’t really find any weakness in using this as I think that
it’s something everybody would make use of.”
- Participant 4
Still, they accentuated that the necessary willpower and mindset is needed for
this to be useful.
Another participant also commented slightly on the irony of a
smartphone-based solution for the promotion of a healthier smartphone relationship:
“If I am to find weakness to this, it’s the fact that you’re still using your
phone. And you’re just kind of like playing games with yourself.”
- Participant 16
5.4.2.3
Concept Strategy: Content Digest
During the third part of the interview, a quick video overview of the last concept
strategy was presented, where participants were able to see Diego, who is a master
student, struggling with staying up late on his phone before bedtime (Appendix A.3).
Further in the video, participants see how Diego shares with his girlfriend his struggle
of mindless scrolling on social media which leads to him staying up far too late every
night. He is also concerned that this activity affects his daily productivity. After the
problem is presented, participants are familiarised with the final concept strategy -
the Content Digest. Content Digest is a plugin, which lets users define their topic
of interest. The plugin is then applied to different social media platforms and helps
users filter out the content they are interested in. Moreover, the plugin summarizes
the newsfeed according to the selected interests and only shows the highlights for the
day. Using it, users can minimize the time spent on social media looking at random
content (Figure 5.25).
After presenting the concept, participants were asked to think of a person who
would not use the solution and to describe another person, who would be interested
in applying the plugin.
==PAGE:119==
5.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
109
Figure 5.25: Screenshot from Content Digest video
==PAGE:120==
110
5 Design Process
Strength
Weakness
It could be personalized, by allowing users to
add personal challenges/tasks.
“This app is trying all the things
that you can do. I will use it. Es-
pecially now, it will encourage me
to go for a walk or something like
that. “
- Participant 22
The level of accuracy might be a problem, es-
pecially if it is not able to recognize certain
activities as work-related activities.
“The weakness could be that if
I use Facebook for work, the app
would not recognize it as a work
activity.”
- Participant 29
“So I thought of somebody who
is studying communications and
journalisms and they want to be
up to date with what is going
on and being constantly updated.
And they don’t trust this filter and
want to know all the news related
to the interested topic.”
- Participant 22
It promotes mindfulness.
“The person who I imagine is
somebody who is trying to change
their personal habits and is in-
terested in personal growth and
mindfulness.”
- Participant 9
It is easy to ignore the app limits, as participants
suggested additional features to add more power
and weight to the Alone Mode, in particular.
“some sort of risk and reward sys-
tem will be nice”
-
Participant 16
The alert keywords feature allows the user to be
notified in case of emergencies.
“the idea of living without the
phone, not being dependent on the
phone. So having an app that it’s
able to just allow you to use the
phone with a good purpose”
- Participant 30
It is easy to apply across the whole system, as it
is built-in to the smartphone settings.
“ It is easy to apply.
You just
go to the app settings and allow
it. It could be applied to any app.
“
- Participant 9
This app is more like a human approach to the
problem.
The user might feel less connected to friends on
social media.
“I imagine somebody who is using
social media a lot. Their interests
are online, they are comfortable
there so they don’t question if they
should use their time in something
else.”
- Participant 22
Table 5.9: Digital Friend strengths and weaknesses
==PAGE:121==
5.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
111
Unlikely Users
Since the plugin is aimed towards social media use, participants described personas
who are not avid social media users as unlikely users of this Content Digest solution.
“Somebody who is not that invested in social media. So you would not
need that feature since you are not using social media that often. “
- Participant 9
Moreover, they concluded that somebody who has a communications-related job,
would not be interested in filtering news since they might miss important news as well
as individuals, in general, that would like to stay up-to-date with what’s trending and
happening on social media. One participant further commented that this filtering
might cause a F.O.M.O, as their content reach is limited.
“I would feel like I was missing something, if I limited myself into cate-
gories, maybe I would get some kind of FOMO, of missing out”
- Participant 31
“just setting something and adjusting something into one specific feature
(...)maybe you will miss a lot of information in the meanwhile.”
- Participant 30
Similar to the previous iteration, one participant also described a person who
would demonstrate skepticism and distrust towards the criteria and efficiency level of
the Content Digest as an unlikely user, as the filtering could yield a bias.
“He does not use the app because he doesn’t trust it.
Who and why
someone curates whatever he wants to look at (...) even if it’s a super
advanced AI”
- Participant 16
Potential Users
When asked to identify a person who would be likely to engage with this pro-
totype solution, most of the participants mentioned themselves, as they frequently
commented on their experiences with losing track of time when browsing through
their social media accounts.
==PAGE:122==
112
5 Design Process
“I think that it would be somebody who is interested in what is going on
on social media but at the same time doesn’t want to spend that much
time there. They have trouble finding what is relevant information and
important news.”
- Participant 22
“He just likes to keep well informed about like world (...) and what’s hap-
pening around him (...)it just makes it more efficient and (...) he doesn’t
need to go deep into the feed to kind of just find his main information”
- Participant 16
Additionally, the participants mentioned individuals with clear content goals as
potential users, as it would limit their search for meaningful content, if they already
know specifically what they are somewhat searching for.
“He is basically going to use it because he doesn’t like when, even though
when (...) he goes on Twitter even though he follows specific media (...)
they often just share some random stuff, some random pictures or what-
soever that (...)he doesn’t really care about. So he would love to be able
to filter that out.”
- Participant 4
“ people that they are looking for something very specific. So, they are
looking for specific content that they only want to get information about
that, and they don’t want to get anything else.”
- Participant 30
Strengths
As before, participants were asked to highlight the strengths of the solution which
would make it more interesting for those they described as potential non-users and
point out the weaknesses they felt would make the Content Digest less interesting for
the people they pointed to as potential users.
As a strength, participants mentioned that the plugin would help university stu-
dents in the field of journalism in avoiding false news from unreliable content sources.
==PAGE:123==
5.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
113
“maybe the app would allow him to filter the fake news. So he would
actually turn it into his advantage by filtering out only the trusted media
that wants to follow.”
- Participant 4
Moreover, participants believed that users of the Content Digest solution, therein
their described personas, would spend less time scrolling through social media, since
the infinite scrolling would be bordered by the pre-selected filters. One participant
further described this new filtered content to be of better quality, as the output is
meaningful for the user and not randomised with ‘garbage news’.
“I guess the main point of this thing is efficiency, right? So you can
effectively see the same amount of value for 15 minutes as you can see in
30 minutes”
- Participant 16
“(...)highlight the quality of the content that you’re ingesting”
- Participant 30
One participant further explained that this plugin could help make research more
efficient in the future, as it would filter out less informative content streams as well.
“if I were to write an article and I wanted to find some information on
social media, I could plug this in.”
- Participant 31
Weaknesses
On the other hand, people expressed their concerns that filtering content might
lead them to miss something important.
“The weakness of this product is that the recommendations it gives are
in terms of what you have to watch and what you don’t have to watch. ”
- Participant 29
==PAGE:124==
114
5 Design Process
“ How good is restricting yourself and you putting yourself into little boxes
if you’re missing something.”
- Participant 31
Another potential weakness raised by participants concerned issues of privacy and
transparency. Participants expressed a lack of understanding of the filtering process
and desired knowledge concerning, for example, whether it would be conducted by a
human or AI system.
“Where’s my privacy in this? There’s going to be a filter that will decide
what I want to see and how to present it to me. And it’s actually going
to know what I’m looking at all time”
- Participant 4
Several participants also showed skepticism towards the accuracy of the general
curating power of the Content Digest.
“how good is the engine behind that to filter all this content, like as a
machine learning or whatever they using to do it. How efficient [is it]? I
think they can look for leaks there”
- Participant 30
“it’s never going to be 100% optimal”
- Participant 16
They also pointed out as a weakness the fact that the plugin might not understand
their needs and display content they are not interested in (Table 5.10).
“For somebody who is doing journalism for example could be a bad thing
because they might miss important news since the phone might filter some-
thing that it thinks is not relevant for you but at the same time it is.”
- Participant 22
Finally, one participant expressed skepticism towards the ability of a filtered con-
tent stream to encourage users to spend less time on their smartphone. This partici-
pant believed this had the potential to motivate the user to spend more time on their
smartphone.
==PAGE:125==
5.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
115
“if you’re giving (...) the [drug addict] like better drugs, will he use less
drugs than he used before? So if you have an app that makes it even more
like Twitter premium, why would I use less? Like that’s what I don’t get.”
- Participant 16
Strength
Weakness
This feature could allow the avoidance of false
news.
“maybe the app would allow him
to filter the fake news.
So he
would actually turn it into his ad-
vantage by filtering out only the
trusted media that wants to fol-
low.”
- Participant 4
The level of efficiency might become a weakness,
in case it does not not understand the user’s
needs and filter out content that the user finds
important.
“For
somebody
who
is
doing
journalism for example could be
a bad thing because they might
miss
important
news
since
the
phone might filter something that
it thinks is not relevant for you
but at the same time it is.”
- Participant 22
It can limit the weakened sense of control users
experience because of infinite scrolling:
“ It could be a good idea for
somebody who gets distracted eas-
ily.
And by filtering the infor-
mation it will kind of decrease
the distraction in social media. I
think anybody who has difficulties
focusing will benefit from that. “
-
Participant 9
It might become complex, as it would present
users with a diversity of settings and filters for
optimal personalisation.
“person who is (...) not studying
something tech (...)
[who would
find] a little bit too complicated
maybe to use with the app”
- Participant 31
It might minimize time spent on specific apps.
“I think that it would be somebody
who is interested in what is go-
ing on on social media but at the
same time doesn’t want to spend
that much time there. They have
trouble finding what is relevant in-
formation and important news.”
- Participant 22
Users’ sense of privacy might be affected.
“Where’s my privacy in this?
There’s going to be a filter that
will decide what I want to see and
how to present it to me. And it’s
actually going to know what I’m
looking at all time”
- Participant 4
Table 5.10: Content Digest strengths and weaknesses
==PAGE:126==
116
5 Design Process
5.4.2.4
Final thoughts
At the end of the interview, participants were asked to imagine that they are the CEO
of a health tech company and to share which one of the lo-fi prototypes they would go
forward with and which they don’t see potential in. None of the participants chose to
continue with the Ring Limiter. They believed that the gadget was too invasive due
to its persistent presence in the user’s sphere of attention, which could potentially
lead to additional social pressures.
At the same time, they also felt that there were already too many technologies
in their everyday lives for them to want to add another tech accessory to it. As an
additional comment, they suggested that if the function of the ring was built into a
smartwatch, they might consider investing in the solution, since a lot of people are
using smartwatches nowadays.
“I would not use the ring because it is just another gadget. After 3 years
there probably will be another version of it and the current want that I
have will probably end up in my drawer and me not using it. So I don’t
think that it will be something that I want to spend my money on.”
- Participant 22
“ the challenge with the first one even if you make it kind of successful, I
think the amount of overall quantity of people using it, it’s not going to be
as high again because of, you know, having ring on your hand blinking”
- Participant 16
The other two solutions - Digital Friend and the Content Digest were the pre-
ferred solutions but led to mixed opinions. Participants expressed concerns related
to efficient content filtering. Moreover, they added that each person is different and
has different interests, so implementing something that satisfies the majority of users
will be hard and it will take a lot of time.
Still, 3 participants expressed the most interest in the Content Digest, as they
believed it was a good way of limiting the effects of infinite scrolling found in most
social media applications, by allowing “an information search.” (Participant 31).
Thereby, participants would “not spend too much time on it” (Participant 4), which
is the most common problem mentioned by the research participants throughout the
different iterations.
On the other hand, 3 different participants preferred the second solution, which
is the Digital Friend. Despite all of the participants agreeing that minimizing time
spent online and on social media should start with changing a person’s perspective
and thinking, they concluded that having a chance to disconnect will “add little more
==PAGE:127==
5.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
117
motivation for personal growth and trying new things” (Participant 22) in the
frame of mindfulness. Additionally, the usual impulsivity traits caused by F.O.M.O
and an illusion of urgency are dissolved because participants know “that if anything
important happens, I would be notified.” (Participant 4). Another participants
further comments that this solution is the most likely to succeed, as it has the potential
to easily reach everybody:
“ (...)because it doesn’t require too much hardware and too much work
to make it accessible and easy for everyone to like, hop on board with
everyone else. You just need the phone.”
- Participant 16
“as long as I have the possibility of selecting a certain notification that
would still go through the filter, then there’s no way you would make me
not use it.”
- Participant 4
5.4.3
In Summary
The Content Digest and Digital Friend were both equally preferred prototypes
amongst the participants (Table 5.11). Still, as noted by participants, the Digital
Friend prototype demonstrated greater potential for scalability, ease of access, a low
threshold for change, flexibility in use, and meaningful interactions.
Also, in ret-
rospective, we believed that the Content Digest proved to be more focused on the
infinite scrolling content-sharing apps, rather than the entire smartphone experience.
Within the Digital Friend prototype, we chose to pursue further development of
the Alone Mode feature for 3 reasons in particular.
First of all, the participants
seemed confused by the multiple challenges addressed in the newly merged solution.
Secondly, as noted by participants, the divertive feature of the original Challenge
Application is more focused on distracting the participants from their smartphone.
Thereby, its scope would not directly allow users to be more mindful of their inter-
actions for a healthier smartphone relationship. Finally, as mentioned in the prior
iteration, the Alone Mode has the most potential for shaping and changing partici-
pants’ overall mode of interaction with their smartphone, as it is part of the whole
system.
“I think there are existent applications who are aiming for the same thing.
But (...)
of course, this one would be one level down and part of the
whole system (...) right now, only those people are aware of these modes
(...) But if the whole thing would be built into iOS or into the operation
==PAGE:128==
118
5 Design Process
system, then of course, all of a sudden a whole wider population would be
aware that it’s an important thing. So I think it’s a good way to spread
the word.”
- Participant 1
In alignment with participants’ perceptions of problematic forms of interaction,
a solution that can effectively address the low-effort engagement and passive con-
sumerism across the smartphone’s system will be chosen, as this would prove per-
tinent for breaking the cycle of ‘smartphone addiction’ by design. It was therefore
decided that the Alone Mode would be further conceptualised and operationalised
upon, for the next iteration.
Participant number
Preferred solution
4
Digital Friend and Content Digest
9
Digital Friend
16
Digital Friend
22
Content Digest
28
“Content Digest: the coolest but the hardest one to im-
plement Digital Friend: easier to develop but probably
people will get used to it and it will stop helping. So I
will go for the 1st one: Ring Limiter”
29
“will not invest in any of them - the problem is in our
minds - but will use the Content Digest”
30
Digital Friend
Table 5.11: Summary of the preferred solution of each participant
==PAGE:129==
5.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
119
5.5
Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
These four distinct phases of design research led us step-by-step to our final proposal
for a technological solution to the challenge of realising healthier relationships to our
mobile devices. This prototype solution, Alone Mode, comprises four primary features.
First, it prompts users to customise their notification settings by choosing which apps
and contacts they want to allow during the mode. Secondly, it supports the creation
of motivational messages to help encourage the user during the Alone Mode.
In
alignment with this feature, the disabled apps are greyed out, as the bright colors can
be distracting. Thirdly, the user can customise no-reply texts, which will be sent to
individuals trying to reach the user during Alone Mode. Finally, the fourth primary
feature is the selection of alert keywords, which allows notifications to be unlocked
in case one of the predefined keywords are detected in the incoming notifications.
Thereby, disabled contacts would be able to reach the user in case of emergencies.
In developing this solution we have come to develop a rich understanding of the
challenges smartphone use poses for students today - an understanding embodied in
this concept solution. This is reflected in particular in the decision to design the
alert keyword feature, which reduces users’ impulsive tendencies by distinguishing
between urgent and non-urgent notifications. Additionally, this is also reflected in
the choice to gray out disabled apps during the Alone Mode to prevent users from
being distracted by them and, consequently trying to access them.
As the fourth iteration of this design research process enabled us to settle upon
a final solution, further development of the Alone Mode is performed through a fi-
nal round of interviews involving five participants in this last iteration. We conduct
usability interviews with these research participants to test and evaluate the afore-
mentioned prototype solution. The main objective is to discover potential issues in
the interaction flow, gather unbiased user feedback as well obtain insights into areas
of improvement in the overall user experience.
5.5.1
Methods
Prior to the usability interviews, we hand sketched the wireframes of the interface
design to initiate the construction of the interaction flow, according to feedback on
the Alone Mode from prior iterations (Figure 5.26). The general findings on what the
research participants perceived as problematic usage patterns were also considered
in the design work. The hand sketches were subsequently polished with Figma 14 to
simulate the envisioned user experience of the Alone Mode (Appendix A.4)(Prototype
A.4).
We conducted the five usability interviews over Zoom, a video communication
service.
All of the respondents were higher education students at Master’s level.
During the evaluation, a link to the prototype was provided to the participants and
14https://www.figma.com/
==PAGE:130==
120
5 Design Process
Figure 5.26: Alone Mode sketches
they were asked to share their screen whilst performing the assigned tasks. We chose
to conduct the evaluation with research participants that had not participated in
any of the prior iterations to accurately determine the ease of use and to eliminate
potential confusion in the interface design.
At the beginning of each session, a short introduction round was included, in
which participants were familiarised with the research subject. Thinking-aloud testing
was chosen for the usability interviews, as it is flexible and easy to learn, given the
circumstance of the usability interview. Therefore, the nature of the method was
clarified to participants. Permission for recording was also requested by researchers
and the participants were informed that they could skip a question in case it made
them feel uncomfortable.
The interviews were separated in two different parts. First, the Alone Mode was
described in broad terms to participants, without showing them the implemented
wireframes. The prototype solution was tied to the practice of mindfulness and the
importance of activating this mode as an act of autonomous choice was emphasized.
Comparisons to the sleep and airplane mode were drawn to explain that this mode
of interaction suppresses notifications from selected apps and contacts. The detailed
features were not mentioned in this first section.
Afterwards, they were asked to describe what their ideal Alone Mode would look
like.
Guiding questions were formulated in case the discussion with participants
needed facilitation (e.g., which applications and contacts would they allow, are there
any features they think are important to include, should it be easily accessible, etc.)
In the second part of the interview, participants were given additional details
on the features of the Alone Mode, developed in alignment with feedback from prior
iterations. It was specified that disabled apps were toned down in colors to reduce dis-
tractions. We further described the opportunity to customise a motivational message,
which is intended to encourage users to stay away from disabled apps by creating a
design friction. The alert keywords feature was also characterized as an opportunity
==PAGE:131==
5.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
121
to select keywords that will re-enable notifications in case of emergencies. Finally,
the option to select an automatic no-reply text was also presented.
Then, participants were asked to share their screen to perform representative tasks
and explain their actions out loud. At the end of the session, participants were asked
to express whether they would see themselves as benefiting from the solution if it
existed and if yes, whether there were any missing features.
5.5.1.1
After the interview
The fifth iteration resulted in 2 hours, 50 minutes and 13 seconds of audio
recordings, which were fully transcribed. These transcriptions as well as the notes
taken during the think-aloud usability tests were subject to close reading by both re-
searchers. We identified selected quotes that best demonstrated participants’ feedback
and suggestions for further improvements. These quotes guided the future direction
of the final prototype solution and facilitated the formulation of the fifth iteration.
5.5.2
Findings
5.5.2.1
Students’ Reflections on Alone Mode
In the first part of the usability interview, participants were asked to specify a
context in which they would use the prototype solution.
The responses provided
were mostly related to productivity-related tasks. Participants primarily noted that
they wanted to minimize distracting elements such as notifications, whilst working or
reaching a predefined personal goal, as this disturbed their ensuing concentral level.
“I will mostly use it for productivity since normally, you are prompt to
check your phone once it makes noise.”
- Participant 32
“I think I would go with the productivity part. Mm-hmm. Because of
course like when you hear all your notifications and everything like while
you’re doing something you’re more prone to kind of stop and go check
it.”
- Participant 35
Furthermore, an important value, as noted by participants’ choice of enabled
applications during the Alone Mode, is connectedness. Participants mainly chose ap-
plications used in the frame of social interactions with family, friends and colleagues
to stay active. Therein, the most prominently mentioned apps were WhatsApp, Mes-
senger, Email apps (for work and/or school) and the Calendar app (for checking their
==PAGE:132==
122
5 Design Process
schedule). Participants further reported they would choose to allow their close family
members and friends as well as their work colleagues to reach them during the Alone
Mode.
“I will leave on my messaging apps since you don’t get distracted when
you answer a message. Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram are the apps
where you go for 30 sec and lose track of time.”
- Participant 36
“Um, I think if it was during the time where I was working, I would only
leave like people that are directly related to my work so that they are able
to contact me. Also my family.”
- Participant 35
When asked about when they would turn on the Alone Mode, participants seemed
to agree that they would primarily prefer to stay disconnected during their working
hours. Still, they emphasized the importance of flexibility in the Alone Mode, as their
needs would differ according to their weekly time schedule. Nonetheless, participants
explicitly noted that they would not use the Alone Mode in the evenings and weekends.
As noted in participants’ statements from prior iterations, this could be due to the
fact that these time frames are associated with relationship maintenance as well as
relaxation, which are activities commonly performed on the smartphone.
“ I want the mode to be off after my working hours. Normally, this is
the time when I connect with people and check social media.”
- Participant 35
“I would like it to be off during the evenings, lunch breaks also weekends.
I want to be connected to my social media and I want to get notifications
from there. “
- Participant 32
Besides that, when asked about their design preferences, respondents agreed that
the design should be consistent with the phone design and easily accessible, i.e., from
the drop-down menu where Do not disturb and Sleep mode are located.
==PAGE:133==
5.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
123
5.5.2.2
Think-Aloud Tests
In the second part of the interview, a link to the Alone Mode prototype was sent
to the participants and they were asked to share their screen whilst performing the
predefined activity tasks. This thinking-aloud test was performed to collect partici-
pants’ feedback on the interface design and its flow to detect and eliminate potential
misunderstandings. Their statements would also constitute the further improvement
of the final prototype solution.
First, participants were prompted to localize the Alone Mode, which they could
find in the dropdown menu. This task was completed easily and rapidly by all par-
ticipants. They agreed that the dropdown menu would be the first place they would
check, when asked to turn on any type of built-in system mode. Next, participants
were asked to personalize their Alone Mode by selecting their allowed contacts and
applications, as well as designate alert keywords. A majority of participants agreed
that the current interface gives them a good overview of their available options (Fig-
ure 5.27). However, some participants noted that they were unsure if these settings
were permanent or if they would have to re-set them again, when turning on the
Alone Mode next time.
After personalizing their settings and turning on the Alone Mode, the respondents
were asked to go back to the smartphone’s home screen. They were asked to try ac-
cessing an application that was not part of their allowed apps ( i.e. YouTube). Before
performing the task, all participants pointed out that this might not be possible, since
YouTube was greyed out (Figure 5.28).
Subsequently, participants seemed to be pleasantly surprised when a motivational
message popped up reminding them that they are in Alone Mode and encouraging
them to continue avoiding distractions (Figure 5.29). They added that they would like
to have the option to customize this pop-up notification according to their personal
preferences.
Moreover, they noted that they did not want the option to directly
turn off the mode from the pop-up notification. Instead, they preferred delaying this
option by adding an extra step to the interaction flow. Thereby, participants are
referring to design frictions, which are believed to promote more mindful interactions
[16].
“I like that I have a motivational message. I think I don’t want to be
given the option to turn it off directly. Instinctively you will just go to
turn it off, because it is just one more tap. Maybe add an extra step or go
to “Settings”.”
- Participant 33
==PAGE:134==
124
5 Design Process
Figure 5.27: Alone Mode Overview
==PAGE:135==
5.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
125
Figure 5.28: Home page while Alone Mode is on
==PAGE:136==
126
5 Design Process
Figure 5.29: A motivational message is displayed when a disabled application is
opened
==PAGE:137==
5.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
127
“I would like to have an extra step or maybe include in the message that
I need to go to Settings in order to turn the mode off.”
- Participant 35
Lastly, participants were asked to access an application that they had allowed in
their Alone Mode settings. Then, they were asked to express their opinion on the
pop-up notification that would appear next. This notification mentions that contact
has tried to reach them through email, by using one of their emergency keywords
(Figure 5.30). All participants agreed that they would, first, like to see a snippet
of the received email or at least, a fragment of the sentence in which the emergency
keyword was included. Some participants explain further this decision by referring
to newsletters that often include expressions that they would be likely to use as alert
keywords. Finally, participants noted that they would not like the Alone Mode to
automatically turn off in the case of a notification being enabled due to the detection
of an alert keyword. Instead, they would like the option to choose if they want to
turn off in the Alone, when this type of notification appears.
“I want to approve when my Alone Mode is turned off and if I reply I
don’t want the Alone Mode to be turned off automatically. “
- Participant 32
“ I would prefer to answer the message and still have the Alone Mode on.
“
- Participant 35
“If I get an emergency I guess I won’t be focusing anymore or anything
like to attend emergency writes. “
- Participant 36
5.5.2.3
Final thoughts
At the end of the session, participants were asked to share their general opinion
about the presented solution. Several participants expressed noting similarities with
Android’s Focus mode. Still, they noted that the alert keyword feature was an attrac-
tive unique value proposition, differentiating the solution from other applications, as
this would allow them to set up emergency keywords for close family members and
friends. Still, some participants expressed concerns with regards to their privacy, as
they noted that this solution would have to scrape the content of their incoming
notifications to detect alert keywords.
==PAGE:138==
128
5 Design Process
Figure 5.30: Emergency keyword was used while in Alone Mode
“I will use it during my studies. I think it is a nice idea. I am a bit afraid
of my privacy because this means that the app will read all my messages
in order to see if an alert keyword has been used.”
- Participant 32
Moreover, another concern raised was the lack of continuity across different elec-
tronic devices. Participants noted that, despite being on Alone Mode on their smart-
phones, they could still access distracting platforms from their personal computers.
“I think it might be. The problem is that in case I can’t access my YouTube
from my phone I might just go to my laptop.”
- Participant 32
==PAGE:139==
5.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
129
In terms of the design, all respondents described the flow as being easy-to-follow.
They positively commented on the minimalistic design, by noting that it gave them a
good overview of everything simultaneously. Furthermore, they liked that the disabled
applications were greyed out during this mode of interaction, as it served as a cognitive
nudge. Moreover, participants expressed that the Alone Mode could be a good tool for
minimizing distractions during productivity-related tasks. Yet they seemed unsure
on whether the solution would be able to promote a healthier relationship with the
smartphone on a long-term basis. Still, they agreed that this solution is a good first
step towards establishing more mindful interactions with the smartphone.
“I think the problem is that we’re all aware that our habits are not healthy.
But I think very few of us are actually willing to do something about it.
So maybe this is like a small step towards that (..)”
- Participant 34
“I just use my phone without any purpose. And I feel like this will help
me to be more conscious about it, which is, which I think is accomplished
by this message that is displayed when you try to click on an app that is
grated, shaded.”
- Participant 36
5.5.3
In Summary
In conclusion, five usability interviews were conducted over two days. All interview
participants expressed interest in the presented solution. They noted that this solu-
tion was an effective manner to stay conscious of their screen time, as it would allow
them to limit distracting elements.
“I think so because it will allow me to not give in to distractions as much
and if I see that I am in Alone Mode and it doesn’t give me access to
distracting apps this will help me to put down my phone and continue
focusing.”
- Participant 33
Despite one respondent noting that she could not picture herself incorporating it
into her daily life, she expresses that she could potentially envision herself using this
solution to limit the distracting elements of her smartphone in certain situations.
==PAGE:140==
130
5 Design Process
“I don’t think I would incorporate it in my daily routine, let’s say but
certainly if, if I would decide somehow to, you know, take a break from
my phone, I think it would be really helpful.“
- Participant 34
She further explains that she is a social person and the smartphone is an important
component for her to connect with people in her life, as it easily solves her needs.
“I can’t picture myself using it. I am associating it with existing apps,
so it’s like I put a label on myself. I realize that I am always seeking to
text people, meet people. And if I am not physically with them then it is
through my phone.”
- Participant 34
“If I stop doing it, maybe it is the new normal. I think that FOMO is
what makes people use social media so if there is something about that I
would use it.”
- Participant 34
The usability interview also provided insight into how the Alone Mode would be
used in practice by the research participants, and which features participants found
most important. Participants expressed that the interface design was easy to navigate,
as they performed the assigned tasks rapidly. Moreover, they seem to envision the
usage of this mode of interaction within the context of productivity, as they note
that they would be most likely to use it during working hours and in accordance with
classmates or colleagues.
As this is not our aim with this prototype solution, this highlights the need to
revise the interface design to prepare and further contextualize users in the variety
of potential use cases of the Alone Mode. As further design revisions were performed
in alignment with participants’ feedback and suggestions for supplementary features,
this series of improvements, leading to the creation of the final solution, will be further
discussed in the next section.
==PAGE:141==
5.6 Final Prototype Solution
131
5.6
Final Prototype Solution
5.6.1
Features
The feedback provided by participants throughout the usability interviews pin-
pointed potential problem areas in the user experience. Therefore, improvements are
made to the existing Figma wireframes (Appendix A.5) (Prototype A.5).
As mentioned earlier, we deem it necessary to further position users in the Alone
Mode ’s envisioned use cases, as participants mainly associated its capabilities to
productivity-related tasks. A preparatory walkthrough of the Alone Mode is, there-
fore, introduced to the start of the interface design to allow a successful onboarding
of first time users. These screens aim to help users better understand the different
features that the solution is providing (Figure 5.31):
• Create a name for your personalized Alone Mode
• Set start and end date
• Choose allowed contacts
• Choose allowed apps to use during your personal mode
• Choose time slot and select days in the weekly schedule
Figure 5.31: Part of the onboarding screens
==PAGE:142==
132
5 Design Process
• Customize your motivational messages and the automatic no-reply text received
by individuals trying to reach during your Alone Mode
• Select alert keywords
Research participants’ expressed concerns about saving their Alone Mode settings.
They also requested flexible modes due to the varied nature of their weekly schedule.
Thus, users can now create and save many Alone Modes according to different routines.
We also add the option of turning the mode(s) on or off, on-demand, to accommodate
unforeseen needs of the Alone Mode.
Users also have the option to “take a 5 -minute break” (Figure 5.32a) to access
their disabled applications. This decision is in light of one participant’s reflection.
Here, he explains that being completely cut-off would tempt him to turn off the
Alone Mode altogether out of frustration.
Notifications, enabled by alert keywords, now include a preview of the sentence,
in which the specific keyword appears. Thereby, the user can decide, if they want to
ignore the notification or continue to see the whole message (Figure 5.32b).
This is an overview of the changes performed on the interface design and its
interaction flow. Participants’ comments and suggestions are at the center of these
revisions. The animated explainer video, created for this research study, shows the
final prototype solution.
5.6.2
Explainer Video
The explainer video of our final prototype solution, Alone Mode, can be accessed
through the following URL: https://youtu.be/KqQlOtfgKDw
==PAGE:143==
5.6 Final Prototype Solution
133
(a) Motivational message giving the option
of a 5-min break
(b) User receives an email with an emergency
keyword included
Figure 5.32
==PAGE:144==
134
==PAGE:145==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
Five distinct phases of design research led us step-by-step to a richer understanding
of what university students believe are problematic relationships to their devices. In
assembling these findings for the development of a final prototype solution, we have
come across several themes that we would like to review further in this Discussion
section.
This section will first discuss select findings from this design research. We have
singled out notable learnings which we would like to address further in detail here.
Secondly, we will reflect upon the elements that have shaped our design choices em-
bodied in the final prototype solution.
6.1
Learnings: Factors Shaping the Individual User’s
Experience
6.1.1
The Mobile Device as A Multi-Tool
Throughout this process of design research, participants made several comparisons to
the laptop, when describing their smartphone usage, in terms of its multifunctionality
characteristic. Still, participants accentuated the on-the-go nature of the smartphone,
as its unique value proposition, as it allowed them to preserve their connectivity
(Section - Connectivity 5.1.2.3).
Acting initially as a tool for human contact, in
personal and professional contexts, the mobile phone now also represents an extension
of the affordances presented by the laptop, as noted by participants.
“When I am making calls or anything that doesn’t require notifications, not
for emails - I go to my laptop to read them. But anything with notifications
- like Twitter, Messenger, LinkedIn, Tinder. Music on the road. Anything
that I am outside, it is a useful tool - navigate, pay for something.”
- Participant 10
==PAGE:146==
136
6 Discussion
Yet, amidst communication- and productivity-driven interactions, the smartphone
also represented a popular source for entertainment-focused interactions for partici-
pants. This promotes an overexposure to the smartphone in terms of screen time, as
multiple needs are concentrated into one device, as reported by participants. Thereby,
participants are left to monitor and navigate these different threads of interaction ac-
cordingly.
“I feel like if I’m bored, I use my phone. If I want to say something to my
friends or use my phone, if I want to learn something, I use my phone.”
- Participant 6
The multifunctionality of the smartphone also allows other daily ad-hoc tasks
to be satisfied, as it accommodates the functionalities of several items (i.e. alarm
clock, watch, music player, map). This element of convenience brought on by the
smartphone reinforces participants’ dependency on the smartphone in their everyday
lives. This is clearly reflected in participants’ articulations of the use of their phones
to wake up, commute, check the time, listen to music, sleep, etc.
“Weekday, (...) I need it cause there is a lot of things I check on my phone
- train situation, health recommendations, alarm, making sure friends and
family are alive, time, really need music.”
- Participant 3
”I use it to wake up, to check the time, to check the busses, I have the
travel card on it - it is necessary for my everyday life.”
- Participant 11
“Even if I have my watch on my hand. I’m not looking at it. I’m just
looking at my phone. I don’t know why but it’s usually like that.”
- Participant 12
Additionally, with the diversity of content available online, their smartphone is
also becoming a source of inspiration. Thereby, the online content has a direct impact
on their actual everyday life decisions, especially in terms of fashion, style, food, and
sports.
==PAGE:147==
6.1 Learnings: Factors Shaping the Individual User’s Experience
137
“I also see a lot of recipes and exercises and I just implement these things
into my daily life”
- Participant 8
The findings of this research therefore emphasize the need for designers to consider
the multifunctionality of the smartphone.
6.1.2
The Mobile Device as a Willpower Battle
Along with participants’ increased dependency on their devices for a variety of usage
scenarios, the nature of their smartphone usage mindlessly shifts from communication-
and productivity-oriented interactions to more entertainment-focused interactions
within the same session. This frictionless user experience thereby blurs out partici-
pants’ initial purpose of usage. Therefore, participants rely heavily on their willpower
to make meaningful interactions in terms of their smartphone usage, especially when
being or feeling alone. Several participants described personal experiences of lack of
willpower as a weakness, displaying a constant mental battle to stay away from their
smartphones.
“(...)the question of weakness is about willpower and willpower is almost
impossible to kind of manipulate unless you do it yourself. You set yourself
the parameters and whatever. Sticks and stones I talked about, like risks
and rewards, you set them up. You can give the tools for someone to set
it up. But you cannot go past that.”
- Participant 16
As revealed by the quotes below, participants showed stronger willpower to stay
away from their smartphone devices, when finding themselves in settings with other
individuals, such as the workplace, the classroom, and group work situations:
“When I study I cannot keep focus that well but where I work I can keep
focus much more so during work I think there are hours when I when I
don’t even touch my phone.”
- Participant 1
“In class, I don’t usually use the phone cuz I need to listen so.”
- Participant 2
==PAGE:148==
138
6 Discussion
“During group work, I am usually more focused on doing the job than on
my phone. Sometimes for some messages, but for around 5 min.”
- Participant 8
The findings of this research therefore underline the need for designers to consider
the smartphone a battleground of will in the path to more mindful interactions. De-
sign frictions were therefore at the center of our framing of Alone Mode, in light of how
participants spoke about their weakened sense of control on frictionless smartphone
experiences.
6.1.3
Ecology of Personal Values
Another common thread in this process of design research is the underlying norma-
tivity associated with students’ ecology of personal values. Participants often referred
to hidden rules, shaping their habits, cues, and expectations for their personal smart-
phone usage.
6.1.3.1
Personal Desires as Social Norms
Social norms represent personal and collective origins of motivation [22] , in which
personal desires can be paralleled to participants’ ecology of personal values, dictating
their behavior and decisions on- and offline. Almost all participants uniformly point
out the desire to remain connected, as their most important value (Participant 8, 9, 11,
12 and 13 interviews). This comes as no surprise, as participants’ exhibited a concen-
trated focus on relationship maintenance with family and friends abroad throughout
this process of design research. Therefore, participants’ desires are primarily enforced
by individuals close to the participants, especially their parents or other close family
members. Therein, participants often refer to a norm in smartphone usage and screen
time inspired by their parents’ online behavior in their youth. Interestingly, partici-
pants do not seem to perceive this as a disproportionate comparison, considering that
their parents’ screen time evidently took up a lower percentage of their everyday lives,
due to their early and limited nature of technology in the past.
“I’m really just disappointed or mad at someone who is all the time at
their phone, even if they’re taking pictures for Snapchat, like please live
the moment now and here with us and make some memories. And when
I’m looking at pictures from my family when they were in their 20s my
parents with their friends, they were like having all the time fun. If I look
back in 20 years and see myself on pictures with my friends looking at our
phones, I’ll be really sad about that.”
- Participant 12
==PAGE:149==
6.1 Learnings: Factors Shaping the Individual User’s Experience
139
As participants appropriated what can be perceived as unrealistic norms for their
own online behavior, they expressed constant feelings of tension and pressure to ac-
tively monitor their screen times within the appropriate scales. Therein, they touched
upon concepts of ‘living in the moment’ versus ‘online presence’, presenting them as
opposed concepts. Thereby, it seemed as if participants aspired for a life without the
smartphone, whilst wanting to belong to a society almost necessitating the usage of
a smartphone.
“So ideally, I would like to spend 0 times on my phone, but at the same
time, I would like to do some work and since my work is digital, I would
say I want the minimum time possible on my phone.”
- Participant 10
This is further expressed in the fact that participants showed less interest in
reducing their time on specific apps and instead, they were focused on reducing their
overall screen time:
“I actually didn’t saw that before cause I was focused on the fact that all
my screen time was above average.”
- Participant 12
Other values that participants aspired to incorporate further into their everyday
life, online and offline, were related to personal development and growth. Participants
noted that they aspired to mature in a variety of areas, ranging from mindfulness,
physical health and mental wellbeing to their professional and academic journey.
These areas were perceived as important by participants, as they shaped their vi-
brant student lives and consequently, impacted their mindset, behaviour and deci-
sions.
Within this ecology of personal values, participants’ comments throughout
this process of design research showed a particular focus on productivity.
Participants often seemed to measure their screen time according to their produc-
tivity level, as it was believed to measure their achievements and growth. Actually,
when participants were first presented with their smartphone-related challenges in the
first iteration, their first reaction was to provide excuses for their screen time or to
express an interest in limiting their screen time in order to become ‘more productive’:
“I feel like lately I have been too much in my phone (...) If I should be
productive, it should be one hour maximum”
- Participant 6
==PAGE:150==
140
6 Discussion
“(...) I feel a bit more productive when I am spending less time. I am
focusing more on human interaction.”
- Participant 8
In alignment with this perspective, participants’ anecdotes throughout this process
of design research indicated that a higher than desired screen time is perceived as
negative and counterproductive, as participants expressed satisfaction with a decrease
in screen time. In this respect, participants used terms such as “useless” and “waste”
to describe smartphone usage perceived as excessive, especially when it comes to social
media. Likewise, they employed terms such as ‘guilt’, ‘shock’ and ‘embarrassed’ to
describe their feelings on their personal screen time.
”(...)that’s why I don’t have Instagram on my phone. I don’t have the app
because I was wasting too much time (...) lately I have not been productive
so I have been watching Netflix (...) I mainly waste my time from eight
till 11 (...) I know I’m wasting my time because I’m not doing anything.”
- Participant 6
“ I feel good, that I spend less time on Facebook (...) This means that I
have not spent my time on useless stuff. This makes me feel really good.”
- Participant 7
“I think when I first saw the screen time, I was surprised and thought
it was very high and kind of shocked because I didn’t think it was that
much and then when I send it in and saw the others that I started to feel
embarrassed.”
- Participant 13
Still, the scope of participants’ understanding of productivity could be argued,
as several participants also related this concept to a desire for more meaningful in-
teractions. This is further noted in their interactions with the Alone Mode in the
fifth iteration, in which they directly positioned the features for the promotion of
meaningfulness within the frame of enhanced productivity.
==PAGE:151==
6.1 Learnings: Factors Shaping the Individual User’s Experience
141
6.1.3.2
Digital Intimacy for Human Connection
As aforementioned, another important value shaping participants’ behaviors and
decisions on- and offline is connectedness as defined by a sense of belonging and
intimacy [57]. Therefore, a common thread described by participants is the search
for human connection and digital intimacy through their smartphone relationships
and activities. This phenomenon is especially prominent in situations in which the
participants are or feel alone, as several participants described their detachment to
their smartphone in contexts where they are surrounded by friends or family.
“I would say because of the connectivity with other people but (...) again it
really depends on the context (...) the only context I couldn’t live without
my phone is if I was alone, but if I’m surrounded by people, doing a nice
trip together with someone or something like that, then I would definitely
be able to do it”
- Participant 1
“I know that when I was like, back in France, sometimes I didn’t use it
for that one day and my friend was calling my brothers. ”Oh my God, is
she okay?” because yeah I just forget about it..”
- Participant 2
Participants pinpointed a phone call as the most basic human contact and the
highest form of digital intimacy that the smartphone could provide. They employed
the term “connection” multiple times to refer to a phone call activity and described
these experiences as intimate. Therefore, several participants additionally noted that
the most important feature on their smartphone is the phone call.
”Yeah, I feel like phone calls are definitely intimate.”
- Participant 1
“[Without my phone, it would be harder] for many things, mainly to call my
parents and have this connection with them. This is my only connection
with them, like the phone calls, so.”
- Participant 12
==PAGE:152==
142
6 Discussion
“I think calling [is the most important] because even if I don’t have the
social media, I can still call up a friend and start to conversate but if I
were not able to see or follow what was happening around me and not able
to contact anyone, I think it would just be.. Plus not being able to contact
anyone, I think it will be even harder.”
- Participant 13
Still, this need for digital intimacy is also dependent on the type of relationships
that participants are maintaining, as participants in romantic relationships as well as
younger participants with seemingly closer relationships to their parents craved this
human connection more, as noted in their statements.
“When I used to have a girlfriend, then I did [longer phone calls] but
I actually think that since we broke up, I haven’t even made one single
phone call. Yeah, only some really short WhatsApp calls or messenger
calls just like ‘Oh, where are you?’, ‘I’m here’ and stuff like that.”
- Participant 1
Some participants also referred to this need for human connection and digital
intimacy as a need for affirmation and care. Notifications signified signs of attention
and interest for them, and, even though notifications could be distracting, participants
refer to them as a positive ego boost.
“Yeah, that always feels really good to me when I get messages on mes-
senger because that means that ’Yeah, somebody cares about me’.”
- Participant 1
“(...)even if sometimes I don’t check my notifications, I love to have notifi-
cations (...) [Is it because you feel the need to hear that people are looking
after you or is it because you want to know what’s going on?] Both.”
- Participant 2
Nonetheless, participants were very determined to state the difference between
digital and real intimacy, as they all expressed a preference for real intimacy, despite
their appreciation for digital intimacy in their increasingly globalised and interna-
tional communities.
==PAGE:153==
6.2 Reflections: What shaped our design choices?
143
“I think many things are way better when you have a human connection
than with your phone.”
- Participant 8
“I am a bad texter in general. I prefer to talk with people face to face. I
don’t get the same feeling when I am talking with people face to face.”
- Participant 10
The findings of this research therefore underline the need for designers to consider
the ecology of personal values in the path to more mindful interactions.
In that
respect, the Alone Mode’s alert keyword feature was inspired through a richer un-
derstanding of participants’ desire for connectedness. This unique value proposition
distinguishes the Alone Mode from the modes offered by Digital Wellbeing (Android)
and Screen Time (iOS) (See section 4.4), as users define and control their urgent
communications by specifying keywords that can re-enable notifications in case of
emergencies.
6.2
Reflections: What shaped our design choices?
6.2.1
Methodology: Reflexivity
The empirical work we describe and refer to in our design research is primarily quali-
tative in nature, and as such subjectivity and reflexivity are in fact valued. Therefore,
it is important to be transparent about the fact that our design choices are heav-
ily shaped by our experiences as individuals and as members of this demographic
group [23].
This helped us establish a baseline of honest engagement throughout
the decision-making process in this process of design research and acknowledge the
disrupted knowledge–power relationship [56]. This reflexive attitude also ensures the
quality of the findings collected and developed, as we, as researchers, could more
easily understand and address research participants’ challenges.
6.2.2
Qualitative Interviews: Language
A primary component of our reflexive engagement in this research process concerns
attention to the language employed by us, as researchers and by our participants;
and in particular with respect to the term addiction. Despite a few tongue-in-cheek
comments from participants, the overall language participants used was quite infor-
mative when it comes to the debate around the use of the term ‘addiction’.
For
instance, one participant referred to their smartphone by adopting the expression
’way too intense’. This form of expression is clearly grounded in human experience,
and therefore perhaps more informative from a design perspective.
==PAGE:154==
144
6 Discussion
“If I have like 5 minutes free, I immediately grab my smartphone and
check something so yeah I think it’s way too intense in that regard.”
- Participant 17
The emotional tone of the interviews also allowed a richer understanding of the
human experience described by research participants. For instance, in the initial user
studies, one participant spoke in very excited terms about a bedtime routine, which
he also described as ’horrible’, ‘useless’ and ‘scattered’. As the tone of this statement
contradicted the vocabulary employed, it highlighted the double-edged nature of this
research participant’s smartphone usage. This apparent paradox highlights the need
to question how ‘horrible’ this routine actually was, when it clearly also played a
meaningful part in the participant’s day.
“And then I have a really long going to bed process because I check crazy
amounts of useless information on my phone like, okay, I take on my PJs,
then I do something on my phone then I go and brush my teeth then I do
something on my phone then. I don’t know - I go to the shower and then
do something on my phone like it’s really scattered. Yeah, my bedtime
routine is is horrible”
- Participant 1
Our framing of Alone Mode was therefore inspired by awareness of how partici-
pants spoke about their own experiences – rather than addiction, as users were more
concerned with finding the right fit for technology within their lived experiences and
in relation to their connections to others.
6.2.3
Gray Zone: External Factors
Another key takeaway from this design research is the need to avoid black-and-white
discourse around students’ use of technology. This is comprehensively highlighted
in a specific finding from our online survey, which showed that 57% of university
students find smartphone activities addictive (Figure 5.15), but a plurality (39.5%)
don’t believe that they are addicted to their smartphones (Figure 5.16). A recurring
element that shaped our design choices was therefore an extensive consideration of
external factors, promoting the ‘gray zone’ discourse within participants’ experience
and understanding of their personal smartphone usage.
6.2.3.1
Consciousness vs. Awareness
Correspondingly, participants seemed to roam fine lines between states of awareness
and consciousness, when discussing their smartphone usage. All participants showed
==PAGE:155==
6.2 Reflections: What shaped our design choices?
145
signs of awareness at minimum, as they would effortlessly describe their preferred
smartphone activities, their routines and their habits. Yet, they often didn’t demon-
strate a high degree of consciousness, by connecting these thoughts to reason and
judgment in their daily lives. Several participants noted that their participation in
this design research represented the first time that they had actively reflected upon
their screen time and smartphone activities.
“[Surprise about Instagram’s high placement] Yeah. Because when I go on
Instagram, it’s like 10 seconds and then you know, so it’s crazy (...) Like
what the fuck?”
- Participant 2
“I am surprised, it makes sense but never thinks about it timewise; don’t
feel guilty or sad about it”
- Participant 3
“I’m usually not checking my screen time, even if I have this function”
- Participant 12
These reflections remind us of the value of supporting critical reflection through
design. Designers might draw on framings of experience such as that provided by
Kahneman’s focusing illusion 1 to enable such practices – highlighting the ever-biased
nature of reflection on our own behavior.
6.2.3.2
Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Motivations
Many participants spoke of intrinsic and extrinsic motivations during reflection
on their smartphone behaviors and related decision-making. Intrinsic and extrinsic
motivations can be classified as types of incentives motivating individuals, in which
intrinsic indicates a perceived enjoyment and extrinsic invokes a perceived usefulness
[66]. Despite certain participants referring to extrinsic motivational elements, such
as rewards and or punishments, a vast majority discussed the importance of intrinsic
motivations throughout this process of design research. One participant in the initial
user studies pointed out that his lack of interest in personal retrospection resulted
in a shortage of intrinsic motivations to change their smartphone relationship for the
better.
1Kahneman, Daniel, et al.
”Would you be happier if you were richer?
A focusing illusion.”
science 312.5782 (2006): 1908-1910.
==PAGE:156==
146
6 Discussion
“[Why don’t you give them up?] Good question, I don’t know. I have to
let these things sit through my head so I can feel that the decision was
mine instead of feeling like it’s addictive through this interview.”
- Participant 10
Intrinsic rather than extrinsic motivations are therefore more likely to lead to
long-term maintenance of behavior [21]. This perspective is also highlighted in the
final prototype solution, as the core element of the Alone Mode is to activate it as an
act of autonomous choice.
6.2.4
Ethical Considerations
Our design choices at each stage in this process were also driven by our own ethical
reflections. Participants’ comments generally suggested a certain level of awareness
of potential ethical concerns. For instance, ethical issues of tailoring content in the
Content Digest solution were raised in the third and fourth phases of this process of
design research. Participants additionally expressed concerns on issues of privacy and
transparency.
“Developing something like this (...)
is full of ethical issues (...)
I’ve
been to conferences where a lot of ideas like this have been kind of floated.
It’s just that notion of tailoring news. Or the ’you’re the censor’ of what
someone else receives is, it’s problematic. I mean, that’s not worse than
the problem of getting a continual loop of content”
- Participant 24
“Where’s my privacy in this? There’s going to be a filter that will decide
what I want to see and how to present it to me. And it’s actually going
to know what I’m looking at all time”
- Participant 4
Again, privacy was generally a key factor for participants, as they raised similar
concerns with the final prototype solution, Alone Mode. Here, participants raised
privacy concerns as they noted that the solution’s alert keywords feature would ne-
cessitate a scraping of the content of their incoming notifications to detect the users’
selected keywords.
“I will use it during my studies. I think it is a nice idea. I am a bit afraid
of my privacy because this means that the app will read all my messages
in order to see if an alert keyword has been used.”
==PAGE:157==
6.3 In Summary
147
- Participant 32
These reflections therefore emphasize the need for designers to support different
ideals of ethical standards through design. Our framing of Alone Mode was there-
fore inspired by awareness of participants’ distinct privacy preferences – encouraging
individuals’ capacity to shape their own behaviour.
6.3
In Summary
Participants often spoke of how ’being alone’ frequently motivated phone usage.
Therefore, the final solution was aimed to be a more positive, framing of aloneness.
Thereby, this Discussion section intends to specify the implication for design inspired
by this process of research design and to clarify select underlying decisions leading to
the Alone Mode.
As mentioned in the first part, due to the multifunctionality of the smartphone,
several needs are concentrated into one device. Therefore, participants describe a
heavy reliance on their willpower to make meaningful interactions. Yet, their sense of
willpower noticeably decreased, when feeling or being alone. Thereby, this personal
experience was recognized as one of the major reasons underlying students’ engage-
ment with their mobile devices. This personal experience was especially considered
problematic by participants in light of the complex, and at times paradoxical, relation-
ship between their personal values and normative perceptions of the need to remain
connected. Participants noted a need for digital intimacy and human connection in
this process of design research. Still, their comments express aspirations for a life
without the smartphone. As a result of these paradoxical desires and unrealistics
standards, participants often felt pressured by their smartphone usage, especially in
the frame of aloneness.
This is why our chosen final solution more fully respects the complex human and
subjective experience of device usage by refraining from judgement and increasing
individuals’ capacity to shape their own behaviour. Our design research was primarily
qualitative in nature. Each of our design choices along the way were therefore shaped
by reflexivity, the overall language participants employed, external factors framing
participants’ experience and understanding of their personal smartphone as well as
ethical considerations.
==PAGE:158==
148
==PAGE:159==
CHAPTER 7
Future Work
Our forward-looking research addresses the challenge of realising healthier relation-
ships to our mobile devices. Within this design-oriented process, select decisions and
actions have been left for future consideration due to time constraints.
7.1
Technical development
Our final proposal for a technological solution to the challenge of realising healthier
relationships to our mobile devices is created on Figma to simulate the envisioned
user experience of the Alone Mode.
As a further perspective, it is important to
consider the technical development of this prototype solution. This would also allow
the opportunity for longitudinal studies, in which research participants’ interaction
with the Alone Mode could be studied in further depth to study the solution’s impact
on a long-term basis as well as develop an ecologically-valid understanding.
7.2
Personal Informatics System
In the last phase of this process of design research, some participants expressed inter-
est in receiving weekly notifications related to their performance. In alignment with
this, they also suggested the addition of a personal statistical dashboard, in which
they can track their personal development for further encouragement. These sup-
plementary features relate to the concept of a Personal Informatics System (P.I.S.),
which is a type of system allowing users to collect and reflect on their personal infor-
mation for enhanced self-understanding [42]. Positioning the Alone Mode within the
stage-based model could be an area for future work. Nevertheless, this would arise
different challenges related to the quantified self and self-tracking, which would neces-
sitate additional qualitative and/or quantitative research. Moreover, a P.I.S would
require a different design aesthetic, than the one achieved through the five distinct
phases of design research.
==PAGE:160==
150
7 Future Work
7.3
Additional modes
A majority of participants also mentioned the need for additional modes of interac-
tions within their smartphones. Such an approach could serve to further the value of
Alone Mode by situating it within an ecology of multiple means of interacting with
our mobile devices. The idea of adding a chill mode, for instance, was suggested
by few participants. They believed it would help them use their smartphones in a
more meaningful manner during ‘phone breaks’, by activating this mode as an act of
autonomous choice.
7.4
Visibility and accessibility
Finally, it is important to continue taking responsibility for habit-making designs.
Despite technology developers like Google, Apple, Facebook, and TikTok adding
features for digital wellbeing, we need to prioritize this further.
These initiatives
and features, including the Alone Mode, need to become more visible and easily
accessible to establish meaningful smartphone habits and routines.
7.5
Limitations
A key limitation in this process of design research was related to the impact of
the COVID-19 lockdown measures on the conducted interviews. A large majority of
the sessions were conducted online, which resulted in constraints on the number of
participants in the respective group interview sessions. Furthermore, the stay-at-home
restrictions also affected the nature of the interviews, as the material and activities
had to be re-adapted for online execution. Thereby, it was also more complicated to
retrieve design material, such as sketches and scribbles, from the research participants.
The online interviews also created an additional layer of distance between partici-
pants, as it became more difficult to build rapport within the sessions. Additionally,
in the frame of a design research project, it would have been more valuable for us to
observe participants’ reactions and emotions face-to-face.
==PAGE:161==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
Within this research study, we have gained a richer understanding of the challenges
smartphone use poses for students today.
The first phase of the design research was initiated with 13 user studies. These
were conducted to define the themes and reasons underlying students’ engagement
with their mobile devices. Subsequently, as part of a mixed-methods approach, an
online survey, as a second phase, was shared to develop a richer understanding on
how students feel about their smartphone behavior. This allowed us to gain a rich
understanding into the daily narratives and personal incentives that could potentially
promote an addictive smartphone behavior amongst university students. Addition-
ally, this led us to identify three user scenarios that promote university students’
smartphone usage - the phone break, fear of missing out and loneliness.
The creation of several novel design solutions to the challenges raised by partici-
pants were then conceptualized and developed for the third phase of this process of
design research.We conducted group interviews to gain actionable insight into these
6 initial concept ideas. Participants expressed an overall preference for the solution
ideas that addressed problems such as losing track of time and the infinite content
loop, as those were perceived as problematic areas in their current smartphone usage.
This led us to further develop these 3 solution ideas, which resulted in the creation
of lo-fi prototypes, discussed and evaluated by participants in the fourth phase of this
process of design research. Finally, we chose to pursue further development of the
Alone Mode concept, as it particularly demonstrated greater potential for scalability,
ease of access and meaningful interactions. Initial wireframes were developed and
presented to 5 research participants during the last phase of this process of design
research. Here, the usability interviews highlighted participants’ interest in additional
personalisation features in the Alone Mode. Therein, they suggested the opportunity
to create multiple modes, which they could connect to their personal goals and time
schedule. Participants’ comments also highlighted the need for an onboarding process
to frame the Alone Mode within the practice of mindfulness, as they primarily linked
the solution to productivity-related tasks. The areas shaping our design choices were
also discussed and reflected upon in terms of participants’ ecology of personal values,
the reflexive nature of the research and ethical considerations.
==PAGE:162==
152
8 Conclusion
In conclusion, this research project resulted in five distinct phases of design re-
search contributing with a rich understanding of the challenges smartphone use poses
for students today and producing our final proposal for a technological solution, the
Alone Mode, which we hope will serve as one step on the path towards realizing more
mindful relationships to and through our mobile devices.
==PAGE:163==
APPENDIX A
Additional Design
Material
A.1
Ring Limiter Video
To see the Ring Limiter concept strategy video click on the next URL: https://
youtu.be/dzDpUhQDqf4
A.2
Digital Friend Video
To see the Digital Friend concept strategy video click on the next URL: https://
youtu.be/-FtXMbDB8Ck
A.3
Content Digest Video
To see the Content Digest concept strategy video click on the next URL: https:
//youtu.be/9cT_NPZtxOQ
A.4
Alone Mode: Initial Wireframes
==PAGE:164==
Think-Aloud Usability Tests: Alone Mode - Wireframes 
 
●
Interactive version of the prototype -  
https://www.figma.com/proto/tDc50gavxXXueIkggsD0mW/Alone-Mode?node-id=1%3A2&
scaling=scale-down&fbclid=IwAR0p2wFNrIL1lz6WNGRBlMaSMkPucqlld_ir6o2a19XF095
e4HsR0whAifQ 
 
 
 
 
 
Home Screen 
Alone Mode In 
Drop-Down Menu 
Alone Mode - Off 
Alone Mode - On 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Allow Spotify and 
Headspace 
Add Emergency 
Keywords 
Overview Of 
Personalized Alone 
Mode 
Home Page when 
Alone Mode Is On 
 
154
A Additional Design Material
==PAGE:165==
A.5 Alone Mode: Final Prototype Wireframes
155
A.5
Alone Mode: Final Prototype Wireframes
==PAGE:166==
Final Prototype Solution: Alone Mode - Final Version Wireframes 
 
●
Interactive version of the prototype -  
https://www.figma.com/proto/tDc50gavxXXueIkggsD0mW/Alone-Mode?node-id=91%3A15
35&scaling=scale-down&fbclid=IwAR37REn47xm6sxrP_Yw9vXzSGQGz4NeV5C69IDLv2
VeTHaMkAHcN5vXtCXY 
 
 
 
 
 
Home Screen 
Alone Mode in 
Drop-Down Menu 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Welcome 
Onboarding Screen ​- 
Secret Personal Mode 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Enter Mode’s Name 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Select Start Date 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Select End Date 
Onboarding Screen ​- 
Select Start Time 
156
A Additional Design Material
==PAGE:167==
 
 
 
 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Select End Time 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Select Days Of The 
Week 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Choose Allowed 
Contacts 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Customize Automatic 
Reply 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Select Allowed 
Applications 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Customize 
Motivational Message 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Add Emergency 
Keyword 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Select Emergency 
Keywords 
A.5 Alone Mode: Final Prototype Wireframes
157
==PAGE:168==
 
Onboarding Screen​ - 
Complete Onboarding 
 
Alone Mode - 
Overview Of Existing 
Modes 
 
 
Personalize Mode’s 
Name 
 
 
Create New Mode 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Add Start Date 
Add End Date 
Add Start Time 
Add End Time 
158
A Additional Design Material
==PAGE:169==
 
 
 
 
Select Days Of The 
Week 
Overview Of 
Personalized Schedule 
Customize Automatic 
Reply 
Select Active 
Application While In 
Alone Mode 
 
 
 
 
 
Personalize 
Motivational Message 
 
Add Emergency 
Keyword 
 
Select Emergency 
Keywords 
 
 
 
 
Overview Of Mode’s 
Settings 
A.5 Alone Mode: Final Prototype Wireframes
159
==PAGE:170==
 
 
 
 
Display Motivation 
Message While In 
Alone Mode 
Overview Of Current 
Modes 
Turn On Specific 
Mode 
Home Page While 
Mode Is On 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Receive Notification 
When Emergency 
Keyword Is Detected 
 
 
 
 
160
A Additional Design Material
==PAGE:171==
A.5 Alone Mode: Final Prototype Wireframes
161
==PAGE:172==
162
==PAGE:173==
APPENDIX B
Interview Transcripts
B.1
First Iteration: Initial User Studies
B.1.1
Participant 1
Researcher: Hi. So first of all, do we have permission to record this interview?
Participant 1 Yes.
Researcher: What is your age?
Participant 1 24
Researcher: What is your nationality?
Participant 1: Hungarian
Researcher: What is your occupation?
Participant 1: Student.. or slash research assistant, I don’t know. Both of them
are part time.
Researcher: What do you study?
Participant 1: Human centered artificial intelligence
Researcher: Are you currently in a relationship?
Participant 1 No.
Researcher: Okay, so now that I have made you aware of the feelings, you can
use them as tools? Yeah, I want you to look at this and I’m gonna give you a pen
and I’m gonna ask you to describe a day in your life and I want you to put milestones
whilst describing a day in your life. So when.. we start from like, when do you wake
up?
But it’s so different each day.
So let’s take yesterday for an example just as a...
Okay, okay, then it will be at 10:00 am so somewhere here
no, like the first...
==PAGE:174==
164
B Interview Transcripts
Should I put the timestamp?
Yeah, just right 10am ”I wake up”. when you wake up, what do you do afterwards?
Go to the bathroom? Describe me through the whole day, the whole process?
Participant 1: Yeah. Yeah, unfortunately first I grab my phone, going through
these the news, and by the time..
Researcher: Can you write that?
Participant 1: Oh yeah. And the news news definitely that that. So yeah, so
so news news every single morning and if I have more time, which I did last last day,
for example, then I go on YouTube and just try spending my time on Instagram and
stuff like that but yeah, news, news every time
Researcher: Okay, then next?
Participant 1: then next I go to the kitchen and try to try to grab some breakfast
I always take my vitamin. that’s that’s sort of a habit with one glass of water that’s
that’s right right after this phone session. should it should I put these down as well?
Researcher: Yes. Estimate times maybe.
Participant 1: Oh, okay..
Researcher: Should I do this for you whilst you talk through it?
Participant 1: yeah that’s perfect. Then they.. put it in half an hour after.. the
vitamin stuff and and and some some breakfast some small breakfast like some fruits
or or musli
Researcher: Okay cool. What is the next step then?
Participant 1: The next step is that usually I yeah, I go to work or university
but not yesterday. but usually I yeah yeah I don’t know there I guess I just I just
work or study yeah yeah I don’t know because because so so this typrr semester of
mine is really different than than the than the previous ones like I only have one
single course you know
Researcher: But say that is.. so you get to school work around 11?
Participant 1: yeah yeah let’s say.. okay okay.. today for example I I got to
University at 11 so that makes sense
Researcher: and then you go for?
Participant 1: then I go yeah then then I I do my stuff for short while, then I
go for lunch
Researcher: so you study?
Participant 1: Yes.
Researcher: And then at 12?
==PAGE:175==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
165
Figure B.1: Participant 1 timeline
Yes, yes, yes. Yes. That’s that’s what I do every day.
Exactly. And then do you have often, cause please also incorporate toilet breaks
and all those into..?
Participant 1: I don’t really go to go to the toilet often to be honest. Usually
I go to toilet in the afternoon more often because in the afternoon, I always realized
that oh, I haven’t drank enough. So I started drinking a lot in the afternoon and
then I started going to pee in every every hour but yeah, it’s actually quite funny. I
never realized it but it’s true. I never go to the toilet in the morning.
Researcher: And then do you take your phone with you when you go to the
toilet?
Participant 1: Yes
Researcher: Okay. And so what time do you finish..
Participant 1: actually I do sometimes that. that is only if I just want to take
a break and I just go to the toilet with my phone
Researcher: so kind of a phone break?
==PAGE:176==
166
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 1: Yes, exactly.
Researcher: And what time do you approximately finish?
Participant 1: 6pm
Researcher: And when you get home what do you do?
Participant 1: usually I make dinner or yeah, actually actually many times every
second day I go to the gym after after six
Researcher: so you go to the gym?
Participant 1: so that’s that’s.. yeah that’s quite usual, yeah climbing for two
hours.
Researcher: Okay um so you come back around eight.
Participant 1: ] Yes, exactly.
And then I make dinner and listen to music or podcast during making the dinner
then usually I watch some Netflix.
Researcher: And do you listen to the podcasts on your phone?
Participant 1: I mean, yeah, like, I have a Bluetooth speaker which I bring to
the kitchen. And then my phone is connected to the Bluetooth speaker. And yeah,
either podcast or music. It’s It’s It’s more like 80% music and 20% podcast so mostly
music. Okay, but I I always listen to something
Researcher: and then when and then afterwards you get dinner and then you
watch some Netflix
Participant 1: Yes. And I started studying or during some productive time
again from nine or Yeah, or 10 or something and then I go to bed really late. Usually.
That’s also a thing which I do, like between one and two.
Researcher: Okay, and how can you sleep this late? Huh? How come you sleep
late?
Participant 1: How come I’m going to sleep late? I don’t know, because I wake
up quite, quite late. So my..
Researcher: So how long do you study, would you say?
Participant 1: Oh, yeah, okay. Okay. Yes that’s also true because I only study
until midnight I think. Yeah, usually yeah the latest is half past midnight. And then
I have a really long going to bed process because I yeah, I check crazy amounts of
useless information on my phone like, okay, I I take on my PJs, then I do something
on my phone then I go and brush my teeth then I do something on my phone then. I
don’t know I go to the shower and they do something on my phone like it’s it’s really
scattered. Yeah, my my bedtime routine is is horrible
Researcher: and also so when you finally do a sit in the bed, are you still on
==PAGE:177==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
167
your phone?
Participant 1: usually I do a last checkup. Yeah. Yeah, but it’s Yeah, it’s like,
you know, it’s it’s just most of the time it’s opening Reddit, or, or, or YouTube and
you just click on one link after another because because everything is interconnected.
So it’s, it’s, it’s a little bit yeah. Okay. And also I’m, I really have a hard time
keeping focus so many times if I if I, if something pops into my mind like I don’t
know, for example, right now I’m quite interested in the Democratic primaries for the
US elections and then boom, something pops into my mind and I google it instantly.
And then I like click on a few, few links, and then something else pops into my mind
and then boom, I commonly leave the previous one and then go to the other one.
Yeah.
Researcher: Okay, cool. So that’s approximately your day.
Participant 1: Yes
Researcher: at least, let’s say on average, maybe
Participant 1: Yeah. In the last two months. That’s, that’s completely accurate,
actually.
Researcher: Cool. Okay, thank you very much. So now..
Participant 1: it’s crazy to reflect, but it’s true.
Researcher: So, now I’m gonna ask you some more questions that’s specific to
the smartphone and how it plays into your life. And so how does the phone play
into your everyday life? Like when and where is the phone as central part of your
everyday
Participant 1: essential meaning useful or essential meaning that?
Researcher: central!
Participant 1: Central?! I think
Researcher: Cause so if we look right now a little bit at this when do you think
that the phone is something where you actually go towards?
Participant 1: Yeah that like like the the morning 100% is a is a is a time for
that also, before the bed is also
Researcher: and what are the frame and the context for it so you wake up and
you just need to check the news.
Participant 1: Yeah,it’s like it’s like it’s like an instinct or some something like
that.
Researcher: And is it because your kids are? Is it because there’s an urge to
keep updated? Or is there a fear of missing something out or what is the goal? or is
it a habit?
==PAGE:178==
168
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 1: It’s completely a habit. It’s completely a habit for for spending
time. It’s a it’s so it actually plays a role in my wake up process that Okay, so first, I
open my eyes, I’m really tired and then while checking Instagram the news Facebook
Reddit and all this stuff then in that half an hour I slowly wake up so that’s that’s
that’s basically supplement for my for my waking up
Researcher: and is it ..
Participant 1: so that’s yeah maybe maybe that morning is the most central
time actually with with with the phone and maybe the less central time is when I
when I work
Researcher: it’s less central?
Participant 1: that yeah there’s a least central where I work but not when I
study. when I study I cannot keep focus that well by where I work I can I can keep
focus much more so during during work i think i think there are hours when i when
i don’t even touch my phone.
Researcher: Could you imagine yourself not having your phone in the wakeup
process?
Participant 1: Yeah, I definitely can imagine Yeah, yeah, I can
Researcher: But how would it make you feel?
Participant 1: Much better
Researcher: Much better so actually you will feel much better if you didn’t have
your phone in the morning. How come?
Participant 1: Because I think it’s a it’s a bad thing
Researcher: why is it a bad thing?
Participant 1: Um because it makes this this wakeup process longer and if I
don’t have.. if I don’t have something to do right after waking up then I tend to
stay in bed and only browsing stuff on my phone and that prevents me from from
being useful.. or not useful, how to say these things? Yeah, anyway useful for hours
sometimes because I just I just lost myself in YouTube videos and Reddit and stuff
like that. So if I could eliminate that interaction with my phone, then I think I could
start my day much earlier. And that would make me much more productive
Researcher: and how come you can’t do that now?
Participant 1: Because I’m... because I’m weak! I don’t know.. because I’m
weak!
Researcher: because you know.. you’re so actually saying a bad thing but then
you’re not removing it from your daily life?
Participant 1: yes yes
==PAGE:179==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
169
Researcher: and is it because you want and because what what role, other than
the wakeup process, what actually keeps you locked to checking you for? because now
it’s a habit but yeah, can you imagine an alternative that will make you wake up?
Participant 1: I I don’t think I need any any alternative actually. Maybe Yeah,
I don’t know. So in my mind I have this perfect morning, when I wake up, drink
a glass of water and then do some yoga. Maybe doing some some yoga would be
nice or just stretching or something like that.
But yeah, now that you said that
actually, there’s definitely a part of the fear of missing out in the morning because,
mostly with the news I’m quite interested in what was happening in the world and
if if something happens during the night like something big like I don’t know I don’t
know the President of the United States dies or something like that then I would feel
really really stupid Oh, I I went all the way until three o’clock and I didn’t know
about this thing. And that that makes me feel a little bit strange
Researcher: So if you were to describe this feeling with these? Which one would
you say?
Participant 1: I mean the the negative ones are only these two right?
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 1: Then that would be one. That would be number one. And I feel
about this whole thing that I use my phone with number two, with guilt.
Researcher: Is it a guilty pleasure?
Participant 1: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Yes.
Researcher: And are there any relationship a situation in your everyday life that
promotes your smartphone usage? Like, parents family friends? ...that makes you
use it the phone more than what you would maybe want to.
Participant 1: Friends.. friends on Instagram! Definitely. That’s why I check
Instagram and, and pretty significant share of my screen time is on Instagram. I
mean, family, they only promote it for FaceTime. I don’t really consider facetiming
like necessarily a smartphone usage because you can do it also on computer and stuff
like that
Researcher: Do you FaceTime a lot?
Participant 1: Yeah, with my family but I think that’s pretty necessary that’s
that’s a bit because that’s the only way I keep touch with my family and that’s usually
one hour per two days. So one hour per two days
Researcher: one hour per two days? and why do you think it’s important to
keep in touch with your friends?
Participant 1: because I cannot meet them all the time. Like because you can
you can meet only with a really like limited group of people right? So yeah, let’s
let’s take me as an example. I think I made like 10 or maybe 15 people regularly but
==PAGE:180==
170
B Interview Transcripts
then I still in touch with with more than more than 50 at least on Instagram and
messenger
Researcher: and you feel you actually keep in touch with them?
Participant 1: yes, yes ,yeah, yeah, I think I do. Like okay let’s let’s take my
friends from home as as an example; like again the only platform to keep in touch
with them is on messenger. I don’t FaceTime with them, I only use Messenger
Researcher: and you want to keep in touch?
Participant 1: Yes, yes. I want right. I want. Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. Do you consider your relationship to your smartphone similar
to a relationship with a friend or a human?
Participant 1: No.
Researcher: So you don’t see a social aspect to the phone? And only the phone
Participant 1: Only the phone, no.
Researcher: So it’s not for you - you feel like you’ve socialized after a phone
break or..
Participant 1: Oh, no. No, I definitely don’t feel like socializing after using the
phone. No.
Researcher: No, I mean, do you feel like you have socialised.. that you feel like
it has.. after hanging out with your phone, it is similar to hanging out with..?
Participant 1: No. No. Because I.. yeah. It’s pretty interesting. But uh, but
I don’t really .. like it’s not interactive what I do in the phone usually. It’s just like
looking at news or videos. Yeah.
Researcher: Do you use your phone to check the time?
Participant 1: Yeah
Researcher: How often?
Participant 1: Hmm.. I don’t know not that often because usually I’m on my
on my laptop also. And it’s just way easier to look at the corner of the screen to
check it while studying and working. So yeah.
Researcher: How often do you use your smartphone to make phone calls?
Participant 1: Oh, really not often, really not often. When I used to have a
girlfriend, then I did but I actually think that since we broke up, I haven’t even made
one single phone call. Yeah, only some really short WhatsApp calls or messenger calls
just like Oh, where are you? I’m here and stuff like that. And then..
Researcher: So to find each other when you are meeting up?
Participant 1: Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
==PAGE:181==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
171
Researcher: But when you were having a girlfriend, you did it more?
Participant 1: Yeah, yes yes. Yes.
Researcher: How come? Why did you call each other?
Participant 1: Just to talk? I don’t know. I don’t know, maybe because because
she was definitely the person the closest to me. Okay if I had a really close friend,
but I don’t. I think like I never had those type of friends who I would call like just
to hang out.
Is there an intimate aspect to calls?
Yes, yes, yes, that’s.. Yeah, I feel like phone calls are definitely intimate.
Researcher: Do you use your phone when you’re eating?
Participant 1: Yes.
Researcher: Often?
Participant 1: Yes. While eat alone, all the time.
Researcher: While you eat alone?
Participant 1: Yes, then always!
Researcher: Do you do it with people?
Participant 1: Sometimes. Sometimes as well. If we run out of topics or some-
thing or if I am excluded from a discussion with my colleagues or something like
that because they are talking about some professional stuff then I check my phone
instantly.
Researcher: Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a noise?
Participant 1: Umm, no.
Researcher: So you get a notification, you don’t check it immediately?
Participant 1: No
Researcher: How come?
Participant 1: because..
i don’t know..
I like that small, like that time of
surprise..
oh well wait what could have happened, i don’t know..
I never check
it instantly, it’s just a good good feeling to have these notifications that ’Oh okay.
Something is happening. I’m an important person because someone is messaging me
or something like that, but I don’t care.’ And then I check it half an hour later or
something.
Researcher: Do you sleep with your smartphone turned on? under your pillow,
or next to your bed?
Participant 1: Next to my bed. Someone sleeps with the phone under the pillow?
==PAGE:182==
172
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Yeah, I do.
Participant 1: Why?
Researcher: Because of the alarm.
Participant 1: Really?
Researcher: That’s also what I was gonna ask you here. Do you have an alarm?
Participant 1: I actually use a sleep tracker. So sleep cycle. And that requires
me to put the phone right next to my head.
Researcher: And do you have an alarm to wake you up?
Participant 1: Yes
Researcher: From your phone too?
Participant 1: Yes
Researcher: Okay, and I’m just gonna go quickly over these. Do you seem to
lose track of time when you’re on your smartphone?
Participant 1: Yeah.
Researcher: After how much time do you like ’oh, I’ve spent a lot of time’ ?
Participant 1: Half an hour
Researcher: half an hour? Do you sleep later at night when you are on your
smartphone?
Participant 1: Yeah.
Researcher: Do you feel FOMO?
Participant 1: Yeah.
Researcher: Has your smartphone caused you feelings of anxiety and or stress?
Participant 1: Yeah. Yeah, I think it did. Yeah, definitely. I mean, I think
that’s pretty much connected to FOMO as well. When I was was feeling quite down
and so everyone doing all the crazy stuff and having a lot of friends and smiling all
the time and stuff like that and that happens quite often.
Researcher: Do your eyes hurt after using the smartphone for a longer time?
Participant 1: Yes. But mostly in the morning and in the evening. but yeah,
never in between but in the morning and in the evening all the time I would say.
Researcher: Do you feel your use of your smartphone decreases your productivity
at times?
Participant 1: Do I feel that using the smartphone decreases my productivity?
Yes
Researcher: Would you be able to live without your smartphone for a day?
==PAGE:183==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
173
Participant 1: If I really need to, yeah.
Researcher: So you would not like to?
Participant 1: No.
Researcher: Why?
Participant 1: Yeah, it’s crazy. I don’t even know why I said that. But it’s true..
but it’s so embarrassing
Researcher: Okay, so you feel embarrassed about it?
Participant 1: yes yes yes. I would say because of the connectivity with other
people but it’s.. so again it really depends on the context because for example right
now when I went to the cabin trip I was even living without my phone for three days
because I didn’t have any internet connection; I didn’t touch my phone for three days.
But I was surrounded by people 24/7 so the only context I couldn’t live without my
phone if I was alone, but if I’m surrounded by people, doing a nice trip together with
someone or something like that, then I would definitely be able to do it.
Researcher: What daily screen time would you consider too much?
Participant 1: Yeah, I would consider above three is too much and above one
for social media
Researcher: All of social media?
Participant 1: Yes.
Researcher: What are your expectations in regards to your screen time?
Participant 1: I really want to make it less
Researcher: And after seeing your screentime actually? Is your usage lower or
higher than expected?
Participant 1: Higher.
Researcher: So you thought you used the phone less?
Participant 1: Yes.
Researcher: What is your opinion on your personal screen time? Describe your
emotions about it? Like are you happy with the time which you spend on your phone,
like if you were to use these emotions again.
Participant 1: I don’t know, so with YouTube and Instagram so with the first
two, that’s that’s definitely ’guilt’. So number two. And messenger is actually.. that
actually feels quite nice. So messenger would be I think number five ’belonging’ be-
cause actually so my challenge was to disable notifications so I completely disabled
all the notifications for messenger. So I checked only few times during the day. So
when I spent some time on it that means that I was actually messaging people con-
stantly and receiving some stuff and that feels good to them. Yeah, that always feels
==PAGE:184==
174
B Interview Transcripts
really good to me when I get messages on messenger because that means that ’Yeah,
somebody cares about me’.
Researcher: And you have this app called index, what is that?
Participant 1: That’s a news application, a hungarian news application.
Researcher: Do you think the challenge impacted your screentime subconsciously?
Participant 1: The messenger.. okay, three hours, four to six and the date.What?!
It’s more? I don’t know. I wouldn’t have expected that..
Researcher: Maybe to explain the general trend: people have used... a lot of
challenges have made people use their phone more subconsciously because they were
aware of the fact that they were restricted
Participant 1: ah, no i didn’t really feel like I was restricted to be honest.
Researcher: So how come the average went higher-?
Participant 1: I don’t know but okay so just for the record only for messen-
ger Instagram and Facebook the notifications were disabled. But also these other
notifications..
Researcher: Facebook...?
Participant 1: ...messenger and Instagram so the three biggest ones from last
week.
Researcher: How come you didn’t put index, when it’s a big part of your day?
Participant 1: Because it’s not sending notifications at all.
Researcher: Yeah. cool. We’re just gonna go through the last questions.
Participant 1: Yes.
Researcher: Which apps did you expect to be the most used on your phone?
before checking this? What did you think was the ones that you use the most?
Participant 1: But now I know.
Researcher: Yeah, but what do you think it would have been? before checking?
What did you generally..
Participant 1: I didn’t expect YouTube to be that that big actually. Yeah, I
definitely wouldn’t have put YouTube that high. I would have put Instagram on the
top and not YouTube. And I would have also expected less from messenger. This
surprised me a lot that I use messenger that much.
Researcher: So the ones that you use the most are YouTube, messenger and
Instagram.
Participant 1: Yeah.
Researcher: And how did it make you feel? So it made you feel surprised that..
==PAGE:185==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
175
the difference?
Participant 1: From these?
Researcher: Because the results are different from what you expected, how did
it make you feel?
So the thing is that whenever it turns out that I actually kind of addicted to
phone and use it more I always feel bad so that would be guilt again. But I’m yeah,
I’m really bad at getting rid of bad habits actually. I’m really bad. And, and I don’t
know I always feel guilt.
Is it something that translate into other parts of your life. Other examples?
Participant 1: smoking? I don’t know. just watching nextflix instead of study-
ing...
Researcher: Is it procastination?
Participant 1: Yeah, yeah. So in general, I really feel like I’m procrastinating
almost everything and I think using the smartphone plays a lot, a huge role in that.
And, and since I really feel bad because of procrastination, I feel bad for using my
smartphone as well.
Researcher: And you feel badly because you’re procrastinating?
Participant 1: Yes
Researcher: and why do you feel bad about procastinating?
Participant 1: Because I feel like I have much more potential. And I feel like I
could do much more with my life, but just in general.
Researcher: So do you have like performance anxiety?
Do you feel like you
should perform better?
Participant 1: Yes.
Researcher: And is this related to.. Is this something you feel since childhood
or is it something that has been evolved later in life?
Participant 1: Later, later.
Researcher: And when would you time it?
Participant 1: When I entered in the professional scene, so from university, I
would say. When I started caring a little bit about my future and career and stuff
like that
Researcher: and is there any milestone specifically that made you, like a teacher
or a class where you’re like, I need to get my stuff together?
Participant 1: No, no, I can’t really remember. Definitely not teachers and
classes. If there was a milestone, then it was coming from somewhere outside of the
university
==PAGE:186==
176
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: it was what?
Participant 1: If there was a milestone, then it was coming outside of university.
it definitely didn’t come from the university. But the funny thing is that at the same
time, I’m doing better than 95% of my friends like just, just by the fact that I’m here
in Denmark and having a job and stuff like that and I was the first one who got a
professional job from my group of friends and stuff like that, but I still feel like this
Researcher: And is it related to your parents, your friends what is it that’s
causing you the anxiety?
Not my friends, maybe more like my family because my family is quite successful
and everybody is really determined but not my parents so that’s the thing basically
that so I have a really successful and yeah from a business perspective successful
family but not my parents they were always the one with the normal kind of life but
all my cousins, all my uncles, the husband of my sister and stuff like; they are really
pushing stuff and I also wanted and still want to be liked by them.
So Youtube, Facebook, messenger and Instagram are the most used app and which
context and situation to use them in the most?
Participant 1: Again just killing time actually.
Researcher: Specifically in the morning and evenings?
Participant 1: Mostly and then when I have to, like focus on my studies or
something and I’m weak and I’m not able to focus then I instantly grabbed my phone
and I don’t know open up Instagram or something like that. And that’s completely
unconscious actually, I just I just realized Okay, I I was working on my special course
for five minutes and then I’m on my phone again. I was working for two minutes and
then I’m on my phone again.
Researcher: And which sections or features of these apps are your favorites. So
YouTube is it you just look at the Explore page or do you actually look intosearching
for the Youtube video?
Participant 1: Yeah, I usually look for like.. Yeah, I definitely search for some-
thing and then from then I go through the links
Researcher: And with Instagram, is it the notifications that prompts it?
Participant 1: Instagram. Mostly the stories, actually, yeah, I opened.. Yeah.
And it’s so stupid. But I opened it up like many times a day and just go through
the stories but but even those stories of people who I don’t even care about and of
course, discover, and I really like the feature of Instagram which says that you are
all caught up today. because before that there was also a thing that i would just
keep rolling. But since this feature is there, this one actually made me stop scrolling
the main page, I definitely remember that But then I turn into other features so it
doesn’t matter but I’m not spending any more time on the homepage anymore.
Researcher: And messenger would you say it’s notifications?
==PAGE:187==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
177
Participant 1: Yeah, but okay, so this week I didn’t get notifications for mes-
senger
Researcher: You didn’t? Oh, yeah.
Participant 1: So I opened up in every I don’t know in every hour maybe, or
something like that and then I saw that Okay, I got messages from four or five people
and then I started replying them back and out of the five usually one started replying
me back instantly. So I caught up with the discussion. And then in the meantime one
of the other from the five also started replying me back so it started being a never
ending circle.
Researcher: And so did the challenge decrease your interaction with your favorite
apps? It did slightly.
Participant 1: I think it did, I honestly. Yeah. But that’s that’s just my feeling
and and the screen time shows something different
Researcher: So would you say you felt more productive last week do you feel
better about yourself last week or did it not change that much? was it not a marking
difference?
Participant 1: In terms of messenger I felt better I honestly felt better that
I’m not spending that much time on messenger but yeah, so this notification stuff it
was a little bit strange because only messenger was affected by that so YouTube and
Instagram and Facebook, they were not really affected by you know notification stuff.
Researcher: Yeah. okay, the last two questions..
Participant 1: For YouTube, I would have definitely needed to put a screen time
limit. Yeah. Because I think for YouTube, that’s the only way to stop it, just to have
a limit and boom. After that there’s no more.
Researcher: Okay, so last 2 questions.
Participant 1: Yes.
Researcher: Is there an application that you can not give up? Like you’ll never
be able to let go?
Participant 1: I mean, yeah, some sort of news application. I don’t know which
one, it’s just in in general.
Researcher: So index, for example?
Participant 1: Yeah, maybe.
Researcher: It’s the one that’s been used the most on your phone.
Yeah. Because, like, it could be something for work or something. But like, it’s
the news application
Participant 1: Yes, yes. Yes.
==PAGE:188==
178
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: And is there an application that you can..
Participant 1: I mean, I mean, I guess I could buy newspapers, but nobody does
it nowadays, right.
Researcher: And you don’t check them on the computer. You check them mainly
on the phone?
Participant 1: No, I check it on the computer as well.
Researcher: But you mainly check it on your phone.
Participant 1: Yes.
Researcher: And last question. Is there an application that you can but don’t
want to give up?
Participant 1: I can but I don’t want to?
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 1: No, I don’t think there is
Researcher: An example is Messenger - a lot of people could if they wanted to
but they don’t actually want to.
Participant 1: Ah okay, in that sense, okay. Yeah, yeah. Then that’s a good
one.
Researcher: Messenger?
Participant 1: Yes, yes.
Researcher: What about YouTube?
Participant 1: No, no, no, no, I could I could definitely give up YouTube and
Instagram. If I had to. Because that’s, that’s just content. That’s just content but
when messenger is actually people and I think that makes a lot of difference. So
messenger feels much more intimate than all the others. the others are just content
and consuming content. Messenger is with dealing people and having friendships and
maintaining friendships
Researcher: How did you overall think about your challenge then? You need to
use the emotions
Participant 1: yeah but like this one ”value”, yeah; and also trendsetting, I don’t
think I will put the notification back. it actually felt quite great. And actually some
time I did not get distracted like for example when I’m watching Netflix with my
friends then many times before I had my phone next to me and and every time I get
a notification from messenger I checked it and I actually realized that we watched the
movie the other day and my phone was on on the kitchen counter not even with me
on the sofa which is crazy and I could without any disturbing stuff watch the movie
for the whole length and that was because I didn’t get notifications from messenger.
==PAGE:189==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
179
So yeah, that was good.
Researcher: And yeah, so you don’t think the notifications is the problem?
Participant 1: I don’t think notifications.. What do you mean?
Researcher: So you don’t think that notification is... cause you won’t put noti-
fications back but you don’t necessarily think it’s the problem as to why you spend
this amount of time.
Participant 1: No. No, no because as you could see the top two: Instagram and
YouTube, they don’t have notifications.
Researcher: Okay, cool. Thank you.
Participant 1: So I should get some other methods to get rid of those. Yeah
Researcher: Thank you.
Participant 1: Yeah thanks
==PAGE:190==
180
B Interview Transcripts
B.1.2
Participant 2
Researcher: Okay, do we have approval to record this interview?
Participant 2: Yes.
Researcher: Okay, so we’re gonna ask you first some general questions. You
have the emotions here on the side to help assist you and we’re going to ask you these
questions first. Do you want to fill it out yourself? Or do you want us to fill it out
for you whilst you talk?
Participant 2: I can do it.
Researcher: Okay, so first of all, what is your full name?
Researcher: Okay. What is your age?
Participant 2: 24
Researcher: Yes. What is your gender?
Participant 2: Female
Researcher: What is your nationality?
Participant 2: Ivory Coast
Researcher: What is your occupation?
Participant 2: student
Researcher: What is your marital status?
Participant 2: I’m single
Researcher: okay. okay, so to start off..
Participant 2: Do I have to put my name here?
Researcher: yeah, yeah. That’d be nice, just
Okay, cool. I want to start off the interview by asking you to describe a day in
your life. So how does your everyday life look like? And we’ve provideed you here
with a timeline. And ideally, we want you to go through it. And, for instance, what
time you wake up? What do you do next and just go step by step and kind of just
draw it out for us.
Participant 2: Okay. I wake up at six, but I get out of bed at 630
Researcher: You can.. yeah.
Participant 2: Okay. So six.. And then 7am breakfast. And then, from 8am to
11/12, I have a lesson. And then go back home.
Researcher: You can write that down.
Participant 2: okay. I think at 11.30/11.45 I’m home and usually I eat something
==PAGE:191==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
181
Figure B.2: Participant 2 timeline
like a snack. Snack and then at 12.00/1pm, I start cooking, like I eat lunch.
Researcher: okay
Participant 2: and after..
Researcher: Dance class?
Participant 2: No, council class
Researcher: What?
Participant 2: The council class, but it depends because sometimes I have class
only in the morning and sometimes I have class in the morning and the afternoon.
So I need to go back.
Researcher: Just take whatever you prefer.
Participant 2: Okay, go back to class again until like five. And then 7.30 pm
till 8pm I eat, again. Like dinner. After I stay here, we watch like a movie or I go to
my room, study a little bit.
Researcher: That’s fine, write it.
==PAGE:192==
182
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 2: Uhm, it depends.
Researcher: Okay and when do you sleep?
Participant 2: I go to bed at like 11
Researcher: 11?
Participant 2: Yeah. Or I like I wash and stuff at 11pm
Researcher: you start..
Participant 2: sometimes 12, it depends.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 2: but I don’t sleep until 2 or 3AM, it depends on the day.
Researcher: Can you write that down? That you don’t sleep until...
Participant 2: ..very late, but it depends sometimes I can sleep right away or
sometimes No.
Researcher: But what is, when is the average time that you fall asleep? Like
you actually sleeping
Participant 2: I think midnight midnight 30
Researcher: Okay. Cool, thank you. Now I want you to take this pen and write
in how does the phone play into your everyday life? Like for example, do you use an
alarm? So every time you interact with the phone, can you please write them in and
just..not every time but you know?
Participant 2: Shower, I listen to music
Researcher: from your phone?
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: But first you do scroll through?
Participant 2: Yeah. Like social media.
Researcher: Yeah.You said for example here that there’s a 30 minute before you
go into the shower.
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: Are you on your phone in those 30 minutes?
Participant 2: I’m in my bed and I’m like ”oh what the fuck, why? I don’t
want to wake up” but yeah And in class, I don’t usually use the phone cuz I need to
listen so. Yeah. Only when I’m home like for phone mode.. social media. it depends
sometimes.
If I have like a message, I will check it. Because sometimes when I’m go back
home, my phone is on silent, so I don’t really hear. Yeah, so it depends.. sometimes
==PAGE:193==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
183
I forgot and I don’t use my phone. Sometimes I’m right away on my phone, so
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 2: Okay, I can’t.. Do you understand?
Researcher: So this whole section, you have your phone maybe.
Participant 2: Uhm hum
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 2: Okay, and yeah nope. like on the break sometimes I check it.
Because.. but yeah, yeah, no, I think I have my phone here.
Researcher: Yeah. And how do you get to school?
Participant 2: Biking
Researcher: and do you listen to music whilst biking?
Participant 2: No, I don’t want to die. Yeah, no and it’s like Two minutes so
people are dangerous here so yeah.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 2: yeah.And after I use my phone here.
Researcher: And what do you specifically use it for?
Participant 2: It depends music like my brothers are always calling me so the
phone..
Researcher: phone calls?
Participant 2: Uhm hum, and for my food ideas, it depends and what more?
Researcher: Do you use your phone to check the time?
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: And for example, here you say there is a process from going to bed.
So from 11 you start getting ready to bed but you can sometimes sleep until midnight
thirty or past. Are you on your phone in that timeframe?
Participant 2: Hmm, it depends if I’m like in bed for like 3040 minutes and I
can’t sleep, I go on my phone.
Researcher: Okay, so there is a delay so it’s only after 30 minutes that you start
going on the phone so you don’t want to..
Participant 2: Or like if I received like a message on the group chat. I don’t
know sometimes. Like things happen. Or I came here. I come in the kitchen because
there are always people in the kitchen, talking until 1am- 2amso if you’re not sleeping
you can come here. And yeah it depends.
Researcher: yeah okay and when is the phone a central part of your everyday?
==PAGE:194==
184
B Interview Transcripts
when is that the phone plays the hugest role in your everyday?
Participant 2: after like when I finish class
Researcher: okay yeah and what specifically, what is the frame and a context
for when it’s very important for you to have your phone on you
Participant 2: Like to check Facebook WhatsApp, music
Researcher: and are there any relationships or situations in your everyday life
that promotes this smartphone usage.
Participant 2: What do you mean?
Researcher: For example right now you’re on an exchange, are there any rela-
tionship that promotes you using your phone more now that you’re in exchange or is
there any situations?
Participant 2: Yeah, because sometimes when we receive like, message from
CBS or from like, exchange group on Facebook, if they are there’s like an event or
something. In we have like a group chat on Nimbus. Yeah, so sometimes ’oh party
on the fourth floor’, stuff like that
Researcher: So do you think that, without putting words into your mouth? But
do you think that because you’re on exchange, you check your phone more often?
Participant 2: No, no.
Researcher: But then do you think there is people in your life that make you
check your phone more often?
Participant 2: Yeah, for example, like, my mom is always calling me.
My
brothers. Sometimes my sisters, no my sister, I only have one. and she’s like in a
different time zones so..
Researcher: do you have your phone on just to check that you get it. And so
why do you think that the phone is so important in this scenario?
Participant 2: Because we are not leaving in the same country so it helps out
to keep in touch.
Researcher: Yeah. And why is it important to keep in touch?
Participant 2: Because? I don’t know. Because I want to have news from my
family, from my family. Yeah.
Researcher: And if you didn’t have this news, how would you feel?
Participant 2: It would be strange because they always call me so if they are
not calling me, something is wrong.
Researcher: But if you didn’t have easy access to this information, how would
you feel?
Participant 2: I don’t know.
==PAGE:195==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
185
Researcher: If you want to use the emotions
Participant 2: this one? I don’t know.
Researcher: Number eight? Okay.
Participant 2: yeah, I don’t know.
Researcher: But so you use your phone to maintain this intimate contact with
your family.
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: And it’s mainly because you’re in different time zones and different
countries. Okay. Do you consider your relationship to a smartphone similar to a
relationship with a friend or human?
Let me explain. Let me explain. So, when you use your phone Do you feel like
After spending a, for example, if you feeling sad and you feel the need to socialize
after spending a select amount of time with your phone, do you feel like oh, I have
socialized now.
Participant 2: No, no.
Researcher: Okay. Okay. Now I’m just gonna go through a couple of scenarios
and I just want you to tell me if this is valid for you. So you use your phone to check
the time, right? Okay. How often do you use your smartphone to make phone calls?
Participant 2: Can I check my history?
Researcher: Of course.
Participant 2: For example, yesterday 7 times
Researcher: 7 times?
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 2: And it was like, my mom, my mom. My brothers.
Researcher: Yeah. Okay, and do you use your phone when you eat?
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: So whilst you’re eating or whilst you’re cooking,
Participant 2: Both.
Researcher: okay. And what do you use it for?
Participant 2: If I have like a message or sometimes when I’m bored, I’m on
Facebook, but it depends of the conversation.
Researcher: Okay
Participant 2: If the other people is boring... If not, I’m usually noy
==PAGE:196==
186
B Interview Transcripts
Marc So when we’re eating together, you are never on your phone?
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: Do you check? Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a
noise?
Participant 2: Hmm. it depends.
Researcher: So if you see a notification, do you check it immediately or do you
wait sometimes
Participant 2: It depends.
Researcher: Depends on what?
Participant 2: I don’t know if I want to. Yeah, sometimes like Oh, if I’m busy,
no but if I’m or if my phone is like close or far away, it depends.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 2: Like Yeah, I have some notificiations but I didn’t check it because
I’m doing the.. depend of what I’m doing.
Researcher: Yeah, of course. And do you sleep with your smartphone turned on
under your pillow or next to your bed regularly?
Participant 2: No, it’s like on the - how do you call it?
Researcher: the cupboard?
Participant 2: Yeah, I don’t know. And yeah, sometimes I forgot to turn off the
wifi. Yeah. So it’s annoying.
Researcher: Yeah.I see
Participant 2: I have like many notification. Or yeah, no if I don’t forgot to..
like it’s on my cupboard. And then if I forgot to turn off the wifi, I have notification.
If not, no. And sometimes I go back to put the Wi Fi because I can’t sleep so I can
use or I watch Netflix but on my computer. So
Researcher: Regards to notifications are there any notifications that you are
more prone to? to react to than others? So some notifications, you immediately take
your phone or not immediately but if the timing is right, you will look..
Participant 2: If it’s like a phone call, yes! If it’s a message from WhatsApp,
yes. But it depends if I saw Mom, I will automatically take my phone.
Researcher: So there’s some people that you immediately react to?
Participant 2: Yeah. Like if I’m doing something but I saw Mom, I will take it.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 2: Yeah.
==PAGE:197==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
187
Researcher: Okay, so we’re gonna talk about some problem areas with regards
to smartphone usage and you say if it’s valid for you. Do you seem to lose track of
time when you’re on your smartphone?
Participant 2: No.
Researcher: Okay, do you sleep later at night when on your smartphone?
Participant 2: No, cause I just go to sleep.. no.
Researcher: Do you feel fear of missing out?
Participant 2: No, not really.
Researcher: Okay, has your smartphone caused your feelings of anxiety and or
stress?
Participant 2: Uhmm, how?
Researcher: So you never feel stressed or anxious after using your phone or was
using your phone because something related to the smartphone or not using your
phone Yeah, of not using your smartphone.
Participant 2: No, no.
Researcher: You don’t think so?
Participant 2: It depends.
Researcher: What you mean?
Participant 2: I don’t know - it depends if I’m doing like if I’m busy doing other
stuff, I don’t mind not checking my phone for like a long time. But if not..
Researcher: But if.. say that you are alone at home in the day and you can’t
you don’t have access To your phone. How would you feel?
Participant 2: The beginning maybe I would be like
Researcher: fidgety? Distracted?.
Participant 2: No, ”frustrée”
Researcher: Oh, frustrated!
Participant 2: Oh it’s the same. And after I would be like, I would start doing
other stuff.
Researcher: Okay. And how long can you stay without your phone?
Participant 2: It depends. Because, um, I know that when I was like, back
in France, sometimes I didn’t use it for that one day and my friend was calling my
brothers. ”Oh my God, is she okay?” because yeah I just forget about it.
But yeah, it’s true that here I use it more because yeah, I just want to have news
from my family.
==PAGE:198==
188
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 2: Yeah. It depends. Some days I know I would be ’oh, my phone”.
for example, one..I think it was two weeks ago, one weeks ago. I forgot my phone.
somewhere. I didn’t know where. But I was like, Oh my god, I lost my phone. And
I realized that it was here. Yeah, so I didn’t care at all. And I didn’t like stress out
or anxious because I couldn’t use my phone.
Researcher: Yeah.
Researcher: But was it because you thought that you lost your phone; is it
because of like, the money. Let’s say this or it’s more..
Researcher: You couldn’t contact your mom for example?
Participant 2: No, it was because of the money. It was expensive. They are
going to kill me.
Researcher: Do your eyes hurt after using this smartphone for a longer time?
Participant 2: Hmm, no,
Researcher: Okay. Do you feel your use of smartphone decreases your produc-
tivity at times?
Participant 2: Yeah. Because sometimes it distract me. Like while I’m studying
and I don’t want to study if I receive a notification immediately I will go on my phone.
So it’s just like an excuse to not study.
Researcher: Okay. And so just to to clarify you would you would be able to live
without your smartphone for one day?
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. So we asked you for your screen time. How much? Or how
much did you expect your screen time to be per day? Before I asked you for it?
Participant 2: I didn’t think about it?
Researcher: You never thought about it? And what daily screen time would
you consider too much?
Participant 2: 10-12?
Researcher: 10 to 12 hours per day?
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And what are, what are you..
Participant 2: 8? I don’t know.
Researcher: So just above eight.
Participant 2: Yeah, above 8.
==PAGE:199==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
189
Researcher: And what are your expectations in regards to your own screen time?
So for example, right now, your screen time is at four hours and 29 minutes. And do
you want it to be lower or higher?
Participant 2: No
Researcher: No, you think this is?
Participant 2: Yeah, because I know that some days it will be like, two hours.
Sunday eight hours. It depends so not really.
Researcher: so what is your overall opinion on your personal screen time if you
were to use the emotions here, how did you feel about your screen time? Don’t look
at the words. Eight?
So you’re okay with your screentime and how much you spent time on your phone?
Participant 2: Mhmmhmm.
Researcher: Okay. And.. but so how come you chose number eight which is a
very not emotional?
Participant 2: I don’t know.
Researcher: Is it because you’re unimpressed or you just you don’t care at all
about your screen time?
Participant 2: I don’t care.
Researcher: Okay, you don’t care. And okay. Which apps do you use the most
on your smartphone?
Participant 2: I think WhatsApp, Facebook. yeah. I don’t know.
Researcher: And in your chart, it’s written Facebook, Whatsapp and Instagram.
Participant 2: What?
Researcher: Instagram is the third most used.
Participant 2: Oh yeah.
Researcher: But you didn’t... Did you know that Instagram was gonna be?
Participant 2: No! Like before Apple Music?
Researcher: yeah.
Participant 2: I think have the other. Okay, can you check?
Researcher: Yes.
Participant 2: [french conversation]
Researcher: So you check a lot of emails?
Participant 2: Yeah. Snapchat also.
==PAGE:200==
190
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: But Instagram is pretty up there. Did you expect it to be there?
Participant 2: No!
Researcher: Because you seem surprised.
Participant 2: Yeah. Because when I go on Instagram, it’s like 10 seconds and
then you know, so it’s crazy
Researcher: So how does this make you feel to see that you’re spending this
amount of time on Instagram that it’s the most that it’s mored use than your emails.
Participant 2: Like what the fuck?
Researcher: Number seven! Okay, and in which context and situation do you
use these apps that we just mentioned
Participant 2: Facebook, I use it to watch videos, news because I follow like the
French...
Researcher: news?
Participant 2: Yeah, news.
Researcher: okay.
Participant 2: Yeah. And my friends if they post something because I don’t
post things on Facebook so, or if someone tagged me on something
Researcher: Then you check it? so it’s mostly but when is it like.. if you were
to use this everyday. Sorry. When do you usually use these applications?
Participant 2: Facebook like here.
Researcher: yeah. What about Instagram and messenger?
Participant 2: Messenger, I think here. Messenger and Facebook here. Insta-
gram here.
Researcher: and Whatsapp? It’s throughout the day, right?
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. So Facebook is more like in the evening when you have time
and WhatsApp is throughout the day.
Participant 2: Yes.
Researcher: And Instagram is mostly here too.
Participant 2: Yeah
Researcher: Okay. And why they important throughout these time slots? Like
why have you put Facebook more in the evening versus throughout the day?
Participant 2: I don’t know.
Researcher: Okay. Which sections or features of these apps are your favorite?
==PAGE:201==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
191
What do you do when you’re in these apps? For example, on Instagram, there’s the
stories, there’s the feed, there’s the messages
Participant 2: I think the stories, and, like with my brother we love to send us
like funny videos or dogs videos. Sometimes for like aspiration
Researcher: Inspiration?
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: What do you mean?
Participant 2: Like, I don’t know how to do my hair.
Researcher: Okay
Participant 2: ...how to dress... stuff like that
Researcher: Okay. And what about.. WhatsApp, you mainly use it just to text
or to phone call.
Participant 2: Both.
Researcher: Both! And what about Facebook? It’s mainly the feed or do you
look.. what parts of the app do you use the most?
Participant 2: Yeah, I think it’s mainly the feed. Or if someone like tag me
or something? We have like a messenger group with like my sister and my brother.
Yeah.
Researcher: Yes. And is there an application that you cannot give up? Ever?
Participant 2: I think Whatsapp.
Researcher: Whatsapp?
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And why?
Participant 2: Because it helps me to keep in touch with many people from
around the world. Yeah, sometimes I only have them on Whatsapp. And I have
pictures like we share pictures and stuff like that. So for example, I changed my
phone and I lost some pictures, some conversation on WhatsApp and I was like really
pissed. And I still have my old phone because I’m trying to find a way to put them
in the new. So, yeah.
Researcher: And is there an application that you can but don’t want to give
up?
Participant 2: facebook and instagram. Yeah.
Researcher: Why?
Participant 2: Because I don’t really post anything on this app. So..
==PAGE:202==
192
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: okay. Just quickly, I’m going to talk about the challenges that were
made the others participants go through. So number one was app positioning. So
you know, the most use apps we put them in a way that is the most accessible, but
what the challenge was to put them in places to kind of hide them in the phone.
Participant 2: Okay.
Researcher: Number two was change colors. And it would make so make the
whole interface gray so that the colors wouldn’t affect you. Number three was removed
the notifications from your favorite applications. So for example, for you would have
been Whatsapp Facebook and Instagram? And the fourth one was App limits. So
you know, on the phone, you can put a limit to how much you use certain applications.
What do you think of these challenges, and which one would you have the easiest to
do and which one would be the hardest for you to do?
Participant 2: Hmm I think the easiest would be... No, the most difficult will
be remove the notification and the change of color.
Researcher: Why?
Participant 2: I love when it’s on the dark mode because it’s more chill and less
tiring for the eyes. And because when I’m like in class and stuff, I’m always on my
computer. So after..
Researcher: Yeah, yeah.
Participant 2: And the no notification because I don’t know.
Like, even if
sometimes I don’t check my notifications, I love to have notifications
Researcher: Is it because you feel the need to hear that people looking after you
Or is it because you want to know what’s going on? or Why do you feel the need?
Participant 2: Both.
Researcher: Both? okay. So it’s also to feel like you’re needed. Is it?
Participant 2: Yeah maybe.
Researcher: Okay, but also..
Participant 2: No, it depends because when I.. If my mom calling I will take
it but sometimes I am like what the fuck, it’s the fourth time in like 40 minutes. I
don’t feel needed there. But it depends, like, yeah.
Researcher: And for you it would be easy to do the app positioning and the app
limits?
Participant 2: Yeah, because Yeah.
Researcher: How come?
Participant 2: No, ah, no I don’t know. Because I love my phone to be organized.
If I have like everything is on one side or the other. Yeah, it will be
==PAGE:203==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
193
Researcher: weird?
Participant 2: Annoying.
Researcher: It would be annoying, but it’s not because it would decrease the
access to these applications?
Participant 2: No, no, no at all.
Researcher: Okay. And the app limit, you wouldn’t mind it?
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: Do you currently use any app limits?
Participant 2: What?
Researcher: Do you currently use any of these app limits?
Participant 2: No.
Researcher: Okay, but would you be for example, would you put an app limit
on Facebook on social networks?
Participant 2: Yeah.
Researcher: Would that be interesting for you to do?
Participant 2: Mhmhm.
Researcher: Okay, but you don’t think you need it?
Participant 2: No.
==PAGE:204==
194
B Interview Transcripts
B.1.3
Participant 3
Researcher: What is your age?
Participant 3: I am 21.
Researcher: What is your gender?
Participant 3: I am female
Researcher: What is your nationality?
Participant 3: Slovak
Researcher: What is your occupation?
Participant 3: I am a student. I study international bachelor in social science.
Researcher: What is your marital status?
Participant 3: I am single.
Researcher: Describe a day in your life? How does your everyday life look like?
Participant 3: I wake up between 6:00 - 7:00 am. It takes me between 30min to
1h to get ready. Around 7:30 - 8:00 I leave home and then I take the train. When
I’m in the train I scroll through social media or message friends. Around 9:00 I am
at work and until 12:00 I work. Around 12:00, I go for a lunch and then at 12:30 I go
back to work. Around 15:00, I have a break for 30 minutes max. Then I go back to
work and I stay until 18:00. After that, I either meet with friends or go back home.
Around 19:30 I go to the store to buy something for dinner. Around 20:00 I cook.
After that, around 20:30 I eat dinner and watch something until 21:00. After that I
call my family for around 30 minutes. And then, I waste my time - checking things
for the next day, reply people on messenger, generally doing stuff which I have not
done during the day Then before I go to sleep I stay around 30 min on my phone. I
fall asleep around midnight.
Researcher: How does the phone play into your everyday life? When is the
phone a central part of your everyday? What are the frame and the context?
Participant 3: I need a phone call from my parents so they wake me up; I’m
not being able to start the day if they don’t call me. Then, I listen to music while I
prepare myself to go out. When I am on the train I am on my phone - I check social
media or call people. At work - I am trying not to use my phone that much. Then
during lunch - hmm, I don’t use my phone there. After work, on my way home, I
use my phone - I listen music, scroll through social media or I talk to my friends or
family. In the evening, I catch up with family or check events/trips on my phone. I
also spend time in social media
Researcher: Are there any relationships or situations in your everyday life that
promotes your smartphone usage? Why is the phone important in these scenarios?
Participant 3: The fact that I moved to another country challenges me to be
==PAGE:205==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
195
Figure B.3: Participant 3 timeline
more on the phone - this way I keep relationship with parents cause I have to but not
using it as much with friends and can clearly see the effect/prefer to see them in real
life. Also its nice with a smartphone to mimic the everyday interactions
Researcher: Do you consider your relationship to your smartphone similar to a
relationship with a friend/human?
Participant 3: No
Researcher: Describe the different use scenarios your smartphone is part: Re-
searcher: Do you use your phone to check the time?
Participant 3: Yes, always.
Researcher: How often do you use your smartphone to make phone calls?
Participant 3: On average I might receive 5 calls per day but I don’t think I call
anyone
Researcher: Do you use your phone when you eat?
Participant 3: No
Researcher: Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a noise?
==PAGE:206==
196
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 3: It depends on the time but usually no; if I am not doing anything
- I do, but if I do - I don’t check it
Researcher: Do you sleep with your smartphone (turned on) under your pillow
or next to your bed regularly?
Participant 3: No, on my desk so I can’t reach it - so I can stand up when I
wake up and turn off my alarm
Researcher: Can you identify any problem areas with regards to your smart-
phone usage - Do you seem to lose track of time when on your smartphone?
Participant 3: No, I am very aware of smartphone usage - adjust the time to
how much time I have - postpone usage until I have an active time
Researcher: Do you sleep later at night, when on your smartphone?
Participant 3: No, the content is not that interesting
Researcher: Do you feel FOMO? Has your smartphone caused you feelings of
anxiety and/or stress?
Participant 3: I would like to say no but there might be cases where I feel this
way - mostly in connection with life from back home or family gatherings and I am
not part of it. Happy to see they are having a good time but I am not there. But no
stress or anxiety. A few months ago - taking the train to go home. I thought I lost
the phone. Everything was on my phone - phone essential during travel. Outside the
comfort zone. I lost my connection to the world at the moment I needed it. I need
to solve things differently to have the day how I wanted it to be.
Researcher: Do your eyes hurt after using the smartphone for a longer time?
Participant 3: I don’t know, but I don’t think so
Researcher: Do you feel your use of your smartphone decreases your productivity
at times?
Participant 3: Yes, when I am studying, not as productive; less interesting to
study and can get very theoretical, rather focus on easier things
Researcher: Would you be able to live without your smartphone for one day?
Why?
Participant 3: Weekday: I don’t think so, I need it cause there is a lot of
things I check on my phone - train situation, health recommendations, alarm, making
sure friends and family are alive, time, really need music Weekend: can survive; no
important tasks; not dependent on time; can use it to relax.
Researcher: What daily screen time would you consider too much?
Participant 3: Above 3 hours is too much
Researcher: What are your expectations in regards to your screen time?
==PAGE:207==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
197
Participant 3: Hopefully lower but would assume around 3h
Researcher: Is your usage lower or higher than expected?
Participant 3: Higher than expected
Researcher: What is your opinion on your personal screen time? Describe your
emotions:
Participant 3: I am surprised, it makes sense but never thinks about it time-wise;
don’t feel guilty or sad about it
Researcher: Which apps did you expect to be the most used on your smart-
phone?
Participant 3: Messenger, Phone calls, maybe Instagram
Researcher: Which apps did you, in reality, interact with the most on your
smartphone?
Participant 3: Messenger, Phone calls, Facebook
Researcher: Are the results different from what you expected? How did this
make you feel?
Participant 3: Pretty much what I would expect
Researcher: In which contexts and situations, do you use these apps? Why are
they important?
Participant 3: Communication with other people; inspiration Phone calls with
family →mostly morning, trains, evening Messenger with everybody else and family
→mostly trains and evening; sometimes urgent during the day Facebook →work,
during work time, when I get notifications but then don’t really get active notifications
Instagram →mostly for inspiration, checking other people inspiration; important but
can live without it, nice to check up on international friends
Researcher: Which sections or features of these apps are your favorites? Why?
How do you interact with them?
Participant 3: Phone calls - mainly call/not text and mainly receive Messenger
- text or video calls Facebook - newsfeed and events + market place Instagram -
newsfeed, stories and explore Pinterest for inspiration
Researcher: Is there an application that you can not give up? (something that
you need for work)
Participant 3: Camera Can imagine living without a phone call but would have
a completely different life
Researcher: Is there an application that you can, but don’t want to give up?
(like messenger)
Participant 3: Facebook, Instagram, Pinterest, and maybe Messenger
==PAGE:208==
198
B Interview Transcripts
B.1.4
Participant 4
The audio recording of participant 4’s interview unfortunately failed to save and
therefore the researchers relied on the notes taken during the interview to account
for his/her insights.
Researcher: What is your age?
Participant 4: I am 27 years old.
Researcher: What is your gender?
Participant 4: Male
Researcher: What is your nationality?
Participant 4: Bulgarian
Researcher: What is your occupation?
Participant 4: I am a student and I am working as a part-time web developer.
Researcher: What is your marital status?
Participant 4: I am engaged.
Researcher: Describe a day in your life. How does your everyday life look like?
Participant 4: I wake up around 6:00 am then I go to the bathroom and I brush
my teeth. Afterward, I make coffee and breakfast and then I eat my breakfast and
drink my coffee. Around 6:50 I dress up for work and around 7 I leave for work. Until
7:30 I travel (drive) to work.
After I go to work, around 10:00 I go to the stand-up meetings we have every day.
After that, around 12:00 I go to lunch and around 12:30 I come back from lunch and
continue working until 16:00.
I am home around 16:30 and until 17:30 I take some rest and after that, I go to
the gym where I work out until 19:00.
After I get back from the gym, I take a shower and around 20:00 I have dinner.
From 20:00 until 22:30 I spend some time with my fiancee. At 22:30, I brush my
teeth and get ready for bed. 23:00 I normally go to bed.
Researcher: How does the phone play into your everyday life? When is the
phone a central part of your everyday? What are the frame and the context?
Participant 4: When I am in the bathroom, I browse social media. While I
drive to work I listen to Spotify on my phone. During my lunch at work, I check my
messages and emails. - I barely check my phone during work. I am trying to focus
on my tasks. I only keep track to check if my fiancee had messaged me something
important. I listen to Spotify on my way back from work. When I get home and when
I rest during this 1h, I normally browse social media and message friends. (Messenger
==PAGE:209==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
199
Figure B.4: Participant 4 timeline
and Twitter mainly) Then during my workout, I listen to music again from Spotify.
When I go to bed, I normally don’t fall asleep right away, but I browse random stuff,
it depends - sometimes it is social media, sometimes YouTube, read news, etc.
Researcher: Are there any relationships or situations in your everyday life that
promotes your smartphone usage? Why is the phone important in these scenarios?
Participant 4: Receiving emails and messages.
Researcher: Do you consider your relationship to your smartphone similar to a
relationship with a friend/human?
Participant 4: No, I don’t. In no way, I consider my phone as a friend or a
human.
Researcher: Describe the different use scenarios your smartphone is part - Do
you use your phone to check the time?
Participant 4: Yes, I do. I mostly use my phone to check the time. Almost
always.
Researcher: How often do you use your smartphone to make phone calls?
==PAGE:210==
200
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 4: Maybe once a day on average.
Researcher: Do you use your phone when you eat?
Participant 4: Sometimes yes. Mostly when I am alone.
Researcher: Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a noise?
Participant 4: It depends if I am at work, I often completely silent my phone
while working.
Researcher: Do you sleep with your smartphone (turned on) under your pillow
or next to your bed regularly?
Participant 4: My phone is next to me, not under my pillow. The phone is
always on, however, it is disconnected from the network. The sound is on vibration,
so if somebody needs me for something important, it wakes me up.
Researcher: Can you identify any problem areas with regards to your smart-
phone usage - Do you seem to lose track of time when on your smartphone?
Participant 4: Not really.
Researcher: Do you sleep later at night, when on your smartphone?
Participant 4: No, I normally keep track of the time when I am on my phone
and try not to spend more time than normal.
Researcher: Do you feel FOMO? Has your smartphone caused you feelings of
anxiety and/or stress?
Participant 4: Only if it comes down to the people close to me, like my fiancee
or family. And only when it wakes me up in the morning, it makes me feel stressed.
Researcher: Do your eyes hurt after using the smartphone for a longer time?
Participant 4: No, I never had that problem, because I try to keep its brightness
low.
Researcher: Do you feel your use of your smartphone decreases your productivity
at times?
Participant 4: No, because I am always keeping it away when I am doing some-
thing important.
Researcher: Would you be able to live without your smartphone for one day?
Why?
Participant 4: If I am not being able to connect to the network, I would feel
mad - because I am paying and it’s not working and second, the smartphone is useless
without network. I would be fine with not having access to my phone for a day. It
will only bother me if I have to go to an unknown place, where my phone would help
me navigate.
Researcher: What daily screen time would you consider too much?
==PAGE:211==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
201
Participant 4: More than 1,5h a day.
Researcher: What are your expectations in regards to your screen time?
Participant 4: It will probably remain the same. Because I used my phone when
I had to and of course when I had free time. I think that moving the icons actually
made it worse since I had to search for every single application when I needed it.
Researcher: Is your usage lower or higher than expected?
Participant 4: Before challenge - 12h 44m for 7 days, during the challenge - 12h
58m for 7 days
I think that it confirms my theory that I used the same time and even used more
time for finding the applications.
Researcher: What is your opinion on your personal screen time? Are you happy
with the time which you spend on your phone?
Participant 4: I would be happy if I could lower it down with let say 20%. One
thing that it will make me lower it down is having more work to do and another thing
to do is find another hobby that fits my free time.
Researcher: Did the challenge impact your screen time, subconsciously? How
did this challenge make you feel?
Participant 4: I knew that I am being tracked, but to be honest, after the first
couple of days I didn’t care. The first couple of days I tried to spend less time, but
it didn’t really work - I spend the same time. I was happy to do the challenge and
see whether something like this will change the way I use my phone.
Researcher: Which apps did you expect to be the most used on your smart-
phone?
Participant 4: Facebook, Twitter and Messenger
Researcher: Which apps did you, in reality, interact with the most on your
smartphone?
Participant 4: Messenger, Facebook and Twitter. I know where I waste my time
the most. And since I do, it actually makes me feel good, since I can try to limit my
time there.
Researcher: Are the results different from what you expected? How did this
make you feel?
Participant 4: The apps - no. In general, I expected that I spent less time on
my phone (around 10h weekly). I didn’t expect that - I don’t know how do I feel. I
have never tracked my time before, so I guess I would say that I am happier that my
prediction is not that far away.
Researcher: In which contexts and situations, do you use these apps? Why are
they important?
==PAGE:212==
202
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 4: Facebook when I browse for memes mostly; Messenger - when I
want to connect with friends and family. Twitter - for reading sports news.
Researcher: Which sections or features of these apps are your favorites? Why?
How do you interact with them?
Participant 4: The fact that they allow me to connect with the world around
me. I never watch stories. In Twitter, the news always follows up based on the time
they were posted and at some point, you end up hitting the stuff you have already
seen - I really like this feature. I don’t like how on Facebook you always randomly
get some posts.
Researcher: Did the challenge decrease your interaction with your favorite apps?
How did this make you feel?
Participant 4: His time decreased - I don’t think that the challenge caused this.
The only big difference is on Twitter and this might be by the fact that my favorite
team played 2 times during the 1st week.
Researcher: Is there an application that you can not give up? (something that
you need for work)
Participant 4: Messenger - Because this is where I find all the people I need.
90% of the people use messenger.
Researcher: Is there an application that you can, but don’t want to give up?
(like messenger)
Participant 4: Facebook - I don’t like the way it is developed. But most of my
friends are only there, they don’t have Twitter, which is my preferred social media.
Researcher: What are the most important values regarding your smartphone?
Participant 4: It helps me connect with people around me. It also helps me to
stay updated with the world around me.
==PAGE:213==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
203
B.1.5
Participant 5
Researcher: What is your age?
Participant 5: I am 25
Researcher: What is your gender?
Participant 5: Male
Researcher: What is your nationality?
Participant 5: Italian
Researcher: What is your occupation?
Participant 5: I’m student and part-time student worker
Researcher: What is your marital status?
Participant 5: I am single
Researcher: Describe a day in your life - How does your everyday life look like?
Participant 5: I wake up around 8 am. I snooze my alarm and then I have
breakfast around 8:15. After breakfast, I get ready and then I go to work or university.
I get ready for about 30 min. So at 9, I take the bus and I go to DTU. I arrive at
DTU at 9:30. Then I study until noon when I have lunch. Around 13:30 I go back
and study until around 19:00. Then I take the bus again and go back home. Around
19:45 - 20:00 I am home. Usually, I take a shower and make dinner. We usually
don’t order something, but one of my flatmates prepares the dinner. Around 21:00,
I am ready. After dinner, we watch a movie or play on the PlayStation. So around
midnight, I go to bed. I stay on my phone around 10-15 min and then I fall asleep.
I use my phone to wake up. Then I use my phone during breakfast - it is mainly
Instagram and reading news. Then I use the phone on the bus again - again Instagram
and some other news. It is mostly to wake up myself. Then after lunch, I spend some
time on social media and then when I am coming back, I read some news on the bus.
I like to read what is happening around the world. Lately, is about the coronavirus.
After dinner is again social media. I would say, I look at my phone every hour for
about 2-3 minutes. Mainly after dinner, I look at my phone when I prepare to go to
bed. I scroll through social media and read some news.
Researcher: How does the phone play into your everyday life? When is the
phone a central part of your everyday life? What are the frame and the context?
Participant 5: It is probably more after lunch because I need to relax for a little
bit. Also, when I come back, I just scroll through some news. It is relaxing because
I don’t have to think that much, I am just reading.
Researcher: Are there any relationships or situations in your everyday life that
promotes your smartphone usage? Why is the phone important in these scenarios?
==PAGE:214==
204
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.5: Participant 5 timeline
Participant 5: The distance with my family. I would say, I talk once a day with
my family - one day with my father, the next day with my sister. Sometimes, it
happens that I don’t talk with them for days, but mostly it is at least 5 min a day. I
am using Whatsapp, where we have chat groups and we chat there. With my family,
I mostly call them. It is not the phone itself, it is the easiest way to keep in touch. It
is a small thing that you always have in your pocket - you can call, it is simple.
Researcher: Do you consider your relationship to your smartphone similar to a
relationship with a friend/human?
Participant 5: No
Researcher: Describe the different use scenarios your smartphone is part - Do
you use your phone to check the time?
Participant 5: Sometimes but I have a watch
Researcher: How often do you use your smartphone to make phone calls?
Participant 5: Yes, during the day. Mainly during the night, when I am coming
back home. Between 19:00-20:00 I am calling my family, friends or my roommates. I
am calling my family to ask them how they are doing and my roommates to check if I
==PAGE:215==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
205
need to buy something before coming home. I am calling my friends here in Denmark
more often than my family.
Researcher: Do you use your phone when you eat?
Participant 5: No. When I am eating breakfast - yes, because I am alone and I
don’t have anybody to talk to, but during dinner, I normally put it away from me.
Researcher: Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a noise?
Participant 5: It depends if I am doing something and I need to focus - I
don’t. Otherwise - yes. Sometimes, if I start to receive a lot of notifications from
a chat group that doesn’t involve me, I stop looking.
But, for instance, here, I
only have notifications for messages, email and calls. I don’t have notifications for
Instagram, Twitter and Facebook, so I don’t receive notifications from them. I have
never had them because I don’t care if somebody liked my picture or whatever - it is
not important for me.
Researcher: Do you sleep with your smartphone (turned on) under your pillow
or next to your bed regularly?
Participant 5: No, I usually shut it down. Since I am not in a position to be
available at night, this is why I turn it off. If I had to help somebody during the night
or my job needed me - I would have kept it on.
Researcher: Can you identify any problem areas with regards to your smart-
phone usage - Do you seem to lose track of time when on your smartphone?
Participant 5: No. Maybe I am not aware, but I don’t feel like I have to track
my time.
Researcher: Do you sleep later at night, when on your smartphone?
Participant 5: Yes, this might happen, but I don’t really care. I have this kind
of routine to use it for 10 mins. I usually don’t exceed these 10 minutes.
Researcher: Do you feel FOMO? Has your smartphone caused you feelings of
anxiety and/or stress?
Participant 5: No, I don’t think so. I don’t think it is related to the phone.
Researcher: Do your eyes hurt after using the smartphone for a longer time?
Participant 5: No
Researcher: Do you feel your use of your smartphone decreases your productivity
at times?
Participant 5: Yes, sometimes. Mainly when I am working on something that
is a bit boring and when I have my phone, it is very easy to get distracted.
Researcher: Would you be able to live without your smartphone for one day?
Why?
==PAGE:216==
206
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 5: Yes, for one day yes. I use my phone for work, so if there was
an alternative, I could live without the phone for 1-2 weeks. I don’t see a problem. I
think Instagram is something that I can live without it. I like to see photos of what
other people post a take a break. I can’t work without a break, I am not productive
without a break - if there is an alternative - like sometimes I make a tea and I am
not looking into Instagram. (or talking with somebody else)
Researcher: What daily screen time would you consider too much?
Participant 5: For all applications? I would say too much is above 1h 45 min -
2h. I guess, it also depends on what you mean by active time, because if you have a
call.
Researcher: What are your expectations in regards to your screen time?
Participant 5: On average I would say 1h 30 min.
Researcher: Is your usage lower or higher than expected?
Researcher: It is 2h and 31min. It is higher than expected.
Researcher: What is your opinion on your personal screen time? Describe your
emotions:
Participant 5: It is not fear, not even guilt - I am fine with myself. Maybe, I
should consider spending less time on this and do more valuable things. I am not
really surprised, but it makes me reflect, for sure.
Researcher: Which apps did you expect to be the most used on your smart-
phone?
Participant 5: Mainly Instagram, because it is a social network I prefer. When
I have 2 minutes free, I open Instagram. I like seeing pictures quickly.
Researcher: Which apps did you, in reality, interact with the most on your
smartphone?
Participant 5: Instagram, Facebook, Chrome, Messenger, Twitter, Whatsapp,
Outlook
Researcher: Are the results different from what you expected? How did this
make you feel?
Participant 5: Facebook is surprising - 33mins for Facebook, I would never have
said it, because I don’t even like Facebook. Chrome, I am not surprised, because I
read the news there. Messenger and Whatsapp I use for messages.
Researcher: In which contexts and situations, do you use these apps? Why are
they important?
Participant 5: I use Outlook for work and university and it is only for that. I
use Chrome and Twitter to check the news. I use them because on Twitter there
are journalists that I follow and I like to read discussions, which sometimes I find
==PAGE:217==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
207
interesting. Chrome, Just use a browser but is basically where I search all my news.
I use Messenger because everybody uses it here in DK, I actually didn’t use it 2 years
ago before moving and WhatsApp because back home everybody uses it. Facebook, I
am not sure, because I don’t really like it. I am not sure how I spend my time there.
Researcher: Which sections or features of these apps are your favorites? Why?
How do you interact with them?
Participant 5: Instagram: I like photos, there are only pictures so there’s not
the garbage that you find on Facebook of links and advertisement; it is simple; mostly
the feed and stories - mainly interested in what my friends are doing but in the last 2
months started using explore →started randomly because I saw something interesting
and then I started using more
Chrome is the one I need the most tho, to find something, to learn about some-
thing, to read news about coronavirus
Researcher: Is there an application that you can not give up? (something that
you need for work)
Participant 5: I would say phone calls to make phone and Whatsapp so I can
keep in touch with people.
The emails because of work and school.
Chrome for
reading news. These are also the ones that I have notifications turned on for.
Researcher: Is there an application that you can, but don’t want to give up?
(like messenger)
Participant 5: Probably Instagram. I like it, so I prefer to do that. But Facebook
wouldn’t make a lot of difference.
Researcher: Which one of the challenges is the most difficult to follow?
Participant 5: App positioning →I only have one page so it wouldn’t make
sense cause I don’t have a lot of pages to scroll Remove notifications →already don’t
have them Put grayscale →I wouldn’t keep my phone grayscale to reduce my time
on social media; only if it was only on the apps instead of the whole interface App
limit →the hardest cause the others you still have access
==PAGE:218==
208
B Interview Transcripts
B.1.6
Participant 6
Researcher: Hi. So first of all, can I record this interview?
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: okay? No, it’s not filmed. It’s just recorded through my phone.
Participant 6: Okay cool.
Researcher: Yes. It’s just so my my teammate also can hear what’s happening.
Okay, so this project is about smartphone addiction and we have decided to focus
on university students and how we’re trying to tackle this on is trying to understand
how people use their smartphone in their everyday life and see which problem areas
that could potentially be added after that focus on one of them. So it’s going to be
very general questions, and this is a safe space. And of course we have these emotion
cars to assist you in case you don’t have the words to describe an emotion. So first
of all, can you tell me your full name, you don’t need to say the middle names.
Participant 6:...
Great. What is your age?
Participant 6: 27?
Researcher: Which gender? Do you identify yourself with?
Participant 6: Female
Researcher: What is your nationality?
Participant 6: Mexican.
Researcher: What is your occupation?
Participant 6: Currently, I’m a student and master in computer science and a
student worker, as a software developer in Microsoft.
Researcher: What is your marital marital status?
Participant 6: Single
Researcher: Okay. Cool. Those are the general of questions. These are just used
to see, in case we find some patterns later on. We just want to see if it’s connected to
any of these but it’s not anything that we want to look at in these questions. Okay,
so I’m going to ask you first to describe a day in your life, sir, from when you wake up,
for example, to when you sleep, so what time do you wake up for instance? And just
so you know, I’m drawing out your chart here. So I’m trying to like visualize it and
then try to describe your day without talking about the phone and then afterwards
we’re going to see how the phone plays into your everyday. Okay?
Participant 6: okay. If it’s mainly my week, it’s divided in three different things.
Like it’s the days I’m going to university, the days I’m working and weekends.
==PAGE:219==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
209
Figure B.6: Participant 6 timeline
Researcher: okay, maybe talk about either school or work day.
Participant 6: Okay. In school days, I’m waking up around eight?
Researcher: Yeah,
Participant 6: taking a shower, preparing my things and going to university.
Researcher: Okay, so just a step back you wake up at 8am.
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: Okay. And just like take it more step by step when you wake up
afterwards, what do you do?
Participant 6: Take a shower.
Researcher: Okay and when from when you wake up so what time approximately
do you start taking the shower?
Participant 6: I normally prepare my things and then take the shower.
Researcher: So 8.10 you start your shower?
Participant 6: Yes.
==PAGE:220==
210
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Okay.Then what do you do afterwards? How long do you take a
shower for?
Participant 6: 15 minutes.
Researcher: Okay. And so around 8.30 you are out of the shower?
Participant 6: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay, what do you do then?
Participant 6: I prefer I prepare something like food to take to university.
Researcher: Okay, and how long do you do that for?
Participant 6: I think like 15 minutes and while I’m preparing that I’m also
like putting makeup, brushing my hair. Getting ready in general, but I was like, I’m
getting ready while I’m cooking.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 6: So at 950 I’m ready to go out of my room.
Researcher: Okay, so you don’t eat breakfast.
Participant 6: No, I eat it in the university.
Researcher: Okay, so at 950 you’re done with all of these tasks.
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: So 9.50 you go out?
Participant 6: 8.50
Researcher: ’Ready to go out’. Cool. And then how long does it take you to go
to school?
Participant 6: 10 minutes so at 9am, I’m at university.
Researcher: Cool. And then?
Participant 6: and I meet with my other friend that we’re doing the master
thesis. We approximately start like talking and what are we going to do today and
what we did before and then we set up activities what she’s going to do and what
I’m going to do and then we start working on that until 11.20
Researcher: Okay, okay.
Participant 6: Then from 1120 to like 30 minutes like 1150 or 12 we have brunch
at uni.
Researcher: Okay. So you skip, skip breakfast and you have just brunch from
11.20?
Participant 6: Yeah!
Researcher: okay.
==PAGE:221==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
211
Participant 6: And then from 1pm to 2pm, I mean from 12 to 2pm, we continue
working in the thesis.
Researcher: 12 to 2pm?
Participant 6: Yeah. And then we have a kind of break and we go like with
more friends from uni, we go and play ping pong.
Researcher: Okay, that’s from what time to what time?
Participant 6: From 2pm to 3pm.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 6: Then 3pm to 5pm come back to continue with the thesis. and
then 17 to.. well at 17 we go and change for going to the gym. And, like 5.30pm
we’re starting exercise. 7pm. Yeah, until 7pm and then at 7pm I come back here to
my room.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 6: Oh, I totally forgot I eat something in the middle, like at 3pm,
approximately after 3pm I eat something like I got the food and I eat something that
I got
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 6: And then when I arrived here I’m preparing something to eat,
like dinner and then lately I have not been productive so I have been watching Netflix.
Researcher: Okay, so from how long do you eat for and how long do you cook
for?
Participant 6: Like I finish uni at 7pm, pm I’m in my room. 7.30-7.40pm I’m
preparing something and I’m eating and then at 8pm, I’m done
Researcher: okay, so from 8pm till what time do you watch Netflix?
Participant 6: I mainly waste my time from eight till 11
Researcher: did you say waste your time?
Participant 6: I know I’m wasting my time because I’m not doing anything.
Researcher: Okay, so you watch Netflix. Yeah.
Participant 6: Netflix, on social media..
Researcher: Then you’re on social media too, between 8pm and 11pm.
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: Okay, and then what time do you like go.. when do you go get
ready to sleep?
Participant 6: Around 11.30
==PAGE:222==
212
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Okay, so 11.30 you’re ready to sleep. Okay. And so you sleep at
what time? 11.30?
Participant 6: I go to bed 11.30 but I end up like sleeping at 12pm -12.30pm
Researcher: Why?
Participant 6: Because after being in a phone for a long time, I just cannot sleep
like my sleep goes away and then I cannot sleep.
Researcher: So you sleep around midnight 30 - midnight 40?
Participant 6: Yes
Researcher: And so for one hour you are on your phone?
Participant 6: No. Without anything.
Researcher: Oh Okay. Cool, thank you, now we’re gonna go throughout this
day, but we’re gonna talk about where the phone plays in.
[random conversation]
Okay, cool. So do you use an alarm on your phone to wake up?
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: Okay.And so walk me through when do you use your phone? When
you take a shower, do you listen to music? When you?
Participant 6: Yeah, I try to not reply to messages and everything until later.
So I wake up, and then I just put music in my phone and then start listen to music
until I leave my room, until 8.50
Researcher: Okay, um, so you just listen to music throughout that time.
And then you go to school you go with bike, I assume.
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: Yeah. So you don’t use your phone?
Participant 6: No, no. It’s such a short distance.
Researcher: So you study from 9am till 1120 do you check your phone at that
time?
Participant 6: Yeah, normally when we started meeting we.. I.. like maybe
my friends late or something then I start checking my messages and replying to the
messages and you know, and then sometimes my brother calls me around 930 or Yeah,
around 9.30 and we do like a quick video call for 5 to 10 minutes with my niece
Researcher: who is from Australia, right?
Participant 6: Yep.
Researcher: I’m asking.. Cool. And then when you have brunch at university,
==PAGE:223==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
213
do you use your phone then?
Participant 6: Just a little bit to tell the others if they want to join.. and not
normally.
Researcher: Okay and so you work from 12 to 14 on your thesis,ou don’t use
your phone there or?
Participant 6: no, if I have to reply messages in messenger, then I use a computer
Researcher: okay
Participant 6: And then is the same until I think maybe five in the gym. If I’m
like doing cardio I use my phone. I download the app that you said so I am doing
some cardio exercises at the gym with my phone
Researcher: Yeah?
Participant 6: yeah. And then coming back here does when I use either the
computer watch netflix, while using my phone and yeah, until 1130 and then I some-
times I put some, like meditation things to fall asleep, like not looking at the phone,
but just like hearing the sound
Researcher: and so you know, from Eight to 11 you’re either watching Netflix,
either on your phone - what do you do on your phone do just go on social media?
Participant 6: Yes, maybe that or I answer the messages from my family because
at that time they were like, more active.
Researcher: Okay, cool.
Okay, so when is the phone essential part of your
everyday life? So when when is it very important for you to have your phone
Participant 6: maybe in the morning like around when I’m calling with my, with
my brother or replying to my family but replying to my family can be like any time
in the morning
Researcher: So you also reply your family in the morning.
So, would you say that your family promotes your smartphone usage? What do
you would you say that your relationship with your family because you’re living in
different countries promotes your usage of the phone?
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: And do you think there’s other relationships or situations in your
everyday life that promotes your smartphone usage?
Participant 6: Yeah, like friends, like friends from uni that we are meeting in
the uni or we’re open to something where I’m talking with, like you or friends from
outside of uni. When I’m arranging like plans
Researcher: Okay, so mainly to schedule meetings, arranging plans?
Participant 6: And normal talking, like just daily life, questions with friends,
==PAGE:224==
214
B Interview Transcripts
not only.. okay, but yeah, it’s relationship okay?
Researcher: And why is it for...why is your phone important in these scenarios
Participant 6: just to be in contact with other people.
Researcher: And for example, you said friends from university or like people
like us, but you also see us at work or school. Why do you feel like the phone plays
an extra role in making the relationship? Orbe in contact.
Participant 6: For instance, like we’re in the university and there are different
friends and then we are like in different parts of the university. So sometimes we are
like, okay, let’s meet in the canteen to have lunch together. And then everybody joins.
Or, for instance, like when you and I go to work, and then we arrange like meeting
lunch or meeting to take coffee or going out together or some kind of things-
Researcher: Yes. Okay. And do you consider your relationship to your smart-
phone similar to a relationship with a friend or human? In a sense where like, after
spending some time if you’re feeling lonely, if Do you feel like you’re socialized a bit
after spending some time with your phone?
Participant 6: Yeah, I feel like if I’m bored, I use my phone. If I want to say
something to my friends or use my phone, if I want to learn something, I use my
phone.
Researcher: Okay.Um, we talked a little bit about your family because you know,
they live far away so you use it to keep in contact with them. Right?
Participant 6: Yes, yes.
Researcher: So would you think that your smartphone usage would decrease if
you were living in the same country as your family? Because...
Participant 6: I think it would increase for my parents.
Researcher: It would decrease for your parents?
Participant 6: For my parents.
Researcher: okay.Because Do you also contact a lot your friends from Mexico?
Participant 6: Not so much lately. But it’s something that I keep in touch.
Researcher: So you think you smartphone usage would always be, would still be
high, even if you lived in the same country as your family?
Participant 6: Yeah, because also like my, my brother doesn’t live in the same
country, and my sister doesn’t live in the same city.
Researcher: But imagine that you all lived in the same country. All of you lived
in Mexico. Imagine all of you lived in Denmark, like your brother, your sister, your
parents. In that scenario, do you think your smartphone usage would decrease?
Participant 6: I think it will decrease. Yes.
==PAGE:225==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
215
Researcher: okay. Now I’m gonna walk you through some use scenarios and just
say if it’s valid for you or not. So do you use your phone to check the time?
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: Okay.How often do you use your smartphone to make phone calls.
Participant 6: I normally do one phone call for my father My sister or another
for my sister, another for my mother. There are three phone calls every week for one
hour each.
Researcher: Three calls every week for one hour each. Yes.
Participant 6: And with my mother and sister is like a video call.
Researcher: So mother and sister video calls
Participant 6: Sunday evenings
Researcher: What?
Participant 6: on Sundays, evenings
Researcher: and Sunday evening and your dad is just a normal...
Participant 6: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. So you don’t call them every day.
Participant 6: Not every day but my brother is the one that I’m like calling
more often, but it’s like five minutes. 10 minutes call and it’s just like to see the faces
to each other mainly.That’s it. But apart from them I don’t usually call other people.
It’s mostly messages.
Researcher: Okay. Do you use your phone when you eat?
Participant 6: No.
Researcher: Do you you do. Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a
noise so as soon as you get a notification
Participant 6: I turn off the notifications like the sound.
Normally, I have
months without the sound. But I.. after some time. I’m just like, checking my phone
if I get any messages. I get the text there in the phone stay in it, but it doesn’t make
any sounds.
Researcher: Would you check it as soon as you see it? As soon as you see there’s
a notification, do you check your phone or you just ignore it. Or does it depend?
Participant 6: It depends. Like if I’m making plans I immediately check it and
try to answer in the moment. If I’m just like doing some other things I just leave it
there and reply after.
Researcher: Okay. And so when you go to sleep to sleep with your smartphone
turned on and do you sleep...
==PAGE:226==
216
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: do you sleep with it under your pillow or next to your bed
Participant 6: next to my bed. Sometimes I turn off the Wi Fi.
Researcher: Why?
Participant 6: Because some people when they call they make, like noise because
sometimes I just want to sleep more. Don’t get distracted to anything.
Because sometimes like family is calling me but then like sleeping.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 6: And that just wakes me up.
Researcher: Okay. But Then why’d you keep it turned on?
Participant 6: Because takes much time. Because I use the alarm to wake me
up. I use the audio thing meditation to sleep. And also it takes too much time to
turn it on and turn it off every day. And I always think like, if there’s an emergency
in some case, they will call me directly to my number.
Researcher: Yeah. Okay, now I’m going to talk about some different problem
errors with regards to smartphone usage. And then you say if it’s valid for you or
not. Do you seem to lose track of time when you’re on your smartphone.
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: How much would you say for example, if you spend one hour how,
like, how.. Plese describe the feeling and how it appears to you? Because is it just a
little bit of losing track? Or is it like, Oh, you ended up spending one hour on your
phone? And then actually, you were only supposed to spend five minutes? Isn’t that
kind of losing track?
Participant 6: Yeah, I feel like lately. It’s like okay, I’m just going to watch a
video or because I’m lazy. I’m like scrolling and Facebook videos, and there’s like
joke comedy stand ups and stuff. And I’m just like, oh, five minutes and then I end
up Like one hour.
Researcher: And how come do you do.. would.. Why do you think this is like
this?
Participant 6: I feel like I need to study a lot of things and I’m just procrasti-
nating those things and I’m just doing something that it’s not that and it’s funnier,
and it’s less boring.
Researcher: So is it because you have a lot of responsibilities right now that you
feel like you would rather do something fun?
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: And why are.. Why are you? Why do you feel you have too many
==PAGE:227==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
217
responsibilities? Is it because you have too much to do or is it because you’re wanting
to do better or what is why do you feel troubled by your responsibilities? Is it because
you want to do better at them? Like, is there a pressure to do better? Or is it just a
pressure to finish them? Or is it? Is it something else, variables, that makes you feel
Oh, I want to procrastinate.
Participant 6: It’s just like finding a job and getting ready for interviews and
stuff is not like a nice thing to do. And then I’m just making something that it’s less
distressing.
Researcher: Yeah. I understand. Um, do you sleep later at night when you are
on your smartphone.
Participant 6: Yes
Researcher: how much later?
Participant 6: How much time?
Researcher: Yeah, like, how much time difference does it make if you sleep later
If you’re on your smartphone I mean.
Participant 6: I think like two more hours.
Researcher: Two more hours?
Participant 6: lately it has been horrible.
Because if I’m in my phone before going to sleep then I cannot sleep after. So it’s
like being in my phone and then not being able to sleep.
Researcher: Okay. Why can’t you sleep if you’ve been on your phone?
Participant 6: it’s just, I don’t know if it’s the blue light or something and it’s
just like changing the patterns of sleeping.
[random conversations]
Researcher: Sorry, I’m just gonna pause. So you said maybe the blue light makes
you feel less sleepy after spending time with it so you think it’s like the radiation
maybe?
Participant 6: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay, that’s bad or I feel bad. Do you feel fear of missing out?
Participant 6: What do you mean?
Researcher: So for example, I’m going to give you different scenarios because
it’s different for every person. But so for example, some people if you have moved
abroad, so do you feel fear of missing out because their friends are catching up back
home and you’re in a different country, or it could be like when your friends from
university go to an event and you couldn’t go because you have to do a homework,
and you see the pictures afterwards and you feel like, Oh, I should have been there.
==PAGE:228==
218
B Interview Transcripts
Or it could be anything from like fear of missing out from social aspect. And usually
it’s not just oh, I’m sad, but it’s like something a little bit more anxious or stressful,
like it’s a little bit stronger feeling
Participant 6: Yeah, yeah, sometimes I feel like that because I haven’t done like
the things and it’s like okay then I cannot go there because I thought I have waste
my time and my phone or in netflix or those things and then I felt need to finish these
things and then I cannot go to this event because I need to finish this and I didn’t
do that I felt like missed out of consequence. Yeah.
Researcher: And when when do you feel you missed out because you watch
pictures afterwards? on your smartphone or what? What? How? Why do you feel
you missed out? Is it because you knew you were gonna go? Or was it because you
saw afterwards it was fun and you’re like, Oh, I should have been there?
Participant 6: No, it’s because I’m like, using my phone, then wasting my time
in not doing the things I need to do. And then I need to do the thing. And because
I need to do the things I cannot go to those events.
Researcher: Okay, but then when do you think it’s a shame?
Is it because
afterwards you’d see pictures of the venue? You’re like, Oh, it looks so much fun, but
I wasted my time so I couldn’t go or is it because you think, oh, I’ve wasted my time
so I can’t go so it’s a shame. Is it because you can’t go or is it because you see that
was fun afterwards?
Participant 6: Because I see that it’s fun afterwards
Researcher: Do you feel feelings of anxiety and/or stressed because of you phone?
Participant 6: anxiety and stress? No.
Researcher: No because. For example, some people get stressed out by notifica-
tions, or I personally feel stressed out if I get too many notifications or if Some people
feel anxious if they’re you know, because FOMO is different for every person some
people get so much fear of missing out then they get anxious. Like, oh, this is really
bad. So do you feel any of these?
Participant 6: Maybe sometimes I feel anxious to just to check my phone if I
receive something.
Researcher: Okay,and why do you feel anxious?
Participant 6: Just like I don’t have I don’t... if I don’t have my phone is like,
Oh, I need to go and get my phone and see if I receive anything. I don’t know. It’s
that feeling of missing something that you need to check?
Researcher: But what are you afraid of missing?
Participant 6: I don’t know. I guess I just got so used to it to have the phone
next to me and just check It is something that I’m doing in consensus.. inconsistent..
Researcher: subconsciously?
==PAGE:229==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
219
Participant 6: without yeah without thinking
Researcher: but for example if we talk about like are you afraid of for example
missing the news, missing messages or missing family like what what is it that links
you to check it? So let’s say that you check your phone What do you first check on
your phone when you check your phone?
Participant 6: The notifications from messenger or Whatsapp? Yeah, like con-
tact with friends and family.
Researcher: And would you say it is friends and family from here in Denmark
or is it from abroad or internationally?
Participant 6: Ah, family, not in Denmark and friends mostly in Denmark right
now and some friends from back in Mexico
Researcher: hmm Is it because you’re out of your comfort zone here? And you
feel like you need to stay in contact? You need like a human contact or is it just
because it’s become a habit?
Participant 6: I think because it becomes a habit.
Researcher: Okay, but so okay. Let’s talk about it again like there’s another
question about this later. So do your eyes hurt after using the smartphone for a
longer time?
Participant 6: Do I what?
Researcher: ...your eyes hurt after using the smartphone for a longer time?
Participant 6: That’s why.. I haven’t thought so. I think it’s I feel it’s normal.
Researcher: You think it’s normal
Participant 6: yeah
Researcher: no, I’m just asking
Participant 6: yeah maybe I haven’t think about how it probably affects my
eyes because I’m only on the computer I’m with my glasses, but in my phone I’m
without them. So maybe I just got used to the feeling and I’m not even noticing.
Researcher: Yeah. Do you feel your use of smartphone decreases your produc-
tivity at times? you already mentioned it but just so yeah.
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: Would you be able to live without your smartphone for one day?
Participant 6: Ah, I will just tell my family before that and then that’s it. I
will feel very, very weird, but I think I can do it
Researcher: Why would you find it very weird?
Participant 6: it’s just like not using the computer it just like feels so normal
==PAGE:230==
220
B Interview Transcripts
to everyday.
Researcher: The smartphone?
Participant 6: Yeah, I mean like it’s the same like with the computer
Researcher: and which part of not using it would be the strangest for you. Out
of all the things that you do on your smartphone what will be the hardest for you to
not do if you were to live out without your smartphone for one day? Is it the human?
Is it the contact with your family? Is it the arrange meetings what is the hardest for
you if to live without the smartphone?
Participant 6: I think I will get bored. And it will be like social media that
I’m just.. maybe it’s.. as far as like, being in contact with other people..And also, it
helps not to get bored by watching videos, social media and stuff. So otherwise
Researcher: So you think that the hardest to not get bored and also the human
contact?
Participant 6: Yeah, and also like the messages and those kind of things.
Researcher: Yeah, I see. Okay, now we’re going to discuss your screen time. So
what daily screen time would you consider too much?
Participant 6: Say two hours is too much.
Researcher: Okay, what are your expectations in regards to your own screen-
time?
Participant 6: Oh, I don’t remember what was it?
Researcher: no no you don’t don’t check it just what do you what do you want
it to be?
Participant 6: Oh, I want to change it to?
Researcher: Yeah or really what do you think your screen time should be?
Participant 6: If I should be productive it should be one hour maximum
Researcher: of your entire smartphone?
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: Including talks messages. Okay. Just making sure did me. So not
social media but the phone Okay,
Participant 6: Yeah.
Researcher: Is you..Okay, now check your usage.
Participant 6: It must have been three hours - four hours. The one that I sent
you or the current one?
Researcher: The current one is fine. How much is it?
==PAGE:231==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
221
Participant 6: I’m checking. It’s charging. Today is one hour 44 minutes.
Researcher: What about yesterday?
Participant 6: Yesterday was two hours 58 minutes.
Researcher: 2 hours 58. Okay, so it’s higher than expected.
Are you surprised by the screentime?
Participant 6: Usage time?
Researcher: Yeah. Are you surprised by it or what are your feeling about it?
Participant 6: I feel like lately I have been too much in my phone.
Researcher: So you’re unhappy with it?
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: Are you disappointed? Do you feel guilty?
Participant 6: Yes. I feel, yeah..
Researcher: Which one? number two?
Participant 6: Yeah, guilt.
Researcher: Okay.So you did the challenge, right. Did you see any difference
between you screentime in the beginning? The average screen time in the beginning
the first week before you did the challenge between and week when you had the
challenge. Did you see any difference?
Participant 6: No, it was the same. It was Yeah, it was the one that I need to
change the..
Researcher: app positions
Participant 6: Yeah, yeah, the app positions, yeah. No.
Researcher: It was the same or did it decrease?
Participant 6: It was the same.
Researcher: Okay, so it didn’t change anything.
Participant 6: Yeah.
Researcher: How did this challenge make you feel?
How did this challenge make you feel? The challenge.. How did it make you feel?
Participant 6: Like not nothing in general.
Researcher: So it wasn’t hard.
Participant 6: No. Like changes in the position did not make me not using it.
Researcher: Okay. And how come? Is it just because you already knew where
==PAGE:232==
222
B Interview Transcripts
they were, so it was easy for you to...
Participant 6: Yeah.
Researcher: And did you quickly...because after the challenge, did you change
it back to where it was?
Participant 6: No.
Researcher: Okay, so you just got used to the new position.
Participant 6: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. Did you hide them?
Participant 6: I put like two or three like, screens after. And at the beginning
it was just like, Oh, it’s not been where it used to be this, it’s in the new one and
then after one day I just got used to it
Researcher: Okay, now let’s talk about the apps. Which apps Did you expect
to be the most used on your smartphone?
Participant 6: Facebook
Researcher: And?
Participant 6: and whatsapp
Researcher: Okay, and when you say Facebook, do you mean also messenger
Yeah,
Participant 6: but the thing is I use more Facebook than Messenger.
Researcher: Okay, so Facebook number one, number two would be what?
Participant 6: Whatsapp and then messenger.
Researcher: Okay. Cool. So this is what you expect and in reality are.. like if
you look at the app at the screen time, or because it did you send me the screen time
after the challenge?
Participant 6: Yep.
Researcher: Okay. Did you send it to me on Facebook?
Yes, yes. And you didn’t send me the app, so Oh, no, it is so WhatsApp is the
most used. And then Facebook. And then what is this? Experience Home?
Participant 6: I don’t know what’s that? Doesn’t say right, like I tried to click
on it. It’s...
Researcher: So it was Whatsapp, Facebook, and then more but what is more?
Participant 6: The app doesn’t say
Researcher: but LinkedIn is up there? Okay, so the the results are different
from what you expect them, a little bit.
==PAGE:233==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
223
Participant 6: Yeah. I’m just trying to check the ones of this week.
Researcher: How did this make you feel to see that you’re using... so WhatsApp
is the one that you use the most. How does that make you feel? Is it not shocking?
Participant 6: Not shocking.
Researcher: But for example, LinkedIn is very used, but you didn’t mention it.
Participant 6: No I think I just use it that day and then that’s why it show it
but I haven’t been using it much. If you check the ones today. Like I haven’t used it
in three days - four days But it is there because I checked it on Sunday
Researcher: and when you look at these apps if you were to choose the emotion
cards which emotion card emotion do you feel about these apps being the most popular
apps in your phone?
Participant 6: What emotion
Researcher: Yeah, like how does it make you feel to see that the most use apps
on your phone is whasaap Facebook? And this.. the one that I don’t know what is
Participant 6: it says more and I cannot check what is more for them. anyhow
I think WhatsApp it’s fine.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 6: Doesn’t make me feel bad because mainly WhatsApp, I use it for
my family. Facebook makes me feel guilty because I’m not being productive and just
wasting my time there. And then more one I guess just wasting more time guilty
Researcher: Okay, in which context and situation do you use these apps? So in
which context do you use Facebook? in which context do you whatsapp and which
context do you? Yeah, let’s just focus on WhatsApp and and Facebook for now.
Participant 6: Okay. What do you mean context like.. I don’t know.. work,
after some time I just take my phone and check my messages
Researcher: But when do you use it the most? When do you use it the most.
Participant 6: In the evening. Normally I try to not use it much when I’m with
people, when I’m eating. And that’s it. Otherwise I can use it.
Researcher: So when you’re alone you usually use it
Participant 6: yeah.Most of the time, when i am alone
Researcher: so if you are with people, you don’t really use Facebook a lot?
Participant 6: When I’m with?
Researcher: when you are with people
Participant 6: yeah, I will use it a little bit and then if it’s something urgent, I
reply in the moment, but most of the time I’m not.
==PAGE:234==
224
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: But then if you were watching something super interesting on Net-
flix, do you still use Facebook a lot?
Participant 6: No.
Researcher: Okay. What about whatsapp?
Participant 6: No. Unless it’s something urgent or someone is calling me other-
wise I will just wait.
Researcher: So you mostly use it if you receive calls
Participant 6: If I’m watching something interesting, very interesting in Netflix,
and someone calls me then I will pause it and then I will reply that or answer it
Researcher: But how do you use whatsapp?
Participant 6: messages? Or is it something like a movie that I need to pay
attention all the time? I don’t use my phone and I just put it apart.
Researcher: But do you.. when do you use the whatsapp mostly?
Participant 6: In the evenings
Researcher: In the evenings, mostly?
Participant 6: No, it’s like also in the morning, because it’s when I get all the
messages from my family. And maybe in the evenings, replying like how was your
day or making conversation.
Researcher: And you mainly use messages and calls?
Participant 6: Yes
Researcher: So the sections or features in the app you use mostly in WhatsApp,
it’s mainly messages, mainly messages, but also calls especially for your brother
Participant 6: and video calls.
Researcher: And for Facebook, you mainly go on Facebook video, or do you go
on to feed a lot?
Participant 6: No, video.
Researcher: Facebook videos so to watch funny content but then what is the
difference between.. Do you know the apps such as YouTube and tik tok? They also
have funny content.
Participant 6: Yeah, but I feel like I’m going to... It takes more time for me. I
used to watch a lot of videos in YouTube and stuff but it just takes more than two
hours so that’s why I’m not using them anymore
Researcher: okay, so just checking your screen time from before the challenge
and after the challenge so after the challenge it was tree hour and 20 minutes and
before the challenge it was.. I don’t know, I need to do the average
==PAGE:235==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
225
Participant 6: okay. I think it was like five hours or something too much. And
it was mainly because it was a longer calls with my family
Researcher: Yeah,But before you spend two hours per day approximately and
after that you spend more time after the challenge. So the challenge increased your
time.
Participant 6: I will say like it was not because of the challenge. I’ll just say
that I’m spending more and more time every day with my phone in general
Researcher: and why are you spending more time with your phone?
Participant 6: Because I don’t want to study
Researcher: but you you like less to study now or is it because you don’t like
what you’re doing right now with your studies?
Participant 6: No, it’s because I need to prepare for the interviews and stuff and
that’s something that it’s not motivating me and it should. That’s the only thing,
not for studies and/or work, I think that’s still the same
Researcher: so that you demotivated by your, the pressure to prepare for inter-
views.
Participant 6: Yeah
Researcher: And why are you pressured by preparing for interview?
Participant 6: Because I should get something, I should get a job.
Researcher: But are you afraid of failing? Is that why you are
demotivated by the pressure to prepare?
Participant 6: I think so there’s like a lot of things. I should get into it.
Researcher: What do you mean?
Participant 6: It’s like not a nice timing for interviews. And then it’s like, I
need to prepare for interviews and jobs. And then it’s like, Okay, I need to check
which jobs I like, and then I’m checking jobs and it’s like, I’m not fully interested in
the jobs. And then the one that i want they ask for other things that I don’t have.
And then I’m not even like PhDs or something that is not something that I can get.
And then I’m just like procrastinating and not been ready for that.
Researcher: Okay, so you’re unsatisfied with your job process in general.
Participant 6: Yeah
Researcher: So are you afraid of not finding the job that you like?
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: So that’s why you’re procrastinating
Participant 6: Yeah and then I feel like if I don’t get a job, then I can hear then
==PAGE:236==
226
B Interview Transcripts
I should move to another country. And then I don’t know which other country and
then all that process thing.
Researcher: so it’s kind of like a vicious cycle, like you don’t find any jobs and
then you’re not really motivated. And if you don’t find a job, you should move but
you don’t know we’re so it’s like go into this loophole and then instead of thinking
about it, you just go on Facebook videos. Okay? Understand?
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: Okay, is there an application that you cannot give off no matter
what something that you need for work or something that’s very necessary in everyday
life that you would never be able to give up?
Participant 6: I think whatsapp at the moment
Researcher: why?
Participant 6: Because otherwise I will lose contact with my family.
Researcher: Okay. And is there an application that you can But don’t want to
give up.
Participant 6: Yeah. the other ones,
Researcher: So all the other ones, all your other applications
Participant 6: I think the ones that I am wasting most time.. Facebook
I normally delete the app and then coming back sometimes,
Researcher: sometimes you delete it?
Participant 6: that that’s why I don’t have Instagram on my phone. I don’t
have the app because I was wasting too much time.
Researcher: But then you redownloaded it?
Participant 6: Yes.
Researcher: Okay. I was just making sure.
Participant 6: But I will delete it again.
Researcher: [random conversations]
Cool, done, thank you so much. I’m gonna stop that.
==PAGE:237==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
227
B.1.7
Participant 7
The audio recording of participant 7’s interview unfortunately failed to save and
therefore the researchers relied on the notes taken during the interview to account
for his/her insights.
Researcher: What is your age?
Participant 7: I am 26.
Researcher: What is your gender?
Participant 7: Male
Researcher: What is your nationality?
Participant 7: Bulgarian
Researcher: What is your occupation?
Participant 7: I am a student and a part-time employee.
Researcher: What is your marital status?
Participant 7: I am in a relationship.
Researcher: Do you consider your relationship to your smartphone similar to a
relationship with a friend/human?
Participant 7: No, I have never.
Researcher: Describe the different use scenarios your smartphone is part - Do
you use your phone to check the time?
Participant 7: No. I don’t usually check the time. I don’t care. That’s why I
am always late.
Researcher: How often do you use your smartphone to make phone calls?
Participant 7: Around 4-6 times a day.
Researcher: Do you use your phone when you eat?
Participant 7: No. Even not if I am alone.
Researcher: Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a noise?
Participant 7: No.
Researcher: Do you sleep with your smartphone (turned on) under your pillow
or next to your bed regularly?
Participant 7: My phone is next to me, but the internet is not on. The reason
why is next to me is so I can hear my alarm in the morning.
Researcher: Can you identify any problem areas with regards to your smart-
==PAGE:238==
228
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.7: Participant 7 timeline
phone usage - Do you seem to lose track of time when on your smartphone?
Participant 7: Not really.
Researcher: Do you sleep later at night, when on your smartphone?
Participant 7: No.
Researcher: Do you feel FOMO? Has your smartphone caused you feelings of
anxiety and/or stress?
Participant 7: I am not feeling like missing something. And no, I have not. I
am not feeling stressed. I don’t care much about my interaction with the phone.
Researcher: Do your eyes hurt after using the smartphone for a longer time?
Participant 7: No, I don’t think so.
Researcher: Do you feel your use of your smartphone decreases your productivity
at times?
Participant 7: Yes and no. For work I use it and it makes me productive, but
during the weekend I use it to watch different kinds of stuff and I can’t start doing
some other things, which are more important for example.
==PAGE:239==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
229
Researcher: Would you be able to live without your smartphone for one day?
Why?
Participant 7: Probably yes. But if I need it for work, I would not be able to
find some material and find the problem.
Researcher: What daily screen time would you consider too much?
Participant 7: More than 3h per day.
Researcher: What are your expectations in regards to your screen time?
Participant 7: To make it less.
Researcher: Is your usage lower or higher than expected?
Participant 7: 19h 34m before and 16h 5m
But the app took next Monday as well. I think that the time was kind of the
same. The only thing about the white-black thing was when I was trying to turn on
my wifi or GPS since they didn’t change their colors, I was not sure if they were on
or not.
I thought that it would be the same.
Researcher: What is your opinion on your personal screen time? Describe your
emotions:
Participant 7: Kind of. I thought that it will be less than 3h per day. It doesn’t
make me feel kind of bad. Maybe Nah. I don’t find it as a problem.
Researcher: Did the challenge impact your screen time, subconsciously? How
did this challenge make you feel?
Participant 7: Not really. I actually wanted to see if the challenge will make me
use it less or no, so I tried to use it as I normally do.
Researcher: Which apps did you expect to be the most used on your smart-
phone?
Participant 7: Youtube Chrome Facebook
Researcher: Which apps did you, in reality, interact with the most on your
smartphone?
Participant 7: Youtube Phone calls Chrome
I am surprised because I thought that Facebook will be more. I feel good, that I
spend less time on Facebook, I guess.
Researcher: Are the results different from what you expected? How did this
make you feel?
Participant 7: Yes. According to Facebook yes. But generally, I thought that I
will spend less time on the phone. Nah (8)
==PAGE:240==
230
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: In which contexts and situations, do you use these apps? Why are
they important?
Participant 7: Youtube - for entertainment Chrome - for work/school Facebook
- for entertainment They make my day goes easier.
Researcher: Which sections or features of these apps are your favorites? Why?
How do you interact with them?
Participant 7: Chrome I know what I am looking for web sites with no commer-
cials. Youtube - recommended stuff - based on what I am interested in
Researcher: Did the challenge decrease your interaction with your favorite apps?
How did this make you feel?
Participant 7: My Facebook time decreased drastically - from 3h to 22min. My
YouTube decreased with 1,5h. This means that I have not spent my time on useless
stuff. This makes me feel really good.
Researcher: Is there an application that you can not give up? (something that
you need for work)
Participant 7: Maybe YouTube, because I can find everything in one place -
something for work, something for school, news, entertainment. It is easier for me to
remember one thing - watching it than reading it.
Researcher: Is there an application that you can, but don’t want to give up?
(like messenger)
Participant 7: Not really.
Researcher: Which one of the challenges do you think will be the hardest for
you to do?
Participant 7: App limit - the hardest. Sometimes, I really depend on my phone
when at work to google different things.
==PAGE:241==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
231
B.1.8
Participant 8
Researcher: What is your age?
Participant 8: I’m 25.
Researcher: What is your gender?
Participant 8: Female
Researcher: What is your nationality?
Participant 8: Croatian
Researcher: What is your occupation?
Participant 8: I am a student.
Researcher: What is your marital status?
Participant 8: I’m in a relationship.
Researcher: Describe a day in your life. How does your everyday life look like?
Participant 8: On a regular day, I wake up at 7. I am brushing my teeth and
doing the toilet thing. It takes around 10 min. I drink my coffee around 7:20. Around
7:45 I’m already out of the house and I go to university.
Then I catch my bus and train. I am at school around 8:30. I usually grab some
breakfast which I eat until 9.
At 9 my classes start. I don’t have a break until 12:15. Then I have a lunch break.
So from 12:15 until 13:00, I have a lunch break. Then from 13:00, I have group work,
which continues until around 15:00. Usually, I am home around 16:30. Then I feed
my pets and prepare some snacks and then I go to the gym until 19:30. After that, I
go home and have some quick dinner and I try to do something for a university or I
watch Netflix. I am done until 22:00 - 22:30. I go to bed and before I fall asleep, I
am on my phone.
I use my phone in the morning to wake up. Usually, I have 2-3 alarms before I
wake up. When I am drinking coffee, I check my phone. After that I travel, I usually
use my phone, since it shortens my travel time. I search for music on YouTube or
browse through social medial. I don’t use my phone while having breakfast, since I
am meeting some friends, so I don’t use it. When I am in class, more often I don’t
use it, maybe for some messages, but not that often. During lunch, I spent a lot of
my time searching for jobs.
During group work, I am usually more focused on doing the job than on my phone.
Sometimes for some messages, but for around 5 min. Then on my home back, I use
my phone.
When I get home, my boyfriend is done with work, so we chat on Viber or friends
are calling me.
==PAGE:242==
232
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.8: Participant 8 timeline
When I am in the gym, I use it to search for some music or search for exercises.
During dinner, I don’t use it that much. Sometimes I search for recipes, but regularly
- not really.
Before I go to sleep, I spend around 20-30 min when I talk to my family. I also
text some friends. We usually text then, because we all have free time.
Researcher: How does the phone play into your everyday life? When is the
phone a central part of your everyday? What are the frame and the context?
Participant 8: Usually after school - in the evening and during the night. In the
morning, I am busy, so I don’t have that much time for my phone, but during the
night, when I am free, I use it to catch up with my friends and family.
Researcher: Are there any relationships or situations in your everyday life that
promotes your smartphone usage? Why is the phone important in these scenarios?
Participant 8: Since I am not from here, it is very necessary for me to keep in
contact with my family. I feel homesick and I feel less sad when using the phone to
contact them.
Researcher: Do you consider your relationship to your smartphone similar to a
==PAGE:243==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
233
relationship with a friend/human?
Participant 8: No, definitely not. I think many things a way better when you
have a human connection than with your phone.
Researcher: Describe the different use scenarios your smartphone is part - Do
you use your phone to check the time?
Participant 8: Yes
Researcher: How often do you use your smartphone to make phone calls?
Participant 8: On average 15 times a day.
Researcher: Do you use your phone when you eat?
Participant 8: Sometimes yes. Maybe 2 a day when I eat, but it is usually when
I am eating alone.
Researcher: Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a noise?
Participant 8: It depends on the situation; if I am free to do it - yes, if not I do
it when I can.
Researcher: Do you sleep with your smartphone (turned on) under your pillow
or next to your bed regularly?
Participant 8: Yes. It is on my night table
Researcher: Can you identify any problem areas with regards to your smart-
phone usage - Do you seem to lose track of time when on your smartphone?
Participant 8: Yes. I usually make some limits to myself and I say “Ok, I will
use this time for this specific time”. Sometimes, I can not keep track of everything I
do, but mostly I am trying to set up some limits.
Researcher: Do you sleep later at night, when on your smartphone?
Participant 8: Yes, it happens - not every time, but it happens. It is more
occasionally. It is not like I am doing it on purpose, but it happens.
Researcher: Do you feel FOMO? Has your smartphone caused you feelings of
anxiety and/or stress?
Participant 8: No. Definitely not. I will feel sad, but not in a way of being
nervous, but then I say to myself self “Okay, I will be there next time”.
Researcher: Do your eyes hurt after using the smartphone for a longer time?
Participant 8: Yes, sometimes I lose complete track of how much time I spend
on my phone, but around 45 min.
Researcher: Do you feel your use of your smartphone decreases your productivity
at times?
Participant 8: Yes. When I know that I have to study or do something and my
==PAGE:244==
234
B Interview Transcripts
focus and motivation are not that much and I find myself watching some videos on
Youtube, then I feel less productive.
Researcher: Would you be able to live without your smartphone for one day?
Why?
Participant 8: Yes, it has happened before and I survived. I didn’t really think
about that too much. About my family - If it’s a day or two or three, it’s ok; if it’s
more I would be devastated because I would miss them. I would mainly feel anxious
because of the loss of contact with the family. Especially cause now it’s the only way
to see your family and this is why I would feel like that.
Researcher: What daily screen time would you consider too much?
Participant 8: Instagram? Instagram takes me a lot of time - usually is I would
say 2.5h a day to use only one application. And I think that this is too much.
Researcher: What are your expectations in regards to your screen time?
Participant 8: It is a process that I am working on, to spend less and less time
per day. I am trying to set a limit on each application for about 15-20 min per day.
The main applications are around 4.
Researcher: Is your usage lower or higher than expected?
Participant 8: After the challenge - 2 hours and 28 min per day
It feels weird that I had more time after the challenge, but it was because I was
looking for a new job. I guess it was depending on the situation I had. But normally,
I don’t spend that much time.
Researcher: What is your opinion on your personal screen time? Describe your
emotions:
Participant 8: It is exhausting. I catch myself during the day that I am spending
too much time. But there are different reasons why I do that - sometimes I am bored,
sometimes it is because I am looking for something in a productive way.
Researcher: Did the challenge impact your screen time, subconsciously? How
did this challenge make you feel?
Participant 8: It felt different because every time I turn on my screen I was
seeing the times saying how much time I saw spending on my phone and it sometimes
it made me feel pressured.
Researcher: Which apps did you expect to be the most used on your smart-
phone?
Participant 8: I would say Instagram and afterward will be Facebook.
Researcher: Which apps did you, in reality, interact with the most on your
smartphone?
==PAGE:245==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
235
Participant 8: Facebook, Instagram and YouTube
Researcher: Are the results different from what you expected? How did this
make you feel?
Participant 8: Now I completely forgot about YouTube. I didn’t consider it as
an application that I use that much. I use it mainly for listening to music.
Somehow I expected it because I know that I use them a lot. Sometimes I am
surprised by how much time I spend on them.
Researcher: In which contexts and situations, do you use these apps? Why are
they important?
Participant 8: I have few friends that don’t have Facebook and we just use
Instagram to chat. I also see a lot of recipes and exercises and I just implement these
things into my daily life.
Facebook is mainly used because of my study groups and different job applications.
I am looking into groups and pages for jobs. I am not looking into the comments or
photos. I found my previous jobs through Facebook and this is why I am looking for
a new job there.
I tried to install a music app, but it didn’t work for some reason and since I have
a lot of GB I decided to use YouTube to listen to music.
Researcher: Which sections or features of these apps are your favorites? Why?
How do you interact with them?
Participant 8: The regular posts and videos that people put on Instagram. I
usually type the name of the group and look into there. I don’t use messages that
much there. On YouTube, I search for music.
Researcher: Did the challenge decrease your interaction with your favorite apps?
How did this make you feel?
Participant 8: I didn’t catch it after the challenge. I think I spend less time
now, just because I got used to it. The app limit was for Instagram and Facebook. I
didn’t track it, I just have a feeling that it is less. I feel a bit more productive than I
am spending less time. I am focusing more on human interaction.
Researcher: Is there an application that you can not give up? (something that
you need for work)
Participant 8: There is Viber - okay if you can behold an app because this is
the only way for me to communicate with my family.
Researcher: Is there an application that you can, but don’t want to give up?
(like messenger)
Participant 8: Instagram, because of I a spending a lot of time on it. And it is
doable to find recipes and exercises on google. I think it is just a habit of using it.
==PAGE:246==
236
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: What are the most important things in your life for using your
smartphone?
Participant 8: Definitely family, health and friends.
==PAGE:247==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
237
B.1.9
Participant 9
The audio recording of participant 9’s interview unfortunately failed to save and
therefore the researchers relied on the notes taken during the interview to account
for his/her insights.
Researcher: How does the phone play into your everyday life? When is the
phone a central part of your everyday? What are the frame and the context?
Notes: Occasionally: To schedule meetings throughout the day; for instance,
lunch
Notes: : Check public transportation
Notes: Coffee breaks →automatic; made it a routine
Researcher: Are there any relationships or situations in your everyday life that
promotes your smartphone usage? Why is the phone important in these scenarios?
Notes: Opposite: in china, they used the phone much more; everything is done
through the phone; since coming back I have been using it less
Notes: When friends from back home are meeting; I am more prone to check the
phone
Researcher: Do you consider your relationship to your smartphone similar to a
relationship with a friend/human?
Notes: More as a tool - allow contact for friends that are not physically there
Notes: Why do you need to keep in contact? Since I have a lot of uncertainties,
I am unease →use friends as advisors; where to head my career; also happens to be
the one I traveled with recently
Notes: It takes time but I do it because, on a long term, I see myself living in
Spain so I want to maintain the meaningful relationships there; keep up with them;
so everything would be the same; fill the gap
Researcher: Describe the different use scenarios your smartphone is part:
Researcher: Do you use your phone to check the time?
Notes: Not usually, always carry a watch
Researcher: How often do you use your smartphone to make phone calls?
Notes: 3 times a week; call through apps; one case is catching up and other case
is we need to solve something quickly and it’s easier to call than type
Researcher: Do you use your phone when you eat? Not regularly;
Notes: if I eat alone, I would
Researcher: Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a noise?
==PAGE:248==
238
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.9: Participant 9 timeline
Notes: Yes
Researcher: Do you sleep with your smartphone (turned on) under your pillow
or next to your bed regularly? Notes: No, put it in the bookshelf with the charger -
stand up to grab it
Researcher: Can you identify any problem areas with regards to your smart-
phone usage - Do you seem to lose track of time when on your smartphone?
Notes: Not really; sometimes I get too involved in a chat but not often
Researcher: Do you sleep later at night, when on your smartphone?
Notes: Yeah, worst case scenario another 1 hour before bed;
Notes: Extend time before going into room
Researcher: Do you feel FOMO? Has your smartphone caused you feelings of
anxiety and/or stress?
Notes: Yes sometimes; used to happen when I was using Instagram but now I
deleted Instagram so I don’t check the stories anymore
Notes: I can’t go because I am studying
==PAGE:249==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
239
Notes: Especially with friends back home, when I was in Asia because I couldn’t
be involved in my circle in Spain - more sad than anxious
Notes: Homesick
Researcher:Do your eyes hurt after using the smartphone for a longer time?
Notes: Yes, not often - the combination of phone (3-4 hours) and PC
Researcher:Do you feel your use of your smartphone decreases your productivity
at times?
Notes: Yes, in scenarios when I am not too motivated to do my tasks
Researcher:Would you be able to live without your smartphone for one day?
Why?
Notes: Yes, it would be weird - because I am used to be able to check the messages
relatively often →especially in student organizations, urgency is important
Researcher:What daily screen time would you consider too much?
Notes: From and above 3 hours is too much
Researcher:What are your expectations in regards to your screen time?
Notes: Lately above 3 hours and usually less when I don’t have to stay home
Researcher:Is your usage lower or higher than expected?
Notes: 5h in average
Researcher:What is your opinion on your personal screen time? Describe your
emotions:
Researcher:Are you happy with the time which you spend on your phone?
Notes: Makes me feel like I am wasting time - should be more productive
Notes: Do something more healthy
Notes: Very shocked by the actual result
Researcher:Which apps did you expect to be the most used on your smartphone?
Notes: Whatsapp, Facebook messenger, the news/browser
Researcher:Which apps did you, in reality, interact with the most on your smart-
phone?
Notes: Whatsapp, Messenger, Ecosia
Researcher:Are the results different from what you expected? How did this make
you feel?
Notes: It’s the same
Researcher:In which contexts and situations, do you use these apps? Why are
==PAGE:250==
240
B Interview Transcripts
they important?
Notes: To keep in contact →follow where my friends and family are
Notes: News/browser →I have a box with all the shortcuts to the newspaper
from the browser; easier than downloading an app
Researcher:Which sections or features of these apps are your favorite? Why?
How do you interact with them?
Notes: Texting, primarily and then video calls next
Notes: Sometimes phone calls
Researcher:Is there an application that you can not give up? (something that
you need for work)
Notes: Whatsapp is the one I use the most - where all my contacts are
Notes: Family, friends →maintain to keep contact
Notes: Messenger for Denmark
Notes: Instant messaging apps
Researcher:Is there an application that you can, but don’t want to give up? (like
messenger)
Notes: Maybe slack →usually another distraction on the phone, but still, it
would allow me to check something and occupy my mind; miss things for organizing
events
Notes: For urgent stuff, we talk through messenger
Notes: For less urgent, it is on slack but the fact that it is on my phone makes
it feel urgent
Notes: App positioning; the apps are already diversified and i can just access
apps notifications
Notes: Remove notifications →opposed of above, can maybe lower a bit interac-
tion but still accessible
Notes: Put greyscale →it’s uncomfortable ; it would decrease it but not sustain-
able
Notes: App limit →hardest; tried it once and i would go more often to extend
it
Researcher: Important values:
Notes: Health; mental health and physical health
Notes: Beloved ones; friends and family
Notes: Personal growth
==PAGE:251==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
241
B.1.10
Participant 10
Researcher: What is your age?
Participant 10: I am 24
Researcher: What is your gender?
Participant 10: Male
Researcher: What is your nationality?
Participant 10: Greek
Researcher: What is your occupation?
Participant 10: Software developer and student
Researcher: What is your marital status?
Participant 10: Not married
Researcher: Describe a day in your life. How does your everyday life look like?
Participant 10: I wake up at 8 am. I snooze my alarm, then I check my noti-
fications on my phone. I get out of my bed around 8:20. Then I have breakfast. I
eat breakfast for about 10 min. I go to the bathroom, I prepare myself and I leave.
I go to work at around 9 am. Around 12:30 I have lunch and around 12:45 I am
back and keep working until 18:00. Then I come back from work and go to the gym
around 18:45. I am there until 20:15, then I go to the store and buy something for
dinner. Then I come back home and start cooking at 8:35. I finish cooking around
21:10. I eat until around 21:30. Afterward, I just sit on YouTube for around 30-40
min, then I get myself to do some work from 22:00 until 23:00 - coding, reading -
depends on the day. Then I get a shower from 23:00 - 23:30 and then I go to sleep.
Around midnight, I fall asleep, I rather read or I am on my phone watching videos
on YouTube - it depends how tired I am.
Researcher: How does the phone play into your everyday life? When is the
phone a central part of your everyday? What are the frame and the context?
Participant 10: I use my smartwatch to wake up. It has to communicate with
my phone. When I wake up, I check my notifications on my phone, since it is silent
during the night. When I eat breakfast, I don’t use it. I use it before I leave because I
put my headphones and start listening to music. During work, If somebody sends me
a message if I get an email, I will check it out, but mostly I don’t. If it is something
that I have to do something - I check my phone. I also check my phone for the time.
During lunch, I don’t use it when I am having lunch with the other, but when I
am alone - I am on my phone. I check my notifications during work for about once
or twice an hour.
Around 18:00 I go home, I listen to music on my way home. Sometimes, I am lis-
tening to music while cooking, but not always. From 21:30 to 22:00 I watch YouTube,
==PAGE:252==
242
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.10: Participant 10 timeline
but on my PC. Before bed, if I get a notification - I check it. YouTube is my phone
drug when I am tired, I watch YouTube. Otherwise, I mainly read.
When I am making calls or anything that requires notifications, not for emails
- I go to my laptop to read them. But anything with notifications - like Twitter,
Messenger, LinkedIn, Tinder. Music on the road. Anything that I am outside, it is a
useful tool - navigate, pay for something.
Researcher: Are there any relationships or situations in your everyday life that
promotes your smartphone usage? Why is the phone important in these scenarios?
Participant 10: Friends from Greece, when we text since the communications
are mainly through texts. Also my family. Most of my communications go through
Messenger.
Researcher: Do you consider your relationship to your smartphone similar to a
relationship with a friend/human?
Participant 10: No. I am a bad texter in general. I prefer to talk with people
face to face. I don’t get the same feeling when I am talking with people face to face.
Researcher: Describe the different use scenarios your smartphone is part - Do
==PAGE:253==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
243
you use your phone to check the time?
Participant 10: Yes.
Researcher: How often do you use your smartphone to make phone calls?
Participant 10: Once a day. Once a couple of days.
Researcher: Do you use your phone when you eat?
Participant 10: No. I think it is messy.
Researcher: Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a noise?
Participant 10: It depends on the setting. If I am having dinner or breakfast -
no. If I am at work, probably yes.
Researcher: Do you sleep with your smartphone (turned on) under your pillow
or next to your bed regularly?
Participant 10: Yes, it is on, next to my head on sleep mode.
Researcher: Can you identify any problem areas with regards to your smart-
phone usage - Do you seem to lose track of time when on your smartphone?
Participant 10: Yeah, I think I do. It is not really losing track of time. I know
how much time I am watching this video - I know what the time is, but I just keep
on not starting doing something else.
Researcher: Do you sleep later at night, when on your smartphone?
Participant 10: Yes, I watch this one YouTube video and then I continue watch-
ing and I end up like watching 5-10 videos. I lose like 30-40 minutes of my life doing
this.
Researcher: Do you feel FOMO? Has your smartphone caused you feelings of
anxiety and/or stress?
Participant 10: No. Not in general. Sometimes, I feel jealous of girls on Insta-
gram.
Researcher: Do your eyes hurt after using the smartphone for a longer time?
Participant 10: No
Researcher: Do you feel your use of your smartphone decreases your productivity
at times?
Participant 10: Not really. I have other devices that are way worse. I think
that a laptop is a way worse in terms of productivity.
Researcher: Would you be able to live without your smartphone for one day?
Why?
Participant 10: Yes. I think I could even go for more than one day - maybe like
a week. The problem is about the calls, like when my parents are calling. My father
==PAGE:254==
244
B Interview Transcripts
also does not have Facebook, so I call him directly.
Researcher: What daily screen time would you consider too much?
Participant 10: I don’t consider any screen time too much.
Regards to my
smartphone, it is like more than 2h a day.
Researcher: What are your expectations in regards to your screen time?
Participant 10: That is a hard question. So ideally, I would like to spend 0
times on my phone, but at the same time, I would like to do some work and since my
work is digital, I would say I want the minimum time possible on my phone.
Researcher: Is your usage lower or higher than expected?
Participant 10: Before the challenge was 1h 48 min and after 1h 53 min.
It is fine.
Researcher: What is your opinion on your personal screen time? Describe your
emotions:
Participant 10: I am not spending too much time but more than I want to. An
app is disproportionately increasing my screen time. I would like to reduce it but I
sound addicted. I can’t remove it because I enjoy the app on my phone, so this is why
I am trying to reduce my time there. Humans are visual, all the pleasure they get
from literature would be more long-lasting or exciting if the mechanism is in action.
With YouTube, you don’t have to rest, you are getting something from the visual
input.
Researcher: Did the challenge impact your screen time, subconsciously? How
did this challenge make you feel?
Participant 10: No, it increased because my phone seemed novel because of the
greyscale. This is why I went and played around. Instagram was way better, also
YouTube was nicer too. I like black and white. I remembered the challenge at the
end, didn’t impact me too much. On the 6th/7th day, I wanted to go back and I
missed the normal interface.
Researcher: Which apps did you expect to be the most used on your smart-
phone?
Participant 10: Youtube, twitter, messenger
Researcher: Which apps did you, in reality, interact with the most on your
smartphone?
Participant 10: Camera, Youtube, Instagram. The camera is because I had to
shoot some videos.
Researcher: Are the results different from what you expected? How did this
make you feel?
==PAGE:255==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
245
Participant 10: I am fine. They are slightly expected. I have a good idea of
how much time I am spending - maybe I don’t have exactly how much time it is, but
I can slightly predict it. When I am sick, the screen time changes (daily average 3.39)
and around 7 hours of YouTube.
Researcher: In which contexts and situations, do you use these apps? Why are
they important?
Participant 10: I use Youtube late at night when I am the most tired because
it’s garbage/trash tv. But it is accessible. Twitter, I use it throughout the day - after
I wake up, during lunch if I am alone. Maybe 5-10 minutes here and there throughout
the day to catch up. Messenger I use for notifications only - very rarely I go by myself.
It is mostly when somebody sends a message. Instagram is when I see a notification
or when I feel horny, maybe in the mornings to see last night’s Instagram stories
Researcher: Which sections or features of these apps are your favorites? Why?
How do you interact with them?
Participant 10: YouTube I use the explore page. Twitter is through the feed.
Messenger is 80% messages and 20% video calls. Instagram is mainly stories and
explore/search.
Researcher: Did the challenge decrease your interaction with your favorite apps?
How did this make you feel?
Participant 10: Maybe, but it really depends. In terms of results, it has to be a
little longer. Maybe during the week, I was not that much at home or I was watching
YouTube on my laptop - maybe I didn’t feel like my interaction decreased.
Researcher: Is there an application that you can not give up? (something that
you need for work)
Participant 10: No, I think Twitter has been meaningful even though it is 90%
garbage, 10% meaningful. But I don’t think that there is an application I can not
give up from.
Researcher: Is there an application that you can, but don’t want to give up?
(like messenger)
Participant 10: I would say Twitter, Instagram and messenger because they
are useful and cool.
Because I use them for actually communicating with people.
Youtube is an application that I can and would give up.
Researcher: Why don’t you do it?
Participant 10: Good question, I don’t know. I have to let these things sit
through my head so I can feel that the decision was mine instead of feeling like it’s
addictive through this interview.
==PAGE:256==
246
B Interview Transcripts
B.1.11
Participant 11
Researcher: What is your age?
Participant 11: I am 19
Researcher: What is your gender?
Participant 11: Female
Researcher: What is your nationality?
Participant 11: Croatian
Researcher: What is your occupation?
Participant 11: Student
Researcher: What is your marital status?
Participant 11: Not married
Researcher: Describe a day in your life. How does your everyday life look like?
Participant 11: I wake up around 8 am. I have breakfast at around 8:05, then
I start getting ready until 8:30. So usually around 8:30 I am ready and I leave for
school. I am at school around 8:50. I have classes until 12:15, then we have a break
until 13:00. We eat lunch in school or someplace close to school. Then from 13:00 -
14:30 we have group work. After that, I go back home around 15:00. If I have to do
something like laundry, I do this. Then I go to work, which takes around 45 min and
I work from 17:00 - 21:00. Then I finish, I take the bus home and I am home around
22:00. Then I take a shower, usually, I take something from work and eat it at home.
And then I just watch something and I go to sleep around midnight. And I stay on
my phone for around half an hour to an hour.
Researcher: How does the phone play into your everyday life? When is the
phone a central part of your everyday? What are the frame and the context?
Participant 11: I use my alarm to wake up.
I use my phone while having
breakfast, I usually watch some video. I listen to music on the bus. During classes,
sometimes I use it, but not a lot. I don’t use my phone during lunch, I talk to people.
If I am alone, I would probably use it. During group work, I check it only if I have
notifications. On my way back home, I use it to listen to music. Usually, when I am
home after classes, I watch Netflix. During work, before closing there is not that much
time at work, so I am on my phone - I watch videos. On my way home, sometimes, I
talk to my mom. Then I get home, I watch Netflix on my phone while having dinner.
When I go to bed, I check social media - Instagram, Facebook. I check my messages.
Researcher: Are there any relationships or situations in your everyday life that
promotes your smartphone usage? Why is the phone important in these scenarios?
Participant 11: For me, the most important is google maps, so I can check
where I am going, to check when the bus is coming. Then it is important for me to
==PAGE:257==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
247
Figure B.11: Participant 11 timeline
listen to music while traveling. I talk to my family, so I have to use it for video calls
and contact my friends as well. I usually don’t text people, but I can’t see them on
a regular basis
Researcher: Do you consider your relationship to your smartphone similar to a
relationship with a friend/human?
Participant 11: No
Researcher: Describe the different use scenarios your smartphone is part - Do
you use your phone to check the time?
Participant 11: Yes
Researcher: How often do you use your smartphone to make phone calls?
Participant 11: Once a day
Researcher: Do you use your phone when you eat?
Participant 11: Yes, to watch Netflix. Just like a distraction while I eat.
Researcher: Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a noise?
==PAGE:258==
248
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 11: Yes, I have different sounds for different apps, but if it is a text
noise - I will check
Researcher: Do you sleep with your smartphone (turned on) under your pillow
or next to your bed regularly?
Participant 11: Yes, it is next to my bed.
Researcher: Can you identify any problem areas with regards to your smart-
phone usage - Do you seem to lose track of time when on your smartphone?
Participant 11: Yes, if I watch a video I don’t realize how much time I have
spent.
Researcher: Do you sleep later at night, when on your smartphone?
Participant 11: I stay up on the phone because I am not that tired. Or maybe
this is what I think, so I would say no.
Researcher: Do you feel FOMO? Has your smartphone caused you feelings of
anxiety and/or stress?
Participant 11: No
Researcher: Do your eyes hurt after using the smartphone for a longer time?
Participant 11: It has to be a longer time - like 3 hours.
Researcher: Do you feel your use of your smartphone decreases your productivity
at times?
Participant 11: Yes, if I have to read something for school I can easily get
distracted.
Researcher: Would you be able to live without your smartphone for one day?
Why?
Participant 11: No, I use it to wake up, to check the time, to check the busses,
I have the travel card on it - it is necessary for my everyday life.
Researcher: What daily screen time would you consider too much?
Participant 11: Maybe like 5-6 hours is too much - more than 6h.
Researcher: What are your expectations in regards to your screen time?
Participant 11: Ideally around 1h-1h30
Researcher: Is your usage lower or higher than expected?
Participant 11: No, I thought that it will be even less, but I was not that
surprised. It is almost the same. I tried to not be that much on the phone and I
forget about the apps when I didn’t get the notifications.
Researcher: What is your opinion on your personal screen time? Describe your
emotions:
==PAGE:259==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
249
Participant 11: I want it less. I don’t want to use it that much. I am not happy
about my usage time. I am not feeling guilty. It’s not even social media but I use it
even when making food.
Researcher: Did the challenge impact your screen time, subconsciously? How
did this challenge make you feel?
Participant 11: Yes, it could also have some impact. Maybe sometimes I told
myself to not go too much on my phone
Researcher: Which apps did you expect to be the most used on your smart-
phone?
Participant 11: Instagram, Netflix
Researcher: Which apps did you, in reality, interact with the most on your
smartphone?
Participant 11: Netflix is the most used.
Researcher: Are the results different from what you expected? How did this
make you feel?
Participant 11: I am not surprised. I expected it because I am aware of what
I spend my time. Even tho, when I am bored, I go to Instagram, just for the sake
of going there. Sometimes I have seen everything on Instagram and I would scroll
through because I am bored.
Researcher: In which contexts and situations, do you use these apps? Why are
they important?
Participant 11: Instagram →when I am bored or if I want to comment or to
contact people Netflix →when I cook or eat or when I get ready. I also use it as a
distraction
Researcher: Which sections or features of these apps are your favorites? Why?
How do you interact with them?
Participant 11: For Instagram, I use the most DMs and then explore.
For
Netflix I watch shows.
Researcher: Did the challenge decrease your interaction with your favorite apps?
How did this make you feel?
Participant 11: I would say yes, overall screen time decreased; I would still go
but less because there were no notifications so I would go when I had time.
Researcher: Is there an application that you can not give up? (something that
you need for work)
Participant 11: Probably the Travel Card and Google Maps
Researcher: Is there an application that you can, but don’t want to give up?
==PAGE:260==
250
B Interview Transcripts
(like messenger)
Participant 11: Yes, maybe all social media but I don’t want to. It’s easy to
talk to people. It’s good as a distraction when you are bored. I am also used to it,
but I want to change it.
Researcher: Why don’t you do it?
Participant 11: Good question - I don’t know why but I think I could.
Researcher: What are the most important values regards your smartphone?
Participant 11: Family is the first. Then health, in general, is really important
for me - mental health; well being; content. Then it is my career and studies
==PAGE:261==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
251
B.1.12
Participant 12
Researcher: Okay, so first of all, we’re both students at the Technical University
of Denmark, and we’re doing our project on addiction. And more specifically, we’re
looking at smartphone addiction. And we’re focusing on university students. And so
the whole purpose of this interview would be mainly to understand how the smart-
phone plays into your everyday life. It’s going to be very general questions and I
hope we don’t touch any sensitive topics because you know, it’s it is smartphone us-
age, but let us know if it’s too much. We’re going to start off with some demographics
questions just to understand what kind of university student you are. But we’re not
using it for anything. It’s just in case we have trends or patterns that we notice in
the answers. We will use them but yeah, first of all, what is your full name?
Participant 12: Should I start?
Researcher: Just your full name, just like ’my name is Participant 12 ’
Participant 12: My name is Participant 12 and I’m from Bulgaria.
Researcher: Yeah. What is your age?
Participant 12: I’m 19. Almost 20 in a few days. Yeah.
Researcher: What is your identified gender?
Participant 12: I’m female.
Researcher: Okay, what is your nationality?
Participant 12: I’m from Bulgaria, Bulgaria.
Researcher: Okay. What is your occupation?
Participant 12: I’m a student and a part time employee.
Researcher: Okay. And what is your marital status?
Participant 12: I’m sorry, what?
Researcher: Marital status?
Participant 12: I’m single.
Researcher: Okay, cool. Yeah, I know it sounds a little bit weird. It’s just in
case we find any patterns.
Researcher: Okay, cool. And you’re writing notes right?
Researcher: Mhmm
Researcher: Okay, cool. Okay, so we’re gonna start off by asking you to describe
an average day in your life and try to say it without thinking in the smartphone to
begin with. Just, let’s start of with what time do you wake up for example?
Participant 12: Okay. Usually, if I’m not at school, like if my lectures don’t
start at nine, I wake up around eight, but if I have to be at school at nine, I wake up
==PAGE:262==
252
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.12: Participant 12 timeline
earlier, like, 7.00 - 7.30.
Researcher: Okay, so let’s say you wake up...
Participant 12: Usually around eight.
Researcher: Okay, so let’s say you wake up at eight, what is the first thing you
do after you wake up?
Participant 12: Of course, as every young person, I think the first thing is to
check my phone.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 12: First to stop my alarm.
And then just to check, because I
usually in the morning have a lot of notifications from the apps. Doesn’t matter if
it’s Instagram or messenger, but people have sent me like memes or my parents like
are texting me. And yeah, it’s just to check my notifications if there’s something
really important to answer.
Researcher: Yeah, yeah. And how long is that period of time? Is it 15 minutes
you’re checking notifications or?
==PAGE:263==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
253
Participant 12: Yeah, it’s around like 10-15 minutes.
Researcher: Okay, and then after you check your phone, what do you do?
Participant 12: And then I go to the bathroom. And then the first thing when
I get out of the bedroom, of the bathroom is to make myself a coffee.
Researcher: Yes. Good.
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: Good start for the day.
Participant 12: Yeah. And then after that I’m putting my clothes on. If I’m
going outside, I’m putting some makeup. Or if I’m not, I’m just going to the sofa
and putting the TV on. So I’m going to watch some TV.
Researcher: Okay, well, let’s take the context of you going out of the house,
then. How long does it take you to get ready approximately to get out of the house?
Participant 12: Around 30 minutes
Researcher: 30 minutes. Okay. And then where do you usually go? Is it school?
Is it work? What is an average day?
Participant 12: If it’s the weekday, I’m going to school usually. If it’s weekends,
because I’m part time employee and I’m working only on the weekends, so if it’s
Saturday or Sunday, I’m going to work.
Researcher: Okay, let’s take the context of you going to school then. So what
time do you leave the house when you’re leaving for school?
Participant 12: Depends on what time the lecture starts. But it’s usually in
the morning around nine. So I have to get up around 8.30. Cause I have 30 minutes
with the metro to school.
Researcher: Okay, so you take the metro to school?
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: And then you arrive at school around 9am.
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: And how long is the lecture for?
Participant 12: Usually it’s from nine to 12.
Researcher: Okay, yeah.
Participant 12: But we have like, every hour we have breaks,
Researcher: Okay, and how long is the break?
Participant 12: 10 to 15 minutes.
Researcher: 10 to 15 minutes. Okay. And then at 12 you have lunch, I suppose?
==PAGE:264==
254
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 12: Yeah. At 12 we have lunch usually, I’m going with my friends to
to the canteen to grab something to eat. And after lunch. We usually have a silence
to work on like, by ourselves,not with the lectures.
Researcher: And how long is the lunch break?
Participant 12: One hour.
Researcher: one hour. Okay. So from 1pm till what time do you do your group
work?
Participant 12: from 1pm to usually it’s assigned to work until four.
Researcher: Mm hmm.
Participant 12: But we are doing everything really quick. So we are finished
around 2.30-3pm something like that.
Researcher: Okay.And then what happens afterwards?
Participant 12: After I finish school, I’m usually going home because I’m living
close to my sister.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 12: And she has her baby now, which is like five months old. So
I’m usually going to my sister’s home to help her with the baby.
Researcher: Okay, so you go home to your sister.
How long? How long does it take you to get there? What time are you there
usually?
Participant 12: It’s like, again around 30 minutes with the metro. So it depends
but usually around for 4-4.30.
Researcher: Okay, and how long do you stay there?
Participant 12: one to two hours, depends on what is the situations. Yeah, but..
Researcher: But you mainly hang out with the baby when you are there, you
don’t
Participant 12: What?
Researcher: Do you mainly hang out with the baby? like what do you do?
Participant 12: Yeah. Because when I came here, I’m just helping her with the
baby because she wants to get a shower or to cook something.
Researcher: Yeah, understand. And so around 5.30 - 6 you leave from your
sister’s place?
Participant 12: Yes, yeah.
Researcher: And then you go home?
==PAGE:265==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
255
Participant 12: And then I go home, and then I usually check up with some
friends who live in England, talk with them. And then I usually put the TV on and
listen to some news
Researcher: How long do you call with your friends from England?
Participant 12: While I’m cooking my dinner. I’m usually listening to the news
here.
Researcher: How long do you call with your friends from England?
Participant 12: Depends but sometimes we talk a lot, for like two- three hours.
Sometimes we just like having a short discussion about what our day was like. Around
30 minutes
Researcher: Okay, and so when.. what time do you start cooking usually?
Participant 12: Around 7-7.30
Researcher: Okay, and then how long.. when do you start eating then?
Participant 12: Well, depends on what I’m cooking. but usually I start eating
around 8-8.30 cuz I’m not that hungry before that.
Researcher: Yeah. Okay. And then how long do you eat for?
Participant 12: 30 minutes?
Researcher: 30 minutes. Do you do something whilst you eat? Do you watch
some shows? or?
Participant 12: Yeah, yeah, every time when I’m having my dinner, I’m watch-
ing friends on Netflix.
Researcher: Okay. And then so you finish around nine with the dinner right?
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And then what do you do afterwards?
Participant 12: Then, I’m, since I’m international student and my parent live
back in Bulgaria. I’m usually talking with them, like to see how are they doing, to
see how their day was and they are asking me questions like, how have I been today
and I’m talking with my mom and dad separately, not because they’re divorced, but
because they’re usually doing their own stuff, and everyone is busy with some things.
So I’m usually talking with them separately and that means that I’m spending like,
around two hours talking with them.
Researcher: Okay, two hours. So you finish calling with them around 11?
Participant 12: Yeah, something like that.
Researcher: And then what do you do afterwards?
Participant 12: After that I’m going to the bathroom again, having a shower,
==PAGE:266==
256
B Interview Transcripts
and then putting my pyjamas on and going to bed.
Researcher: What time are you in bed like not what time you sleep but what
time are you in bed?
Participant 12: Well, I’m in bed around midnight, but then, I don’t know,
depends how much time I need to fall asleep.
If I’m too tired, I’m falling asleep
immediately. If I’m not sometimes it takes me like, one hour even two, if I’m on my
phone, which is usually
Researcher: So you’re scrolling through your phone sometimes. One-two hours.
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay, cool now I’m gonna start asking you some questions. so do
you use your phone to wake up for example?
Participant 12: what?
Researcher: do you use your phone when you wake up?
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And where do you use it in the morning period? so let’s say
from.. because you wake up at eight if I remember well, do you listen to music whilst
getting ready for example?
Participant 12: No I’m just like when I wake up I just stop my alarm which
is awful it’s like a sound of like a beeping alarm, like this fire alarms that we have.
And then I stop the alarm and I’m just checking my notifications really quick, like
not putting music or anything in the background.
Researcher: And then you go for coffee. Do you check your phone when you’re
drinking coffee?
Participant 12: Yeah, usually when I’m walking from my room to like the coffee
machine in the kitchen. I’m scrolling again.
Researcher: Yeah. And then you don’t eat breakfast, do you? At home?
Participant 12: No, I don’t. I don’t. I really cannot eat that early.
Researcher: Yeah, no. And so afterwards, when you get ready, you take the
metro. Do you listen to music in the metro?
Participant 12: Yeah
Researcher: yeah?
Participant 12: yeah, I’m listening all the time to the music or I’m scrolling in
Instagram. All the time. When I’m in the metro, my face and my eyes are in the
phone. Sometimes I even see people who are like in the metro, and I know them, but
I’m so focused on my phone and I don’t even see them and then I have to be sorry:
’sorry, guys.’
==PAGE:267==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
257
Researcher: What about when you get to class, do you check your phone during
the lecture from nine to 12?
Participant 12: I’m usually not but if I know that there is something important
for example, one day my nephew has had temperature and my sister was really
concerned. So I had to check my phone regularly to see what is going on. So if there
is a case like that something important is happening. Meanwhile, I’m checking it but
usually not. I’m trying to focus on the school. Yeah.
Researcher: Yeah, I understand, and then during lunch break, do you check
your phone there?
Participant 12: Yeah. Well, I’m trying not to because I want to talk my friends.
Yeah, since we’re all together and having lunch, but sometimes I just cannot, like
resist because I really like sending memes to my friends and like, seeing interesting
things showing up on my Facebook newsfeed and yeah,
Researcher: um, you said you like sending memes to your friends, which friends
are these? Is it friends from friends from back home or friends from the UK?
Participant 12: friends from back home!
Because they are Bulgarians, but
they’re also international students. Some of them are studying in England. Some of
them are studying in Netherlands. Yeah,
Researcher: yeah. Okay. And then after lunch break, you have your group work,
right? Well, do you check your phone during the day or is it the same as the lecture
or do you check it more often or..?
Participant 12: I check it more often since we’re like, we’re not focused on one
person talking to us, but we’re more doing like group projects. And sometimes we
need it because most of our projects last two weeks for examples were data collection.
And we had to make surveys and like to focus on target groups, which was students
so I was checking my phone not for like having my own phone but to send like the
survey to my friends.
Researcher: Yeah. Make sense? And then afterwards, you take the metro to go
to your sister’s place. Do you listen to music there again, I suppose?
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: Yeah? Okay. And then when you’re at your sister’s place, do you
check your phone?
Participant 12: No, when I’m here like it’s her place. No, no, here. It’s just so
close to my home that I’m saying it’s here. Yeah. When I’m there. I’m leaving my
phone because I really love the baby and I’m focused only at him. I don’t need to
check my phone because when I’m there I know that if something’s really important
happens with our parents, for example, they call her and yeah.
Researcher: yeah. Okay. And then afterwards you take the metro to go home?
==PAGE:268==
258
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 12: No, I’m living just like two streets away. It’s really close.
Researcher: Okay, so you just walk home? Do you listen to music whilst walking
home too?
Participant 12: Depends sometimes I’m too lazy to put my headphones on. So,
yeah, but yeah, like I’d say yes. Usually, yes.
Researcher: And then you get home and you get ready to cook?
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: Yeah. And do you...
Participant 12: Usually when I get home first thing is to put the TV on.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 12: And maybe sometimes I’m watching Netflix, sometimes I’m just
listening to the news and start cooking.
Researcher: Okay
Participant 12: ..and then I use my phone only to look at some recipes for
example.
Researcher: Yeah. And then you shower. Do you listen to music whilst you
shower?
Participant 12: Yeah, yeah, all the time.
Researcher: Okay, cool. And then afterwards..
Researcher: Can I just ask: it’s the dinner before that, do you check your phone
while having dinner? Or you just watch the Netflix as you said?
Participant 12: I’m just watching the Netflix series, while I’m eating.
Researcher: okay.
Researcher: And then you get ready to sit in bed or lay in bed. And then you
said, you sometimes check your phone for one to two hours. How often does that
happen?
Participant 12: Well, I’m always checking my phone, but sometimes it takes me
two hours just to like talk with either my friends or my family. Depends on how much
we have to say to each other about like the day or what happened and everything.
But it’s usually like, almost every day spending one hour before falling asleep.
Researcher: But that’s in addition to.. because you have two hours to talk with
your mom and your dad.
And so in addition to that, you’re also on your phone
checking in with your friends and..
Participant 12: Yeah, but I’m doing doing it like in the meanwhile, like, while
I’m talking with them.
==PAGE:269==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
259
Researcher: Yeah. Okay, cool. Do you have any questions so far, Researcher:
?
Researcher: Are you using your phone while talking with your parents or it’s
like on your computer?
Participant 12: I’m using my phone.
Researcher: Okay.
Researcher: Cool. Okay. Okay, so when do you think the phone is a central
part of your everyday so when is it very important for you to have your phone?
Participant 12: in the metro?
Researcher: In the Metro?
Participant 12: Yeah, because there I’m alone. For example, if I’m at school
and I’m around people, I sometimes forget about my phone. But when I’m home, I
also forget about my phone because I’m putting the TV on and someone is talking to
me, you know, but when I’m in the metro, and I seriously need to listen to something.
So I need my phone to put some music on. And then I’m traveling for around 30
minutes. So 30 minutes, I’m just scrolling and looking at some things in my phone.
Researcher: Yeah, okay.
Participant 12: When I’m alone, I need it the most
Researcher: So when you’re alone, so it’s mostly when you’re transporting.
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: So if you were taking the metro with someone, you would not need
it as much.
Participant 12: Yeah, sometimes I’m taking the metro with one girl that I know.
She’s living close to me. And then I just see myself that I’m not using my phone. I’m
just keeping in my hand, but I’m not even unlocking it.
Researcher: Okay, yeah, yeah. Are there any relationships or situations in your
everyday life that promotes your smartphone usage? So for example, you said that
you’re an international student. So is there any relationships or situation that really
have to link you or increases your smartphone usage?
Participant 12: Of course, my parents live far away, so I really need to call them
if one day, I don’t call my mother. I will feel so bad about that. Like I just want
and need to hear her voice every day. So I think this relationship with her is really
important. It’s a lot making impact on my phone usage. Because if sometimes she’s
coming here like because mainly because of the baby. Yeah, her grandchild and when
she’s here, I’m not using my phone that much like, immediately a lot of my time is
focused on her and even I’m talking with my father but for around like 30 minutes
’Hi Dad, how are you? I’m fine. Okay’ and that’s all because my mother is here and
==PAGE:270==
260
B Interview Transcripts
like, if my parents were here, probably my phone usage will be down like a lot.
Researcher: Okay. Yeah. Do you consider your relationship to your smartphone
similar to a relationship with a friend or human?
Participant 12: I don’t know. It’s a hard question.
Researcher: Because .. so I’ll give you an example or context. So some people
after not socializing, especially now that we’re all in quarantine. So to not be able to
go out and interact with other humans. So after spending time on your phone, you
feel like you have socialized.
Participant 12: Yeah, definitely. Yeah. Sometimes especially I told you, I want
my phone because I’m in the metro when I’m alone. So when I have my phone and I
have music to listen to, and I have things to look at, or even to text with my friends
who lives in England, for example, I feel like they’re here and next to me, and that
makes me feel not alone anymore.
Researcher: Yes. Okay. I’m gonna go through some different use scenarios, and
then you tell me if it’s valid for you or not. Do you use your phone to check the time?
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: How often throughout the day?
Participant 12: Even if I have my watch on my hand. I’m not looking at it.
I’m just looking at my phone. I don’t know why but it’s usually like that. And it’s I
don’t know, maybe every 30 minutes, let’s say.
Researcher: Yeah. And how often do you use your smartphone to make phone
calls?
Participant 12: Oh, every hour.
Researcher: Every hour. Okay.
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: Do you use your phone when you eat?
Participant 12: No, I’m usually watching TV.
Researcher: Yeah. Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a noise? So as
soon as you get a notification?
Participant 12: Yeah, yeah, definitely.
Researcher: Okay. Do you have different sounds for your different notifications?
Or is it the same sound?
Participant 12: I have different sounds.
Researcher: Okay, so is there any notification that you are more prone to react
to? Or is it the same for everything?
==PAGE:271==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
261
Participant 12: Messenger is like the main one and then Instagram.
Researcher: Okay. Do you sleep withh you smartphones turned on?
Participant 12: Um, no, the Wi Fi is.. my phone is turned on but my Wi Fi is
not so I’m not receiving notifications while I’m sleeping.
Researcher: Okay. And then do you sleep with it next to you pillow or next to
your bed?
Participant 12: It’s next to my bed, but it’s not under my pillow.
Researcher: OK. Now I’m going to talk about some different problem areas that
are generally identified with smartphone usage. So do you seem to lose track of time
when you’re on your smartphone?
Participant 12: Yeah, it usually happens.
Researcher: How much? Can we talk? Is it like five minutes? Or is it one hour?
or how much do you feel like you..?
Participant 12: It’s sometimes around 30 minutes.
Researcher: Okay. Do you sleep later at night when you’re on your smartphone?
Participant 12: Yeah, definitely.
Researcher: And so you mentioned earlier one to two hours. So do you end up
with that frame of delay?
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. Do you feel fear of missing out?
Participant 12: Yeah, definitely.
Researcher: Okay, and in what contexts and situations?
Participant 12: I don’t know. It’s like..
Researcher: Is it related to family or friends. Is it.. because for example, some
people would feel it because you’re an international student, so maybe you feel it if
your friends or family back home are meeting up, but it could also be related to if
your friends here in Denmark were meeting up for an event and you can’t go because
of prior arrangements.
Participant 12: Yeah, I don’t know, mainly, when I think about people who are
back at home, because I have a lot of friends who stay to study in Bulgaria, like, they
choose to stay there. And sometimes I feel like I’m here. I know that I can contact
you. I know that I can call you all the time but it’s not the same when I’m not there.
Yeah so usually that.
Researcher: And has you smartphone caused your feelings of anxiety and or
stress?
==PAGE:272==
262
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 12: I don’t think that my phone helped me for that. Um, I think
when I’m stressed a lot, I just need to put it away, grab some books to read or
sometimes when I really really stressed I started drawing some things on paper just
to like relieve my stress
Researcher: but has youru smartphone caused this? Like was it because of your
smartphone that you felt stressed or anxious?
Participant 12: Sometimes yes especially now with all this Coronavirus and
literally like I don’t want to put my phone on because it’s everywhere. Like you open
Facebook, you open Instagram, you open everything - everywhere it’s just like Corona
and this is like a lot stressful because we all know that this is going.. this is viral now.
We all are stressed, we all are concerned about our health. But when it’s like all the
time in your head, like Coronavirus is here, it’s too much it’s overwhelming.
Researcher: Yeah. I understand. Do your eyes hurt after using the smartphone
for a longer time?
Participant 12: Well, yes, since I have problems with my eyes. I have contact
lenses, so when I’m using my phone
Researcher: We all do
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: But yeah, how? How much time usually?
Participant 12: After how much time my eyes hurt? Yeah. Oh, I don’t know
maybe like more than two hours if I’m like, all the time looking at my screen.
Researcher: Yeah.
Do you feel your use of your smartphone decreases your
productivity at times?
Participant 12: Yeah, definitely.
Researcher: In what situation?
Participant 12: Especially, when I started studying here in Denmark, I was
really, really focused on my phone because I was still in like, first in the honeymoon,
honeymoon stage. And then I started like, Oh, no, what am I doing here? Now I
have to call my friends and talk with them all the time because I don’t know if I can
handle it all here. And then at the same time, I had to study a lot because I had my
exams and everything and I felt distracted. Yeah, because of that.
Researcher: Would you be able to live without your smartphone for one day?
Participant 12: One day?
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 12: Yeah, one day, definitely I can. I can manage that. But I’m not
sure about anything more.
==PAGE:273==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
263
Researcher: How come you can do it for one day, but not more?
Participant 12: Because if I know that it’s only one day, I’ll prepare myself, like
mentally and handle it. But if it’s like all the time, I’m not ready for that since I
really really need my phone
Researcher: Why?
Participant 12: For many things, mainly to call my parents and have this
connection with them. This is my only connection with them, like the phone calls,
so.
Researcher: So for you the most, the hardest part of not having your phone
would be the loss of connection with your parents.
Participant 12: Yeah
Researcher: So that’s the most important thing for you.
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. Um, now we’re going to talk about screentime So what daily
screen time would you consider too much?
Participant 12: Mine? I don’t really remember from the screenshots that I sent
you because I’m usually not checking my screen time, even if I have this function..
Researcher: It was around four hours.
Participant 12: ..but 5 hours maybe?
Researcher: Five hours is too much, you said? Yeah. Okay. And so what are
you expect? Like, ideally, what do you want your screentime to be?
Participant 12: Two to three hours.
Researcher: Two to three hours. And so I can tell you now you had four hours...2
seconds, four hours and 40 minutes after the challenge and four hours and 15 minutes
before the challenge. So it’s higher than what you want.
Participant 12: Yeah, I expect it to be lower and I was really surprised that it
was higher.
Researcher: I’m sorry, can you just repeat the timing so I can write it?
Researcher: Yeah. Four Hour and 40 minutes after the challenge. And before
the challenge it was four hour and 15 minutes.
Yeah, so the usage is higher than expected. So you were slightly shocked by it.
Or..
Participant 12: I was, I was.
Researcher: How come?
Participant 12: My challenge was to have my colors on my phone like black and
==PAGE:274==
264
B Interview Transcripts
white for a week, so Thursday when I put the colors off, and I was like ’Oh, my God,
this is so strange. I don’t know if I can do it for one week’.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 12: And then I was like, all the time. When I was in the metro. I
was looking at my phone and then when it was like my stop and I had to get out of
the metro, when I looked around, I have everything in my head was like black and
white. It was like ’What is happening?’ But at the next moment, everything was
colorful again. And I was like ’Okay, this will be really strange’. But then like with
the time probably I got used to it and even because when I turned my colors back on,
when I saw how different are they like the Facebook icon is blue and the Instagram
is different colors like pink and orange and everything and all of them have different
colors. Duolingo I have this app on my phone. It is green. It is really really green.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 12: And all of these colors were making me like ’oh my god, I’m
having a headache now’.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 12: So at first I was shocked because I expected ’if my colors are
not on, I will not be attracted to my phone anymore’. I was like that the first day I
was like, my phone is not attractive to me anymore. I hate it. It’s so boring. I don’t
know what to do on it when it has no colors. But then when I got used to it, and
then at the Sunday, I think after I send you the screenshot of the screen time, I turn
the colors on, and I was like this colors are too much, maybe I was used to it so much
to be black and white. And the colors were awful for me. But then I realized that
it makes sense the screen time to be like higher, since it’s easier for my eyes. The
first day they got used to the colors. And then the other days, it was easier to me to
look at the screen because it doesn’t have that much colors to give me headache, you
know? I’m not sure if I’m explaining it clearly now.
Researcher: No, no I understand. And so were you happy with the time you
spend on your phone?
Participant 12: No, I was not. I really expected it to be like lower and I was so
happy that finally I have like less than four hours.
Researcher: Yeah. But so do you feel any guilt? Or do you feel uneasy when
you see your... when your see this time increase? Or how do you feel about it?
Participant 12: I felt guilt a lot. A lot guilt.
Researcher: How come.. did you..
Participant 12: Especially when I saw these like arrows which showing like how
much percentage I have, like, increased? And I was like, ’No. Why?’
Researcher: Why did you feel guilty though?
==PAGE:275==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
265
Participant 12: Because I prefer to spend a lot more time with people and like,
especially when I’m in a group of people like friends. I’m really just disappointed or
mad at someone who is all the time at their phone, even if they’re taking pictures for
Snapchat, like please live the moment now and here with us and make some memories.
And when I’m looking at pictures from my family when they were in their 20s my
parents with their friends, they were like having all the time fun. If I look back in 20
years and see myself on pictures with my friends looking at our phones, I’ll be really
sad about that.
Researcher: Okay, so there’s also some tradition to it. You want to live moments
like your family was doing it?
Participant 12: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Researcher: Okay. Did you feel like the challenge impacted your screentime
subconsciously? Because you know we were tracking or we were checking your screen-
time? Did you feel like ’oh, I’m going to use it less because I know that someone will
check it’.
Participant 12: At first I thought that, but then I don’t have the time to think
about it all the time. So I was just doing my daily routines and I wasn’t thinking
about it.
Researcher: Okay. Yeah, you already talked about how the charge made you
feel. So I’m just gonna skip through to apps. So which apps did you expect to be the
most used on your smartphone?
Participant 12: Messenger and Instagram for sure.
Researcher: Okay, and why? Like, is it because you use them the most or?
Participant 12: Yeah, yeah.
Researcher: okay. And which apps did you in reality interact with the most in
your smartphone? If you remember, well, I can see that messenger was number one,
but I don’t.. I can’t see what number two was.
Participant 12: Um, should I check it if it will be like..?
Researcher: maybe if you have the opportunity to check that.
Participant 12: Just let’s see. It’s Instagram.
Researcher: Okay? Instagram. Okay, so the results are not different from what
you expected
Participant 12: It was the same. I expected it. I was sure that it will be like
messenger and Instagram, so.
Researcher: How does it make you feel to know that these apps are the ones
you use the most?
Participant 12: Well I was like, I expected it. I wasn’t surprised. But at the
==PAGE:276==
266
B Interview Transcripts
same time I was like, well, maybe now is the time to change something.
Researcher: Why do I feel like you need to change something?
Participant 12: Not to change like the apps I am using but to change the time
that I’m using them.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 12: Because I know these are the apps I’m using the most and I don’t
want to change that. These are the apps that I’m using mainly for communication
with my friends and family, so.
Researcher: But you want it to be less because you want to live more in the
moment?
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. In which context and situation do you use these apps. You
said messenger, you use it for your friends and family, but if you could talk us through
an average situation where you use messenger.
Participant 12: Well, it’s usually when I’m talking with my parents, after I
eat my dinner. I’m really using my phone for long time then, before going to bed.
Messenger is the main app that I’m using to talk with them. And not even not only
with my parents but my friends as well. And that’s it. Like all the time I’m checking
messenger but I’m mainly using it before going to bed.
Researcher: And do you use calls, video calls or texting? What is it?
Participant 12: Yeah, mainly video calls.
Researcher: Video calls. And why do you use messenger in contradiction to, for
example, Whatsapp or telegram and all these? What is it that attracts you?
Participant 12: I don’t know, I don’t know actually, maybe it’s because in
Bulgaria, Whatsapp is not that popular. Not many people are using it.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 12: And my parents are like the old generation, I barely even told
them to use messenger.
Researcher: So it’s the easiest.
Participant 12: I don’t know if they can handle whatsapp.
Researcher: Okay. Yeah. And so Instagram, which context and situation do
you use that in?
Participant 12: I’m using it for fun. Sometimes when I’m listening to the music
in the metro, like usually then and sometimes when I’m.. I don’t know, for example,
at school and we’re not doing anything and we’re taking our break. I’m just scrolling
to see some memes.
I’m using Instagram for entertainment because I’m sending
==PAGE:277==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
267
different memes to my friends and my sister as well.
Researcher: And which sections or features of Instagram do you use the most?
Instagram Stories, Instagram explorer, the feed? What do you mainly go for?
Participant 12: The feed and the stories.
Researcher: Okay, the feed and the stories. And do you actually post or you
just look at it? like how do you interact with them?
Participant 12: I’m more watching other people’s stories and posts, and some-
times I’m posting as well.
Researcher: Okay. Did your challenge decrease your interaction with your fa-
vorite apps? Because.. Okay, I can check actually. So before the challenge you had
14.. Actually, let me just.. you had 14 hours with messenger before the challenge
and after the challenge you had 12 hours and 50 minutes so you decreased by a whole
hour messenger. How does.. is that because there were some specific events that week
or was it because of the grayscale? How does it make you feel? What do you think
was the reason for the decrease?
Participant 12: I don’t know. Maybe the reason that it decreased with one hour
is my friend who is living in England was sick. So we didn’t talk to each other that
much that week.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 12: But it wasn’t.. it was a consequence. I think.
Researcher: So it wasn’t because of the challenge?
Participant 12: Yeah, it wasn’t because of the challenge.
Researcher: Okay, and how does it make you feel to see that your interaction
decreased with one hour?
Participant 12: I actually didn’t saw that before cause I was focused on the fact
that all my screen time was above average.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: Um, but would you like..
because ideally right now you spend
between 13 and 14 hours, how much time do you want to spend on messenger for
example?
Participant 12: 10 or less.
Researcher: 10 or less. And what about Instagram?
Participant 12: I don’t know, maybe five to six, something like that.
Researcher: Okay. Is there an application that you cannot give up? Like abso-
lutely not give up something for example that you need for work or..
==PAGE:278==
268
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 12: Let me think about it. For school, I’m using my laptop mainly.
So if I have to give up something, it will be.. I don’t know. Let me see my apps
because I totally forgot them, now that we are talking. Oh, yeah. I cannot give up
on my Outlook email. It’s an app.
Researcher: Yeah it is. Okay. And is there an app.. and why? Because of
school?
Participant 12: Yeah. Because of school and because I’m receiving, like im-
portant emails there, regarding my internship, for example, or like my studies and
yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And is there an application that you can but don’t want to
give up?
Participant 12: Messenger.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 12: Yeah.
Researcher: Mainly messenger.
Participant 12: I can but definitely I don’t want to.
Researcher: Why don’t you want to?
Participant 12: Again, because it’s my only connection with my parents and
friends.
Researcher: What about Instagram then?
Participant 12: Well, again, I can but I don’t want to because it’s one of the
ways that I entertain myself.
Researcher: Okay.But is there.. because technically there’s a lot of entertain-
ment out there? How come Instagram is the one you prioritize in terms of entertain-
ment? Because there is.. you said you use Netflix a lot. And there’s also YouTube,
there’s TikTok. There’s so many different platforms for entertainment. Why is it
that Instagram is the one you go for?
Participant 12: Okay, so I’m using Netflix mainly to watch Friends and YouTube,
I’m using it for like listening to music, but not that much for watching videos. So
entertaining myself mainly with memes and funny pictures is something that really
makes me happy and makes me laugh. Yeah, and if I have to like to choose between
watching a funny video or watching a funny meme, I would prefer a meme.
Researcher: Okay
Participant 12: I don’t know why. I’m laughing more at like pictures and like
texts on them. But then like, watching videos is not my thing. I feel like I’m losing
a lot of time when I’m watching a video.
==PAGE:279==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
269
Researcher: Okay, but then there’s also memes on Facebook. Do you also spend
a lot of time on Facebook with memes?
Participant 12: Not really. At first I was doing that but then I realized that
they’re like the same. So I’m watching the same content twice. I don’t need that. So I
gave up on Facebook like scrolling the newsfeed I’m doing it only to see news or some
Facebook groups that I’m part of like from Bulgaria, like to see what is happening
there.
Researcher: Then dhy did you choose Instagram over Facebook then, if it’s the
same content?
Participant 12: It’s just because it’s repetitive if I’m watching like Facebook,
they’re posting the same things that I can already see in Instagram.
Researcher: But did you have Instagram before Facebook?
Participant 12: Ah no, but, I don’t know, maybe Instagram, like the design of
it is more like my thing.. I don’t know.
Researcher: And do you have more friends on Instagram? Or like more of your
closer friends? Is that a reason for it?
Participant 12: Yeah, yeah, I have around 800 on Facebook and 300 on Insta-
gram. So like, I’ve chosen like the closest, not that I have 300 people close myself, but
like, for example, I have friends of my parents on Facebook and I don’t have them on
Instagram, so I prefer Instagram because of that.
Researcher: Okay, just last last question. So if you were to talk about your
values, and in terms of your smartphone usage, so there’s different values that people
value, so there is this career, health, family, friends, what are the three most important
values for you? It could be something that I didn’t just say but I just gave an example
Participant 12: Yeah. Well, I cannot say that like career is valid for me. But
friends, my family and my education for sure.
Researcher: Okay, so you structure your life based.. or you life and your smart-
phone usage based on these three values you would say?
Participant 12: Yeah.
==PAGE:280==
270
B Interview Transcripts
B.1.13
Participant 13
Researcher: I’m gonna start recording audio. Can I get permission from you to
record the interview?
Participant 13: Yes.
Researcher: Okay, so what is your age?
Participant 13: I’m 24
Researcher: What is the gender you identify yourself with?
Participant 13: Female
Researcher: What is your nationality?
Participant 13: I’m Danish and also from Benin, I have dual nationality.
Researcher: What is your occupation?
Participant 13: I’m a student and I also work part time as a barista slash
waitress.
Researcher: Okay. And what is your marital status?
Participant 13: Single.
Researcher: Okay, now we’re going to go through so we are doing a project on
smartphone addiction and we’re doing it more specifically on university students. So
we want to get an understanding of how your every day is with your smartphone to
try to see what different areas of problems potentially there are. So we’re gonna ask
first to describe an average day in your life. You can choose whatever it’s related to
work to study or a weekend day, but just an average day and then tell us for example,
from what time you wake up.
Participant 13: If it’s a school day, I would wake up around 7am - 730. Yeah.
Researcher: And what is the first thing you do when you wake up?
Participant 13: I turn off my alarm.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 13: Check for messages as well.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 13: Social media sometimes.
Researcher: And how long do you do that for?
Participant 13: Depending, maybe like 10 to 20 minutes.
Researcher: Okay. And so, what do you do after you do that? What does the
next?
==PAGE:281==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
271
Figure B.13: Participant 13 timeline
Participant 13: I just take a shower and get ready to go to school
Researcher: and how long do you take a shower and get ready for?
Participant 13: like half an hour
Researcher: okay, so you leave the house around what time?
Participant 13: around maybe 8.15-20.
Researcher: Okay. And then you go to school?
Participant 13: Yes.
Researcher: How do you get to school? And how long does it take you?
Participant 13: I take the bus. It takes me about 25 minutes.
Researcher: Okay. And then you arrive at school around what time?
Participant 13: Hopefully 10 minutes before nine.
Researcher: Yeah. Cuz then your class starts at nine, I suppose?
Participant 13: Yeah, exactly.
==PAGE:282==
272
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: And so before you get to class, so you have these 10 minutes. What
do you usually do in those 10 minutes?
Participant 13: I will be on my phone.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 13: Or just talking with the classmates that are, that have also
arrived earlier, depending on who’s there. Yeah.
Researcher: And then you have class from nine until what time do you have
class?
Participant 13: So until 11.55
Researcher: Yeah
Participant 13: and then we have the lunch break. And then I have class again
at 1pm till 4.15pm.
Researcher: Okay. And so you have lunch from 1155 to one.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And then you have from 13 to 4.15 you have group work?
Participant 13: Yes.
Researcher: Okay. And then after that, what do you do?
Participant 13: I maybe hang out with my classmates.
Researcher: Mm hmm.
Participant 13: It’s for coffee or something and then I usually go home.
Researcher: How long do you hang out with them?
Participant 13: For a good two hours, I would say.
Researcher: Okay. So until 6pm approximate.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And then you get home?
Participant 13: Yes.
Researcher: Okay. And then what time are you home approximately?
Participant 13: I usually walk from school.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 13: So I take my time. So maybe Like an hour after I’ll be home.
Researcher: Okay, so around seven.
Participant 13: Yeah.
==PAGE:283==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
273
Researcher: Okay. And then what do you do when you get home?
Participant 13: I usually prepare some dinner
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 13: or I would just be on the computer and maybe watch a series
or something.
Researcher: Okay, and how much? So you would prepare dinner?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: And you will watch a series at the same time.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: And how long do you do that for?
Participant 13: Like an hour?
Researcher: An hour? And then so around eight you eat?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And then how long do you eat for?
Participant 13: For 30 minutes
Researcher: 30 minutes. Okay. And then around 8.40 you’re done with food?
Participant 13: Yes.
Researcher: Cool. And then what do you do afterwards?
Participant 13: And then I just stay on the computer, or, you know, talk with
friends chat online with friends and stuff. And that’s it.
Researcher: And how long do you do that?
Participant 13: Um, I think I usually stay on my phone until I get tired, which
would be around like 9.50 or 10.
Researcher: And then from 10 what do you do?
Participant 13: I put some music on or podcasts or anything on YouTube and
I try to sleep. I try to get myself to sleep.
Researcher: Okay, and what time do you end up sleeping?
Participant 13: I think like the earliest would be like 10.30 or 11.
Researcher: Okay, cool. And the latest?
Participant 13: It would be at midnight. Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And but mainly from 10 till midnight. At latest. You would
be listening to a podcast or?
==PAGE:284==
274
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 13: Yeah or listen to some videos just playing in the background
and..
Researcher: Okay. Cool. And now we’re going to talk about your day but talk
into how the phone plays into your everyday life. So, you said in the beginning that
you had an alarm, right?
Participant 13: Yes.
Researcher: Okay, so you have an alarm waking you up from your phone.
Participant 13: Yes.
Researcher: And then you school through notifications and messages in the
morning?
Participant 13: Yes.
Researcher: Do you listen to music when you’re in the shower?
Participant 13: No, sometimes but rarely.
Researcher: Okay. And so, afterwards you get ready. Do you use your phone in
that time?
Participant 13: Yes.
Researcher: Okay. And then you get ready and you go out of the house. So you
you take the bus you said, do you use your phone in the bus?
Participant 13: Yeah, I’ll listen to some music.
Researcher: Okay. And you don’t eat breakfast, I suppose?
Participant 13: No.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 13: Or I usually just get a coffee at school.
Researcher: Okay, and so you arrive at school a little bit before nine and then
you are on your phone, if you don’t want to talk or if you don’t know anyone? Just
so.
Participant 13: Yeah, if I don’t really feel like talking or if I don’t feel like talking
with people, I don’t feel like comfortable with them. Then I’ll be on my phone.
Researcher: Okay, and what do you usually do on your phone?
Participant 13: I would just browse in social media
Researcher: And then during class, do you check your phone?
Participant 13: Sometimes, yes.
Researcher: Okay. What do you do? When you check your phone?
Participant 13: It’s usually I received a message or sometimes even conversating
==PAGE:285==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
275
with some of my classmates through social media.
Researcher: Yeah. Okay, cool. And then, then lunch break comes on. Do you
check your phone during lunch?
Participant 13: I do check my phone. I think out of habit sometimes. Like if I
receive the message, then I checked but mostly I think it’s out of habit just to check
if something if I’ve gotten a message even though I don’t have any notification or if
you know something new pops up on Instagram or Facebook.
Researcher: Okay. And then afterwards there’s group work session and that’s
for approximately three hours, do you check your phone in that time?
Participant 13: Yes, I do and it’s the same reason. I would just take it just to
do something different.
Researcher: Okay. So it’s kind of like a phone break.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay, cool. And how much how regularly do you do it? Is it once
an hour, every half an hour?
Participant 13: I’d say at least every half an hour, to be honest.
Researcher: Okay. And then afterwards, you hang out with your friends for a
little bit. What do you usually do?
Participant 13: We just go for coffee usually
Researcher: And then do you use your phone there?
Participant 13: Not as much. I would maybe look at my screen a couple of
times, but because we’re talking I try to not look at it too much. But again out of
habit. I find myself reaching for my phone.
Researcher: Okay. And then afterwards for one hour you walk home. Do you
use your phone there?
Participant 13: Yes, I do play music while I walk to distract me.
Researcher: Yeah. Okay. That’s nice. And so then you get home and you cook
and you watch your series. Is that on your phone or is that on a computer?
Participant 13: When I’m cooking, I do have my phone to play music or if I
have a video playing in the background, and then while I eat I will use my computer.
Researcher: Okay, so whilst you eat, you use the computer, okay.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: And then, after..
Participant 13: And then after it’s the computer. I mainly use the computer
for leisure time or so to speak. After I eat, the break that I take, is on the computer
==PAGE:286==
276
B Interview Transcripts
and when I try to sleep, it will be on my phone.
Researcher: Okay. So when you try to sleep you use the phone.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: So when is that? Is that after the podcast and the music?
Participant 13: Oh no, that is where I listen to podcast music on my phone.
Researcher: Oh, so the podcast music is on your phone. Okay.
Researcher: Okay. Okay, so when is the phone an essential part of your day?
When is it very important for you to have your phone? What is the frame and the
context?
Participant 13: I think when I am in public, and I don’t know how to.. I think
when I don’t know what to do or how to.. don’t want to interact with people, I think
I tend to reach to my phone a lot. Just to have something to do, I guess.. to feel
busy.
Researcher: So when you’re out of your comfort zone?
Participant 13: Other than that I think when I’m home and I just need some-
thing to do.
Researcher: Okay, so the two use scenarios is mainly like when you out of your
comfort zone, and when you’re bored.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And when you feel like you’re out of your comfort zone, is it
mainly related to having people around you that you don’t know? Or is it related to
new situations? Or when is it that it’s out of your comfort zone?
Participant 13: When I feel anxious, every time we feel anxious, then I reach
to my phone.
Researcher: And is there..?
Participant 13: I can focus on that rather than people around me
Researcher: And is there a usual frame and context to when you feel anxious?
Participant 13: It’s really, it could be any time when I take the bus or when
I’m just by myself around people. I don’t know, I’d say.
Researcher: Okay. And when you’re bored, it’s mainly when you’re at home
bored.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay.
Cool.
Are there any relationships or situations in your
everyday life that promotes your smartphone usage?
Participant 13: I think.. so maybe when I feel alone you know. Not conversating
==PAGE:287==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
277
with someone or not having someone to talk then I would go on my phone. I think
some people choose to read a book, but I just choose to be on my phone.
Researcher: So mainly being alone promotes it.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: So, if you are around people or if you’re traveling or if you’re..
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Then you use it less.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Do you have any friends or family members, anyone that lives
abroad that promotes this smartphone usage? Or is it mainly when you’re alone?
That you would say it’s a prominent..?
Participant 13: No, I think it’s mainly when I’m alone. Yeah.
Researcher: Do you consider.. Oh, before that, why is the phone important in
these scenarios when you’re alone?
Participant 13: I don’t know. I never really thought about it, but I wouldn’t
know what to do by myself, I think to be honest, yeah.
Researcher: So it’s kind of like a support.
Participant 13: Yeah. Yeah.
Researcher: And is it something that has grown into a habit to become a support
or is it something that you initially thought of as a support tool?
Participant 13: No, it’s definitely a habit.
Researcher: Okay. Would you remember when was the first time you went for
the phone when you were feeling anxious? Like do you remember the context of it?
Participant 13: Um, I don’t remember the first time but I remember the specific,
like a specific time where it made me think that I could rely on my phone.
Researcher: When was that?
Participant 13: Just another day like going. I don’t remember where I was
going. But I was in the bus. And for some reason, I started to feel very anxious. And
I felt like people were maybe staring or judging or I didn’t know what to do or who
to call so I just tried to focus on my phone and use it as much as I could at that time.
Researcher: Mm hmm. Okay. Do you consider relationships to your smartphone
similar to a relationship with a friend or human?
Participant 13: No.
Researcher: So do.. because you’re describing this that you feel like when you’re
alone you go for your phone. And when you feel anxious you go for your phone.
==PAGE:288==
278
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Would you not describe that similar to a relationship with a friend
or human?
Participant 13: I don’t think so. Because for me, the phone would be a way to
escape but a conversation, conversation with a human being, or just interacting with
a human being would be a way for me to accept the reality and talk about it. I can’t
talk to my phone and receive advice. Of course, I can Google it, but it’s not the same
thing as maybe needing someone to hear your thoughts or what you’re going through.
At the time it helps in a different way. I feel like
Researcher: Okay, so I’m going to go through some different user scenarios, and
you’ll just let me know if this is valid for you or not. Do you use your phone to check
the time.
Participant 13: Yes
Researcher: How often is that? Is it because you don’t have a watch? Or is it
because you prefer to do it over watch?
Participant 13: Oh, I don’t have a watch.
Researcher: And how often do you check the time throughout the day?
or
throughout the hour?
Participant 13: Five, six times. Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And how often do you use your smartphone to make phone
calls?
Participant 13: At least once a day, at least. Once or twice a day, yeah.
Researcher: And who do you usually call or do you receive the call?
Participant 13: I usually call like, family, either my mum or friends. Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. Do you use your phone when you eat?
Participant 13: Yes.
Researcher: And is there a specific time of the day when you eat that you do
it? Or is it for breakfast lunch or dinner like equally or..?
Participant 13: Evening.
Researcher: Evening, okay.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Do you check your phone as soon as it makes a noise or as soon as
you get a notification?
Participant 13: Yeah, most of the time.
Researcher: Do you have different sounds for the notifications? Or is it the same
==PAGE:289==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
279
sound?
Participant 13: No, it’s the same.
Researcher: Okay. Do you sleep with your smartphone turned on?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Do you sleep with it next to your pillow or under your pillow?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Which one is it?
Participant 13: Oh, sorry. I sleep with it next to my pillow.
Researcher: Okay. Now I’m going to discuss some different problem areas with
regards to smartphone usage and then you let me know if it’s valid for you or not.
Do you seem to lose track of time when you’re in your smartphone?
Participant 13: Yes, I think I lose track of the time in a sense where like, I can
always see how much time I’ve spent on it, but I don’t get a sense of reality. Like if
an hour passes by I don’t go ’oh, I’ve been on my phone for a whole hour’, it’s not
like that. I know how much time I spent on it. But I don’t really put in perspective
and say ’Oh, that’s too much’.
Researcher: And how much time, what is the ratio to like..? Because do you go
in thinking I’m going to spend five to 10 minutes and then you spent, I don’t know
how much hour or like..
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: How much? so how many hours in general do you overspent over
what you originally want to?
Participant 13: I’d say maybe two, three hours.
Researcher: Two to three hours. So do you usually go in with 5-10 minutes
expectations, or what is the expectation? And then what is the reality?
Participant 13: I go in with maybe.. I give myself like half an hour to an hour.
Researcher: Mm hmm.
Participant 13: And then I find a video or something and I just keep binge
watching something. And yeah,
Researcher: So it ends up being 2-3 hours.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And do you sleep later at night, when you’re on your smart-
phone?
Participant 13: Yeah.
==PAGE:290==
280
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: How much later?
Participant 13: Like a half an hour later
Researcher: Okay, and it’s because.. what is the context for you sleeping later?
Is it because you start scrolling through stuff or what’s the frame?
Participant 13: I think it’s because I have something to distract myself that I
would rather do.
Researcher: Mm hmm.
Participant 13: So I just scroll through the phone.
Researcher: Okay. And do you feel fear of missing out?
Participant 13: Oh, I mean, yeah, I guess. I just never thought about it. Um,
I think I do because I’m constantly updating and seeing if there is something new
happening so I think I do yeah.
Researcher: Has your smartphone ever caused you feelings of anxiety and or
stress?
Participant 13: Not because of the smartphone, but because of the news right
now. The corona.
Researcher: Yeah. So the Coronavirus - what is called?
Participant 13: Lockdown?
Researcher: Yeah, no, but the fact that there is everywhere and social media
and everything.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: It’s stressing you out.
Participant 13: Every five news page that was on my Facebook every time I
opened it was related to the corona.
Researcher: Mm hmm. And if we just go back quickly to the fear of missing
out. You said that you always check so you feel like maybe you have fear of missing
out. But have you ever looked at an event for example that you were supposed to go
to? And then feel like ’oh’ like a strong feeling because you’re not part of it. Even
though..
Participant 13: No, no-
Researcher: Okay, okay,
Participant 13: I think I want.. I like the option. I like to have the option but
I don’t necessarily feel bad or anxious about missing out on the event.
Researcher: Okay, but so if you see then a friend or friends hanging out without,
so from back home or not from back home, from, for example, you went to an exchange
==PAGE:291==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
281
in South Korea and imagine that you went home earlier and your friends in South
Korea are meeting up and you are not there? How would that make you feel?
Participant 13: I’ll feel sad that I was not participating at the event. But I’d
want to recreate it in a situation where I’ll be there or have the opportunity to do it
myself.
Researcher: And which one of them would make you most feel sad like to see,
to hear it through a text to for them saying that they’re doing it or is it seeing it or..?
Participant 13: I think it’s seeing it.
Researcher: Okay. Okay. Do you eyes hurt after using the smartphone for a
longer time?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: How long? Oh, how much time? Does it hurt after?
Participant 13: After I’d say two hours.
Researcher: Two hours. Okay.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Do you feel use of your smartphone decreases your productivity at
times?
Participant 13: Yes, it does because I’m not doing anything when I’m on the
phone. I’m just procrastinating.
Researcher: Yeah, and which situations do you feel like you are decreasing your
productivity the most?
Participant 13: When I am supposed to do schoolwork, but I choose to reach
out to the phone.
Researcher: Okay. Would you be able to live without your smartphone for one
day?
Participant 13: Hmm, I think so, I think.. like I’ve technically done it before,
but I think the more I got used to having it and like being, having all the features
available, I think it’s difficult but I think I could.
Researcher: What would be the hardest for you to not live without in the
smartphone? Like what features?
Participant 13: I think the social media, yeah.
Researcher: So it would be hardest for you to live without the social media?
Participant 13: No, actually without being able to call.
Researcher: Call?
Participant 13: Yeah.
==PAGE:292==
282
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Okay. Why?
Participant 13: I think calling because even if I don’t have the social media, I
can still call up a friend and start to conversate but if I were not able to see or follow
what was happening around me and not able to contact anyone, I think it would just
be.. Plus not being able to contact anyone, I think it will be even harder.
Researcher: So you would say that the most basic human contact that you can
gain through the phone is through a phone call.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. Um, now we’re going to talk about some screen time. What
daily screen time would you consider too much?
Participant 13: I think mine. I think I had six hours.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 13: On average, six or seven hours, which is a lot.
Researcher: Yeah, you had a six hour and 43 minutes before the challenge and
six hour and 29 minutes after the challenge.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: So around 6.30
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: So you think that’s too much, but from what hour do you think it’s
too much, is it from six hours or is it..?
Participant 13: I think from four and upwards is too much
Researcher: Okay, and what are your, ideally.. What are your expectations for
your screentime? What would you like it to be?
Participant 13: Um, I would like it to decrease for two hours, like getting to the
four hours on average.
Researcher: Hmm.
Participant 13: I think like during the challenge, I realized, like I tried to limit
myself in certain areas, but then also because I had the opportunity to extend it
sometimes. Then I realized that, like, I use this platform a lot. And I see I use the
other platform a lot, and it’s not really necessary. I think there were a lot of times
where I extended it.
Researcher: So just to clarify, you had the app limit challenge.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: And so you found yourself extending the limit. A couple of times.
Participant 13: Yes.
==PAGE:293==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
283
Researcher: Was it that you extended it for like ’Hey, give me 15 minutes more’
or was it ’Oh, let me cancel it for today’
Participant 13: um, at first it started off like 15 minutes and then an hour and
then I think I had two days where I just cancel it for the day.
Researcher: Yeah. Okay. Um, now, I just told you that your screentime was
6.29 after the challenge and 6.43. So it’s higher than expect that or like, before you
went into this challenge, what did you expect your screentime would be?
Participant 13: Around four. I thought my average would be around four,
Researcher: And it’s higher than expected. So what is your opinion on your
personal screentime? Like, what, how does it make you feel? What do you think of
it?
Participant 13: What? Sorry it didn’t.
Researcher: The connection went off. Okay, I’m gonna just gonna repeat it. So
you were expecting a screen time of around four hours, right?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: And your usage is higher than expected.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: What is your opinion on your personal screen time? So how does
it make you feel to see your personal screen time and see that it is first of all higher
than expected but also just to see it? What do you think of it?
Participant 13: I think it made me realize that I might have a phone addiction.
That I didn’t need to be on the phone that much and how much of that time through-
out the day because that’s a lot of hours throughout the day. And it just got me
thinking like, what I could have done with six hours instead of constantly being on
the phone.
Researcher: And if you were to describe this as an emotion: like did you feel
guilt? Did you feel sadness? What emotion did you feel?
Participant 13: I think I felt a little bit. I felt surprised and maybe a little bit
disappointed. And a little bit embarrassed.
Researcher: Embarrassed. Why did you feel embarrassed?
Participant 13: Because I think my screen time was very high compared to what
I would think is average. Yeah.
Researcher: And then on what basis do you compute this average for you? Like
why is four hours the ideal time for you?
Participant 13: It’s not the ideal time, but it’s a time that I would - how do
you say - I would be okay with
==PAGE:294==
284
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Mm hmm. Yeah. And why? Why is it that this is something that
you would be okay with?
Participant 13: I just think that maybe what people in my generation would,
how much time they would also spend on it without it being excessive.
Researcher: Mm hmm. Because just to maybe put it into context because you’ve
sent in your screentime in the same group shot as your co students. Did it make you
feel any way to see other people’s screentime as well?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: How did it make you feel to compare an average university student
to yourself? Or not an average, but like other university students?
Participant 13: Yeah. I just thought that my time was excessive, that I was
maybe on my phone too much.
Researcher: And was it after you send it in and saw everybody else’s and also
saw yourself’s or was it before? Like, was it when you first saw this screentime that
you felt ’Oh, this is excessive’ or was it when you send it in and saw what everybody’s
average was?
Participant 13: I think when I first saw the screentime, I was surprised and
thought it was very high and kind of shocked because I didn’t think it was that much
and then when I send it in and saw the others that I started to feel embarrassed.
Researcher: Okay. Did you think that the challenge impacted your screentime
subconsciously? because you decreased your screentime?
Participant 13: Yeah. Yeah, I think it did because, um, I could have chosen to
you.. Like at first I was making a conscious effort to decrease my screen time.
Researcher: And was that because we were.. you knew that we would watch
your screen time? Or was it because you were aware of the fact that it was above
what you wanted?
Participant 13: I think I think it was because I wanted it to go to four hours
because I thought that is doable for me that I could be satisfied with just four hours
screen. I didn’t need to go up to the six hours, which is why I tried to decrease it
but also made me realize that I got dependant on just being able to see a certain
content or being on it all the time. But I also think that it would be possible for me
to decrease more in the future.
Researcher: What do you think is not allowing you to decrease it more than
what you’re already done? So you said that you think that you could do four hours?
Participant 13: Yeah
Researcher: But you still were in the six hour like you decreased it by half an
hour. How come you didn’t manage to decrease it to four hours?
==PAGE:295==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
285
Participant 13: I think some days personally, I couldn’t use my computer instead.
So I had to use my phone because of internet issues. And I also was.. I remember the
days where I was - when I deleted the parent control/the screentime control for the
day, it was because I wanted to get certain notifications, or I wanted, I was waiting
for some responses. And I was worried that I wouldn’t be able to see it if I had the
control on?
Researcher: What kind of notifications if I can ask? Like what app?
Participant 13: It was just messenger.
Researcher: And so you were saying that sometimes you can use your computer
instead. So you would say then would.. How do you feel about your computer time
then that’s also some screen time. Because then..
Participant 13: I use..
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 13: Yeah, I think because I have a specific time where I have my
computer and it’s not as comfortable like I don’t, I cannot walk around with my
computer, I cannot, you know, I have to be in a certain position, like sitting and stuff
like that to use the computer comfortably. That’s why I opt for the phone I think.
Researcher: Okay, but so you don’t so if your screen time was like on your smart-
phone was around four hours, but it was 10 hours on your computer, you wouldn’t
mind?
Participant 13: No, it wouldn’t be like that. I think if I would replace those
four hours or maybe half the time on my computer.
Researcher: Okay, so yeah, so you would prefer having half of the screen time
you have right now on the computer.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Why?
Participant 13: I don’t know.
Researcher: Okay. That’s fine. Let’s talk about apps. Which apps did you
expect to be the most used on your smartphone?
Participant 13: Probably messenger or Instagram.
Researcher: Messenger, Instagram. And in reality which ones do you interact
with the most on your smartphone? If you can check it because I can’t see it in the
screenshots that I received.
Participant 13: I think it’s Instagram but I can check it now.
Researcher: Yes.
Participant 13: It was messenger.
==PAGE:296==
286
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Messenger is number one? What is number 2 and 3?
Participant 13: Sorry, it was Instagram. for that week
Researcher: And what are the other apps?
Participant 13: Messenger and Netflix
Researcher: Okay. And the week before it?
Participant 13: Two seconds. It was YouTube and Netflix and then Instagram
and messenger, the week before.
Researcher: Okay.
Researcher: So before the challenge which were the apps that you used the
most?
Participant 13: Okay, before the challenge it’s Instagram and messenger. YouTube
and Netflix.
Researcher: Okay. And after the challenge?
Participant 13: Netflix and instagram.
Researcher: Okay, um, and you expected Instagram and messenger to be the
most used in your smartphone?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: But in reality you also interact a lot with YouTube and Netflix.
Participant 13: Yes.
Researcher: Is that surprising for you?
Participant 13: No.
Researcher: No. So the results that you just saw are what you expected ?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: And how does it make you feel to have these apps as your most
used applications?
Participant 13: I don’t really feel bad about it.
Researcher: No?
Participant 13: It doesn’t surprise me.
Researcher: So like you had predicted it?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And in which context and situation to use these app, so
maybe talk through, what situation do you use Instagram, first?
Participant 13: Just to update on what my peers are doing, or to see some
==PAGE:297==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
287
funny content.
Researcher: Okay, and why is it important to use Instagram to get that update?
Participant 13: I think it’s because it’s one of those platforms that other people
use the most.
Researcher: So it’s because your peers are on it. So it’s the easiest.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: And then Messenger: what do you use it for?
Participant 13: To talk; to conversate with my friends.
Researcher: Okay, so messenger is mainly for communicating, where Instagram
is more life updates.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And then Netflix and YouTube. Netflix first.
Participant 13: Yeah, it’s to watch movies as a way to entertain myself.
Researcher: What about YouTube?
Participant 13: Same
Researcher: okay, and why do you have both or is it because you get different
content from both places?
Participant 13: Yeah, I think it’s depending on the content.
Researcher: Okay. So there’s a specific content on YouTube that you don’t find
on Netflix and vice versa.
Participant 13: Well, I can get specific movies on netflix, I feel like specific
movies and series. Whilst on YouTube, I can listen to some music. And I can switch
to listening to a podcast or I can switch to just simply watching a video following
someone’s life. Yeah,
Researcher: Okay. And so, if we go back to Instagram, which section of futures
of the app do you use the most? Because there’s Instagram explore, DMs, stories,
feed. What do you think is the one you interact with the most?
Participant 13: The feed.
Researcher: Yeah, and do you? Like how do you interact with it? Is it you just
watch like you like, you comment? Like, what? How do you interact with it?
Participant 13: Yeah, I just watch what’s updated on my page?
Researcher: Mm hmm. Do you like and comment stuff?
Participant 13: Not really. I don’t really leave comments.
Researcher: But do you like?
==PAGE:298==
288
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 13: I like, yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And then, so you mainly use the feed.
Participant 13: Yes.
Researcher: And then we have messenger.
How do you interact, like what
features do you use? Is it mainly text, phone calls, video calls or audio calls? Like
what?
Participant 13: Text
Researcher: Texting. And then we have Netflix. So how do you interact with
it? Is it that you search for a show? Or do you a look at the recommended sections?
Participant 13: I look at the recommended sections.
Researcher: Cool. And then for YouTube, is it you search for a video or do you
just look at what’s on your start screen?
Participant 13: I search for videos
Researcher: Okay, cool. Did the challenge decrease your interaction with your
favorite apps. If it’s possible, like could you see the lower amount?
Participant 13: I don’t really see the...
Researcher: Next to the apps, there’s the time.
Participant 13: Um, I would say like the week before, for example, Instagram
is like 11 hours to seven.
Researcher: Okay, so it decreased by four hours?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: What about Messenger?
Participant 13: From 6 to 2 and a half.
Researcher: Okay, and what about Netflix and YouTube?
Participant 13: From four.. Sorry. from four to seven for Netflix and...Oh no,
sorry, from four to 15 for YouTube
Researcher: 15 hours?
Participant 13: Yeah
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 13: And Netflix. I don’t.. From 7 to 8 I think. Yeah. From 7.65 to
8.60.
Researcher: Okay. And so, for the social media apps, your interaction decreased
but for the watching apps, it increased. How does this make you feel?
Participant 13: It doesn’t surprise me because I do search first for things to
==PAGE:299==
B.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
289
entertain myself a lot. And I do tend to binge watch on stuff and series. So it doesn’t
surprise me that.. If I didn’t use the other ones that much. I tried to find a way to
replace it.
Researcher: The app limit - which apps did you app limit?
Participant 13: I did it for all the entertainment apps and Safari.
Researcher: Okay. And so there was an app limit on YouTube and Netflix.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: How big? Well, how much was the app limit?
Participant 13: Three, three hours.
Researcher: Per day?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay.
Um, but how does it make you feel to use, to see that
amount? for example, your usage went from four to 15 hours.
Participant 13: It’s a lot.
Researcher: And how does it make you feel?
Participant 13: Kind of reflect on what I chose to spend my time on.
Researcher: So you don’t like it? That you spent that amount of time?
Participant 13: I can’t hear you. Can you repeat?
Researcher: So you don’t like the fact that you spend that amount of time on
YouTube, for example.
Participant 13: No, it’s not something I’m proud of.
Researcher: Okay, but then how come you still spend that because you said you
were aware of the time you spent, but is it because you get into that infinite loop
of YouTube or is it because you have nothing else to do to entertain yourself? Like,
what is the reason for using..?
Participant 13: Yeah, I think I don’t have other ways to entertain myself. So...
or that’s the easiest way to entertain myself sometimes, yeah. So I choose to go on
YouTube instead. Because it’s eaiser and it’s in my reach. So..
Researcher: Okay. Is there an application that you cannot absolutely not give
up? For example, something you need for work or something else.
Participant 13: I mean, yeah, I have my school schedule on my phone. So I’ll
be very troubled if I didn’t have that one.
Researcher: Is it an app?
Participant 13: Yeah.
==PAGE:300==
290
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Okay, so it’s a school app?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Is there other apps that you can absolutely not give up?
Participant 13: I think Instagram.
Researcher: You cannot give it up?
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Is there an application that you can but don’t want to give up?
Participant 13: Yeah. To be honest, probably Netflix
Researcher: Netflix?
Participant 13: and Facebook
Researcher: and Facebook?
Participant 13: Yeah, the app Messenger and stuff.
Researcher: What about YouTube? Which category would you put YouTube
in? You cannot give up or you can but don’t want to give up?
Participant 13: I can but don’t want to.
Researcher: Okay. But how come we didn’t think of YouTube when we first..
Participant 13: I don’t know, I feel.. I think it’s because of the I don’t want to
part.
Researcher: Yeah. But so YouTube is the one you would least want to remove?
Participant 13: Yeah, yeah.
Researcher: Okay. And why? is it because it’s the main entertainment tool you
have now?
Participant 13: Yeah. And I think I have so many options with it. I think that’s
why I don’t really want to give it up.
Researcher: Okay. I’m going to skip to the last question now. So, in terms of
your everyday life, and your smartphone usage and how you structure your day, and
how you use the phone, what are the most important values for you? So I’m going to
give you some examples in order for you to understand it. So there’s family, there’s
friends, there’s career, there’s health, there’s sports, like there’s a lot of different
categories.
Which three would be the most important for you to structure your
smartphone usage or your everyday life? Like what is important for you?
Participant 13: I think..I don’t know. I think it would be maybe friends I guess.
Yeah.
==PAGE:301==
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
291
B.2
Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
Figure B.14: Age
Figure B.15: Gender
==PAGE:302==
292
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.16: Education level
Figure B.17: Relationship status
==PAGE:303==
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
293
Figure B.18: Nationality
Figure B.19: Smartphone usage frequency
==PAGE:304==
294
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.20: Smartphone charging frequency
Figure B.21: Most used smartphone applications
==PAGE:305==
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
295
Figure B.22: Average screen time
Figure B.23: Reflection on screen time
==PAGE:306==
296
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.24: Used strategies for decreasing current screen time
Figure B.25: Using smartphones for relaxing
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:307==
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
297
Figure B.26: I can’t understand why people use smartphones
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.27: Experience a buzz of excitement while using certain smartphone appli-
cations
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:308==
298
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.28: Social media jargon is confusing
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.29: Feel drawn towards smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:309==
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
299
Figure B.30: Rarely thinking about the smartphone when its not used
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.31: Feeling a sense of power when using smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:310==
300
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.32: Smartphones are unimportant
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.33: I do not feel anxious about using my smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:311==
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
301
Figure B.34: Neglect important things when using smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.35: It would not matter to me if I never used my smartphone again
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:312==
302
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.36: Losing track of time when using smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.37: Continue smartphone activities on personal computer
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:313==
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
303
Figure B.38: I feel happy at the thought of using my smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.39: I have made unsuccessful attempts to reduce the time I spend on my
smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:314==
304
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.40: I often use my smartphone during meals
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.41: I am sometimes late for engagements because of my smartphone activi-
ties
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:315==
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
305
Figure B.42: I often use my smartphone to keep in touch with friends and family
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.43: I often fail to get enough sleep because of my smartphone activities
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:316==
306
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.44: Using my smartphone has sometimes interfered with my work
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.45: Arguments have sometimes arisen with friends or family because of the
time I spend on my smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:317==
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
307
Figure B.46: I often feel that I spend more time than I can afford on smartphones
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.47: My thoughts often become disorganized when I use my smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:318==
308
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.48: My social life has sometimes suffered because of my smartphone activi-
ties
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.49: The less I have to do with my smartphone, the better
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:319==
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
309
Figure B.50: I have never used my smartphone as an escape from socializing
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.51: Spending time on my smartphone is good for overcoming boredom
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:320==
310
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.52: I don’t feel in control when I use my smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.53: I find smartphone activities addictive
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:321==
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
311
Figure B.54: I think that I am addicted to my smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.55: I have never tried to avoid using my smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:322==
312
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.56: Smartphones make my life easier
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.57: I am calm when using my smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:323==
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
313
Figure B.58: I feel connected to other people when I spend time on my smartphone
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.59: I seldom worry about my self-image when I am using a certain smart-
phone application
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:324==
314
B Interview Transcripts
Figure B.60: It is important for me to be up to date with my smartphone activities
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
Figure B.61: I often get irritated with certain smartphone applications
1: Strongly disagree
5: Strongly agree
==PAGE:325==
 
Has the current coronavirus outbreak, and related social distancing 
measures, changed your smartphone usage in recent days or weeks? If yes, 
how? 
Contacting my family 
nope 
I use more my phone 
Yes, I use more time on my phone, because my social activities can't find place outside my 
home or at my home, so that's why I am socialising myself by using my phone 
Yes, I use more time on my phone, because my social activities can't find place outside my 
home or at my home, so that's why I am socialising myself by using my phone 
I would say that I am using my smartphone a bit longer that before, but not a huge 
difference 
Now that I am at home, I put my phone in a drawer far away to concentrate 
I use it more 
Yes, I spend more time checking my insta and Facebook feed 
No 
Yes, I spend more time on my phone checking social media than I normally did, because of 
the lack of socializing these days 
Yes, I use it more. 
Yes, I use it more often to keep communication with family/friends 
Yes, i am using video calls more than before 
I am calling more 
Messenger calls 
Use it more 
I am spending more time on my phone 
I use my phone a lot more compared to before the coronavirus outbreak 
not really no 
Not really as I mostly do calls/meetings on my PC 
Yes, I call or talk to my family and my friends almost every day now since the coronavirus 
outbreak 
no 
Yes, using it way more 
Yes, I use my smartphone much more to entertain myself 
I downloaded Houseparty and use it with my friends. Otherwise I call my family more often, 
yeah. 
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
315
==PAGE:326==
No 
checking way more the medias 
Use it more in all ways 
Yes, a lot, currently being confined in my appartment alone I use my phone a lot more than 
I do usually, which makes answering these questions difficult. 
Yes, more texting/calling, but i also check twitter much more regular 
It's increased it significantly 
Not really, I use my pc mostly so the use is around the same 
Due to isolation, my on screen time has significantly increased, because I am pointlessly 
scrolling through applications to kill time. 
No 
Yes, my screen time skyrocketed 
more video calls, less usage overall 
Sure, I do more Video/Audio calls 
Yea, screen time increased with like 20% 
I Facetime more 
Increasing the amount of time I spend on my smartphone. 
More free time leads to more time wasting, sometimes on the phone 
I use FaceTime much more often to keep in touch with my friends. My screen time has also 
increased with minimum 30% 
Not really 
Yes, before Corona I tried to limit my usage.. It has now sky-rocketed compared to before. 
No 
Yes, whatsapp calls have increased. 
My consumption has increased. 
Yes, it has increased drastically 
not really 
I used to use mainly skype, now I also use discord, facebook video call, skype business, 
whereby + 
Yes, I think I use it a bit more actually. 
I use it muchhhh more!! 
Usage/ screen-time increased heavily 
Totally, my screen time has increased and I'm using it more for video calls and send more 
messages to talk to family and friends 
Not much. 
316
B Interview Transcripts
==PAGE:327==
Yes, it has increased the number of meetings I'm attending through my smartphone, so it 
has increased my screen time 
no 
Yes, increasing screen time 
YES, INCREASED SIGNIFICANTLY 
Calls and Messages 
I think not so much 
Yes i use it much more, and can now spend hours on tiktok 
More time home = more time on SoMe 
Yes.i spend more time on my phone. I have used the news app more than I normally do, 
the same goes for Facebook Snapchat Og Instagram. I also got some new traningapps too 
help kill time. And FaceTime to call and see friends and family. 
Yes, spent way more time on it to get the latest updates/follow the conferences, called more 
people too 
Yes, I spend double the time on my phone if not more 
Yes, I use it more than usual 
Videocall 
No 
Yes, spending more time 
Yes, more videoconference and more time spent 
I videocall a lot more than before. 
No 
Spending more time on youtube, but not on the smart phone since I am at home where I 
have a computer 
Yes, I was procrastinating with Netflix last days, but strangely podcasts (Youtube) allowed 
me to concentrate for work. Sometimes in the middle of the day, I am calling to my friends 
or family to get to know how they are doing. 
Yes, I tend to make more calls over facebook and whatsapp 
Not notably. 
Yes, I spend more time calling, facetiming and messaging friends, classmates and family to 
stay in contact and talk about assignments/exams 
no 
Yes I communicate digitally with friends and family way more often 
No 
I defo use my smartphone more. 
Yes I use Whatsapp more, and I am playing Games more. 
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
317
==PAGE:328==
use of houseparty app 
Yes, I use my phone to communicate also with people I didn't use to text (school mates 
especially, face to face communication has been replaced with text messaging or video 
calls). 
I don't feel like my screen time has increased a lot. However, I am using my smartphone 
way more to follow the news on a daily basis. 
Yes, I am using my phone around 5 more hours for sure 
I do more (video)calls with my family and friend on Whatsapp 
More frequent smartphone usage (up 4/5 hours a day) to stay in touch with friends & family. 
No 
No 
Yes it changed a lot, I use my phone more than ever. I'm always on except the work hours 
or study hours 
yes, more time on twitter, news 
Yes, I do lots of video calls now 
No 
It has increased 
Yes, definitely spending more time on my smartphone to connect with friends and family 
I use less my phone and more my laptop for social media. I do call / message my friends or 
colleagues more to keep in touch. But that's either on phone or laptop. 
Yes, I am spending more time than I used to in using apps like Instagram and Whats app to 
stay connected with my friends 
Yes. An increase in time wasting on social media 
It reduced the usage of the smartphone, cause I use my laptop all the time. 
I'm using it more to stay in touch with friends - mainly for call/text 
Yes, it has increased. Less google maps. More frequently looking at the news. More 
facetime. 
Not really 
Yes. I'm definitely using my smartphone, but especially my computer almost the whole day, 
because I'm alone and I want to communicate with my family and friends. 
Yes, I spend more time with my smartphone than before 
I think it’s pretty much the same. I’m always on my phone a lot 
More usage 
Screen time has definitely increased, as to speak and meet with people you use your phone 
No, I use it less than before. 
Yes, increased significantly. 
318
B Interview Transcripts
==PAGE:329==
 
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
319
==PAGE:330==
 
Has the current coronavirus outbreak, and related social distancing measures, 
changed your smartphone relationship in recent days or weeks? If yes, how? 
Yes, I am more connected to my smartphone, because of work and family 
nope 
I used more News app like BFMTV and France24 
Yes.. Because people are posting all kind of crap about the virus, which is not useful 
information 
Yes.. Because people are posting all kind of crap about the virus, which is not useful 
information 
I feel I spend too much time using my smartphone sometimes. 
No, just communicating more 
I use it more 
No 
No 
Yes, I feel that most of the content I follow is connected to coronavirus, why I aim to spend 
less time on it 
Not really. 
Yes, I feel more connected my family. 
K 
No 
No 
no 
Anxious about news 
no 
No 
not really no 
I do sometimes purposefully look up trends about the virus 
Yes, watching news is more stressful 
no 
The same question as above 
Yeams I rely on it more 
No, not really 
No 
checking way more the medias 
320
B Interview Transcripts
==PAGE:331==
Not besides using it more 
Yes it is almost my only source of communication with friends and family 
Feel kind of anxious about checking the new numbers of infected people 
No, I'm in a privileged position to not be too worried about catching coronavirus. So the news 
doesn't bother me as much 
No i feel the same no need to panic. I have been an introvert since the begining nothing 
changed with the outbreak 
No 
No 
On social media, I feel I have less to tell, yet there's a slight pressure of posting and on some 
days, when you see how productive/ creative/ cheerful others are makes me even more 
anxious. 
less stressed 
No 
No 
No 
FOMO. I feel there's more going on in Whatsapp groups discussions, for example. 
Any emotions are more related to the storm of negative news rather to using the phone. 
No 
Not really 
I use it way more for brain dead entertainment. Facebook videos are my weakness 
No 
Yes, a little bit more anxious. 
Not at all. 
As above 
for sure 
No 
Yes I feel a bit more anxious due to the cover-19 situation. 
No 
Usage required to keep social contacts. Increased boredom yields increased usage, too. 
Not really, it's obvious that some news are upsetting but it hasn't changed my smartphone 
relationship 
Not much 
Not really 
no 
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
321
==PAGE:332==
No 
YES, DISTRACTION FROM MY STUDIES 
No 
No 
Yes because of the distance i use my smartphone differently, i facetime much more and im 
tired of it but i need some human contact 
No 
No you see less people out having fun and spending money. That makes me feel better about 
being to broke too go out. 
Not really, my feed is either climate change or corona related so not more anxiety 
Not really 
Yes, I have more call and video call 
No 
No 
No 
No 
I feel more anxious in general. Including with the phone. 
No 
No 
Feels like no. 
No 
No. 
The news does tend to make me anxious but except for that I feel the same 
no 
Yes I avoid using social media because everyone is talking and panicking about it so it 
stresses me out 
No 
No, I like the news feed still. 
Not necessarily scrolling but gaming yes. 
No 
Yes, I am thinking in particular of when I use it to read news. 
Not significantly 
No 
More tired of using my smartphone 
No 
322
B Interview Transcripts
==PAGE:333==
No 
No 
NO, I'm just getting bored because of the challenges on Instagra, 
same + more time on messaging apps but mainly desktop apps for work 
I appreciate having the technology more now 
No 
No 
Not really 
Yes, avoid reading about coronavirus 
Yes 
No, though I'm conscious I've spent more time on it lately 
I forget that I have a smartphone these days. I own a smartphone for the last 3 years. I 
remembered how nice it felt before that I did not have to respond immediately to my 
messages. And that my friends and family were ok with that. 
No 
Yes. 
Not really 
No 
No.. It's the same 
Yes, I feel more anxious based on the increasing usage of my smartphone 
I felt anxious in the beginning because I couldn’t control seeing all the information about the 
pandemic. Now, it’s back to normal 
No 
Nothing has changed much regarding feelings 
no 
I'm trying even more to reduce the time I spend on useless applications like Fb, IG and such. 
 
B.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
323
==PAGE:334==
324
B Interview Transcripts
B.3
Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
B.3.1
Participants 15 and 16
Researcher: Tell us a little about yourself
Participant 15: I’m 22 and I study digital management at CBS
Participant 16: I study Political Science at Copenhagen University
Researcher: What do you think about the survey you filled?
Participant 16: I thought that the survey was good. There were a lot of inter-
esting aspects. I was in a little bit of shock about my screen time. I was a little bit
conflicted about where the limit is about smartphones and TV. If I am watching TV
while cooking, does it still count as smartphone usage? Because my time was mostly
spend on Netflix.
Participant 15: If you watch Netflix on your phone, probably. It is different for
me because I watch it on my TV. Also since the quarantine started, I started face
timing with my family and friends a lot more than normal. It is around 8h a day,
but when I talk, I don’t touch my phone - it is just there. Otherwise, I think that
the survey was really detailed. But it did make me realize that I use my phone a lot.
But it also might be because of the quarantine.
Participant 16: For me, the biggest question was “What do we define as smart-
phone usage?”
Researcher: The concept of “chill” and “relaxing”. What do you think about
this finding in general?
Participant 15: I think it’s true. When I am on my phone I do this scrolling.
This is how I try to relax. My phone is a way for me to relax.
Participant 16: I think that phone usage can be relaxing in a many ways. For
me, I realize that I use my phone as background noise. Listening to music or watch
TV while playing NBA. It is eather like constant using or as background noise.
Researcher: A lot of people mentioned that they are conscious of their self-image
on social media. What do you think about social media in regards to self-image.
Participant 15: Everybody talks about these models on social media with nice
pictures, like skinny girls and this really destroys self-esteem. For example, I started
unfollowing stuff that make me feel weird. Not only people but in general. But it is
true, a lot of people try to act as people on social media.
Participant 16: It varies on how people use their phones. For example, I use
my phone watching funny videos, but especially for girls - they like watching videos
for makeup and these kinds of stuff. And I can see a lot of girls try to look like the
people they follow on SM.
==PAGE:335==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
325
Researcher: Have you ever feel uncomfortable when using certain applications?
What about now during the outbreak?
Participant 15: It is not about self-image, but content in general. For example
racists videos around this corona outbreak - and in general a lot of weird stuff. But I
don’t think SM can trigger some strong emotions in me. Every app has a lot of sides.
It depends on what kind of account you follow. Maybe this is why it is so diverse
because you can follow so many different content accounts. I think that the corona
content that I see it is mostly funny memes, so I don’t feel anxious about it.
Participant 16: I agree, for me, it’s annoying seeing these kinds of content and
making these miss information videos. I think memes bring a positive impact in order
to think more positively. It is about a way of discussing common issues. In SM, the
provided content is directly from people to people and we have seen so many misuses
of that.
Researcher: Do you find smartphone activities addictive - over 50% said that
they find them addictive, but when asked do you believe you are addicted to your
smartphone - they said that they don’t. What do you think about that?
Participant 15: I think you can get addicted really fast to useless stuff. For
example, I downloaded TikTok because of my sister and I started spending like 6h
a day watching videos on the app. But when it comes to chatting applications, you
don’t have to be active all the time. I think that it is mostly for apps where there is
so much content - it is just never-ending and you end up scrolling and watching stuff
for so long. For me when my phone broke, I realize how much I need it. Because
everything was there - my travel card and so on. So maybe in a way, I am addicted,
because nowadays it is hard to survive without a phone - but in a way, it is not only
the apps, but also like phone numbers and so on.
Participant 16: I agree. I think what is so dangerous in smartphones is that
everything is at ones - finding news, music, connecting with people, portable TV. I
can totally see where this addiction is coming from because I can totally see that
people can not survive without it in a way. Let’s say that you want to go to sleep and
want to say hello to a friend and then you end up chatting with him a whole night
without realizing it. Or in my case, when I am cooking I am used to watching Tv
from my phone as a background. It’s the whole user experience that it is addictive.
I think it is a good point. It is a one-stop for everything you need. We don’t even
need a credit card, we just use our phone and we instantly pay. We don’t need a
newspaper in order to follow the news. It is everything in one place. The practicality
is what people look for.
Researcher: Do you think the word “addictive” has a negative connotation to
people?
Participant 15: Yes, I think it is more “reliance” because they rely a lot on their
phone
==PAGE:336==
326
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 16: Reliance is good, but maybe also a necessity. If you don’t have
it, you feel how much life is hard without it. Even that being said addiction - it is
something almost as useful as wearing shoes.
Researcher: What do you think about the ring limiter strategy concept?
Participant 15: I don’t know if it will stop me from using my phone or I will
just use it anyway. I mean I have these limits on my apps. Some apps which tell me
like f.ex. on Instagram I have max 1 h per day and if I exceed it, if I want to check
it - I still check it. So I don’t know if this ring will help me using it less.
Participant 16: If we say I use my phone for 5h per day and look at where these
5 hours went (app related) I am thinking about is TV included as screen time when I
watch it on my phone? There are certain things that are more harmful than others.
Participant 15: Now when you mentioned the loop, I think it will help because
then you will actually realize how much time you have spend on your phone so you
can do something more productive.
Participant 16: I guess I can see the purpose of that. Like, okay, 30 min have
passed so it is like a reminder tool. If it is like a limiter it would not be a good idea.
Researcher: Is there anything you would like to share about the design or
change?
Participant 16: For instance, it could be a lamp on your night table. If it is
something like a ring, this means that it is kind of like peace of you. I see the potential,
but I also see the challenge. Some sort of an AI lamp or I don’t know.
Researcher: What do you think about the Bond Touch strategy concept?
Participant 15: To be honest, I think it is a bit weird. Because I guess you can
just send them a text or goodnight-message instead of touching this
Participant 16: There must be some sort of like a thing already or like at least
theoretically where you touch a doll or something and it make craters and like sort
of a sensation and someone else like okay this person is like touching my shoulder, so
I guess like that’s like an ultimate version of what do you talking about does it make
sense. But I don’t think this is ideal. I don’t think in practice it will work. If it was
something more powerful - probably yes, but I don’t think it will be useful.
Researcher: What do you think about the Content digest strategy concept?
Participant 16: I see a lot of issues here. Who is determining, who does that -
is it some sort of an AI algorithm type of thing. I guess, it depends on the level of
the AI and also, I think I don’t know like that’s like an extremely scary scenario. I
guess that might be useful but that means that the basically the AI or the algorithm
will both have to be more advanced than the humans themselves.
Participant 15: I agree. It has to be advance. Different people find different
highlights in articles so like it maybe you’re another aspect and what the AI says if
==PAGE:337==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
327
it’s a long article, then there can be a lot of ways to summarize it.
Researcher: Do you think the endless scrolling makes you stay longer on your
phone?
Participant 15: No.
Participant 16: Not at all. I don’t think that’s the issue. This is a small aspect
of the issue I think
Participant 15: Something that puts me in the loop it’s more like platforms
where you have videos and pictures
Researcher: What do you think about the Challenge Application concept strat-
egy?
Participant 15: In quarantine, I would use this I think this sounds fun even
though I think the design looks really disturbing but I think it’s fun at least you
passed time somehow more interactively but if I’m on the metro like when life is back
to normal again and for example, I’m on the Metro on my way to school then I would
rather do whatever I want to do because during those times like you don’t have that
much free time so when you’re on the way to school, you could like I don’t know you
could check what you have to do before the lecture or you could just text your friends
or something so I think in the normal scenario I wouldn’t use it.
Participant 16: Why is it any better than any other apps? what stops me from
downloading like a few different games few different music apps really differently have
like 20 different apps then I use them rotate them instead of others I don’t see like how
does this differ from just being downloading sudoku and playing sudoku. Otherwise,
it just becomes another app another distraction for you.
Researcher: What do you think about the Alone Mode concept strategy?
Participant 15: For me, like I always use it do not disturb even like when I’m
in school I also you just use it like even when I’m not sleeping I use it because then
I don’t get the notifications and I can just check it whenever I have time. it’s really
similar to do not disturb I think but I get the idea I think it’s cool but it’s just not
too different I think from the other one
Participant 16: I don’t know if I have anything to add
Researcher: What do you think about the Social Network strategy concept?
Participant 15: I think it would be a great way to learn the language to practice
a language with me but I don’t know if I would want to talk to a stranger for half
an hour instead of talk, for example, face-timing my friend instead-but if you want
to practice the language then it’s a great way I think.
Participant 16: seems like another app to get hooked on the way I’m thinking
the more the more I hear these ideas are just like another app so you actually just
try to hook me on even more. It’s like Reddit meets Twitter-ish
==PAGE:338==
328
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Do you have any ideas of how you can foster a healthier relationship
with your smartphone?
Participant 16: I have like the same thing that the same issue with just the
concept of a smartphone - what it actually mean? What does healthy mean you
know for instance say twitter, twitter is a really really nasty place but for me at the
same time Twitter is amazing because I get the most efficient way information there
is. So is twitter unhealthy for me - I would say No. Where does the limit go?
Participant 15: For me unhealthy means that I use it to thank for example
when I have to study for exams I use it and I procrastinate instead of studying so I
just end up doing useless stuff like scrolling on social media. Then I like for example
the ring that you talked about that would work because then it would remind me of
studying. But otherwise, I don’t feel like it could be described as unhealthy after you
have if you have nothing better to
Participant 16: It could be an app or it could be literally hardware that like a
ring what you guys talked about or just kind of a like multi-purpose tool that it kind
of includes both hardware and software but extremely smart and holistic now I’m
gonna call it an app that includes where you can maybe say where you can prioritize
some sort of apps and through that, you can reduce the amount of time spend. what
are my priorities and based on that you can say okay if I really need to study on my
exams I can program this thing to kind of literally tell me okay you’ve been using
this is too much time to go to study and if the app tells me I have an exam where I
need to study I am gonna listen to. Kind of an app where you kind of tell yourself
what to do.
==PAGE:339==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
329
B.3.2
Participants 17 and 18
Researcher: Tell us a little about yourself
Participant 17: I just graduated so um and hoping to continue studying graphic
design
Participant 18: I study physics and hope to be graduating this year
Researcher: What do you think about the survey you filled?
Participant 17: The main thing is that it made me realize how much I’m using
my phone some questions I could um were positive but most of them make me realize
actually that I’m using my phone so much
Participant 18: yeah I think it was kind of the same for me it just felt kind of
depressing to fill out the questions because I was like okay I know I have a problem.
there was this one question which was like uh do you something like that about your
sleeping patterns and the relation to smartphone usage and I filled out the survey at
like 1 30 in the morning on my smartphone so that was a good feeling well but I also,
like that the questions came in the order
Researcher: The concept of “chill” and “relaxing”. What do you think about
this finding in general?
Participant 17: I feel like right now definitely is comforting because I connect
with my friends and you know like with text and all that which is obviously in general
as well but now it’s more a bigger volume. The apps I use I feel like those are the
things I select to have on my phone so like I obviously only download things that
make me joy like brings me joy right so things I use yeah it’s comforting.
Participant 18: I don’t play games but I think there’s a lot of stuff I use on
my smartphone that isn’t really comforting especially in times like this so I don’t
know it’s not that bad anymore but I used to check the corona numbers like every 20
minutes. It really makes made me feel anxious to see the numbers rising all the time
basically but I just want to add that I don’t I never had like work on my phone so
that’s also something that you know like I never got work emails and like I never had
work calls so I think it’s also why it’s more comforting than stressful for me
Researcher: A lot of people mentioned that they are conscious of their self-image
on social media. What do you think about social media in regards to self-image?
Participant 17: I just feel like it’s this like the culture built upon that there are
so many great people doing so well um you know and all these famous people like
models and or like they have the greatest pictures and I have also been pressured by
small details like oh it’s not good enough and I was also caring so much about the
number of likes I was getting. But I feel like by a certain age you kind of overcome
these but it also depends on what like a stage of life you’re in how happy you are
how many things are happening to you and all that so yeah I’ve had all the faces like
I’ve been worried I don’t know I’ve been happy with it and so on. It gives you like
==PAGE:340==
330
B Interview Transcripts
a short term positive feeling but in the long term it’s not really something that yeah
helps you.
Participant 18: it makes you happy and I think just seeing pretty pictures I
guess at least most of the pictures are pretty or seeing funny pictures I don’t know
yeah I like to see creativity and something different from everyday life.
Participant 17: some friends of mine girls they care so much about their self-
image there and they care so much more about what’s happening online that they
don’t live in the present and that can annoy the shit out of me excuse my language.
Participant 18: yeah exactly like you know when you walk on the street um
when you’re on a holiday and you have a friend who’s always on the phone and
actually missing out on those events happening right there but then they care about
to post the The picture they just took five minutes ago
Researcher: Do you find smartphone activities addictive - over 50
Participant 17: I think that people think that yes i think these smartphone
activities are Addictive but then at the same time, I’m like oh no I’m not addicted
to my phone though
Participant 18: I don’t know maybe it also very much depends on everyone’s
definition of addiction because something can be addictive and I know that something
is addictive but I’m still not addicted to it
Researcher: Do you think the word “addictive” has a negative connotation to
people? Is there a different word you would use instead of addicted?
Participant 18: Toxic. I mean I don’t know I still think that even though there’s
a A lot of bad parts I don’t know about smartphones it still gives me a better life
in total I guess I’m not sure but I’m actually not sure about that I think if I would
buy a phone which only has I don’t know WhatsApp installed because everyone in
Austria at least uses WhatsApp it would be fine and I would be fine.
Participant 17: that’s your A choice like I also I haven’t downloaded tick tock
because I know it’s addictive and I know I want to spend my time in quarantine on
better things than that you see but I still think I’m addicted to my smartphone. it’s
rather a necessity than an addiction because I feel that it’s necessary now to have it
and not for all the texting and social media but also for google maps because I use
that a lot to get to places and then I can leave without mobile pay or um and all that
but calling people and texting people now it’s just it’s a necessity.
Researcher: What do you think about the ring limiter strategy concept?
Participant 17: it was crazy um yeah I mean it’s a way if you really want to um
focus on um decreasing your screen time I kind of feel like I have to see the others to
give an opinion
Participant 18: this one sounds really intense to add another electronic gadget
to your life to to decrease the usage of your smartphone I don’t know if I’m that
==PAGE:341==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
331
convinced. I can’t really see myself using it. first of all, I can’t really see I don’t
really see myself wearing a ring in general so that’s kind of uh yeah makes it difficult
and Secondly, to be honest, I don’t really see why I should use a ring when I could
just I don’t know how but I mean you can just use the screen time thing inside ios.
Researcher: What do you think about the Bond Touch strategy concept?
Participant 17: I think it would confuse me because then I get a vibration but
who did I actually get the vibration from and then I would immediately check my
phone if this person has written me a message or something. but even if you knew
who the person were you would still check if he or she needs something or what he
wants.
Participant 18: that would just be a new way of um making new form of social
media then that’s weird like yeah it’s basically adding another layer
Researcher: What do you think about the Content digest strategy concept?
Participant 17: I mean it sounds good if you could like filter out the content
you want things you’re interested in, yeah I mean I like this one.
Participant 18: but then you could also just check the home page of the news-
paper and read because the first five articles most of the time is the most important
ones of the day. I think it’s cool and I feel like this is also something you could apply
for politics a lot that’s just an idea I mean I think it won’t make sense for for updates
from your friends. yeah I’m a little bit worried because of I mean that that was the
idea of the Facebook news feed they hope to to filter out the best stuff and show you
the most important stuff at first and then the not so important stuff later and we we
all know how that turned out.
Researcher: What do you think about the Challenge Application concept strat-
egy?
Participant 18: It sounds like a good idea but on the other hand it may lead to
you using your smartphone even more which might not be able to intended purposes
Participant 17: I mean I feel like I could use this in some situations as a brain-
storm but it’s kind of like I downloaded this app that reminds you to drink water you
just kind of don’t care about it because I’m using or like I don’t care about.
Researcher: What do you think about the Alone Mode concept strategy?
Participant 17: I mean I think it’s a good idea I don’t have no idea but what
does night mode do - does it do something similar?
Participant 18: I like it I feel like this is something I could have used during my
bachelor thesis
Participant 17: yeah I also like it I think there should be more different modes
and should be more customizable.
Researcher: What do you think about the Social Network strategy concept?
==PAGE:342==
332
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 17: I don’t know I don’t think people will feel comfortable to talk
to a Chatbot.
Participant 18: I don’t know I think it kind of sounds like a harassment night-
mare.
Participant 17: Yeah, what if that someone on the other side who answers you
is like nasty or something like that. I don’t like the idea.
Researcher: Do you have any ideas of how you can foster a healthier relationship
with your smartphone?
Participant 17: If I have like 5 minutes free, I immediately grab my smartphone
and check something so yeah I think it’s way too intense in that regard.
Participant 18: I don’t think my problem is this screen time definitely use
Instagram way too much and I feel like our generation has used to um having the
phone muted. so I never hear when I have a notification I always have this pressure
to check my phone if something has happened someone has texted and I haven’t tried
any apps that lock your apps or reduce the screen time but I try to use my phone
less and like um, use my laptop instead. I like the content filtering thing - I think it
will help me reduce my time searching for content.
==PAGE:343==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
333
B.3.3
Participants 9, 19 and 20
Researcher: Tell us a little about yourself
Participant 9: I’m studying my master’s in telecommunication engineering at
DTU I’m currently on my last semester
Participant 19: I am also studying master’s in materials manufacturing engineer.
I’m working on my thesis.
Participant 20: I study innovation and entrepreneurship.
Researcher: What do you think about the survey you filled? Did it make you
reflect on certain parts of your behavior?
Participant 19: not really I got the idea that I’m not in as sort of committed
erase relationship to my smartphone as other people by taking this early so yeah I
guess
Participant 9: it made me reflect also to realize how other people treat the
phone like I try to the thing or at least I like to think that I use it as a tool but it’s
true that many times you sort of vocalize your relationship with other people through
the phone so in the end, it’s a bit unclear whether you’re you know attached to a
person or using your phone as a tosser and it’s evidently around it’s a bit weird how
that being in the middle works but for me, it was quite useful to see it from another
point of view
Participant 19: I just remember this feeling of being feeling different from what
you would expect
Researcher: The concept of “chill” and “relaxing”. What do you think about
this finding in general?
Participant 9: I don’t know your opinion or about this but I think it’s um it’s
a bit like I think it shows perfectly how how addictive this is because that’s basically
the same reaction that drug addicts have towards their drug itself that is like you feel
anxious and then that thing produces relaxation or sort of you know feeling release
of some pressure. so I think it shows that there might be more addiction than people
think. it’s like also seems your user phone everywhere including like your most private
moments of the day like you’re having in your bedroom your sofa home I guess that
also translates into whenever you’re using your phone it can sort of creating that
atmosphere that you’re on your own so even in situations where you’re not might not
be too comfortable or that your other sort of stress or whatever that can make you
feel in that bubble of everything’s all right, calm when I’m on my own.
Participant 19: that is definitely an extreme case but I would I agree with it
because of I have a sister who is very much that she she has normalized just having
the phone in her hand wherever she goes and at this point she uses Snapchat instead
of just calling someone for example. so they sound like clips of each other talk instead
of just call which I don’t know if I’m being a Boomer or something that it just doesn’t
==PAGE:344==
334
B Interview Transcripts
make sense to me.
Participant 20: the phone is the first thing I look at when I wake up just today
I was on it like an hour before I got up and so I would say I’m addicted.
Researcher: Another finding is that social media is very strongly correlated with
smartphones so when we say smartphone although people immediately think about
social media what do you guys think about social media in general?
Participant 20: I love it. you can get addicted and I of course girl sometimes
get insecure about the things they see on the social media and um yeah they can
be addicting and most people use it just as an escape from their everyday life and
entertainment also
Participant 19: I mostly use social media just to keep in contact with friends
beyond that I don’t really see the point of it. it’s essentially a tool to stay in contact
with your socializing through this tool but when the tool becomes your life then you
might have a problem I don’t know.
Participant 9: I’ve thought a lot about this or social media because of I I was
using Instagram until three months ago that I decided to uninstall it from my phone
but I gotta say that I think it is one of the best decisions that I made. I think it’s
very time consuming and it creates these fake connection between people. I think in
Instagram it’s more like people come in you can you can have two sides you can like
basically use it for two perspectives like just watching how other people are living or
how they show you their lives or you can be the one that it’s always talking about
their lives or showing everybody as well. it can create an image that people project
and make me think that my life should be like that and that’s completely unreal I
think that’s very unhealthy as well so I’m not a big fan of social media. it’s a bit
of you know try to keep the balance between using it for what is it supposed to be
connected to people and falling into the addiction of itself or just keeping scrolling
down and just being fed up with a lot of information about other people’s lives that
you probably don’t need to worry about it.
Researcher: A lot of people mentioned that they are conscious of their self-image
on social media. What do you think about social media in regards to self-image.
Participant 19: No.
Participant 20: Yeah. I think oh what will people say or is this funny enough
Participant 9: I think a little bit like there’s I know as well that there are
some places that I can post some stuff and others that don’t like I really think of
the audience usually like I’m not going to post bullshit on LinkedIn because I know
that maybe my future employer would be there so I will try to look as professional
as possible and try to be like the cleanest guy who is great University and has this
great ambition and so on but then in Facebook, I can just like memes that I see and
you know it’s like depending on the audience. I think that’s one of the reasons why
I deleted Instagram because it was like a lot of seeing how people were fighting with
==PAGE:345==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
335
their own real selves because of the image that they needed to project so that was a
bit weird for me or thinking about it.
Researcher: Have you ever feel uncomfortable when using certain applications?
What about now during the outbreak?
Participant 9: I think that has a lot to do I mean this is the results of having a
really good design or a very addictive design so from like from the user perspective, I
think it’s a it’s not ideal because it’s making you feel anxious and then also creating
that need of you knowing everything all the time and not missing any single thing that
everybody posts. but on the other side as if I look from the engineer’s perspective
that have the sign that it’s like a great job because you created a UX to your product
so it’s magnificent.
Participant 20: I don’t feel the needs like going to these apps to be updated I
just go whenever I feel I have the time for it and but I could see like people getting
like anxiety from answering people from like Messenger.
Participant 19: it’s obviously not very healthy I’d say further mental health
it’s sort of a self-destructive the addiction I guess at that point. we feel the need to
because we’ve addicted some people.
Participant 20: individual thing to find balance in these apps in this world.
Participant 9: There are two parts - going to Instagram and other applications
just for the sake of going there and the other part is when it is useful like buying a
bus ticket or paying - something for making your life easier. There are other things
that are basically designed for you to be using them all the time and I think I think
that’s where I would draw the line between necessity and addiction.
Participant 19: no one’s strictly addicted to holding a smartphone they’re ad-
dicted to certain apps within this smartphone. You can split them in two - either
necessity yeah that’s the comfortable stuff that just makes your life easier and then
there’s the addictive stuff which might be games, messages, and so on.
Researcher: Do you find smartphone activities addictive - over 50
Participant 19: maybe it could be in the way that you can access your addiction
elsewhere.
For example, you can go on Instagram on your laptop.
therefore you
wouldn’t be addicted to your smartphone you’d be more addicted to Instagram.
Participant 9: I agree like I don’t see people being attached to their phones but
more like what it’s inside like this software. And this software you can find it on your
laptop.
Researcher: What do you think about the ring limiter strategy concept?
Participant 20: You get lost track of time when you’re on your phone but giving
yourself a time span - I don’t know for me it’s annoying.
Participant 19: I feel like it’s too easy to ignore so you can just always blinking
==PAGE:346==
336
B Interview Transcripts
red but whatever.
Participant 9: it’s like it’s like me timer you can put on your phone like most of
the people, I know that tried that especially on an iPhone because on Android you
cannot say okay extend for 15 minutes but on an iPhone or iOS you can say okay
extend for 5-10 minutes whatever. I think this will be the same - people will ignore
it.
Researcher: What do you think about the Bond Touch strategy concept?
Participant 20: that’s cute if you like oh my mom’s thinking of me. I don’t
know maybe my feelings will get hurt she doesn’t buzz me in.
Participant 19: It’s a cute idea, but I don’t see myself using it. Because you
can’t really say much from this buzz.
Participant 9: I agree with all it’s very cute and well it can also hurt your
feelings if someone forgets about you one day and you get used to this buzzing thing
but yeah, I don’t see myself using it. would prefer using these than just sending a
message hey I guess I saw this and this being this thing of you.
Researcher: What do you think about the Content digest strategy concept?
Participant 20: I like it. Sometimes, I am just keeping scrolling and looking for
fun things.
Participant 9: I mean it’s a good idea definitely, because that’s one of the things
that they scroll down like being finished scroll down. I think it’s a good way to block
that behavior. I am going to use it on Instagram. It’s not like I am reading things, I
am just skimming.
Participant 20: I would use it on TikTok. It is endless.
Participant 19: It is a good idea. often when you check Facebook you sort of
see something that looks cool and they need to scroll on yeah I mean suddenly it’s
like 10 minutes later and you don’t know where the time went so sometimes but it’s
not often enough for me to use some sort of third-party app to limit it. I’m very
conscious of how I waste my time.
Researcher: What do you think about the Challenge Application concept strat-
egy?
Participant 20: I would use it. when you’re bored for example.
Participant 9: I think it is a good alternative because if you are committed to
start using your phone less and then for instance you have this time block and there’s
nothing else happening and you know that’s it that suggestions of what you could
use your time for it’s I think it’s a good opportunity. It shows good alternatives.
Participant 19: often if you’re on your phone you’re just trying to not be Bored.
Participant 9: I think for me would make sense to well let’s say that the app
==PAGE:347==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
337
has a list of all the things that you want to do during the day and make some sort
of connection between this list and your phone and suggest you to go and to your
actual tasks.
Researcher: What do you think about the Alone Mode concept strategy?
Participant 20: I already have the night sign thing on so when I think after 7
or 8 my I don’t get any notifications I have to get into my phone and then see a red
dot. I removed all of my notifications on several apps I don’t want that stress that
anxiety to answer people all the time see my facebook notifications is so Stressful.
Participant 9: I really like the concept also the likely more profound pain that
you mentioned of sort of normalize the willing of being alone. I think it’s a good it
could be a good tool for making people realize how beneficial it could be to take some
alone time to meditate.
Participant 19: I don’t really see the point of it because we have the night mode
already. just leave your leave your phone in a drawer somewhere and it wouldn’t
disturb you at all.
Researcher: What do you think about the Social Network strategy concept?
Participant 20: I love this idea. I’ve tried to eat alone and during work it’s so
boring so and sometimes you don’t know what to eat for the next day so you can get
inspired by other people and talk to them.
Participant 19: I think it’s a good idea because it sort of would break up your
lunch for example and yeah just promote sort of cultural diversity.
Participant 9: I think in that framework of like lunch breaks make sense although
the idea of the board a bit too much for me looks a bit myself a black mirror episode.
Researcher: Do you have any ideas of how you can foster a healthier relationship
with your smartphone?
Participant 20: I have a lot of unhealthy relationships with like this device like
when I go to sleep is the last thing I look at, when I wake up is the first thing. When
I am outside - it is in my hand. I would use the speech-base network and the content
digest.
Participant 9: I still find a bit contradictory to put something in the phone
when you’re trying to use less of your phone. if it suggests things from the real world
like real other goals that are not related to your phone.
Participant 19: I feel like I spent too much time on my phone. it would be
much better to have something else something more protective so I think I would
definitely use this Challenge app which tells me to clean up or read a book. Alone
time, challenge app
==PAGE:348==
338
B Interview Transcripts
B.3.4
Participants 1 and 21
Researcher: (...) First of all, thank you so much for taking the time to join us
to talk about your smartphone usage and your relationships with. We’re going to
Technical University of Denmark. And we want to get insight into students use off
and relationship to their mobile devices, more specifically smartphones, and this is
for a master thesis. And what we hope to do is to kind of understand how we can
foster a healthier relationship to read through our smartphone. We will be recording
the interview just so that we don’t miss any comments, or and also for the sake of
transcription. Could you give us permission to record into? Yes. So your answers
will remain anonymous and we just work on first name basis just to maintain your
anonymity during the call And I also just want to say that this is a focus group
interview. And I will just give it give you questions to navigate the discussion, but the
main conversation should happen between you two. And please maintain a respectful
tone, just so everybody can get their opinion. Hear it out. And there are no wrong
answers, but rather different points of views. And please feel free to share your point
of view, even if it differs from what others have said. And keep in mind that are just
as interested in negative comments as positive comments to please feel free to just
criticize some of the concept ideas we go into further on, because we were interested
in that just so we can improve the concepts. Well, okay, let’s begin. Maybe we can
start off by who you are and where do you study.
Participant 1: Okay, yeah. My name is barnabus if we if we stick to the first
name and yeah I am I am also a student from DTU second year on digital media
engineering. I’m from from Hungary originally. And I don’t know what’s what’s
really relevant for for this for this discussion. I like music, let’s say.
Researcher: What do you study?
Participant 1: Digital media engineering.
Participant 21: Okay, I’m Participant 21: and I’m also doing the Masters
at DTU. I did a Nordic masters so I did my first year in Chalmers in Gothenburg.
And my second year, I’m doing it here with master thesis right now. And I study
maritime engineering and naval architecture. And yeah, I was just really interested
in the survey. The students as to what the conclusions you guys were drawing. So
this was why I actually took the survey.
Researcher: Okay, thank you. Um, so I’m interested in hearing, first of all, first
of all, what do you think of the survey and what reflections you’ve gotten through
the survey by completing it, because I don’t know if you’ve noticed, but the way that
the survey was conducted and the questions was also a way for you to be aware or
reflect over your consumption and also your relationship to your device. So what you
think of maybe Participant 21: , you can start.
Participant 21: But it was an interesting survey. And it did make me consider
like, I thought, I did not use my phone that much. But then you asked me to quantify
==PAGE:349==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
339
it. And then I had to really sit down and think and look at my phone and I saw
that the image you had put off like average consumption was like some 40 minutes
or something. And I saw my 40 to seven hours and I was like, okay, maybe I don’t,
so it’s not so slow as i thought, but yeah, it was an interesting survey. it really make
me think about maybe I’m not as low as I like to think I am.
Participant 1: My turn yeah. Oh yeah ah I don’t remember exactly the ques-
tionnaire unfortunately but I still have some some points. Like for example one one
thing is that if I remember correctly, most of the time you were referring to like what
is my relation to my to my smartphone and for me, my smartphone can mean a lot
of different things depending on what I’m using for me, so sometimes I feel guilt by
using my smartphone. I don’t know if I use it for Instagram or just useless stuff.
But sometimes if I use it for really useful topic for finding out something, some some
historical effect or something I did, then it’s a completely different Or relationship
to my smartphone. So maybe some sort of confusion came from that that you I if I
remember correctly that you referred most of the time just like smartphones in gen-
eral and that can mean different things. But but you can definitely ask for specific
applications as well if I remember and those are really good I mean, me personally,
I thought some some questions were crazy, but but I think they make perfect sense.
But like, I don’t know something like, if I remember correctly, like, is my relationship
to my smartphone is like, personal or like some it’s almost like like, relationships are
personal or something like that. Yeah, I get that. It’s it’s a [...] but it seemed quite
crazy.
Researcher: Okay, interesting. So we’re gonna, because we’re respecting GDPR
requirements. I don’t actually know or we don’t actually know what you’re specifically
answered. So we’re just gonna refer to the general trends and make you talk and
discuss them. So the first finding that we found is that a lot of people refer to the
smartphone and talk about the smartphone as being a tool to relax. So to calm down
to feel chill, to kill time, a lot. A lot of people talk about brain dead entertainment
is something that is comforting, relaxing, something where you don’t need to be
proactively focusing.
What do you think of this, and this is over 60% that have
written this, have reflected on this.
Participant 21: Well, I agree. I use it in the same sense as well. And I would
say that a lot of people I know do Use it in the same fashion. And yeah, I mean, at
some points it gets kind of blurry where I’m like I just like even in class I use it a lot
and at some points I’m just it’s really an easy way to sort of turn off your brain as
you said. So when you’re really just frustrated with something it’s just right at your
hands you just go there. Yeah.
Participant 1: I completely agree maker. Many times my fingers just moving
without me noticing. And like, I don’t know if it comes up into you, but as I close
Instagram, I open up Facebook and I close Facebook and then I open Instagram again
in like 30 seconds time difference and without me noticing, so that that means that
my brain is completely shut. That I’m not thinking so I agree with this sentence.
==PAGE:350==
340
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: The next finding is.. first off before I say it, which application do
you use the most on your smartphone? So what part of your smartphone do you use
the most?
Participant 1: Should I check it?
Researcher: No, no, just when when I ask you now what do you think is the
application category that you would use the most - like social media? contact appli-
cations? news?
Participant 21: Yeah, (..) yeah.
Participant 1: I think I would say. I don’t know which category messenger is
messaging apps like contact. So maybe maybe that’s that’s what I’m using for the
most. Yeah, but I think that’s it yeah.
Researcher: Okay. So according to the trend, and in the survey, a lot of people
use social media and social media is often correlated with smartphone. every time
we said.. So you’re referring earlier that we are always said the word smartphone
and never refers to something specific. And it was also to kind of understand what
smartphone meant for our population who are university student. So what is it that
immediately thought off when we said smartphone. A lot of people - I don’t know
if you remember one of the initial questions which was when was the last time you
checked your smartphone and everybody referred to ’Oh, I just checked the messaging
app, or I was checking social media’. A lot of it was purely social media and also the
questions were referring to social media
What do you think of social media?
Participant 21: You’re breaking up there. Yeah,
Participant 1: yeah, yeah, we may have some some hard time here hearing
you but I understand the question, I think it’s just for next time. Okay, so so just
messaging us are they part of the social media category?
Researcher: It is.
Participant 1: Okay. Then I guess I guess I, I agree most of most of Yeah, I
don’t know.
Okay, I let you start with this one.
Participant 21: I see. I uninstalled all social media apps like Facebook and
Instagram, and stuff from my phone. So the only apps I have are like messenger and
WhatsApp. So those are the only apps I use for the most part on my phone. And I
wouldn’t call it social media, I would just say that’s just keeping in touch with them.
Social media is more like you’re scrolling through posts and memes and stuff like that.
Participant 1: I would I would actually agree with this one. So So for me, it was
a bit strange to hear that messenger was a part part of social media. Because Yeah,
I agree. It’s it’s not really it’s not content or publishing information. consuming the
==PAGE:351==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
341
content which was published by others and messaging is not really like that
Participant 21: yeah, that’s it. Yeah, that’s, that’s exactly what.
Researcher: So you don’t consider messaging application as social media? No.
So just to challenge this, so, um, social media is meant to be a way to stay in touch
with your friends and family or also to stay in to stay connected to celebrities. And
messenger is a way to do the same. It’s just a typical.. different type of content.
Whereas messenger is mostly text based, and Instagram is mostly picture based. And
how do you see the difference when technically it’s just a different type of content
that’s being shared, but it has this Same overall purpose.
Participant 1: I think that the big difference here is that messenger and What-
sApp are private. So most of the time it’s only between two, two individuals and
posting something on Twitter or Instagram that’s made for public
Participant 21: mass consumption, right?
Participant 1: Of course, of course you You’re so so okay, if if the messenger or
the whatsapp group, okay, so if there’s a group in messenger or WhatsApp and that
gets bigger, then I agree that it’s almost almost like a social media. But that then
it then it also behaves like social media because I don’t know what’s your experience
Participant 21: . But my big messenger groups, they are basically meme pages.
People are posting pictures and memes and stuff like that. So then it becomes like a
like on social media. Until it’s between two individuals, I think the big difference is
that it’s private.
Participant 21: Yeah. And also, it’s like you’re talking to friends and people
you actually know, I don’t think I use messenger stuff to any celebrity. And yes, if
it’s very big group chat Well, if it is like a lot of memes and stuff, it dies down it
stops you know, like people stop posting and they move on with their lives. Whereas
in like Twitter or Facebook, there’s always something to, to you know, consume. I
think that’s the..
Researcher: okay. But so, um, as I said before, the most used category of apps
on smartphones is social media, but then also over 50% has said that they worry
about the self image on social media, and did you feel uncomfortable or sometimes
hard to tolerate some social media applications, and you also feel anxiety sometimes
or very strong negative or at least seen as negative emotions when Talking about
social media. But then also it is the one that’s the most used. And it’s also the type
of application that people feel the most prone to the most. It’s the most needed to
stay up to date. They feel that they should always stay up to date with their social
media applications? And they also use them the most, but then they feel these seen
as negative emotions. Why do you think so?
Participant 21: I don’t know. Actually, the day I filled in your survey was the
day I deleted my Instagram. I was just so sick of seeing people. I was like, okay,
you are having fun during quarantine. I don’t care. It was. I mean, I agree. I don’t
==PAGE:352==
342
B Interview Transcripts
know what to think really. I mean, I would say it’s like mainly the fact that people
are posting their highs and not their lows. So you are just constantly bombarded by
people having the time of their life and you don’t see the struggle behind it. It’s kind
of frustrating. If you’re struggling here and no one’s acknowledging that in a sense.
Researcher: Participant 1: ?
Participant 1: Yeah, yeah so that’s that’s completely true that it causes anxiety
and low feelings but at the same time it it can definitely cause like appreciation and
and good feelings as well. For example, if your.. I don’t know.. one of your posts
gets popular or something like that, then it’s it’s definitely a good feeling.
Participant 21: That’s true.
Participant 1: I don’t know - there’s a trade over there.
Researcher: But does it balance out? Do you think it balances out?
Participant 1: No
Researcher: Then, why are you not.. why don’t everybody like Participant
21: just delete their social media?
Participant 1: Haha That’s a really good question. I don’t know.
Participant 21: I just got frustrated and I don’t post stuff because I like to
think I’m a private person. So I don’t have that balance at all. I just keep consuming
people. And I don’t post anything. So yeah,
Researcher: But that’s interesting that you say that because over 60%, at least
in an article I read recently, over 60
Participant 1: What, what, what consumers?
Researcher: Silent consumers is that you don’t necessarily post a lot, but you
just consume the content, and then just scroll through or like or comment sometimes
under private friends, but it’s not like you actually go out there. It’s not like you go
full influencer on it, then why? Yeah, then why do you still think that people if it’s
just the fact that you don’t have as much attachment to the content or need to create
content? Why do you still have the need to look at the content?
Participant 21: I think it’s because you’re stressed and as you said, the be-
ginning, just want to turn your brain off.
And it comes at the weight of a little
discomfort. I don’t think a lot of people mind it, as long as they’re not. As long as
they’re distracted. They’re fine.
Participant 1: I think I think it’s also the the urge to stay up to date to to know
what your friends are doing to know what’s what’s happening in the world to know
what I didn’t know the latest trends are in fashion or tech or anything. And and I if
I remember correctly you asked if if you feel fear of missing out while browsing and
I definitely answered yes, I definitely do. But at the same time I for some reason I
feel like if I stopped seeing these then I would feel even a bigger fear of missing out
==PAGE:353==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
343
because then I because then I don’t even know what’s going on. And then I am, I
don’t know .. there I feel completely isolated. Or at least but I actually never tried
maybe now I will I will completely delete the apps or something. I don’t know I never
tried. But right now, I feel like yes, I feel some fear of missing out. But if I would
completely get rid of it and go completely blind, then I would even feel a bigger fear
of missing out. But
Participant 21: yeah, I mean it is sort of kind of like a withdrawal because even
though sometimes I type Instagram and I’m like, Oh, wait I don’t have that. So it is
a kind of withdrawals. Yeah. I mean, I didn’t enjoy it too much at the beginning, so
I’m trying to be like, you didn’t enjoy it anyway. So let it go.
Researcher: So another finding that we had is - so 60% said that they defined
smartphone activities addictive. However, 70% said that they are not addicted to
their smartphones. Why do you think that there is this difference or this line set
between smartphones activities and the smartphone?
Participant 1: I think everybody likes to say that they can stop their addiction
anytime. Like if you if you if you ask a High School smoker they will say 99% that oh
no, I’m not a smoking addict because if I want to I can I can just stop stop smoking
next day. But then it turns out that the majority of them actually becomes a smoking
addict so I think there’s a there’s a pretty big tendency to deny the fact that that
you’re you’re addicted and until you until you don’t try, you will not see.
Participant 21: And also is the same thing as what you said in the beginning.
It’s not entirely bad like smoking or something. It’s like you also use it for stuff to
look up stuff and look up tutorials on YouTube. So you can kind of justify it like,
I’m using it mostly to learn stuff and only on the side I’m using it for games so it’s
harder to beat because it’s something you used in a positive way as well.
Researcher: Do you think the term addiction is the current term because just
to kind of reframe it in a bigger picture, right now we have Apple Pay or Android
pay on the phone, we have bus tickets. We have Google Maps, we have everything
Google Drive, emails, social media, everything is in this small device. And it’s very
interrelated into the culture. We’re very .. more technological. Everybody has a
smartphone nowadays. 100% of the survey respondents said that you had a smart-
phone. is it an addiction or would it be a ..? Is it just a necessity? Something that
we just need in our way to become a citizen of the society?
Participant 21: I would say it is a necessity. Especially right now with the
Coronavirus stuff. It’s a necessity.
Participant 1: I, I also wouldn’t call it an addiction.
Exactly because of this division that you can use it for good things as well. Like
if you if you can distinguish really clearly, what part of the smartphone is is bad and
time consuming and and and waste of time, that part of the smartphone, I can call
them addiction, which doesn’t provide any value to you whatsoever that I can call
==PAGE:354==
344
B Interview Transcripts
an addiction but in general, yeah, but I would
Participant 21: But even the part where you want to go off and you just want
to turn your brain off and relax, that’s also a positive thing I would say. I would I
mean, of course it’s wasting time but if you did not relax, you would just you know,
keep winding up. If you can. It’s a very blurry line. I would say it’s not a fine thing
like Facebook is time we waste and you know, YouTube tutorials are good. It’s not
a fine line. It’s not it’s not a like a black and white line, I would say.
Participant 1: Yeah, yeah, I agree. I agree. So yeah, I wouldn’t call it addiction,
I would call it an attachment or something like that. Or necessity. Yeah.
Participant 21: Yeah.
Researcher: So based on some initial use of studies and also based on the survey,
we have identified three separate problem areas that we have made concept ideas out
of, the first one being, phone break. So this concept of taking a mental break and
being on your phone just to kind of entertain yourself. And the second area is fear of
missing out but related to physical distance.
Can you hear me? Yes.
And so if you’re missing out related to physical distance, for example, as an
international student to keep up to date with your family or friends back home, or
Yeah, so it’s really it’s a physical distance. And then the last category being loneliness.
Because.. when you’re alone at lunch, or in the public transport or when you’re by
yourself and you’re feeling lonely, you just go to phone as a way to deal with this.
So those are the three different areas and within those, we have six different concept
ideas. Those are very broad concepts, we have not detailed them. And the idea is
that you.. we will tell you the general idea and you tell us how you would change it
or how it would work into your life, if you would use it and if you wouldn’t use it
them at all, and also how you would change them or if you would just keep them as
they are. Is that okay?
Participant 1: Can you can you maybe repeat this three three categories or, or
something you mentioned?
Researcher: Okay, the first one being phone break. So taking up a break on
your phone. The second being fear of missing out related to physical distance.
Participant 1: Yeah.
Researcher: And then the last one being loneliness.
Participant 1: Okay.
Researcher: okay, so there’s we have two ideas within the category phone break,
the first one being bring limiter. So how this works is, imagine you have a normal
ring an accessory that you wear, that you get, and you you want to this ring will
be attached or connected to a device. And for example, one scenario could be, say
that you want 30 minutes of break on your phone, but you had a study session the
==PAGE:355==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
345
whole day, you just want a 30 minute break, and you just mark that down and the
color of the ring changes based on the screen time. So after 40 minutes, it took so it
gradually changes and then at 30 minutes, it turns red and it blinks red until your
until you’re done with using your phone just to kind of so you don’t lose track of time.
That’s gonna be one scenario but it can also be attached to a – related to a specific
application that you want to limit the consumption of or usage of. Or it could be
also related to your general screen time. What do you think of this idea?
Participant 21: But it doesn’t actually like turn off the phone or disable the
app or something, right?
Researcher: it could. you tell us if you think it should or not, right now. iThis,
this is just a broad idea, but you do tell us if you think it should turn off the phone
or something like that.
Participant 21: I would say it shouldn’t, because that would make it even more
frustrating. And I would just throw off the ring. That’s what I would do. And, and
then it sounds like it’s not not it’s not invasive, so you don’t feel like you’re being
actively monitored and stuff, but it might work. It’s similar to the screen time thing
in iPhone, I guess, where you set a screen time and after that, it just turns the screen
blank and you have to select Do you want to use it more or something like that. I
would say it should be like this. I don’t know. Because if you make it harsher, you
just throw it away altogether.
Participant 1: So it turns, it turns green when when you can start using your
phone, right? And then it turns red again when you when you use all your time.
Researcher: Hmm, we don’t necessarily have a green color for it when you start
Participant 1: Yeah, yeah.
Researcher: it’s gray to start with. When you when you start using it’s just
gray - the normal color, the standard color, and then you set the limit in your phone
and then after 30 minutes, it turns red and it blinks. it’s kind of like a subconscious
way to be like hey you you have done your 30 minutes. make you more aware of
Participant 1: Okay, okay, okay, okay, I see. Okay, but so it doesn’t it doesn’t
let you know when you can start using your phone
Researcher: Well, it could work if you want. because right now we’re thinking
of it as a way to delimit or frame the phone break, but it could also be a way for you
to know when to have a phone break.
Participant 1: Okay, okay, I see okay, no, no, that’s that’s my point. I think I
think it should not let you know when when you can have a phone break because you
should decide if you need one or not. And the.. and maybe if it lets you know that
Okay, now you can go in a phone break, then you will have a phone break, no matter
what. Even though you you wouldn’t need it. So I think I think it shouldn’t let you
know when when you can have a phone break because because maybe you don’t even
==PAGE:356==
346
B Interview Transcripts
need it. But otherwise I like the idea. I really like everything which is tangible and
wearable. I like these tech gadgets. So in general, I really like the idea.
Researcher: And in which situation would you use it? would you use it in the
context of a phone break or related to the screen time of a specific application? For
example, if you want to delimit how much you spend time on Instagram, or would
you use it in relation to your overall screen time?
Participant 1: I think I think application specific like Instagram for example
Participant 21: Yeah, I probably would use it for a game or something.
Researcher: next idea.
Okay, so the next idea is Bond Touch. I don’t know if you’ve seen it on 9gag or,
yeah, this bracelet has been around but so the idea is that you have this bracelet and
it’s the Category FOMO and physical physical distance, say that I’m an international
student and my mom lives back in Morocco. And just to keep in touch with her, um,
I buy her a bracelet and I have it too. And when I think of her, missing her or
something like that, I just tap on the bracelet, and then she gets a vibration so she
knows that I’m thinking of her, this is the general idea. It can be used in the context
of a family, friends. Anyway, it’s it’s a pretty broad idea. What do you think of this
idea?
Participant 1: I think it’s really cute, but it’s really intimate; it’s really, really
intimate
Participant 21: Yeah, it’s something you’d use for a long distance relationship
or something, not with your family.
Researcher: Yeah, so you wouldn’t use it?
Participant 21: Not for my family, no. Definitely no.
Researcher: But you would use it for a long distance relationship?
Participant 21: Yeah, I mean, this is sort of that kind of intimate thing.
Participant 1: Yeah, I think yeah this this could be integrated into a dating app
or something. Yeah, exactly. Like Like you can you can send, send or attach to your
Tinder matches or something like that but for I don’t know, for some reason it’s it’s
really intimate for me. But yeah the yeah i think i think i would use it maximum with
two persons. like maybe with my with my girlfriend and with my really, really, really,
really best friend or something like that but but I wouldn’t be.. open the circle.
Participant 21: Yeah, yeah, definitely. I would not use it with my parents or
my friends. That would just be weird.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 1: But I really like the idea to send some sort of small message
without the, without the phone. So the general basic idea I really really like but
==PAGE:357==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
347
for some reason for me, it’s, it’s a little bit too intimate. Because, okay, maybe it’s
because of the vibration and then maybe it’s because you have to bear it. Because
that that makes it almost like a touch, like a like a, like a virtual touch. like I can, I
can touch my dad.. but maybe maybe if it’s a I don’t know maybe if it’s a dashboard
at home next, like next to your door or something like that which which has a counter,
where you can check that Oh, okay, this this person thought of me, I don’t know, three
times today or something like that and maybe you can check it in your apartment
or something like that, then it’s then it’s less less intimate than, than a vibration on
your wrist. That is just an idea. To make it feel a little bit more.. I don’t know..
further from the from the physical, physical touch.
Researcher: Okay. Next idea. Yeah.
Okay, so um, the whole information architecture right now and on different social
media, news applications is: they want you to scroll a lot, you need to click from
one place to another. You can’t read one news article without having to read the
three others to get the complete information. You need to scroll a lot through the
feed to get like the whole overview. you need to swipe through stuff. there’s a whole
like spider web of information spread out so that you spend the most time and so
this idea is inspired by.. there’s recent initiatives that are being made by Instagram
and Twitter to Oh, these were the highlights for today to make your stop kind of
scroll.
But we want to go further and like make content digest so it would help
you summarize the contents do you spend less time scrolling and get the necessary
info.
How it could work.
So I’m going to give you a scenario is so you say for
example, I only want it specific to Twitter and I want it to filter out information that
I want or I want it to summarize what is it the highlights that I have. It’s kind of a
technological implementational plugin into it. And but it can also work throughouy
different applications. So different news streams. What do you think of this idea?
Participant 1:
Participant 21: ?
Participant 21: content digest, it sounds good. I am just trying to picture it in
a in a platform where you just keep scrolling endlessly. I mean, yeah, I would prefer I
don’t know there’s a part of me that kind of likes, the aimless scrolling. And there’s
a part of me that would really appreciate this sort of, like content, sort of, you know,
concentrated in one place. I mean, I would say like for Really important things or
maybe I mean, if you could select the topics which you really want to see all the
content of like, I don’t know, fashion or footballers, stuff like that then and then you
could also like, scroll through.
Participant 1: Is it just me who can..?
Participant 21: Yeah, if you can like customize to which topics you want to, you
know,
Participant 1: Is it just me who have connection issues?
==PAGE:358==
348
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: I think so
Participant 1: Or you also are having a awhere you also have a hard time hearing
Participant 21: ?
Participant 21: I can hear fine. I can hear you.
Maggie Yeah, I can hear fine. Pretty well, actually.
Participant 21: Yeah.
Participant 1: Okay. Okay. Now it seems to be better now. Okay.
Researcher: Yeah, essentially, if you could just choose the topics you want to
do. Okay. That would be nice.
Maybe just to detail a little bit more. Because right now Instagram and Twitter,
you have these hashtags and you have categories that you can choose to kind of filter
out after the content. The problem is, that it’s still inspired by this infinite loop, so
you kind of keep finding content, whereas this is kind of to stop you being like, Hey,
this is the content for today, just to kind of limit a little bit this infinite scrolling
infinite loop of information. Yeah, I just wanted to detail that out.
Participant 1: So So, so if I understand this correctly, like a machine learning
algorithm or some sort of algorithm will filter the most most relevant information for
you to to limit the content you’re exposed to,
Researcher: to limit the amount of time you spend looking for the content.
Participant 1: Yeah, yeah, I think it’s it’s quite dangerous because I don’t
know if you if you know, the term like I think it’s called an information bubble or
something like that. Which is already present without these. I mean, okay, because
because Basically this is already in place. It’s just just the aim is not to limit your
screen time. The aim is to have the most relevant content. But but but Facebook,
Twitter and all these pages or applications, they are prioritizing the content which
fits you. And with that. And with that you are not exposed to any other political
views or any other type of content or stuff like that. It’s really difficult to break this
loop. And I think this will make it more more strong. And then you can really easily
find yourself basically trapped in a really small pot of content.
Participant 21: Yeah, I guess it’s similar to the YouTube’s recommendation
algorithm where it just recommends things similar to what you just watched. And it
just keeps going on and on.
Researcher: Just to kind of correct. recommendation. You choose what you
want to see on that day on that. It will be you who chooses the content and it gets
digested for you, because YouTube and Facebook and all that is you watch something
and then you think that you like it and they just assume and recommend you that
information. Whereas here, you’re like, Oh, I want to get information about art today.
And then you find you the relevant information that they’ve digested or like..
==PAGE:359==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
349
Participant 21: I don’t know, the whole appeal of social media is that there
is this vast amount of information, you can choose what you want it because if
you’re digesting something, means someone or something is curating it for you. And
therefore me personally, some of the appeal is lost.
It’s like, it’s like listening to
almost, you know, there’s a sort of bias that comes in when you do that. And I
think the whole appeal of social media is that everyone gets an equal say, and yeah,
I personally, I would not. And it depends on the topic again, if it’s something like
news or something like that I would prefer a digest. But if it’s something like opinion
on a movie or something like that, I would like to see everything so
Researcher: Participant 1: , do you have anything to add?
Participant 1: Not not really not really for for some reason, I’m still quite quite
a skeptic about about this one. Because Yeah, that’s, that’s true that you can choose
your categories and stuff like art, or architecture or something like that, but those
categories will already be pre filtered for you. So there’s, there’s no way you can you
can choose from all the categories available. Because you just yeah, there’s there’s
no way because there’s too much but too many categories. Yeah. So I really have
a hard time seeing how you are not stuck, you know, in a really small selection of
information here. But yeah, I like I like the idea to filter out the content. But as
these filtering methods work right now, I don’t really feel that it’s it’s a it’s, it’s a
good Good idea. But but maybe maybe in the future when when all these algorithms
are more ethical and they are more advanced, maybe maybe it’s a good way.
Participant 21: But even then I wouldn’t recommend filtering because it’s sort
of like saying something is good and something is bad and who’s to judge? So yeah.
Researcher: What if it was filtered not on the content but the amount of scrolling
or swiping or..?
Participant 21: Yeah, but I mean, when you’re thinking of like social media
manipulate elections and stuff like that, this seems like something they would imme-
diately jump on and make use of (...)
Participant 1: No, I agree. I agree.
Researcher: Okay, next idea.
Okay, so this is in the category of loneliness. So imagine you are alone in the train
or alone and at lunch, your co workers couldn’t join you that day. And you want to
kind of alter how you use your smartphone or get inspired. So it’s a little bit okay.
So right now the app limit, at least in iOS, I don’t know which system you have, but
on the iPhone, when you have the app limiter, you can still extend it for 15 minutes
or you can ignore it for the day. It doesn’t tell you what you can proactively do with
your time, now that you have spend all your time for that social media application or
for that category. So this is kind of a proactive app limiter, that will challenge you to
do different stuff. It could be still stuff on the social media stuff on the smartphone,
but a different things so that you don’t, you’re not as dependent on these applications
==PAGE:360==
350
B Interview Transcripts
to entertain you. But it could also be stuff that.. outside for example, go out for a
walk, read a book, listen to this podcast, have a zoom call with friends. It’s very, like
a varied amount of challenges, but it’s a way kind of to proactively limit you so kind
of give you inspiration for what else you could do.
Participant 21: Personally, personally, I’m saying that I’ve tried this and it
never worked, because I’d always be like, you are a fucking phone. Shut up. I will do
whatever I want. But maybe people who are lonely they would maybe, they could
take advantage of it. I don’t know.
Participant 1: I like the idea in general, I would say.
Yeah, but let me let me think. It’s like you really you really have to believe and
you you really have to trust your phone here. That it that it knows what you should
do, or something like that, like,
Participant 21: I mean..
Researcher: I’m sorry. You can still click on like through different ideas. It’s
not like that you have to do this.
Participant 21: Yeah, the thing is like doing something like this, the first step is
to like acknowledge that you’re lonely and then to sort of, like combat it using these
ideas. Because I think I don’t know what happened was it was some app. I don’t
remember what it was, but it was some sort of anxiety app and it was like, okay, go
clean the room or something like that. And I’ll just close the app and be like, Don’t
tell me what to do.
Researcher: Maybe just to reframe because I’m not sure you, you both under-
stood me. When I say the category loneliness, it’s like you people right now at least
a trend is that people generally when you’re eating alone, or when you’re alone in
the transport, you automatically go use their phone. And it’s when that happens
that we want to introduce this application. So it’s not combating loneliness. It’s
in the context of feeling lonely, this could be a way to practice or make a healthier
relationship with your smartphone. So you’re not dependent on certain applications
to entertain you but also give you like ideas for how you can use your time maybe
better.
Participant 1: Yeah, no,I like it. I like it. And I think I I get the get the concept.
Yeah, it’s basically just reassuring you that you’re not not alone. And you can you
can do things to connect with others outside of the smartphone, and stuff like that.
I I genuinely like like that idea.
Participant 21: I like the idea as well, but I really do not see myself taking
advantage of it. Because I feel like on some level I would just not listen to it.
Researcher: Okay, next idea. Yeah..
Participant 1: but they, they.. just one last question. The funny thing is that
if you go go back to that screenshot, like most of the things, you would use your
==PAGE:361==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
351
smartphone for like zoom call with others, you use your smartphone for do karaoke
or lunch, you have to use your smartphone to organize the whole thing. Okay, but
for what you reading, it’s something else but for meditation again, most of the people
are using headspace or something like that. So it’s, yeah, it’s quite quite funny that..
Researcher: I think.. what we said in the beginning, with..we want to foster
healthier relationships. And I think it’s not we want to limit the screen time. But it’s
we want to foster healthy relationships and removing the smartphone from the equa-
tion would not be the solution. Because as you said in the beginning it’s something
that has become an attachment or something that is also needed in other contexts.
So I think that’s what the idea here is just give you other alternatives. So you’re
not dependent on certain applications to entertain you or to make you feel happy
or not happy. So that’s the idea. That’s why the example here is related to the
smartphone just to say, hey, it’s not we it’s just to give you a different way of using
your smartphone.
Participant 1: Get it.
Researcher: next idea, okay, so this is inspired by.. at least I think it’s been
in both devices In the Android and also iOS, the sleep mode. And the sleep mode
is similar.. No, the alone mode is similar to the sleep mode. So it will immediately
push down your notifications and app interactions and it will let you focus on, for
example, listening to music, podcast meditation. And what this whole thing is, it’s
mainly a symbolic frame for you to value your time alone. Because right now, the
sleep mode is kind of like, subconsciously, it lets you know that hey, now it’s time
for you to sleep. So now you should let off your phone. But there is no initiative or
incentive to Hey, you’re now alone. You should not use your phone or I’m I’m not
sleeping, but I’m alone. That’s why I should not be using my phone. So this kind
of more of a symbolic idea of, if there was a different mode in iOS or an Android to
be like, Hey, I’m alone. Do not disturb me. And it was more to inspire, like a self
love, self aware moment for yourself. So to promote this idea of it’s fine to be alone
without your phone.
What do you think of the idea?
Participant 21: This, I like. This, I really like. Yeah, the appeal of it is in the
fact that it’s a concept of like, you’re going to like not use your phone, you’re going
to concentrate on one thing for the moment. I like this, I would really consider this.
Because a lot of the time what I do is I start to do something for five minutes and a
notification comes up. And then you go there and then you get distracted, and then
you lose track. So I would actually appreciate this. You can actually you can actually
just modify the phone in some way to do this.
Researcher: Yeah. But it’s just more to promote this mindset, that..
Participant 21: sort of like a productivity zone. I like this.
Participant 1: Yeah, I agree I also really like it. I think I think there are existent
==PAGE:362==
352
B Interview Transcripts
applications who are aiming for the same thing. But uh, but of course, of course, this
one would be one level down and part of the whole system. So of course, right now,
only those people are aware of these modes who are using those applications, those
those meditation applications. But if if the whole thing would be built in, into iOS or
into the operation system, then of course, all of a sudden a whole wider population
would be aware that that it’s a it’s an important thing. So I think it’s a good way to
spread the word.
Researcher: Now on to our last idea.
Um, so this is a speech based social network, how it would work.
So say for
example, Today, my co workers can’t eat with me. So I’m eating lunch by myself.
And I don’t want to feel lonely. I want to use my time a bit more differently at least.
And so I talk into my phone to this app saying, I’m interested in discussing what
do people eat for breakfast outside of Denmark, and then the question pops up and
someone that is available in the same break. So 1130 to 12 will join me in and I
will be able to talk to a stranger about this topic during my lunch break. Another
alternative to this could be also just having it as a chat bot. So you talk about your
day or you let out maybe you steam or anger or rant about your day or talk about
the day to a chatbot that will work AI based. so those are the two alternative for
this speech based social network. What do you think?
Participant 21: Is it similar to Omegle or something like that?
Researcher: I don’t know it but I think it’s more inspired by Quora so in quora,
you write in a question and then an expert comes in, but here it will be more speech
based so that you can FaceTime a talk or call you’re like hey this person wants to
discuss with you What do people eat for breakfast last time in Denmark and then
you get to foster new knowledge whilst not feeling lonely because you’re technically
with someone. it could be connected to either your friends but it could also be with
strangers.
Participant 21: So it’s speech based mainly.
Researcher: Yes.
Participant 1: I think I think connecting to the friends would be would be a
better idea at least for me.
Participant 21: Yeah.
Participant 1: Because I think just talking to a random stranger would not make
me feel less lonely because because Okay, let’s let’s say there’s a perfect example let’s
let’s let’s take the canteen at DTU. You are surrounded by thousands of strangers.
So you are surrounded by people. Maybe Maybe you could you could also ask them
some something but you would still feel lonely. Because because you don’t have any
attachment I think I think having the, I don’t know the deeper level of the of the
connection or relationship is definitely an important factor to feel not lonely So, it’s
like it’s it’s, it’s a little bit like talking to a customer service or something like that.
==PAGE:363==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
353
You would, you would I don’t think how, that’s how less lonely you would feel. talking
to friends or or people who you have a stronger bond with. That’s that’s really good.
Participant 21: Yeah, because it’s talking it’s more of an active thing you do.
It’s not something like it’s not the equivalent of just mindlessly scrolling through your
phone because the the here you have to really, I mean, I’m an introvert. So the very
idea of like, calling someone on the phone sounds like so draining. And yeah, I do
not see myself using this. Even when I’m alone, let alone in public. If it’s like text
based, like a chat bot, then maybe but speech based? I don’t see.
Researcher: Okay. So those were the ideas. Now to kind of finish up, I have a
concluding question. So which part of your relationship to your smartphone do you
think is unhealthy? Participant 21: , maybe you can start
Participant 21: right now?
Because it used to be bad. And now I’ve sort of cut it down. Right now I would
say it’s YouTube. Because what used to happen was I would wake up in the morning
and for two hours, just keep scrolling, switching through three apps. And the only
reason I deleted the apps of my phone was that I it forced me to get up out of bed
and if I wanted to use it, I could use it on my computer. So that’s sort of forced me
to get up. But YouTube’s an app I do not I do not delete because the only app I can
listen to music on and stuff. But now I wake up and for two hours instead of doing
something productive, I just sit on YouTube. And because the recommendations are
like, really like, oh, okay, you like this, you might like that. And I do like that. It just
keeps going on and on. And yeah, YouTube, I would say, and I don’t even subscribe
to anything. That’s the thing. I haven’t subscribed to anything and yet they still
show me random Do it yourself nonsense that I won’t even ever actually do but I
still watch the videos. I really wish I would like stop doing that. It’s a waste of time
watching videos of people making stuff that no way in hell I’m gonna make.
Researcher: And what if you could choose one of the ideas that we just men-
tioned or another idea that you have stumbled upon that you think is great - Which
one do you think would help you cope with this unhealthy habit?
Participant 21: I would say the alone time thing like I would. I mean I can just
force myself to like switch that thing on then at least I’d get up and do something I
would say. I’d like to think that I don’t know if I’d actually do that. I like to think
that idea would help me the most.
Participant 1: , what is unhealthy with your relationship with your smartphone?
Participant 1: It’s just a really small addition, it’s super funny Participant 21:
, because we are complete like like we did completely the opposite. I deleted YouTube
like like two or maybe a month month ago, but I kept Instagram and all these things.
Exactly the opposite like you only have YouTube but not the other ones. Yeah, it’s
quite funny. And by the way, those those those DIY videos, they are anyway I will I
will send the YouTube video but they are Part of a really big scam.
==PAGE:364==
354
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 21: Yeah. I saw that as well. YouTube recommended that as well.
Participant 1: Okay, perfect, perfect. Okay, so it’s a whole content factory from
Russia and anyway okay, okay, good.
So okay, what is my most toxic part? I guess I guess Instagram and OMG it’s
really awkward to to say but my friends made me download Tik Tok and I deleted
it today I I had it I had it for two days. And that’s that’s really crazy that’s that’s
really crazy. That’s the worse, that’s the worst.
Researcher: Why is it the worst? if you could..
Participant 1: because you you don’t get any value out of that like like like
honestly like that’s that’s completely useless because you You are not even connected
to your friends you are you are seeing random and random people And, and you’re
not, you don’t realize how much time you spend on it because you just scroll and, and
you can scroll infinitely, like like just just scroll down, down, down, down down and
the content never stops. So that’s that’s crazy. Anyway, I deleted that but Instagram
is really similar because because the Explorer mode is quite similar you can you can
scroll almost almost forever. This alone time is is really good. I also liked it, but at
the same time of course now we are living in really strange times, in the coronavirus.
And I actually really liked this this type of type of way that you you send some signal
that you care about others, that you think about them because I feel really lonely
many times Now during during self isolation, because I cannot meet people. And
anyway, maybe that would be a good idea, but but not with the vibrated wristband.
maybe, maybe with some sort of other way, but I really liked that idea that without
a smartphone, you can let people know that, that they matter. Yeah, and I really
like the ring thing. I will definitely try it out. But I don’t know if it’s only because I
like these gadgets or because I find it useful. Maybe.
Researcher: Okay, cool. Thank you so much for joining us. If you’re interested
in hearing more about the project, drop us an email and then we will keep you up
to date. If you have additional comments or stuff or ideas that you think would be
better than the ones we have talked about. Please also drop us an email. We’re open
to anything And thank you so much for joining us and giving us so many awesome
insights. Thank you
==PAGE:365==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
355
B.3.5
Participants 13 and 22
Researcher: I’m gonna do a little bit of a speed up version. It’s gonna last approx-
imately 45 minutes to one hour, depending on how much you have to say. Okay, so
I’m gonna start off by saying hello, welcome. We’re both at the Technical University
of Denmark. And what we want to get inside is his students use off in relationship to
their smartphone, and it’s for in the context of our master’s thesis. While we want to
what we hope to obtain is an understanding of how we can foster healthier relation-
ship to and from your smartphone. Your answers will remain anonymous and will
not be shared with external partners. But for the sake of transcription and coding
and categorization, we will be recording this interview. Is that okay with you? Yes.
Okay, thank you. Just before we start, I want to just say that there are no wrong
answers, but when different points of view, please feel free to share your point of
view, even if it differs from what others have said. Also keep a respectful tone. Keep
in mind that we are just as interested in negative comments as positive comments.
And technically, we also are more interested in the negative comments because it will
help us improve. Okay, let’s begin. So maybe just start off by saying your name and
where do you study?
Participant 13: My name is Participant 13 and I study service management.
Okay.
Participant 22: My name is Participant 22 triangle, and I studied public
health.
Researcher: Okay, cool. What did you think of the Survey in General? Well,
before you answer, I’m more interested in seeing a conversation between you too .
So I will be asking questions to guide the whole discussion, but it’s more focused on
the interaction between you two. So yeah, what is your opinion about the survey
and did it make you reflect on certain aspects of your behavior. In regards to your
smartphone,
Participant 22: um, I thought this survey was good. I thought it was a little
bit long at some points about having to type in my own answers, which I also think
the current context of use of smartphone made me reflect on how I normally use my
smartphone.
Participant 13: I felt the same honestly .. I thought it was a bit long.
No, but, um, and I mean, I but I thought the question made sense as to where
they wanted to go, and the information they wanted to get out of it. Obviously, the
length of the question also made me kind of think it was similar to the other question,
but then it’s formulated in another way. So it made me think a little bit more about
my previous answers as well. And yeah, I think the survey was good.
Researcher: So as we said before, like as I said in the survey, we are complying
with GDPR requirements so I don’t know actually what either of you have actually
answered. So I’m going to discuss some of the general trends and I want to hear your
==PAGE:366==
356
B Interview Transcripts
opinions and make you discuss it. So the first thing is over 60% have said that do use
their smartphones to relax a lot of people use the terms kill time, chill, relax on our
phones. You also use the concept of brain dead entertainment. What do you think
of this statement?
Participant 13: I agree. That’s also my answer. It was to entertain myself and
yeah,
Participant 22: yeah, I definitely say kill time.
I think sometimes for more
entertainment, I might end up going like more to my computer rather than my smart
home if I have like longer period of time for entertainment, but I think definitely like
killing time when you’re like waiting for things to happen are like waiting for people
like, I don’t know, then it’s just like easy way to like be entertained in a short for a
shorter period of time.
Researcher: Okay, um, what application do you currently use the most? Or like,
what category of application Do you use the most right now on your smartphone?
Participant 13: Uhmm, like social media like Instagram, Facebook,
Participant 22: um, I say currently, my trends and usage of smartphone have
enormously changed because we’re inside all the time, which I think is very important,
but I think regularly I would check a lot of different social media apps. I think the
one I’m most common like frequently uses WhatsApp, because in the end, I mainly
would use it like Instagram I’d use to kill time, but when I’m actually using my phone,
it’s mainly to communicate with other people. Talk to friends who are not in the
same country, time zones, things like that.
Researcher: Okay. So generally the trend that we have noticed is that when we
talk about the smartphone, although people correlate it with social media, and what
do you think of social media? Participant 22 , you can start.
Participant 22: Yeah. Um, I think I think it’s a, I think it’s a useful way to
keep in touch with people that you don’t necessarily talk to you all the time. So for
example, knowing that friends that you’re not particularly close to that you don’t
talk to you regularly what they’re up to. And I’ve definitely found myself studying
in Paris that a lot of people would come through Paris and then it’s hard to like keep
track of everyone’s schedules, but then you see another post on social media. It’s
a really great way to get in touch with them again, be like, Oh, hey, like I noticed
you’re in Paris. I live here. Like, do you want to get a drink, like catch up, go for
dinner. I think that’s a really great way. To keep in touch with people and like, kind
of follow people’s lives that you don’t see all the time, but that you still appreciate
and would like to keep in, like, in kind of your circle of friends. So I think that’s a
good way. And and yeah, I mean social media is taken off in so many different ways
to be like, inspiring of like, in like when you see people do things like wow, like I want
to do that too. And so I think it can be like a really, it’s an amazing tool for a lot of
different things.
==PAGE:367==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
357
Researcher: Mm hmm.
Participant 13: Yeah, I agree that it’s useful to like widen your connections and
your network as well. And just being able to keep in touch with other people that
you’re not able to talk to daily or just, you know, see on average or on the daily so I
think it’s, it’s a nice tool for that
Researcher: Yeah.
What do you think about the fact that..Sorry, it’s just
because one of the participant texted me. Um, what do you think of the fact that
people so strongly correlate smartphone and social media so that they immediately
pick up social media when we talk about smartphone in general?
Participant 13: I think it’s the feature that they use the most. So that’s why
they immediately think about that. And I also do that.
Participant 22: Yeah, it’s the most handy way to use like, Instagram and mes-
senger and things like that, or like Facebook, just because otherwise you have to pull
out your computer like here you have it on, wherever you are. If we I think that’s
why, because you can just give access to immediately wherever you are.
Researcher: Right now, at least according to the findings, people are 60% peo-
ple, people worry about the self image on social media and have feelings of being
uncomfortable or anxiety or having strong negative emotions when talking about so-
cial media. But then at the same time, as I mentioned earlier, it’s the category of
application that is the most used by university students. And it’s also the category
of application that people feel the most prone or to need to be up to date with. Why
do you think so?
Participant 22: Um,
Participant 13: yeah, go ahead.
Participant 22: I think like, kind of like, I think social media as much as you’re
able to keep up with it, it puts a lot of pressure because you see everything else. So
it’s like, I I personally use it more as a way I really like to keep, like, up to speed with
people’s lives, because I’ve moved a lot and I think it’s a really good way for that.
But you also get pressure of like, seeing people’s lifestyles that you don’t have. And
I think that can make a lot of people uncomfortable, especially as a young person
where you don’t necessarily have a job. You don’t necessarily have income. You don’t
necessarily have all these opportunities for travel that other people have who have
I don’t know really travel bloggers or anything like people who are able to create
lifestyles through using social media. So they definitely make you uncomfortable and
not feel as... I don’t know, you’re not able to show your qualities as much. So there’s
definitely pressure to show your.. the best version of yourself kind of
Participant 13: I agree. Like you kind of end up comparing yourself.
Participant 22: Yeah.
Participant 13: With how other, you know, around your age, are living or how
==PAGE:368==
358
B Interview Transcripts
you could live could be living, I guess. Or how you could see yourself.
Participant 22: Yeah.
Researcher: Another finding that we’ve found is that university students find
smartphone activities addictive. 60% of people have mentioned that, however, 70%
of the respondents from the survey, think they’re not addicted to their smartphone.
Where do you think the line is drawn between being addicted to the smartphone
activity versus being addicted to their whole phone.
Participant 13: I think people understand the concept of finding it addictive.
But then I don’t think everyone is able to take a step back and realize that they’re
addicted to it. Yeah, it’s a cause and effect. Like, if it’s addicted, then naturally you
get addicted to it. But then I think people immediately think, oh, but I know, it’s
addictive. I know when to stop. But in reality, you actually don’t stop when you
need to.
Participant 22: I think it’s.
I agree, like, generally like you don’t consider
yourself it also depends on what where the line is for addictive like how many hours
a day is considered addictive, which I’m not currently aware of. So it could be like,
Oh, I don’t feel like I’m addicted. Like, I don’t use it that much. But then it’s like
comparing, like, how much do you actually use it to be addicted? Technically, I think
it’s kind of like, a hole, like a black hole. like kind of like, you know, when you find
when people talk about like, oh, like, I clicked on this one YouTube video, and then
I just clicked I’ve done another one. And another one another one. Social media is
the same thing of like, Oh, I found this person on Instagram. Wow, who’s this other
person, you click on them, like you, like, fall into a hole of like just spending a lot of
time just like looking at random things.
Unknown Speaker But then, so do you think that addiction is measured in terms
of what other people are doing?
Participant 13: Not really, I think it’s measured on [you] not [being] able to
restrain yourself. Like if you’re not able to go a day without saying, today I’m gonna
take some time to, you know, meditate or something and just take a step back if you
feel the need, whether it’s a reasonable or not, but if you feel different, it’s like a
strong need to go on your phone or to do this thing without having any restriction.
Like, I guess. Yeah,
Participant 22: yeah, I kind of agree. I think it was I would define addiction
based on a certain number of hours that you surpass showing that you spend a certain
amount of time per day on your phone.
Researcher: And then... how would you compute that certain amount like this?
This threshold..
Participant 22: well, I mean, you’d have I think most iPhones have like they
show you how many hours you spend. I think you can scientifically look at what
would be considered addiction. I think there’s a way..
==PAGE:369==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
359
Researcher: Then, that would be depending on other people that’s why I was
asking you the question how do we not..
Participant 22: Not on other people because you make a..
Participant 13: It depends like you are saying but then if that norm changes,
you know, if they make that, for example, like three hours would be the average but
because everybody’s, it’s become more like common to use the phone longer longer in
doing this, then the average can change to like five hours and that will be the norm
without you feeling.
Participant 22: I don’t think I’ll do it based on the average numbers of hours of
use, I do it on the percentage of hours out of the day. So out of 24 hours, if you take
up a quarter of your day spent on your phone, that’s addiction. So that can be in
between this amount of hours. So it’s out of 24 hours, the percentage that you spend
in your phone. So it’s not an average of like, people spend an average of five hours.
So if you’re in the five hours because everyone spends that time, you’re not addicted.
I’d be saying it on. If this percentage of your day is spent on your phone, then it’s
an addiction of some sort. And then Participant 13 pointed out something about
not being able to like put your phone down. I agree. I particularly agree that about
that with social media. I think it’s very different because a phone, especially since a
lot of things are distance. I know I particularly like my need to be on my phone is to
talk to people who don’t live in the same country as I do. So that’s why I want to be
on my phone and like check my phone. It’s more to be able to talk to these people.
Which, then you can is, I don’t know if you consider still social media or is because
yeah, so I guess like it’s a communication tool in addition to social media. So yeah,
it makes you spend more time on your phone, but it’s communicating with people
that you care about, which you don’t necessarily see every day.
Researcher: But maybe to just to challenge that a little bit. So we live now in
a society that’s very technical, technological, technologically connected. So we use
phones to Apple Pay, or we use our phones to get on the bus, to find our next itinerary,
to connect with our friends to call our friends or family. And we have emails on it
work stuff, everything is in the phone right now. So is it really an addiction or is it
a necessity to become a citizen of today’s society?
Participant 13: I think it has become a necessity.
Participant 22: I think it’s become a necessity, but I also think it’s an addiction.
I think it’s both. I think the time that you use. when you’re using your spare time
when you could be doing something else on your phone, I think that’s where it’s
an addiction, whereas like if you’re checking your emails because you’re or you’re
talking to someone, really I feel like social interaction through social media is less
of an addiction than just like, Oh, I’m just scrolling and wasting my time and like,
kind of getting lost and like killing time. Whereas, like, you’re on your phone for a
purpose. Like, I have an email like I got an email or I’m looking at the news on my
phone, or I’m, I’m talking to my grandmother on like, I don’t know, WhatsApp, I
==PAGE:370==
360
B Interview Transcripts
think it’s a different use kind of use. So it is a necessity because everyone’s so busy.
It’s a necessity to like keep in contact with people, I think for sure.
Researcher: Where do you think the line..
Participant 13: It’s also part of being in the society.
Sorry.
Yeah.
Just, I
think also like the, not the pressure, not really a pressure but if you see most of
your peers doing like on their phone, interacting through social media, and you’re
the only one I guess you can take you can keep it to to a minimum where you don’t
have to constantly be on it, but for example, a person that uses no social media or
no.. doesn’t even own a phone or something, I think they will have a little bit of a
disconnect with others in society that are that are used to having that way of life, I
guess.
Participant 22: I think so. But then there’s a line for sure. Because it’s like
it’s becoming a necessity. But I think particularly for like work emails, that means
you can get your emails, anytime of day, weekends, everything and you’re notified
on your phone and you see it whereas you might not log on to your computer and
check your emails until you start work. And so it’s just like, you’re never you never
stop working really either. So I think that’s the negative side of like, always being
connected. Like you always know like, your work is there kind of
Researcher: Participant 13: , do you have any last comments?
Participant 13: No. I agree with what has been said.
Researcher: Okay, cool. So based on the surveys and also the initial user study
that we did, we have identified tree uses, case scenarios in which the smartphone
plays a less healthy role.
The first one being phone break. The concept of phone break here is understood
as when you’re taking a break, for example, you having a study session the whole day
and you just want to have a mental break. So you just go through your phone and
you scroll, that could be a phone break. Another scenario is fear of missing out but
related to physical distance. So for example, being an international student or having
friends internationally and wanting to stay connected with them and fill the void of
being far away from each other, you’re more attached to the phone to stay in touch.
And the third one being loneliness. So for example, it can be in different contexts it
can be when you’re eating lunch alone. For example, if you’re not with your friends,
if you were alone into into train at a boss, it could also be when you’re in a social
interaction. group where you don’t feel like you belong there. So you feel a bit lonely.
So you go for your phone. So that those are the tree case scenarios. And based on
those, we have six concept ideas that we want to get your feedback on. Remember
that we really wants to also hear the negative feedback. So please give us that. And
we.. these ideas are very broad in the sense that we won’t go into the detail and we
want you to take it in and make it your own and tell us how it would work into your
everyday life and how it would really not work into your everyday life. Give us this
context, but also tell us if you would use it or not.
==PAGE:371==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
361
So the first one being the ring limiter, how it works is so it’s an tech gadget, an
accessory that you get, and then it’s connected to the device. And one scenario of it
being used could be so for example, I’ve been studying the whole day and I want a
30 minute break on my phone just to kind of let off the steam of having to focus so
much. And so I put a time limit of 30 minutes and I connect it to my ring, and then
when I’m scrolling through my Instagram, my Facebook, this color changes gradually
until I reach 30 minutes, then it becomes very red. And then it blinks red until you
have stopped using your phone in the entertainment frame. What do you think of
this idea? Oh, by the way, it could be related to, for example, the phone break, but
it could also be related to a specific application. For example, if you want to control
how much time you spent on Instagram or it could be related to overall screen time.
Participant 22: I think it’s a good idea. I don’t I think I feel like you don’t
necessarily need a ring to limit it. Like Can you if it’s programmable into the app of
like, shutting it down?
Researcher: It’s more of a subconscious reminder because.. but yeah.
Participant 13: I mean, I think it’s a good idea if it shows like, because I tried
the the reminder like just on the app and with a time limit and It worked, but just
a little bit for me, because I still have the option to
Participant 22: extend it haha?
Participant 13: or to remove it. And also, when I was putting the timer, like
the restriction, it wasn’t very realistic, you know? So it was I would choose which
apps like different, like entertainment, Safari and stuff like that. I would put different
times. So at the end of the day, instead of being like four hours, like, for example, it
would be like six, because we have three and three on each one of them, you know.
So if it’s I think it could work if it’s an overall, you know, limit.
Participant 22: Yeah, I guess it would then depend if it like limits still like kind
of, like you said, because I think it’s important to limit for certain apps because I
think communication apps should not be limited because what if there are like email,
it should not be limited, because though that’s when you get information that you
might need, or someone like sends you like Link though to something you’re studying,
like the group chat and you’re like, oh, wow, like this is exactly what I needed. But
if your phone’s like limiting, then you won’t necessarily get the notification for like
a whatsapp group of like providing you because I know for my my master’s degree,
um, everything was on WhatsApp. Everything’s on WhatsApp still like group chats
of like, oh content of Oh, here’s like the I found this activity that we did in class
like, Oh, can someone send it on WhatsApp, you’re getting information like articles,
everything is on there. if people have questions that you can also have questions. It’s
it’s used daily every day. So not having that connected. Connectivity can almost be
like a problem when you’re studying as well. So I think you’d have to be limited to
like these social media apps that don’t actually provide you with useful tools while
you’re working. Yeah.
==PAGE:372==
362
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Okay, and we can move on to the next idea. So this is Bond Touch.
So how it works. It’s a bracelet so imagine me I’m going, I’m living here in Denmark,
and I have my mom back in Morocco. And I want a way to fill the void of fear of
missing out this physical distance. So I have this bracelet that she also has, and when
I miss her or I feel like hey, I just wanna let her know that I’m thinking of her. I click
on my bracelet, and then she gets a nudge or vibration or some sort of way to know
that I’m thinking of her. Um, what do you think of this idea?
Participant 13: Oh, I mean, I think it’s nice and just like cute. It’s you know,
it’s nice to have a little reminder that someone is thinking of you and to send it to
someone, but i don’t i don’t think i would buy it though.
Participant 22: Yeah, I think it’s a cute idea but what I it kind of reminds me
I was there not like this thing that you could like get that made it seem like it was
like someone else kissing you. But it was like, just like an app. It was like some like
technology device. It kind of reminds me of that for some reason. of like, Oh, you like
miss your partner who lives far away and there’s like this thing you can feel like there,
whatever. Anyways, I think I think I’d still prefer to communicate with someone that
I care about. As as much as the nudge is nice, um, I feel connected with someone
when I know what’s going on in their life. And so and it’s nice to feel thought of and
i think i think it is really good idea but I think it would have to be like, paired with
a communication to like a communication tool of like, verbal communication as well
because
Participant 13: I think that there has to be a little bit more than jusy, just a
reminder that so many..
Participant 22: because a reminder it like I’m like I’m like in a long distance
relationship as much as like a a buzz thing is nice. I would rather FaceTime or like
talk on the phone, then just get buzzes and you’re like, Okay, that’s a nice thing but
I don’t know anything that’s going on your life. I feel very distant still. So yeah.
Researcher: Do you have any last remarks Participant 13 ?
Participant 13: No, I think it’s good..
Researcher: making sure before I move on to the next idea. Okay, so this one is
inspired by so you already mentioned a little bit, but this infinite loop of content. So
right now, everything is you can scroll forever on certain applications Twitter. Tick
Tock is also a new entertainment device that has infinite scrolling Instagram. Also
the way news are architectured right now, you have to clink, click from news article
to news articles just to get the full information, everything is just made. So there’s a
big spider web of information. If you want a full picture, you need to like spend a lot
of time so this is a content digest, it would work as a plug in. And it will help you
summarize content to spend less time scrolling and you get the necessary info quickly.
So kind of filter out the content. You can be specific to a specific app. For example,
here we have the example of Twitter, so that you can maybe filter out what you’re
interested in. Or what information you’re interested in getting. But it could also be
==PAGE:373==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
363
related to different news articles. So you can get a kind of a bigger picture of it, or
related to social media. What do you think of this idea?
Participant 13: I like the idea. I think it wouldn’t work on for example, teens,
because I think they want to know everything, whether they’re interested in it or
not. But I think like, for our age and up, I think it’s very useful. Because, you know,
sometimes you just, the more you get useless information, you kind of find yourself
like scrolling to find just like this one thing that is interesting and that you can relate
to. So I think it would be a nice thing to have it filtered so you just see the things
you’re interested in that day, and you can kind of move on.
Participant 22: Yeah, I agree. I definitely think it’s a good idea. I think I’ll
just add that for I mean, Twitter last maybe I personally don’t use Twitter, but yes,
I think for Twitter, like it’s very much used and can be very political and like news
articles, it’s very good. I think for like Instagram, it would just have to see whether
it’s filtered out to because if it’s the highlights based on personalities you follow or
based on people that you actually know. And so I think sometimes it’s nice to like
know what I don’t know, like a professional athlete is doing. But most of the time,
I’m more interested in like what my friends are doing.
Participant 13: But I guess you can filter that.
Participant 22: Yeah, I guess Exactly. That’s, I guess it would depend on how
the filter is set to make sure that you get content from people, you know, it’s not just
the most popular, like the most liked posts, for example, and it wouldn’t be filtered
based on likes, because otherwise you wouldn’t actually get content from people, you
know. And that’s all that’s just full comment. But I think it’s good idea.
Researcher: Just to clarify, Participant 13 , which application would you use
it on? If you had this content digest?
Participant 13: Uhmm, I don’t really..I don’t really use Twitter. So I don’t
really know how to How it works. But I think it could be nice on Instagram like I
know they have some things similar with their feed, but I still feel like you get a lot
of once you start with, you know, you’re interested in beauty it’s not it’s not narrow
enough it’s more like a wide range. So I think this would be nice to have it like, more
narrow. Okay, but yeah, Instagram, I guess.
Researcher: And then Participant 22 , it’s Instagram too?
Participant 22: I think Instagram and sometimes Facebook as well because I
feel like Facebook you.. like some things that Facebook Facebook’s just older. I don’t
know about you, Participant 13 , but I realized that I’ve liked weird pages when I
was like 13 and then all sudden they posted something and I’m like, why do I have
this? I don’t want this. And then I unfollow it but then was like, sometimes you
forget. Yeah. And so like, that’d be great if those were just like filtered out like I
don’t really care to see this. Sometimes like seeing people tagged in something or
like I don’t really care that you were tagged in like, a dog post like, that’s great. I
==PAGE:374==
364
B Interview Transcripts
don’t really want to see this. no offense filtering through that is like, that’s great.
Like maybe like, just showing posts like when people are tagged like in your, like the
people you talk to you the most, which would make sense being like, oh, like I talked
to Participant 13 the most and like, I’ll see when she’s tagged in a post, I’ll be like,
oh, haha, like she’s tagged in that, that’s totally Participant 13 . I don’t know, but
I don’t really.. there’re most people I don’t care.
Participant 13: And sometimes you can even see like, what the person has liked,
you know, they could literally like a post and you’ll get a notification or see it on
your feed, and it’s just like, you don’t really need that information.
Participant 22: No, it’s just like too much like I don’t want this. So I would
filter that’d be great to filter out Facebook as well [..]
Researcher: um, next idea. Okay, so this is inspired.. This is in the category
loneliness and when I say loneliness, it is more like these moments where you out of
loneliness go to your smartphone. So for example, when you’re alone in the train, or
if you’re eating lunch, alone for some reason, or if you just want a situation where you
feel like hey, I, I’m alone. So I’m you go to phone as a rescue, but it’s also related to
the current app limiter. So I don’t know how it is an Android. But in iOS right now,
you can extend the app limiter. And it just like the snooze button, so it’s very easy
to just snooze for it. So this idea is basically to give you a way to challenge you to
do something different. So you have reached this 15 minutes of app interaction with
the social media that you said that you wanted to only use for one hour, for example,
that day. So what else can you do? So for example, it could, like the idea is not just
to make you not use your smartphone, but it’s also give you other ways to not be as
dependent on certain applications for entertainers. For example, hey, you can go do
a zoom call with your friends and do karaoke. Or you can go listen to this podcast
or you can also go outside for a walk or just give you different ways So that you’re
not relying on specific application to entertain you, but you have a wider option but
also options that let you do stuff outside too. What do you think of this idea?
Participant 22: I think it depends on the moment. I know like, the moments
I’ve eaten lunch alone is because I find it awkward more than like, I feel alone. Or like
when I’m in a group of people and I’m like, Huh, they’re just talking about things
I don’t know I just feel uncomfortable. And so it’s kind of to hide my discomfort is
to look at your phone you like I have friends in it just to feel less awkward. I don’t
know if I actually like in the train is to pass time. But I don’t know if I use it more
as like because I feel lonely or just because I feel uncomfortable. Um, which I guess
can change based on situation. But I don’t think I necessarily if I feel uncomfortable,
I don’t know if I’d necessarily zoom call because then I wouldn’t be able to like, like
try to make the situation better.
Researcher: And also the other stuff is not. I think the example here is just
relate to zoom call just to show you that you can do something in your smartphone
too. But it could also be read a book or count how many plates around you or yeah..
==PAGE:375==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
365
Participant 13: I think it’s a nice reminder of the options because sometimes
you just like, it may be obvious, but you can’t think of it. And I think I would use
it also, like, for example, in this situation, where I am by myself, like at home all the
time, so it’s nice to, like have some something that can remind me, Hey, you can do
this. You can read a poetry book or meditate for 30 seconds or just something to do,
you know?
Participant 22: Yeah, I think that too would be nice. I think it would, if it was
like a wide range of activities then you can pick from
Participant 13: Yeah, I wouldn’t use it for a public setting because I I think
again, it’s not the aspect of loneliness more than the aspect of feeling awkward.yeah.
Participant 22: Just Yeah, maybe in the train, I would definitely consider like
reading something. Or I feel like then the train is when when if I would maybe read
like news on like a news app because you’re like, just need something short to do.
Um, so if there’s like, if there was like a Yeah, if it was suggested like, oh here like
get your like daily news if you like your commute is taking the subway every day. I
know in Paris, I actually would get in the habit of if there was they, they give like
newspapers. And so I would if I could, I would always grab one of the free newspapers
and I would read my horoscope and in the metro, or like, look at the weird articles
in there, because it was also a way to pass the time and then you’re not on your
phone. But if your phone provides you with those kind of like quick stories are like
horoscope kind of things that you’re just gonna read for 20 minutes, I think it’s like
can be really cool.
Participant 13: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay, I’ll move on to the next idea.
Okay, so this is inspired by the sleep mode that is currently available on all devices,
I would say. And the idea is more symbolic here, where just like the sleep mode allows
you to think, Okay, I’m going to sleep. So Oh, just to maybe to detail what sleep
mode is. It’s like an option. So you can go in do not disturb mode. And so calls are
silenced, notifications are silenced. And so there’s no app interaction really coming
through to you. And so the alone mode is kind of to encourage this state of, Hey, I’m
alone, and I’m taking this moment to be self aware and take time to myself and doing
something for myself. And for example, like, to listen to a podcast and meditate,
kind of a self love moment, and just taking more time for yourself, just because sleep
mode right now is very encouraged. But it just promotes this idea of like when you’re
going to sleep, this is when you should not be disturbed. But you should also not be
disturbed when you’re having a moment for yourself alone. So this is the alone mode.
What do you think of this?
Participant 13: I like the idea. I don’t really use the sleep mode just because
I turn off like the sound from my phone when I go to sleep. But I think it’s a nice
thing to have. So you remember, like you kind of forced to have like this moment for
yourself, really take the time for yourself and like a nice reminder as well.
==PAGE:376==
366
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 22: I think it’s a good idea. Um, I tend to my my habits because
when I was younger, I didn’t have any data for a very, very long time. So I’ve gotten
into the very big habit of turning off and on my data whenever I use it. So generally
if I don’t have one Wi Fi, unless I take out my phone to use it for something, my
data is always off. So I, so I explicitly do that. Which means I’m only contactable if
by a text message or a phone call. But I think it’s a good reminder to have like alone
mode. And I mean, I think since I switch off my data a lot like not when I’m home,
because I have Wi Fi. But for example, even Wi Fi, if you’re like studying, I always
switch off my Wi Fi. So it’s like you only get like text messaging phone calls, like
really for emergencies. If someone’s like, Oh my god, I really need to call you like you
have your phone number. You can, like we don’t need to use like, if you really have
an emergency. So I think it’s a I think it’s a good idea because it helps to do that.
And I think it helped me also to continue to do that even when you’re home because
you have Wi Fi. But in my personal use, I feel like I’ve because I didn’t have data
for a very long time. I’ve gotten into the habit of just turning it off. And so being
less accessible when I’m out doing things but When you’re home alone, I think it’s
one this is really good.
Researcher: Any last remarks, Participant 13 ?
Participant 13: No.
Researcher: Okay, so this is the last idea.
This is a speech based social network. So to give you a context, imagine I having
today my coworkers can eat with me and I’m having lunch by myself. And I have a
lunch break between 1130 and 12. And I’m interested today in talking about what
do people eat for breakfast outside of Denmark? And I just talk into my phone I say,
Hey, this is what I think could be interesting. And then the question pops up and
someone else either in my in my friend circle or someone around the world that has a
break in that same time span will be able to have a phone call or FaceTime call with
me to talk about this. Another scenario of this same speech based social network
would be to, if you’re having a like a rough day or if even if you’re having a nice day.
You will be able to talk with a chat bot. to kind of let off the steam or kind of to
allow you to talk about it. What do you think of these ideas?
Participant 13: I think it’s actually nice because I was thinking of the pen pal
system. Just, you know, because especially in the situation that we’re now kind of got
me thinking like, how do you normally meet new people, you know, in social setting
like, Yeah, I know people use Tinder, but what if you don’t want to, you know, hook
up with someone or for romantic purposes, I think. I mean, of course, you can write
in your bio, I’m just looking for friend but then the whole platform is not catered to
that like it’s misleading. So I was, you know, thinking, Oh, back in the days, back in
the days, people used to use pen pal, you know, they would write to people from the
other, like another country. And then it’s not so done anymore, but I was thinking
of doing like a, of searching for a platform that could do similar things in that so I
==PAGE:377==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
367
like this idea.
Participant 22: That’s true, I see where it can be very appealing. I don’t know
if I would necessarily use it.
Um, I think I tend to be particularly interested in
maintaining relationships that I have, I think through my degree and through like my
life experience, I’ve moved around a lot. I’m doing internships for short, short terms
in new places. And so I find it, it actually can get to a point where it’s very tiring to
always start, like conversations with people even sometimes in person is just like over
socializing. And I feel like I need to really, really want it to go follow through with a
conversation with someone I don’t know. And to be like, like, I’m gonna socialize and
then tell you all about myself and like, we’re gonna create a relationship where we
don’t meet, I think, I don’t know I think before I might have had more of a mindset
to but I think currently because I did an internship abroad recently. I think I would
not have the the energy, to be honest, because sometimes even like in person having
[..moonrise?] is kind of like I just kind of want to be with not have to make so many
social efforts all the time.
Participant 13: But it sounds like in that case, this platform will do fine for you,
because it doesn’t sound like it’s necessarily to have a long conversation and really,
actually get to know each other, which I think you could if you really end up having
like a connection with the person that you’re talking to. But I think it’s just simply
like, you know, asking a question and getting like others opinion or
Researcher: It’s inspired by Quora. I don’t know if you know that platform.
Quora is like a platform where you can type in a question. It’s more text based,
but you type in a question and then an expert around the world, kind of gives his
two cents about it. And then you kind of start a conversation. It’s to kind of get a
different perspective on questions or topics. So it’s not more it’s That’s why social
network is maybe not the best here. It’s not to make really friends, it could become a
friendship. It could like blossom to that. But it’s more of like, Hey, this is something
I’ve been thinking about. And I think I want different opinions about it because it
is an information bubble you kind of get stuck in when you’re only interacting with
your friends because you you are similar to some extent, or, more or less.
But yeah, and it also could be really like this network could also work maybe with
friends or So would you use it if it was with your friends?
Participant 22: I think I would use it more like kind of as you’re mentioning in
a professional context, if I had a question, I don’t know if I have regularly questions
that I like have that I share with a bunch of people because I’m like, What if this is
a weird question. It’s weird. I don’t want random people to judge me.
Participant 13: But I think it’s it I think I would use it just because like if it if
you can do both, like have your own group, you know of people that you know, like
friends, and then just ask some questions or and, and get some replies that, you know,
it’s like purposely just to ask a quick question and not to have a long conversation.
And then also be able to ask, you know, I guess other people that you don’t know
==PAGE:378==
368
B Interview Transcripts
when to have a general opinion, I think I would use it. I don’t know if I would ask
questions like that directly. Like, I can’t think of something here. But I think it
would be nice just to read as well to see like, what other people like questions are,
and maybe that’ll, like, give me an idea of something.
Participant 22: Yeah, I don’t, I don’t personally think I’d use it. I think. I
think it really depends on how it’s used like for for small things like, like culture. I
think it can be very interesting. But then I think there’s also the possibility of like,
making sure who’s answering because if it’s more of a technical question, making sure
there’s not misinformation if we think about like the pandemic.
Participant 13: Like you wouldn’t want too many...
Participant 22: Ensure there’s not someone giving their opinion about what
things that they aren’t informed about would be my only concern.
Participant 13: Like you don’t want medical opinion on that side.
Participant 22: Yeah, exactly. You don’t want people I like asking people have
questions about health care or like, currently pandemic situation, but you don’t want
I wouldn’t want like some random person being like, this is what I think. And then
you just like then it becomes one of those chains that people kind of argue in, this is
my fear. And so I think it would depend on the context. I don’t think I personally
use it, but I can see how it can be a good tool for people who want to explore but I
think culture would be really interesting.
Researcher: Okay. That was the last idea. So kind of to run off the conversation.
I want you to tell me, what do you think is unhealthy about your current relationship
with your smartphone? Maybe Participant 13 , you can start
Researcher: if you want to, I can let Participant 22 go first.
Participant 13: Yes.
Participant 22: Um, probably I should disinfect it more than I do. Like, what..
Researcher: Unhealthy in the sense of..
Participant 22: It’s part of it though. We touch our phones a lot, since it’s so I
think it’s important to be clean, especially in this time of pandemic. Public Health.
What can I say? This is this is what we’re all thinking but not saying.
Participant 13: I don’t think she meant. I don’t think it was hygiene question.
Researcher: I was starting to think that uhmm Participant 22 is very slow
today haha.
Participant 22: no, I just like, I’m looking at my phone and like, I’m looking at
the case. It’s like, you know, it’s like a clear case and they like, change color. And
I’m like, wow, this kind of looks gross. so sorry. But it’s part of like use. It’s like also
be clean. Um, what would I change? Is that ..was that the question?
==PAGE:379==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
369
Researcher: What do you think is unhealthy right now with your relationship
and your usage of your smartphone?
Participant 22: Oh, I probably spend way too much time because I have way
too much time. I think I think I have it. I think it’s unhealthy because I have too
much time. I think if I had less time I’d be more productive. But and do other things.
I think it’s hard to disconnect. I think I have a hard time disconnecting with things.
So I think it’s once I get like sucked into my phone, then I like then I go down like
the rabbit hole. But I think it’s not starting which is healthy. Like it’s not healthy
because I think I got sucked in easily
Researcher: So, it’s the infinite loop content, that kind of?
Participant 22: exactly. Or just like, and, and there’s nothing like currently
nowadays, there’s nothing to like, make me stop. There’s not like, Oh, I have to
go do this thing outside. Like there’s nothing to make you stop. And so like that’s
what’s super dangerous about it because there’s endless content and there’s nothing,
no commitment. I currently have, um, because, um, yeah, I don’t have a lot of stuff
to do on top of everything else because I’m in an internship. But, um,
Researcher: Is there any of the ideas that we just mentioned or any idea that
you personally have that you think would help with this?
Participant 22: I think I think some of the ideas were really good. I really like
the one about highlights of content. I think that’s really good. Because I think, I
think I would use it all.. like, actually regularly. I forget, I don’t know. I don’t know
if the like physical objects I would end up doing because I don’t think I’d invest that
much into it. I don’t know if I’d end up purchasing it. But I think that one was like,
a really good idea. And if there was another one that I liked, I forget which one
Researcher: Which physical object: the ring or the bracelet?
Participant 22: I mean, both like I probably wouldn’t buy them because I’m
cheap.Like I can’t buy this
Participant 13: I mean. If you can get the same function on your phone, like
You can still text someone that you care about and say, hey, I’ve been thinking about
you. How are you doing
Participant 22: You can send them a Facebook wave.
Participant 13: Yeah, then you wouldn’t spend money on an accessory.
Participant 22: Yeah, this is like, as a student. I think I probably would not pay
for it because I don’t have that money. Or depending on how much it cost I probably
wouldn’t pay for it. Because, yeah, limited budget. But yeah, I think I definitely
use it. I don’t have necessarily any other ideas. Maybe like, I don’t know, I, I don’t
know, because I think the things I would think of would be like, too much. Meaning
like, all data should be shut down and really all internet, you know, but like, that’s
not what we want. But it’s because like, I would want to be stricter on myself. So I
==PAGE:380==
370
B Interview Transcripts
guess something that would help me like, be strict on myself like, like timers are like,
you can’t don’t use your phone between this time and this time. So I would like go
exercise. Somewhere, but that means my computer has to have it too, because that’s
the problem. If you don’t take the phone there’s always computer.
Researcher: Yeah. Okay. So you want some kind of alarm time planner thing?
[...] for your screentime?
Participant 22: Yeah, I was just like, yeah, like, um, during these like, like two
hours like Wi Fi is like gets disconnected and like you need to put in like a password
or I don’t know something to try to like, because it’s the disconnection I think that’s
harder for me. It’s not like I don’t it’s not Yeah, I’d love to go for a run. It’s not
that. Actually I don’t want to but it’s just like getting disconnected from your phone
and having that like, break and sometimes it’s harder for you to make yourself have
that break. Whereas if someone else’s if it’s just like, during the day, like all this is
like the timer like yeah, I have to like it just helps you put it down.
Researcher: What about you, Participant 13 ?
Participant 13: Can you ask the original question?
Researcher: Yeah. What do you think is unhealthy about your relationship with
your phone?
Participant 13: And I think, um, because I don’t have like a realistic limit to it.
You know? I allow myself to indulge. So maybe that’s a, maybe that’s a something
I need to fix. Yeah, I think that would be it, to have more restriction
Researcher: But more of a more realistic restriction, I think, yeah, probably
Yeah. You don’t know what limit will is something that you can actually..
Participant 13: ..that is doable for me that you know, as well as what would be,
I guess, healthy as well.
Researcher: Which one of the ideas you think would maybe help you with this?
Or do you have an idea of how?
Participant 13: I think like a mixture of the reminder. So it wouldn’t be with
a ring, but just like the limit on the phone, but and the app with the message of,
you know, what you can do to have that kind of a reminder. So instead of, hey, you
spend this amount of time on your phone, maybe, you know, have suggestions. So
what you can do instead or just a reminder that you know, maybe try to focus on
your mental health you know,
Participant 22: I’m gonna bounce off of what Participant 13 said because I
think that’s a good idea maybe like it’d be Um, so like having that like, let’s say
you you’re like okay I want to spend like maximum like this amount of time. Then
you have your reminder with like a notification popping up with alternatives but you
have like a list of like goals for yourself and then so the things that pop up are like
a reminder of the goals that you have set yourself, so like, really, like run I want to
==PAGE:381==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
371
exercise I want to do an online class I want to like bake cookies I want to do this and
like it pops up a reminder of like alternative things you can do with your free time
be like remind me like you wanted to do this, this this and this today. Do you want
to keep using your phone? kind of like a guilt trip you
Participant 13: ..or even like a message that says ’take a break from your phone
and make yourself a cake’ or something
Participant 22: Yeah exactly. But I think it could be really good if it’s linked
to like personal goals that you’ve set for yourself for the week, or like long term, like,
you wanted to learn a foreign language, maybe think about like, doing like Duolingo
for a bit or something like that, although it’s using your smartphone, but it’s like, in
different way than just scrolling. Or like, you wanted to bake a cake. Like, here’s,
um, like, do you need to, like, be send some recipes, so you can like, just like push
you to like launching that maybe? Or like, Oh, you plan to work out like, here’s like
a link like for some, like, workout? videos? I mean, it’s kind of using your phone, but
it’s like not being like stuck in front of it.
Researcher: Definitely. Okay. Thank you so much for joining us and for giving
your insights. If you have any ideas that pop up for today or for the next days and
you just want to share them with us. Please drop an email, a message you know, you
know me, if you’re interested in hearing more about the project, also let me know
because then I’ll give you updates. And yeah, thank you so much for your time. It
was really nice.
Participant 22: Well, thank you guys. I think it’s a really interesting topic, and
very relevant to everything that’s happening nowadays. And yeah, so I’m curious to
see how it will turn out.
==PAGE:382==
372
B Interview Transcripts
B.3.6
Participants 23 and 24
Researcher: Okay. I’m just going to start the interview. If the person comes on
later, yeah, we will, we will try to include him. So first of all, Good afternoon, and
welcome to our session. Thank you so much for taking the time to join us to talk
about smartphones and their relationship to a smartphone.
We’re both with the
Technical University of Denmark. And what we want is to get insight into students
use off and relationship to your smartphone, and its indicate and the case and the
context of our master thesis. And what we want to we hope to obtain is how we can
foster healthier relationship to improve our smartphones. Your answers will remain
anonymous and will not be shared with external partners. And we will work on first
name basis as we will be recording the interview for the sake of transcription and
coding categorizing the data afterwards. Do you give us permission to record this
into First of all, yep. Okay, perfect. Um, I just before we start a conversation, it’s
going to be a focus group interview. So what I’m interested in seeing and hearing
is the conversation between you too. And there are no wrong answers, but right at
different points of view, so please feel free to share your point of view, even if the
differs from what the other person have said. And keep in mind that we are just
as interested in negative comments as positive comments. And also that negative
comments are also the most helpful, so please feel free to share them. And please also
keep a respectful tone when you talk to shareholders to make sure that everything
goes smoothly. Yeah, okay. Let’s begin. Maybe just to start off, introduce yourself
by saying: What’s your name and what your current occupation is?
Participant 24: Sure.I’ll go first. My name is Participant 24 . Hello. I’m
currently a PhD student in UCD. My PhD specializes in speech based technology
and perception of it and how that impacts language production in human machine
dialogue.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 23: Okay. My name is Participant 23 . I’m also a PhD student
but in Nice, so at a French University, University of Côte d’Azur, and I’m a PhD
student in linguistics, studying speech perception by modified speech professions, by
musicians and non musicians.
Researcher: Okay, cool. To start off, I’m just going to ask a very open question.
What did you think of the survey? And did it make you reflect on your behavior in
relationship to your smartphone?
Participant 24: If I’m honest, I did that many surveys. I can’t remember which
one it was.
And I would say it hasn’t had any impact on how I actually use my phone if I’m
honest, because I can’t remember it.
Participant 23: I remember because I I got the service through my sister who
is Nermen’s friend. So I remember like the context better. Probably But I thought
==PAGE:383==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
373
it was kind of a not well timed survey, given the context, especially in France of
confinement. So when I received the survey, we were already in confinement. So
clearly, your cellphone usage is completely different during confinement as it is, during
normal times of the year, and I wasn’t sure if the cell phone, like questionnaire was
about now, so how do I use my phone right now? Or how do I use it generally, in my
life? And so there are a few questions that made that particularly unclear especially
about how much time do I spend on my phone? And how much time on average and
how much like looking at your phone data of how much time you spend on it, which
is really not realistic compared to how I use it. normally. Um, so I thought that was
kind of a big downside of the questionnaire. And I’m sure unfortunately, I feel like
that will that will really influence your results.
Unknown Speaker No, definitely. Just to clarify, it was in general, we look at
a general trend of smartphone usage, but Obviously the corona virus outbreak has
spread through a lot of European countries. I don’t know if you can hear me..
Participant 23: yeah.
Researcher: Okay. But it spread very quickly to a lot of countries. So we have to
take that perspective into account now in our Master Thesis. But yeah, the original
idea was to just look at our smartphone usage in general
Participant 24: I have suffered with that. Actually, I was doing a lot of them.
And they were all kinds of the same issue: Do you want it based on now or do you
want it based on..
Participant 23: I think it was unclear in your questionnaire, because you es-
pecially given the context. And you did, you did put out the questionnaire in this
context that it should have been more specific in the beginning that it was on your
normal cell phone use. And some of the questions that you can’t answer like, look-
ing at how much how many hours you spent on your phone.
Like, I mean, they
should they should be in according to the context, as that’s when you are sending the
questionnaire, but I mean, yeah, you could probably like write that in afterwards.
Researcher: So we’re going to discuss a little bit about defining so we have from
the survey and obviously due to GDPR requirements, we don’t actually know what
either of you have said. So we’re just going to go in general terms and say a little bit
statistic wise what has been said and then you can reflect on it or discuss it. So the
first thing is the general population of the survey said: over 60% said that they use
their smartphone to relax and a lot of the words or expressions used is kill time, chill,
relax. It’s comfortable; expressions like brain dead entertainment is used very much.
What do you think of this finding?
Participant 23: So, again, is this in the current context or in my usual context?
Researcher: In your usual context.
Participant 23: Okay.
==PAGE:384==
374
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: But you can reflect on the Coronavirus situation. But the study is
on the general.
Participant 23: Okay, just checking, I would say I don’t know that Yeah, I use
my phone to, to sometimes to relax, I guess
Participant 24: It’s perfect to me. That’s exactly what I do. Sitting on the sofa.
Last couple of hours, just flick through stuff without actually reading half of it.
Unknown Speaker Hmm. But Participant 23 , you were asking into the difference
before: was it in general or during the current situation? Do you think that your
way.. it’s less relaxing to use your phone right now?
Participant 23: Well definitely because I like can’t talk to anyone so I live by
myself. So I literally by myself all the time so my phone is the only interaction I have
with with any one at all, which makes its function completely different from when
you usually have Your phone and you send two texts to your friends when you’re
meeting or, and then you have, you know, live interactions like right now my phone
is the only source of interaction with with anyone. So all interaction with my phone
is not relaxing in the same, it’s not. It has a different function in life.
Researcher: Okay.So according to the survey, the most used category of appli-
cation on the smartphone is social media. What do you think of this? And what
application category would you.. are you using the most in general, but you can also
reflect on what you’re using now if it’s different, but in general, what do you use the
most?
Participant 24: To me, it’s pretty much the same as normal, just maybe using
it a bit more frequently. So social media definitely is what I use the phone most
for. And that would go from Facebook just goofing off looking at crap and not really
paying much attention to using WhatsApp, to keep in touch with the guys in the lab
in the university and just chit chat nothing major just to kind of keep keep in contact
with them while we don’t see each other. and Twitter for getting people to do my
questionnaire.
Participant 23: yeah, mostly Facebook and Instagram, I think like kind of as
much time on on both. But like I definitely spend way more time on my phone looking
at Facebook and Instagram now than I do at other times since I like I don’t have any
other interactions with people. So that is kind of it is kind of different but I do look
at Facebook regularly in on a daily basis, support environment and Instagram as well
but less less frequently.
Researcher: Okay,another finding us around 60% say that Social media make
them worry too much about their self image. And sometimes it makes them feel
uncomfortable. And it also sometimes brings strong emotion, like anxiety and stress
to them. But it’s also the application category that you feel the most prone and need
to be up to date with. And it’s also as I said earlier, the application category that
people use the most, why do you think so?
==PAGE:385==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
375
Participant 24: It’s designed to do that.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 24: Facebook and Instagram in particular, are designed to do exactly
that. Like the the feed of the feed of notifications is timed perfectly to your personal
need to to go near those, those notifications like their.. Facebook, they know exactly
what they do.
Researcher: You think it is the design of their interface that has this duality of
feeling.
Participant 24: Yeah.
Participant 23: Yeah, I would say I would probably agree. I think they know
that that is kind of like one of the mechanisms they use to hook people into using
Facebook. And I think people on Instagram as well. But I think people have known
that more about Facebook since it’s been around longer, and always been kind of like
how to get people to spend more time on your website. And it definitely Yeah, I do
think I do think there is an intentional part. I don’t personally feel like I don’t, I
haven’t personally felt like I haven’t personally felt pressured from either Facebook or
Instagram, about personal self image. And I think that’s also due to the fact that I
don’t follow on .. I don’t really follow other people, aside from people that I actually
know. And I was talking to friends about this recently, but it depends how you use
Instagram for example. So since I only know the people that I follow, the pictures
that they take don’t really, I mean, I don’t feel better or worse about myself, from
those pictures of people that I normally appreciate, that I follow.
Participant 24: I think that’s exactly I was gonna I was just gonna add that
as well like, but that it depends what you use it for, they’ll keep feeding you the
same thing. So if you’re inclined to look at images of other people, and spend a lot
of time thinking about your own image in relation to those, it’s going to be like a
self fulfilling prophecy where they just keep forcing more and more of these kinds
of images. Whereas if you’re spending your time on Facebook looking at cookery
stuff, they’ll keep giving you cookery stuff. Yeah. You know, it’s like it just keeps
reinforcing it. If you have issues and you go and use these sites, it just reinforces
those issues like that’s the way their algorithms work like you know,
Researcher: Another finding in the survey is that the general population find
smartphone activities addictive. 60% However, 70% have marked that they’re not
addicted to their smartphones. Why do you, Where is the line drawn and why do
they need to distinguish between these two?
Participant 24: so like addiction itself is .. there is a huge gray area between
being addicted to something and being prone to do something quite often because you
know if that makes sense like defining something as an addiction from a self report
basis is like is going to be riddled with inaccuracies anyway because some people
will be addicted but won’t recognize they’re addicted. Some people will actually just
==PAGE:386==
376
B Interview Transcripts
be like, can’t use it a lot but not really addicted but consider themselves addictive
to know because it’s that that subjective impression of what addiction is. But that
wouldn’t surprise that.. the figure doesn’t surprise me. I’d say the vast majority
people don’t think they’re actually addicted.
Participant 23: Yeah, I agree that if you were asked to ask anyone if they were
addicted to Anything.. addicted has such a negative connotation, but I don’t think I
don’t think they would respond seriously with Yes, I’m addicted to blah, blah. But
um, I do think I do think that phone usage is addicting, because it creates a constant
stream of interaction with other people. Which is why when you are in confinement,
like it is addicting, because that is your only source of relations with anyone else.
But when you are in the normal world, anytime you’re feeling or thinking that you
need to connect to people, the phone is really easy to do that, whether it’s with local
images or reading something, or Yeah, anything if you even feel like you’re always
connected, which can be which can be addicting, I think.
Participant 24: Yeah. And really what you said earlier about it kind of honing in
on those kind of mindless behaviors, you know, where you’re just doing things without
thinking too much about it, by timing notifications by giving you notifications. Things
that you’re very familiar with. So it’s like, just appealing to that system, one in your
brain fast acting, not thinking. But yet, most people have the capacity to engage the
system too and just go, you know, actually, I’ve been doing this a bit too much. Now
I need to take some steps to keep away from me for a bit or something like that just
until my behavior kind of calms down.
Unknown Speaker So to challenge that a little bit, considering the current context
of us being very technologically connected right now on your phone, you can have
your bus ticket you can have you can look through travel itineraries on Google Maps,
you can pay with Apple Pay Now, you have emails, work emails, you have everything
inside that device. Is addiction really the right term to use here?
Participant 23: I’m sorry, can you repeat the end of your question.
Researcher: Yeah, of course.
Participant 24: You’ve got work emails and we got?
Researcher: So we have everything Inside this device, whether it’s work or
ordering food or getting your bus ticket or Apple Pay, so everything is inside the
device. So is it really correct to call it an addiction? Or is it just a necessity now to
have a smartphone or to be attached to a smartphone in today’s society?
Participant 24: Yeah. Maybe the definition falls on what you’re using doesn’t,
it? if you’re using it as a tool, then it’s not like for paying for things for using maps
for doing things like that, then it’s not really an addiction is same as wearing a pair
of shoes. Whereas if it’s social media use that that’s that’s a different kettle of fish
all together. Like that’s where addictions and body image problems and all that kind
of stuff can definitely come in. So it’s more to do with the what’s on the device than
==PAGE:387==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
377
the device itself.
Participant 23: I would agree. I would agree as well. And I think that the idea
of maybe the image of addiction to phones maybe comes from a point of view from
people who haven’t had phones as involved in their everyday tool usage. Like, if it’s
especially older generations, I think when you say that young people are addicted to
their phones and see them with their phones all the time, also aren’t coming from
that idea of, oh, wow, you can use your phones to Google Maps or your bus ticket
or to read the article from the times that you wanted to read. They don’t think of
phone as that kind of tool. So it might also influence this idea of, of this image of
people being glued to their phones all the time, and not so much as the tool that they
can be.
Participant 24: I think some of that comes from like egocentric biases as well
as you know, where you’ve got older people who are probably not using their smart-
phones to the full functionality. They’re probably using them for a couple of games
and a couple of social media apps. And just assume that everyone else has got a
phone in their hands. doing exactly the same thing. They are not using it for Maps.
They are not using it to do statistical analysis or, you know, I don’t know who will
go for that. But, you know,
Participant 23: I don’t think that but
Participant 24: It’s literally impossible. I am trying to do factor analysis here
and I can’t imagine doing that on a smartphone.
Researcher: Okay, so those were the main findings from the survey. Based on
these findings from the survey and also from some initial user studies that we con-
ducted. We have identified three narratives or scenarios in which we have found the
most unhealthy relationship or the less the less healthy relationships to the smart-
phone, the first one being, phone break, the concept of taking a break on your phone,
to mental breaks just to entertain yourself. For example, if you were having an in-
tensive study session the whole day and you want to take a small break, you take a
phone break. That’s the first scenario the second being fear of missing out but due
to physical distance, for example, if you have an international network and you want
to stay connected and ensure that the relationships are somewhat somehow the same,
or if you’re having your family or friends or partners in a different country, and you
want to keep it as, fill the gap with the smartphone, and the last one being loneliness,
it can be by, if you’re eating lunch alone, and you want to feel less lonely during the
lunch break, or if you’re taking the train or bus alone, or if you’re in a social context
in which you don’t feel comfortable, so you feel lonely, so you just go to the phone.
So those are the three key key areas. And based on those we have formulated six
concepts, ideas that we want you guys to give us your feedback on.
They are very broad and not detailed. So what we want you to do is first of all,
give us your honest opinion about them. Also tell us how you would take this idea
and make it your own how it would fit into your everyday life or if it would not fit
==PAGE:388==
378
B Interview Transcripts
at all into your everyday life. And if you have any additional features or aspects of
the idea that you think should be developed further. The first idea is ring limiter. So
this ring would be a tech gadget or an accessory that you would wear and it would be
connected to a device and for example, say that I have had a very long study session
and I want a 30 minute break on my phone. And I put this 30 minute break and
then the color of the ring change based on the screen time and when I reached 30
minutes, it turns.. it gradually changes to red. And when it hits 30 minute mark, it
gets red and it starts blinking until I’m done, leave my phone, but it can also be used
in general to your specific screentime related to an app for example, Instagram, or it
could also be used in general to your overall screentime if you want to monitor and
limit that. What do you think of this idea?
Participant 24: I think it’s a great idea. it’s very good idea. I mean, like, part
of the problem is that we, when we’re using phones is the kind of mindless thing that
we were talking about before. So having that something objective telling you exactly
in the same way screentime does when it comes up and gives you a hours or whatever,
but on an ongoing basis, rather than once at the end of every week. You get that
data, you just ignore it. If it’s there, while you’re while you’re actually in the midst
of using it, I think that’d be a lot more helpful.
Participant 23: Um, I don’t know I don’t really I don’t really use my phone that
much when I’m during the normal day. I think I’m probably emphasizing this, like
way too much, but I think it’s actually really hard for me to almost remember how I
use my phone normally because I’m in my apartment for a month. So I have like, a
month is a long time to be using your phone in a completely different way. And to
remember, I usually do everything, but I don’t actually use my phones that much like
I respond to messages pretty quickly. So maybe messaging, but messaging is kind of
a different type of like, it’s not the amount of time that you spend messaging people,
usually you can limit or you put your phone away if you’re at work or whatever. Um,
and I don’t I don’t know if I would use it personally that much, but I could see it
being a helpful thing for other people.. to just in general, to monitor and be able to
monitor what you are doing.
Participant 24: I really find that useful actually. I do slip into patterns regularly
where I find myself on my phone quite a lot. And I just like, oh i have to kind of take
a step back.
Researcher: But we mostly use it in relation to a break. So you’re telling yourself
Hey, I want this 30 minute break and I don’t want to overstep it or lose track of time
or would you use it in terms of a certain application or your overall screentime?
Participant 24: I would probably use it as a sort of cumulative thing throughout
the day. So it wouldn’t be like I’d want times of the day where I can use the phone,
but like having allocated amount of time, spending just wasting time. And that would
be more for just like social media apps and stuff like that, rather than tools so that
you can use tools, your payment methods and all that whenever you wanted to. But
==PAGE:389==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
379
you could still limit the amount of time you’re spending using apps like Facebook and
things.
Researcher: Okay, and the next idea is Bond touch. It’s a bracelet that keeps
you connected to your loved ones through touch. So how it works is for example, say
that I am an international student here in Denmark and my mother is back home or
a friend of mine is back home in in Morocco, for example. And I want to be able to
send her a way of me thinking of her so for example, I just Click on this bracelet and
then it sends a nudge or vibration to the other person wearing also the bracelet and
then it will keep you it will kind of fill the gap of the distance because you have this
gesture touch aspect of the bracelet. What do you think of this idea?
Participant 23: Um I think I think it could be a good idea for elderly people
maybe to be in contact with people that they .. if there’s an emergency like that kind
of usage of being in contact when they need it and kind of monitoring your health
type of things. But I don’t think that’s a very positive. I don’t think it’s I think it’s
one of those like too connected tools, that we’re already very like pretty connected,
that I don’t think we need another like another tool another especially physical object
tools to be connected through
Participant 24: I agree, it kinda.. it has kind of a novelty. It’s a nice idea. But
it has that kind of novelty sort of vibe to it where it would be something people might
use for a month, and then it’ll go in the drawer and never be seen again.
Researcher: Yeah.
Okay.
The next idea is a content digest and to kind of
put a frame around it. So you kind of mentioned it earlier, but it is.. right now
interfaces and social media, but also a lot of news applications are designed with this
infinite loop content. You can scroll forever, you can find 3000 articles about the
same subject. And there’s a whole spiderweb of information being spread around
so you only get the full picture once you spend a specific amount of time on your
smartphone. So this content digest would be a way to summarize this content to
spend less time scrolling or swiping or clicking through the different content streams.
So you get the necessary info. A scenario of this could be, for example, if you use
Twitter and Twitter does a very long stream of information. And it’s hard sometimes
to get an overview of what the information actually is. So to help you filter out and
get the necessary information, so it would be kind of a plugin, but it could also work
throughout different news streams or through different social media applications as
a way to kind of get an overview or get the bigger picture without having to scroll
forever.
Participant 24: I think I think it’s a really good idea, but it’s going to be trite,
like developing something like this will be is full of ethical issues that like I’ve seen,
I’ve been to conferences where a lot of ideas like this have been kind of floated. It’s
just that notion of tailoring news. Or the ’you’re the censor’ of what someone else
receives is, is problematic. I mean, that’s not worse than the problem of getting a
continual loop over
==PAGE:390==
380
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 23: I think it’s almost kind of like the same idea. It’s not a con-
tinuous loop. But it is kind of the same kind of filter of what you’re seeing without
choosing.
Participant 24: Yeah, yeah. And even if you give people access to, to decide
the parameters of what gets select doesn’t get selected, you still recreate in that kind
of bubble effect where they’re just seeing the same thing over and over again, then
it just continues, you know, I think, yeah, I think that’s already a severe issue with
social media that needs address so yeah.
Researcher: The next idea, I don’t know if you’re familiar with the current app
limiters on either iOS or Android where you can limit your interaction with certain
applications.
Participant 24: I know of them.. maybe..
Participant 23: I do.
Researcher: So basically, right now, you can through different application, either
through the build in application or operating system, you can limit your interaction
with certain applications. So for example, if you want only to use social media in
general for one hour today, you can do that. And then it would pop up a message
after your one hour interaction with all social medias and be like, Hey, you, this is
an apple (...) update. And in iOS, you can extend it for 15 minutes or ignore for
the day. And I think in Android, you can’t but at least a lot of people have voiced
that they kind of end up snoozing, this app limiter notification because they’re doing
something and it just is a kind of stoic message telling them hey, you’re done for
today. And inspired by this but also in the context of loneliness when you’re alone
in the train, or if you’re eating alone, or if you’re just in a social context where you
feel like you go to your phone to kind of fill the void of not being with other people
want us to do our proactive app limiter. So for example, say that you spent your one
hour of social media, it will kind of give you ways to do.. entertain yourself, either
with a smartphone, or something and your surroundings. For example, instead of
using social media, you can go take a zoom call with others, or you can go listen to
this podcast or read a book or take a walk or count how many plates are in your
surroundings, or how many people wearing red, kind of give you challenges to do to
alter your attention and dependency on certain applications for entertainment.
Participant 24: Yeah, I like the idea. I think it’s good having that kind of
distraction rather than just having a cut off zone. Right. You can’t use this anymore.
But I feel eventually, once the novelty of doing these challenges is worn off, that
people will do exactly that. They’ll just don’t mute it again. What they were doing
before, it doesn’t have the same kind of separation as the idea of the ring. Warnings
is a degree of separation with the ring that kind of makes it you’re more likely to
actually pay attention to it than something that is still on the phone, you know?
Participant 23: Yeah, I think I agree. I think it’s a good idea. Like, it’s a nice
idea. And, like, could be useful, but I don’t know how long term it would be. I
==PAGE:391==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
381
feel like if you’re really looking for long term effects, in my opinion, like long term
effects on smartphones, I feel like you’re learning about how you can use your time
and monitor your own phone, such as an like, as a person, rather than making your
app or a phone thing to monitor. I think it’s more of a health type of monitoring
people would really need to work on rather than, like, Oh, I’m gonna have my phone,
tell me not to do that. well, in the end, it’s your own decision of do I do actually
not want to do this or do I want to do this and so it’s more of a self monitoring that
would have a bigger impact in my opinion on people’s addictive phone usage or other
phone usage. But it is a good idea.
Participant 24: Yeah, I’d say particularly if you’ve got some feedback about
usage in, in within society, like how long the average most people who live in your
area use their smartphone for. So nobody wants to be at the bottom of that pile,
you know. So if they see that they’re there, they’re running five hours when everyone
else is doing three, they are inclined to actually step in and make an effort to change
that.
Researcher: Another respondent voiced maybe the idea of integrating it with a
to do list. So for example, if you have a to do list of stuff, for example, if you need to
clean the kitchen, and you need to pet I don’t know, feed the dog and integrate that
with a challenge application so that it also becomes stuff that you actually already
need to do but maybe you are procrastinating What do you think of this add-on
feature to it?
Participant 23: I actually just downloaded a to do list app because it’s very,
very hard to self motivate when you’re in confinement and you don’t actually have
any like, like things to do at any time. And as time goes on, it’s harder and harder
to motivate yourself to do really normal things. But, um, I don’t know if that would
actually help in that kind of app. Like, I think it would help but I feel like once
confinement is over, I’m going to probably going to delete that app because I’m fine
with writing it in my notes, whatever for things that I actually need to do, whether
it’s grocery shopping, or or even feeding the dog, but like maybe for some people that
would be helpful. I think it depends on how you really interact with the phone, how
you..
Participant 24: It’s a really subjective thing, I would find that really annoying.
If someone was telling me to do things that, if my phone started telling me to do
things that I was supposed to be doing, I would find that like really annoying. I would
probably throw that out of the window. Yeah, I prefer the idea of the challenges. But
like, I mean, that’s a very subjective thing some people would prefer.
Participant 23: Yeah, it is very subjective
Researcher: Okay, and the next idea is the alone mode. So it’s inspired by,
there’s a sleep mode on phones right now. And this sleep mode kind of puts you into,
do not disturb and calls are silenced and apps interactions are also silenced and this
sleep mode kind of promotes this idea of when you go to sleep, you should kind of
==PAGE:392==
382
B Interview Transcripts
shut down your phone or like, take some time for yourself. And so inspired by that we
want to do an alone mode. Where here it’s it’s more symbolic than actually something
different. But if you have ideas for how it should be different from the sleep mode,
please let us know. But the alone mode is kind of to promote this self aware moment,
being by yourself is something you should do. It’s something that other people do
too. And it’s kind of a self love, self awareness moment, where aybe the interaction
would be limited to listening to music or listening to podcasts or meditation or more
productivity based tasks. Or.. Yeah, so this is diet, the main idea, what do you think
of this?
Participant 24: Again, this kind of, I don’t know, it’s good idea, but it is.. I
don’t know. Yes. So the first idea, the first thing that came to mind was this, that
that sounds very similar to just having a meditation app. But then if you can change
what you might be doing during those times to suit yourself, then that’s a.. that’s a
good idea.
Participant 23: Yeah, I think for me, when I heard alone app, I thought, I
thought of more of the times when you were talking about people who are, you
know, feeling alone, whether, you know, it’s an awkward social context or the bus or
waiting for a bus by themselves and I think that in a totally different direction, that
could be very, very useful. Especially if it’s a situation which could be potentially
uncomfortable, like waiting for a bus at night, and you need to be on your phone,
whether it’s looked at anything, because you don’t want to look like you’re available
to be talked to, by, by anyone. And I think that kind of direction of alone mode in a
kind of, you know, occupy me type of thing could could be, you know, could could be
interesting. Otherwise I yeah, I feel like it’s kind of just sounds like the sleep mode
or, you know, maybe leave your phone at home if you’re going to do an activity.
Participant 24: Yeah, I think there are already lots of kind of apps that do each
of those things individually. Whenever an app that will do that, or feature on a phone
that would do that, do all of that collectively, and you could customize it to yourself
would be more useful for people. I don’t know, myself using any of those apps, they
go out the window after a week because one thing we never have is enough time. I
start timetabling things that are just for myself, like exercise meditation, they just
go out the window because I don’t have time to fit them in when I’ve allotted them.
And then it’s not that you know, you’ve already missed that day, by the time you do
start again tomorrow, you give up
Participant 23: Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. Um, the last idea is, um, so we didn’t find a very perfect
name for it, but right now it’s speech based social network and how it works is so say
that I have a lunch break today and my coworkers can’t join me for once and I have
a lunch break between 1130 and 12. And I’m, I don’t want to be alone. I want to
feel less lonely. So I talk into this app. And I’m like, I’m actually interested about
hearing ’What do people eat for breakfast outside of Denmark?’ This is a topic I’ve
==PAGE:393==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
383
been thinking about lately. Then I type it in and it becomes a box. And so either
your friends or any stranger in the world would be able to see this. And if you have
a break in that same time span, this would be a topic of conversation that you talk
for 30 minutes or less if that that’s the, what you have marked down. That is one
dimension of this application. Another dimension could be so say that you had the
long day and you just really need to talk off, maybe let off some steam. Or maybe
you just want to talk about your day something nice happened. Then you have an
AI based chat bot, and then it asks you some questions and then let you talk through
it.
What do you think of these ideas?
Participant 24: I don’t know.
Again, it’s kind of..
it has just as an air of
novelty about it. I don’t know how long lasting something like that would be. It’s
like something of you might enjoy using a few times. Then, just going back to having
lunch as you did before.
Participant 23: Yeah, I don’t know how I feel like there are other things that
kind of do that, like talking about any topic, isn’t that kind of what like Reddit is? I
mean, I’m not very familiar with Reddit, but I think that’s kind of the idea that you
like write something.
Researcher: It is definitely inspired by Quora and Reddit and in general this
idea of like, but I think here the the main keyword is speech based. So it’s something
is just more like, when you have a lunch break, it’s more like a face to face. You talk
with someone leaves when you? Yeah. So here, the idea is to have this conversation,
not the text based aspect of it.
Participant 23: I think the text based aspect of a lot of these things like Reddit
kind of gives you a security. Personally, I’m not sure if I’d be like, oh I’m on my lunch
break. I’m going to talk to a random person about, you know, about. I don’t know
what topic like maybe, but it kind of goes quickly into maybe a creepy like, chat,
chat call type thing that you’re not really sure like I would, I would want to take a
chance that I might fall on someone who’s going to be weird during my 30 minute
lunch break where you just want to Relax.. I don’t know. I don’t know, maybe like,
maybe but..
Participant 24: yeah. And if you if you if you have like it was just a system
based I mean, that’s just what Siri does.
Participant 23: Yeah, yeah. and then you just talk to Siri. I don’t know, I don’t
think it’s a very, very I don’t think it would be long lasting either unfortunately. And
like, I think that overall from the from this survey and the talk I mean like on one
hand you have the addiction to phones, social media and the tools and then a lot of
apps trying to limit between the two. Like, I mean, at the end it kind of can become
more and more app, you know that you have that’s like, more space and more time
that you’re supposed to dedicate your energy to, you have to like write in. I mean
even to do lists you have to write in your to do list on your phone. Do them like
==PAGE:394==
384
B Interview Transcripts
Yeah.
Researcher: But I think maybe just to clarify, because I feel like you keep talking
about a third party app, it can also be something integrated into the operating system,
at least as we envision it. So it doesn’t have to be an app, it doesn’t have to be a
separate thing. We’re also taking into context, it could be something already plugged
into the system or part of the system.
So it doesn’t have to be something you
download and have to maintain. But something that’s just there if you want to deal
with it, for example,
Participant 23: That makes sense. Sorry.
Researcher: No, no. Just because the last tree.. I felt like you thought it would
be a separate app, but it doesn’t need to be a separate app.
Participant 23: Okay. Okay.
Participant 24: Yeah, I don’t know. I can see problems of how it might work.
Like, and you have the issue where you don’t want to talk to someone you’ve never
spoken to. A lot of people are just not gonna want to talk someone they’ve never met
before. And if you want to say this was built into the iOS on this smartphone. It’s
going to have to be someone you know who’s been to Denmark. How are they gonna
tell you that information? like that’s private information that someone might not
want you to know. If you were looking for someone you already know, for instance,
to fill that social gap, and then you can replace that person with Siri anyway by just
saying, hey, Siri, what people in Denmark eat for breakfast? And she’ll tell you. So,
yeah, I don’t know how useful
Participant 23: but I mean, it could be something that you could you know,
instead of being like question it could be I feel like there are apps that kind of do
this but could be like one of those things where you can connect with people who are
having lunch at the same time and who’d be like, Oh, sure, someone can join us for
lunch. As a, you know, who’s free for lunch now? And everyone you know, kind of
like a dating app like everyone who’s like around you answers yes or no. And that’s
a very different direction, but it would be a solution to the problem as well.
Participant 24: I love that. If you’re having lunch and someone says to you, can
I join you for lunch and you don’t want to talk to you?
Participant 23: Yeah, yeah, that would be really awkward, but like if it was like
an app that that said, you know, one person free for lunch and people could see it
like, oh, there’s one person for lunch if they wanted, they were like, Oh, sure there’s
three of us someone else can join that we don’t know. And they could say come here
or not. quite rejective, no one answers.
Researcher: Okay, to round off a bit he conversation, I want you to reflect
on what you think is unhealthy about your General, smartphone usage and your
relationship to your smartphone usage. Or in the case of Participant 23 , if you
don’t remember you can just talk about right now ,what do you think is the most
==PAGE:395==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
385
unhealthy aspect of it? Maybe you can start?
Participant 24: Me?
Researcher: No, I thought Participant 23 .. but I’m sorry..
Participant 23: um, I think in general, I probably like spend too much time
in the mornings and evenings on social media, because I think that’s kind of when
you’re like, Oh, I want to disconnect and then you like, look at your phone when
you’re disconnecting. I think that’s probably the worst habit, whether it’s now or at
any other time. Um, it’s worse now because like, like, I don’t actually talk to anyone.
It makes that like, the need for feeling connected all the time, even worse. So it’s
kind of more understandable now than it is generally, but I say that, yeah.
Researcher: Do you think any of the solutions that we just or the concept we
just talked about would help you with this? Or do you have an idea for something
that would help you, um, have a healthier relationship with this problem?
Participant 23: Yeah, I think I think it could, like maybe something’s like the
time limiting or something. Or maybe it’s like, if you like, could block an app off
after a certain time. Maybe that would help. But I think maybe it helps but I still,
I still believe that the real problem would be some kind of, you know, like, General
sociological awareness and talking about it and education about using this tool slash,
social media game thing that is your phone, you will have, like it hasn’t really been
addressed in the kind of society type of issue that know how to interact with because
it’s so new, like apps are so new and even. Yeah, we’re talking like 10 years of it
being used not.. and five years of the way it’s been now so people don’t get it. I feel
like that people just can’t we haven’t learned how to have a normal or like a good
relationship with our phone. I don’t know, if having the app change that will help
more than, like, really, you know, learning.
Researcher: Would it work to have it more as an integrated part of the interface
so that not like an app but more of like, so you say I only want to spend 30 minutes
in the morning and 30 minutes in the evening. On my social media.
Participant 23: Yeah, maybe like maybe that would work. Like I said, I think
that that could be, that could be a good solution. But I think a long term solution
would be like, just general education and awareness about how to use your phone,
because in the end, like, in the end, you can put your timer on. And if you don’t like
it, then just take your timer off, you know?
Researcher: Mm hmm. And would the challenge application work in this context
of giving you other alternatives to use your time differently, or would you just ignore
it?
Participant 23: Well, I think it depends, like confinement is really pretty de-
pressing.
So if you’re like sitting in your bed, because you don’t want to get up
and looking at social media, whether you have like another thing to do, like, it’s
not, I mean, you know, it’s like one of those social contexts of you kind of like need
==PAGE:396==
386
B Interview Transcripts
interaction. That’s why you’re on social media.
And that’s like a sociological issue of needing interaction and how phones create
this possibility for interaction with social media. I think that’s a different issue than
just..that can just be regulated by an app unfortunately.
Researcher: What about you, Participant 24 ? What do you think is unhealthy
about your current or general relationships to your smartphone?
Participant 24: Don’t think I’m too bad, probably periodically use social me-
dia too much. Normally for a distraction. If I’m trying to learn something really
complicated. It’s an awful habit, just going on there every four or five minutes but
generally, anytime I get quite bad, I kind of notice it, you know, just make an effort
to stop it, stop doing it. Just put my phone somewhere. Tend to leave my phone in
my jacket pocket when I’m working and just turn it off.
Researcher: Would any of the solutions that we just mentioned or something
else well, you just mentioned that you put your phone in the.. put it away..
Participant 24: I tend to prefer basic practical measures rather than more apps,
because I try. I tried using a couple of different apps things before, but just like you
just end up with more things to do. And more reasons to be looking at your phone.
I actually end up end up looking at my phone more often, rather than less often,
because I’m tending to the app, you know so yeah, I find practical measures, like just
leave my phone in my pocket or something like that is is a better solution.
Researcher: So you wouldn’t use any of the solutions that we just discussed?
Participant 24: I might use the ring actually the ring, I kind of like the idea
of the ring. If you do have to tend to it’s just there doing its thing and it gave you
some information at the end of the day that you could look and count those hours
and stuff like that. I might find something like that useful.
Researcher: Okay, cool. Um, that was it for the questions. Thank you so much
for joining us. If you’re interested in hearing more about the project, please let me
know so I can keep you up to date. And if you have any additional comments or other
ideas that pop up throughout the next days or the next week, please let us know so
we can take them also into account. And yeah, thank you so much for joining us. It’s
very helpful.
==PAGE:397==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
387
B.3.7
Participants 2, 25, 26 and 27
Researcher:
Okay. Hello. Nice to meet y’all. Welcome to this session. First of all, thank
you for taking the time to join us to talk about your smartphone usage and your
relationship to smartphone. She will be mainly taking notes. But yeah, you can see
her. We’re both at a Technical University of Denmark. What do you want to get
out of this to get an insight into students use off and relationship to the smartphone.
And what we hope to do is obtain an understanding as to how we can foster healthier
relationship to improve our smartphones. Your answers will remain anonymous and
will not be shared with external partners. But for the sake of transcribing, we would
like to record this into you. Do you give us permission for that? Sure. Okay, perfect.
First of all, before we start, I want to just refer to this as a focus group into what
I’m interested in is seeing you for guys talk to each other.
I’ll just navigate the
conversation and give you questions to lead the discussion, but the you are supposed
to talk to each other.
And we will go with first name basis just for the sake of
keeping them the personalities anonymous. I’m also please keep a respectful tone
when talking to each other. There are no wrong answers. but rather different points
of view. And please feel free to share your point of view, even if it differs from what
others have said. Keep in mind that we’re just as interested in negative comment,
comments as positive comments. And actually, the negative comments are more than
welcome, because that will help us improve our concept ideas when we show them
later. Okay, let’s begin. Maybe just to icebreaker a little bit. Can we go around and
say, what my name is and what you study and yeah, maybe where you are in the
world. Participant 25: , you can start
Participant 25: Alright. Okay, so my name is Participant 25 . I’m studying
in Germany. I’m currently doing my master in Computer Engineering. Yes, software
communications more specifically. Yeah, that’s it.
Participant 26: Okay, I can continue. Yeah, I’m Participant 26 and I study
in Denmark, transportation systems. And I was the previous semester in Germany
at the Technical University of Munich in an exchange and I am a master in negative
feedback and negative comments, so you’re welcome.
Participant 4: Should I go
Participant 27: Yeah, go.
Participant 4: Alright, so I’m Participant 4 , I am a Bulgarian who studies
and lives in Copenhagen, Denmark. I currently. I currently am doing my master’s
degree in software design specializing in software development. I have just my thesis
left and basically that’s what I’m doing right now. Yeah, also working part time.
That’s me, unless we have some more specific questions.
Participant 26: Do you like cats?
Participant 4: Kinda. Can you, can you not tell?
==PAGE:398==
388
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Last one first.
Participant 27: So hey, my name is Participant 27 . I’m also coming from
Bulgaria. I study and work in Germany. I’m during my bachelor right now at software
as a software engineer. I’m also working part time as a student. And yeah, that’s
basically all.
Researcher: Just to kind of open up pretty easily. What did you think of the
survey that you formulated, all of you completed the survey, I imagine?
Participant 25: it’s too long. So actually, I actually thought that it’s way too
long for a survey because usually if people want participants to take a survey seriously,
usually, in my opinion, at least it should be not as long as this one was because in the
beginning, you’re concentrated, you’re answering the questions truthfully, but when
it’s like 25-30 minutes later, and then you’re thinking, when is this going to end?
Researcher: okay, but I meant it more in the sense of like, did it make you reflect
on your smartphone behavior a little bit when you did this because even though the
questionnaire was long, it was angled or asked in a sense that it would make you
think about how you use your smartphone and what your relationship is. Um, can
you please discuss this?
Participant 4: Maybe I can start if you want.
I mean, it did.
It did have
some pretty nice questions. But what I found out is that a lot of them are actually
repetitive. Like, I don’t know if that was intended or not. Maybe Maybe it was just
to see whether we would show the same behavior but as Participant 25 mentioned,
at some point, if it’s like too long or something you might have lost interest in it,
and that might have affected it but in general, I think the questions were pretty nice
defined. They did make you think about what you use your phone for and why. In
my opinion,
yep. I agree with that statement. Actually. They do really actually, after I did
the survey, I was just thinking that I’m not using my phone too much.
Participant 27: Actually, I realized the same thing that I’m barely using my
phone.
Participant 25: Yeah.
Participant 27: Yeah, most of the time just to check in with friends make a
couple of make a couple of calls, play a few games. And that’s it. Not like a lot of
people that are not leaving their phones. You can see like their phone is attached to
the hand. You cannot take it off.
Participant 25: Yeah.
Participant 26: I think that the survey was quite well done. Yeah, maybe it
was too long. In particular, I think in the third section when there were like, I think
thirty question or something like this one where there was strongly agree or strongly
disagree. I think that maybe I don’t know how you base that survey. I think that you
==PAGE:399==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
389
want to like to make cluster or something like this one. But yeah, maybe you just
should reduce the question because it was maybe too long. And in this way, maybe
you can, you can have many people that they can start the survey, but they don’t
finish it. So you have a lot of missed data in this way. And second I installed because
I have an Android system, the app creen time. And like every day you have like in
the percentage if it’s up based on the previous day, or if it’s down. So every day, I
just check and I hope that it’s more down than the previous day.
Researcher: Thanks, but so you didn’t have the app before the screentime app?
Participant 26: No, I just installed it because you recommended in the survey,
actually, you it was kind of mandatory, because if you don’t install the app, you don’t
know, you can not provide the data: how long your phone.
Researcher: Okay, um,
Participant 4: I have a question actually for the two guys living in Germany.
This is because almost nobody that I know there uses the smartphones so much. But
as far as I know, you don’t really get any data in Germany. Like you if you want to
have decent amount of mobile data, you actually have to pay like a lot a lot while in
Denmark for like, you just pay like the lowest price and you get like 100 gigabytes of
mobile data. Don’t you guys think that if you had the data that you would get here,
for example, you would have used your phone more?
Participant 25: No, actually, ah, for example. Sorry.
Participant 27: Can I answer to this one because I have a little bit more knowl-
edge about this. Yes. Well, you’re completely right about this. In Germany, buying
a mobile data is a lot. It’s not that cheap. Like you said in Denmark. For example,
for two three gigabytes. It depends on the company, you have to pay like 12 or 13
euros per month.
Participant 4: And for this money here you get 100.
Participant 27: Yeah, or the other case around this, you need to have a contract
there, you’re like you have almost unlimited internet connection. So you can use your
phone like 20 gigabytes or 50 gigabytes. You cannot use it in the whole of the month,
but this will cost you like 50 euros or something like that. And most of them is
when you buy a new phone, you get a contract, and this is the cheapest way to do
it. Otherwise, if you just go to the shop, get a contract, you’ll pay almost the same
money but you’ll get nothing.
Participant 25: But actually, just to mention regarding Participant 4 ’s ques-
tion for me personally, even if I had more than the data I have now which is actually
three gigabytes per month because I get a package, which is like eight euros per
month. And I can talk indefinitely with people and I have three gigabyte volume of
data which I can use. I never actually use it for the whole month. So even if I had
more, it’ll be the same, it’ll be the same outcome.
==PAGE:400==
390
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 27: And please be anonymous then don’t say other people’s name.
Participant 25: No, we’re on a first name basis. So if I say Participant 4 , it’s
fine.
Participant 4: I think they record the video so, so you can see, not the video.
Researcher: Anyways, when we transcribe, we’re not gonna write your names,
we’re just going to give you initial or random names, so don’t worry. Okay, so, um,
we are complying with GDPR requirements. So we don’t actually know what each of
you have answered, but we’re going to talk about the general trends. And we want
you to kind of reflect on it. So the first one is around 50% of people. No, more than
60% of people say they use their smartphones to relax. And a lot of expression that
are used in terms of smartphones is Oh, I’m just going to go chill. I’m just going to
go kill time. There’s this brain dead entertainment notion of using your smartphone?
What do you think of this statement?
Participant 26: I think that it makes sense because when someone uses a smart-
phone in most of the time is just like also in a relaxing position, maybe you’re in your
bed, or maybe you are on your sofa. So it’s just also maybe where you are in that
moment that give you the impression that is just like relaxing.
Participant 27: I would say more about killing the time because actually, I use
a lot of my phone when I’m traveling. You need two, almost two hours in a direction
to go to work and then I’m using my smartphone at most otherwise, when I’m home,
I’m just going to check the hour if I don’t have a clock next to me or I’m just going
to call somebody else. So I will not say more for relaxing rather for killing time.
Participant 4: Yeah, that sounds that.. I also agree with what Participant 27
just said mostly, I mean, I personally never use my phone to Relax. I mostly use it
to when I need it for something either for like directions or something when traveling.
Or maybe maybe if I want to get connected with somebody or when I’m expecting
something like an email or something for work or for the university. But yeah, for me
using my phone is never related with relaxation or whatsoever
Participant 25: actually I share the same opinions since I mostly use my phone
to check if there’s something from work and to answer if there’s if somebody has
some questions for me, and I’m not currently on my laptop or desktop. Especially
I’ve noticed that since the quarantine started my phone usage is even less than it was
before Of course because Before I would mostly use it when I’m on my way to work
or to the uni.
Researcher: So you use it less right now?
Participant 25: Yeah, a lot less. Literally less than probably 15 minutes per
day. Okay, unless I’m calling someone, but otherwise, it’s less than 15 minutes per
day for browsing or anything actually.
Researcher: So the next finding we found is that most of people when we say
==PAGE:401==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
391
smartphone immediately correlate it with social media. So would you associate smart-
phone to social media, and actually around more than 50% use social media as their
most preferred smartphone application category. So if there’s contact applications,
news applications, it’s mainly social media that is the most used, what do you think
of this statement, and also maybe reflect on what kind of smartphone application is
the most used for you. Participant 25 , maybe you can start as you were the last
one
Participant 25: Okay, so actually, it’s, for me personally, I do use it for social
media. But as I mentioned in my previous answer, I would, let’s say when I’m at
home now during the quarantine, I would not use it for that because I rather I’d much
rather use my desktop to check my Facebook or WhatsApp or anything else, not my
phone. But if I’m traveling somewhere that that’s what I would mostly use it for.
So I think it’s pretty that’s pretty straight for that for me specifically. Yeah, that’s
what I would use it when I’m using my phone, social media. That’s how I associated
it with.
Participant 27: with this one I’m hundred percent going to agree with Partici-
pant 25 , because With social media if I’m at home I will never use my phone I will
just check everything on my laptop because on my laptop I have more opportunities
to do more things if I want to share something it’s going to be quicker and like I said
with a lot of options rather than my phone and yeah, I am also not using my phone
really that much I’m staying almost all day at home. I’m just using it to contact
my family to contact my friends, to write a couple of messages, a couple emails but
that’s it. I’m using it a little bit more for calling because alright, everybody is under
quarantine and yeah, you need to hear how you have family How is your family doing?
Are everybody okay? That’s it. otherwise for socialize? Yeah, okay. To check up
some news but not not that much. Really.
Participant 26: Yeah, I think that it’s just because a lot of the apps that you
use on mobile, all the social media apps are apps that you don’t use as much often on
your laptop, because maybe for every one of us, we have the idea that the laptop is
like a tool that you should use more to work. And maybe you can use the phone just
to get in contact with your friends. And also because a lot of people they prefer to
chat with many contacts instead of make one call. It’s like a kind of way to optimize
time. This way, I can just talk with many people instead of make one call about an
hour. So yeah.
Participant 27: With this, I would agree that I do kind of, I do kind of like,
think of my phone as... I mean, when I think about my phone The first thing that
I think is social media. And it’s mostly because I do use my phone to be connected
with people. And technically, that’s what social media is, it’s just a platform that
allows people to share stuff. So I would even like going from what Participant 25
and Participant 27 said, I can say that, for me personally, I hardly ever open any
social media on my laptop or computer whatsoever. I only use my phone for that.
Unless I have to have like, like some some longer serious conversation where I would
==PAGE:402==
392
B Interview Transcripts
have to type a lot because I’m not really a fan of typing on my phone. That’s the
only reason I would prefer opening social media on my computer than on my phone.
Researcher: Can I just ask a general question. At least, yeah, Reddit, do you
think it’s a social media or not?
Participant 25: 100% social media
Researcher: Okay, just to clarify because I think.. so you don’t use.. Do you
use Reddit? at all?
Participant 25: A lot.
Participant 4: A lot.
Researcher: A lot. Okay, yeah, figured out.
Then, do you use it on your laptop?
Participant 27: Barely.
Participant 4: Shame on you.
Participant 25: Actually, I do use it on my laptop. But now that you mentioned
it, I am thinking how every time I’m going to work, I’m actually browsing Reddit.
So yeah, yeah, but if I’m at home, I would use it on my laptop. Yeah.
Researcher: So you, except for Participant 26 , the rest will be more prone to
use your laptop to browse through that content stream rather than use smartphone.
just to make it, to clarify,
Participant 27: yes.
Participant 4: I use my smartphone.
Researcher: You use your smartphone, but would you prefer doing it on you..
because Participant 25 and Participant 27 ..pretty..
Participant 4: No.
Researcher: Yeah. Okay, so you prefer a smartphone to browse through the..
Participant 4: To browse. Like he says, Hey, if you talk about like Reddit or
Twitter or Facebook whatsoever, I would prefer to use my smartphone.
And Participant 26 , are you agreeing with this too?
Participant 26: Yeah, yeah.
Researcher: Okay, cool. Um, so why do you prefer using your laptop to browse
through the content Participant 25 and Participant 27 ? Because, technically,
right now, at least the updates for the social media applications are more up to date,
sometimes on the smartphone, and sometimes the whole interface is more
Participant 26: user friendly.
==PAGE:403==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
393
Researcher: Yeah, it’s different but it’s also.. like it’s worked around differently
for the smartphone to make it a little bit more user friendly. So how come you prefer
it on the laptop?
Participant 25: So for me personally, I mean, even if it’s more appealing to use
them on your phone, I can I can have multiple tabs open on my, on my laptop so
I can be in Facebook, Whatsapp and read Reddit at the same time. And it’s a lot
quicker for me to go through these tabs if I’m using them. And it’s a lot quicker
for me to also go through, let’s say the Reddit topics or whatever they are. I mean,
that’s one reason.
Researcher: And why is it quicker? Is it because the interface is bigger?
Participant 25: Yeah, the interface is bigger. I guess it’s also more appealing for
me to use them on my laptop to check to check these.. to check Reddit for example
on my laptop. It’s basically if I would have the choice to do either on my phone or
my laptop, I would always choose my laptop.
Researcher: And it’s because the interface is bigger on your laptop.
Participant 25: Yeah, yeah, that’s that’s one big reason for it. Yeah.
Researcher: Okay.
So for you, it’s not very important the whole on the go
element of the smartphone you prefer just having a bigger interface so that you can
browse information better.
Participant 25: I mean, smartphones are still important. As I said, if I’m not
at home then I don’t have other choice. So that’s only if I have a choice. Yeah.
Researcher: But the smartphone is definitely an alternative to the laptop for
you.
Participant 25: It’s an alternative. Yeah.
Researcher: Okay, what about you Participant 27 ?
Participant 27: Yeah, well for me it’s more or less the same like Participant
25 said I would also prefer on my laptop because I can do I can be in a couple of
websites at the same time. So if I have a group and I want to share some information
with people I if I have multiple tabs, I can just copy paste and it will be hundred
times more easier rather than with the phone. And yeah, for me, it’s really easier to
be on the laptop. And also I as a secondary option, of course, when I’m outside I can
use my phone, like I said, to check an email because when I’m outside I’d prefer to -
how should I say it? - to enjoy the weather outside or to be with my friends not to
look at my phone.
Participant 25: Actually, to build up on that also typing is a lot easier as well.
If you use social media on your laptop, you’re a lot faster in writing so and you’re
wasting less time. I mean, actually, maybe that’s not the case for all people. I guess
there’s some people that are typing quite very fast on their phones. But I’m mostly
fat, fingering most of the keyboards letters, so..
==PAGE:404==
394
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Okay. So, another finding that we found is that over 60% of peo-
ple say that they have, they worry about a self image and that you feel sometimes
uncomfortable and have strong emotions such as anxiety and stress, sometimes due
to.. feeling less productive when when using social media, but then at the same time,
As we said before, it’s also the category that’s the most used, and also is the one
where people feel the most prone and need to be up to date. Why do you think that
people have this duality of at the same time, they use it a lot and they feel the need
to be up to date with social media. But then at the same time, um, they feel strong
emotions, such as anxiety, stress, or sometimes feeling very worried about the self
image or uncomfortable. And also maybe sometimes feelings like oh, annoyed, hard
to tolerate?
Participant 27: Wow
Participant 4: Can I just say that I didn’t quite get that.
Participant 25: Yeah, me too actually.
Participant 4: To clarify.
You’re saying that people want to stay updated,
therefore, they use their phones a lot, but then at the same time, they worry that
other people would criticize them for using the phone. Is that?
Researcher: No, it’s not that... So imagine, I use my smartphone a lot. This is
an example by the way, I use my smartphone a lot. And I feel the need to be always
up to date, I always need to check my social media. I always use social media but
also feel the need to up being up to date to my social media every hour, for example.
But then at the same time, I worry a lot about my self image, how I’m portrayed
in social media, and also feel uncomfortable sometimes with social media. And I get
annoyed and like some social media apps I can have a hard time tolerating and I feel
unproductive when I am on social media. Why do you think that a lot of people have
this situation? over 60% as I said feel the situation but then at the same time, still
keep on going to social media when they don’t have these? There’s more a negative
connotation to it, at least and the way they feel about it.
Participant 25: ... I guess...
Participant 27: You want to continue or should I?
Participant 25: No, no, no. You can go
Participant 27: Well I guess as much as they’re browsing in social media or
doing whatever, they’re happy. But at the same time, they’re realizing how hooked
up, are they to the social media that they’re like, just say, like, social media junkie
or something like that. And I guess after they realize, so what are they doing, how
they’re wasting their time? It’s basically not nothing that much important. They
just cannot stop. And I guess this is why people get depressed because they’re happy
doing it. But after realizing more they’re doing it. They’re getting depressed because
they see okay, they have.. today I have lost for example, like five hours. I’m up to
all of the data. Okay, everything what is happening right now I know it, I’m happy.
==PAGE:405==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
395
But at the same time, you realize, Oh, my God, I wasted like five hours of my life.
Where is my day going? What am I doing?
Participant 25: I don’t think that has anything to do with the self image of
a person actually. And I mean, in my opinion, at least, I don’t quite agree on that
statement.
Participant 27: Okay go.
Participant 25: I mean, in most cases, I assume. So let’s say people who are
browsing constantly through their social media, and let’s say they have a lot of friends,
which are currently traveling there. They’re traveling there. And for example, going
around in the Philippines, the USA wherever. And they see themselves, for example,
studying still in the university or something like that, and they want to be doing the
same thing. And that’s depressing them in a way. So I guess, but they still continue
to browse Of course, even though they see that some people are at that very moment,
for example, living their lives better than them.
Participant 26: I think that sometimes we just like to browse on social media
because like, the major part of the day, we feel lonely. So for that reason, we want to
do it and Because our emotion is that we feel lonely we we start like to use a lot of
social media and forget about what’s our job that day and about all the psychological
effect that you could get to using a lot of social media. I think it’s more it’s more
something psychological because there are many studies or many research that for
example, if you use a lot to your form before to go to bed, you can suffer of insomnia
and all that other stuff. So I think that sometimes it can be like a preset, or like
Participant 25 said that you can be just like jealous about the experience over that
someone else is living, but it’s also true that maybe, I don’t know it cannot. It cannot
have a good effect to be all the day looking at the display over the phone, for your
eyes and also for your mind.
Participant 4: , any roundind off?
Participant 4: Yes. So to kind of follow up on what everybody said, first of all,
I personally don’t have that problem. Even if even if I do end up browsing a lot, at
some point.. I never really post anything. So in any way that’s like me, even even
when you browse you don’t post so there’s nothing to worry about nothing about
your self image or whatsoever because like there’s nothing to show basically nothing
to tell.
However, like Participant 25 and Participant 26 just said that like people
seeing other people traveling and stuff, maybe maybe that’s maybe that’s part of
what makes people anxious and worried about their image.
Because if you are a
person that truly wants to be active and wants to share stuff all the time and have
like cool posts and likes and stuff and like you, you do something and then you don’t
maybe you don’t feel as appreciated as the guy who is in the US posting pictures
from the Statue of Liberty or something,
==PAGE:406==
396
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 26: but also mostly in the social media, I think that everyone will
also show the best part of ourselves. So we just show our success in the social media
like if we if we graduate, if we travel, if you are with a group of friends and so I think
that is a kind of feeling that it could be quite common many people that use social
media that can be jealous for just like some achievement or whatever people like if
they graduate like if they travel, yeah, all this kind of stuff.
Participant 4: Yeah, but don’t you think that a lot of people actually lie about...
you can, for example, go on vacation and it could be raining, basically, the whole week?
And that one sunny day you have you’re gonna make pictures and you’re gonna post
them one at a time. Like, I’m sure a lot of people are doing it.
Participant 26: Yeah, yeah, but that’s true but of course, you don’t want to
show your rainy day you want to show just your success on the social media. So
maybe you don’t want to share that you failed one exam, you want to share that you
graduate at the end. So it’s the same for the travel. Yeah. And for many things, we
just want to show our success in the social media, not our failures.
Participant 25: Yeah, I mean, what I observed, actually was from knowing
some people which were, which were obsessed with social media, basically, that means
checking it every time. When they wake up in the morning, the whole during the
whole day.
Like every, literally every 20 minutes.
And that’s what usually they
complain about that they’re not doing enough and something like that.
For me
personally, that’s not the case. As I’m not browsing social media. It’s almost not
as much at least, or not at all, even some days. But I understand that some people
could feel like that when looking at themselves and what other people other people
are accomplishing. And also, I might disagree with Participant 27: ’s points. I
still think it’s somewhat relevant because if somebody spends like five hours a day,
browsing through their social media, they would in the end feel non productive. And
maybe that also could make them depressed, that they’re not doing anything to fix
their life, for example. Something in that manner.
Researcher: So you agree with him?
Participant 25: I mean, I don’t quite agree with him, but I kind of understand
his point. Like, it could be a reason let’s say.
Researcher: Okay. The last finding that we’re going to talk about is um, so the
university students or like the student population that have answered this survey find
smartphone activities addictive. 60% have agreed with this. Oh, and however, 70%
of these don’t believe they’re addicted to their smartphone. Where do you think the
line is drawn? Where 60% think that they have addictive smartphone activities but
they are not addicted to their smartphones
Participant 4: Can something not be addictive without you being addicted?
Like what what would be a good example here like I mean a lot of people the only
the only thing I’m, I personally am addicted to when it comes to the phone is the
==PAGE:407==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
397
comfort that it brings whenever I’m outside. Basically I don’t get to think of when
my train is going to be here or like which street to go to or where to go to eat or
whatsoever. Or like what time does the shop close also, it just brings a comfort that
I would say, personally I might be I let’s say that I’m addicted to or is addictive. But
it’s not like I can’t live without it that..our generation wasn’t born with smartphones.
So we know what it’s like to have to remember stuff. I know a lot of people don’t
know that, but ..
Researcher: You are making us sound sound very old.
Participant 25: Yeah.
Participant 4: It was a long time ago.
Participant 27: Come on.
Participant 4: So yeah, like this, this this would be this would be my explanation
about it. Like, it’s a comfort that is addictive. Like it’s it’s nice. I don’t need to I
don’t need to think of like, I don’t need to think of Hey, well, what time should I
What time did I have to go to the station or something? I could, I can just pull out
my phone and check. But I mean, I wouldn’t say that I’m addicted. If I If I can’t do
it or if I decide to stop doing it, then I’m not going to do it like.
Researcher: Can I challenge that a little bit? If you’re addicted to smoking, why
are you not addicted to a cigarette?
Participant 4: I think this is two different things.
Participant 27: Definitely
Participant 4: So, smoking is addictive, but I’m not addicted.
Researcher: Smoking is an activity that you can do with a cigarette.
Participant 4: Yeah, but the thing is that you say that smartphones are addictive
not that people are addicted to them, which are two different things. Being addictive
is something that might cause addiction. And then being addicted means that you
are already like..
Researcher: So, then being addicted is a state before addiction?
Participant 4: It’s more like a property of a non connectivity in my opinion.
Butt I mean, that’s, that’s me.
Researcher: Okay. Someone else wants to say something.
Participant 26: maybe?
Participant 26: Why me every time?
Researcher: Because..
Participant 4: You have to break the ice after my denial.
Participant 26: Yeah, I think. Did you say that the smartphone are addicted
==PAGE:408==
398
B Interview Transcripts
and was it not addicted? The question?
Researcher: smartphone activities are addictive but you don’t think you’re ad-
dicted to the smartphone.
Participant 26: I don’t know what I can answer about it. I’ll jut pause for the
moment to give me time to think.
Researcher: Okay, what about Participant 25: or Participant 27: ?
Participant 25: Well, now when I think about it is you asked us whether how
would one actually distinguish the border between being addicted to a phone and not
being addicted to a phone right, that was part of the question. Yeah. So, I mean,
usually, probably 99- 95% of the people when they go out to the moment like they
would first see that their phone is with them, right? But that doesn’t mean that
they’re addicted to them even though they will always bring it when they’re going
outside. So, I guess the addictive one would be when, let’s say when when you wake
up in the morning and that’s the first thing you’re thinking about is to check your
smartphone and see and keep yourself up to date with social media for example. Now,
that sounds a bit addictive. That’s it. That’s at least where I would draw that line.
Participant 27: Well, in my opinion, I cannot draw a line because every person
it’s for himself. I mean, for me being one hour on social social media in the phone for
me, this is going to be addictive for example, but for some other person if it says like
After seven hours still on his phone, he said, No, no, no, I’m not addicted. Because
for him, this is not an addiction for being so long on his phone, this is why drawing
a line of being addicted or not, it depends on your personal mind.
Researcher: Do you think we as an individual can decide whether we were
addicted or not?
Participant 27: Yes. Yeah.
Participant 25: No !
Researcher: Do you think a smoker can.. knows that they’re addicted to smok-
ing?
Participant 27: Yeah, because I’m a smoker, and I smoke. And I know that I’m
addicted.
Participant 25: I mean, but that’s you.
Participant 27: It depends. Yeah, but it depends on the person for example,
you can be a smoker, you can be addicted to cigarettes, but there are people which
are overriding, which are smoking like two packs a day. It means every five minutes
they have a cigarette in their mouth. There are smokers, they’re addicted, but for
them, smoking like two packs a day. It’s something normal for me smoking up to
10-12 cigarettes per day, it’s normal, but I’m still addicted. So drawing the line for
for me, it’s something different.
==PAGE:409==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
399
Participant 25: So you think it depends on the person?
Participant 27: Yeah. For me, it depends on the person.
Researcher: The person can can identify themselves whether they are addicted
or not?
Participant 27: Yeah.
Researcher: So as long as you know that you’re addicted, you know?
Participant 25: But there’s so many examples in the world that that’s not the
case. There are so many people that would not that would not say that they are
addicted to something like for example, drugs, alcohol. There are... There are a lot
of examples in which people actually think that that’s completely normal when when
it’s not, that’s not something up for them themselves to decide.
Participant 27: Yeah, My point exactly how can you draw the line?
Participant 26: I think that you can draw the line just when maybe you don’t
use that tool that can be for cigarettes, or like drugs for some days, and you show
that you’re independent in.. These things, just..
Participant 25: Actually, that makes sense. I agree with that. If you can, if
you can, let’s say keep yourself away from from these so called addictions for some
period of time, then that maybe proves that you are actually capable of living your
life without them.
Participant 4: But then how much is the timeframe that you have to stay away
from it in order to prove it?
Participant 27: Yeah, where where can you draw the line?
Participant 4: Maybe..
Your idea..
Participant 25: I’ll write some set of truths now in the internet and share with
you the Google document and have it.
Participant 27: I think your opinion with Participant 26 is either you’re
addicted or you’re not. Either you smoke or you’re not either you drink or not.
Participant 26: Because I think that okay, for example, I did. Okay, I just make
an example. I was brought in Estonia in Tallin, and it was like a project in wild and
we didn’t use the
Researcher: Did we lose you?
Participant 4: Yeah you have to again.
Participant 26: Did you say no?
Researcher: We didn’t hear you the last.
==PAGE:410==
400
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 26: Can you listen me now?
Researcher: Yeah, we can hear you.
Participant 26: Okay, I hope that ..
Researcher: We can hear you know but we didn’t hear what you just said.
Participant 26: okay, okay, I just like. two years ago in Estonia.
Participant 27: So far, so good.
Participant 26: Okay, I did a project in Estonia just like go and we didn’t use
the phone at all, because it was like a project in the wild. And I think that I just
used the phone 20 minutes in two weeks. So just proving that I didn’t use the phone
at all in two weeks. It means that I’m not addicted to the phone. It means that like
when I am in a different environment or when I am in a differential situation, I can
also try to avoid the use of the phone that It means that I am not addicted, maybe
if I smoke cigarette in that kind of situation, I continue to smoke cigarettes because
it’s something that I’m addicted. So it depends just like if in a moment of our life
that can be in our comfort zone or not. We just give the proof that we don’t do these
kind of things. It can be one week, it can be two weeks, it can be one month. It’s
hard to establish the time. But in that situation for 2 weeks I didn’t use the phone.
In that case, it means that I’m not addicted.
Participant 27: Wait, How did you? How did you feel during this time when
you’re not using your phone? You feel good or bad.
Participant 26: I feel good, but it’s also linked with something that I said before.
Most of the time we use our phone, at least for social media when we feel lonely in
that situation. I was like with a group of other 25 people every day, every minute
every single hour. So I think that I never feel lonely in that situation. Because every
time we’re in contact
Participant 27: Okay, did you miss your phone during those 20 days?
Participant 26: Yeah, not at all. because I got my phone with me it was like in
my bag, I just didn’t use it at all. But it was not that they. That they took them at
the beginning of the project, okay, give us the phone you can not use at all for two
weeks. We were free to use it.
Researcher: Okay, just to maybe to round off this conversation.
Why do we talk about addiction in regards to smartphone when right now, in
a society, you can Apple Pay, you have your bus ticket on your phone.
You can
Google Maps itinerary, you have your work emails, you have social media, you have
the camera, everything is in the smartphone. Why do we talk about addiction and
being hooked on the smartphone when it could be called a necessity to be a citizen
of society to have this technological device and stay connected on the go? What do
you think of thi?
==PAGE:411==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
401
Participant 27: It depends on the usage of your phone. It depends for what
you’re using your phone, if you stick out to those apps that you need during your
day, to show your ticket in the bus to check your traveling destination to check your
working email, then you’re not hooked up. Those are basic things that you need to
do. Those are things that are helping you like playing games for three, two hours a
day or just browsing somewhere. pointless. Then that’s another topic.
Participant 4: Okay, this is I think this is basically what I tried to say. Like, I
mean, we can we can go without it. Anybody can go without it. But why would you
go without your phone if you can have it and as you said, like, stuff like mobile paying
or like having your bus ticket on your phone, like the phone is basically a small device,
a pocket computer that allows you to not only to stay connected, but it has certain
social benefits. That Yeah, like you can you can actually say that in some countries,
if you don’t really have a phone, if you don’t have all the other mobile features, then
you can’t actually be a part of the society..
Participant 25: I don’t have a concrete opinion on this matter to be honest.
Participant 4: Don’t you have something on your phone like mobile banking?
Where’s your bus ticket? Where is?
Participant 25: I don’t have mobile banking, but..
Researcher: do you really only use your phone to check Reddit on the way and
the train to go to work?
Participant 25: Yeah, I mean, and for course. No, I mean, for course as well.
And also, I mean, generally, I would check my For example, I will check messenger
and WhatsApp also when I’m not at home. But that’s what I would use my phone
for. or checking up if somebody from work, wrote me an email or something like that.
But yeah, that’s what I would use it for
Researcher: but would you be able to go through your day without having your
phone? So say that from tomorrow on you would, okay, imagine that the situation
was different and you would go to work every day and school or whatever you do.
And you would not have your phone so you only have your laptop. Would you be
able to function the same or normally?
Participant 25: For sure, but it would feel weird. It would feel weird when
I’m out. But I definitely think. I mean it would feel weird that I don’t have my
phone with me and everyone currently in. In the in the modern world is basically
hooked to their phone in a way that they know that if anything happens you can
call somebody That’s the first thing you’re looking for when you’re going out. And
people are dependable on their phones, but that doesn’t mean that they’re addictive
to them. They’re addicted to the phones. So.
Researcher: Okay, Participant 26 , any comments?
Participant 26: Yeah, I think that you would use your your phone less in this
==PAGE:412==
402
B Interview Transcripts
example because if you can use just your laptop, for sure. It’s like all the operation
that you do every day, you’re not going to do with your laptop. Like I’m not going
to check maybe my bank accounts often I’m not going to check like if the train is on
time I’m not going to check if the bus is on time. I’m maybe I’m not going to use
my phone to make the check-in for a flight and all the rest of the stuff. So for sure, I
will try to instead of like do this operation many time because maybe every one of us
check if the trains on time, three, four times in 15 minutes to check because Maybe
if we if you can take your brain just for 60 seconds you want to check quite often if
the train is on time or not. So be you you will do less operation and based also on
this activity that quite often you do just like a take your phone from your pocket,
it’s also something that help to be addicted to your phone because it becomes like a
normal reflex for yourself. Just take the phone from your pocket and look at it for
everything.
Researcher: Okay, so based on these, this survey and based on some initial user
studies, we have defined three case scenarios of where the the smartphone becomes an
unhealthy aspect of your everyday life and the first one being phone break. So when
you take a break on your phone, so you take a mental break you entertain yourself
this.. what we talked about a little bit in the beginning so the phone break, the
second being fear of missing out due to physical distance. So for example, say that
you’re an international student to keep in touch with your friends and family back
home. But it could also be when you have a very international network and you feel
you want to filll the physical distance. So you keep in touch or stay in touch with
your friends more, or you stick to your smartphone more. And the last one being
loneliness. And that’s due to, or it’s in the context of when you’re alone in to train or
if you’re eating alone, or if you’re in a situation with people where you feel not part
of the group so you feel lonely, so you end up using your smartphone. Did anyone
follow me so far? Or did you understand it?
Participant 27: You lost me at the second one.
Participant 4: , you are making a weird face.
Participant 4: I mean I was too busy looking at the screen at the same time,
like what are we, what are we supposed, what are we looking at?
Researcher: I’m thinking I’m gonna get into there but right now there’s three
categories phone break, fear of missing out due to physical distance, and the third
one being Loneliness. And within these categories we’ve made six concept ideas that
we’re going to run through. And we want to hear your feedback on them. And we
are presenting to you very broad ideas. So you tell us how you think it would work
into your everyday life, if you’re thinking this is a bad idea, and then it would not
work at all. And yeah, just your general thoughts and what you would add or remove
from the idea. So the first one is the ring limiter. So what this is, is an accessory
or tech gadget that you have that is connected to your device, how it would work,
for example, is say that I have a long day of study sessions and I want a 30 minute
==PAGE:413==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
403
break on my phone just to kind of relax or whatever or just to kill like I don’t know
to relax, and I put a timer for 30 minutes and I connect it to my phone and then I go
through and then the color gradually changes until it hits 30 and then when it has
hit 30 minutes, the ring is red and it blinks until you stop using your phone. It can
also be working and related to for example, especially fixed social media application.
For example, if yoou don’t want to use Reddit too much. You can say, hey, if I’ve
used in more than one hour I wanted to start blinking. Or if you want to do it in
general to your overall screen time, what do you think of this idea?
Participant 27: A good one.
Participant 25: It’s okay. But I would not prefer it, I don’t know. So, the idea
is basically that somebody who is addicted should get the ring so that they can stop
and fight their addiction. Is that the goal of the ring limiter?
Researcher: No, it’s to foster healthier relationship so that you spend less time
because right now the way that the smartphone activities applications are made, it’s
s this infinite loop of information so you get you lose track of time and you kind of
keep scrolling, keep browsing content information, for example, Reddit, you just you
can browse forever, YouTube, you can see the next video forever. So this is kind of
to remind you and make you aware of the fact ’hey, you’re spending enough time’ to
kind of hold yourself accountable. It doesn’t need to be for someone that’s addicted
because I don’t think or at least that’s what we talked about it. Someone can have,
have an addictive behavior in relation to certain things, but not be addicted to it. So
it doesn’t necessarily need to be someone that’s addicted.
Participant 25: I mean, I don’t know if it helped that much unless it has
electroshock or something like that.
Because you can always browse through the
next story of Reddit and even if it’s blinking, correct, you can just hide it or ignore
the color. I mean, that’s, that’s how I see it at least.
Participant 27: And that’s coming from Germany.
Participant 4: But you know, if you are using the ring, it means that you
actually want to change so having the ring means that okay, I assume that if you do
have the ring, then you’re not ignore, like
Participant 25: Actually, yeah, that makes sense what Participant 4: is say-
ing.Yeah, I agree with that point.
Participant 4: If I’d want to ignore it or don’t want to limit my time then I’m
not gonna get the ring in first place right?I personally think that this is a good idea.
But then, yeah, social medias are made to be infinite infinite like most of them. The
only one that I know is actually the one that I prefer is Twitter that doesn’t have
that infinite loop.
Participant 25: How so?
Researcher: How? yeah.
==PAGE:414==
404
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 25: How so when you can always go to the next tweet or go to the
one..
Participant 4: This is the thing I have my phone. Okay you can it. There it
is. Nice, phone edition now. Okay, so I have my phone if I log in right now. It will
show me like he will. If I go to Twitter right now. It will fetch the newest tweets and
it will tell me like There are new tweets and by clicking the home button it will take
you to the top like basically to to the newest tweet. But if I keep on scrolling down,
I will eventually end up on the tweets that I saw last. Like it doesn’t change it’s not
an infinite loop they all follow up and they.. there’s text, always the same. I don’t
know if that makes any sense.
Researcher: No, it doesn’t. Why, why is it super calm? Okay, Participant 26:
. Do you have any last comments before we move on to the next idea?
Participant 26: No, I agree with them. It’s based on our awareness if we want
to just like to check ourselves, if not there are people that are not going to wear it.
Researcher: Okay, next idea.
So, this is a bracelet that it’s in the category of fear of missing out physical
distance with your loved ones. It could be family, partner, friends. You call it. So
it’s a bracelet that you share with this person. And so for example, say that I am an
international student in Denmark and I want to keep in touch with my best friend
or my mother back in Morocco, and she also has a bracelet and every time I think
of her before I go to sleep, I just want to kind of send her a little nudge or so then
when I click on the bracelet, then she will receive a vibration or nudge. What do you
think of this idea?
Participant 25: I mean, it’s cool.
Participant 4: How is it gonna keep you away from your phone? Like
Researcher: It’s a bracelet instead of the smartphone?
Participant 4: Well, why would you rather give a vibration to your mother’s
hand instead of saying hi or something?
Participant 25: I mean, it’s just better if you write her right? Because as Par-
ticipant 4 just said why just Give her like change of color or vibration or whatever.
Just think this instead of having communication.
Participant 27: No, no, actually, this with the bracelet. I think it’s a good idea
because most of the people when they call somebody after just they’re keeping it on
their phones. I mean, they’re checking something after that.
Participant 4: So, here’s, here’s the way I think this is gonna work. Let’s say
that I want to focus. And when I when I do want to focus, I keep my phone away.
But let’s say that I’m focusing right now and I have a bracelet that starts vibrating.
What am I going to do? I’m gonna look at my phone and see who it is right? I think
that this is gonna work the opposite way like this is actually gonna encourage people
==PAGE:415==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
405
to use their phones more.
Participant 25: Yeah, that makes sense.
Participant 26: I agree.
Participant 27: I agree.
Participant 4: Yeah, it’s like the smartwatches or the smart..
Researcher: Do you have anything to add Participant 26 ?
Participant 26: No, no, but just a question Where do you take inspiration for
this bracelet?
Researcher: It’s a 9gag video.
Researcher: This is actually a real thing
Researcher: It’s a real bracelet that people can buy.
Participant 27: oh my god!
Participant 25: oh my god! Oh, can I buy it from Amazon?
Participant 27: don’t google it right now come on
Participant 4: I mean there are like smart wrist watches or whatsoever right but
they are actually made to yeah to stay even more connected with your phone then
Researcher: I think this one is made for like lovers.
Participant 25: Smartwatch is the perfect sync I’m using when I’m driving
Participant 4: The ones for lovers look a little bit different.
Participant 27: That’s another topic.
Researcher: Right, next idea. This one is kind of dead.
Okay, so, okay, in the framing of this infinite loop of content. We have this idea of
content digest. So this is mainly inspired by the fact that right now if you go through
social media and news articles, you can swipe forever, you can scroll forever, you can
click article to Article just to get a whole overview of the spider web of information.
And so this content digest would be like a plug in, or a separate app, you tell us what
you prefer, where you kind of put it in either application or different news streams
that you take into and it’ll help you filter out the content. So that you spend less
time scrolling or less time looking for information but the content gets summarized
for you so you get the necessary info. What do you think of this idea? here it’s about
Twitter. But.. is it Participant 4 ’s twitter?
Participant 4: Just look at the left screen picture and you will know.
Researcher: There’s a lot of Liverpool stuff so I figured out it was you.
Participant 25: I think that’s the that’s actually genuinely something that would
==PAGE:416==
406
B Interview Transcripts
help. Actually, I think Instagram has something like that at the moment. Because
when you.. that, it just tells you that you have already covered all of the news stories
or something like that.
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 25: And this is something that’s definitely going to help more than
a vibrating bracelet. Yeah.
Participant 26: Yeah. Yeah, I think that’s a that’s a nice idea. It’s a it’s like a
robust idea to highlight to the content that you’re interested in
Researcher: And..because right now the idea is that you filter out so for example,
if you say you want to know everything that’s happening with Liverpool FC right
now. Then you just kind of filter that out information out in your different streams
that you use, like Twitter or Facebook and you just get it all together. So do you
have the highlights from all the applications in use? Or would you use it mainly for
one application at a time?
Participant 4: Well, I was actually gonna bring that up that this idea is cool
and this is gonna help but it’s gonna help you mainly browse like one social media,
but who does that most of the people are all around social medias. So hitting this
message for a lot of people would mean Okay, I’m done with Twitter, let’s go to
Facebook or..
Participant 25: But I thought the idea is for all the I mean not specifically for
Twitter, isn’t it for all these applications like Twitter, Instagram, Reddit and stuff
like that?
Researcher: Exactly. It’s supposed to be for all of them.
Participant 25: Yeah
Participant 4: So you basically want to design a new platform that combines
like stuff from all the social medias?
Researcher: It could be a new platform, but it could also be a plug in to the
current platforms.
Participant 26: I think that it can work because most of the time at the be-
ginning, we are not ready for the changing but after like one month we are getting
used.
Participant 25: Yeah, that’s true.
Participant 26: Yeah.
Participant 25: I agree to that.
Participant 26: So I think just like after one month, we will get used to do it
and it will be fine. Maybe we’ll, if we just try to conduct an experiment so you can
see that after one month the time on the phone is reducing.
==PAGE:417==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
407
Researcher: next idea.
Participant 25: but how would actually...Okay, nevermind.
Researcher: No, ask.
Participant 25: No, how would you actually filter them out?
I mean, how
would you know what I’m interested in specifically, like if there are one, let’s say in
Participant 4 ’s case, there are 1000 topics for Liverpool out there. How do you
know which are the most important for him to to see?
Participant 4: It’s the people that I follow, basically.
Researcher: Yeah. It will be a machine learning algorithm. So it understand
from your current preferences, like what do you follow but also, you specify the filter
so that you can find the most accurate information. And maybe it could also learn
from getting feedback from you saying, Hey, this is not what I wanted or something
like that.
Participant 25: Ah, okay!
Participant 4: This actually can be further inspired. And this can be an idea.
This could be further inspired by a new thing that they introduced to Twitter. So
instead of following random people and thinking of, hey, which account I should follow
or unfollow, now, you can just follow trends. So I can I can, for example, just follow
the trend, Liverpool, and oh, maybe you can do that in Instagram as well. I’m not
sure. But it would, it would just show me like the most the most tweeted or like
the hottest topics in the past, I don’t know, let’s say 12 hours or whatsoever. So
combining with let’s say that I followed certain trends, you can actually combine
them from all the apps and filter just the most commented or the most viewed . So
this could work.
Researcher: Okay. And the next idea is a challenge application. So this is in
the context of, first of all, like when people are in the train alone, or if they are eating
lunch alone. They usually go to the smartphone as a way to cope with this lonely
moment they have. And this challenge application would be could either work as
an app where you go in and find ways to entertain yourself when you’re alone. But
it could also be related to I don’t know if you know, there is opportunity to limit
your app interaction with certain apps on Android and iOS, an app limiter, I don’t
know - do anyone know it? No. Okay. Anyways, long story short, you choose the
app that you want to limit for example, say that you only want to spend 30 minutes
with Reddit and then it would let you spend 30 minutes and when 30 minutes has
happened, then it comes up a pop up being like you’ve spent 30 minutes. And on
iOS, you can extend it for 15 minutes or ignore it for the day. But usually you, you
have to.. you can’t use this app anymore. And here just this would work more as a
proactive app limiter. So it will tell you hey, what you can do instead. For example,
it could give you ideas to use your time on different apps. So you’re not dependent
on one app to entertain you, for example,’ oh, you can zoom call. You can listen to
==PAGE:418==
408
B Interview Transcripts
a podcast. You can read this book’, something like that. But it could also be stuff
like going outside for a walk or listen to some music or something like that. What do
you think of this idea?
Participant 25: I like the idea of doing karaoke in the middle of a train and
everyone listens to me. That would be cool.
Participant 27: You want to get kicked out of the train.
Researcher: Any other comments?
Participant 4: Yeah, it would be cool to do karaoke while you’re eating. But
how? How is? How is the pushing? How is the idea of pushing me towards another
app gonna keep me away from my phone?
Researcher: I think because the overall idea is not to make you stop using your
phone, it’s to foster a healthier relationship. The problem right now with phones at
least as we see it as a dependency on some apps to entertain you or to keep you calm
or to kill time, right? But if we spread out this dependency, so it’s not you’re not
dependent on what app but you just go through this. It’ll give you an alternative as
to how to spend your time better. This is the idea behind this.
Participant 4: But you talk about addiction to smartphones and how..
Participant 25: No, but actually,
Participant 4: I’m on the smartphone. And this, same as the vibrating bracelet
in my opinion. It’s not going to limit my time but just give me new ideas of what to
do with my smartphone.
Participant 25: But Previously, we had a topic about what was the depression
and stuff like that that could happen to people, when they overuse social media,
right? Maybe this app itself would not help from limiting your time from the phone
but would rather help you to, would rather pay help people like that to not be as
depressed because they would have to constantly change not not let’s say be stuck
Facebook looking loop or on Instagram looking loop So they would rather change the
applications and that could improve their mentality.
Participant 4: Yeah, from this point of view, it does make sense.
Participant 26: Yeah, I’m agree what, what they say. But I don’t know if the
challenge application can be can be a good idea. I think that the previous one, the
idea of just like allied to the content. Yes, it’s better.
Researcher: Participant 27 , any last remarks?
Participant 27: No, I agree with the guys.
Researcher: Cool, next idea. So this is inspired by the current sleep mode that
is on phones. So instead of a sleep mode, we want to promote the idea of a alone
mode and it’s more symbolic in the sense of; so the sleep mode right now it’s like Do
not disturbm, calls are silence and notifications don’t appear, and the alone would be
==PAGE:419==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
409
a moment for you to kind of take time for yourself. And be self aware of it but also
proactively taking time for yourself to kind of promote that symbolic ’I’m now taking
time for myself’, either to be productive, either to kind of have a meditation moment,
listen to music, listen to a podcast, so kinda it’s more to promote a different mode so
not only sleep mode, so when you sleep you don’t use your phone. But when you’re
alone, you also want to be by yourself or be productive or take a self-love moment.
What do you think of this idea?
Participant 25: If it was called forever alone mode mode, I would buy it. I
would give you money for it. No Joking aside. So that would actually limit like you
would not be able to access any apps.
Researcher: It could work like that. Yeah.
Participant 25: So it’s like airplane mode in a way because Instagram, Facebook,
all of these are connected to the internet, messenger WhatsApp,
Researcher: It’s similar to airplane mode but it’s more symbolic in the sense
of you actually go in and say, Hey, I’m alone, but maybe you can still get calls for
example.
Participant 25: Yeah, okay.
Researcher: Or you could mark down emergency stuff that you need to get in,
for example.
Participant 25: I mean, I don’t..
Participant 4: I would..
Participant 26: you just say that in this mode, I can make things that they
don’t provide me the opportunity to interact with other people. So I can just like
listen music or a a podcast or make something that cannot help me to interact with
the world outside or with other people. This is what you want to say.
Researcher: Yeah. So you are by yourself, so it promotes you to take your time
by yourself. And of course, you can listen.. like you not actually on your phone,
you’re not supposed to be actually connected to the phone. You’re not online.
Participant 27: In this case, what is the difference between going into this mode
and just switching your phone off?
Participant 25: Now I should mention, I think it’s because of the calls like it’s,
it’s like airplane mode with extensions.
Participant 27: Okay.
Participant 25: But but actually similar to the airplane mode. I don’t think
people would actually use that to be honest.
Participant 26: Like, yeah, but maybe it can be also based on the name because
you call airplane mode. You just think that you can use it in a flight or maybe only
==PAGE:420==
410
B Interview Transcripts
when you sleep because a lot of people use that kind of mode when you sleep so
maybe if you call a mode like Alone mode and you try to and yeah, you draw to show
that is for that kind of okay, yeah is for this kind of activity just when you want to
be productive or when you want to just like to relax yourself in the.. I don’t know,
some people they can start to use it also if it’s quite similar to the flight mode
Participant 25: but is it like configurable for ..so would the user is able to
configure what they want to filter out from this mode?
Researcher: Yeah, that’s an that’s an option.
Participant 25: Okay, then then it can be quite helpful. Yeah. But again, for
that to happen. The person must know how or how much they are or they are not
addicted to their phone when they use it right because if I am using let’s say a lot of
hours browsing social media but I feel like it’s and I can still think that everything is
fine and I will never enable it for example. So it’s for it would be used only by people
who in a way know and so they know that they’re addicted and that’s why they use
it. so that filters like most of the people. At least, that’s how I see it.
Participant 4: I have an idea about that. And this is actually something that I
would use and that I would, I actually would like to have on my phone. So let’s say
that I do have that DND mode or forever alone or test mode, alone mode or however
you call it. I would like to have a mode like this that would switch my phone off like
switch my notifications and stuff. But first of all, yes allows me to filter like Let’s
say I want to filter my work email because of.. I don’t know maybe I’m expecting an
important email or something. But at the same time, I want to I want to be able to,
let’s say, let’s say that somebody messages me, and I’m in DND mode. Well, I would
I would just send an automatic reply saying that I’m focusing. So like, sorry, sorry
that I can’t answer right now. But I’m focusing, I would like that person to have the
option to actually activate my phone. Like, let’s say that they will, they will, they
will be given an option to reply and actually trigger my notification if it’s something
important, because this is basically what happens like, I sit in a focus, let’s, let’s work.
I sit and focus. I always put my phone to the side. But then whenever during the
day, I’m expecting somebody to message me or something. I’m expecting basically
something important, then I can’t really push my phone aside and any notification
that I get makes me actually pick up my phone and look at it. And that does waste
time. And that makes me, throws me out of focus again. So this will actually be
good if people could trigger your notifications only for something important.
Researcher: Okay, thank you. next idea. last idea. Um, it’s a speech based
social network. We don’t have a better word for it, but I’ll explain what it is. So,
imagine that you’re having lunch alone today because your friends or your co workers
don’t have time. So you have a lunch break from 11.30 to 12. And today, you feel
like hey, I’m kind of interested in hearing what people eat for breakfast outside of
Denmark and you don’t really want to spend your time during lunch just scrolling
through and being alone, so you speak, speak this out to your phone. And then it
==PAGE:421==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
411
kind of pops up as a question and then people either as your friends or strangers can
see this question and be like, Hey, I also have a break, a lunch break in that time
let’s let’s meet up or like let’s talk. And you could have a phone conversation with
them or FaceTime or video call is what it’s called? Yeah. and talk to them. That is
one dimension of it. Another dimension of it is for example, at the end of your, your
day, or during your lunch break, you just feel the need to talk let off some steam or
talk about your day or rant. Then you have an AI based chat bot that allows you to
kind of let off your steam or ask you the right question and then you just talk talk
talk. What do you think of these ideas?
Participant 26: Kind of Siri?
Participant 25: Yeah.
Participant 26: But the, in with the this idea, you should use your phone less.
Participant 25: Definitely not.
Participant 26: Yeah. I just didn’t get, at least which is the which is the goal
of this idea
Researcher: So the idea here is to have a healthier relationship with your phone
so instead of just scrolling through information endlessly without actually proactively
taking in something then you get this to talk with someone through the phone but
you’re not actively looking in the phone you’re just talking with someone through the
phone. So that device is you’re using the device to communicate with someone but
not just to consume endlessly brain dead entertainment or content.
Participant 26: Okay, so kind of what we’re doing right now.
Researcher: You can say that.
Participant 27: Then, I find it it’s a good idea.
Participant 25: I, it’s for me, it’s a this is essentially another social network
application just like Facebook or as you say like it will remove the scrolling. Yeah,
that’s true. You will not have to throw a scroll through the stories or through the
Reddit topics or anything but It can still be, it can a lot of people can still ask for
stuff, which is irrelevant. Just like what Facebook information gives your or what like
a lot of Reddit topics would give you like they would, they would still be, they could
still be talking about memes, for example, or something of the sort.
Researcher: But it’s supposed to work a little bit like a speech based Reddit or
Quora
Participant 25: So it’s like another social network application?
Researcher: To some extent but it’s more like to make you instead of just
endlessly scrolling, you just say say to yourself, hey, I have a 30 minute break and
this is what I’m gonna discuss this topic instead of just scrolling for information that
you’re not interested in maybe,
==PAGE:422==
412
B Interview Transcripts
Participant 26: I think that the idea is good because at least it reduce the eye
contact that you have with the former. Yeah, if you want if your goal is to reduce the
eye contact or like to scroll in social media I think yeah that you can fit it can work
the The only thing is that it’s more useful the solution with like other people, you
just like.. just with a topic and you start to discuss, I think that after a while people
get bored to discuss with an AI system that that of course also have some boundaries
and some leads. So after after a while it will start to repeat the same stuff
Researcher: okay, cool um so to round offthe conversation, I’m going to ask you
what do you think is unhealthy about your current smartphone behavior if you have
anything unhealthy about your smartphone behavior. And if you could choose one
of these applications, which one do you think would be the most appropriate for your
current problem? Or if you have an idea for yourself like a personal idea that you
think would be the most appropriate. Maybe, Participant 27 , you can start.
Participant 27: Well, I don’t know if I’m the perfect guy for this answer to this
question. All of all, I don’t have a Twitter account. I also don’t have an Instagram
account. So I’m not that much hooked up to social media. I guess I’m the person
that who doesn’t like to tap a lot prefer to communicate more to talk with people.
This is why I’m going to stop on the last suggestion with the last application with the
speaking because I would like to prefer to talk to people rather than keep scrolling
and to keep searching.
Researcher: But you don’t think anything else with your smartphone in general
is unhealthy?
Participant 27: Well, no because..
Researcher: yeah?
Participant 27: yeah, because I’m barely using my phone. I’m using it only
for the basic stuff for the things that I need. Not for going through social media or
something like that very, very often.
Researcher: So, the solution that you think is the most appropriate is the last
one for you.
Participant 27: Yeah, yes.
Researcher: Okay, Participant 4 ?
Participant 4: For me, I think the biggest.. I wouldn’t say that my relationship
is unhealthy with my phone, maybe maybe it’s good to like reduce my time a little
bit. And yeah the solution that I like and that I would pick is I don’t remember
which number was it but the one with the DND mode or..
Researcher: Forever alone?
Participant 4: Sorry?
Researcher: Forever alone mode?
==PAGE:423==
B.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1 - Lo-Fi Prototypes
413
Participant 25: Forever alone mode!
Participant 4: Yeah the forever alone mode, in a way that I would like to I
would like to have something that would allow me to filter important notifications
through like all other notifications.. I would like to have something that allow me
to say okay, today I’m expecting this person to call and like Maybe an email from
somebody and unless the notification is from these two people then don’t even bother
vibrating or ringing whatsoever. This is this is what I would like. So I would go with
the, the forever alone mode.
Researcher: What about you Participant 25 ?
Participant 25: I’m actually quite happy with my phone usage at the moment
because I barely use it. Like, for example, even yesterday, my phone was turned off
because there was no.. there was no battery remaining. So I just saw it today in
the morning. And that’s like, more than 12 hours, which I haven’t even considered
using my phone. But I do think that some tendencies can be limited like when I’m
going to work if in the cases I’m not browsing Reddit I’ve seen myself, at least before
to either read some lectures from the uni, or just increasing my knowledge in some
topic. Software Development related or anything of the sorts, so I would actually use
I would definitely use the application which shows you the most interesting topics for
you, like the one that was shown with the Twitter. I think it was the second one. I’m
not sure which number it was.
Participant 26: It was the third one.
Participant 25: Yeah. So I will choose that one. So that even if I’m browsing
Reddit, it comes to an end and then I can do something useful afterwards.
Participant 26: Yeah, I think the same of Participant 25 . I think that should
be of option because it just allied the main trend, main topic. And it’s what I think
most of the people need, it’s just like to change their behavior and use their phone less.
Maybe they are not too much stronger to do it for themselves. But if it’s something
that you try to impose to them, they they will get used to it. For sure. I think that
is the best idea. And the worst is the idea of the vibration
I would.. If I actually had them, I would put them on both my hands just to see
how.. I would ping myself.
Researcher: Okay, thank you so much for participating in the interview. It was
really helpful to get your feedback. If you’re interested in hearing more about the
project. And if you have any additional comments or ideas that pop up throughout
the next days, please also let us know because we want any feedback that you have.
And thank you so much for taking Friday afternoon, evening ish early evening off for
us. Yeah. Thank you.
==PAGE:424==
414
B Interview Transcripts
B.4
Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final
Prototype Solution
B.4.1
Participants 28 and 29
Ring limiter Researcher: : Describe 1 person who will not use this idea and why?
Participant 29: : Gender is male. He studies computer science at DTU. He will
not use it, because he is confident of what he has to do. So he doesn’t need such a
bracelet, because he feels that he can also control himself.
Participant 28: : I think that it will be a male, who is nerdy. He will not use it
because he is a structured worker that define clearly the timeframe that he needs to
perform certain tasks. And he is also stubborn in a way that if he finds a problem,
he is not gonna spend time not looking at the problem, but he gonna go into the
problem and try to solve it.
Researcher: : Imagine that you are the project lead for this solution. Which are
the strengths of this solution?
Participant 28: : Since it is difficult for this person to procrastinate. It could be
nice if it was nothing down the time that they are studying, for example, and certain
thresholds are exceeded. Like they’re saying some studies are saying that you can
study for 45 minutes and take a five-minute break. And the second bullet point is
because it’s an extra feature maybe that a sensor in the thing that is measuring some
faults or something else are the time you’re spending focused and studying and they
can identify whether or not your performance is going down. So you should like to
take a break.
(a) Part 1
(b) Part 2
(c) Part 3
Figure B.62: Participant 28 Notes
==PAGE:425==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
415
(a) Part 1
(b) Part 2
(c) Part 3
(d) Part 4
Figure B.63: Participant 29 Notes
Participant 29: : That it is free and it has to be charged once a week.
Researcher: : Describe 1 person who will definitely use it
Participant 28: : So I wouldn’t mention my two flatmates. Yeah. Ah, they’re
both males. They’re both around 25 to 27 years old. And I would say that they are
minded that their mind might escape the brain easily and travel around so it’s difficult
for them to be concentrated in tasks. Why I believe they would use it is because they
would like to make the most out of their studying time and not procrastinate too
much extending the amount of time that they need to perform their tasks.
And
therefore, they can have more free time for their hobbies.
Participant 29: : Girls, 20-22 years old.
Studying design.
They both like
shopping for social media. Appearance counts. They definitely use it because they
==PAGE:426==
416
B Interview Transcripts
get bored pretty quickly of studying.
Researcher: : Imagine that you are the project lead for this solution. Which
are the weaknesses of this solution? What existing alternatives would you suggest
instead?
Participant 29: : also maybe a little bit nerdy and down, because you’re like a
Christmas tree if you’re using in a public place.
Participant 28: : The device might put us in much more pressure when using
it. inside the brain inside the mind that some changes need to happen.
Challenge Application + Alone mode Researcher: : Describe 1 person who will
not use this idea and why?
Participant 29: : They don’t feel they need something to control them. they
are not in line to try something new.
Participant 28: : it’s the content is pretty much similar to the ring before. I
would imagine somebody who doesn’t want t o be controlled. And I have personally
I’ve tried something similar in the past, like an app that counts the time that I’m
spending in my phone. , but it was irritating when the app was saying to you know
that you cannot use it anymore. It was like a judge above your head.
Researcher: : Imagine that you are the project lead for this solution. Which are
the strengths of this solution?
Participant 28: : the strength is that is very easy to establish and try. you
can also keep track very well of which applications you’re using. Extra feature - the
mobile phone should be classified in terms of use and like trust so you can have an
idea of how quality was the time that you took the break, to spend time on your
phone.
Participant 29: : It should be free, has to recognize what they automatically
have If I’m spending time reading or if I’m spending faulty quality time, another
feature would be like, what you can add a note to the beginning of the day. What
you have to accomplish? What are your thoughts today? And then when you actually
accomplish a task you, Yeah, of course, you can say I’m done or not done. And then
you see a percentage on the say the screensaver on your phone.
Researcher: : Describe 1 person who will definitely use it
Participant 29: : I would say related to computer science.
So whether it’s
engineering schools and their interests are a little bit nerdy. Why would they use it is
because they are really open-minded and they really try; they really like to try things
just for the sake of trying them. Because they know that they struggle with their
concentration. They want to change and this is why they like to try the technology.
But can help them to be more efficient, more productive.
Researcher: : Imagine that you are the project lead for this solution. Which
are the weaknesses of this solution? What existing alternatives would you suggest
==PAGE:427==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
417
instead?
Participant 28: : I would say the weaknesses of this app could be the accuracy.
I was not really certain about the results of the app that I was personally using in
the past.
Participant 29: : The weakness could be that if I use Facebook for work, the
app would not recognize it as a work activity.
Content digest Researcher: : Describe 1 person who will not use this idea and
why?
Participant 28: : I would put myself inside. And a friend of mine. Why would
we not use it because we have already outside personalized these applications like
Facebook and Instagram, let’s say two big examples to reflect what we really are
into like the news or the politic views or memes or aesthetic pictures, photographers,
instead of doing the regular counting of other people’s lives. That is the trend in
social media. And we already have filtered what this application has done, let’s say
until a certain degree and in our phones so than being finished content, which I really
liked as an expression.
Participant 29: : Okay, Docomo and Ilya. Okay, they’re 24 years old. They
are in the engineering field one study telecommunication the other one electrical
engineering, they interest is like they like to stay with family they like staying with
friends. They like outdoor activities. they would not use it because they really dislike
trying new things.
Researcher: : Imagine that you are the project lead for this solution. Which are
the strengths of this solution?
Participant 28: : ah major strength is the up customization on the things
that you’re really interested into with a practical formulation through the use of the
hashtags, for example, and the second strength Is there some pressure can be put
on the campaign for avoiding toxic content that you find a lot in the apps in the in
terms of toxic people. it’s a modification for one application or related to the other
application. So you can say, you don’t need to go into each individual application
and modify or configure what you’re really into..
Participant 29: : I really have no clue because the app itself i think it’s really
complicated so readily did this thing, but you can tailor what you want and say, then
the app will recognize these topics or whatever. I think it’s already a mess.
Researcher: : Describe 1 person who will definitely use it
Participant 29: : He’ll do the x thing with friends, do outdoor activities kind
of things.
Participant 28: : They are both into sports, a bit of football, football clubs,
committee videos.
And they’re using their social media and their mobile phone
like too much. And also during the night like more content, infinite scrolling into
==PAGE:428==
418
B Interview Transcripts
unnecessary and random stuff, and I believe that they would meet to optimize their
social media phone users through a useful content that you can produce by using this
application the intense digest articles in order to eliminate content digest, in order
to eliminate all the time and spend during the night scrolling through stuff that they
are not really into it and it makes them feel neutral.
Researcher: : Imagine that you are the project lead for this solution. Which
are the weaknesses of this solution? What existing alternatives would you suggest
instead?
Participant 29: : the worst weakness of this product is that the recommendation
it gives you a recommendation in terms of what you have to watch and what you don’t
have to watch. They are like awful meaning but you feel like it gives you a teaser but
the feature is not working that much.
Participant 28: : I will repeat myself with the concept of the infinite content
and the infinite scrolling. In my opinion, this is super difficult to be battled and by
modifying the application interests that you have inside is not gonna change too much
our mobile phone behavior. It’s when you pick up your mobile phone, you might not
even feel the need to pick it up. But you’re doing it out of laziness, laziness. So it’s
not as if it is good content that you’re scrolling through, or if it is a random content
that you’re scrolling through that you’re really caring about, you just feel like you’re
avoiding your tasks or avoiding going back to sleep.
Researcher: : Which one of these 3 projects, which one would you go forward
with and why? If not, then why again?
Participant 28: : As you understood from my answers, I have a kind of different
approach to the whole subject. I would not choose any of the three projects. And
this was an outcome over the plan of evasion of structured tasks that I had the tasks
that they were exciting me and now I will say, fulfilling one after the other one. So
I think that what could help in this case, it’s not maybe a product but it’s like the
mind states that we should force our minds to be concentrated and be focused. I
would say that these three projects are a more and not radical, but a more direct
and like a patch up of the whole problem. But the whole problem is deep inside our
minds and in my opinion, we should start working from there.
Participant 29: : meaning the coolest project would be the last one, I think is
the more useful one. But on the other hand, it is impossible to implement. So I believe
the second one though, is it’s definitely easier to develop. And people definitely can.
They are used to the smartphone. They’re used to install apps, they’re used to this
kind of approach. So probably there is a market there. But I think that is definitely
different from the existing solution. There is nothing out there at least that I know
that there’s something like this. First, second is the fact that it can actually help you
by not using the smartphone at all. Almost I would say, because you have this ring
and you don’t have to check the smartphone to see the time or to see what So you
then that gets distracted, right? And notice physically. The thing when it’s physical,
==PAGE:429==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
419
you can touch it and you can lock in this kind of thing. and also in one of the points
that are probably the easiest one to implement. I’m not an electrical engineer, but I
mean three lights with thumbs up I think it’s not that difficult.
Participant 29: : A person who is willing to buy a ring watch to change his
behavior.
==PAGE:430==
420
B Interview Transcripts
B.4.2
Participants 4 and 16
Researcher: [random conversations]
Good afternoon or is it the afternoon? Yes, it is. Thanks for taking the time to
join to talk with us. Okay. You’ve both been with us in the last group interview.
So I’m not going to go too much in detail about what the subject is because you
know what the subject is. I’m just gonna say that your answers again will remain
anonymous, and we’re recording this interview for the sake of transcription. Are you
okay, Participant 16 ?
Participant 16: Yeah, I’m just trying to find something good to put on.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 16: I’m listening. I’m listening.
Researcher: Okay, but so what we are gonna do right now..
So a little bit
about the structure.
We’re going to show you a video and then you will receive
some questions after it; another video, questions; another video and questions. So
three videos in total so you’ll be seeing three concepts that you have, to some degree,
already met in the previous group interview. And finally you have one last question.
[random conversations]
Anyways, so first of all I just...before we start the video, I want you to remember
when we’re having a discussion to always think of.. like reflect about what the other
person is saying.
So what you can add or what can you challenge in the other’s
opinion. And yeah, enjoy the videos. They are a little bit humorous.
Participant 16: Nice.
Ring Limiter Video [video playing]
Participant 16: Are you selling the ring or is this like a commercial?
Researcher: It’s supposed to be like a Kickstarter video.
Participant 16: Ah, okay.
(a) Part 1
(b) Part 2
Figure B.64: Participant 4 Notes
==PAGE:431==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
421
(a) Part 1
(b) Part 2
(c) Part 3
(d) Part 4
Figure B.65: Participant 16 Notes
==PAGE:432==
422
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Okay. So first of all, what we want you to think of is...do you have
a paper and pen in front of you? or close to you?
Participant 16: Me?
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 4: Yeah, I do. It’s been given to me.
Researcher: Okay, good. Yeah. Okay, cool. So, I want you to take this paper
and pen and I’m going to ask you.. so the first thing.. so these questions are going to
come up again with each concept. So please listen to the instructions now. So first of
all, I want you to describe two people that would definitely not use this product that
you just saw. And I want you to imagine how they look, name, gender, you can draw
them you can write that, do whatever you want. Just please write it down because
we want these notes from you afterwards. What do they study? So also.. please,
as our focus is university students think of your student friends or recently graduate
friends. Where do they study, what are their interests? Why would they not use it?
Participant 4: So we can’t use boomers.
Researcher: No. I’m starting the timer now.
Participant 16: Can they be fictional friends?
Researcher: Yeah. It doesn’t need to be real friends. It could be just some-
one you imagined to be a good user category that would not use this. So did you
understand the question? This is for people that wouldn’t use it.
Participant 16: Got it!
Researcher: Okay, time is up. Participant 4 , do you want to start by present-
ing?
Participant 4: Um,yeah, I mean, it’s not like I have much... but thinking of
two people, I really couldn’t think of two friends kind of cause I don’t know it’s just
90 seconds, so I just thought of like general description of people who might not use
the ring or not make that.. the first person would be the one who has absolutely no
social life and complete workaholic. So, basically a person that doesn’t doesn’t really
go on his phone or doesn’t really connect with anybody. So a person like this, that
is mainly focused on either studying or working. This person wouldn’t really need
it, now that I mention that, I actually have a friend so she is.. So she is a she’s a
girl and she studies the same thing as me. We actually do our thesis together right
now. So she actually barely uses her phone. She doesn’t even have like any, any chat
applications like messenger or WhatsApp whatsoever on her phone. She only uses
her phone if she has to call somebody. So this person doesn’t really need this ring
because she doesn’t sound like she’s gonna make any use of it.
Researcher: What are her interests?
Participant 4: Finance, she’s interested in financing. She has a bachelor in IT
==PAGE:433==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
423
technologies or something. Right now she’s.. the master that she’s doing is a software
design. She works as a consultant at the moment
Researcher: What are her personal interests?
Participant 4: Investing and finance as well, like it’s not like she has some like
side hobbies.. maybe that’s why, maybe that’s the reason why she doesn’t really go
on the phone that much. She’s mostly focused on what she’s doing and what she’s
learning at the moment.
Researcher: Okay. Do you have another persona or?
Participant 4: Yeah, the other one is.. will be just a general description.. is
the person that is 24/7 on social media, posts pictures of everything, his breakfast,
his lunch, his cooking.Even his time in the bathroom, I would say like is the person
that can’t spend an hour, not an hour; can’t spend a minute without being on social
media. That kind of person. I mean, we.. there are a lot of people like this. I don’t
have any close friends that are like this. But I have a lot of friends on Facebook that
are doing it.
Researcher: Why would they not use the ring?
Participant 4: Because they don’t want to.. and like if you, if you spend your
whole day on social media and if it’s so important for you to show everybody what
you’re doing and get those reactions or whatsoever and then I don’t see these people
ever wanting to limit their time at all. Like if you spend that much time then you
obviously don’t even think of, don’t even think of it as a problem or addiction or
whatsoever.
Researcher: Okay, Participant 16 ?
Participant 16: So my first person is called Britney. She’s 18 to 20 years old.
She studies at KEA, some sort of design or social media. And her interest is being
cool with her friends. Kind of what Participant 4: said. She’s just like hip. Yeah,
she wants to keep up with the latest Tik Tok stories or whatever. She’s dancing. She’s
dancing with her partner, or she’s using her partner to be cool. Why would they use
it? Yeah, that kind of answers it. My second person is called Abdullah Mohammed.
He’s 22 years old. He studies at KEA and he studies Hotel Management. He thinks
it’s Haram. He wants to only have the wife’s ring in his hand and also the cool like...
anyways. Yeah. And he uses it to.. he doesn’t want.. he’s interested like to keep
up with the latest developments in travel industry.
So he’s like checking out the
Instagram like on a non stop basis to kind of keep up with the trends and keep up
with his homies Abdudeshak and Abdulrahman
Researcher: Okay. Cool. Thank you for that. Next slide, please. Okay, now that
you have described your two personas, please keep them in mind. Imagine now that
you are the project lead for this solution. So you’ve been given this ring and you’re
the project lead. Which strengths would you highlight to make it more interesting
for your two personas. So these two people that would not use the ring, what would
==PAGE:434==
424
B Interview Transcripts
you highlight ot them so they could start using it or they would consider using it?
And would you add any extra features to make the solution more effective? If yes,
what? You have 60 seconds. I’m starting the timer now.
Participant 16: Remind me again, was this ring supposed to kind of limit the
use of social media or the smartphone all together?
Researcher: It’s supposed to make you.. to help not lose track of time when
you’re on your phone so that you take more.. So when you’re on your phone, you
know, okay, I spent this amount of time on my phone already.
Participant 16: Okay.
Researcher: Okay,time is up.
Participant 16 , maybe you can start this time.
Participant 16: There’s a kind of... Okay, maybe more for Britney. So make
it cool. Make it have some like really nice features that will make her.. make it like
really approachable for young people.
Researcher: What features?
Participant 16: For Abdullah Mohammed..
Researcher: No, no, no Participant 16 , Participant 16 - what features would
make it cool for Britney before you go to Abdullah?
Participant 16: I don’t know like, you could have some like design, some design
features.
Researcher: Mm hmm. So make it customizable?
Participant 16: Yeah, that was going to be one of the things I was gonna say..
Make it customizable for each’d needs. And maybe there will be a way to make the
ring viral. So as in like have some functionality that can make it viral. Such as play
a song after 15 minutes and then it could be like Rick Astley. I don’t know.
For Abdullah Mohammed, make it functional. So when the ring...when the 15
minutes has gone by or whatever the timer was, it could remind him that ’do you
want to be successful? Go look at the hotels now’ or something. So as in, make it
like really specified for the user and like tailor made for each one so basically making
it not only lights or coloring or a beep making it something more pragmatic into say
whatever the needs are of the person are. Yeah.
Researcher: Okay, would you add any extra features? Other than the customiz-
able thing.
Participant 16: So I don’t know but i i would like to.. maybe this ring could be
a Linux based program so we can program yourself some own apps into it and own...
So kind of make it like an open ended platform? I don’t know. I don’t know if this
is, yeah. Make the whole platform moldable according to the user.
==PAGE:435==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
425
Researcher: Okay. Participant 4 ?
Participant 4: So, for the first person that is not really on social media, I
wouldn’t, I wouldn’t really present it to her like, it’s not like she needs it or she’s
gonna use it. If you’re not on social media, if you’re not interested in these stuff, then
why would you be interested in something that would eventually limit your time?
Like, you don’t really need it. But for the second person, for the person that is like,
always there and always interested in everything, then I think the way to present it
and make them use it would be to just, to just advertise it as the new trend, like
the new modern thing to do. ’Hey, look. Everybody’s using that ring now.’ And a
feature that I would add would be like the possibility of sharing achievements. Like,
let’s say that a person do take, does take the break, so after the break, you can share
and show everybody ’Hey, look, I’m doing very well with not using my phone, even
though I’m on the phone all the time, except for the break.’ But if you actually give
them the chance, like Brittany, was that the name of Participant 16 ’s?
Participant 16: Yeah, Britney.
Participant 4: If you give.. I’m just gonna use the same name because I didn’t
I didn’t name my second person.. But if you give Brittany the chance to like say
’hey guys, look at how well I’m doing with this new challenge. Like I’m not using my
phone and taking breaks’, I’m pretty sure that they’re actually going to use it and
like, even if they just use it to show off and keep in touch with the trend, they’re still
going to use it. So they’re still going to take breaks so it might actually be effective.
Participant 16: Amen to that Participant 4 .
Researcher: Okay. Next slide. Okay, so now we’re going to turn around the
tables, so now we want you to describe two people that would definitely use it. So
how do they look? Please write down what you think during this 90 seconds. And
you can also draw them out.
Participant 4: Draw them?
Researcher: If you want to. Participant 4 is inspired now.
Participant 4: I don’t have the time.
Researcher: Okay, time is up.
Participant 16: Just give me two more.
Researcher: Okay, well maybe Participant 4 can start this time?
Participant 4: All right. So person A, that would be Nikolai. What do they
study? He studies management at CBS. Interests? Their interests is in.. he’s in-
terested in.. what is his interests? I didn’t think of that. Let’s just say that he is
interested in the latest like, business approaches and stuff, the latest technologies,
talking about management. He’s interested in like Scrum and all these stuff that I
don’t really know a lot about. So why why would they use it? Why would he use it?
He would use it so he can limit his time on the phone and focus more on his work.
==PAGE:436==
426
B Interview Transcripts
He has, let’s say that he has like that project approaching him. And due to, I don’t
know, let’s say customer problems, or the customer just changed their mind at the
last second. So they have to make changes in the way like they’re already going with.
So he would definitely make use of this to limit his time and focus more on his work.
Person B is Tea. She is studying at the ITU university. She’s doing a computer, a
degree in computer science. Her interests is front end development and web develop-
ing, the latest trends. Why would she use it? She would simply use it because she’s
at her last semester and she’s currently doing her thesis. But we, probably all of us, I
don’t know if.. I don’t know Participant 16 about you, but I know that all three of
us are doing their thesis. So when you do your thesis, you.. it’s really easy to distract
yourself with anything you would find in the room, even just a napkin on the table.
At least that’s true for me. So I would really use like the bracelet, even not only for
my phone, but in general, like remind me to go back to work, like stop distracting
yourself and focus on what’s more important. So Tea is in that exact situation and
Tea wants to focus on her thesis.
Researcher: OK, Perfect. Participant 16 ?
Participant 16: I don’t know if I can.. if I’m going to add anything new.
Mine are more or less kind of similar but but my first guy is called Lee Ying. He’s
a 20 year old. He studies in DTU Biochemistry. His interests is being successful and
or making his father proud. So he’s using the ring to be.. streamline his time use and
to be extremely efficient. So he’s gonna make.. Now I’m going through what’s gonna..
what the streaming has to have.. is sort of like a really practical excel sheet function
where you can like time your time use, time usage. So you can also effectivise it by
saying ’okay for four hours, you study math, two hours, something else’, so on so
and so on. So social media 10 minutes break, for instance. Other person is called
Rebekka, she’s 22 year olds. She studies IT & Communications at KU. She loves
SoMe. But she doesn’t want to.. get too entangled into it. So she sets ths timer to..
instead of using four hours each evening or to be like, two hours in the phone before
asleep. So she puts that bad boy on.Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. Cool. Thank you. So next slide. So now imagine that you’re
a rival company of the solution. So you have a rival solution, which weaknesses would
you highlight to make it less interesting for these two persons? And what existing
alternatives would you suggest instead? So something that would serve the same
purpose as the ring but like that already exists? You have 60 seconds
Okay, time is up, Participant 16 , maybe you can start this time.
Participant 16: I guess, I would say maybe that this kind of say that it’s a
gimmick, that it relies too much on the personal willpower of the user. As in isn’t
really that much more different for them to, for the user to say, why don’t you just
make yourself a schedule on your calendar or something, and live by that, instead
of just having something like that. I don’t know. Yeah, like, how is it just different
than you making your own calendar? I don’t know. Or you could just say that while
==PAGE:437==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
427
you have these kind of fancy, what are those Alexa’s and Google whatever those
things I don’t know what the status with those guys are but maybe they already
have something similar? I don’t know, maybe they don’t. So is it different than
having some just like speaker like machine in your room, kind of dictating what you’re
supposed to do and what you’re not supposed to do. And that being said, maybe
they could add like a camera or something, which is like extremely, like a black mirror
kind of stuff. But, uh, like, maybe it could be some sort of augmented reality kind of
thing, which doesn’t necessarily have to have any hardware on yourself. Except for
some sort of software in the room. I don’t know. But now I’m just brainstorming,
so..
Researcher: Participant 4: ?
Participant 4: So my weaknesses would be related to what Participant 16
just said about not having any hardware on yourself. So speaking generally for both
personas, as a weakness I would show first the fact that you’re actually wearing a
glowing ring, right? I mean, come on, you’re kind of an adult and you walk outside,
go to work or to school with like a glowing, childish looking ring. Like, that’s, that’s
really not like something that I personally would do, for example. And then with that
ring, like when you have I mean, I hope it’s not as big as shown in the videos, because
this actually make it almost impossible to wear. But let’s consider that it’s actually
a small ring, but it’s still visible and it’s still not a regular ring. So going outside
in public at work or at the university, anywhere, like you, you would eventually be
questioned. Like, what is this on your hand? Why are you wearing this? Why is this
shining? Like why is it red now? So you usually don’t want all the people to know
when like, you don’t want to be like oh, it’s just that I have addiction. So I have to
wear this to fight it or, oh, well, I can’t stay off my phone. So I’m just using this.
So instead of that, I would just suggest something like, either using a calendar or
like schedule, as Participant 16 said, and just, like, do it yourself without anybody
knowing. Or you can just do like, you can just use the app that we use for timing our
screen time. And maybe.. there’s definitely other applications. I don’t know if that
exact application can do it. But there’s definitely other applications that could, that
allow you to set up a filter and they would like not let you use let’s say Instagram
after you reach 30 hours or 30 minutes screen time for today. So just in general use
something that people can’t see.
Researcher: Okay, do you have anything to add or to challenge there, Partici-
pant 16 ?
Participant 16: No, I think that it’s a really good point like hardware can be
kind of stigmatize itself quickly if you’re using. I don’t know. So again, it’s about
twisting the narrative into something cool. But yeah, maybe, I guess the ultimate
solution would be to have some sort of non hardware kind of originality.
Researcher: Okay. Now, we are going to talk about the next concept, which is..
Yeah, you’re gonna see it.
==PAGE:438==
428
B Interview Transcripts
Digital Friend Video [video playing]
Researcher: Okay, so this is the screen time app. This is a combination of two
ideas that you saw on the previous round of group interviews. Again, I want you to
describe two people that would not use it. How do they look? Name, gender. What
do they study? Where did they study? What are their interests? And why would
they not use it? I’m starting the timer now.
Participant 4: Can we use the same people or?
Researcher: Yeah, you can
Okay, time is off. Also, please remember to write notes in the paper so we can
have it afterwards. Participant 16 , maybe you want to start.
Participant 16: I need to be honest with you. I honestly don’t see anything
wrong with that. So I don’t really know it’s hard for me to start creating the profile
(...) when I don’t see anything, like why wouldn’t anyone do that? You know what
I mean? Like, I don’t do, but that’s just because I’m lazy. So if we’re going with
laziness, then we can go like basically anyone. So regardless what they’re studying or
what their age is, then it’s extremely individual.
Researcher: Least likely to do it. Do the least likely profile. For example, you
said lazy, so a lazy person. So describe a lazy person,
Participant 16: Least likely people to do so is actually either less educated
people or lazy people. So either someone who might be maybe like not so motivated
or doesn’t really know that that’s a problem or doesn’t care.
Researcher: Okay, and you can’t put name, gender, study, interest on this. It’s
fine if you can’t, I’m just asking.
Participant 16: I can’t, sorry.
Researcher: No worries. Okay. Participant 4 ?
Participant 4: Oh, names and studies. I mean, I’m just gonna go with kind of
the same people. Yeah, any student basically, any student basically can make use of
it and..
Researcher: And people who would not use it?
Participant 4: Yeah, I’m going there. So a person that would not use it would
be for example, I came up with Zach. So Zach is again, any.. just a regular student
who studies something in a Danish University. And Zack just found his.. just got
together with that new girlfriend of his. So he wants to be in touch 24/7. They just,
they literally just started their relationship. So would never want to be alone. He
would always want to be in touch, stay connected and like not miss a single call or
single message. So that’s why they wouldn’t use the alone mode.
Researcher: What about the other person?
==PAGE:439==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
429
Participant 4: Yeah, the other person would be, Brittany, the one from the
previous video suggestion. The one that is never alone is always on social media and
always has the urge to share everything she does. Yeah.
Researcher: Okay. Cool. So next slide. Okay, so now again, imagine that you’re
the project lead for the solution. Which strengths would you highlight to make it
more interesting for your two personas? Or for the people that you envision this being
not likely to use it? And would you add any extra features to make the solution more
attractive? If yes, what? I’m going to start a timer now.
Okay, time is up. Participant 4 , do you want to start?
Participant 4: So, strenghts that I would highlight... The main thing that I
would highlight is that every person has to take some time for themselves. Like, this
would be the perfect time to using that filter, it would be the perfect time to read
a book that has been on your shelf since forever. Or maybe focus on some hobbies
that you have and you always push aside. We often, it often happens that you start
browsing something on the internet or on your phone and you end up watching a
weird video on YouTube. I don’t know, which which brand of batteries last longer,
or something like this. So this would be like the perfect. This would be the perfect
tool that you can use to force yourself offline and focus on something that you always
wanted to do.
Researcher: Would you add any extra features?
Participant 4: I mean, not really. I don’t see what could be added there. Maybe
something like..maybe the ability to receive like an urgent call or something. So you
know that if anything happens that actually requires your attention you would be
notified.
Researcher: That’s actually part of the solution. I just.. we didn’t.. it’s not
visible very clearly but as per your suggestion last time, we have included it.
Participant 4: Alright.
Researcher: Um, Participant 16 ?
Participant 16: I don’t know if this kind of blend together what strengths and
adding any extra features but I think some sort of risk and reward system will be
nice. So say you only keep it, you do only keep it to like 15 minutes, instead of just
hitting the snooze button for half an hour or whatever, you get some sort of a penalty
or award. So I don’t know, that’s kind of vague what I’m just saying but so it has
more power and weight to it to press the, you know, to do those settings and to then
obeyed by those set rules. And..
Researcher: Before you go to the next point, which penalties and rewards would
motivate you?
Participant 16: You could take.. it would be like in the app, you could set them
yourself. So say you could briefly kind of say that, okay. I need to write in my thesis
==PAGE:440==
430
B Interview Transcripts
like you guys need to for instance, so you know, it could remind you to do that? Or,
you know, I don’t know if that’s anything new but or risks is that you could.. your
phone could turn off itself. Like, fuck off and it shuts itself off. Why not? If you
accept it yourself, who sets the like the parameters of the app? Why wouldn’t you
be able to do that? So have it like.. have something like that? Or another risk would
be like some sort of like really annoying sound.. like, you know, from the Dumb and
Dumber, the guy when Jim Carrey makes the [sound] sound or something like that?
Yeah.
Okay, and then have these this app or this feature kind of more prevalent, and
more kind of just featured. For instance, in the phone settings itself. I honestly didn’t
even know that this Alone setting existed, I know that you could set the.. I knew
that you could set this, like time limits for the individual apps, I had no idea that
the Alone setting even existed.
Researcher: It doesn’t exist. It’s a Kickstarter video style. So it’s supposed to
be like, oh, it exists in your settings now, but it doesn’t exist yet. The vision is that
it should be in your settings so you don’t have to..
Participant 16: Okay, but that being said, even the the app limits we have now,
even those guys, I just happen to come.. run into you know, so to have it really kind
of integrated in the whole user experience the same way when you set up your.. for
instance, when you set up your new phone, and while you do that, when you sign up
to what time zone is, for instance or language, you could immediately start setting
up some parameters how to use it. So making it really grounded in that. I know
that might be a bad business case for the phone companies themselves. So that’s why
they’re kind of like putting in deep in the trenches because they really want everyone
to use their phones. So, but that being said, it could be something to think and keep
an eye on.
Researcher: Okay, thank you.
So now, next slide, describe two people that
would definitely use it. So again, same drill, but this time people that would use it.
Participant 16: Can you just say everyone?
Researcher: Specifically like person that would 100
Okay. Time is up. So Participant 4 , do you want to start?
Participant 4: Yeah. So person one would be Nikolai the example that I gave
in the previous, the previous example with the ring. So in order to focus on his work
and his studies, he would definitely use the Alone mode cause this would help him
like I don’t know read that new book that his boss suggested or maybe sit down and
read on his subject. Then Person two would be.. I can give an example with myself,
I will definitely use that. So person two would be Participant 4 , he studies at ITU
and finishes his master’s degree in software design. I would definitely use that. I am
kind of using something like this but not really. I just throw myself away when I’m
trying to focus but if I had that option, then I would definitely make use of it as well.
==PAGE:441==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
431
Researcher: Okay. Participant 16 ?
Participant 16: So one example could be Fatima. She’s a 24 year old DTU
student in data science. She’s interested in computers and various forms of technology.
She studies hard and she works a lot. For instance, in Microsoft, so why would she
use it? Because she’s, although she knows and she’s interested in technology and
using it. She’s conscious of the drawbacks it has on a human mind. Therefore, she
does actively pursue these kind of opportunities that makes her use the technology
she loves and adores, but in a responsible sustainable matter.
Another example could be Participant 16: , the 24 year old political science
student from Copenhagen University. He’s interested in the global world matters,
but he sometimes sees himself getting drifted away. So he sets his parameters so that
he can keep keep doing what he’s doing. But in a reasonable manner, or reasonable
way, for instance, not get too attached to Twitter, for instance, or some other forms
of what he or she sees unefficent.
Researcher: Okay. Next slide. Okay, so now imagine that you’re a rival company
with a solution: which weaknesses would you highlight to make it less interesting for
these two people you just mentioned?
And what existing alternatives would you
suggest instead? I’m starting the timer.
Okay, time is up, Participant 16: , do you want to start?
Participant 16: Um, I guess now is what we define as a weakness. That’s a key
question here. I could go say well if I am to find a weakness to this, is the fact that
you’re still using your phone. And you’re just kind of like playing games with yourself.
So you just being.. you’re attaching another feature to your phone, therefore you use
it more, I don’t know. So existing alternatives, meditation, read books. Don’t use
your phone, find alternatives to not to use your phone. Get away from it altogether.
go to church. go for walks, be with your friends. I don’t know. Find ways not to use
the phone at all.
Researcher: Okay, go tell that to Fatima and Participant 16: . Okay. Par-
ticipant 4 ?
Participant 4: Oh, I personally can’t really find any weakness in using this as I
think that it’s something everybody would make use of. If however, I have to convince
somebody then I think a person like Brittany, the one that doesn’t go off social media
would be very easy to convince that this is not a good thing. Like just say, hey, Britt,
what if your friends pose that really cool photo and you’re not one of the first one to
comment with? You’re not gonna be the star player in that new trend or something,
then this will definitely push that kind of people from it.
Researcher: But how could someone convince you to not use it?
Participant 4: Me to not use it?
Researcher: Because you’re likely to use it. If it worked. If it existed, you would
==PAGE:442==
432
B Interview Transcripts
use it. So how can someone?
Participant 4: If you said.. if you didn’t, if you don’t include that filter that I
can allow like Person A to notify me if they want to, then this would be, this would
be a reason why I won’t to use it. Because basically, that’s what I do. For example,
when I’m at work, I just have my phone on the side. But most of the time when I
do receive a notification, I need to look at it, just to see who has reached.. who has
messaged me, or what have I received? And like, I just see that it’s someone that I
don’t really care about right now. So I put it away, but I still waste that time and I
still lose focus just to pick my phone, look at it, say okay, whatever. I’ll talk to you
later and throw it away again. So, as long as I have.. as long as I have the possibility
of selecting a certain notification that would still go through the filter, then there’s
no way you would make me not use it. I would use this like on a daily basis.
Participant 16: To kind of add what I.. can I add just quickly and the reason
why I went that way is because if this is to be successful, I mean it’s gonna be
functional. Good for everyone because say I guess the weaknesses that.. I guess the
main weakness of this is the will, actually the interest of doing it so in the first place
so if Britney, as Participant 4 said, if she doesn’t have a will to do like to do this,
there’s not gonna be, she’s not gonna set those things up. So I think that the treshold
of doing this is so low, but I guess the weakness is that whether you want to do it at
all in the first place. So as in how do you keep, how do you make someone do it if they
don’t even want to do it in terms of like, for instance the ring, there’s a question of..
do you want to.. there’s a question of design and a question of, like, do you want to
have a piece of hardware on yourself? You know, I don’t even want to have an apple.
I don’t even want to have an Apple Watch, because I don’t think it’s not.. just it’s
not for me, because I think it’s just weird. But so here is.. if you’re already using
your phone, you like your phone. So then if you have this amazing feature that limits
your use of phone the way you like it to be useful. So then the question is, what do
you like it to be? Does that make sense? So essentially, the question of weakness
is about willpower and willpower is almost impossible to kind of manipulate unless
you do it yourself. You set yourself the parameters and whatever. Sticks and stones
I talked about, like risks and rewards, you set them up. You can give the tools for
someone to set it up. But you cannot go past that. Okay.
Researcher: Thank you. Now, the last idea. Yeah.
Content Digest Video [video playing]
Researcher: First of all, is it understandable because this is the same solution
as in the group interview, but it’s just more developed.
Participant 4: It is.
Researcher: Okay, cool. So now again the same task, described two people that
would not use it.
Okay, time is off. Participant 4 , do you want to start this time?
==PAGE:443==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
433
Participant 4: Yeah. So the person that doesn’t want to use it is named Klaus,
Klaus studies at the Danish school in journalism. He wants to be a journalist. These
are his interests. So Klaus wouldn’t use that filter simply because he doesn’t want to
limit what he sees on social media because as a journalist, he wants to always see new
things. He always wants to be in touch and stay in touch with all the new trends. So
using that filter would actually cause him limiting what he sees, so he wouldn’t like
that. And then second person, I couldn’t think of a second person.
Researcher: Okay, that’s fine. Participant 16 ?
Participant 16: So the first one is Bogomil, 28 years old from Bucharest Uni-
versity. He is a psychology student. He’s interested in Freud and societal psychology.
He does not use the app because he doesn’t trust it. Who and why someone curates
the whatever he wants to look at it so he does not trust even if it’s a super advanced
AI or whatever, he does not trust it, because there’s just, as kind of Participant 4
said, you know, he sees that he’s clever enough to distinguish. Other one is Ludvig,
27. He studies design, whatever university that is. He’s interested in art, design
and trends and something like that. He does not use the application because, again,
there’s a funnel, there’s a bottleneck. So that’s not the whole truth. So it’s kind of
counterproductive to what he - okay, could be a she - but he sees, you know, to be
just like the world at the moment. So it limits the spectrum of the reality.
Researcher: Okay, cool. Next slide. So imagine again that you’re the project
lead for the solution, which strengths would you highlight to make it more interesting
for these two personas or one persona that you just mentioned and would you add
any extra features? Timer is on.
Okay, time is up. Participant 4 , do you want to start?
Participant 4: Yep. So, what I would tell Klaus is that he can like..just to point
out some strengths. First of all, maybe the app would allow him to filter the fake
news. So he would actually turn it into his advantage by filtering out only the trusted
media that he wants to follow. This way, he won’t be bothered with any fake news
or whatsoever. And then the second strength, I would point out is to.. not a second
strength but extra feature, I would suggest, would be to just point to like, let’s say
some very important media that he follows and be notified. I’m not sure that this
is actually gonna push him away from his phone, but it would notify him as soon as
they like release some content or put some content online this way he would know
that he’s going to be one of the first people to see it.
Researcher: Okay. Participant 16 ?
Participant 16: I guess the main point of this thing is efficiency, right? So you
can effectively see the same amount of value for 15 minutes as you can see in 30
minutes. But just a quick drawback of that is that.. it’s like, if you’re giving the
[drug addict] like a better drugs, would he use less drugs than he used before? So if
you have an app that makes it even more like Twitter premium, why would I use less?
Like that’s what I don’t get. Well, now that.. Sorry, I derailed for a second. What
==PAGE:444==
434
B Interview Transcripts
extra features would I add is that: transparency is really key. What is curating my
content? And how, why and so on. And the second is the adaptability; now that you
know what these parameters are, what is this agency that is controlling me? How
can I adapt it or mold it in a way that I feel more comfortable with it? If there’s
something that just.. some cloud, some magical being that just dissect all the things
that I want to do.. you know, for both of them, both Bogomil and Ludvig, have all
sets of challenges with it, without these extra features.
Researcher: Yeah. Okay. Next slide. Okay, so now describe two people that
would definitely use it. Yeah, it’s the same drill.
Okay, time is up. Participant 16: , do you want to start this time?
Participant 16: Sure, so the first person is called Mickey. He is a 22 year old
student (...)medicine student. He likes to use. He just likes to keep well informed
about like the world beings and what’s happening around him. So and he is inquisitive.
So why would he use it ? It is because it just makes it more efficient and he would just..
he doesn’t need to go deep into the feed to kind of just find his main information. So
it just makes it more efficient for him to kind of just dip his toes in without you know
having to check everything. So he just blindly believes it and trust it and he just
doesn’t need to use that much of it, in that case. Another one is a Claudia, fashion
student. She has curated the.. She trusts the.. whatever the AI to curate the content
in the best, best way so the she can do her work, again more efficiently and more
streamlined way or just follow the whatever the makeup people or whatever you girls
do on social media
Researcher: Wow, the stereotype.
Participant 16: I’ve made it broad.
Researcher: Okay, Participant 4 ?
Participant 4: Okay, so, person number one is, again, Participant 4 who
studies at the ITU. He is basically going to use it because he doesn’t like when,
even though when, for example when he goes on Twitter even though he follows
specific medias, specific people, they often just share some random stuff, some random
pictures or whatsoever that like he doesn’t really care about. So he would love to be
able to filter that out. The second person is Xu. Xu is a student at DTU. She studies
chemistry. She is one of these people that are convinced that the coronavirus is caused
by the 5g and she easily gets paranoid about anything she sees on the internet, such
as the fact that 5g causes Coronavirus.
Researcher: Who’s 5G?
Participant 4: I can’t hear you.
Participant 16: 5g not.. like the Internet.
Researcher: Okay.
Participant 4: So it’s the upgrade of 4g that...
==PAGE:445==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
435
Researcher: Yeah, okay.I thought it was an organization but it’s just yeah, I
understood it.
Participant 4: It’s a way of transferring data. So, yeah, she could even get
paranoid when she reads that the earth is flat.
So she would definitely use it in
order to, in order to limit these kind of. I mean, I wouldn’t call them fake news just
because I don’t believe in them, but people believe in them, then maybe they’re not
fake. Maybe we’re all wrong. But anyway, she could make use of that filter to limit
such information.
Researcher: Okay, next slide. Okay, so now again, before we go to the last
question, so imagine that you’re a rival company of this solution. Which weaknesses
would you highlight to make it less interesting for your two personas and what existing
alternatives would you use, would you suggest them to use instead? Timer is on.
Okay, time is up. Participant 16: , do you want to start?
Participant 16: Yes. Like weaknesses I’ve already kind of talked about before,
so I don’t need to highlight them too much. So what they will do is that they will
just do a study or a few studies and improve the mishaps and the fallacy of these
algorithms or whatever this you know, doing it. So if you’re, for instance, using it
to do a fact checks, like a reading, so then you would just, it’s really easy to kind of
prove it not functional. So because I think I personally don’t believe that this would
be possible because it’s never going to be 100
Researcher: Okay, Participant 4 ?
Participant 4: Just a little, just something to envision. I don’t think that any
other media, like any actual media that works for somebody is more reliable than like
Twitter, for example.
Participant 16: No, but yeah, then you can ask yourself, well, what the hell is
like good out there.
So just, just because they work for somebody and they work for money and these
money come from people of interest. Anyway. One of the disadvantages that I would
point out is what Participant 16 said earlier about, like privacy and how reliable
this thing is. Because basically, it’s a filter that I’m going to give access to. I’m going
give that filter access to, basically, all the content on my phone. So who would.. how
are people actually going to guarantee me that whatever is filtered for me doesn’t get
stored somewhere or that like, yeah, like. Where’s my privacy in this? There’s going
to be a filter that will decide what I want to see and how to present it to me. And
it’s actually going to know what I’m looking at, at all time. Existing alternatives,
well, I’m not too familiar with the social medias such as Facebook and Instagram,
and Tik tok or whatsoever. I’m only familiar with Twitter more or less. So in there,
you can actually filter out, they already filter out your content based on what you
follow, based on language, based on location, like lots of things. So you could just,
you could just use what’s already built in the app. Like you can just limit what you
==PAGE:446==
436
B Interview Transcripts
see by just following the trends that you want, the people that you want.
Okay, next slide. Okay, so last question. Imagine that you’re the CEO of a health
tech company, and your focus area is on tackling smartphone addiction amongst
university students, herein consider your own environment and friends. Out of these
three projects, which one would you go forward with and why? Also, if you wouldn’t
go forward with any of them. What would you do instead? You have 30 seconds.
Researcher: Okay. Time is up. Participant 4 , do you want to start?
Participant 4: Yeah. Do I necessarily have to point out one or can I combine
two of them?
Researcher: You can combine two of them.
Participant 4: Right. So what I would do then is just combine the mixture of
the second and the third solution. As I said in the video, I myself, Participant 4
, the master’s student at ITU, would definitely use the second solution in order to
be able to just throw my phone away and not think about it at all knowing that if
anything important happens, I would be notified. So I would definitely use this as a
driving force to like introduce the project to all my friends and all the people around
me. So just use this to stay focus. Use this to put your phone away. And I don’t
know like to bump up your grades or your productivity or whatsoever and then when
you are on your phone, like after work or like in your free time, then use the third
solution to not spend too much time on it. It’s just time wasted of unnecessary stuff
as...again as I mentioned, I’ve been in a situation where just out of, out of being
bored or something I’ve ended up watching a video of like which brand of batteries
last longer on YouTube. And I’m pretty sure we’ve all been there at some point. And
like out of random suggestions and and out of random things we see, we often get
carried away so while you use your phone, just make use of the third solution and
that will help you limit your distractions.
Participant 16: I will go with the second option because I think it has the lowest
threshold of success
Threshold of success?
Yes to success, as in like it can be most likely to succeed. Because third option
is absolutely ludicrous. I would, I don’t even I wouldn’t even consider it to like, for
this purpose, I can see, I can see if you can just, it’s about this.. basically effectivise..
more efficiently using what you’re using, but it’s not solving the problem, I think
as in what you’re looking for, as I said, like if you’re making the drug stronger and
better, you’re not using less of the drug, so to say. So now, the second one, I think
it’s also because it doesn’t, doesn’t require too much hardware and too much work
to make it accessible and easy for everyone to like, hop on board with everyone else.
You just need the phone. You’re using it already. So in essence, it’ss just an app
and software. So that’s why... And then you can just tweak within that application..
kind of the..work on the challenges and make the..whatever the..suggestions we came
==PAGE:447==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
437
up with, work on those. So yeah, I think the second one by far. The first one maybe
if, I mean, but again, the challenge with the first one even if you make it kind of
successful, I think the amount of overall quantity of people using it, it’s not going to
be as high again because of you know, having ring on your hand blinking, you know,
Researcher: What if it was vibrating instead of being in color. What if it was
vibrating, like the ring was doing a nudge or something so you knew ’Okay, your time
is up’.
Participant 16: I think the whole..just the concept of adding things onto your-
self.. regardless how fashionable, even if it’s a Gucci ring, whatever. I still think
that not all the rappers would have it, you know what I mean? I don’t know if that
metaphor works, but if it’s invisible, you know. If it is already in what you’re using,
you know? If you like to be blonde, it’s easier to color your hair instead of just putting
a wig on, if you have hair. Okay, maybe that metaphor doesn’t work, but you got
what I’m saying. Right?
Researcher: Yeah, I got what you are saying. Okay, cool. Okay, well, that was
the end. Thank you so much for all the insights, it was very helpful. Please send a
picture of your notes.
Participant 4: Okay.
Researcher: Yeah, even if they don’t look nice. It’s just for ourselves to docu-
ment a little bit the process, right? Because we wanted to make you guys work with
paper and pen, a little bit more. And yeah, thank you so much. And if you think
about anything in the next few days. If you are like, ’Oh my god, I should have said
that’, then just drop us a message or go across the room and say it. Yeah, thank you
so much. That’s it. Sorry, we went over time again, but..
Participant 4: It’s fine.
Researcher: cool.
Participant 16: Yeah, I’m sending the pictures now.
Researcher: Yeah.
Bye!
Transcribed by https://otter.ai
==PAGE:448==
438
B Interview Transcripts
B.4.3
Participants 30 and 31
Researcher: [random conversations]
Okay, cool. So hello, my name is Nermeen. This is Researcher . Yeah. Thank
you so much for joining us this late afternoon for talking with us. I’m going to start
off by explaining a little bit what the concept of our project is, just because yeah, you
haven’t encountered it as much.
Researcher: So the focus of the project is so we want to get insight into students
use of and relationships to our mobile devices (...) we hope to obtain insight into
university students phone usage in order to understand how we might foster health-
ier relationships to and through mobile devices. Okay. So your answers will remain
anonymous, we will not share them with external partners and we will be tape record-
ing this session just for the ease of transcription later in the process. Do you give us
permission to record this session?
Participant 31: Yes.
Participant 30: Of course.
Researcher: Researcher , you can start sharing. Okay, so today we’re going to
show you three solutions. And yeah, we are showing you a video and I’ll be giving
you some cases that you have to work on but yeah, let’s just jump into the first video
first.
[random conversations]
Ring Limiter Video [video playing]
Participant 30: Do you have the music in the background? Or is the music of
(a) Part 1
(b) Part 2
(c) Part 3
Figure B.66: Participant 30 Notes
==PAGE:449==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
439
(a) Part 1
(b) Part 2
Figure B.67: Participant 31 Notes
your computer?
Researcher: We have music in the background of the video.
Participant 30: Okay, okay.
Researcher: Okay, so this is like a Kickstarter like video. So this is why, there’s
no actual purchase, but it’s just inspired by that. Okay. Now you got introduced to
the ring. And what we first want you to do so you have a piece of paper and a pen in
front of you, we want you to describe one person that would definitely not use this.
So how do you?
Participant 30: Can it be us?
Researcher: Yeah, it can be yourself.
Participant 30: Okay, okay.
Researcher: And describe how this person looks, name, gender. What do they
study? Where do they study? What are their interests? Why would they not use
it? We’re doing our thesis on university students, so please do it with the student
==PAGE:450==
440
B Interview Transcripts
population. You can draw, you can write down, you do whatever. I’m turning on the
timer now. 90 seconds.
Okay, time is up. Participant 31 , do you want to start off?
Participant 31: Yes, um, I think I’m seeing like a person who is maybe very
simple. A simple student, I don’t know, like, if I don’t know if I can, like, define the
gender, it can be both women and men for me. And I see them not studying (...) I
see them not studying something tech, maybe. Maybe something... For example, I
don’t know if I would use it, because I think it was a little bit complicated maybe
with the app and also like I, I wrote down that you have to kind of admit to yourself
that you have like, some kind of lack of self control in regards to like you using your
your cell phone. And so yeah, I didn’t write any more down, actually. And maybe
it was like a little bit too complicated, maybe to use with the app and for me, for
example.Yeah.
Researcher: Okay, cool.
Participant 30: Should I go for it?
Researcher: Yeah.
Participant 30: I will put myself as an example. Because even though the idea
is super interesting, and it can help people to.. that they take a lot of breaks and
they want to just set a time on it. For me, for example, it doesn’t. It has no sense
to havea device that is going to tell me when I have to go back to do something. For
example, I could do that with my phone now, putting like an alarm. I never do that.
I don’t like to be attached to any kind of restriction. So even taking a break, I’m
taking a break because I want. In my case, I study electrical engineering at DTU.
And my kind of interests I have is, again, hanging out with people and I love to hang
out with people, cooking, sports. And having this kind of device just to settle my..
because in my life, I would say, I don’t have my schedule on every, every morning
what I would do. So I don’t like to set times for everything I do.
Researcher: Okay. Next slide. Okay, so now I want you to imagine that you’re
the project lead for the solution. So you’ve been given this ring and you’re the project
leader. What are the strengths that you would highlight to make it more interesting
for the persona that you just discussed and would you add any extra features to make
the solution more attractive. If yes, what? You have 60 seconds. Please use the paper
and pen to document your findings because we will use them in our thesis.
Okay, time is up. Participant 30 , do you want to start off this time?
Yeah. The strengths I can see in this device is that it suits very well, because
it’s a ring. So it will never give a problem to whoever user wants to use it. So it’s
very.. So apart from being sold as a device that it can help you with a timer of how
to schedule your brakes. I would say it is interesting that it’s just a ring. And it’s
not like a big device that it can be uncomfortable for you. So I’ll highlight that. And
the extra feature I would add to this device, in my case, for example, I don’t know if
==PAGE:451==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
441
I like to wear rings, I would think having a fashion ring, not a fashion like a normal
ring that it can look fancy even though you’re not using it for the purpose of having
this break things. I think that would be nice.
Participant 31: Actually wrote down, like highlighting that it is a ring that it
doesn’t like, doesn’t take a lot of like space. It’s not a huge thing. It’s just a little ring
that can help you and it’s easy to look down and you’re already using your hand so
you can just look at your finger whenever and I think it’s cool that it changes color. I
really like that. So I would highlight that. And I don’t know if I would add any extra
features other than like highlighting the thing that Participant 30 said. If they can
make another design I don’t know, which kind of design the ring was supposed to be
just like a round thing or are there other designs. For example, like..
Researcher: We haven’t thought of any designs yet..
Participant 31: okay, for example, like I’m into, like, it could be like a little
rock and that rock could change color or something. I don’t know, to make it more
like, versatile for..
Researcher: Maybe just to ask like a challenging question. You said earlier that
you are a person that would not use this ring. It’s complicated, but then you didn’t
address the complicity. Like how the complicity could become a strength through
other measures. So I don’t know if it did make sense but how could you make..?
Participant 31: I think it’s like for myself, I have like a hard time like, like, you
know, with the app watches and all the tech things like if I have to connect like a
device to an app, I have like difficulties like using that. So that’s why I thought it
was a little bit complicated.
Researcher: Okay, now we’re going to turn things a bit around. So next slide.
Now I want you to describe one person that will definitely use it. So that will have
any usage for it. And so the same drill, how do they look, name gender, what, where,
interests and why would they use it? I’m setting the time up now.
Okay, time is up. Participant 31 , so do you want to start off this time?
Participant 31: Yes. I’m feeling I’m becoming like very stereotypical, but I
thought of like this person type that could be maybe a girl or woman and she could
be into like, the blogging world, if that makes sense. And she could be like studying at
CBS or anything like management wise and she’s into social media so she’s interested
in like lifestyle and also like tech and how that can like help improve your life and
and she would use it because she needs to define her time on social media because
she also wants to be like present in real life.
Researcher: Okay, so blogger.
Participant 31: Yeah, I thought of like this blogger because, like if you make a
fashionable ring, it can be like, like a new thing, to like, it’s cool to be offline with
this ring. You know what I mean?So to make it like fashionable?
==PAGE:452==
442
B Interview Transcripts
Unknown Speaker In my case, I thought about my sister. I don’t know why. My
sister, she’s a female, but I would say that this ring can work in whatever gender as
long as you like to wear rings. She is studying Public Relations in Barcelona and her
interests are like I would say everything and nothing at the same time. So it’s the
kind of person that is.. everything is fine for her. And I would say that she would use
it because this ring at the end if you have a lack of motivation, for example, when you
are studying when you are working, and you are like I don’t want to work.. if you, if
you have this ring at the end, it can give you just a bit of motivation of saying ’Okay,
I’m gonna take a break of half an hour and then I’m going to go in’ and then having..
my sister is the kind of person that having time completely scheduled.. completely
opposite of me.. is super fine. So I will say for people that they like to just schedule
their time to know what they’re going to do and to follow like some steps, this device
will help them.
Researcher: Okay. So now, I want you to imagine that you are a rival company
of the solution. So you have a rivaling solution, and which weaknesses would you
highlight to make it less interesting to your persona that you just described, and
what existing alternatives would you suggest instead. You have 60 seconds
Okay, time is up. Participant 30 do you want to start?
Participant 30: I would say that companies that are rivals to this device, they
will...that it’s only useful for people that they like to wear rings. I would say it’s not
going to be used for people that they never use it. They can be.. It’s going to be used
as well for people that they are keen on technology. As, as we were saying before,
and if you don’t know, if you don’t like to play with technology and you need an app
to do everything, you will kind of struggle a bit and can say like, I don’t want to use
it. So the existing alternatives that I would suggest instead would be that the idea
to keep it the same. But instead of using a ring, give me something more suitable for
everyone. I don’t know what. maybe I don’t know an app for the phone. It does the
same with light and you put the phone on the table. I was thinking about that and
something that is like only one device because if you use the phone, it’s more easy,
it’s easier for the people to just set all the instructions they need to go through.
Researcher: Okay, are any existing alternatives? So you mentioned the phone?
Participant 30: No, I don’t have yet.
Researcher: Okay, cool. Participant 31 ?
Participant 31: Well, I wrote down that yeah, it’s, it’s meant for people who
like to wear rings. So not all can use them. And I wrote down that the exisitng
alternatives can be like, I use like the time stop thing on the iPhone, just like you set
a time and for example, instead of timeout I can only be one hour on Instagram or
anything else. So that’s, that’s the thing I use, for example, and then it just stops
like there comes like a notification that says like, now you have used your time. So..
Researcher: Okay, cool. So now we are on to the next solution.
==PAGE:453==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
443
Digital Friend Video [video playing]
Researcher: Okay, so that’s the second solution. We’re going to go through the
same structure as we did before. So first I’m going to ask you to describe one person
that would not use this.
Okay, time is up. Participant 31 , do you want to start?
Participant 31: Yes. Well, I know that we.. We’re still in the student part,
right. I had to like talk. Yeah. Because then I would have said like, maybe an elderly
person would not use it so much. But I think about actually my brother. I don’t
think he would use it because he’s not using his phone so much. And like he’s in high
school. And he’s a male. And where does he study? He’s studying in Copenhagen
and his interests is a lot on like gaming. So he just uses his time on gaming and he
will not use it because he simply does not use his phone so much. So that’s it, but
otherwise, I actually think it’s like very good-
Researcher: What about you Participant 30 ?
Participant 30: In this case, I think because this app would be very useful for
people that they are.. they believe that they are addicted to the phone and they
want to change it. But otherwise, there is like a lot of people that even though they
are addicted to the phone, they don’t accept it. So this app for people... To put
an example, I can put myself again, sorry for that. But I would put myself again,
because even though I use the phone, for example, when it’s quarantine time, so just
like COVID video just came up. When you are at home and you have many things
to do, and you have friends. At the end,the use that you give to the phone is the use
is for your personality. So it’s like, as long as the use of the phone doesn’t affect your
personal life, meaning that you’re with friends at home, and instead of being with
your friends, you are with your phone, then you will be aware of this application. For
example, in my case, I think that the use of the phone I use.. I use this phone only
for self pressure. And I don’t think, I just avoid anything else. So I wouldn’t use it
because it will give me nothing because I know that, I know that I am I’m not afraid
about how much time I’m using the phone or worried about it. So I would think it’s
like..
Researcher: But the app is not only for controlling your screentime. It’s also..
so the alone mode is supposed to be this mindfulness app so that you spend like not..
just focus your time on something not technological so you do something outside of
this sphere.
Participant 30: Are we just thinking about the specific situation that we live in
right now with the COVID or in general?
Researcher: It was just an example to position the video in but for example,
because we don’t really go into the Alone Mode too much in the video but it’s like
an active mindfulness. And so, when you activate it, then you can allow only certain
persons to contact you in case of emergencies. So you can allow keywords. So for
==PAGE:454==
444
B Interview Transcripts
example, if the word emergency, hospital or urgent comes up in your deactivated
notifications, then you got them, but otherwise you would only be able to listen to
meditation, music or podcasts. Or just go for a walk so your phone would be on
complete standby mode. Therethe use scenario is not only to ’oh, I’m addicted, I
need to spend less’. But there is more ’Hey, I’m, I take some time away from my
phone’
Participant 30: Because if that’s the idea, I was thinking that the idea is mag-
nifique because at the end, since we are.. so the things that we are young people I’m
talking about, like student life. So being young people that we have been grown up
by phones, so we already know a lot of it and we spend a lot of time. So being aware
of what is outside is good as well. So having this app that says to you, okay, the
phone is just to emergency calls, do for your life, forget about the phone. It’s super
nice.
Researcher: Okay, cool. So next part. So now again, imagine you’re the project
lead for these solutions, which strengths would you highlights to make it more inter-
esting for your persona and would you add any extra features. If yes, what? I’m
putting a timer on
Okay, time is up.
Participant 30 , do you want to start?
Participant 30: Strength I would highlight is the idea of living without the phone
not being dependent on the phone. So having an app that it’s able to just allow you
to use the phone with a good purpose, I think it’s a super good idea. What I would
add like as an extra feature, maybe to make it as well as a game, as how, how far I
can push in this isolation mode. So to be aware of yourself that I don’t need a phone
to survive, because at the end, the main thing about the phone is communication,
right? So you can call your friends and you can hang out. So if you can get these
basic modes, where it just goes that you call, you meet, and all the social media,
everything else is out. And you make this kind of game that you can push it as far
as you can. I think it could be nice.
Researcher: Okay. Participant 31 ?
Participant 31: Well, I would highlight the mindfulness piece of it, I think. I
think that was that was quite nice. And I really like that you can, like get an overview
of how much time you’re actually spending on your phone. Because sometimes we
actually forget how much hours we like spend on the phone. So it’s good, like, just to
get like, like an overview of how much time you’re spending on your phone and like,
compare that to like spending on something else, for example, and there you like, take
the mindfulness on. And like get it together and say like, Okay, if you spend like one
hour here, you can do yoga one hour or anything like, like, spend your time otherwise
.Yeah. And add any other extra features, maybe I would build on the mindfulness.
Do something there. I don’t know quite what that should be. But expanding that
universe maybe. So you can like, transfer those hours into the mindfulness.
==PAGE:455==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
445
Researcher: Okay. Cool. Okay, next slide. Now again, we want you to describe
one person that would definitely use it. So turn the tables.
Okay, time is up. Participant 31 , do you want to start?
Participant 31: Yes, well, I would definitely, definitely use it myself. I study
journalism. So my interests are like politics. I’m also into social media, art and music
and so on. And I would use it because as I said, I’m already actually using it. I really
like to have an overview of how much time I’m spending. And right now, for example,
I’m trying to like use my time a little bit more wisely. And I just deactivated my
Instagram account, for example, because I felt that I was spending countless hours
just scrolling into, into nothing. So that was also like a challenging thing for me and
it’s actually going quite good. So yeah, I would use it to get like an overview. And
yeah.
Researcher: Okay. Participant 30 ?
Participant 30: So in my case, I would like to share more than one person
because it came to my mind more than one. So first of all, I would say is like for
people who are very supportive that they don’t want to pay attention on the phone,
even though they have some social media, and they want to be completely isolated in
that. I think this app would be super helpful then to just have a phone with whatever
social media whenever they want. And meanwhile, I put these mindful mode and then
i forget. And the other people I would like to say that... can take all kind of people.
Doesn’t matter I would say neither the age, neither what kind of studies they have
and where is it then. And I would say people as well that they believe themselves,
that they have a problem with the phone and they want to change. So this kind of
people that they want to change the problem they have of ’I spent too much time in
the phone, I don’t know how to solve it’, and I think this tool would be super nice
for them to at least start somewhere.
Researcher: Okay, cool. So next slide. Okay, so now again, imagine that you’re
rival company of these solutions. Which weaknesses would you highlight to the person
that is interested in getting this and what existing alternatives would you suggest
instead? 60 seconds
Unknown Speaker Okay, time is up. Participant 30 , do you want to start?
Unknown Speaker This answer is not..so I would say that the weakness that they
can just highlight from it, it’s like the scam companies that they want to make you
think that whoever is selling this app is selling it because they are saying to you that
you have a problem. So it’s kind of like you need..they’re selling you that because they
think that you are super attached to social media while this is not what is happening
to you, so as an existing alternative they will say to you, for example, they will give
extra mindful courses, through apps through phone onsocial media, just to make the
social media even bigger. That’s the only project now because I think that the idea
of the screen time is super useful... I don’t see any bad, any weakness.
==PAGE:456==
446
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Okay, cool. What about you, Participant 31 ?
Participant 31: I don’t see any weaknesses, like I use it myself. But I can see like,
yeah, I wasn’t really thinking of like how I should define a weakness by it because it’s
not like it’s just like an overview for me. And I can see like the thing if, if it becomes
like that you just spend your hours somewhere else on social media, for example, just
do mindfulness, it’s like, in the end it’s going to be like the same thing. Maybe. Yeah.
And for existing alternatives, I don’t know if I’ve seen any alternative to this. No,
maybe there’s like an app or something else. I don’t know. I haven’t come across.
Okay.
Researcher: Now on to the last solution.
Content Digest Video [video playing]
Researcher: Does this idea makes sense because it’s one of the more complicated
ones.
Participant 30: Yeah. Let’s gonna summarize it. So basically what it does is
whenever you watching Twitter or Instagram, it filters what you’re watching.
Researcher: Yeah, to some degree. So basically, you get this app and it gets
built into your settings, and then you choose applications you want it to be turned
on. And then, when you go inside this social media application, or yeah, so Twitter,
for example, you could choose which categories or information categories that you’re
interested in, so if it’s a football club or something like that. So you help filter out
and it also only shows you the highlights, so you don’t have to scroll through and
look for information you want. You just get what you want, like as information, and
it’s like a more compact version of it so that you don’t, you’re like okay, you’ve seen
these top five articles about football?
Participant 30: Yeah. But this is specific for someone who wants to know a lot
of information or something, right?
Researcher: No, so it’s inspired by, you know on social media and a lot of apps
are built on this infinite content loop. So you can scroll forever. You can swipe forever,
whether it’s Instagram or YouTube or Twitter. And so it’s kind of to highlight so
instead of you losing track of time and just scrolling endlessly.. so getting just the
key information from what you want.
Participant 30: But this key information at the end is going to be a scroll that
is going to be endless as well of this key information, right?
Researcher: No, so the thing is..
Participant 30: There’s a limit?
Researcher: There’s a limit and it shows you these are the highlights for today.
Like when you reach the end of your scroll, it shows you these are the highlights
today you are done, a little bit like on Instagram, I don’t know if you’ve seen it but
on Instagram at some point, if, after a few scrolls, then it shows that you have seen
==PAGE:457==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
447
the highlights for today and here, inspired by the same thing, it would show you the
most interesting like you will filter out the articles but then you’ll also be like ’ Hey,
this is done, you’re done’.
Participant 30: And does it give you the chance to jump to other higlights.
Does it give you the chance to jump to other higlights later?
Researcher: Yeah, you can choose another category.
Participant 30: Okay, it’s not like it forbids you to do it.
Researcher: No, no. Okay, so based on this, describe one person that would not
use it. I’m putting a timer on.
[random conversations]
Okay, time is up. Participant 31 , do you want to start?
Participant 30: Good luck!
Participant 31: Yeah, this one is like a little more difficult for me. Who wouldn’t
use it? Because I feel like it’s, it’s actually quite good that you can.. Yeah, categorize
what you want to see and like be the own, like in charge of what is thrown at your
face. But on the other hand, if I should take myself maybe as an example, maybe I
would feel like I was missing something, if I limited myself into categories, maybe I
would get some kind of FOMO of missing out of in anything else. And maybe if I
categorize my own interests in.. For example, I only want to see this, this and this, I
think that maybe I could be missing something else. And I would only like cleanse
myself those like categories and I wouldn’t evolve or use social media in a different
way. Because maybe sometimes when you go through these endless hours of like you,
you just you also discover a lot of new things. You may be discovering new music,
new artists, new people that you can get inspired. So maybe by limiting yourself
into categories, it wouldn’t broaden your perspective. Or maybe you wouldn’t. You
would just use social media the same way every day and you would see maybe the
same things every day. if that makes sense. I think this was this one was like a little
bit challenging for me.
Researcher: Yeah, but you’re talking about information bubble, so being stuck
in this?
Participant 31: Yeah, exactly. I mean, you see, you see different things maybe
every day, but it’s like under the same category, like, if I were to like, say, Okay, ’I
want to see about Coronavirus every day’ like it, uou know, it’s like, you don’t get,
yeah..
Researcher: Okay, cool. Participant 30 ?
Participant 30: I think my opinion is gonna be similar to Participant 31 now
because the thing is that this app is for people that they [don’t] like to get any Tweets..
with one.. they will have like.. when at the end, they might. But at the end, the
good thing about Twiiter I would say is that you can finish looking for something
==PAGE:458==
448
B Interview Transcripts
completely different. But you have arrived there through the, whatever news you
were looking for. So just setting something and adjusting something into one specific
feature will be like, maybe you will miss a lot of information in the meanwhile. So
people that they want to use in social media, like something that to just stay with it,
stay at home looking at it and then just discovering something with no specific aim.
I would say that these people that they have no specific aim on looking in Instagram
and Twitter because like okay, I want to know about football. I want to know about
food. I want to know like, I want to see what is happening, I will say it’s not useful
for these people.
Researcher: Okay. Next slide. Imagine that you are the Project Lead for the
solution. So which strengths would you highlight to make it more interesting for the
persona you just described and would you add any extra features? I’m putting a
timer on.
Participant 30: [random conversations]
Researcher: Cool, time is up. Participant 31 , you want to start?
Participant 31: Yes. Well, I was thinking that if we talk about, for example,
using social media in regards to information search, it’s quite a good example of
limiting yourself. It’s gonna like, yeah, you don’t have to spend so much hours on like
if I were to write an article and I wanted to find some information on social media, I
could plug this in. I can say I want to know about that, that and that, that would
like limit my search, you know, like looking for a scientific article or something you..
maybe like, that could be an extra feature. It could be like using some search words
or anything that could like numb your search more down or something. Yeah, I don’t
have anything else.
Participant 30: So I would say as a strength is to highlight the quality of the
content that you’re digesting. So.. if you’re looking for some content that.. to ensure
that your customers will have like the best content of what they’re looking for. The
other thing is like a difficult task, but highlighting that would make like people interest
on this digesting content. And as a feature, I would say that apart from the content,
so instead of like when you go for the engine, and you put like the content you’re
looking for, so imagine that you’re looking for some, I don’t know, just to give the
example that you gave before: football, right? So that you have fun in this football,
like a very specific content, but then when you finish with your scrolling, then you
have another feature that will give you the chance if you want to go for another digest
content related to football, whatever for example sports, so you can get like a lead
that it will give you another like scrolling page with the limit that it would have a
limit but with like a very, with a content with a lot of quality. So I would say that..
like as a tool that it gives like the customer like quality news, in order to [filter] like
this bullshit that there is nowadays in the social media, everywhere.
Researcher: Okay, cool. Next. Describe one person that would definitely use it
then.
==PAGE:459==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
449
Okay, Participant 30 , do you want to start?
Participant 30: So here I think, if we compare it with the other two, this one
would be part of like more generic people like there is not a specific people that they
will not use it or they will use it. So, I would say that people that they will use it
will be people that they are looking for something very specific. So, they are looking
for specific content that they only want to get information about that and they don’t
want to get anything else. So, it’s a good tool for it. As well as this is a good tool for
example, the video you put, the guy, the wolf or whatever, Diego. Diego, it’s a good
tool for him to like.. it’s a person that is spending all the time scrolling out scam
news. And he can be forever there, it’ss a good tool to just restrict and people’s time
in the device. I would say that, that’s it and people that they are tired to have this
news. A lot of news about nothing. They want more quality news, I would say that
this is the app for that.
Participant 31: Okay, cool. What about you? Well, I thought about myself
under like exam periods where I still want to be on social media, but I want to have
it restricted. I want to see what my friends are doing. I want to see the things I’m
interested in but I don’t really want to see anything else because I know that I will
have like this subconscious like scrolling thing going on. So yeah, that’s more like it.
Researcher: Okay, cool. Next slide. So imagine that you are a rival company of
this solution. So last thing before the final question. So which weaknesses would you
highlight to make it less interesting for your persona? And what existing alternatives
would you use instead?
Okay, time is up. Participant 30 , do you want to start?
Participant 30: Yeah. I would say that the weakness that they will highlight
would be how good is the engine? I would say is about tech, the answer I’m giving
but it’s like how good is the engine behind that to filter all this content like as a
machine learning or whatever they using to do it? How efficient is it? so I think
they can look for leaks there.. saying like, ’Okay, they are saying to you that they
are like highlighting something but then at the end, you get a lot of scam news that
you don’t want or you get data that you don’t want’. And as an existing alternative,
I would suggest, for example, talking about the Instagram, sometimes in Instagram,
you’d like to see some very specific people, it is true that Instagram already when you
enter, it will give you people that you will see the most. But in, as Participant 31
was saying, in exams period, it would be a good alternative to just select the people
you want to see..no one else, even though you’re following 2000 people. So to make,
like more specific for you, yeah. That would be it. Sorry for my short answer here.
Researcher: No, no, it’s fine. Participant 31 ?
Participant 31: Well, I thought about some of the things I said like in the first
question, maybe the thing about like, How good is restricting yourself and you put
yourself into little boxes if you’re missing something. It just becomes the same. Yeah.
And I don’t know about existing alternatives. I didn’t think about that. Sorry for
==PAGE:460==
450
B Interview Transcripts
my very short answers.
Researcher: No, it’s fine.
Last question, now imagine that you’re the CEO
of a health tech company, your new focus area is on tackling smartphone addiction
amongst university students. So herein, consider your own environment and friends.
Out of these three projects, which one would you go forward with? And why? Also, if
you wouldn’t go forward with any of these projects, why again, but also what would
you do instead? You have 30 seconds.
[random conversations]
Okay, time is up. Participant 31 , do you wanna start?
Participant 31: Yeah, I think I would go forward with the plugin. Actually.
Researcher: The last one?
Participant 31: Yeah. The last one. It got me the most I think. And the reason
why is because I think it’s quite interesting. Like, the dilemma of like, also because
first of all, it’s a plugin you can always like, or you can always get it away, right?
Researcher: But both the second idea and the third idea are plugins.
Participant 31: Okay, yeah, good. See, I’m not like tech [person] But yeah, I
think I would, I would choose like, if I was the CEO, I would choose the last one.
And even though the other ones were quite good as well. I just like the idea of having
like a plug in where you can use it also as a, as an information search. Yeah. Now
that was quite selfish of me thinking that way but..
Researcher: How does it tackle the area of smartphone addiction, then?
Participant 31: Um you could tackle it by like I saw like Diego, he didn’t use
it as much I think which is quite good, you just see the content you want to see, you
don’t spend endless hours. Your girlfriend don’t get mad at you. And I see it as a
way of like, just shorting your time and see what you want to see. That could help
like with addiction
Researcher: So not lose track of time?
Participant 31: Yeah, I think like that’s the perspective not lose track of time,
getting more like an overview of what you’re like using time on.
Researcher: So quality over quantity?
Participant 31: Yeah. And just also like limiting your time. And you can do
that by like choosing what you want to see, so you can like be in control of what
you’re actually using your phone [for].
Participant 30: I would definitely go for the second one. Because, first of all for
the smartphone addiction, the tool is giving is..basically you can use the phonebut
you will have no feature on the phone. So, it would be like having a stone in your
hand. And it will be like very useful because there is like this characteristic that you
==PAGE:461==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
451
can put something like calling emergency or calling the doctor, whatever, it will be
keep going. Right. So as a CEO of a health tech company, I think in selling this app,
where you can see first of all, which is the use that you are spending in your phone, in
social life, in social media, when reading newspapers, in playing games in your phone,
whatever. Plus, being able to enter in this mindful mode, where you can choose to
stop using the phone and do something else, I think is the one I would go for it.
Researcher: Okay, perfect.
So thank you so much.
That’s the end of the
interview. If you have any additional comments or insights that come up in the next
few days, please share them with us. You know my contact information. And please
take a picture of your notes because we want to use them for documenting our Master
this.
Participant 30: Good luck with this.
Researcher: And yeah, thank you so much for joining us.
Participant 30: No problem.
Participant 31: You’re welcome!
Researcher: Thank you and have a nice weekend as well.
Participant 30: Thank you guys.
Participant 31: Thank you.
==PAGE:462==
452
B Interview Transcripts
B.4.4
Participants 9 and 22
Ring limiter Researcher: : Describe 1 person who will not use this idea and why?
Participant 9: : I don’t think there is a specific gender.
I just think that
probably man will use it less. I think that the person who will use it would have
some kind of interactive degree, some type of art, dance. Something that is different
from the typical textbook study. In developed countries. So they will not use it since
most of their time is related to dancing for example, where they do not use their
phones.
Participant 22: : I focused more on the fact that it is a ring. So probably this
will be Daniel, he is in his 20ties and studies business. I imagine that this person is
into sports so these kinds of people don’t usually wear any kind of accessories, just
because it is not comfortable to be fully active while wearing them.
Researcher: : Imagine that you are the project lead for this solution. Which are
the strengths of this solution?
Participant 22: : It will allow you to focus more on things that you love so it
will help you not get distracted. An extra feature that I would add - probably for
some it will be uncomfortable wearing ring all the time, so if it is made from some
kind of material that is not steel or something that is more comfortable for the finger.
Participant 9: : If you can have some sort of smartwatch, why can’t you just
(a) Part 1
(b) Part 2
Figure B.68: Participant 9 Notes
==PAGE:463==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
453
(a) Part 1
(b) Part 2
Figure B.69: Participant 22 Notes
wear your smartwatch instead of the ring. In the essence of tracking activities. I want
to highlight that it is small and doable.
Researcher: : Describe 1 person who will definitely use it
Participant 9: : I still think that it will be generally girls who will use it. I
think somebody from the younger generation, maybe late high school or early stage
of university. It will be from developed countries as well. The younger generation
would like to keep up with the trends and I don’t somebody who has a full-time job
will use it - because you kind of develop your own mechanisms and don’t need to
track your behavior.
Participant 22: : I agree. I think that the person who will use it will be focused
on building some kind of mechanisms in order to be more productive and focused.
The interests of this persona will be technologies and will want to be the first to use
==PAGE:464==
454
B Interview Transcripts
these things.
Researcher: : Imagine that you are the project lead for this solution. Which
are the weaknesses of this solution? What existing alternatives would you suggest
instead?
Participant 9: : You can lose it easily. Another point could be that it might be
expensive. And in order to use it, you need to use your phone. So this might lead to
using your phone more than expected. Maybe an alternative could be, for example,
couple of years ago Nissan included a feature where you put your phone aside. There
was a metallic box next to the driver where you put your phone and basically you
don’t receive any notifications since no signal was going through this box. Something
as simple as that might help.
Participant 22: : I think there are a small number of people who might use it.
Even if you focus on students, I think that it will be hard to find students who want
to use it and afford it. Because a lot of students don’t have high paid jobs. Existing
alternatives - if you can make it as an application or app feature, you don’t need to
use a ring. Even if it is build in your smartwatch, I think that the watch is more
multifunctional than a ring.
Challenge application + Alone mode Researcher: : Describe 1 person who will
not use this idea and why?
Participant 22: : The person I imagine that will not use this solution is some-
body in their late teen years. Started university - I imagine somebody who is using
social media a lot. Their interests are online, they are comfortable there so they don’t
Researcher: if they should use their time in something else.
Participant 9: : I think the opposite. I think older students because as you get
older you kind of navigate through channels you are interested in so you don’t get
that much lost. It could be a wide range of things they could study. If you are an
active person you don’t intend to use your phone that much. If you have a job on
top of your studies so you will spend less time on your phone if you study and work
because you don’t have enough time.
Researcher: : Imagine that you are the project lead for this solution. Which are
the strengths of this solution?
Participant 9: : It is easy to apply. You just go to the app settings and allow it.
It could be applied to any app. I don’t know if I would add another feature. Maybe
if there is a way it blocks ads because ads are distracting and you click on things and
kind of lose track of time.
Participant 22: : This app is trying all the things that you can do. I will use it.
Especially now, it will encourage me to go for a walk or something like that. I would
not add an extra feature.
Researcher: : Describe 1 person who will definitely use it
==PAGE:465==
B.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2 - Final Prototype Solution
455
Participant 9: : The person who I imagine is somebody who is trying to change
their personal habits and is interested in personal growth and mindfulness. Someone
who’s interested in techniques on how to be more productive or how to waste less
time um and they would use it because it’s a tool to remove unnecessary distractions
from your life.
Participant 22: : I think the same thing it’s not really about the look or the
gender for this one. for what they study I think it would potentially be like com-
munication digital marketing or media even like journalism. I think it’s about time
management.
Researcher: : Imagine that you are the project lead for this solution. Which
are the weaknesses of this solution? What existing alternatives would you suggest
instead?
Participant 9: : You can show them that it is a good way for them to spend
less time on social media.
Participant 22: : A weakness is that you have to find a person who has a
problem with social media. Existing alternatives - the feature that shows you how
much time you spend on your phone is a good alternative.
Content digest Researcher: : Describe 1 person who will not use this idea and
why?
Participant 9: : Somebody who is not that invested in social media. So you
would not need that feature since you are not using social media that often.
Participant 22: : Knowing that this app exists I am not sure why people would
not use it. So I thought of somebody who is studying communications and journalisms
and they want to be up to date with what is going on and being constantly updated.
And they don’t trust this filter and want to know all the news related to the interested
topic.
Researcher: : Imagine that you are the project lead for this solution. Which are
the strengths of this solution?
Participant 9: : I think it is a good reminder of how much time you spend on
social media. Phone time is more about the general idea where you can spend time
checking your email or answering messages which I think is not the same. Once it
comes at the end of the highlights it actually closes the app.
Participant 22: : Filtering all the information and picking only the most im-
portant information. An extra feature would be some kind of regulator where you
can choose if you want to filter it a lot or not that much - you can choose chunks of
information you want to receive.
Researcher: : Describe 1 person who will definitely use it
Participant 22: : I think that it would be somebody who is interested in what
is going on on social media but at the same time doesn’t want to spend that much
==PAGE:466==
456
B Interview Transcripts
time there. They have trouble finding what is relevant information and important
news. Regardless gender and age - I don’t think that is that much relevant.
Participant 9: : I agree about the focus aspect. It could be a good idea for
somebody who gets distracted easily. And by filtering the information it will kind of
decrease the distraction in social media. I think anybody who has difficulties focusing
will benefit from that.
Researcher: : Imagine that you are the project lead for this solution. Which
are the weaknesses of this solution? What existing alternatives would you suggest
instead?
Participant 9: : I think a weakness would be that it is for people who use social
media users - you need to use Instagram, Facebook, Twitter a lot in order to be
effective. An existing alternative - maybe the app where it shows you how much time
you have spent on the different apps. It obviously is not the same thing but it could
be a potential alternative.
Participant 22: : For somebody who is doing journalism for example could be
a bad thing because they might miss important news since the phone might filter
something that it thinks is not relevant for you but at the same time it is. Existing
alternative - I know that Instagram has some kind of a limiter.
Researcher: : Which one of these 3 projects, which one would you go forward
with and why? If not, then why again?
Participant 22: : Out of these 3 projects, I would choose the Challenge app
+ Alone mode. I would choose that one because I think that it will add little more
motivation for personal growth and trying new things. Also the phone can suggest
things that you want to do from the list you have provided.
Participant 9: : I think I will go for the Content digest. Even though I do like
the Challenge app idea, sometimes you are not on your phone to waste time - a lot
of people use their phone to relax and work. It can be relevant to what your day has
been like. I think that most people use their phone when they are bored so sometimes
it might not be relevant. I don’t think ıwill buy the ring. I don’t own that much
technology so I don’t think I want to invest in that. If there are other ways of what
that ring does I will go for that.
Participant 22: : I would not use the ring because it is just another gadged.
After 3 years there probably will be another version of it and the current want that
I have will probably end up in my drawer and me not using it. So I don’t think that
it will be something that I want to spend my money on.
==PAGE:467==
B.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
457
B.5
Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
B.5.1
Participants 32
Researcher: How does your idea Alone Mode look like?
Participant 32: I would use it for mindfulness and productivity.
Researcher: Which apps would you allow?
Participant 32: I would like to have notifications from my calendar (to keep
track of my tasks) and emails (to keep track for mails from colleagues)
Researcher: Which contacts would you allow?
Participant 32: Close friends and colleagues that I am working with now. Bud-
dies in the groups I am currently working with. It depends on my current working
situation.
Researcher: When would you want it to be on? And, when do you want it to
be off?
Participant 32: I think I would like it to be on during some kind of period and
also it will be nice if I can adjust that period for the specific days. I would like it
to be time-scheduled. I would like it to be off during the evenings, lunch breaks also
weekends. I want to be connected to my social media and I want to get notifications
from there. Maybe during the weekends not when I am studying, so I would not like
to get notifications.
Researcher: Where would you want it situated? Should it be easily accessible?
Participant 32: I would like it to be in the drop-down menu on the top.
Researcher: Are there any features that you think are very important to include?
Participant 32: I don’t have any thoughts. I would like not to have any adds.
Researcher: Do you have design preferences?
Participant 32: I want it to be consistent with my phone design.
PART 2
Researcher: From your drop-down menu, click on Alone Mode and turn it on.
Participant 32: It’s pretty easy to follow.
Researcher: Select “No one” to be able to contact you when in Alone Mode.
Participant 32: I would click on “Everyone” and I will choose “No one” and I
will press “OK”
Researcher: Click add button to select apps which will be allowed to use when
in Alone Mode. Activate “Headspace” and “Spotify” (in the same order)
Participant 32: I would click on the plus icon.
I would click on the switch
==PAGE:468==
458
B Interview Transcripts
buttons next to Headspace and Spotify icons.
Researcher: Go back to “Alone Mode” settings
Participant 32: I would click on the top arrow to go back.
Researcher: Click add button to add “Alert keywords” . Add ‘emergency’ as a
new alert keyword
Participant 32: I would click on the second plus. Then I would click on “add
keywords” and type “emergency” and I would click on the bottom-right arrow circle
to add the keyword.
Researcher: Select ‘emergency’ to be part of your keywords and then Go back
Participant 32: Then I would select it and click on the top arrow in order to go
back.
Researcher: Describe what you see. Do the categories make sense? Is it aesthet-
ically pleasing? Does it give you a good overview?
Participant 32: I see all the choices I made. All the apps I want to be active
and the keywords I want people to use in order to contact me. The categories make
sense. And yes, it gives me a good overview.
Researcher: Go back to your Home Page
I would click on the top arrow.
Researcher: Describe what you see - Did you notice the greyscaled apps? What
do you think of this?
Participant 32: I see all my apps being blurry. And I see normal icons for the
apps I chose to be active. I haven’t seen the icon next to the apps’s title.
Researcher: Open “YouTube” and after that cancel the pop-up notification
Participant 32: I will try to click on the “YouTube” icon. I see a notification
saying that I should continue my alone mode. I think this kind of pop-up notification
will motivate me not to continue with YouTube. Customizing the pop-up notification
would be a good idea, but I think that I will be too lazy to do that.
Researcher: Open “Headspace” (Let’s assume that you are trying to spend some
Alone time and meditate). While you are meditating, you receive a notification. (Have
to click on the screen so you can see the alert notification). Describe what you see
Researcher: Does this screen make sense for you? Do you understand that the
alone mode when you reply to the message?
Researcher: Would you prefer if the alone mode was automatically turned off
and you directly saw the message with the emergency keyword?
Participant 32: I see a notification from Alone Mode and I see that I have
received a mail from somebody who used “emergency” in his mail. I would also want
==PAGE:469==
B.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
459
to see some part of the message. Like Google for example - seeing the first part of
the message when I receive it.
I actually don’t want to see that it is from Alone Mode, I would just want to see
the message.
I want to approve when my Alone Mode is turned off and if I reply I don’t want the
Alone Mode to be turned off automatically. I didn’t know that from the beginning.
Maybe it is a good idea to put some text which will tell you that it will get turned
off automatically.
Researcher: What do you think of this feature? Would you use it?
Participant 32: It looks very similar to Samsung’s Focus Mode, but yours have
some new features added (like turning off). I will use it during my studies. I think it
is a nice idea. I am a bit afraid of my privacy because this means that the app will
read all my messages in order to see if alert keyword has been used.
Researcher: Would this help you foster a healthier relationship with your smart-
phone?
Participant 32: I think it might be. The problem is that in case I can’t access
my YouTube from my phone I might just go to my laptop.
==PAGE:470==
460
B Interview Transcripts
B.5.2
Participants 33
Researcher: How does your idea Alone Mode look like?
Participant 33: I will try to lock all of the social media apps. Or maybe the ones
that you have the option to scroll infinitely. I will probably leave on the apps where
I can only communicate with people because this could be productive sometimes. I
will use it for both productivity and mindfulness reasons. But mostly I will use it for
productivity because I find myself wasting my time on my phone.
Researcher: Which apps would you allow?
Participant 33: WhatsApp, meditation apps, apps where you listen to music,
read books.
Researcher: Which contacts would you allow?
Participant 33: I think the closest family and friends so I can be available for
them if there is an emergency.
Researcher: When would you want it to be on? And, when do you want it to
be off?
Participant 33: I would have it rescheduled but I want it to have it turn it on
and off whenever I want. For example, I would like to prolong it if needed.
I don’t want it on during the afternoon and in the evenings. I would not want it
on when I am leaving work because normally this is the time where I connect with
people and check social media.
Researcher: Where would you want it situated? Should it be easily accessible?
Participant 33: I would like it to be there the sleep mode and do not disturb
mode are located.
Researcher: Are there any features that you think are very important to include?
Participant 33: I think it will be relevant if you can choose from different
categories of apps that you would like to limit - the amount of time you want to
spend.
Researcher: Do you have design preferences?
Participant 33: I would like it to be consistent with my phone design but at the
same time motivate me to use specific productivity apps.
PART 2
Researcher: From your drop-down menu, click on Alone Mode and turn it on.
Participant 33: It is easy to follow.
Researcher: Select “No one” to be able to contact you when in Alone Mode.
Participant 33: I will click on “Everyone” and select “No one” then I will click
==PAGE:471==
B.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
461
on “OK”.
Researcher: :Click add button to select apps which will be allowed to use when
in Alone Mode
Researcher: Activate “Headspace” and “Spotify” (in the same order)
Participant 33: I will click on the plus sign and then click on the switch buttons
next to the specific apps I want to allow.
Researcher: Go back to “Alone Mode” settings
Participant 33: I will click on the top arrow.
Researcher: Click add button to add “Alert keywords” Researcher: Add ‘emer-
gency’ as a new alert keyword
Participant 33: I will click on the plus sign. I will click on “add keywords”.
Then I will tap the different letters in order to write the word into the input area.
Researcher: Select ‘emergency’ to be part of your keywords Researcher: Go
back
Participant 33: I will select the word and then click on the top arrow in order
to go back.
Researcher: Describe what you see Researcher: Do the categories make sense?
Researcher: Is it aesthetically pleasing? Researcher: Does it give you a good
overview?
Participant 33: I can see that I am in Alone mode. It is pretty easy to see when
it is on and off. I can see that there are 3 different features - where you can choose
who can contact you, what apps you allow and what keywords you allow people to
reach out to you when you are in Alone Mode.
I think they make perfect sense - the categories. It gets through everything that
offers you and also it is very minimalistic at the same time.
What I don’t see is the automatic reply - to customize what people will receive as
a reply when they want to reach you - you can choose text and also when you want
to go into an app.
Next to “Contacts” should be the feature about the message people get - the
automatic reply. And next to the “Allowed apps” you should have the option to
customize the message you will receive when trying to get into a specific dissabled
app.
Researcher: Go back to your Home Page
Researcher: Describe what you see
Researcher: Did you notice the greyscale apps? What do you think of this?
Participant 33: I see that all of the apps that are not allowed are greyed out
==PAGE:472==
462
B Interview Transcripts
and I can see the Alone Mode icon next to the apps so it let me know why they are
greyed out. And I can see that the apps I have allowed are fully accessible. At least
this is what I have perceived. I think this is nice, because it makes it very obvious
which apps are accessible and not. I think the grey scale is fine. I think that the
colors should stay the same because users associate the apps with image and if you
see something else you get a bit confused.
Researcher: Open “YouTube” Researcher: Cancel the pop-up notification
Participant 33: I expect not to be able - yes. When I try to open YouTube, I
see that I am in Alone mode. I like that I have a motivational message. I think I
don’t want to be given the option to turn it off directly. Instinctively you will just
go to turn it off, because it is just one more tap. Maybe add an extra step or go to
“Settings”. If you would like to turn it off, please go to “Settings” and I would not
provide a link, so I put the temptation away.
Researcher: Open “Headspace” (Let’s assume that you are trying to spend
some Alone time and meditate). While you are meditating, you receive a notification.
(Have to click on the screen so you can see the alert notification).
Researcher: Describe what you see Researcher: Does this screen make sense
for you? Do you understand that alone mode when you reply to the message? Re-
searcher: Would you prefer if the alone mode was automatically turned off and you
directly saw the message with the emergency keyword?
Participant 33: I like the way it is shown to you that there was an emergency
and that’s why it gives you that notification. What is odd to me is the question:
“Would I like to turn off the Alone mode” and the options I have is to “Reply”. This
does not seem to be related to the question above.
Maybe if I swipe down I would like to see a sentence of the message I got. I want
to reply to emergent things but not necessarily take me out of the Alone Mode.
Researcher: What do you think of this feature? Would you use it?
Participant 33: I really like the idea - especially for myself and people my age
group which tend to overdue their time spent on their smartphones. If you want to
do something that it is not part of your goal it reminds you to stay focused.
Maybe if there is an option where I can add goals for the day in, so this way I feel
motivated to finish them. I would prefer it to be simple.
Researcher: Would you recommend it?
Participant 33: Yes, I would.
Researcher: What would you add or change?
Participant 33: I think the features we talked about - customizing your mes-
sages.
If you set goals for yourself and you are not using the apps related to your goals
==PAGE:473==
B.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
463
(for example reading) it reminds you that you haven’t followed your schedule.
Researcher: Would this help you foster a healthier relationship with your smart-
phone?
Participant 33: I think so, because it will allow me to not give into distractions
as much and if I see that I am in Alone mode and it doesn’t give me access to
distracting apps this will help me to put down my phone and continue focusing.
==PAGE:474==
464
B Interview Transcripts
B.5.3
Participants 34
Researcher: How does your idea Alone Mode look like?
Participant 34: I am way too dependent on my phone to do it. I am always on
my phone. Even now I am looking at it - will I get something. I think it is because
I don’t want to miss out - I am always getting snaps from my friends so for me it
will be more like mindfulness. I started doing meditation lately, so I think that my
phone might be a problem. I am getting problems with my eyes but I don’t know
if I am ready to do something about it - what am I going to do without my phone?
Everything is on my screen, so I don’t know what I will be doing without my phone.
Researcher: Which apps would you allow?
Participant 34: I don’t have notifications on for most of my apps. Maybe just
messenger, because my mom texts me there.
Researcher: Which contacts would you allow?
Participant 34: My mom, but if somebody wants to contact me, I don’t think
I will put my mindfulness above. I will still take this call.
Researcher: When would you want it to be on? And, when do you want it to
be off?
Participant 34: I can’t picture myself using it. I am associating it with existing
apps, so it’s like I put a label on myself. I realize that I am always seeking to text
people, meet people. And if I am not physically with them then it is through my
phone.
Researcher: Are there any features that you think are very important to include?
Participant 34: I think it is all in the way you communicate it. If you promote
it in a positive way - hey this is not away from us to take you away from your phone
and it is about your mental health. Not play it negatively like - you are spending too
much time on your phone.
Researcher: Do you have design preferences?
Participant 34: My mind thinks about a tree. Maybe something like an organic
shape - this is not a software but something that helps you with your mental health.
PART 2
Researcher: From your drop-down menu, click on Alone Mode and turn it on.
Participant 34: Easy to follow.
Researcher: Select “No one” to be able to contact you when in Alone Mode.
Participant 34: It is pretty straight forward.
Researcher: Click add button to select apps which will be allowed to use when
in Alone Mode
==PAGE:475==
B.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
465
Researcher: Activate “Headspace” and “Spotify” (in the same order)
Participant 34: It is easy to follow.
Researcher: Go back to “Alone Mode” settings
Participant 34: I would click on the top arrow in order to go back.
Researcher: Click add button to add “Alert keywords”
Researcher: Add ‘emergency’ as a new alert keyword
Participant 34: Easy to follow.
Researcher: Select ‘emergency’ to be part of your keywords
Researcher: Go back
Participant 34: I would click on the top arrow in order to go back.
Researcher: Describe what you see
Researcher: Do the categories make sense?
Researcher: Is it aesthetically pleasing?
Researcher: Does it give you a good overview?
Participant 34: No one is allowed to contact me.
I can use Headspace and
Spotify while being on Alone Mode and my keywords are added. So if someone is
texting me with one of those keywords, then I will get a notification from the app.
The categories make sense.
Researcher: Describe what you see
Researcher: Did you notice the greyscaled apps? What do you think of this?
Participant 34: The apps I haven’t allowed are blurred. I think this is a good
indicator that I am in Alone mode.
So if you put it on mistake, you can easily
understand why the apps are greyed out. And it helps you to be more aware of what
you can use - only these two apps. Making the screen black and white this would be
a little bit more aggressive.
Researcher: Open “YouTube”
Researcher: Cancel the pop-up notification
Participant 34: It’s a good thing that you can turn it off. Do you really need
it? But also, like, if you read the message is like, Okay, do I really want to do this
like, Okay, I’m actually doing pretty good. Maybe it’s better not to. So I think it’s
a matter of urgency, like, if you really have to, if you’re really done with it like, or
if you just need it for one minute, I don’t know, I feel like I would need this kind of
escape door just just so I don’t feel really, really constrained. And I feel like yeah,
most people have this fear of commitment, right? Like, I have, I have to have a way
out. I cannot fully commit to this thing. So yeah, I think it’s a really good feature.
==PAGE:476==
466
B Interview Transcripts
But, maybe like most people are like me. I don’t know, but just because I’m so
addicted to it, I think I would know, you know, but, uh, yeah, maybe something. I’m
sure you thought about it like a password for it. to kind of put people off a little bit,
or like make it a bit easier not just one click away. Um, honestly, I don’t know what
to think about it. I’m sure it would be a good way of. Yeah, as I said, make it a bit
harder to disable. And at the same time still allowing people to back off from it.
Researcher: Open “Headspace” (Let’s assume that you are trying to spend
some Alone time and meditate). While you are meditating, you receive a notification.
(Have to click on the screen so you can see the alert notification).
Researcher: Describe what you see
Researcher: Does this screen make sense for you? Do you understand that the
alone mode when you reply to the message?
Researcher: Would you prefer if the alone mode was automatically turned off
and you directly saw the message with the emergency keyword?
Participant 34: So, I think that once I’m actually meditating, I would get
annoyed. Now I’m doing it like it took me so long to actually start doing it. And I’m
so proud of myself. And who sends email and what’s the emergency and who are you
like? It depends on a lot of creation.
Well, if we, if it would be my phone, then of course, I would know who’s sending
the email. But what if it’s just like, you know, a newsletter using the word emergency?
Ignore reply, maybe ignore or see, maybe I just want to see you not reply.
I would just like to reply, and then Get back to it.
Yeah, I think that would be much better than actually having to click and get
out of the app. And then I can just like, see for myself and decide for myself if it’s
actually an emergency or not. And if it’s not, then I can just ignore without having
to exit the app.
Researcher: What do you think of this feature? Would you use it?
Participant 34: Actually, I think it’s it’s pretty good idea. And I was pretty
excited when I finally introduced the report of your screentime. You know, it’s kind
of, maybe you could I don’t know if thought about it, but maybe you could include
it in that way and have like, How much time did you use in your alone time and
kind of because I feel like if you see the overview of it, and then you see how you
evolve, then you kind of have more. You’re more inspired or motivated to use it more.
Once you make it like a competition, let’s say, because whenever I see, okay, your
screentime was 70% down this week, I’m like, good for me. You know, it’s like I’m
really proud of myself that I actually managed to cut down on it. So that can kind of
like motivation. vacations like, hey, you’ve done really good this week. Keep it going.
I think that would be helpful.
I don’t think I would incorporate it in my daily routine, let’s say but certainly
==PAGE:477==
B.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
467
if, if I would decide somehow to, you know, take a break from my phone, I think it
would be really helpful.
Researcher: : Would you recommend it?
Participant 34: : Yeah, I think I think actually, my friends would love it. They’re
all studying medicine. So they’re pretty hardcore study studies. So I’m sure they
would love it. Because I know for sure they’re using the apps and this is so much
more.
Researcher: : What would you add or change?
Participant 34: : I think it would be cool to have some, like notifications, like
maybe just once per week, so it’s not really buggy. But like, hey, if downgrade this
week compared to last week is so much better, and then you start to feel like you’re
actually making progress now.
Researcher: Would this help you foster a healthier relationship with your smart-
phone?
Participant 34: I think the problem is that we’re all aware that our habits are
not healthy. But I think very few of us are actually willing to do something about it.
So maybe this is like a small step towards that, but I honestly doubt if it’s possible
to have a healthy relationship. We’ve gone too far, you know, this is like, an extra
limb for me. Yeah. So yeah, but definitely a good step towards that goal.
So obviously now would be reducing the time I use my screens because my eyesight
is bad. So like, I have physical signs, okay, this is bad for you. You should stop but
I just I just can’t so I just don’t.
I see it as something that’s necessary. That’s part of me. Basically, it’s really
weird. How would it be more healthy? I don’t know, maybe maybe it’s about social
media as well, because there’s a lot of crap in the news as well. It’s like fake news. I
think it’s a matter of content as well, of what I’m thinking about not only like how
much time I spend on it, but what I’m consuming as well. Because everything that’s
on there, it’s kind of messing with you.
I am so used to using my phone so I don’t see it as unhealthy. But if I really
stop and think about it - everyone is doing it. If I stop doing it, maybe it is the
new normal. I think that FOMO is what makes people use social media so if there is
something about that I would use it.
==PAGE:478==
468
B Interview Transcripts
B.5.4
Participants 35
Researcher: How does your idea Alone Mode look like?
Participant 35: I think I would go with the productivity part. Mm-hmm. Be-
cause of course like when you hear all your notifications and everything like while
you’re doing something you’re more prone to kind of stop and go check it. So I think
it would be really nice if I could like to turn off some of them but still keep, for
example, my email notifications which are important.
Researcher: Which apps would you allow?
Participant 35: Just emails.
Researcher: Which contacts would you allow?
Participant 35: Um, I think if it was during the time where I was working, I
would only leave like people that are directly related to my work so that they are able
to contact me. Also my family.
Researcher: When would you want it to be on? And, when do you want it to
be off?
Participant 35: Um, I think it would mainly be doing like working hours. I
think it would also help me to kind of set the time for me to Work and then you
know, after that I can just relax into other stuff. So during the week, like during the
working hours.
I think scheduling would be nice because you don’t always have the same like
schedule every day. So it would be nice to schedule it according to your needs.
Researcher: Where would you want it situated? Should it be easily accessible?
Participant 35: Either like directly there in the main menu that you can access
really easily, or actually like having it as an app on your home screen is also a good
idea.
Researcher: Are there any features that you think are very important to include?
Participant 35: I guess it would be really nice if you could, like, really customize
it like a lot to yourself, um, be able to kind of choose the apps you want to turn off,
turn on and like maybe set the times when I’m really being like making really flexible
so that everyone can make it like personal.
Researcher: Do you have design preferences?
Participant 35:No, I think as long as it’s like user friendly, I don’t really mind
design.
PART 2
Researcher: From your drop-down menu, click on Alone Mode and turn it on.
Participant 35: Easy to follow.
==PAGE:479==
B.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
469
Researcher: Select “No one” to be able to contact you when in Alone Mode.
Participant 35: Pretty straight forward.
Researcher: Click add button to select apps which will be allowed to use when in
Alone Mode Researcher: Activate “Headspace” and “Spotify” (in the same order)
Participant 35: Easy to follow.
Researcher: Go back to “Alone Mode” settings
Participant 35: I would click on the top arrow.
Researcher: Click add button to add “Alert keywords” Researcher: Add ‘emer-
gency’ as a new alert keyword
Participant 35: Easy to follow.
Researcher: Select ‘emergency’ to be part of your keywords Researcher: Go
back
Participant 35: Easy to follow.
Researcher: Describe what you see Researcher: Do the categories make sense?
Researcher: Is it aesthetically pleasing? Researcher: Does it give you a good
overview?
Participant 35: Okay, so I can see that no one can contact me right now. Then
I can see that the only apps that are allowed are that space and Spotify. No. And I
have my alert keywords which are emergency hospital and urgent. So I think these
categories make sense.
Maybe like a timer?
No.
Okay, that word that you could set when it would
actually just turn itself off. So you don’t really have to think about it now.
Researcher: Describe what you see Researcher: Did you notice the greyscaled
apps? What do you think of this?
Participant 35: Okay, so the apps that are off now are kind of like shaded. Yeah.
And you can see the ones that are on like, bright compared to the others. I think it’s
really nice. And it’s clear like which ones are active and which ones are not. maybe
not to recognize them would be the easiest so you can actually choose what to click
on.
Researcher: Open “YouTube” Researcher: Cancel the pop-up notification
Participant 35: Can I actually do that?
Yeah, that’s nice. I think the turn off the mode should be harder to access.
Researcher: Open “Headspace” (Let’s assume that you are trying to spend some
Alone time and meditate). While you are meditating, you receive a notification. (Have
to click on the screen so you can see the alert notification). Researcher: Describe
what you see Researcher: Does this screen make sense for you? Do you understand
==PAGE:480==
470
B Interview Transcripts
that the alone mode when you reply to the message? Researcher: Would you prefer
if the alone mode was automatically turned off and you directly saw the message with
the emergency keyword?
Participant 35: And then once you would click reply that would turn off the
loan load would just send you to the email?
Maybe it would be nice if you could just go directly to the email without necessarily
turning everything off. Because then you just focus on the emergency part without
having all the other notifications come in.
I think it would be good to have a bit more information. I would prefer to answer
the message and still have the Alone mode on.
Researcher: What do you think of this feature? Would you use it?
Participant 35: I think it’s a very good idea. Um, I think it already happened
to me sometimes that I was actually, you know, wondering, or like telling myself,
what would be nice if I could, for example, turn off certain things on my phone for a
certain amount of time, it would probably really help me to be more productive. So
I think it’s a very good idea, and I would definitely use it.
Researcher: Would you recommend it?
Participant 35: Yes, my supervisor maybe because she always gets distracted
with older emails.
Researcher: What would you add or change?
Participant 35: Have you thought of actually also giving an option where, like,
you set a timer for example, for when you want it to be off and you can actually
Absolutely not turn it off. Mm hmm. Like maybe a password thing, or like, just
like for example, if someone really wants to be productive and I would probably use
this like, let’s say now I need four hours of, Okay, I’ll just leave whatever is really
important on and the rest will be off. Because like like this if you started clicking on
applications, you have the option to actually turn it off and open it
Researcher: Would this help you foster a healthier relationship with your smart-
phone?
Participant 35: I think so. Yeah. I mean, I think at the beginning, it would
always be hard and tempting to kind of, you know, go back to what you’re used to,
but it’s a thing of habit. So if you would really get into using this, then I think you
could really, you know, get used to just doing it automatically at some point.
==PAGE:481==
B.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
471
B.5.5
Participants 36
Researcher: How does your idea Alone Mode look like?
Participant 36: Yeah, actually, like sometimes when I whenever I look at my
phone like it’s even if I’m looking for one reason immediately I, as soon as I touch my
phone, I forget and then they just move into something else look into social media.
And then if I try to be productive, then what could have been only like 30 seconds
or something becomes like 5-10min even half an hour, right.
Researcher: Which apps would you allow?
Participant 36: Apps related messaging, so WhatsApp Messenger.
I think,
pretty much show me those two. I don’t scroll through the messages. I just replace
them mostly replay and then I just use them anymore. What struck me the most is
social media like Twitter, the actual Facebook and Instagram.
Researcher: Which contacts would you allow?
Participant 36: Like close friends and my family
Researcher: When would you want it to be on? And, when do you want it to
be off?
Participant 36: for like a tool better to have both options available. Because
then you can scale but sometimes you can also, like, move right? When you went to
be productive on it, and then if it’s scheduled then I would rather do it like from 10
- 15:00.
Researcher: Where would you want it situated? Should it be easily accessible?
Participant 36: In the drop-down menu. Not scrolling too much.
Researcher: Are there any features that you think are very important to include?
Participant 36: Not that I can think of any right now.
Researcher: Do you have design preferences?
Participant 36: I think that as long as it goes well with the design of iOS.
PART 2
Researcher: From your drop-down menu, click on Alone Mode and turn it on.
Participant 36: Easy to follow.
Researcher: Select “No one” to be able to contact you when in Alone Mode.
Participant 36: Easy to follow.
Researcher: Click add button to select apps which will be allowed to use when
in Alone Mode
Researcher: Activate “Headspace” and “Spotify” (in the same order)
Participant 36: Easy to follow.
==PAGE:482==
472
B Interview Transcripts
Researcher: Go back to “Alone Mode” settings
Participant 36: Click on the top arrow.
Researcher: Click add button to add “Alert keywords”
Researcher: Add ‘emergency’ as a new alert keyword
Participant 36: Easy to follow.
Researcher: Select ‘emergency’ to be part of your keywords Researcher: Go
back
Participant 36: Easy to follow.
Researcher: Describe what you see
Researcher: Do the categories make sense?
Researcher: Is it aesthetically pleasing?
Researcher: Does it give you a good overview?
Participant 36: I’m seeing a menu with four options, allowing me to set on
and off the low note. And then specify the three things that you told me about the
contracts that we want to allow to continue during the alone mode, the apps that I
want to be accessible and the keywords and whatever I feel is that it is really simple.
I’m just unsure about whether this is going to be like a permanent state or do I
have to modify it every time?
Researcher: Go back to your Home Page
Participant 36: Easy to follow.
Researcher: Describe what you see Researcher: Did you notice the greyscaled
apps? What do you think of this?
Participant 36: The apps I have not allowed and grayscale. This definitely shifts
my attention to the apps I have allowed.
Researcher: Open “YouTube”
Researcher: Cancel the pop-up notification
Participant 36: I think it’s actually nice because it’s like it doesn’t, it doesn’t
allow like a mid ground, right? And I feel like turning it off. It’s like, personally for
me, it’s the message of a journal trying to focus anymore. Which means man makes
me reconsider what I’m doing.
And I think the fact that it is like a motivating statement at the beginning, you’re
doing pretty nice, like encouraging to keep working.
So, for me, this is a good experience that I will be looking for while using this kind
of mode. Because if you actually want to turn it off, you don’t want to go through,
like a lot just turn it off. No, I want to turn it off quickly, but I also want to feel like
==PAGE:483==
B.5 Fifth Iteration: Think-Aloud Usability Tests
473
this message really makes me conscious about me turning it off.
Researcher: Open “Headspace” (Let’s assume that you are trying to spend
some Alone time and meditate). While you are meditating, you receive a notification.
(Have to click on the screen so you can see the alert notification).
Researcher: Describe what you see
Researcher: Does this screen make sense for you? Do you understand that the
alone mode when you reply to the message?
Researcher: Would you prefer if the alone mode was automatically turned off
and you directly saw the message with the emergency keyword?
Participant 36: If I get an emergency I guess I won’t be focusing anymore or
anything like to attend emergency writes.
Researcher: What do you think of this feature? Would you use it?
Participant 36: it’s nice. I am not too sure if I have something similar before,
but differently, at least with this prototype. I liked that it was easily accessible. I
would use it also. I will also, think it would be nice to include a set of suggestions
for like, emergency words, because sometimes I myself cannot come up with all the
possible emergency words that could be used.
Researcher: Would you recommend it?
Participant 36: Yes, in normal talk. Not actively recommend it.
Researcher: What would you add or change?
Participant 36: Alert keywords suggestion list.
Researcher: Would this help you foster a healthier relationship with your smart-
phone?
Participant 36: I just use my phone without any purpose. And I feel like this
will help me to be more conscious about it, which is, which I think is accomplished by
this message that is displayed when you try to click on an app that is grated, shaded.
I think it will help me be more conscious about how I use my phone in ways and have
a healthy relationship.
==PAGE:484==
474
==PAGE:485==
APPENDIX C
Additional Interview
Quotes
C.1
First Iteration: Initial User Studies
C.1.1
Morning routine
“It actually plays a role in my wake up process (...)
so first, I open
my eyes, I’m really tired and then while checking Instagram, the news,
Facebook, Reddit and all this stuff then in that half an hour, I slowly wake
up so that’s basically supplement for my waking up”
- Participant 1
“I use my smartwatch to wake up. It has to communicate with my phone.
When I wake up, I check my notifications on my phone, since it is silent
during the night. “
- Participant 10
“First to stop my alarm. And then just to check, because I usually in the
morning have a lot of notifications from the apps. Doesn’t matter if it’s
Instagram or messenger, but people have sent me memes or my parents
are texting me. And yeah, it’s just to check my notifications if there’s
something really important to answer.”
- Participant 12
“[First thing in the morning] I turn off my alarm. (...) Check for messages
as well. (...) Social media sometimes. (...)maybe like 10 to 20 minutes.”
- Participant 13
==PAGE:486==
476
C Additional Interview Quotes
C.1.1.1
Evening and bedtime routine
“And then I have a really long going to bed process because I check crazy
amounts of useless information on my phone like, okay, I take on my PJs,
then I do something on my phone then I go and brush my teeth then I do
something on my phone then. I don’t know - I go to the shower and then
do something on my phone like it’s really scattered. Yeah, my bedtime
routine is is horrible”
- Participant 1
“If I’m in bed for like 30- 40 minutes and I can’t sleep, I go on my phone.”
- Participant 2
“Well, I’m in bed around midnight, but then, I don’t know, it depends
how much time I need to fall asleep. If I’m too tired, I’m falling asleep
immediately. If I’m not sometimes it takes me like, one hour even two, if
I’m on my phone, which is usually”
- Participant 12
“I mainly use the computer for leisure time or so to speak. After I eat,
the break that I take is on the computer and when I try to sleep, it will be
on my phone. I think I usually stay on my phone until I get tired, which
would be around like 9.50 or 10.”
- Participant 13
C.1.1.2
Breaktime routines
“Actually I sometimes do that. that is only if I just want to take a break
and I just go to the toilet with my phone”
- Participant 1
“I think Instagram is something that I can’t live without. I like to see
photos of what other people post and take a break. I can’t work without a
break, I am not productive without a break - if there is an alternative - like
sometimes I make tea and I am not looking into Instagram. (or talking
with somebody else). I have this kind of routine to use it for 10 mins. I
usually don’t exceed these 10 minutes.”
- Participant 5
==PAGE:487==
C.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
477
C.1.2
Habits
“Yeah,it’s like an instinct. (...) It’s completely a habit. It’s completely a
habit for spending time. ”
- Participant 1
“I think because it becomes a habit. (...) it just feels so normal to every-
day.”
- Participant 6
“I do check my phone. I think out of habit sometimes. Like if I receive the
message, then I check it but mostly I think it’s out of habit just to check
(...) if I’ve gotten a message even though I don’t have any notification
or if you know something new pops up on Instagram or Facebook. (...) I
would just take it just to do something different.”
- Participant 13
C.1.3
Comfort zone
“Because I love my phone to be organized. If I have like everything is on
one side or the other. Yeah, [changing the apps positioning] will be (...)
annoying”
- Participant 2
“I think that moving the [app] icons actually made it worse since I had to
search for every single application when I needed it.”
- Participant 4
“I wouldn’t keep my phone grayscale to reduce my time on social media;
only if it was only on the apps instead of the whole interface”
- Participant 5
“[The greyscale challenge] (...) it’s uncomfortable. It would decrease the
screen time but it’s not sustainable”
==PAGE:488==
478
C Additional Interview Quotes
- Participant 9
“My challenge was to have my colors on my phone like black and white
for a week, so Thursday when I put the colors off, and I was like ’Oh, my
God, this is so strange. I don’t know if I can do it for one week’. (...)
’if my colors are not on, I will not be attracted to my phone anymore’. I
was like that the first day I was like ‘my phone is not attractive to me
anymore. I hate it. It’s so boring. I don’t know what to do on it when it
has no colors.’”
- Participant 12
C.1.4
Alone
“While I eat alone, all the time [I have my smartphone] (...) Sometimes
as well. If we run out of topics or something or if I am excluded from
a discussion with my colleagues or something like that, because they are
talking about some professional stuff then I check my phone instantly.”
- Participant 1
“A few months ago - taking the train to go home [alone]. I thought I lost
the phone. Everything was on my phone - the phone is essential during
travel. I was outside my comfort zone. I lost my connection to the world
at the moment I needed it. I needed to solve things differently to have the
day how I wanted it to be.”
- Participant 3
“When I am eating breakfast - yes, because I am alone and I don’t have
anybody to talk to”
- Participant 5
“Most of the time, [I use my smartphone], when i am alone (...) In the
evening, normally I try to not use it much when I’m with people, when
I’m eating..”
- Participant 6
“During lunch, I don’t use it when I am having lunch with the other, but
when I am alone - I am on my phone.”
==PAGE:489==
C.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
479
- Participant 10
“For me, the most important is google maps, so I can check where I am
going, to check when the bus is coming. Then it is important for me to
listen to music while traveling (...) Just like a distraction while I eat.”
- Participant 11
“[When I am commuting alone] I listen to music all the time or I’m
scrolling on Instagram. All the time. When I’m in the metro, my face
and my eyes are on the phone.
Sometimes I even see people who are
like in the metro, and I know them, but I’m so focused on my phone and
I don’t even see them and then I have to be sorry: ’sorry, guys.’
(...)
because there I’m alone. For example, if I’m at school and I’m around
people, I sometimes forget about my phone. But when I’m home, I also
forget about my phone because I’m putting the TV on and someone is
talking to me, you know, but when I’m in the metro, I seriously need to
listen to something. So I need my phone to put some music on. And then
I’m traveling for around 30 minutes. So 30 minutes, I’m just scrolling
and looking at some things on my phone.(...) When I’m alone, I need it
the most (...), sometimes I’m taking the metro with one girl that I know.
She’s living close to me. And then I just see myself that I’m not using my
phone. I’m just keeping in my hand, but I’m not even unlocking it.”
- Participant 12
“Yes, I do play music while I walk to distract me.”
- Participant 13
“If I have a message or sometimes when I’m bored, I’m on Facebook, but
it depends on the conversation. (...)If the other people are boring..”
- Participant 2
“(...) usually another distraction on the phone, but still, it would allow
me to check something and occupy my mind”
- Participant 9
==PAGE:490==
480
C Additional Interview Quotes
“(...) when I am bored, I go to Instagram, just for the sake of going there.
Sometimes I have seen everything on Instagram and I would scroll through
because I am bored (...) [social media] is good as a distraction when you
are bored. I am also used to it, but I want to change it.”
- Participant 11
“I think.. so maybe when I feel alone you know. Not conversating with
someone or not having someone to talk then I would go on my phone.
I think some people choose to read a book, but I just choose to be on
my phone (...) Other than that, I think when I’m home and I just need
something to do. (...) I wouldn’t know what to do by myself, I think to be
honest, yeah.”
- Participant 13
“I think when I am in public, and (...) I don’t feel like talking with people,
I don’t feel comfortable with them. Then I’ll be on my phone. (...) I
would just browse social media (...) Just to have something to do, I guess..
to feel busy. (...) I don’t remember the first time but I remember (...) a
specific time where it made me think that I could rely on my phone (...) I
was in the bus. And for some reason, I started to feel very anxious. And I
felt like people were maybe staring or judging or I didn’t know what to do
or who to call so I just tried to focus on my phone and use it as much as
I could at that time. (...) I can focus on that rather than people around
me. (...) ”
- Participant 13
C.1.5
Deconstruction of time
”(...) that’s just my feeling and the screen time shows something different”
- Participant 1
“Maybe I am not aware, but I don’t feel like I have to track my time.”
- Participant 5
“Sometimes, I can not keep track of everything I do, but mostly I am
trying to set up some limits (...) sometimes I lose complete track of how
much time I spend on my phone, but around 45 min.”
==PAGE:491==
C.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
481
- Participant 8
“(...) if I watch a video I don’t realize how much time I have spent.”
- Participant 11
“Yeah, [losing track of time] usually happens.(...) It’s sometimes around
30 minutes (...) I feel like I’m losing a lot of time when I’m watching a
video. ”
- Participant 12
“I think I lose track of the time in a sense where like, I can always see
how much time I’ve spent on it, but I don’t get a sense of reality. Like if
an hour passes by I don’t go ’oh, I’ve been on my phone for a whole hour’,
it’s not like that. I know how much time I spent on it. But I don’t really
put in perspective and say ’Oh, that’s too much’.”
- Participant 13
C.1.5.1
Procrastination tool
“Because sometimes it distracts me. Like while I’m studying and I don’t
want to study if I receive a notification immediately I will go on my phone.
So it’s just like an excuse to not study.”
- Participant 2
“(...) when I am studying, not as productive [because of the smartphone]
(...) less interesting to study and can get very theoretical (...) I’d rather
focus on easier things”
- Participant 3
“Mainly when I am working on something that is a bit boring and when I
have my phone, it is very easy to get distracted.”
- Participant 5
==PAGE:492==
482
C Additional Interview Quotes
“I feel like I need to study a lot of things and I’m just procrastinating
those things and I’m just doing something that (...) is funnier, and it’s
less boring (...) because I need to prepare for the interviews and stuff and
that’s something that it’s not motivating me and it should.”
- Participant 6
“When I know that I have to study or do something and my focus and
motivation are not that much and I find myself watching some videos on
Youtube, then I feel less productive.”
- Participant 8
“(..)in scenarios when I am not too motivated to do my tasks”
- Participant 9
“It is not really losing track of time. I know how much time I am watching
this video - I know what the time is, but I just keep on not starting doing
something else.”
- Participant 10
“(..) if I have to read something for school I can easily get distracted.”
- Participant 11
“(...) because I’m not doing anything when I’m on the phone. I’m just
procrastinating. (...)When I am supposed to do schoolwork, but I choose
to reach out to the phone.”
- Participant 13
“So the thing is that whenever it turns out that I [am] actually kind of
addicted to my phone and use it more, I always feel bad so that would
be guilt again. But I’m yeah, I’m really bad at getting rid of bad habits,
actually. I’m really bad. And, I don’t know I always feel guilty.”
- Participant 1
==PAGE:493==
C.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
483
“Because after being on the phone for a long time, I just cannot sleep like
my sleep goes away and then I cannot sleep (...) I don’t know if it’s the
blue light or something and it’s just like changing the patterns of sleeping.”
- Participant 6
“I stay up on the phone because I am not that tired. Or maybe this is what
I think”
- Participant 11
“[Because of the smartphone I sleep] Like a half an hour later (...) I think
it’s because I have something to distract myself that I would rather do (...)
So I just scroll through the phone.”
- Participant 13
C.1.6
Urgency
“My phone is next to me, not under my pillow. The phone is always on,
however, it is disconnected from the network. The sound is on vibration,
so if somebody needs me for something important, it wakes me up.”
- Participant 4
“Maybe sometimes I feel anxious just to check my phone if I receive some-
thing (...) If I don’t have my phone, it’s like ‘Oh, I need to go and get
my phone and see if I receive anything’ (...) It’s that feeling of missing
something that you need to check (...)
I guess I just got so used to it
to have the phone next to me and just check. It is something that I’m
doing [subconsciously] without thinking (...) like contact with friends and
family.”
- Participant 6
“(...) it would be weird - because I am used to being able to check the
messages relatively often (...) especially in student organizations, urgency
is important (...) For urgent stuff, we talk through messenger. For less
urgent, it is on slack but the fact that it is on my phone makes it feel
urgent”
==PAGE:494==
484
C Additional Interview Quotes
- Participant 9
“Yes, it is on, next to my head on sleep mode.”
- Participant 10
“(...)
my phone is turned on but my Wifi is not so I’m not receiving
notifications while I’m sleeping (...)It’s next to my bed, but it’s not under
my pillow.”
- Participant 12
C.1.7
F.O.M.O
“(...)there’s definitely a part of the fear of missing out in the morning
because, mostly with the news, I’m quite interested in what was happening
in the world and if if something happens during the night like something
big like, I don’t know, the President of the United States dies or something
like that then I would feel really really stupid ‘Oh, I I went all the way
until three o’clock and I didn’t know about this thing’. And that that makes
me feel a little bit strange”
- Participant 1
“(...) When I was feeling quite down and saw everyone doing all the crazy
stuff and having a lot of friends and smiling all the time and stuff like that
and that happens quite often.”
- Participant 1
“I would like to say no but there might be cases where I feel this way -
mostly in connection with life from back home or family gatherings and I
am not part of it. Happy to see they are having a good time but I am not
there. But no stress or anxiety.”
- Participant 3
“(...) sometimes I feel like that because I haven’t done like the things (...)
then I cannot go there because I thought I have waste my time on my
phone or in Netflix or those things, and then I felt need to finish these
things and then I cannot go to this event because I need to finish this and
I didn’t do that I felt like missed out of consequence. (...) Because I see
that it was fun afterwards”
==PAGE:495==
C.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
485
- Participant 6
“When friends from back home are meeting; I am more prone to check the
phone (...) Especially with friends back home, when I was in Asia because
I couldn’t be involved in my circle in Spain - more sad than anxious.
Homesick”
- Participant 9
“Yeah, I don’t know, mainly, when I think about people who are back at
home, because I have a lot of friends who stayed to study in Bulgaria, like,
they choose to stay there. And sometimes I feel like I’m here. I know that
I can contact you. I know that I can call you all the time but it’s not the
same when I’m not there.”
- Participant 12
“I think I do [have F.O.M.O] because I’m constantly updating and seeing
if there is something new happening (...)
I’ll feel sad that I was not
participating at the event. But I’d want to recreate it in a situation where
I’ll be there or have the opportunity to do it myself”
- Participant 13
C.1.7.1
Content
“I use Chrome and Twitter to check the news. I use them because on Twit-
ter there are journalists that I follow and I like to read discussions, which
sometimes I find interesting. Chrome, just use a browser but it’s basically
where I search all my news (...) [it is] the one I need the most tho, to find
something, to learn about something, to read news about coronavirus”
- Participant 5
“YouTube I use the explore page. Twitter is through the feed. Messenger
is 80% messages and 20% video calls. Instagram is mainly stories and
explore/search.”
- Participant 10
==PAGE:496==
486
C Additional Interview Quotes
“Okay, so I’m using Netflix mainly to watch Friends and YouTube, I’m
using it for listening to music, but not that much for watching videos. So
entertaining myself mainly with memes and funny pictures is something
that really makes me happy and makes me laugh. Yeah, and if I have
to choose between watching a funny video or watching a funny meme, I
would prefer a meme.”
- Participant 12
“I think it’s depending on the content (...) Well, I can get specific movies
on Netflix (...) Whilst on YouTube, I can listen to some music. And I can
switch to listening to a podcast or I can switch to just simply watching a
video following someone’s life.”
- Participant 13
C.1.8
Notifications
“ (...) I don’t think I will put the notification back. It actually felt quite
great. And actually some time I did not get distracted like for example
when I’m watching Netflix with my friends then many times before I had my
phone next to me and and every time I get a notification from messenger
I checked it and I actually realized that we watched the movie the other
day and my phone was on on the kitchen counter not even with me on
the sofa which is crazy and I could without any disturbing stuff watch the
movie for the whole length and that was because I didn’t get notifications
from messenger. So yeah, that was good (...) but yeah, so this notification
stuff it was a little bit strange because only messenger was affected by that
so YouTube and Instagram and Facebook, they were not really affected by
you know notification stuff (...) So I should get some other methods to
get rid of those.”
- Participant 1
”(...) it’s not because it would decrease the access to these applications”
- Participant 2
“I already don’t have them [notifications on]”
- Participant 5
==PAGE:497==
C.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
487
“Instagram is when I see a notification or when I feel horny”
- Participant 10
“I would still go but less because there were no notifications so I would go
when I had time.”
- Participant 11
C.1.9
Infinite content loop
“(...) most of the time it’s opening Reddit, or YouTube and you just click
on one link after another because everything is interconnected. And also I
really have a hard time keeping focus so many times if something pops into
my mind like I don’t know, for example, right now I’m quite interested in
the Democratic primaries for the US elections and then boom, something
pops into my mind and I google it instantly.
And then I like click on
a few links, and then something else pops into my mind and then boom,
I commonly leave the previous one and then go to the other one (...)
[it]prevents me from from being (...) useful for hours sometimes because
I just lost myself in YouTube videos and Reddit and stuff like that.”
- Participant 1
“It takes more time for me. I used to watch a lot of videos in YouTube
and stuff but it just takes more than two hours so that’s why I’m not using
them anymore”
- Participant 6
“I watch this one YouTube video and then I continue watching and I end
up like watching 5-10 videos. I lose like 30-40 minutes of my life doing
this.”
- Participant 10
“(...) I give myself like half an hour to an hour. (...) And then I find a
video or something and I just keep binge watching something. And yeah
(...) So it ends up being 2-3 hours (...) also made me realize that I got
dependent on just being able to see a certain content or being on it all the
time.”
- Participant 13
==PAGE:498==
488
C Additional Interview Quotes
C.1.9.1
Passive consumerism
“like it’s not interactive what I do on the phone usually. It’s just like
looking at news or videos.”
- Participant 1
“Facebook, I use it to watch videos, news (...) And my friends if they post
something (...) or if someone tagged me on something (...) Because I
don’t really post anything on this app.“
- Participant 2
“It is probably more after lunch because I need to relax for a little bit. Also,
when I come back, I just scroll through some news. It is relaxing because
I don’t have to think that much, I am just reading.”
- Participant 5
“I use Youtube late at night when I am the most tired because it’s garbage/-
trash tv. But it is accessible (...) Twitter has been meaningful even though
it is 90% garbage, 10% meaningful. But I don’t think that there is an ap-
plication I can not give up from.”
- Participant 10
C.1.10
Relationship maintenance
“Yeah, with my family but I think that’s pretty necessary that’s that’s a bit
because that’s the only way I keep touch with my family and that’s usually
one hour per two days”
- Participant 1
“my mom is always calling me. My brothers. Sometimes my sister (...)
and she’s in different time zones. (...) Because we are not living in the
same country so it helps out to keep in touch (...) like with my brother
we love to send us funny videos or dogs videos.”
- Participant 2
==PAGE:499==
C.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
489
“The fact that I moved to another country challenges me to be more on
the phone: keep relationships with parents cause I have to but not using it
as much with friends and can clearly see the effect/prefer to see them in
real life. (...) nice with a smartphone to mimic the everyday interactions
(...) [social media] is nice to check up on international friends”
- Participant 3
“It helps me connect with people around me.
It also helps me to stay
updated with the world around me.”
- Participant 4
“The distance with my family. I would say, I talk once a day with my
family - one day with my father, the next day with my sister. Sometimes,
it happens that I don’t talk with them for days, but mostly it is at least 5
min a day.”
- Participant 5
“Since I am not from here, it is very necessary for me to keep in contact
with my family. I feel homesick and I feel less sad when using the phone to
contact them (...) [If I couldn’t use my smartphone] I would be devastated
because I would miss them. I would mainly feel anxious because of the loss
of contact with the family. Especially cause now it’s the only way to see
your family and this is why I would feel like that.”
- Participant 8
“It takes time [to maintain relationships through the smartphone] but I
do it because, in the long term, I see myself living in Spain so I want
to maintain the meaningful relationships there..
keep up with them so
everything would be the same.. fill the gap (...) allow contact for friends
that are not physically there”
- Participant 9
“Then, I’m, since I’m an international student and my parents live back
in Bulgaria. I’m usually talking with them, like to see how they are doing,
to see how their day was and they are asking me questions like, how have I
been today and (...)I’m spending like, around two hours talking with them
(...)
if one day, I don’t call my mother.
I will feel so bad about that.
==PAGE:500==
490
C Additional Interview Quotes
Like I just want and need to hear her voice every day. So I think this
relationship with her is really important. It’s a lot making an impact on
my phone usage (...) if my parents were here, probably my phone usage
would be down like a lot.”
- Participant 12
C.1.11
Social norms
“(...)because I cannot meet them [with my friends abroad] all the time (...)
you can meet only with a really limited group of people right? So yeah,
let’s let’s take me as an example. I think I made like 10 or maybe 15
people regularly but then I’m still in touch with more than 50 at least on
Instagram and Messenger”
- Participant 1
“[I can’t give up Whatsapp] Because it helps me to keep in touch with
many people from around the world. Yeah, sometimes I only have them
on Whatsapp. And I have pictures like we share pictures and stuff like
that. So for example, I changed my phone and I lost some pictures, some
conversation on WhatsApp and I was really pissed. And I still have my
old phone because I’m trying to find a way to put them in the new.”
- Participant 2
“[The app I can’t give up is] WhatsApp at the moment (...)
Because
otherwise I will lose contact with my family.”
- Participant 6
“Friends from Greece, when we text since the communications are mainly
through texts. Also my family. Most of my communications go through
Messenger (...) The problem is about the calls, like when my parents are
calling. My father also does not have Facebook, so I call him directly.”
- Participant 10
“I talk to my family, so I have to use it for video calls and contact my
friends as well.
I usually don’t text people, but I can’t see them on a
regular basis”
==PAGE:501==
C.1 First Iteration: Initial User Studies
491
- Participant 11
“Facebook - I don’t like the way it is developed. But most of my friends
are only there (...) 90% of the people use messenger.”
- Participant 4
“I use Messenger because everybody uses it here in DK, I actually didn’t use
it 2 years ago before moving and WhatsApp because back home everybody
uses it ”
- Participant 5
“I have few friends that don’t have Facebook and we just use Instagram to
chat (...)[I can’t give up on]Viber (...) because this is the only way for me
to communicate with my family.”
- Participant 8
“[Why did you choose Whatsapp over Messenger?] I don’t know actually,
maybe it’s because in Bulgaria, Whatsapp is not that popular. Not many
people are using it (...)
And my parents are like the old generation, I
barely even told them to use messenger. “
- Participant 12
“(...) I have around 800 on Facebook and 300 on Instagram. So like, I’ve
chosen like the closest, not that I have 300 people close to myself, but like,
for example, I have friends of my parents on Facebook and I don’t have
them on Instagram, so I prefer Instagram because of that.”
- Participant 12
“[I use Instagram the most because] (...) because it’s one of those platforms
that other people use the most.”
- Participant 13
==PAGE:502==
492
C Additional Interview Quotes
C.1.11.1
Lack of reflection
“I am surprised, it makes sense but never thinks about it timewise; don’t
feel guilty or sad about it”
- Participant 3
“In general, I expected that I spent less time on my phone (around 10h
weekly). I didn’t expect that - I don’t know how I feel.”
- Participant 4
“Sometimes I am surprised by how much time I spend on them.”
- Participant 8
“Very shocked by the actual result”
- Participant 9
“I thought that it would be even less, but I was not that surprised. It is
almost the same. I tried to not be that much on the phone and I forget
about the apps when I didn’t get the notifications.”
- Participant 11
“I expect it to be lower and I was really surprised that it was higher.”
- Participant 12
“What?! It’s more? I don’t know. I wouldn’t have expected that (...)This
surprised me a lot that I use Messenger that much.”
- Participant 1
“[Surprise about Instagram’s high placement] Yeah. Because when I go on
Instagram, it’s like 10 seconds and then you know, so it’s crazy (...) Like
what the fuck?”
- Participant 2
==PAGE:503==
C.2 Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
493
“Facebook is surprising - 33 mins for Facebook, I would never have said
it, because I don’t even like Facebook.”
- Participant 5
“I completely forgot about YouTube. I didn’t consider it as an application
that I use that much. I use it mainly for listening to music.”
- Participant 8
“Kind of reflect on what I chose to spend my time on.(...) it’s not some-
thing I’m proud of. (...)I think I don’t have other ways to entertain myself
(...) or that’s the easiest way to entertain myself sometimes, yeah. So
I choose to go on YouTube instead. Because it’s easier and it’s in my
reach.”
- Participant 13
C.2
Second Iteration: Smartphone Usage Survey
C.2.1
New routines
“My screen time has also increased with minimum 30%”
- Survey respondent
“More frequent smartphone usage (up 4/5 hours a day) to stay in touch
with friends & family.”
- Survey respondent
C.2.2
Boredom
“Increased boredom yields increased usage, too”
- Survey respondent
“it has increased. Less google maps. More frequently looking at the news.
More facetime.”
- Survey respondent
==PAGE:504==
494
C Additional Interview Quotes
C.2.3
New sense of availability
“I spend more time on my phone. I have used the news app more than I
normally do, the same goes for Facebook Snapchat Og Instagram.“
- Survey respondent
“spent way more time on it to get the latest updates/follow the conferences,
called more people too”
- Survey respondent
C.2.4
Human connection
“Yes, I use more time on my phone, because my social activities can’t
find place outside my home or at my home, so that’s why I am socialising
myself by using my phone”
- Survey respondent
“I spend more time on my phone checking social media than I normally
did, because of the lack of socializing these days”
- Survey respondent
“I use my phone to communicate also with people I didn’t use to text
(school mates especially, face to face communication has been replaced
with text messaging or video calls)”
- Survey respondent
“I use it more often to keep communication with family/friends (...) I feel
more connected to my family.”
- Survey respondent
“(...) because of the distance i use my smartphone differently, i facetime
much more and I’m tired of it but i need some human contact”
- Survey respondent
==PAGE:505==
C.3 Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1
495
C.2.5
Saturation of content
“Any emotions are more related to the storm of negative news rather to
using the phone.”
- Survey respondent
“The news does tend to make me anxious but except for that I feel the
same”
- Survey respondent
“I avoid using social media because everyone is talking and panicking about
it so it stresses me out”
- Survey respondent
“my feed is either climate change or corona related”
- Survey respondent
C.3
Third Iteration: Group Interviews 1
C.3.1
Alone mode
“Sort of like a productivity zone. I like this.”
- Participant 21
“Actually similar to airplane mode. I don’t think people would actually
use that to be honest (...) The person must know how or how much they
are or they are not addicted to their phone when they use it”
- Participant 25
==PAGE:506==
496
C Additional Interview Quotes
C.3.2
Speech-based social network
“I think the text based aspect of a lot of these things like Reddit kind of
gives you security (...) I might fall on someone who’s going to be weird
during my 30 minute lunch break where you just want to Relax (...)instead
of being like question it could be(...) like one of those things where you
can connect with people who are having lunch at the same time (...)kind
of like a dating app like everyone who’s like around you answers yes or
no. And that’s a very different direction, but it would be a solution to the
problem as well.”
- Participant 23
C.3.3
In Summary
C.3.3.1
Infinite content loop and losing track of time
“I don’t have like a realistic limit to it (...) I allow myself to indulge.”
- Participant 13
C.3.3.2
Fear Of Missing Out
“I have a lot of unhealthy relationships with this device like when I go to
sleep is the last thing I look at, when I wake up is the first thing. When I
am outside - it is in my hand. “
- Participant 20
C.3.3.3
Challenge Application
→Reminder of other options
“I think it’s a nice reminder of the options because sometimes (...) it may
be obvious, but you can’t think of it.”
- Participant 13
“I mean, I feel like I could use this in some situations as a brainstorm but
it’s kind of like I downloaded this app that reminds you to drink water you
just kind of don’t care about it at some point”
==PAGE:507==
C.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2
497
- Participant 17
“In Paris, (...)
I would always grab one of the free newspapers and I
would read my horoscope and in the metro (...) look at the weird articles
in there, because it was also a way to pass the time and then you’re not
on your phone. But if your phone provides you with those kinds of quick
stories (...) like horoscope kind of things that you’re just gonna read for
20 minutes, I think it (...) can be really cool.”
- Participant 22
“It’s not going to limit my time but just give me new ideas of what to do
with my smartphone.”
- Participant 4
“It’s good having that kind of distraction rather than just having a cut off
zone(...)But (...) it doesn’t have the same kind of separation as the idea
of the ring(...) [which] you’re more likely to actually pay attention to (...)
than something that is still on the phone”
- Participant 24
C.4
Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2
C.4.1
Potential users of the Ring Limiter
“Girls, 20-22 years old.
Studying design.
They both like shopping for
social media. Appearance counts.”
- Participant 29
“ my sister, she’s a female, but I would say that this ring can work in
whatever gender as long as you like to work rings”
- Participant 30
“So I think that what could help in this case, it’s not maybe a product but
it’s like the mind states that we should force our minds to be concentrated
and be focused. (..) “
==PAGE:508==
498
C Additional Interview Quotes
- Participant 28
“Out of these 3 projects, I would choose the Challenge app + Alone mode. I
would choose that one because I think that it will add little more motivation
for personal growth and trying new things. “
- Participant 22
“ (...)would definitely use the second solution [Challenge Application +
Alone Mode] in order to be able to just throw my phone away and not
think about it at all knowing that if anything important happens, I would
be notified.”
- Participant 4
“I will go with the second option [Challenge Application + Alone Mode]
because I think it has the lowest threshold of success (...) most likely to
succeed (...)because it doesn’t require too much hardware and too much
work to make it accessible and easy for everyone to like, hop on board with
everyone else. You just need the phone.”
- Participant 16
“I would definitely go for the second one [Challenge Application + Alone
Mode](...) very useful because(...) you can put something like a calling
emergency or calling the doctor or whatever, it will be keep going”
- Participant 30
C.4.2
Potential users of Alone Mode
“They really like to try things just for the sake of trying them. Because
they know that they struggle with their concentration. They want to change
and this is why they like to try the technology.”
- Participant 29
“The person who I imagine is somebody who is trying to change their
personal habits and is interested in personal growth and mindfulness.”
- Participant 9
==PAGE:509==
C.4 Fourth Iteration: Group Interviews 2
499
“ I just throw myself away when I’m trying to focus but if I had that option,
then I would definitely make use of it as well”
- Participant 4
“Fatima.
She’s a 24 year old DTU student in data science (...)
she
does actively pursue these kind of opportunities [that] makes her use the
technology she loves and adores, but in a responsible sustainable manner.”
- Participant 16
“I would definitely, definitely use it myself (...) I study journalism (...)I’m
trying to like use my time a little bit more wisely. And I just deactivated
my Instagram account, for example, because I felt that I was spending
countless hours just scrolling into nothing.”
- Participant 31
“ people who are very supportive that they don’t want to pay attention on
the phone (...) And I would say people as well that they believe themselves
(...)that they have a problem with the phone and they want to change.”
- Participant 30
C.4.3
Content digest
Unlikely users
“Klaus wouldn’t use that filter simply because he doesn’t want to limit what
he sees from social media because as a journalist, he wants to always see
new things (...)he always wants to be in touch and stay in touch with all
the new trends.”
- Participant 4
“He does not use that application because, again, there’s a funnel, there’s
a bottleneck. So that’s not the whole truth.”
- Participant 16
Potential users
==PAGE:510==
500
C Additional Interview Quotes
“I thought about myself under like exam periods where I still want to be
on social media, but I want to have it restricted. I want to see what my
friends are doing. I want to see the things I’m interested in but I don’t
really want to see anything else because I know that I will have like this
subconscious like scrolling thing going on.”
- Participant 31
“I don’t see any weaknesses (...) like I use [something similar] myself”
- Participant 31
C.5
Discussion
C.5.1
Multifunctionality
“It is not the phone itself, it is the easiest way to keep in touch. It is
a small thing that you always have in your pocket - you can call, it is
simple.”
- Participant 5
“Yeah, I think because I have a specific time where I have my computer
and it’s not as comfortable like I don’t, I cannot walk around with my
computer, I cannot, you know, I have to be in a certain position, like
sitting and stuff like that to use the computer comfortably. That’s why I
opt for the phone I think.”
- Participant 13
“Sometimes for like inspiration (...)Like, I don’t know how to do my hair.
(...)...how to dress... stuff like that (...)”
- Participant 2
“Weekday, (...) I need it cause there is a lot of things I check on my phone
- train situation, health recommendations, alarm, making sure friends and
family are alive, time, really need music.”
- Participant 3
==PAGE:511==
C.5 Discussion
501
“I mostly use my phone to check the time. Almost always. (...) It will
only bother me if I have to go to an unknown place, where my phone would
help me navigate.”
- Participant 4
“Sometimes, I really depend on my phone when at work to google different
things.”
- Participant 7
”I use it to wake up, to check the time, to check the busses, I have the
travel card on it - it is necessary for my everyday life.”
- Participant 11
“Even if I have my watch on my hand. I’m not looking at it. I’m just
looking at my phone. I don’t know why but it’s usually like that.”
- Participant 12
“(...)I think the more I got used to having it and like (...) having all the
features available, I think it’s difficult (...)”
- Participant 13
C.5.1.1
Willpower
“For work I use it and it makes me productive, but during the weekend I
use it to watch different kinds of stuff and I can’t start doing some other
things, which are more important for example.”
- Participant 7
“It is exhausting (...) sometimes I am bored, sometimes it is because I am
looking for something in a productive way.”
- Participant 8
==PAGE:512==
502
C Additional Interview Quotes
“Because I’m... because I’m weak! I don’t know.. because I’m weak!(...)
When I have to, like focus on my studies or something and I’m weak
and I’m not able to focus then I instantly grabbed my phone and I don’t
know open up Instagram or something like that. And that’s completely
unconscious actually, I just realized ‘Okay, I was working on my special
course for five minutes’ and then I’m on my phone again. I was working
for two minutes and then I’m on my phone again.”
- Participant 1
“When I study I cannot keep focus that well but where I work I can keep
focus much more so during work I think there are hours when I when I
don’t even touch my phone.”
- Participant 1
“In class, I don’t usually use the phone cuz I need to listen so.”
- Participant 2
“During group work, I am usually more focused on doing the job than on
my phone. Sometimes for some messages, but for around 5 min.”
- Participant 8
“(...) if I know that there is something important for example, one day
my nephew has had temperature and my sister was really concerned. So I
had to check my phone regularly to see what is going on. So if there is a
case like that something important is happening. Meanwhile, I’m checking
it but usually not. I’m trying to focus on the school.”
- Participant 12
C.5.2
Normativity
“maybe more like my family because my family is quite successful and
everybody is really determined but not my parents so that’s the thing basi-
cally that so I have a really successful and yeah from a business perspective
successful family but not my parents they were always the one with the
normal kind of life but all my cousins, all my uncles, the husband of my
sister and stuff like; they are really pushing stuff and I also wanted and
still want to be liked by them.”
==PAGE:513==
C.5 Discussion
503
- Participant 1
“I am very aware of [my] smartphone usage (...) adjust the time to how
much time I have (...) postpone usage until I have an active time”
- Participant 3
“I knew that I am being tracked, but to be honest, after the first couple
of days I didn’t care. The first couple of days I tried to spend less time,
but it didn’t really work - I spend the same time. “
- Participant 4
“I feel like lately I have been too much in my phone (...) If I should be
productive, it should be one hour maximum”
- Participant 6
“(...) every time I turn on my screen I was seeing the times saying how
much time I saw spending on my phone and it sometimes made me feel
pressured (...) It feels weird that I had more time after the challenge, but
it was because I was looking for a new job. I guess it was depending on
the situation I had. But normally, I don’t spend that much time (...) I
feel a bit more productive when I am spending less time. I am focusing
more on human interaction.”
- Participant 8
“I want [to use] it less. I don’t want to use it that much. I am not happy
about my usage time. I am not feeling guilty. It’s not even social media
but I use it even when making food (...) I told myself to not go too much
on my phone”
- Participant 11
“Because I think my screen time was very high compared to what I would
think is average (...) I wanted it to go to four hours because (...) I just
think that maybe what people in my generation would, how much time
they would also spend on it without it being excessive (...) that I could
be satisfied with just four hours screen. I didn’t need to go up to the six
hours, which is why I tried to decrease it”
==PAGE:514==
504
C Additional Interview Quotes
- Participant 13
Negative connotations with high screen time
“I honestly felt better that I’m not spending that much time on messenger“
- Participant 1
“So in my mind I have this perfect morning, when I wake up, drink a glass
of water and then do some yoga. Maybe doing some some yoga would be
nice or just stretching or something like that.”
- Participant 1
“(...) I was like, well, maybe now is the time to change something (...)
Not to change like the apps I am using but to change the time that I’m
using them (...) Because I know these are the apps I’m using the most
and I don’t want to change that. These are the apps that I’m using mainly
for communication with my friends and family, so.”
- Participant 12
“Because I think my screen time was very high compared to what I would
think is average (...) I wanted it to go to four hours because (...) I just
think that maybe what people in my generation would, how much time
they would also spend on it without it being excessive (...) that I could
be satisfied with just four hours screen. I didn’t need to go up to the six
hours, which is why I tried to decrease it”
- Participant 13
“I know where I waste my time the most.
And since I do, it actually
makes me feel good, since I can try to limit my time there.”
- Participant 4
“Maybe, I should consider spending less time on this and do more valuable
things. I am not really surprised, but it makes me reflect, for sure.”
- Participant 5
==PAGE:515==
C.5 Discussion
505
”(...)that’s why I don’t have Instagram on my phone. I don’t have the app
because I was wasting too much time (...) lately I have not been productive
so I have been watching Netflix (...) I mainly waste my time from eight
till 11 (...) I know I’m wasting my time because I’m not doing anything.”
- Participant 6
“I am surprised because I thought that Facebook will be more. I feel good,
that I spend less time on Facebook (...) This means that I have not spent
my time on useless stuff. This makes me feel really good.”
- Participant 7
“(...)
used to happen when I was using Instagram but now I deleted
Instagram so I don’t check the stories anymore (...) Makes me feel like
I am wasting time (...) should be more productive. Do something more
healthy”
- Participant 9
“I think when I first saw the screen time, I was surprised and thought
it was very high and kind of shocked because I didn’t think it was that
much and then when I send it in and saw the others that I started to feel
embarrassed.”
- Participant 13
C.5.3
Human connection
“I would say because of the connectivity with other people but (...) again it
really depends on the context because for example right now when I went
to the cabin trip I was even living without my phone for three days because
I didn’t have any internet connection. I didn’t touch my phone for three
days. But I was surrounded by people 24/7 so the only context I couldn’t
live without my phone is if I was alone, but if I’m surrounded by people,
doing a nice trip together with someone or something like that, then I
would definitely be able to do it”
- Participant 1
‘Yeah, I feel like phone calls are definitely intimate.”
==PAGE:516==
506
C Additional Interview Quotes
- Participant 1
“Can imagine living without a phone call but would have a completely
different life”
- Participant 3
“[Without my phone, it would be harder] for many things, mainly to call my
parents and have this connection with them. This is my only connection
with them, like the phone calls, so.”
- Participant 12
“I think calling because even if I don’t have the social media, I can still
call up a friend and start to conversate but if I were not able to see or
follow what was happening around me and not able to contact anyone, I
think it would just be.. Plus not being able to contact anyone, I think it
will be even harder.”
- Participant 13
==PAGE:517==
Acronyms
CACHET Copenhagen Center for Health Technology
CEO
Chief Executive Officer
FOMO Fear Of Missing Out
GDPR General Data Protection Regulation
GPS
Global Positioning System
Lo-Fi
low fidelity
MNT
Medical News Today
O-FAQ Offline-Friend Addiction Questionnaire
P.I.S
Personal Informatics System
RICE
Reach Impact Confidence Effort
SAMS
Smartphone Addiction Management System
SAS
Smartphone Addiction Scale
SMART Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant and Time-based
URL
Uniform Resource Locator
==PAGE:518==
508
==PAGE:519==
Bibliography
[1]
Heejune Ahn, Muhammad Eka Wijaya, and Bianca Camille Esmero. “A sys-
temic smartphone usage pattern analysis: focusing on smartphone addiction
issue”. In: Int J Multimedia Ubiquitous Engineering 9 (2014), pp. 9–14.
[2]
Seyyed Salman Alavi et al. “Behavioral addiction versus substance addiction:
Correspondence of psychiatric and psychological views”. In: International jour-
nal of preventive medicine 3.4 (2012), p. 290.
[3]
Fahad D Alosaimi et al. “Smartphone addiction among university students in
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia”. In: Saudi medical journal 37.6 (2016), p. 675.
[4]
Fling B. Mobile design and development: Practical concepts and techniques for
creating mobile sites and Web apps. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2009, pp. 38–39.
[5]
Hafidha Suleiman Al-Barashdi, Abdelmajid Bouazza, and Naeema H Jabur.
“Smartphone addiction among university undergraduates: a literature review”.
In: Journal of Scientific Research and Reports (2015), pp. 210–225.
[6]
Mengwei Bian and Louis Leung. “Linking loneliness, shyness, smartphone ad-
diction symptoms, and patterns of smartphone use to social capital”. In: Social
science computer review 33.1 (2015), pp. 61–79.
[7]
Norman Blaikie. Analyzing quantitative data: From description to explanation.
Sage, 2003.
[8]
Emily Brown and Paul Cairns. “A grounded investigation of game immersion”.
In: CHI’04 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems. 2004,
pp. 1297–1300.
[9]
Hilary Brueck. “This Is What Your Smartphone Is Doing to Your Brain–And
It Isn’t Good”. In: Business Insider Australia (2018).
[10]
Geir Scott Brunborg and Jasmina Burdzovic Andreas. “Increase in time spent
on social media is associated with modest increase in depression, conduct prob-
lems, and episodic heavy drinking”. In: Journal of adolescence 74 (2019), pp. 201–
209.
[11]
Alan Bryman. Social research methods. Oxford university press, 2016.
[12]
Natale Canale et al. “Emotion-related impulsivity moderates the cognitive in-
terference effect of smartphone availability on working memory”. In: Scientific
reports 9.1 (2019), pp. 1–10.
==PAGE:520==
510
Bibliography
[13]
Valerie J Caracelli and Jennifer C Greene. “Data analysis strategies for mixed-
method evaluation designs”. In: Educational evaluation and policy analysis 15.2
(1993), pp. 195–207.
[14]
Ting-Ray Chang, Eija Kaasinen, and Kirsikka Kaipainen. “What influences
users’ decisions to take apps into use? a framework for evaluating persuasive
and engaging design in mobile Apps for well-being”. In: Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia. 2012, pp. 1–10.
[15]
Wenli Chen et al. “IDC Theory: Habit and the habit loop”. In: Research and
Practice in Technology Enhanced Learning 15 (2020), pp. 1–19.
[16]
Anna L Cox et al. “Design frictions for mindful interactions: The case for mi-
croboundaries”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2016, pp. 1389–1397.
[17]
Deloitte. Global Mobile Consumer Survey, US Edition. 2018. url: https://
www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/technology-
media- telecommunications/us- tmt- global- mobile- consumer- survey-
extended-deck-2018.pdf. 2020-03-17.
[18]
Jackie Dove. What is WhatsApp? url: https://www.digitaltrends.com/
mobile/what-is-whatsapp/. (accessed: 04.07.2020).
[19]
Jon D Elhai et al. “Depression and anxiety symptoms are related to problematic
smartphone use severity in Chinese young adults: Fear of missing out as a
mediator”. In: Addictive behaviors 101 (2020), p. 105962.
[20]
Facebook. Tools to Manage Your Time on Facebook and Instagram. url: https:
//about.fb.com/news/2018/08/manage-your-time/. (accessed: 04.07.2020).
[21]
Gregory G Feehan and Michael E Enzle. “Subjective control over rewards: Ef-
fects of perceived choice of reward schedule on intrinsic motivation and behavior
maintenance”. In: Perceptual and motor skills 72.3 (1991), pp. 995–1006.
[22]
Ernst Fehr and Urs Fischbacher. “Social norms and human cooperation”. In:
Trends in cognitive sciences 8.4 (2004), pp. 185–190.
[23]
Jane F Gilgun. “Lived experience, reflexivity, and research on perpetrators of
interpersonal violence”. In: Qualitative Social Work 7.2 (2008), pp. 181–197.
[24]
Şahin Gökçearslan et al. “Modelling smartphone addiction: The role of smart-
phone usage, self-regulation, general self-efficacy and cyberloafing in university
students”. In: Computers in Human Behavior 63 (2016), pp. 639–649.
[25]
Google. Digital Wellbeing Experiments. url: https://experiments.withgoogle.
com/collection/digitalwellbeing. (accessed: 04.07.2020).
[26]
Google. Tools to help you achieve your own personal sense of digital wellbeing.
url: https://wellbeing.google/tools/. (accessed: 04.07.2020).
[27]
Mark Griffiths. “Internet addiction: Fact or fiction?” In: The psychologist (1999).
==PAGE:521==
Bibliography
511
[28]
Tristan Harris. “How technology is hijacking your mind—from a magician and
Google design ethicist”. In: Thrive Global 18 (2016).
[29]
Nazir S Hawi and Maya Samaha. “To excel or not to excel: Strong evidence
on the adverse effect of smartphone addiction on academic performance”. In:
Computers & Education 98 (2016), pp. 81–89.
[30]
Caroline Haythornthwaite. “Strong, weak, and latent ties and the impact of new
media”. In: The information society 18.5 (2002), pp. 385–401.
[31]
Milena Head and Natalia Ziolkowski. “Understanding student attitudes of mo-
bile phone features: Rethinking adoption through conjoint, cluster and SEM
analyses”. In: Computers in Human Behavior 28.6 (2012), pp. 2331–2339.
[32]
Constance Holden. ’Behavioral’addictions: do they exist? 2001.
[33]
Hansen Hsu. Machine gambling in the ‘zone’: Natasha Dow Schüll’s Addiction
by Design. 2013.
[34]
Instagram. Introducing “You’re All Caught Up” in Feed. url: https://about.
instagram.com/blog/announcements/introducing-youre-all-caught-up-
in-feed. (accessed: 04.07.2020).
[35]
Charlene Jennett et al. “Measuring and defining the experience of immersion
in games”. In: International journal of human-computer studies 66.9 (2008),
pp. 641–661.
[36]
Anna Lucia Spear King et al. “Nomophobia: Dependency on virtual environ-
ments or social phobia?” In: Computers in Human Behavior 29.1 (2013), pp. 140–
144.
[37]
Ruth C King and Su Dong. “The impact of smartphone on young adults”. In:
The Business & Management Review 8.4 (2017), p. 342.
[38]
Min Kwon et al. “Development and validation of a smartphone addiction scale
(SAS)”. In: PloS one 8.2 (2013), e56936.
[39]
Sylvie D Lambert and Carmen G Loiselle. “Combining individual interviews
and focus groups to enhance data richness”. In: Journal of advanced nursing
62.2 (2008), pp. 228–237.
[40]
Heyoung Lee et al. “The SAMS: Smartphone addiction management system
and verification”. In: Journal of medical systems 38.1 (2014), p. 1.
[41]
Yu-Kang Lee et al. “The dark side of smartphone usage: Psychological traits,
compulsive behavior and technostress”. In: Computers in human behavior 31
(2014), pp. 373–383.
[42]
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. “A stage-based model of personal infor-
matics systems”. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors
in computing systems. 2010, pp. 557–566.
[43]
Yu-Hsuan Lin et al. “Time distortion associated with smartphone addiction:
Identifying smartphone addiction via a mobile application (App)”. In: Journal
of psychiatric research 65 (2015), pp. 139–145.
==PAGE:522==
512
Bibliography
[44]
Thomas R Lindlof and Bryan C Taylor. Qualitative communication research
methods. Sage publications, 2017.
[45]
Andrew Lipsman and A Lella. The 2017 US mobile app report. url: https://
www.comscore.com/Insights/Presentations-and-Whitepapers/2017/The-
2017-US-Mobile-App-Report. (accessed: 01.07.2020).
[46]
I Scott MacKenzie. Human-computer interaction: An empirical research per-
spective. Newnes, 2012.
[47]
Aleksandar Matic, Martin Pielot, and Nuria Oliver. “Boredom-Computer Inter-
action: Boredom Proneness and The Use of Smartphone”. In: Sept. 2015. doi:
10.1145/2750858.2807530.
[48]
Patrick D McGorry et al. “Age of onset and timing of treatment for mental and
substance use disorders: implications for preventive intervention strategies and
models of care”. In: Current opinion in psychiatry 24.4 (2011), pp. 301–306.
[49]
Marshall McLuhan and Quentin Fiore. “The medium is the message”. In: New
York 123 (1967), pp. 126–128.
[50]
Stuart Miles and Britta O’Boyle. What is Apple Screen Time and how does it
work? url: https://www.pocket-lint.com/apps/news/apple/144733-what-
is-apple-screen-time-and-how-does-it-work. (accessed: 04.07.2020).
[51]
Alberto Monge Roffarello and Luigi De Russis. “The race towards digital well-
being: Issues and opportunities”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 2019, pp. 1–14.
[52]
Dianne Morrison-Beedy, Denise Côté-Arsenault, and Nancy Fischbeck Feinstein.
“Maximizing results with focus groups: Moderator and analysis issues”. In: Ap-
plied Nursing Research 14.1 (2001), pp. 48–53.
[53]
Arab Naz et al. “The malevolence of technology: An investigation into the
various socio-economic impacts of excessive cell phone use among university
students (A Case Study of University of Malakand, KPK Pakistan)”. In: In-
ternational Journal of Academic Research in Business and Social Sciences 1.3
(2011).
[54]
J Nielsen. Smartphones: so many apps, so much time. 2014.
[55]
Kenton P O’Hara et al. “Everyday dwelling with WhatsApp”. In: Proceedings
of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social
computing. 2014, pp. 1131–1143.
[56]
Barbara Probst. “The eye regards itself: Benefits and challenges of reflexivity in
qualitative social work research”. In: Social Work Research 39.1 (2015), pp. 37–
48.
[57]
Ruth Rettie. “Connectedness, awareness and social presence”. In: (2003).
[58]
Maya Samaha and Nazir S Hawi. “Relationships among smartphone addiction,
stress, academic performance, and satisfaction with life”. In: Computers in Hu-
man Behavior 57 (2016), pp. 321–325.
==PAGE:523==
Bibliography
513
[59]
Sameer. How to avoid wasting time on WhatsApp? url: https://www.muchtech.
org/2015/07/how-to-avoid-wasting-time-on-whatsapp.html. (accessed:
04.07.2020).
[60]
Liam Satchell et al. “Development of an Offline-Friend Addiction Questionnaire
(O-FAQ): Are most people really social addicts?” In: (2020).
[61]
Natasha Dow Schüll. Addiction by design: Machine gambling in Las Vegas.
Princeton University Press, 2014.
[62]
May-li Seah and Paul Cairns. “From immersion to addiction in videogames”. In:
People and Computers XXII Culture, Creativity, Interaction 22 (2008), pp. 55–
63.
[63]
P Semaille. “The new types of addiction”. In: Revue medicale de Bruxelles 30.4
(2009), p. 335.
[64]
Aaron Smith, Lee Rainie, and Kathryn Zickuhr. College students and technology.
2011.
[65]
Alistair Sutcliffe. “Designing for user engagement: Aesthetic and attractive user
interfaces”. In: Synthesis lectures on human-centered informatics 2.1 (2009),
pp. 1–55.
[66]
Thompson SH Teo, Vivien KG Lim, and Raye YC Lai. “Intrinsic and extrinsic
motivation in Internet usage”. In: Omega 27.1 (1999), pp. 25–37.
[67]
TikTokUK. Screen Time Management and Restricted Mode Features on Tik-
Tok. url: https://medium.com/@TikTokUK/new-screen-time-management-
and - restricted - mode - features - on - tiktok - 86eb30bcf93d. (accessed:
04.07.2020).
[68]
Sensor Tower. Q4 2019 Store Intelligence Data Digest. url: https : / / go .
sensortower.com/rs/351-RWH-315/images/Sensor-Tower-Q4-2019-Data-
Digest.pdf. (accessed: 04.07.2020).
[69]
MW Van Someren, YF Barnard, and JAC Sandberg. “The think aloud method:
a practical approach to modelling cognitive”. In: London: AcademicPress (1994).
[70]
Kevin B Wright. “Researching Internet-based populations: Advantages and dis-
advantages of online survey research, online questionnaire authoring software
packages, and web survey services”. In: Journal of computer-mediated commu-
nication 10.3 (2005), JCMC1034.
[71]
Mehmet Ali Yildiz. “Emotion regulation strategies as predictors of internet
addiction and smartphone addiction in adolescents”. In: Journal of Educational
Sciences and Psychology 7.1 (2017).
[72]
Kimberly S Young. Internet addiction: Evaluation and treatment. 1999.
==PAGE:524==
