==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Exoplanetary Spectra Analysis
A Deep Learning Approach
Frederik Boe Hüttel (s151689)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Consistently and accurately estimation of stellar labels is of great importance for
astrophysical research. Currently, the estimation of stellar labels is done by using
spectra which have been continuum normalised. The normalisation happens after
an observation is retrieved from a telescope. We contribute to this research field by
proposing that the stellar labels can be estimated from spectra which have not been
continuum normalised, which would allow scientist to estimate stellar labels directly
from observations coming from a telescope. We propose the use of contemporary deep
learning techniques, such as attention-based models to estimate these labels from the
spectra and the use of variational auto-encoders to increase model performance when
the signal to noise ratio of the spectra is low. Through experiments, we can show that
we can estimate the stellar labels across a wide range of different signal to noise ratios.
We show that unsupervised learning models can learn a meaningful encoding of the
spectra, which increases model performance for low signal to noise ratios. We show
that we can estimate confidence intervals for the labels by learning the parameters
of a Gaussian distribution, We can use the learned distributions to quantify the
uncertainty of an estimation by the model. When comparing the proposed methods
in this work with previous related research projects, we show that we can estimate
the stellar labels on par with these and more accurately determine some stellar labels.
With an experiment based on an observation of the sun, we show that the models
presented in this work can estimate the stellar labels of real observations. Which
leads us to the overall conclusion that stellar labels can consistently and accurately
be estimated using spectra which have not been continuum normalised
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring a masters degree in engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 17, 2020
Frederik Boe Hüttel (s151689)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Alexander Dybdahl Ratchke and Lars A Buchhave from DTU
SPACE National Space Institut for providing the data-set and insides into the gener-
ation of the spectra considered in this work.
In addition Alexander should also receive a huge thank for discussion on how vi-
sualisations and results should be presented to allow physical scientist to understand
the results presented
A huge thank should also be given to Line Kartrine Harder Clemmensen for con-
tinued support and encouragement during this this, and allowing me to pursue my
own ideas and solutions
Thank you,
Frederik Boe Huttel
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Data-set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
A Deep learning approach
7
2.1
The Curse of Dimensionality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Feature Engineering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Explainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Data augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Deep learning methodology
13
3.1
Supervised Learning Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Uncertainty estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Unsupervised Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Autoenconders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Variational Autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.7
Variational Autoencoder with auto-regressive flow prior
. . . . . . . .
23
4
Experimental setup
29
4.1
Data Augmentation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Training hyper-parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.3
Regularisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
5
Results and discussion
43
5.1
Denoising Input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Supervised results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
Conclusion on results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Conclusion
59
A Appendix
61
A.1 Result data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2 Visual explanation of the Change of variable theorem . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.3 A visualisation of the Jensen’s inequality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Bibliography
69
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Continued surveying and exploration of the vast cosmos is of great importance and
great interest for humankind.
Now it appears that we have arrived at a time in
human history where the technology is at a stage where we can explore the great
wonders of the universes. In recent years technology have allowed us to conduct ex-
tensive stellar surveys of the milky way, which have shown tremendous astrophysical
promise [Majewski et al., 2017]. These surveys have generated large databases with
spectroscopic data of stellar objects, which presents new challenges for both mod-
elling and analysis of these massive amounts of spectroscopic data [Ness et al., 2015,
Majewski et al., 2017]. One of these challenges lies in consistently and accurately de-
termination of stellar labels [Ness et al., 2015]. These labels are parameters for a stel-
lar object such as the effective temperature, size of the object, rotational velocities and
other parameters of the object. These parameters influence the shape and features of
the spectra, and previously these labels have been estimated by comparison between
the real spectroscopic data and a grid of synthetic model spectra [Ness et al., 2015].
As an alternative to this grid-based comparison method, researches have recently ap-
plied machine learning and data-driven approaches to estimate stellar labels. These
data-driven approaches have shown that they can match the grid-based methods
[Fabbro et al., 2017, Ness et al., 2015, Casey et al., 2016]. Even with the promising
results from these research projects, we still think there is room for improvements.
The current data-driven approaches apply their models on spectra which have been
continuum normalised, which is a post-processing step done after an observation is
retrieved from a telescope. However, we argue that the stellar labels can be estimated
before the spectra are continuum normalisation. This new approach would be of great
importance because the data coming directly from a telescope is not continuum nor-
malised and would allow the data models to estimate the stellar labels directly from
the telescopes.
1.1
Research objectives
This thesis contributes to the research field of stellar label estimation labels by propos-
ing that; using spectra that have not been continuum normalised, we can estimate
the stellar labels by applying deep learning models. The main research objectives are
to estimate the labels on par with current methods which are using the continuum
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
normalised data. We will also investigate how the performance of models changes as
we change the signal to noise ratio (SNR) of the samples. To increase model perfor-
mance when we get lower SNR we propose the use of a denoising unsupervised model
to denoise the samples. The improvement to performance for low SNR is equally as
important as the stellar label estimation. Due to the fact that a high SNR is achieved
by spending lots of time on a telescope, which can be expensive. If we can reduce the
telescope time by estimating the labels at lower SNR, researches could save money
and time. Furthermore, we will also present an attention network which can show re-
gions of interest in spectra and present ways of learning the uncertainty of the stellar
label estimations.
1.2
Related work
The standard methodology for the data-driven approaches have been to train models
on a set of synthetic spectra, before the models are tested on real observations with
well-defined labels [Fabbro et al., 2017, Ness et al., 2015, Bailer-Jones, 2000]. Some
of the most recent data-driven approaches are the Cannon [Ness et al., 2015] and
Starnet [Fabbro et al., 2017] which followed this approach, but the approach goes all
the way back to [Bailer-Jones, 2000], which introduced this approach. The application
of neural network for stellar labels also goes back to [Bailer-Jones, 2000] which applied
a neural network to estimate stellar labels. We will here provide a short introduction
to the most recent research approaches.
Cannon [Ness et al., 2015]: This work proposes the use of a probabilistic genera-
tive model, which learns from ’know’ labels of reference stars and how the continuum-
normalised spectra depend on the labels [Ness et al., 2015]. The cannon turned out
to be very accurate [Ness et al., 2015] and the labels estimated using synthetic data is
in line with the labels from the APOGEE pipeline [Majewski et al., 2017]. They later
continued this research and expanded on the stellar labels that they can estimate and
named that work Cannon2 [Casey et al., 2016].
Starnet [Fabbro et al., 2017]: This project work applied a 1D-convolutional neu-
ral network architecture they named starnet to synthetic stellar spectra, and achieved
results that are on par with current methods for estimation of effective temperature,
surface gravitational force, and metalicity, even outperforming the first Cannon model.
They applied their convolutions on continuum-normalised data and showed that the
performance they achieved on the this was comparable or slightly better than the
results presented in [Casey et al., 2016].
This thesis is inspired by the work of [Fabbro et al., 2017]; however, the data-set
we will be using is a data-set that has not been continuum-normalised. We also extend
the three stellar labels to include radial velocities. In this work we will also evaluate
the proposed models at low SNR, and investigate if we can improve performance of
the models by applying unsupervised learning models at these low SNR.We will at the
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Data-set
3
end of this work compare the results obtained from the proposed methods with the
results obtained by Cannon2 [Casey et al., 2016] and starnet [Fabbro et al., 2017].
1.3
Data-set
The data-set consists of synthetic spectra sampled from a grid of model atmosphere
as in [Fabbro et al., 2017] and differs from their work by not having been continuum-
normalised. The grid of model atmospheres is generated using the ATLAS9 code
[Kurucz and Bell, 1993]. The original code is described in [Kurucz, 1970] and since
been updated to include new opacities as outlined in [Castelli and Kurucz, 2004]. The
grid was extended to include different rotational velocities, by applying Grays meth-
ods [Gray, 2005]. In this work we want to estimate the 4 labels; effective temperature
(Teff), logarithm of the surface gravitational force (log g), metalicity (Z) and radial
velocities (V sini). So we generate a model atmosphere by sampling from these four
values, we then use these 4 values to generate a spectrum. The model atmospheres
are sampled from a grid, which only allows for discrete values to be sampled. We
sample 28366 noise-free spectrum from this grid. Since they are noise-free their signal
to noise (SNR) is undefined or ∞. In Section 4.1, we will explain how the discrete
samples can be used to generate even new samples which have non-discrete labels and
how simulate different signal to noise ratios.
The sampling scheme of the 4 different labels can be seen in Table 1.1. Here the
effective temperature is sampled from 3500 degrees Kelvin to 9750 degrees kelvin with
a step size of 250, which results in 26 different temperature values.
Teff
log g
Z
Vsini
Min
3500
0
-2.5
0
Max
9750
5
0.5
30
Step
250
0.5
0.5
2
Different values
26
11
7
16
Table 1.1: Stellar label parameters sampled from the grid. Showing both the Mini-
mum, maximum and Step size used to generate the spectra
Using this sampling scheme, we can produce up to 32032 total samples; however,
some of the combinations are not physically possible. This means for example, a
model atmosphere with a high effective temperature will not be able to have a low
gravitational force, which means we excluded it from the sampling.
After we ex-
clude all the impossible configuration we end up with 28366 different samples. The
distribution of the sampled labels can be seen in Figure 1.1.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
4000
6000
8000
10000
Teff
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Frequency
Teff
0
1
2
3
4
5
Log g
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Log g
2
1
0
Z
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Z
0
10
20
30
Vsini
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Vsini
Figure 1.1: Histogram showing the distribution of the 4 labels. All 4 labels have
a somewhat similar uniform distribution. However some labels, such as log g is not
uniform, as some combinations of surface gravitational force and other labels is not
a possible combination of parameters
From theses histograms we can see that the different label distributions appear to
be uniformly distribution across their domain. However for the log g it appears there
is a skewed distribution. This is because of the exclusion of combinations that are
impossible.
The sampled spectra have a wavelength range of 5050 to 5400 Angstrom (Å),
where 1 nm = 10 Å [Schroeder and Inc, 2000]. This region is only a fraction of an
entire spectrum, as the spectrum spans the entire light spectra going from 4000 Å to
7000 Å.
The initial spectra come in a 2-dimensional input where each row corresponds
to an order of spectroscopic analysis [Schroeder and Inc, 2000], in total it consists of
8 orders with a length of 4096 observed flux values. The last values of each order
are overlapping with the first values of the next order; such the last 250 values are
duplicated in the next row to mimic a real spectroscopic analysis. Also, the first
and last values of the first and last order are zero-padded to match the number of
observed flux values across the orders. Usually the processing of the 2D data is where
the continuum normalisation is performed. The overlapping flux values at the end of
each order is stitched together with the first flux values of the next order, and then
converted to a 1D spectrum, and as previously mentioned we do not perfrom the
continuum normalisation.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Data-set
5
Figure 1.2: Samples of the spectra considered in this thesis. Left: Samples which
have been continuum normalised.
Middle The 2D un-continuum normalised spectra
depicted as a 1D spectrum . Right: The un-continuum normalised spectrum shown
as 2D plot, where each order is a row
In Figure 1.2 four samples from the data-set can be seen. From the middle and
the right column, we can see the un-normalised data considered in this work. In the
middle column we can see the effect the 8 orders have on the spectra. There are 8
slopes in the spectra, which are non-smooth and non-linear, whereas the continuum
normalised spectra appear to be somewhat smooth and linear. We also note that for
the un-continuum normalised spectra they appear to be non-stationary across the a
order, compared to the continuum normalised which appears to be entirely stationary.
From the middle column we can also see that for the second observation, there
does not appear to be alot of features for estimation of those labels. This is because
for objects with a high temperature Teff the features of a spectra is less defined
compared to objects with lower Teff. This lack of features can is apparent in Fig-
ure 1.2 on the second row, which is a spectrum from a object with a high temperature,
whereas the top spectra have a cold temperature. Here we note that the stellar fea-
tures for the hot object do not appear to contain much information about the stellar
labels. In contrast, with the cold object, it would take some astrophysical knowledge
to determine the labels, but at least there appears to be some signal in the spectrum.
This lack of stellar features should make the estimation of the high temperatures
difficult, as the features are less defined.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
The main objective will to be use this synthetic non-continuum normalised data-
set to estimate stellar labels of effective temperature (Teff), logarithm of the surface
gravitational force (log g), metalicity (Z) and radial velocities (V sini).
1.4
Overview
We will here present an overview of the proposed solutions and for the thesis as a whole.
We will take a deep learning approach to the stellar label estimation and in Chapter 2
we will provide an argument to why this approach is suitable for the estimation of
the stellar label and why it is suitable as an approach to denoise low SNR samples.
The methods are then elaborated and introduced in Chapter 3, where we cover both
the supervised learning and the unsupervised learning models. We then explain the
experimental setup to test the models in Chapter 4, where we elaborate on how to
simulate different SNR, interpolate between the data and the specific architectures
for each model. The proposed solution pipeline can be seen in Figure 1.3, where each
block will be covered in the respective chapter.
Discrete Data
Interpolate
Data
Interpolate
Data
Continous Data
Denoising unsupervised
learning model
Supervised learning model
Continous data
Unsupervised Learning
Eksperiemental setup
Supervised learning
Figure 1.3: Proposed solution pipeline for the stellar label estimation
We then evaluate and discuss the results obtain by the pipeline in Chapter 5,
where we also compare the obtained results with the previous work. Based on the
entire work we the formulate a conclusion and propose future ideas for investigation
in Chapter 6
The code with the implementations of the models presented in this work can be
found on GitHub: [Link]
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
A Deep learning
approach
In this chapter, we provide an argument as to why a deep learning approach is a
suitable methodology to apply in the estimation of stellar labels. Even though the
recent increase in computational power and with the introduction of new frameworks
- these are not considered being the primary forces as to why for a deep learning
approach is suitable. These arguments have made it easier to apply and create deep
learning models. However we can not just choose a deep learning approach because
we have the computational power, some more consideration must be taken into ac-
count before we chose this approach, as there is no free-lunch in machine learning
[Goodfellow et al., 2016]
2.1
The Curse of Dimensionality
Many traditional machine learning approaches struggle to create meaningful inference
in high dimensional data. Mainly because the number of configurations of a data-set
grows exponentially with the number of variables within the set. This exponential
growth results in the distances between observations also grows exponentially with
the number of variables, which means that there are not enough samples to cover
the entire data-space [Bishop, 2007]. The problem arises because many traditional
machine learning methods assume that new observations should be approximately
equal to the closest training example, but if the training examples do not cover the
entire data-space, and if the closest training sample is far away, the models will not
perform well [Goodfellow et al., 2016, Hastie et al., 2009].
This problem is not so
prevalent in deep learning and there are multiple theories of why deep learning does
not suffer from this problem. We will here present one of those theories; the manifold
learning theory [Goodfellow et al., 2016].
==PAGE:18==
8
2 A Deep learning approach
2.1.1
Manifold learning
An important concept within the field of machine learning is that of a manifold
[Goodfellow et al., 2016].
In machine learning the term ”manifold” is used more
loosely than in mathematics and in machine learning its meaning is designate to
a connected set of points that can be approximated well by only considered a few de-
grees of freedom or dimension [Goodfellow et al., 2016]. Figure 2.1 is an example of
such a manifold. The data points are observed in 2-dimensional space; however, there
exists a 1-d manifold which is fitting the data. The idea of manifold learning is then
to infer this underlying manifold, and the manifold theory suggests that deep learning
exploits this manifold. Generally we also assume that this underlying manifold is of
a lower dimension that the actual observations, which because of a lower dimension
can help us make better inference and not suffer from the curse of dimensionality
[Goodfellow et al., 2016].
Figure 2.1: Example of training data lying near a one-dimensional manifold embedded
in two-dimensional space. source [Goodfellow et al., 2016]
Manifold learning originates from unsupervised and generative modelling problems
[Goodfellow et al., 2016]. The idea is we can use deep learning to learn this underlying
manifold, and then use the manifold to generate new data samples, estimate sample la-
bels or compress data onto the manifold [Vincent et al., 2008, Goodfellow et al., 2016]
2.1.2
Learning Manifolds with auto-encoders
An architecture in deep learning that tries to learn this underlying manifold is the
Auto-encoder. The auto-encoder tries to exploit the idea that; the data is concen-
trated around a lower-dimensional manifold [Goodfellow et al., 2016].
If the auto-
encoder have learned the manifold, it can encode only the variation within the data-
set, needed to reconstruct samples [Goodfellow et al., 2016].
Now non-parametric
==PAGE:19==
2.1 The Curse of Dimensionality
9
unsupervised learning methods also tries to learn this underlying manifold, such as
k-nearest neighbours, but if the manifold is not smooth1, a huge amount of training
examples is required to learn this manifold, when the dimensions of the data-set is
high [Goodfellow et al., 2016].
Using Auto-encoders we can learn this underlying manifold [Goodfellow et al., 2016].
However, for the case when we have a noisy sample, the sample might not fall on this
manifold but somewhere next to it [Vincent et al., 2008]. So when a stochastic map-
ping corrupts the input x into ˆx, it could be beneficial to learn the projection of ˆx
back onto the manifold. This extension to the auto-encoder is is the denoising auto-
encoder [Vincent et al., 2008], where the objective is to learn the vector that projects
the data point back onto the underlying manifold, or learn to remove the noise from
an observation and recreate the observation. In Figure 2.2 an example of corrupted
inputs ˆx are project back onto the lower-dimensional manifold.
Figure 2.2: Suppose that the the data X is concentrated near a low-dimensional
manifold. Now corrupted examples from X, ˆx, which is obtained by applying some
corruption qD(ˆx|x). The objective is then to learn the model g′
θ(fθ(ˆx)), which projects
ˆx back onto the original manifold. Source: [Vincent et al., 2008]
In Section 3.4 we formally introduce the auto-encoder and the denoising auto-
encoder. In addition to this, we extend the auto-encoder to more contemporary un-
supervised learning models, which also aims to learn the manifold and the projection
of corrupted data back onto the manifold.
We consider the stellar spectra in this work (see Section 1.3), to be high dimen-
sional data-set, with 32000 input features, which is roughly equal to a 180×180 image.
1smoothness is depended on the structure and complexity of the data
==PAGE:20==
10
2 A Deep learning approach
Given the high dimensionality of the data, it appears that a deep learning approach
is suitable for analysis of these spectra, and that deep learning models can use this
underlying structure of the data to make inference.
2.2
Feature Engineering
An important branch of machine learning is feature engineering, where we engineer
features that can improve model performance. For example, one might add an interac-
tion term to a ordinary least squares model in order to improve the model performance
[Hastie et al., 2009]. However, with a deep learning approach there is no need to per-
form feature engineering of the input x, as the feature engineering happens in the
non-linear layers of the deep learning model [Goodfellow et al., 2016].
When analysing spectroscopic data, human-engineered features are often based on
assumptions about various physical properties of a sample [Yang et al., 2019]. Even
though these features sometimes can tell important things about the composites of a
spectrum, only a few human-engineered features can improve the performance of
machine learning models for some types of spectroscopic data [Yang et al., 2019].
Another downside of the human-engineered features is that they often come with
a computational cost as-well-as imposing a prior onto the samples in the data-set
[Yang et al., 2019].
What we argue is that features used for stellar label estimation is already present
in the un-continuum normalised data, and that the continuum normalisation is re-
dundant when estimating the stellar labels. Hence why there is no need for feature
engineering as this ensures we do not impose priors onto our data, and that the models
only generate the features needed to estimate the stellar labels.
2.3
Explainability
Even though deep learning appears to be superior compared to other machine learning
models, many branches of science are also interested in what features and what regions
are of importance. The need for explainability in science is one of the drawbacks of a
deep learning approach because the stacked non-linear layers give very little room for
interpretation. Compared with a ordinary least squares where each parameter comes
with a significance level and a uncertainty, which easily translate into an interpretation
of importance, the deep learning approach does not hold the same kind of statistical
evidence for the importance of features. Due to this interpretation, the OLS is a very
qualified model for various branches of science. However we have argued that an OLS
would not perform so well for the high dimensional data of the stellar spectra due to
the curse of dimensionality. So in order to obtain something kind of interpretation
of a deep learning models, we look to contemporary deep learning methods for a
solution.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Explainability
11
2.3.1
Attention and grad-cam
Some contemporary fields of deep learning are looking into how this problem of inter-
pretation can be solved in a deep learning framework. One of the approaches is the
Grad-Cam algorithm [Selvaraju et al., 2016].
This approach investigates activated
gradients during a forward pass, to examine what areas of the input had been acti-
vated during the forward pass in order to evaluate regions with high activations during
the forward pass[Selvaraju et al., 2016], which starnet [Fabbro et al., 2017] applied to
visualise elements present in their data-set.
Another approach which is not based on the gradients but based on the idea of
attention where the deep learning models learns to pay attention to some input fea-
tures [Jaderberg et al., 2015, Vaswani et al., 2017, Jetley et al., 2018]. The approach
to attention varies across applications, but the main idea is, the model learns weights
which indicate parts of the input to focus on. These attention-mechanisms are used as
a way to interpret the importance of different features of the input [Xu et al., 2015]
2.3.1.1
Hard versus soft attention
Within the sub-genre of attention, there are two main branches of attention, a hard
and soft attention [Xu et al., 2015]. The difference between the two approaches is
how they attend to the input. The hard attention blocks out part of the input or
crops the inputs, whereas the soft attention does not block any of the input, but
puts more emphasis on different parts of the input.
In Figure 2.3 two examples
of the different attention can be seen.
On the right, a soft-attention mechanism
proposed by [Jetley et al., 2018] is depicted. Here the different parts of the input
are highlighted based on the attention for that input. On the left an example of
hard attention where each image ins cropped by the bounding boxes on the images
[Jaderberg et al., 2015]. Often in order to optimise hard attention approaches, we
need a sampling scheme in order to allow for gradients to flow across our deep learning
models [Xu et al., 2015, Oktay et al., 2018].
(a) An example of soft attention.
Source:
[Jetley et al., 2018]
(b) An example of hard attentio.
Source:
[Jaderberg et al., 2015]
Figure 2.3: Two examples of different attention approaches. 1 example of soft atten-
tion and 1 example of hard attention
==PAGE:22==
12
2 A Deep learning approach
In this work, we apply a soft-attention mechanism in order to solve this lack
of explainable. The soft-attention approach will be elaborated in Section 3.3. In
Section 3.2 we will also present ways of adding uncertainty in to the stellar label
estimation.
The soft-attention mechanism in this work is suitable, because for high-temperature
spectra the stellar features are somewhat sparse, which could make hard attention
models having trouble locating these features for high-temperature spectra, resulting
in difficulties at locating regions to attend.
2.4
Data augmentation
Lastly, an advantage of using a deep learning approach is that the more data we
have, the better a deep learning model performance. This increase in performance is
not as substantial in traditional machine learning algorithms [Ng, 2017]. However, it
might not always be able to get more data; and this is where data augmentation can
work as a way to generate new data [Goodfellow et al., 2016]. When we want to test
the model under different SNR, we add Gaussian noise to the data x, but instead of
adding the Gaussian noise directly onto the entire data-set, each mini-batch during
training2 is corrupted by new Gaussian noise.
This almost guarantees that each
training example is a new training example, and this forces the network to learn the
underlying structure of the data [Goodfellow et al., 2016], this have increased the size
of the data-set as whole. In addition to this we will also interpolate between samples
to generate even more samples, if we randomly interpolate between two samples, we
can almost generate an infinitely large data-set, which would make the models more
generalise-able
All the points made in this chapter argued why a deep learning approach is suitable
to use for estimation of the stellar labels.
We will propose the use of denoising
autoencoder variant in order to denoise a corrupted input. This denoising should
make a supervised learning model perform better for low SNR. Then for the supervised
learning case, we will introduce a soft-attention mechanism such that we can generate
interpretability of our models. In the following chapter, we will formally introduce
the models.
2Also during testing, but the effects can be seen during training.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Deep learning
methodology
This chapter will present the deep learning methodology applied to solve the problems
presented in Chapter 1 and Chapter 2.
This chapter both covers the supervised
learning methodology and the unsupervised learning methodology (see Figure 1.3 for
an overview of the pipeline)
We will present and attention models, denoising unsupervised learning models
and a way to add uncertainty estimations to the estimations. For the denoising unsu-
pervised learning the starting point will be the auto-encoder, before we expand this
model and introduce more complex model designs. When introducing the methods
and models, we will mainly state the loss used to train the models. The implementa-
tions of the models are explained in Chapter 4.
In this section, whenever a function or probability distribution is learned through
a deep learning model, we will use a subscript to identify the parameters of the
network (θ,ϕ). It is then implied that we minimise the loss function with regards to
the parameters of the model. Also note that some distributions are not parameterised
by a neural network, these distributions are explicit defined. In the case of multiple
distributions subscript of a letter indicate that the distributions is related to the
variable of that letter
3.1
Supervised Learning Objective
The main objective of this work is the estimation of the stellar labels, which setups a
supervised learning objective.
fθ(x) = y
(3.1)
where y is the stellar labels, which is effective temperature (Teff), surface gravita-
tional force (log g), metalicity (Z) and radial velocities (V sini). The x is the the un-
continuum normalised spectra. the function fθ will then be parameterised by a neural
network. All the labels of y well be considered continuous even though in Section 1.3
the samples are discrete from a model grid, but in Section 4.1.1 I will explain how we
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Deep learning methodology
can linear interpolate between samples from the grid in order generate new samples
which are not categorical. So in the following consider the stellar labels y continuous.
This means where in Multivariate Regression setting. The mean-squared error (MSE)
loss i commonly used as a loss function for regression. [Goodfellow et al., 2016].
L(y, fθ(x)) = ∥y −fθ(x)∥2
(3.2)
The aim of the supervised learning objective is then to minimise Equation 3.2, with
respect to the parameters of fθ.
3.2
Uncertainty estimation
One of the areas of interest within the stellar spectroscopy community is the uncer-
tainty of label estimation. There exist various ways of adding uncertainty estimate of
the estimated label, either by applying dropout during inference [Gal and Ghahramani, 2015]
or a complete Bayesian approach to the weights of the network [Blundell et al., 2015].
In this work we chose to estimate a distribution of the stellar labels, and use this to
quantify the uncertatinty of the estimation [Kendall and Gal, 2017, Nix and Weigend, 1994]
When a model is trained using the MSE loss function (Equation 3.2) there is an as-
sumption that the variance is constant across the observations [Kendall and Gal, 2017,
Nix and Weigend, 1994], however this might not always be the case.
Instead we
can perform perform heteroscedastic regression, where we assume that the variance
across observations is not constant [Kendall and Gal, 2017]. In order to perform het-
eroscedastic regression using deep learning, we change the architecture to output
parameters of a Gaussian distribution µθ(x) and σθ(x) [Nix and Weigend, 1994], so
we try to estimate the uncertainty of a given sample using a Gaussian distribution.
fθ(x) = N
 µθ(x), σθ(x)2
(3.3)
The µθ(x) is then considered the estimation of the network, and the σθ(x) is an
approximation of the uncertainty of a given sample. Using Equation 3.3 can both
be a multivariate distribution and if there is more than 1 label for estimation. Since
we now learn a distribution instead of a point estimate we must change the loss to
account for this. Since we know the labels we can train the model such that the
learned distributions maximises the likelihood of the labels. In practice this becomes
a minimisation of the negative log-likelihood [Kendall and Gal, 2017]
L(y, µθ(x), σθ(x)) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
1
2σθ(x)2 ∥yi −µθ(xi)∥2 + 1
2 log σθ(x)2
(3.4)
Here it can be seen that if σ = k the minisation of Equation 3.4 simplifies back
into Equation 3.2. When the learned distribution is a multivariate Gaussian the loss
becomes
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Attention
15
L(y, µθ(x), Σθ(x)) = N
2 log |Σθ(x)| + 1
2
N
X
i=1
(yi −µθ(xi))T Σθ(x)−1 (yi −µθ(xi))
(3.5)
In the multivariate case we also learn the correlation structure between the labels.
However the multivariate case comes with an disadvantage, that we need to learn Σ,
which size is equal to dimensions of y squared, which increase the sizes of the models
we need. One can chose to just learn the lower triangular representation of Σ and
then use that to parameters N(µ, Σ). In this case i assume independence between the
4 stellar labels, and train the model under Equation 3.5 with a Σ being a a diagonal
matrix.
The uncertainty that is caputered by this approach is in a bayesian approach
called aleatoric uncertainty [Kendall and Gal, 2017], and explains the uncertainty
in the estimation of the labels. This approach to uncertainty estimation does not
capture the epistemic uncertainty which is the uncertainty that is present in the
model [Kendall and Gal, 2017].
3.3
Attention
In this section we will present the attention architecture applied in this work. The
attention mechanism applied in this work, can be applied to any convolutional neural
network architecture.The approach is based in a soft-attention mechanism [Jetley et al., 2018],
where no parts of the input is cropped away. The main architecture can be seen in
Figure 3.1. The specific architecture can be seen in Section 4.4.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Deep learning methodology
Conv
Conv
Conv
Conv
Conv
Attention block
Attention block
Attention block
Linear Layer
Linear Layer
Linear Layer
Mean
Mu
Sigma
Mu
Sigma
Mu
Sigma
Mu
Sigma
x2
x1
x3
g
Figure 3.1: Figure showing the attention network used in this work. Each feature
map xs produced as feature map that along with the global feature vector g makes
an estimated µ and σ. The from each attention block we mean the estimaties to
get the final estimation of the stellar labels. The attention blocks of the figure will
be elaborated on in Section 3.3.1 and a figure showing the blocks can be seen in
Figure 3.2. Complete architecture can be seen in Section 4.4. Illustration inspired by
Figure 2 in [Jetley et al., 2018].
The overall attention network architecture is inspire by the work of [Jetley et al., 2018],
however for the attention mechanism we propose the use of attention blocks presented
in [Oktay et al., 2018, Schlemper et al., 2018]. These attention blocks where chosen
as an alternative to the methods presented by [Jetley et al., 2018] as they empirically
was found to outperform the methods from [Jetley et al., 2018]. The proposed archi-
tecture is illustrated in Figure 3.1. The idea is to extract feature maps at different
levels of the convolutional layers which together can make an estimate of the entire
input. If we apply pooling layers to the network, the later feature maps, contains fea-
tures that are more local, so the initial block will find global features for the spectrum,
and the subsequent blocks will attend to more local features [Oktay et al., 2018]. We
combine the output of the 3 blocks to make the final estimation of the network.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Attention
17
3.3.1
Attention Blocks
Figure 3.2: Schematics for the attentionblock from [Oktay et al., 2018]. This is the
overview of the attentionblocks in Figure 3.1.
This implementation have a slight
difference and that is we still normalise Ψ using softmax instead of sigmoid.
We will here adopt the notation from [Oktay et al., 2018] to adhere with Figure 3.2,
and formally present the attention block.
Let xl = {xl
i}n
i=1 be an feature map of chosen layer l ∈{1, ..., L} where the
each xl
i be the specific values for a feature vector of length Fi (i.e.
the number
of channels). For all xl
i, the attention blocks computes a coefficients al = {al
i}n
i=1,
where al
i ∈[0, 1], in order to identify important areas. The ouput of the attention
block is ˆxl = {al
ixl
i}n
i=1, where each input feature is scaled by an attention coefficient
[Oktay et al., 2018]. Let g ∈RFg be a global feature map with the entire input as
support. The global feature map is used in together with the feature maps xl in the
attention block to determine what regions to attend to [Oktay et al., 2018].
There are various ways of combining the the attention al with the input xl.
[Oktay et al., 2018] Propose the use of additive attention to combine the two, which
they argue performs well for high-dimensional data. Formally we can compute the
attention map al as follows, which is a equation of Figure 3.2:
ql
att,i = ψT 
σ1

W T
x xl
i + W T
g g + bxg

+ bψ
αl = σ2
 ql
att
 xl, g; Θatt

(3.6)
where σ1(x) is the activation function of the neural network, and σ2(x) is a nor-
malisation function. This normalisation function can either be the sigmoid or the
softmax operation, such that the attention map sums to 1 [Oktay et al., 2018]. The
convolutional weights W x and W g, of the network is to ensure that that g and xl
have the same dimensionality and channels. The weights ψ combined the features
the features from all the channels a 1 channel attention map. This attention map is
then normalised and added back onto the original input
The parameters of the attention block is convolutional layers, which all together
can be trained using standard back-propagation, without the need for sampling based
optimisation methods [Oktay et al., 2018]
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Deep learning methodology
3.3.2
Global feature map
The global feature map g works as global information about the entire input. it is
called a global feature map, because it must contain global information regarding the
entire input, such that the attention block can combine this to know which parts
of the input to attend to. However dependant on how many times we have applied
pooling in the network, the size of g does not match the intermediate feature maps
xl. So we apply a billinear upsampling of g to match the width and height matches
the dimensional of the feature maps xl [Oktay et al., 2018].
3.3.3
Normalisation
For the normalisation function σ2(x), there exist a trade-off between using the sig-
moid or the softmax normalisation. The soft-max normalisation function will often
encourage sparse features, compared to the sigmoid [Oktay et al., 2018].
al
i =
eql
att,i
P
i eql
att,i
(3.7)
However based on empirically evidence we found the soft-max normalisation to
out perform the sigmoid normalisation.
3.3.4
Combination of the feature maps
Recall that the output of the attention block is ˆxl. Combining all the ˆxl from the
attention blocks must done such that all blocks learn meaning-full attended fea-
tures [Oktay et al., 2018, Jetley et al., 2018].
One way to combine them could be
to concatenated all ˆxl into a vector and apply a multi-layered perceptron in order
to make estimations, however this can lead to some blocks not learning meaningful
features as the feature engineering could be done in the multi-layered perceptron
[Oktay et al., 2018]. Therefor we apply a linear layer to each individual ˆxl before
they are averaged across all the blocks. This ensures that all the blocks must learn
features which are relevant in the estimation. In addition to this, this combination
works as a ensemble of models, which together make the final estimation.
This concludes the supervised learning methodologies applied in this work. The
specific architectures and dimensions of the models can be seen in Section 4.4. We
will now introduce the unsupervised learning methods.
3.4
Unsupervised Learning
As mention in Section 2.1.1 it could be beneficial to learn the underlying manifold of
spectra or learn the vector which projects a sample back onto the underlying manifold.
==PAGE:29==
3.5 Autoenconders
19
The auto-encoders have the ability to learn this. I therefor introduce the autoencoder
and variants hereof.
The auto-encoder is an unsupervised learning model, so the
learning objective becomes
fθ(x) = x
(3.8)
The models of interest in this section will be the denoising variations of the models
described in this section.
3.5
Autoenconders
The auto-encoder have a rich history within the field of deep learning. The auto-
encoder consist of 2 networks, a encoder fϕ(x) and a decoder gθ(y). [Goodfellow et al., 2016]
The auto-encoder takes in input x and maps it to an encoding z through the encoder
network fϕ(x). Then z is used to reconstruct the original input ˆx using the decoder
network gθ(z). The both networks are trained using some loss function on the re-
constructed ˆx to the input x. [Goodfellow et al., 2016]. In this case we want the
output of gθ(z) to be continuous, as the spectras are continous, and such we apply
the mean-squared error loss as the reconstruction error of the auto-encoder.
L(x, gθ((fϕ(x))) = ∥x −gθ(fψ(x))∥2
(3.9)
From Equation 3.9 it can be concluded that gθ(fϕ(x)) can simply learn the identity
function in order to minimise it. In order to avoid this you limit the dimensionality
of z such that the dimension of z is lower than the dimension of x. This forces the
auto-encoder to encode information about x into the code z, but the encoding z also
just needs to keep the variation within x that is sufficient to reconstruct the original
sample.
3.5.1
Denoising Autoencoder
An extension of the auto-encoder is the denoising auto-encoder [Vincent et al., 2008].
As the name suggest this network denoises a corrupted input x′ to the original input
x. The corruption can be performed by some stochastic mapping
x′ ∼Q(x′|x)
(3.10)
The corrupted input x′ is the propagated through fϕ(x′) and then again through the
gθ(z). The loss of reconstruction is once again the mean squared error, however with
a change to the input
L(x, gθ((fϕ(x′))) = ∥x −gθ((fϕ(x′)))∥2
(3.11)
Trivially this new loss will not result in the identity function [Vincent et al., 2008].
This is the model class of interest as this model learns the vector which projects a
input x onto the original data manifold [Vincent et al., 2008, Goodfellow et al., 2016],
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Deep learning methodology
a visualisation of this can be seen in Figure 2.2. The stochastic mapping applied in this
work will be a simulation of different SNR which will be elaborated on in Section 4.1.2.
We will use these types of models to try an increase the SNR when we have noisy
samples.
3.6
Variational Autoencoder
An extension the autoencoder is the variational autoencoder (VAE) [Kingma and Welling, 2013].
This model type is similar to the autoencoder as they both apply the same building
blocks, namely the decoder and encoder. However the VAE starts assumes that the
data is generated using an unobserved continuous random variable z [Kingma and Welling, 2013].
This assumption changes how we train the autoencoder as we impose a prior on the
latent variables z and its distribution p(z). The VAE also have roots in bayesian statis-
tics as we are learning the distribution of z and a posibility to learn a probabilistic de-
coder pθ(x|z). The encoder is also name a recognittion model qϕ(z|x). The recognition
is an approximation of the intractable true posterior pθ(z|x) [Kingma and Welling, 2013].
3.6.1
Variational lower Bound
In the VAE the loss have to be change from the original Autoencoder as we now have
prior assumptions on the latent variable z. I will here derive the variational lower
bound, which is used as the loss function for the VAE. The idea is to do maximum
likelihood estimation of the data-set x
log pθ(x(1), ..., x(n)) =
X
i
log pθ(x(i))
(3.12)
I will here start with on data point xi and call it for x in the following, so P
i is
not written at each equation. Given that the assumption of the latent variable z, the
log-likeihood is obtain by combining the prior p(z) with a parameterised familly of
conditional distributions pθ(x|z). So the objective can be written as
log pθ(x) = log(
Z
z
pθ(x|z)p(z)dz)
(3.13)
Even though that p(z) and pθ(x|z) generally will be simple distributions. This is stil
intractable to solve analytical, becuase we need to solve the integral. However if we
introduce q(z) which can be any distribution and then multiple the integral with q(z)
q(z),
the objective is rewritten into
log pθ(x) = log(
Z
z
pθ(x|z)p(z)
q(z)q(z)dz)
(3.14)
The intergral can be writen as a expectation of the the latent variable z and since
the log is concave. We can use Jensen’s inequality (see Apendix A.3 for visualisation
==PAGE:31==
3.6 Variational Autoencoder
21
of Jensens inequality)
log E(x) ≥E [log(x)]
if log(x) is concave
(3.15)
to swap the logarithm and the expectation. [Bishop, 2007]. Using this we can write
up the variational lower bound consisting of terms we can evaluate provided pθ(x|z),
p(z) and q(z) [Bishop, 2007]:
log pθ(x) = log

Ez∼q(z)

pθ(x | z)p(z)
q(z)

≥Ez∼q(z) [log pθ(x | z) + log p(z) −log q(z)]
= Ez∼q(z) [log pθ(x | z)] −KL[q(z)∥p(z)]
(3.16)
This holds for any q(z) [Bishop, 2007]. Now in the context of an auto encoder
we can use the encoder to apply the approximate posterior qϕ(z|x), which now de-
pends on x and the parameters ϕ.
This changes to the loss of the VAE to be
[Kingma and Welling, 2013]
L(x, θ, ϕ) = −Ez∼qθ(z|x) [log pϕ (x|z)] + KL (qθ (z|x) ∥p(z))
(3.17)
Note that Equation 3.17, we can interpret the first term as a reconstruction accu-
racy of the decoder network pθ(x|z) and the second term can be seen as regularisation
of the latent space, which forces the distribution of the z to be packed into the prior
p(z)
A common prior imposed on p(z) is an isotropic Gaussian. This means that for
the Kullback–Leibler divergence in the loss Equation 3.17 has a closed form solution
[Kingma and Welling, 2013]:
KL (qθ (z|x) ∥p(z)) = 1
2
k
X
i=1
 σ2
i + µ2
i −ln
 σ2
i

−1

(3.18)
Where the parameters µ and σ is estimated using the decoder part of the VAE qϕ(z|x).
This allows for easy evaluation of the loss Equation 3.17, which is important when
we want to minimise the loss.
For the reconsutrction accuracy we again apply the same loss as normal auto-
encoder, where we compute the mean-squared error of the reconstruction of an ob-
servation.
This then changes the loss of the model to be the reconstruction loss
from the auto-encoder in addition the regularisation of the latent space with the KL
divergence.
L(x, gθ(z), qϕ(z|x)) = Ez∼qθ(z|x)

||x −g(z)||2 + KL (qθ (z|x) ∥p(z))

(3.19)
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Deep learning methodology
3.6.2
Reparametrization trick
Now in order to minimize the loss in Equation 3.19, we need to generate samples from
the latent distribution
z ∼qθ(z|x)
(3.20)
It much be done such that the gradients can be calculate across the deep learning
model, so we can minimise the loss [Kingma and Welling, 2013].
Using the repa-
rameterisation trick [Kingma and Welling, 2013], we can generate samples from the
Gaussian prior p(z):
z = µ + σϵ
ϵ ∼N(0, 1)
(3.21)
Where the paramters µ and σ are learned through the encoder. This allows us to
easily generate samples from qθ(z|x). This allows for sampling of the latent space,
while the gradients still can flow through the encoder.
3.6.3
Annealing of the KL divergence
A way to improve the VAE is to anneal the importance of the KL divergence by a
variable β [Bowman et al., 2015]. This changes the Equation 3.19 into
L(x, gθ(z), qϕ(z|x)) = Ez∼qθ(z|x)

||x −g(z)||2 + βKL (qθ (z|x) ∥p(z))

(3.22)
Then the parameter β can be varied to increase or decrease the importance of the
KL-divergence in the loss. [Bowman et al., 2015]. If the beta value is set to start a 0
and increase to 1 during training the mosel first optimizes the reconstructions before
it starts to pack the latent variable z into the prior distribution [Bowman et al., 2015].
The annealing can both be done in various ways, either by a linear increase - or a
cyclical annealing scheme as proposed by [Fu et al., 2019]. In this work I apply the
cyclical annealing scheme as the idea of the VAE is to work as a denosing autoencoder,
and the reconstructions are of the most importance.
3.6.4
Denoising Criterion in an VAE
As with the autoencoder the VAE also extends to the denoising case. Where the
input x have been corrupted by some stochastic mapping as in Equation 3.10.
L(x, gθ(z), qϕ(z|x′)) = Ez∼qθ(z|x′)

||x −g(z)||2 + βKL (qθ (z|x′) ∥p(z))

(3.23)
The VAE also extends to work in the demonising case, where x is corrupted by some
stochastic mapping and may be trained the same way as a normal variational auto-
encder. [Im et al., 2015].
==PAGE:33==
3.7 Variational Autoencoder with auto-regressive flow prior
23
3.7
Variational Autoencoder with auto-regressive flow
prior
Now one might argue that the prior p(z) can be more expressive, it might even be a
complex distribution, compared to a simple Gaussian [Chen et al., 2016]. So a way
to model a more complex prior distribution, it can be modelled using a flow model. A
type of model which can model complex distributions [Rezende and Mohamed, 2015].
I will here give a short introduction to auto-regressive flow models in order to explain
how they can be applied to learn the prior in a VAE. For more in depth reading on flow
models the reader is refereed to [Rezende and Mohamed, 2015, Kingma et al., 2016,
Chen et al., 2016].
3.7.1
Flows for Variational Inference
A flow describes the transformation of a probability density through a sequence of
invertible mappings into another probability distribution. The idea is often to trans-
form a simple distribution into a more complex one [Rezende and Mohamed, 2015].
The notation of z and x in the following is for generality, and have no relation to
previous mentioned latent variables, I will in Section 3.7.3 couple the flow models
back into the VAE model. The idea of a flow is to map the input x into a latent
variables z
z = fθ(x)
(3.24)
where we assumed that z comes from a distribution pz(z). The function fθ is then
parameters using a deep neural networks [Rezende and Mohamed, 2015]. We would
like to train the model under maximum likelihood, where we maximise the likelihood
of x
max
θ
X
i
log pθ (x)
(3.25)
So how can we train maximum likelihood under the give model setup? we can apply
the the Change of variables theorem (see Apendix A.2 for visualisation of the theorem)
[Rezende and Mohamed, 2015, Kingma et al., 2016], where if we know the density of
the one variable we can know the density of the other variable
z = fθ(x)
pθ(x)dx = p(z)dz
pθ(x) = p (fθ(x))
det ∂fθ(x)
∂x

−1
(3.26)
This theorem provides equation we can use to flow between two distributions. How-
ever this puts some requirements on the models we can learns as the function fθ must
be invertible and differentiable.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Deep learning methodology
If we then apply this theorem Equation 3.26 back into the the maximum likelihood
for the flow, we get the following objective
L(x, pθ(x)) = Ex

−log pz (fθ(x)) −log det

∂fθ(x)
∂x


(3.27)
From Equation 3.27 we can note, that we still need to pick a distribution of pz(z)
in order to evaluate pz(fθ(x)). In addition to the constraints of fθ, the determinant
of the jacobian det
 ∂fθ(x)
∂x
 must also be easy to compute as we need to evaluate the
equation during each optimiziaiton step.
Now in a network we can have multiple flows. If one layer is a flow and the second
layer is a flow, then combined they are also a flow [Rezende and Mohamed, 2015].
This means that we can make the transformation between p(z) and p(x) as complex
as we would like, given the constraints mentioned earlier.
zK = fK ◦· · · ◦f1(z0)
z0 ∼q0(z0)
(3.28)
When we add multiple flows, we need to account for multiple flows in the change
of variable theorem.
This should update to the loss to account for the following
likelihood.
qK (zK) = q0 (z0)
K
Y
k=1
det
∂fk
∂zk−1

−1
(3.29)
For the case of the learned prior, we are more interested in going with the flow,
as we need the prior density. This means the requirement of the inversion of f is
actually redudant. This mean that the inversion of fθ it can easily [Dinh et al., 2015]
be obtained by saying that
x = f(x)−1
(3.30)
In order to solve the the computation of the jacobian i will introduce autoregressive
autoencoders and show how they can help easily compute the jacobian.
3.7.2
Autoregressive Autoencoders
The autoregressive autoencoder is a variation of the original autoencoder. The idea
is to train an autoencoder which can learn the probability of sample, by imposing
the autoregressive property, which is that an feature is dependent on all the previous
features in the input
p(x) = p(x1)
D
Y
i=2
p(xi|x1:i−1)
(3.31)
The original auto-encoder (Section 3.5) have a dependecy of all the elemts in x, since
each element in x is used during the forward pass. This means that the original auto-
encoder does not hold the auto-regressive property [Germain et al., 2015]. A problem
==PAGE:35==
3.7 Variational Autoencoder with auto-regressive flow prior
25
when training a moodel under the autoregressive loss Equation 3.31 is that in order
to compute p(xi|x1:i−1) for an arbitrary i we need to have computed the probability
of all the previous observations. This can be done by performing a forward pass to
generate p(x1), and use this value to estimate p(x1|x1) and so on. If the dimension
of the x is D we need to perform D forward passes in order to be able to evaluate
Equation 3.31. The loss would be reduced by the sum of cross-entropy loss
A way we can solve this problem i by invoking a masking scheme on the weights
of the neural network [Germain et al., 2015]. Now if we setup the masking scheme
correctly we can directly impose this auto-regressive property of a data-set using a
single forward pass. The specific masking scheme proposed in this work is the masking
scheme for a masked autoencder for density estimation (MADE) [Germain et al., 2015].
Figure 3.3: Image showing the masking of the input in order to create the auto-
regressive part of the image. On the left an autoencoder can be seen, in the middle
the mask applied to the connections and on the right the Masked auto-encoder. source
[Germain et al., 2015]
In Figure 3.3 an example of as MADE can be seen. Here the mask remove some
connections from the input to the output. For example the output for p(x3|x2) have
no connection between the input x1 to this output node. Even though the figure does
not fulfill the auto-regressive property as there is a dependency of later indices, it is
because the ordering of the autoregressivity property can be set as you would like.
The way to setup masking scheme for the MADE can be seen in Section 4.4.6. For this
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Deep learning methodology
case the masking scheme will be setup so the autoregressive property is numerically
such that p(x1) and p(xi|x1:i−1).
So why does the auto-regressive property helps us when we are using a flow model.
The autoregressive properties ensures that the gradients of the network, with respect
to the later indices, is zero
∂f(xi)
∂xj
= 0
for j ≥i
(3.32)
Since this is true for all D, the Jacobian turns into a lower triangular matrix, where
the upper triangle is 0
dfθ(x)
dx
=


∂f(x1)
∂x1
0
. . .
0
∂f(x1)
∂x1
∂f(x2)
∂x2
. . .
0
...
...
...
...
∂f(x0)
∂xD
· · ·
∂f(xD−1)
∂xD
∂f(xD)
∂xD


(3.33)
The determinant is tractable for a lower triangular matrix, as the determinant be-
comes the product of the diagonal entries, and when we do the logarithm of this it
becomes the sum of the diagonal entries.
log
det dfθ(x)
dx
 =
D
X
i=1
∂f(xi)
∂xi
(3.34)
This now provides a easy computeable log determinant in the loss. We have also
argued to why fθ is invertible and differentialable. And we can now learn the prior
of a VAE.
However we still need to generate samples for p(z), which i in the following will
show how we can transform the variables to make this work. However this transforma-
tion will make the evaluation of p(z) fast, but sampling willl be slow, and in order to
generate a model which can fast sample we need to apply the inverse transformation
as proposed in [Kingma et al., 2016]
3.7.3
Learning the prior in VAE
For the VAE we just want to be able to evaluate the prior p(z) for the loss Equa-
tion 3.19.
So still let the encoder output a µ and a σ to generate a sample for
p(z) and uses this with the decoder. Then to evaluate p(z) in the loss, we setup an
auto-regressive flow f, with some continuous noise source ϵ with z →ϵ.
ϵ = f(z)
(3.35)
Under the assumption of the density function for ϵ is p(ϵ) I have shown that
log p(z) = log p(ϵ) + log det dϵ
dz
(3.36)
==PAGE:37==
3.7 Variational Autoencoder with auto-regressive flow prior
27
We setup ϵ such that ϵ ∼N(0, I). The masked auto encoder takes the sample z
as the input and outputs a [µ(z), σ(z)], which fulfilled the auto-regressive property.
Then we setup the following transformation of the random variable
ϵ = µ(z) + zσ(z)
(3.37)
The masked autoencoder takes the sample z as the input and outputs a [µ(z), σ(z)].
Then since the masked auto-encoder fulfilles the autoregressive property the gradients
are
∂[µi, σi]
∂zj
= [0, 0]
for j ≥i
(3.38)
The [µi(z0:i−1, σi(z0:i−1)] are then the estimated mean and standard deviation of the
i’th element of z. As a result the jacobian simplies into ∂ϵi
∂zi = σi [Kingma et al., 2016]
which makes the determinate
log det dϵ
dz =
D
X
i=1
log(σ(z))
(3.39)
If we setup the flow to only have one flow, and under the assumption that ϵ ∼
N(0, I) we can calculate the probabity of p(z) like
p(z) = 1
2 log(2π) + 1
2ϵ2 + log(σ)
(3.40)
Using this we can evaluate the variational lower bound Equation 3.16 for the VAE,
with an auto-regressive flow model as a prior
L(x, gθ(z), qϕ(z|x′), fθ)
= Ez∼q(z|x)[log p(x|z) + log p(z) −log q(z|x)]
= Ez∼q(z|x),ϵ=f −1(z)

log p(x|f(ϵ)) + log p(ϵ) + log det dϵ
dz −log q(z|x)

(3.41)
.
Using this we can train the VAE, however we need to compute the flow in order to
evaluate the loss. This extension to the VAE shows that we can model the distribution
of z as a more complex distribution.
3.7.4
Denosing Criterion for the learned prior
The loss for the denoising VAE with a flow prior also trivially extends to the case
where the depended latent variable z is dependent on the corrupted input x′
L(x, gθ(z), qϕ(z|x′), fθ) = Ez∼q(z|x′),ϵ=f −1(z)

log p(x|fθ(ϵ)) + log u(ϵ) + log det dϵ
dz −log q(z|x′)

(3.42)
==PAGE:38==
28
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Experimental setup
This chapter will elaborate on the experimental setup as-well-as the implementation
of the models described in Chapter 3. The deep learning models are implemented in
Python 3.6 using PyTorch version 1.4.0 [Paszke et al., 2019]. The experiments used
a single Tesla V100-SXM2 with 32 Gb ram.
This chapter will also elaborate on how to perform data augmentation, to simulate
different signal to noise ratios and how we can generate a sample from the discrete
label grid, which are continuous. We also provide a formal definition on how to set up
the masking scheme of the masked auto-encoder to fulfil the auto-regressive property,
before we lastly introduce the evaluation criteria which we will use to assess the model
performance
The proposed solution of this work is to apply a denoising auto-encoder of some
type to denoising inputs for estimation.
After a denoising model has denoised a
sample, we train the deep learning models on the denoised data.
For evaluation of the model, we split the data-set up into a train, validation and
test set. 10% of the data-set will be set aside as a test-set to assess model performance
- however, we will not use the test-set to find optimal parameters. To evaluate the
model and tune parameters, we use the validation set, which will be 10% of the
remaining 90% after the test split. The rest of the data-set will be used for training
[Ng, 2017]
Recall that the different labels are on very different scales (Table 1.1). The tem-
perature is ranging from 3500 to 9750, whereas the gravitational force is from -2 to 2.
This range difference can make the errors for the temperature have a higher impact
on the loss compared to the gravitational force. Therefore we normalise each of the
labels, with values from the train-set, before we train the models, and the re-scale
them back during the inference process.
4.1
Data Augmentation
We will here explain the setup of the data augmentation we perform on the data-set
in order to set up the experiments. It will not be feature engineering but ways of
simulating different SNR and how to interpolate between samples from the grid.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Experimental setup
4.1.1
Making the data grid continuous
The sampling scheme used to generate the data-set only allows for discrete labels of
the model atmospheres to be sampled (Section 1.3). However, the grid has a linear
connection, meaning that linear interpolation can be performed the different samples
from the grid in order to generate new samples [Fabbro et al., 2017]. Provided with
two samples from the grid x1 and x2, we can generate new samples not from the grid
by performing the following linear interpolation.
xnew = x1 + w(x2 −x1)
w ∼U(0, 0.5)
(4.1)
In practice, the weight w is sampled uniformly between 0 and 0.5, but the weight
could be anything. We have chosen to limit the interval for w because using the
interpolation the highest values of the labels will result in a sample with lower values
of the labels. So in order to not skew the distribution of the data-set to much an upper-
bound of 0.5 was chosen. This random weight w from a uniform distribution ensures
that there is no duplicated samples in the new data-set, because the probability of
performing sampling the exact same weight w is 0. This interpolation is also used on
the labels y with the same weight w for a given sample.
In Figure 4.1 we have depicted how the discrete grid is re-sampled into continuous
values.
(a) Discrete grid
(b) Continous grid
Figure 4.1: Sampling of the discrete grid into continuous grid for the the labels
Effective temperature (Teff) and gravitational force (Logg)
From these figures we can see that we are able to cover more of the entire data
space. We have actually filled out the entire space using the continous samples instead
of the discrete grid.
Using this interpolation we can generate unlimited new observation. To set up the
interpolation, we generate a random permutation of the data-set and then interpolate
this permuted data-set with the original data-set. We perform the interpolation twice,
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Training hyper-parameters
31
so we end up with 56672 samples, which is a comparable size of the data-set used by
[Fabbro et al., 2017].
4.1.2
Simulating different signal to noise ratios
The signal to noise ratio is computed as the ratio of the mean to standard deviation
of a signal [Schroeder and Inc, 2000].
SNR = µ
σ
(4.2)
Initially, the spectra have a µ ≈1 and σ = 0, making the initial SNR unde-
fined. However, we note that we can vary the σ of the signal in order to generate
different SNR. So to simulate different SNR, we add Gaussian noise to the input.
[Fabbro et al., 2017, Schroeder and Inc, 2000].
xnoise = x + N(0, σ2)
(4.3)
Using this, we do not change the µ of spectra but change the SNR of the input. If
we add Gaussian noise with σ = 0.05 the resulting SNR is ≈20. The SNR is only
approximately equal to 20, as the µ of the different spectra are non-stationary, but
in general have µ of 1. During the training of each mini-batch, we add this Gaussian
noise, which also allows us to generate new samples during each training step, which
should make the model more generalise-able (see Section 2.4). We will, denote the
SNR as an approximate SNR for the entire data-set.
4.2
Training hyper-parameters
We will here elaborate on the general training hyper-parameters for both the unsu-
pervised and supervised learning models. The supervised learning models are trained
for 500 epochs using the data-set of 56672 samples, and for the unsupervised learning
models, we train for 750 epochs. For the annealing of the KL divergence in the VAE,
we perform four cycles of going from 0 to 1.
4.2.1
Optimisation
To train the deep learning models, we apply stochastic gradient decent (SGD) methods
in order to minimise the loss function of the networks [Bishop, 2007, Goodfellow et al., 2016].
The different loss functions for the different models are explained in Chapter 3. To
apply SGD for deep learning the back-propagation algorithm, is used to differen-
tiate the loss with respect to the weights of the network [Rumelhart et al., 1986,
Goodfellow et al., 2016].
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Experimental setup
4.2.2
Stochastic gradient descent algorithm - AdamW
Some of the optimisation difficulties of SGD is the use of a constant step-size. This
constant step-size can make convergence hard. The Adam-variant of SGD computes
individual adaptive learning rates for different parameters from estimates of first and
second moments of the gradients [Kingma and Ba, 2014], which solves the problem of
the constants step-size. The Adam algorithm performs well in practice and is one of
the recommended algorithms for deep learning [Ruder, 2016, Kingma and Ba, 2014,
Goodfellow et al., 2016].
However we would like to regularise our model for regression [Hastie et al., 2009] -
and [Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017] argue that weight decay1 is not equal to l2 regulari-
sation when the learning rate is adaptive [Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017]. The adamW
algorithm decouples the weight decay and the gradient step, compared to the adam al-
gorithm, which combines them [Kingma and Ba, 2014, Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017].
Therefore the optimisation algorithm applied in this work will be the AdamW algo-
rithm.
4.2.3
Reducing learning rate
To further increase the performance of the model and help convergence, we reduce the
learning rate for the last 50 epochs by 0.1. This reduction of the learning rate helps
the neural network converge to a minimum which is smaller than with the original
learning rate [Bengio, 2012]. For the unsupervised learning case, the decay of the
learning rate happens for the last ten epochs. The initial learning rate will start at
0.0001
4.3
Regularisation
In addition to the l2 regularisation impose by the AdamW SGD algorithm, another
regularisation technique that is used throughout this work is dropout [Hinton et al., 2012]
and batch normalisation [Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015]. We apply batch normalisation to
each convolutional layer and dropout to each fully connected layer.
4.4
Architectures
This section will describe the architectures applied in this work. The main architec-
ture is that we apply some convolutional blocks before we flatten the input and apply
a multi-layered perceptron [Bishop, 2007, Goodfellow et al., 2016]. In general, the
activation function that will be applied at each layer of the network will be rectified
1weight decay have in deep learning often be linked with l2 regularisation
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Architectures
33
linear unit (ReLU) [Nair and Hinton, 2010]:
ReLU(z) = max{0, z}
(4.4)
unless otherwise specified.
The output of each of the supervised models will be 8; 4 µθ(x) and 4 σθ(x), 1 for
each of the stellar labels estimated. The output eight outputs will then be used to
construct a Gaussian distribution object, where the log-likelihood can be computed
using the built-in functions in PyTorch[Paszke et al., 2019]. One constraint to the
output is that the 4 σ′s cannot be negative and 0. So we learn the σ in the log-space
and then apply the inverse function the log, so we only have positive values of the
σ. We apply the same trick to each time we estimate a standard deviation σ. For
the unsupervised learning models the output of the models will be equal to the input
size, in order to learn the reconstructions.
Initially the spectra come in as the 2-dimensional input with 1 channel [B, 1, 8, 4096],
where B denotes the batch size. We propose to squeeze the channel dimension into
[B, 8, 4096], which allows for 1d convolutions to be used with eight input channels.
This approach will be applied in all the architectures - however, for the attention
model, we still apply 2D convolutions in order to preserve the spatial features of the
input.
When applying 1D convolutions will be denoted by W × C where C will denote
the number of filters applied, and the W denotes the width of the kernel. For 2d
kernels the notation is ((H × W) × C), again C denotes the number of filters applied.
(H × W) denotes the height H and the width W of the kernel
4.4.1
Multi-layered perceptron
The multi-layered perceptron is used after the convolutional part of the network has
been flattened into a vector. The input to the multi-layered perceptron will be based
on; the dimensionality of the input D, the number of kernels k in the last convolutional
layer, the size of the kernel used for the pooling operation psize and the number of
pooling operations p that are applied in the convolutional network. The following
equation can calculate it.
input to dense =
D
(psize)(p-1) k
(4.5)
Once the input have been flattened we apply a 3-layered perceptron. The specific
architecture can be seen in Table 4.1.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Experimental setup
Denselayer(1024)
ReLU() + Dropout (0.3)
Denselayer(1024)
ReLU() + Dropout (0.3)
Denselayer(512)
ReLU()
Denselayer(8)
Table 4.1: Architecture of the multi-layered preceptron as the last layer. The last
denselayer outputs 8 values. 4 for the µ and 4 for the σ.
4.4.2
Residual network
An extension of the convolutional neural network is the residuals network architec-
tures [He et al., 2015]. These networks impose a residual block (ResNet block), where
the network includes skip connections. Using these blocks, we can add expressiveness
to the model without increasing the depth of the network. This ResNet block allows
for better gradient flow in the network because if we add more layers and increase
the size of the network, we can experience vanishing gradients, but the ResNet block
does not increase the depth of the network [He et al., 2015]. Table 4.2 shows the
implementation of the ResNet block.
1D Convolution (7x128)
Batchnorm(128)
ReLU
1D Convolution(5x128)
Batchnorm(128)
ReLU(Input + Convoluted features)
Table 4.2: Architecture of the channel-wise residual network
Initially, the input is passed through two convolutional layers before we add the
convoluted signal with the original input.
4.4.3
Full Network
Combining the ResNet blocks and the multilayered perceptron, the complete network
architecture can be seen in Table 4.3.
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Architectures
35
1D Convolution(7x128)
1D batchnorm
ReLU
1D ResNetBlock
1D Average pool(5)
1D ResNetBlock
1D Average pool(5)
1D ResNetBlock
1D Average pool(5)
1D ResNetBlock
1D Average pool(5)
Flatten()
Multi-layered perceptron
Table 4.3: Architecture of the channel-wise residual network
Here the flatten function just takes a [B, C, H, W] and makes it [B, C · H · W].
This architecture we will name the bResnet in the result section, the name stems
from the fact that we are learning distribution instead of a point estimate so the b is
for Bayesian residual network. This first dense layer in this architecture is of quite
large input as the input is dependent on the original size of the input.
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Experimental setup
4.4.4
Attention Network
2D Convolution ((1x7)x64)
ReLU() + BatchNorm2d (64)
2D Convolution ((1x7)x128)
ReLU() + BatchNorm2d (128)
Attention-Block()
Max Pooling 2d (2 × 2) - Stride 2
2D Convolution ((1x7)x128)
ReLU() + BatchNorm2d (128)
2D Convolution ((1x7)x128)
ReLU() + BatchNorm2d (128)
2D Convolution ((1x7)x128)
ReLU() + BatchNorm2d (128)
Attention-Block()
Max Pooling 2d (2 × 2) - Stride 2)
2D Convolution ((1x7)x128)
ReLU() + BatchNorm2d (128)
2D Convolution ((1x7)x128)
ReLU() + BatchNorm2d (128)
2D Convolution ((1x7)x128)
ReLU() + BatchNorm2d (128)
2D Convolution ((1x7)x128)
Attention-Block()
2D Convolution ((1x7)x128)
ReLU() + BatchNorm2d (128)
2D Convolution ((1x7)x128)
ReLU() + BatchNorm2d (128)
2D Convolution ((1x7)x128)
ReLU() + BatchNorm2d (128)
Mean(Attention-Block1,Attention-Block2,Attention-Block3)
Table 4.4: Architecture of the attention network. the attention blocks are defined
in [Oktay et al., 2018] and full explanation of them can be seen in Section 3.3. The
output from each attention-block goes is averaged across the 3 different blocks.
Here i specify the attention network. This architecture will not apply the 1D convo-
lutions with the orders as channel inputs as the previous model did. The main reason
for this is because we want to keep spatial information of the values in the spectrum.
When we apply the channel-wise approach, this spatial dimension is lost, because we
add more channels, which becomes dependent on each other, and the channels are in
that case observed values, which is not desired in an attention framework. However
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Architectures
37
the convolution used will have a 1 in the height dimension, effectively making the
convolutions 1d convolutions.
The global feature map g as mentioned in Section 3.3 is extracted after the last
convolutional layers. The intermediate feature maps xl is extracted at the level with
the attention block. The final output is the mean of the output from the attention
blocks, for the eight parameters estimated in this work. In this network, we also
apply pooling layers after each attention block. To match the dimensionality of the
g and xl we use bilinear up-sampling of g as mentioned in Section 3.3 and used in
[Oktay et al., 2018].
4.4.5
Autoencoder
This section describes the autoencoder architecture applied in this work. This archi-
tecture is shared across all the 3 different unsupervised learning models. The output
of the encoder will be dependent on the size of of the lantent space z. For the VAE
variations of the output will be 2 times the number of dimensions of z becuase we
need two values for the µ and σ
1D Convoluion (3x32) - Stride: 2
ReLU()
1D Convoluion (3x64) - Stride: 2
ReLU()
1D Convoluion (3x128) - Stride: 2
ReLU()
1D Convoluion (3x256)- Stride: 2
ReLU()
Flatten()
Dense layer(256 · 512)
Table 4.5: Architecture of the Encoder. we apply a stride of 2 in order to reduce
dimensionality. Size of the input dense is based on the 256 channels and a length of
512 of the spectra.
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Experimental setup
Denselayer()
1D Transposed-Convoluion (4x128) - Stride: 2
ReLU()
1D Transposed-Convoluion (4x64) - Stride: 2
ReLU()
1D Transposed-Convoluion (4x32) - Stride: 2
ReLU()
1D Convoluion (3x32)
ReLU()
1D Convoluion (3x32)
Table 4.6: Architecture of the Decoder
The input to the decoder is then also dependent on the size of the latent space
when we want to decode the variables z. The dense-layer takes the code z and increase
the dimension to match the channels of the first convolutions and a length of 8 times
the length of singe row, because the transposed convolutions increases the size by 8.
An introduction to transposed convolutions can be seen in Section 4.4.7
4.4.6
Autoregressive flow - MADE implementation
This section will describe how to implement the masked autoregressive auto-encoder
(Section 3.7.2 and Figure 3.3). The most important part of the architecture is how
the masking scheme masks the input such that the model satisfies the autoregressive
property. First, we will introduce the scheme for a single hidden layer before We
extend the scheme to multiple layers and deep architectures. The masking M W are
the mask for the first layer W, and M V are the masking for the output layer V.
The masking scheme in the masked autoencoder for distribution estimation (MADE)
is set up by multiplying the weight matrix with a binary mask, where the entries of
the binary mask are set to 0, for the connection that is masked away. If these masked
are set up correctly, the final outputs will fulfil the autoregressive property.
To impose the autoregressive property, we first assign each unit in a hidden layer
an integer m between 1 and D −1 inclusively, where D is the dimensionality of the
input. The k′th hidden unit’s number m(k) gives the maximum number of input
units to which it can be connected.
m(k) = D is of not allowed, as this would
create a hidden unit where all the inputs would be allowed, which would break the
autoregressive property, in addition to this m(k) = 0 is also excluded as this creates
a hidden unit with 0 inputs [Germain et al., 2015]
The constraints on the maximum number of inputs to each hidden unit is encoded
in the matrix masking the connections between the input and hidden units:
M W
k,d = 1m(k)≥d =
 1
if m(k) ≥d
0
otherwise
(4.6)
==PAGE:49==
4.4 Architectures
39
for d in{1, ..., D} and k ∈{1, ...., K}. The main idea is that the constraint ensures
that the d′th output units only connects to x<d, it is a way of formalising that if the
dimension in the input is larger than the integer the hidden unit haves, there should
not be a connection between these two. These constraints also ensure that hidden
units are at most connected to d-1 input units [Germain et al., 2015]. This means
that units that are connected to at most d −1 input units. The constraints of the
output matrix are encoded as:
M V
d,k = 1d>m(k) =

1
if d > m(k)
0
otherwise
(4.7)
for d in{1, ..., D} and k ∈{1, ...., K}.¨ Using these definitions of M W and M V , we
can demonstrate that this satisfies the autoregressive property [Germain et al., 2015]
The masks M W and M V represents the connectivity of the network, and their
matrix product M V,W = M V M W represents the connectivity between the input
and output. Specific M V,W
d′,d is the number of paths between the input ˆxd and input
xd. Thus to demonstrate the autoregressive property, M V,W must be strictly lower
diagonal. By definition of the matrix product:
M V,W
d′,d
=
K
X
k=1
M V
d′,kM W
k,d =
K
X
k=1
1d′>m(k)1m(k)≥d
(4.8)
if d′ ≤d then then there are no values for m(k) such that it is both strictly less
than d′ and greater or equal to d thus M V,W
d′,d is indeed 0.
The masked defined for now have only been for a 1-layered perceptron. In order
to expand in the masking scheme to the multilayered case with L > 1 hidden layers.
the superscript W l where l ∈{1, ..., L} denotes the weight matrix at some layer l.
The number of hidden units will also be indexed Kl. The k′th unit in the l′th layer
to ml(k). Then instead of applying the masking to the input dimensionality, we apply
it to the weights of the previous mask
M Wl
k′,k = 1ml(k′)≥ml−1(k) =

1
if ml (k′) ≥ml−1(k)
0
otherwise
(4.9)
And if l = 0 it is defined as m0(d) = d, such that the init layer have masking of the
input. The output mask is also adpated to the defintion of the last layer.
M V
d,k = 1d>mL(k) =

1
if d > mL(k)
0
otherwise
(4.10)
We have shown that for a single layer, the auto-regressive property holds, and when
we stack multiple layers which each holds the auto-regressive property, the entire
network must fulfil the auto-regressive property [Germain et al., 2015].
For the assigning of the value m(k) are randomly sampled from a uniform discrete
distribution of the integers between 1 and D1 [Germain et al., 2015]
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Experimental setup
The MADE in this work is implemented using two dense layers of size 512. and
the input of the model is a sample from the latent space in order to estimate the
density as mentioned in Section 3.7.3
Denselayer(512)
ReLU
Denselayer(512)
ReLU
Deselayer(2)
Table 4.7: Architecture of the Masked autoencoder for density estimation
In the case of the flow to be a normalising flow, the output of the model is
2 dimensional a µ and a σ.
The input two the model is then dependent on the
dimensions of z.
4.4.7
Transposed convolutions
In the decoder (Table 4.6) we apply transposed convolutions. Transposed Convolu-
tions are used for upsampling the input feature map to a desired output feature map
using some learnable parameters. I here give an example for a 2x2 input and a kernel
with 2x2 weights2. We want to upsample the 2x2 input into a 3x3 feature map. For
each input in the input map, we multiply the input with the kernel.
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
0
0
0
0
0
2
1
3
0
2
4
6
0
6
3
9
0
0
0
4
4
12
1
6
9
=
+
+
+
=
Kernel
Input
Figure 4.2: Showing how an 2x2 kernel would tranpose convolute a 2x2 input
Figure 4.2 shows an example of a transposed convolution can be seen. The first
element of the input 0 is multiplied with every element of the kernel. This results
in a 2x2 feature map of the input 0. This is the continued for the next element but
with the same kernel. This results in 4 feature maps one for each input element and
is depicted in Figure 4.2. In the case where there is an overlapping of the features,
such as the middle, the elements are added together, resulting in a 3x3 output feature
map [Dumoulin and Visin, 2016]
The transposed convolutions can be used in auto-encoder architectures to up-
sample the latent space to the original input sizes Table 4.6
2This also extends to the case of 1 dimension
==PAGE:51==
4.5 Evaluation metrics
41
4.5
Evaluation metrics
In this section, we will introduce the evaluation metrics, which will be used to evaluate
the implemented models. These evaluation metrics might differ from the loss function
of the models, which might provide some advantages to different models.
4.5.1
Supervised learning
In order to evaluate the performance of the model the mean estimations of the dis-
tributions will be used as the label estimation, because the mean estimation of the
model, is equal to the estimated value of the network that does not learn the standard
deviation. One of the evaluation metrics will be mean absolute error (MAE).
MAE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
| (Yi −µ(xi)) |
(4.11)
In addition the MAE also the root-mean-squared error (RMSE) will also be reported.
Both of these performance metrics are also reported in previous work [Fabbro et al., 2017,
Ness et al., 2015], which allows us to compare the models presented in this work, with
the models from other related research projects
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
X
i=1
(Yi −µ(xi))2
(4.12)
These metrics will be used as the main evaluation point of the models.
Even though we are learning a distribution for the output, the most essential part
for of the model is the µ, because reasonable estimations of the labels are of most
importance. So the primary evaluation criteria will be a model, with the lowest values
of the MAE and RMSE.
4.5.1.1
Evaluation of the estimated σ
In order to provide an evaluation of the estimate σ, we will compute the percentages
of residuals that are greater than the estimated 2σ. This is to quantify how well the
distributions are estimating the mean, and how well the uncertainty σ is a reliable
estimation of the uncertainty.
Also, a visual analysis of the standard deviations
compare to residuals will be conducted in order to assess the qualitative performance
of the σ
4.5.2
Unsupervised learning
For the unsupervised case, the primary evaluation point will be how good the models
can denoise a sample. Therefor the evaluation criteria will be the mean-squared-error
from the reconstructed spectra ˆx with the original sample x
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Experimental setup
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
| (xi −ˆxi) |
(4.13)
Since the unsupervised learning models are suppose to be used before the super-
vised learning model, the computational cost of performing a forward pass. The size
of the latent space determines the computational cost of a forward passes, so the
way we asses the computational cost, is that there should be a considerable jump in
reconstruction-able power when we increase the latent dimensions in order to pick the
model with higher dimensions. In addition to this a visual evaluation by application of
the PCA [Hastie et al., 2009] and T-sne-algorithm [van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008]
will be used, to evaluate the encoding of the latent space in the auto-encoder. This
will purely be a qualitative analysis of the space in order to se if the latent code is
representative of the data-set.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Results and discussion
In this chapter, we will present the results from the experiments performed on the
models elaborated on in previous chapters. Three replicates of each experiment are
tested, and the results reported are the mean of these three runs. Uncertainty esti-
mates of the models will then be based on the standard deviation of these three runs.
Multiple runs were chosen because empirically there was still a difference between
each run, even when the random seed of PyTorch was set. The attention models have
not been run three times, due to the fact it takes two days to train. Complete data
from all the runs can be seen in Apendix A.1
Hyper-parameter tuning for the models was done on the validation set, and here
we report the results to form the test-set. With deep learning, the search for optimal
hyperparameters is almost endless. The main idea with the results section is to show
that the stellar labels can be estimated from the data which have not been continuum
normalised, and showing that it is possible to achieve similar performance as current
methods. We would also like to show that using a denoising auto-encoder before we
train a supervised learning model could also improve the performance for models in
low SNR scenarios.
5.1
Denoising Input
Initially, we will present the results from the unsupervised learning models.
We
will use the reconstructions of a model as the primary evaluation point, but also
computationally cost will be an evaluation criterion, as the idea is to perform a
forward pass with these models during the training of the supervised learning models.
5.1.1
Reconstruction Error
The reconstruction error for the model is the MSE for the observation compared to
the reconstruction. I will denote the VAE with a DVAE for denoising variational
auto-encoder and AF-DVAE for the VAE with the auto-regressive flow prior. During
the reconstruction of the DVAE and the AF-DVAE, we do not sample z, but rather
use the z which the decoder estimates. The latent space of the model will be chosen
based on the performance with a SNR ≈20.
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Results and discussion
Latent Dimension
DAE
DVAE
AF-DVAE
25
50.41 ± 8.1
124.14 ± 12.1
111.5 ± 7.6
100
15.41 ± 2.4
103.53 ± 37.4
95.80 ± 10.9
625
11.70 ± 5.3
137.41 ± 47.5
91.08 ± 6.6
1600
16.02 ± 9.1
112.17 ± 47.9
110.04 ± 47.3
Table 5.1: MSE of the reconstructions compared to the noised input. Computed as
a mean pr. batch for all batches in the test set
From Table 5.1 we can clearly conclude that the denoising auto-encoder outper-
forms the variationals methods. Clearly the advantage of just minimising the recon-
struction error gives the denoising auto-encoder an edge, compared to minimising the
variational lower bound, as the denoising auto-encoder outperforms the other meth-
ods for all latent dimensions. For all models we do not see a huge increase in the
performance when we increase the size of the latent space beyond 100. We can also
see that the AF-DVAE is actually outperforming the VAE across multiple latente
dimensions, this shows that the auto-regressive flow prior did increase the reconstruc-
tional power of the models, however compared to the performance of the DAE there
is still quite a gap in performance.
The optimal latent space in terms of reconstruction appears to be 625. However
there exist a computational cost of going from 100 to 625 dimension in z, as z is
extracted using a dense layer at the encoder and decoder (Table 4.5 and Table 4.6).
As mentioned we would like to perform a forward pass for this model each time we
train the supervised learning model, so low computational cost is a desired property
and since there is not a large gain in going from 100 to 625 latent space, we prefer
using the denosing autoencoder with 100 latent dimensions. If computationally power
was of no concern the ideal dimensions would be 625.
5.1.2
Performance across signal to noise ratio
We will here provide with the performance across the signal to noise ratios for the
denoising auto-encoder the various SNR considered in this work
DAE(100)
σ
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
SNR
100
20
10
5
2
1
MSE reconstruction
11.89 ± 3.1
15.41 ± 2.4
19.25 ± 3.1
39.83 ± 8.4
106.42 ± 9.4
287.7 ± 16.1
Table 5.2: MSE of the reconstructions compared to the noised input. Computed as
a mean pr. batch for all batches in the test set
From this we can see that as we increase the noise we add to the spectra the
re-constructional power deteriorates. This is assumed as we do not alter the model
for higher noise levels, so the model performance will decrease as we a more noise to
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Denoising Input
45
the input. One of things that can add difficulties when we add more noise, is that
it can be difficult to distinguish the underlying spectra, for example if the SNR was
below 1, there would be more noise than actual signal, which would make the models
completely useless. However we note that the more noise we add is also causes an
exponential decrease in the SNR ratio, so compared to with how much noise is added,
the models appear to perform the same
5.1.3
Latent space
We will here provide an evaluation of the encoding z for the denoising auto encoder.
We apply a Principal component analysis [Hastie et al., 2009] and the t-SNE algo-
rithm [van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008] in order to visualise the latent space space.
Figure 5.1: Pricinpial component analysis of the latent space of the for a denoising
autoencoder with latent dimension 10, and with a SNR ≈1
Looking at both the figure Figure 5.1 and Figure 5.2 we can note that the auto-
encoder have encoded the the different spectra into different areas of the latent-space.
The figures are produced with a SNR ≈1, which is very low SNR, but we can see that
even at this SNR the encoding of z have found the underlying structures of the data.
A desired quality in the latent space is that the encoder have learned a meaningful
encoding of z [Goodfellow et al., 2016], and based on the visualisations it appears to
have done so
Figure 5.2: T-sne analysis of the latent space of the for the denoising auto-encoder
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Results and discussion
However some of the packing appears to have been done of the stellar labes Teff
and V sini because the distinguishing between the two are more apparent than for the
log(g) and z. Recall that for objects with a high temperature the stellar features are
not so apparent, and that the hotter the temperature the more the flat spectra. Hence
why the temperature have a large impact on the variation of the different spectra,
whereas the other labels are more represented at specific wavelengths positions, which
does not cause the same amount of variation as the temperature. Considering that
this is based on a SNR ≈1 the partiaioning is pretty well packing of the latent space,
even with that amount of noise.
Based on this the plots indicates that we have learned the underlying structure
of the data and we should be able to increase the performance of the supervised
learning models for low SNR by applying a denoising auto-encoder before we train
the supervised learning model.
5.2
Supervised results
This section will go over the supervised learning results presented in this work. The
residual network we name bResnet, when we apply a denoising autoencoder the name
is DAE-bResnet. The attention network is still called Attention. We will present the
residuals and estimated standard deviations from the attention model, however the
overall structure of the residuals and standard deviations are the same for all the
models presented. Complete results from all experiments can be seen in Apendix A.1
5.2.1
Performance on evaluation metric
The evaluation metric of the models will be based on the estimated µθ(x). In Table 5.3
and Table 5.4 we show the evaluation metric for all the models and for all the labels.
Temperature
Log(g)
Metalicity (Z)
Vsini
bResnet
86.14 ± 7.5
0.14 ± 0.001
0.058 ± 0.002
0.723 ± 0.038
DAE-bResnet
84.90 ± 12.9
0.14 ± 0.002
0.056 ± 0.008
0.706 ± 0.010
Attention
73.09
0.13
0.052
0.689
Table 5.3: MAE based on the mean prediction from model. Performance on the 4
parameters at SNR ≈20. Error bars based on ±2σ from 3 experiments.
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Supervised results
47
Temperature
Log(g)
Metalicity (Z)
Vsini
bResnet
122.26 ± 10.9
0.21 ± 0.001
0.079 ± 0.003
1.201 ± 0.083
DAE-bResnet
123.25 ± 20.3
0.21 ± 0.003
0.081 ± 0.008
1.188 ± 0.013
Attention
112.35
0.20
0.0756
1.32
Table 5.4: RMSE based on the mean prediction from model. Performance on the 4
parameters at SNR ≈20. Error bars based on ±2σ from 3 experiments.
From these two tables we are able to see that the attention model out performs the
bResnet at a SNR ≈20. The denoising model only slightly outperforms the bResnet,
for this SNR, hower as we increase the amount of noise, we can see that denoising
model outperforms the bResnet (Figure 5.3). Higher performance at SNR ≈20 could
have been obtained if we applied the DAE with a latent dimension of 625 with the
addition of the computational cost of using a higher dimension in the latent space.
The high uncertainty of the values for the denoisinsing model, is also because the first
experiment did not converge as well as the other runs (see Apendix A.1), where this
performance of the evaluation metric was worse than the two following experiments.
All this combined indicates that we can increase the performance of models by using
a denoising auto-encoder before we train a supervised learning model.
We also note that for the stellar rotation V sini the deoising auto-encoder is ac-
tually also outperforming the attention network. One could think of combining the
attention network and the denosing auto-encoder in order to improve the performance
by even more, but due to time constraint this was not possible. The resulting atten-
tion model of applying a denoising auto-encoder, might also not attend to underlying
features of the stellar spectra, but to the features that the denoising auto-encoder is
best a denoising.
5.2.2
Evaluation across different signal to noise ratios
We will now present the performance on the evaluation metric across different SNR.
The simulation of different SNR is presented in Section 4.1, and we here depict a
decrease in model performance as a function of standard deviation used to sample
the Gaussian noise Figure 5.3:
==PAGE:58==
48
5 Results and discussion
Figure 5.3: The MSE and RMSE across the different σ values used for sampling of the
SNR. Green line is the attention network, blue, the bResnet and blue is DAE-bResnet.
Evaluation is based on 3 runs.
We can see that the performance of the models decreases as we add more and more
noise to the input spectra. Based on this visualisation we can see that the denoising
model actually outperforms the bResnet model across all low SNR presented here, it
is consistently a few values below the performance of the bResnet. The lines are also
based on 3 runs, so the difference across the runs are consistent.
We can see that the performance of the attention network appears to deteriorate
faster than the performance of the bResnet. Which can be an effect of the attention
mechanism itself; as it learns features to attend to, but these features might have
to much noise injected to make a decent estimate using these features. However, we
also see that for high SNR when the features of a spectrum are more defined, the
attention model outperforms the other models, which also was concluded based on
Table 5.3 and Table 5.4
The SNR is is dependent on the amount of Gaussian noise we add, but not linear
relationship. The relationship between the two can be seen in Section 4.1, but as we
increase the amount of noise, we lower the SNR in a exponential way. In Figure 5.4
the performance metric across the different SNR can be seen. Here small SNR is
equal to high σ in the Gaussian noise added.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Supervised results
49
Figure 5.4: The MSE and RMSE across the different SNR computed by adding more
gaussian noise to the input. Green line is the attention network, blue, the bResnet
and blue is DAE-bResnet. One should note that the lower the SNR the higher the
noise added
Looking at both of Figure 5.3 and Figure 5.4 we can conclude that the models
performance decreases as the SNR becomes lower and lower.
Which leads to the
conclusion that you should always try to obtain observations with the highest SNR
possible when making a spectra analysis. But if this is infeasible the stellar labels can
still be estimate with a decrease in performance almost linear to amount of noise there
is added to the observation. But from Figure 5.4, we can see that the exponential
decay of the model performance only happens after we go below SNR of 20, and we
can see that the model performance increase by going from 20 to 100 SNR is not
a huge gain in the performance estimation. But closer investigation shows that the
performance at SNR ≈100 is still quite large. For example on average the MAE for
the temperature label on SNR ≈100 is 59.4 for the bResnet. For the SNR ≈20 the
MAE is 86.1 which is still a sustainable decrease in model performance, when we lower
the SNR. In the end it comes down to how accurate the results of an experiments
is desired, and the conclusion might be trivial, but the higher the SNR the better
results, but if high SNR is to expensive to achieve, model performance at SNR ≈20
is not completely bad.
5.2.3
Residual analysis
We will her provide a qualitative evaluation of the residuals across the 4 different
labels. The residuals are calculated by using the estimated µθ(x) of the Gaussian
distribution. The residuals can seen in Figure 5.5. The residuals are depicted by the
4 labels and all their combinations, this is to check for correlations structures within
the residuals.
==PAGE:60==
50
5 Results and discussion
Figure 5.5: Residuals from the attention network, with a signal to noise ratio of 20
From the residuals depicted in Figure 5.5 we can see that the residuals across the
different labels appear to be somewhat equally distributed around 0. We can maybe
detect a little bias in some of the estimation, for example the temperature estimates
for really high temperatures appear to be a underestimated, and the residuals from
high stellar rotation might also appear to be a bit underestimated. As for the variance
within the residuals it appears that the variance of the residuals is not constant across
the entire values. A clear example of this is the residuals for metalicity Z. We can see
that for low values of Z we appear to have high variance across all the four labels, so
it appears that for spectra with low metalicity we have high variance in the residuals.
Based on this the argument to perform heteroscedastic regression appears to be a
good argument, and hopefully the estimated standard deviations reflect this high
variance of the residuals.
With this is mind, we still think the mean estimations appear to be reasonable es-
timation of the stellar labels. Based on the residuals from a low metalicity, we assume
that these model uncertainties is reflected in the estimated standard deviations.
5.2.4
Evaluation of the learn standard deviations
We will here provide an evaluation of the learned standard deviation σθ(x). We would
like to see the different variances from the residuals to be reflected in the estimated
standard deviations.
In Figure 5.6 the estimated σθ(x) are depicted across the 4
labels.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Supervised results
51
Figure 5.6: Estimated standard deviations from the attention network, with a signal
to noise ratio of 20
Looking at Figure 5.6 we can see that the standard deviations are non-stationary
across the different labels, which suggest the learned standard deviations actually can
be used, as they reflect uncertainty in the model estimate. This non-stationary further
suggest that the heteroscedasic assumption applied in this work have proven to be
a good modelling choice. A clear example of this is the uncertainty of the effective
temperature Teff and the metalicity Z. We can see that the as the temperature
increases the model estimates higher and higher uncertainty, which mirrors the fact
the stellar features for high temperature objects are sparse, so this follows prior
assumptions of the data. In addition we can also note that for small metalicities
the uncertainty is also higher and decreases across the ranges of metalicites, which is
exactly what we assumed based on the residuals from the previous figure Figure 5.5.
Based on the previous argument the estimated σθ(x) appears to be a good measure
of the uncertainty of the models, but to asses the quality of theses we will estimate
the quality of the confidence interval which can be made created based on µθ(x) and
σθ(x). Based on the assumption that it is a Gaussian distribution the 95% confidence
interval is roughly µθ(x) ± 2σθ(x). We will then evaluate the σθ(x) based on this
confidence interval, by computing how often the residuals are within this confidence
interval. Even though we estimate a new distribution for each observation, we will
still assume that the confidence interval is representative for the models
==PAGE:62==
52
5 Results and discussion
Model
ϵ < σθ(x)
ϵ < 2σθ(x)
bResnet
79.9%
98.4%
DAE-bResnet
77.9%
97.9%
Attention
65.5%
93.4%
Table 5.5: Table showing percentages of observations that are within µ±σ and µ±2σ.
The models are trained with SNR ≈20
In Table 5.5 we can note that the residuals are actually within 1 or 2 σθ(x) of
the mean prediction for a majority of the estimation.
This is indicates that the
estimated σθ(x) can be used as a way to quantify the uncertainty of the model. This
uncertainty only expresses the uncertainty of the estimation of the labels, and not
the uncertainty of the weights in the model, and one should strife for a full Bayesian
approach if uncertainty of the weights is desired [Blundell et al., 2015].
For the attention model the estimated σθ(x) we can see that the learned standard
deviations are not as wide as the one estimated by the bResnet. This could indicate
that that the uncertainty of the bResnets then are better than the uncertainty of the
Attention network due to this fact. However when considering the 95% confidence
interval of a Gaussian distribution, we would still expect 5% of observations to fall
outside of this interval. For a confidence interval of just one σθ(x) in a Gaussian
distribution we would also expect to only have 68% of observations within this interval.
These two values for the estimated confidence interval appears to be more inline with
the confidence intervals learned by the attention model instead of residual network.
Therefor it appears that the attention model have better estimation of the Gaussian
distributions compared to the other models.
We theorise that the estimated uncertainties are higher in the residual network
compared to the attention model, becuase we apply dropout in the residual networks.
During training of the model we dropout weights, which means that we train the
model to have uncertainty in some of the weights, and we theorise that this over
estimates the uncertainty σθ(x). This effects can be seen when we want to estimate the
uncertainty; as the model have learned some of this uncertainty in the dropout, which
inflates the uncertainty of the models. In the attention we do not apply any dropout,
which during training ensures that we can learn the distribution better. However the
learned distributions are of course just estimations of the real distributions but the
results appear pretty close to the expected values of a normal distribution.
We now visualise the residuals of the models combined with a confidence interval
of 2σθ(x), to visualise the combination of the estimated means and the confidence
interval
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Supervised results
53
Figure 5.7: Samples from the residuals combined with the standard deviation error
bars. Based on 2 σθ(x)
Here we can see then uncertainty of the samples appear to most of the time
eclipse the 0, indicating that the confidence interval contains the actual values of a
sample. In addition to this we can clearly see the difference in the estimate confidence
intervals. For low temperature spectra the uncertainty is very small, compared to high
temperature spectra, where the uncertainty is large.
Based on all this arguments and the visual investigation of the estimated uncer-
tainties, we conclude that they can indeed be used to to create meaning full confidence
intervals for a given estimation (see Figure 5.7 and Table 5.5). Through a combined
analysis of the residuals and the estimated standard deviations we can conclude that
we can estimate the stellar labels of a spectrum.
5.2.5
Attention
In this section we will present the attention learned by the attention network, in order
to fully asses the quality of the attention, apriori knowledge of the composite of the
spectra is required. This is where the experience of a scientist is of great importance,
because when we do image classification it can be easy to evaluate if the attention is
attending to something useful, whereas in spectra analysis the apriori knowledge is
of great importance.
In this section we scale all the attention to be between zero and one, because due
to the normalisation of the attention the values from the earlier attention blocks are
low, compared to the other attention blocks, becuase the dimensionality of the earlier
attention blocks are higher than then later ones.
==PAGE:64==
54
5 Results and discussion
First we depict the attention blocks form at star with a high temperature were
the stellar features are sparse. The attention and continuum normalised spectra can
be seen in Figure 5.8
Figure 5.8: Top picture: Continuum normalised spectra with no noise added. Bot-
tom picture: Attention from the 3 different attention blocks. The model was trained
on SNR ≈20.
From this we can see that the different attention blocks are attending to differ
places of the spectra. The first attention block, focuses on the later values of the spec-
trum, but in general have attention across the entire spectrum. The second attention
block is more sparse in the attention of the model, where specific wavelengths appear
to have a high attention, this is also seen in the third attention block. These findings
are inline with the observation of [Jetley et al., 2018, Oktay et al., 2018] where they
observed the initial attention block capture global features, and the later blocks cap-
ture more local features. The same pattern can be recognised in Figure 5.9, where
the attention is on 3 different scales.
Figure 5.9: Top picture: Continuum normalised spectra with no noise added. Bot-
tom picture: Attention from the 3 different attention blocks. The model was trained
on SNR ≈20.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Supervised results
55
There exist some attention outside of the spectrum where the spectrum are zero
padded. This is due to the interpolation of the intermediate feature maps for the
different attention-blocks, as-well as the addition of noise to the input spectra, which
is also added at the zero padded area. This leads to activation’s outside the spectrum.
The sparseness of features are not so apparent as reported by [Oktay et al., 2018].
But the sparseness of this reported attention can be misleading due to the scaling
of the values between 0 and 1 in Figure 5.8 and Figure 5.9, as some low values have
been increased, but in general this sparseness is not observed. We theorise that when
we add noise to an observation, it uses a larger neighbourhood to attend to, becuase
there is noise on the specta, and therefor attentended features in a neighborhood
might be more relevant.
Based on the results obtained by the attention model we conclude that it is the
preferred model when high SNR can be achieved. In order to fully understand and
evaluate the learned attention more knowledge of the stellar spectra is required.
5.2.6
Benchmarking models with previous work
Previous work of estimation of stellar labels [Fabbro et al., 2017, Casey et al., 2016],
considered model atmosphere temperatures that are around 4000 to 6000 K, whereas
we consider a broader range of temperatures, so in order to perform a fair comparison
with the previous work, we limit the data-set to only contain temperature values
within this range. We still perform interpolation to get roughly 50000 samples with
is comparable with the size of the data-set applied in previous work. In addition to
the limited range of temperatures, also the SNR of the data-set is ≈200. However we
do not consider this SNR to be noisy, so we this we will not use a denoising criterion,
and we will train models using an NR ≈100.
Metric
Parameter
Attention
bResnet
StarNet
Cannon2
MAE
Teff
12.9
19.5
31.2
46.8
Log g
0.045
0.053
0.053
0.066
Feh
0.013
0.26
0.025
0.036
Rad
0.15
0.30
-
-
RMSE
Teff
20.1
26.9
51.2
71.6
log g
0.085
0.077
0.081
0.102
Feh
0.019
0.036
0.040
0.053
Rad
0.24
0.421
-
-
Table 5.6: Comparison with previous work. Both StarNet and Canon was used on
tested on spectra with SNR ≈200, and models from this work with SNR ≈100.
Uncertainty of the evaluation these are not reported as only provide a small change
to the estimations. The complete results from 3 runs can be seen in Apendix A.1
==PAGE:66==
56
5 Results and discussion
From Table 5.6 we can conclude that we are able to estimate the stellar labels
at the same quality as current research projects. We also show that we are able to
achieve the same performance on spectra that have a lower SNR than compared to the
other previous work. Recall that the previous work applied their models on spectra
which had been continuum normalised, however the results presented in Table 5.6
shows that the stellar labels can be estimated before they have have been continuum
normalised. In [Ness et al., 2015] state that their work was accurate in estimation of
the stellar labels, which based on the results presented in Table 5.6 we argue is work
also can acclaim that adjective.
5.2.7
Performance of models on the Sun
We also test the models performance on real observations of the sun. The sun is well
studied and have very well-defined labels. This also allows us to obtain rather high
SNR observations of the sun, the observation used in this case observation is ≈200.
Which we again not consider a noisy observation as the corresponding Gaussian noise
to be added is σ = 0.005.
So we will not perform denoising on this observation.
We will also evaluate models trained with a SNR ≈100, which of course effects the
models performance on observations of SNR ≈200
Model(SNR)
Temperature
Log(g)
Metalicity (Z)
Vsini
Ground Truth (200)
5750
4.44
0
2
bResnet (100)
5567 ± 260
4.54 ± 0.4
−0.14 ± 0.21
1.7 ± 3.2
Attention (100)
6428 ± 73
4.85 ± 0.8
−0.04 ± 0.05
−0.5 ± 0.7
bResnet† (100)
5857 ± 198
4.55 ± 0.2
−0.05 ± 0.23
0.1 ± 3.4
Attention† (100)
5478 ± 30
2.9 ± 0.7
−0.21 ± 0.03
4.6 ± 0.4
´
Table 5.7: Estimated values for the sun.
Around SNR ≈200.
Ground truth is
based on the results of .... Confidence bands is estimated using a guassian confidence
intervals. models are trained under SNR ≈100. † performance of models trained
under the same as the benchmark data. Confidence intervals is based on ±2σ
From Table 5.7 we can see that the models are able to estimate the labels of the
sun. However looking at the estimations from the bResnet, we can see that every
value of the sun is within a confidence interval of the estimated σ.
For the attention model the estimates of some of the parameters are a bit off. We
argue that this is because the attention model should be trained on SNR that is equal
to the SNR of a sample, because the attention models attend to features, which it
learns to attend to and it learns the how the noise affects these observations. This
results in a wrong estimation of an observation when the SNR is different.
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Conclusion on results
57
5.3
Conclusion on results
Based on the results presented in this chapter we conclude that the stellar labels are
able to be accurately estimated before any continuum normalisation is applied to the
spectra.
We conclude that we can apply a denoising auto-encoder in order to increase
model performance for observations with low SNR, and that even with a SNR of
≈20 we are able to reasonably estimate the stellar labels. From comparison with
previous work we showed that the models are able to estimate the stellar labels on
par with other methods for stellar label estimation. In addition we also noted that for
very noisy environments the attention network does not perform so well as the other
models, We theorise that this is because it attends to some wavelengths which can
be noisy, making the attention not work so well. I was also able to conclude that for
high temperatures the models struggles to estimate the temperature of these. I also
concluded that the learned standard deviations is a good measure for the uncertainty
of the models. I was also able to conclude that the models could indeed be used on
real observations to estimate stellar labels, based on the performance of the models
on the sun.
For future work we propose that maybe instead of training a supervised learning
model on denoised samples from the DAE. Then instead train a model the noiseless
spectra, and then when evaluating the model, take noise samples and denoise them,
in order to estimate that performance.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
Through a literature analysis of existing stellar label estimation methods, we found
that current methods estimate the labels from spectra which are continuum nor-
malised. This normalisation is a post-processing step done after data is retrieved
from a telescope, which led us to propose that stellar labels could be estimated before
this normalisation was applied. If the stellar labels could be estimated directly from
a telescope, a scientist would be able to fast and accurately obtain an estimate of the
stellar labels from an observation.
We therefore presented arguments to why a deep learning approach was a suitable
suite of models to apply when analysing the spectra, and why it should be preferred
compared to other machine learning methods.
We also argued how some of the
shortcomings of deep learning could be solved to provide scientist and researches
with insight into the inference process and uncertainty estimation of the stellar labels
We formally presented the methods that could solve some of the shortcomings of
deep learning; interpretability, performance with noise and uncertainty quantification.
The methods we presented was an attention-mechanism, the denoising auto-encoder
(and variants thereof) and distribution learning.
We also presented experimental
setups of these methods in order to evaluate them with other current research projects.
Through evaluation of the unsupervised models, we showed that a denoising auto-
encoder was the best performing model for denoising an input. We compared the
denoising auto-encoder to a variational auto-encoder and a variational auto-encoder
where we had learnt the prior by using an auto-regressive flow model. We introduced
both of these extensions to the original auto-encoder and formally presented the
loss for theses, as-well as extended it to a denoising loss function.
Furthermore,
we visualised the latent code of the denoising auto-encoder to show that the learnt
encoding had capture the underlying structures of the spectra.
Through experiments, we were able to show that by applying this denoising auto-
encoder, before we train a model on spectra with low signal to noise ratios, we could
increase the performance of our models across a range of different signal to noise ratios.
We additionally showed that when there is a high signal to noise ratio, an attention
model could perform very well, and provide a visualisation of activated areas of the
spectra. Through analysis of the estimated distributions, we could conclude that the
==PAGE:70==
60
6 Conclusion
mean estimations were adequately estimating the stellar labels, and combined with
the estimated uncertainties of the distributions we could generate sufficient confidence
intervals for our estimations. We showed that the estimated distributions were closely
resembling Gaussian distributions, and concluded that when we applied dropout to
a model, the uncertainty was overestimated. Through the estimate uncertainties and
residuals, we were able to conclude that the model had troubles estimating the labels
with a high temperature and low metallicity. The problems with the high-temperature
objects were shown to be down to lack of stellar features, which had a negative effect
on model estimation the label correctly. However, the estimated uncertainties of the
models captured uncertainty int the input and were able to estimate a high uncer-
tainty for these observations. Through analysis of model performance across different
signal to noise ratios, we also showed that the difference between the performance at
a signal to noise ratio of 20, was not a substantial stepdown from a signal to noise
ratio of 100.
Through comparison of the models presented in this work with other projects, we
were able to show that we can estimate the stellar labels on par with current methods.
We showed that the attention model presented in this work was able to obtain the
lowest errors across multiple labels, only beaten by the other models presented in this
work. The performance we compared with, we had achieved on a signal to noise ratio
that was half of the other models. The current methods states they are accurate,
which we then also will state for the result presented in this work. When tested on
observations of the sun, we concluded that the models could estimate the stellar labels
of an real observation. We noted that the attention network had trouble estimating
the real values, which we argued was because the attention model is sensitive to the
signal to noise ratio is has been trained on.
We believe that future work should continue the path of deep learning started in
this work. We suggest that the aim should be a complete end-to-end deep learning
approach to the data-analysis to reduce the impact of human bias onto the data.
Future work could look into semi-supervised learning, where a combination of real
observations and synthetic spectra combined could make a model more robust for
application in the real world.
Throughout this thesis, we have shown that the stellar labels can consistently and
accurately be estimated before any continuum normalisation is done to the spectra us-
ing the deep learning models presented in this. This should be able to allow researches
and scientist around the world to apply these d techniques to faster determine the
stellar labels of observations from the vast cosmos.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Result data
A.1.1
Unuspervised learning results
Model
Latent Dimension
Sigma
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
DAE1d
5
0.05
47.430
55.072
48.728
DAE1d
10
0.05
15.933
14.037
16.246
DAE1d
25
0.05
12.821
18.276
14.012
DAE1d
40
0.05
12.211
14.733
21.120
VAE1d
5
0.05
123.711
130.304
118.178
VAE1d
10
0.05
94.395
91.144
125.070
VAE1d
25
0.05
159.805
112.491
139.849
VAE1d
40
0.05
100.421
96.340
139.775
AF-VAE1d
5
0.05
115.810
108.425
110.562
AF-VAE1d
10
0.05
93.439
91.909
102.059
AF-VAE1d
25
0.05
93.816
87.405
92.023
AF-VAE1d
40
0.05
135.204
88.228
106.711
Table A.1: Evaluation metric for all experiments of the unsupervised learning models.
Model
Latent Dimension
Sigma
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
DAE1d
10
0.01
12.111
13.331
10.256
DAE1d
10
0.05
15.933
14.037
16.246
DAE1d
10
0.10
19.341
20.769
17.665
DAE1d
10
0.20
36.338
38.668
44.488
DAE1d
10
0.50
111.857
103.995
103.411
DAE1d
10
1.00
294.889
289.289
278.999
Table A.2: Evaluation metric for the denosingin atueocoder
A.1.2
Supervised learning evaluation metric
==PAGE:72==
62
A Appendix
Model
Label
Sigma
Type
Experiment .
Experiment 2
Experiment 3
bResnet
Teff
0.01
MAE
60.917
59.314
58.098
bResnet
Teff
0.05
MAE
90.108
85.56.
82.692
bResnet
Teff
0.10
MAE
107.015
107.792
106.288
bResnet
Teff
0.20
MAE
143.324
147.927
153.020
bResnet
Teff
0.50
MAE
233.524
233.146
234.554
bResnet
Teff
1.00
MAE
334.167
333.603
330.634
bResnet
Teff
0.01
RMSE
86.347
81.563
81.167
bResnet
Teff
0.05
RMSE
127.914
121.787
117.065
bResnet
Teff
0.10
RMSE
151.384
154.040
151.029
bResnet
Teff
0.20
RMSE
199.146
205.680
213.397
bResnet
Teff
0.50
RMSE
317.730
324.504
321.872
bResnet
Teff
1.00
RMSE
446.945
450.310
444.783
bResnet
Log(g)
0.01
MAE
0.093
0.092
0.097
bResnet
Log(g)
0.05
MAE
0.142
0.104
0.104
bResnet
Log(g)
0.10
MAE
0.194
0.192
0.109
bResnet
Log(g)
0.20
MAE
0.274
0.274
0.276
bResnet
Log(g)
0.50
MAE
0.440
0.434
0.438
bResnet
Log(g)
1.00
MAE
0.593
0.595
0.591
bResnet
Log(g)
0.01
RMSE
0.135
0.133
0.104
bResnet
Log(g)
0.05
RMSE
0.208
0.205
0.206
bResnet
Log(g)
0.10
RMSE
0.283
0.280
0.282
bResnet
Log(g)
0.20
RMSE
0.397
0.395
0.399
bResnet
Log(g)
0.50
RMSE
0.607
0.602
0.607
bResnet
Log(g)
1.00
RMSE
0.784
0.789
0.783
bResnet
Z
0.01
MAE
0.043
0.041
0.041
bResnet
Z
0.05
MAE
0.060
0.057
0.059
bResnet
Z
0.10
MAE
0.075
0.075
0.074
bResnet
Z
0.20
MAE
0.104
0.103
0.107
bResnet
Z
0.50
MAE
0.172
0.170
0.171
bResnet
Z
1.00
MAE
0.250
0.251
0.253
bResnet
Z
0.01
RMSE
0.059
0.054
0.056
bResnet
Z
0.05
RMSE
0.082
0.079
0.080
bResnet
Z
0.10
RMSE
0.104
0.104
0.102
bResnet
Z
0.20
RMSE
0.143
0.104
0.145
bResnet
Z
0.50
RMSE
0.234
0.229
0.231
bResnet
Z
1.00
RMSE
0.334
0.334
0.334
bResnet
Vsini
0.01
MAE
0.494
0.488
0.488
bResnet
Vsini
0.05
MAE
0.712
0.713
0.746
bResnet
Vsini
0.10
MAE
0.999
0.959
0.985
bResnet
Vsini
0.20
MAE
1.400
1.400
1.435
bResnet
Vsini
0.50
MAE
2.249
2.262
2.255
bResnet
Vsini
1.00
MAE
3.222
3.200
3.202
==PAGE:73==
A.1 Result data
63
bResnet
Vsini
0.01
RMSE
0.741
0.716
0.725
bResnet
Vsini
0.05
RMSE
1.199
1.174
1.255
bResnet
Vsini
0.10
RMSE
1.685
1.625
1.651
bResnet
Vsini
0.20
RMSE
2.272
2.233
2.299
bResnet
Vsini
0.50
RMSE
3.304
3.304
3.332
bResnet
Vsini
1.00
RMSE
4.447
4.419
4.444
bDenoise
Teff
0.01
MAE
79.937
63.370
63.357
bDenoise
Teff
0.05
MAE
91.380
79.364
81.295
bDenoise
Teff
0.10
MAE
104.124
95.811
95.442
bDenoise
Teff
0.20
MAE
134.890
133.045
137.132
bDenoise
Teff
0.50
MAE
212.898
207.565
210.507
bDenoise
Teff
1.00
MAE
305.919
306.629
302.088
bDenoise
Teff
0.01
RMSE
112.391
91.136
92.882
bDenoise
Teff
0.05
RMSE
135.116
115.756
118.887
bDenoise
Teff
0.10
RMSE
151.126
139.555
139.208
bDenoise
Teff
0.20
RMSE
194.579
194.393
197.409
bDenoise
Teff
0.50
RMSE
297.339
291.405
294.408
bDenoise
Teff
1.00
RMSE
414.381
417.977
418.950
bDenoise
Log(g)
0.01
MAE
0.118
0.107
0.110
bDenoise
Log(g)
0.05
MAE
0.146
0.144
0.147
bDenoise
Log(g)
0.10
MAE
0.187
0.183
0.186
bDenoise
Log(g)
0.20
MAE
0.264
0.263
0.265
bDenoise
Log(g)
0.50
MAE
0.416
0.412
0.411
bDenoise
Log(g)
1.00
MAE
0.549
0.548
0.549
bDenoise
Log(g)
0.01
RMSE
0.107
0.162
0.165
bDenoise
Log(g)
0.05
RMSE
0.217
0.215
0.219
bDenoise
Log(g)
0.10
RMSE
0.279
0.274
0.278
bDenoise
Log(g)
0.20
RMSE
0.387
0.392
0.391
bDenoise
Log(g)
0.50
RMSE
0.586
0.581
0.580
bDenoise
Log(g)
1.00
RMSE
0.735
0.730
0.736
bDenoise
Z
0.01
MAE
0.052
0.044
0.045
bDenoise
Z
0.05
MAE
0.062
0.055
0.054
bDenoise
Z
0.10
MAE
0.072
0.068
0.066
bDenoise
Z
0.20
MAE
0.098
0.099
0.100
bDenoise
Z
0.50
MAE
0.106
0.157
0.159
bDenoise
Z
1.00
MAE
0.232
0.232
0.235
bDenoise
Z
0.01
RMSE
0.072
0.063
0.065
bDenoise
Z
0.05
RMSE
0.087
0.079
0.079
bDenoise
Z
0.10
RMSE
0.102
0.099
0.095
bDenoise
Z
0.20
RMSE
0.138
0.143
0.144
bDenoise
Z
0.50
RMSE
0.221
0.220
0.222
bDenoise
Z
1.00
RMSE
0.317
0.315
0.321
bDenoise
Vsini
0.01
MAE
0.581
0.550
0.542
==PAGE:74==
64
A Appendix
bDenoise
Vsini
0.05
MAE
0.706
0.702
0.713
bDenoise
Vsini
0.10
MAE
0.917
0.900
0.911
bDenoise
Vsini
0.20
MAE
1.277
1.273
1.303
bDenoise
Vsini
0.50
MAE
2.057
2.063
2.044
bDenoise
Vsini
1.00
MAE
2.874
2.852
2.845
bDenoise
Vsini
0.01
RMSE
0.917
0.889
0.873
bDenoise
Vsini
0.05
RMSE
1.184
1.195
1.175
bDenoise
Vsini
0.10
RMSE
1.565
1.519
1.569
bDenoise
Vsini
0.20
RMSE
2.105
2.125
2.177
bDenoise
Vsini
0.50
RMSE
3.167
3.190
3.175
bDenoise
Vsini
1.00
RMSE
4.143
4.123
4.111
bAtt
Teff
0.01
MAE
43.211
bAtt
Teff
0.05
MAE
73.089
bAtt
Teff
0.10
MAE
102.980
bAtt
Teff
0.20
MAE
148.924
bAtt
Teff
0.50
MAE
256.776
bAtt
Teff
1.00
MAE
391.260
bAtt
Teff
0.01
RMSE
68.213
bAtt
Teff
0.05
RMSE
112.347
bAtt
Teff
0.10
RMSE
153.550
bAtt
Teff
0.20
RMSE
215.719
bAtt
Teff
0.50
RMSE
359.628
bAtt
Teff
1.00
RMSE
527.745
bAtt
Log(g)
0.01
MAE
0.072
bAtt
Log(g)
0.05
MAE
0.103
bAtt
Log(g)
0.10
MAE
0.202
bAtt
Log(g)
0.20
MAE
0.303
bAtt
Log(g)
0.50
MAE
0.515
bAtt
Log(g)
1.00
MAE
0.710
bAtt
Log(g)
0.01
RMSE
0.1013
bAtt
Log(g)
0.05
RMSE
0.208
bAtt
Log(g)
0.10
RMSE
0.308
bAtt
Log(g)
0.20
RMSE
0.450
bAtt
Log(g)
0.50
RMSE
0.710
bAtt
Log(g)
1.00
RMSE
0.918
bAtt
Z
0.01
MAE
0.029
bAtt
Z
0.05
MAE
0.052
bAtt
Z
0.10
MAE
0.074
bAtt
Z
0.20
MAE
0.101
bAtt
Z
0.50
MAE
0.203
bAtt
Z
1.00
MAE
0.314
bAtt
Z
0.01
RMSE
0.043
bAtt
Z
0.05
RMSE
0.076
==PAGE:75==
A.1 Result data
65
bAtt
Z
0.10
RMSE
0.1008
bAtt
Z
0.20
RMSE
0.105
bAtt
Z
0.50
RMSE
0.281
bAtt
Z
1.00
RMSE
0.422
bAtt
Vsini
0.01
MAE
0.362
bAtt
Vsini
0.05
MAE
0.689
bAtt
Vsini
0.10
MAE
1.028
bAtt
Vsini
0.20
MAE
1.479
bAtt
Vsini
0.50
MAE
2.692
bAtt
Vsini
1.00
MAE
4.080
bAtt
Vsini
0.01
RMSE
0.799
bAtt
Vsini
0.05
RMSE
1.321
bAtt
Vsini
0.10
RMSE
1.840
bAtt
Vsini
0.20
RMSE
2.453
bAtt
Vsini
0.50
RMSE
3.984
bAtt
Vsini
1.00
RMSE
5.527
Table A.3: Evaluation metric for all experiments of the supervised learning models.
==PAGE:76==
66
A Appendix
A.2
Visual explanation of the Change of variable
theorem
The proof for the change of variable theorem is considered outside the scope of this
thesis, however we here provide a visual explanation of the change of variable theorem.
Consider a uniform distribution on the interval between 0 and 1. The total proba-
bility under any distribution has to integrate to 1, so the probability mass under this
interval for a uniform distributions is the unit square, where the density is constant
and the density at all points are 1.
Now let’s transform this variable with function y = 2x+1. So what is the density
of p(y)), it still going to be uniform, but we are stretching the domain by 2. Since
we are stretching the domain and we must still integrate the probability to 1, so we
must conserve volume of the probability mass. An example of this can be seen in
Figure A.1
Figure A.1: Example of the change of variable theorem for 1 dimensional case. Source
[Jang, ]
This is where the change of variable theorem can be used to calculate the conser-
vation of probability mass. So we calculate how the probability mass changes as we
apply a transformation to the orignal variables x. The change is calculated by the
inverse of the gradient f with respect to x.
In multiple dimensions if we send the unit square (area =1) to some other par-
allelogram (area=ad-bc) of the change in volume is descriped by the determinant of
Jacobian matrix of f
==PAGE:77==
A.3 A visualisation of the Jensen’s inequality
67
Figure A.2: Example of the change of variable theorem for 2 dimensional case. Source
[Jang, ]
So the change of variable theorem explains how we can change one probability
distribution into another one by squeezing the original data distribution onto another
distribution.
A.3
A visualisation of the Jensen’s inequality
This appendix provides a visual proof of the Jensen inequality. A mathematically
proof of this, is considered outside the scope of this thesis. Suppose that we have two
values of values a and b from a random variable x, where both a and b have equal
propability. This results that the mean of the random variable x is between a and b.
The applying the function f on the E[x] can be seen in Figure A.3
==PAGE:78==
68
A Appendix
Figure A.3: Visualisation of the Jensen’s inequality. Source:[Neurabites, ]
Now the random variable f(x) will take f(a) and f(b) with equal probability.
Looking at Figure A.3 we can see that the mean of these two E[f(x)] we see that this
is greater or equal to
E[f(x)] ≥f(E[x])
(A.1)
However looking at Figure A.3 we can see that this should only hold for functions
f(x) which is convex, becuase if it was not, this would not hold
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[Bailer-Jones, 2000] Bailer-Jones, C. A. L. (2000). Stellar parameters from very low
resolution spectra and medium band filters te , log g and (m/h) using neural
networks.
[Bengio, 2012] Bengio, Y. (2012).
Practical recommendations for gradient-based
training of deep architectures. CoRR, abs/1206.5533.
[Bishop, 2007] Bishop, C. M. (2007).
Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning
(Information Science and Statistics). Springer, 1 edition.
[Blundell et al., 2015] Blundell, C., Cornebise, J., Kavukcuoglu, K., and Wierstra, D.
(2015). Weight uncertainty in neural networks.
[Bowman et al., 2015] Bowman, S. R., Vilnis, L., Vinyals, O., Dai, A. M., Józefowicz,
R., and Bengio, S. (2015). Generating sentences from a continuous space. CoRR,
abs/1511.06349.
[Casey et al., 2016] Casey, A., Hogg, D. W., Ness, M. K., Rix, H.-W., Ho, A. Y. Q.,
and Gilmore, G. F. (2016). The cannon 2: A data-driven model of stellar spectra
for detailed chemical abundance analyses.
[Castelli and Kurucz, 2004] Castelli, F. and Kurucz, R. L. (2004). New grids of atlas9
model atmospheres. arXiv preprint astro-ph/0405087.
[Chen et al., 2016] Chen, X., Kingma, D. P., Salimans, T., Duan, Y., Dhariwal, P.,
Schulman, J., Sutskever, I., and Abbeel, P. (2016). Variational lossy autoencoder.
CoRR, abs/1611.02731.
[Dinh et al., 2015] Dinh, L., Krueger, D., and Bengio, Y. (2015). Nice: Non-linear
independent components estimation. CoRR, abs/1410.8516.
[Dumoulin and Visin, 2016] Dumoulin, V. and Visin, F. (2016). A guide to convolu-
tion arithmetic for deep learning.
[Fabbro et al., 2017] Fabbro, S., Venn, K., O’Briain, T., Bialek, S., Kielty, C., Ja-
handar, F., and Monty, S. (2017). An application of deep neural networks in the
analysis of stellar spectra.
==PAGE:80==
70
Bibliography
[Fu et al., 2019] Fu, H., Li, C., Liu, X., Gao, J., Çelikyilmaz, A., and Carin, L. (2019).
Cyclical annealing schedule: A simple approach to mitigating KL vanishing. CoRR,
abs/1903.10145.
[Gal and Ghahramani, 2015] Gal, Y. and Ghahramani, Z. (2015).
Dropout as a
bayesian approximation: Representing model uncertainty in deep learning.
[Germain et al., 2015] Germain, M., Gregor, K., Murray, I., and Larochelle, H.
(2015).
MADE: masked autoencoder for distribution estimation.
CoRR,
abs/1502.03509.
[Goodfellow et al., 2016] Goodfellow, I. J., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. (2016). Deep
Learning.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.
http://www.deeplearningbook.
org.
[Gray, 2005] Gray, D. F. (2005). The observation and analysis of stellar photospheres.
Cambridge University Press.
[Hastie et al., 2009] Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., and Friedman, J. (2009). The Ele-
ments of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. Springer
series in statistics. Springer.
[He et al., 2015] He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2015).
Deep residual
learning for image recognition.
[Hinton et al., 2012] Hinton, G. E., Srivastava, N., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and
Salakhutdinov, R. (2012). Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation
of feature detectors. CoRR, abs/1207.0580.
[Im et al., 2015] Im, D. J., Ahn, S., Memisevic, R., and Bengio, Y. (2015). Denoising
criterion for variational auto-encoding framework. CoRR, abs/1511.06406.
[Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015] Ioffe, S. and Szegedy, C. (2015).
Batch normalization:
Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift.
CoRR,
abs/1502.03167.
[Jaderberg et al., 2015] Jaderberg,
M.,
Simonyan,
K.,
Zisserman,
A.,
and
Kavukcuoglu, K. (2015). Spatial transformer networks. CoRR, abs/1506.02025.
[Jang, ] Jang, E. Normalizing Flows Tutorial in Jax for ICML. https://github.
com/ericjang/nf-jax. Accessed: 2020-07-07.
[Jetley et al., 2018] Jetley, S., Lord, N. A., Lee, N., and Torr, P. H. S. (2018). Learn
to pay attention. CoRR, abs/1804.02391.
[Kendall and Gal, 2017] Kendall, A. and Gal, Y. (2017). What uncertainties do we
need in bayesian deep learning for computer vision? CoRR, abs/1703.04977.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
71
[Kingma and Ba, 2014] Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. (2014).
Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. cite arxiv:1412.6980Comment: Published as a conference
paper at the 3rd International Conference for Learning Representations, San Diego,
2015.
[Kingma et al., 2016] Kingma, D. P., Salimans, T., and Welling, M. (2016). Improv-
ing variational inference with inverse autoregressive flow. CoRR, abs/1606.04934.
[Kingma and Welling, 2013] Kingma, D. P. and Welling, M. (2013). Auto-encoding
variational bayes.
[Kurucz and Bell, 1993] Kurucz, R. and Bell, B. (1993). Kurucz cd-rom 13. ATLAS9
stellar atmosphere programs and, 2:1.
[Kurucz, 1970] Kurucz, R. L. (1970). Atlas: A computer program for calculating
model stellar atmospheres. SAO Special report, 309.
[Loshchilov and Hutter, 2017] Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. (2017). Fixing weight
decay regularization in adam. CoRR, abs/1711.05101.
[Majewski et al., 2017] Majewski, S. R., Schiavon, R. P., Frinchaboy, P. M., Prieto,
C. A., Barkhouser, R., Bizyaev, D., Blank, B., Brunner, S., Burton, A., Carrera,
R., and et al. (2017). The apache point observatory galactic evolution experiment
(apogee). The Astronomical Journal, 154(3):94.
[Nair and Hinton, 2010] Nair, V. and Hinton, G. E. (2010). Rectified linear units
improve restricted boltzmann machines. In Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’10, pages
807–814, USA. Omnipress.
[Ness et al., 2015] Ness, M., Hogg, D. W., Rix, H.-W., Ho, A. Y. Q., and Zasowski,
G. (2015). The cannon: A data-driven approach to stellar label determination. The
Astrophysical Journal, 808(1):16.
[Neurabites, ] Neurabites.
neurabites.
https://neurabites.com/2020/03/26/
antifragility/. Accessed: 2020-07-07.
[Ng, 2017] Ng, A. (2017). Machine Learning Yearning. Online Draft.
[Nix and Weigend, 1994] Nix, D. A. and Weigend, A. S. (1994). Estimating the mean
and variance of the target probability distribution. In Proceedings of 1994 IEEE
International Conference on Neural Networks (ICNN’94), volume 1, pages 55–60
vol.1.
[Oktay et al., 2018] Oktay, O., Schlemper, J., Folgoc, L. L., Lee, M. C. H., Heinrich,
M. P., Misawa, K., Mori, K., McDonagh, S. G., Hammerla, N. Y., Kainz, B.,
Glocker, B., and Rueckert, D. (2018). Attention u-net: Learning where to look for
the pancreas. CoRR, abs/1804.03999.
==PAGE:82==
72
Bibliography
[Paszke et al., 2019] Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J.,
Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., Desmaison, A., Kopf,
A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Raison, M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B.,
Fang, L., Bai, J., and Chintala, S. (2019). Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
performance deep learning library. In Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A.,
d'Alché-Buc, F., Fox, E., and Garnett, R., editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 32, pages 8024–8035. Curran Associates, Inc.
[Rezende and Mohamed, 2015] Rezende, D. J. and Mohamed, S. (2015). Variational
inference with normalizing flows.
[Ruder, 2016] Ruder, S. (2016). An overview of gradient descent optimization algo-
rithms. CoRR, abs/1609.04747.
[Rumelhart et al., 1986] Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J. (1986).
Learning Representations by Back-propagating Errors. Nature, 323(6088):533–536.
[Schlemper et al., 2018] Schlemper, J., Oktay, O., Chen, L., Matthew, J., Knight,
C. L., Kainz, B., Glocker, B., and Rueckert, D. (2018). Attention-gated networks
for improving ultrasound scan plane detection. CoRR, abs/1804.05338.
[Schroeder and Inc, 2000] Schroeder, D. and Inc, E. I. (2000). Astronomical Optics.
Electronics & Electrical. Elsevier Science.
[Selvaraju et al., 2016] Selvaraju, R. R., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Cogswell, M., Parikh,
D., and Batra, D. (2016). Grad-cam: Why did you say that? visual explanations
from deep networks via gradient-based localization. CoRR, abs/1610.02391.
[van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008] van der Maaten, L. and Hinton, G. (2008). Visu-
alizing data using t-SNE. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9:2579–2605.
[Vaswani et al., 2017] Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L.,
Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L. u., and Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need.
In Guyon, I., Luxburg, U. V., Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan,
S., and Garnett, R., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
30, pages 5998–6008. Curran Associates, Inc.
[Vincent et al., 2008] Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Bengio, Y., and Manzagol, P.-A.
(2008). Extracting and composing robust features with denoising autoencoders. In
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML ’08,
page 1096–1103, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
[Xu et al., 2015] Xu, K., Ba, J., Kiros, R., Cho, K., Courville, A. C., Salakhutdinov,
R., Zemel, R. S., and Bengio, Y. (2015). Show, attend and tell: Neural image
caption generation with visual attention. CoRR, abs/1502.03044.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
73
[Yang et al., 2019] Yang, J., Xu, J., Zhang, X., Wu, C., Lin, T., and Ying, Y. (2019).
Deep learning for vibrational spectral analysis: Recent progress and a practical
guide. Analytica Chimica Acta.
