==PAGE:1==
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-
Expert Users
Master Thesis
DTU Digital Media Engineering
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
Master Thesis
July, 2020
By
Fotios Pegios
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over seven months at the Section for Digital Media En-
gineering, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in En-
gineering, MSc Eng.
Fotios Pegios - s171866
Signature
Date
ii
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
6-July-2020
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Nowadays, there is a significant number of people that suffer from mental health problems.
During the therapeutic process, therapists often ask the patients to track the moments of
their symptoms. The collection of this data can be valuable for users in understanding
the triggers of the symptoms and improving the outcome of the therapies. However, there
is limited support to help non-expert people to make sense of this self-tracking wealth of
data. Thus for them to utilize data and take a data-driven approach to therapy, they need
proper tools that are easy to use and can seamlessly be integrated into a therapeutic
process, without taking away the sparse time available.
The goal of this thesis is to bridge the gap between self-tracking and the sense-making
of time series data for health researchers and patients who may have limited computer
proficiency. This will be achieved with the research and development of a high fidelity
web-based prototype that visualizes self-tracked personal time-series data. The project
will explore different approaches of visualizing time series in order for individuals to be
able to spot patterns and trends in the data to support the therapeutic process.
The aforementioned solution is prototyped in an interactive process and think aloud evalu-
ation is conducted to get feedback from users. The feedback from the conducted usability
evaluations is utilized to enhance the visualization experience of the users. Results show
that individuals can learn from the data through visualizations. Further development can
be done to the app to support more features that enhance user experience.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Fotios Pegios, MSc Digital Media Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Jakob Eg Larsen, Associate Professor, Thesis Supervisor
I would first like to thank my thesis supervisor, Jakob El Larsen, for giving me the op-
portunity to work on this thesis. He allowed this thesis to be my own work but steered
me in the right direction whenever he thought I needed it. His patience, motivation, and
immense knowledge helped me during all the phases of this thesis.
Secondly, I must express my very profound gratitude to my parents and friends for pro-
viding me with unfailing support and continuous encouragement throughout my years of
study and through the process of researching and writing this thesis. This accomplishment
would not have been possible without them. Thank you.
And finally, last but by no means least, I am more than grateful to my girlfriend, Androniki
Sakonidou, for supporting me spiritually throughout my studies and the valuable feedback
she has given me for this thesis.
Thanks for all your encouragement!
iv
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goal of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Report structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Related Work
3
3
Analysis
7
3.1
Personal informatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Visualizing personal data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Visualization techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Material design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Design
13
4.1
Colors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Global Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.3
Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.4
Calendar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Implementation
23
5.1
Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Development process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.3
Server side . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.4
Client side . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6
Evaluation
25
6.1
Usability method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.2
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
7
Discussion
29
8
Future work
31
9
Conclusion
33
Bibliography
35
A Prototype
37
B Source code
38
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Self-tracking data is becoming increasingly common in people’s daily life, especially in
chronic disease management. People tend to utilize handheld devices to monitor and
track daily habits and activities in order to improve their behaviors. The term Quantified
self (QS), which refers to the strategy for tracking a user’s vital data across time in order to
identify important patterns, is becoming more and more popular as the days go by. This
can include everything from biorhythms monitoring to daily activities tracking in disparate
places. Usually, patients use technological tracking tools such as smartphones and wear-
ables in order to collect health and lifestyle data. This data can be utilized from patients
and healthcare providers to finally make decisions that can lead to improved quality of
patient’s life and better ongoing care [Patel et al. 2012, Zan et al. 2015].
According to research, the sociologist Deborah Lupton estimates that there are well-over
160,000 tracking apps available in the app stores, including both for Android and Apple
phones [Lupton 2014]. However, most of these tracking tools are not designed to fully
meet patients’ and clinicians’ expectations in the visual representation of the personal
data. The key challenge with the data visualization is that users cannot create insight out
of the displayed data, especially when these end-users have low computer proficiency.
People that belong to this category, do not have the technical experience to read scientific
visualizations and prefer a more human-readable format compared to the experts who
demand machine-readable data.
1.1
Goal of the thesis
The self-tracking data can describe important phenomena that are not visible at first
glance. Usually, expert computer users utilize scientific applications to visualize data and
learn from it. There are also the data scientists who utilize advanced algorithms in pro-
gramming languages such as Python, Matlab, and R, to perform data analysis and make
assumptions with the operation results. However, there is limited support to people with
no computer proficiency to achieve the same result. The goal of this thesis is to develop
a high fidelity web-based prototype that visualizes time series personal data. It targets to
non-expert users that want to discover the insights of their own data without requiring a
solid experience in visualizations.
Usability evaluation is conducted to the prototype in cooperation with a number of users
that have different characteristics and profiles. After a thorough evaluation of the test
users’ feedback, a couple of usability issues were listed and changes are made in order
to improve the user experience.
The prototype can be utilized for any time-series data, as it is developed for generic pur-
poses. Since the app is hosted in a cloud server, it can be accessible from everyone with
access to the Internet and using a browser.
1.2
Report structure
The thesis begins with introducing the motivation and goal of the thesis in Chapter 1
which is followed up by Chapter 2 where related research work is summarized and dis-
cussed. In Chapter 3 the personal informatics theory and various time-series visualization
approaches are displayed. The implementation and design of the components that are
used for user interface are described in Chapter 4, while in Chapter 5 the technologies that
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
1
==PAGE:10==
finally create the web application of the prototype are presented. The conducted usability
evaluation and the received feedback are analyzed in Chapter 6. The overall results of the
project and possible future work are discussed in Chapters 7 and 8, respectively. Finally,
Chapter 9 concludes the thesis.
2
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:11==
2
Related Work
In 2016, there was an attempt with a visualization that targeted non-expert users. In other
words, an interactive web-based visualization tool for healthcare data was proposed, es-
pecially for health researchers and clinicians who may have limited computer proficiency.
Users could select a patient cohort and visualize the distributions of various variables
within the selected cohort. Also, there was a comparison feature between two patient
cohorts [J. Lee, Ribey, and Wallace 2016].
Figure 2.1: The visualizations proposed by J. Lee, Ribey, and Wallace 2016
A strive to bridge the gap between self-tracking data regarding sleep and sense-making
happened through the design of SleepExplorer [Liang et al. 2016]. Sleep explorer is a
web-based tool that helps individuals understand sleep quality through multi-dimensional
sleep structure and explore correlations between sleep data and contextual information.
Although the participants understood the relevance of different metrics that define sleep
quality, the average profile of the test users were people who have a good level in com-
puter utilization.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 2.2: Time series plots of sleep metrics and self-tracked contextual factors in Sleep-
Explorer app
Another important work was derived from a group of researchers that aimed to under-
stand the healthcare providers’ attitudes towards reviewing patient-generated data. In
cooperation with a mixed group of healthcare providers, they collected information from
chronic patients and a series of visualizations representing the collected personal data
were designed. As a result, the importance of designing visual representations was dis-
cussed considering both patients and healthcare providers, instead of designing with a
generalization purpose [Rajabiyazdi et al. 2020].
Figure 2.3: Preliminary visualization sketches from Rajabiyazdi et al. 2020 work
In Choe, B. Lee, and Schraefel 2015, a platform that visualizes personal data to non-
expert users was presented. Similar to the current this, the described system is imple-
mented to assist people gain insights of personal data. The final proposal of the conducted
analysis includes four areas for development of system that visualize personal informa-
tion.
4
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.4: Screenshot of data-driven insight with a visualization in Choe, B. Lee, and
Schraefel 2015 work
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
5
==PAGE:14==
6
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:15==
3
Analysis
In this chapter, the definition of Personal Informatics will be described alongside some
visualization techniques and critical validations for the designing process.
3.1
Personal informatics
Personal informatics is a set of tools that assist people to collect personally relevant infor-
mation for the purpose of self-reflection and self-monitoring. These tools help people gain
self-knowledge about one’s behaviors, habits, and thoughts. They are also mentioned as
living by numbers, quantified self, personal analytics, and self-tracking. The development
of personal informatics applications poses new challenges in the human-computer inter-
action field of study and creates opportunities for applications in various domains related
to life quality, such as fitness, nutrition, wellness, and mental health [Li, Froehlich, et al.
2010].
Li et al. [Li, Dey, and Forlizzi 2010] presented a stage-based model that improves the
effectiveness of personal informatics systems. The model consists of five stages and
each stage is composed of four properties. In fig. 3.1, the five stages, and four properties
are being displayed.
Figure 3.1: The five-stage model of Personal Informatics Systems and its four properties
as it was presented in [Li, Dey, and Forlizzi 2010]
The personal informatics model consists of the following five stages:
• Preparation: Users’ motivation to collect personal information, determining what
information they will collect and the way data will be tracked
• Collection: Users collect information about themselves
• Integration: The collected information is prepared and transformed for the users to
reflect on
• Reflection: Users are looking at lists of collected personal information or interacting
with visualizations.
• Action: Users choose what actions will be taken based on what they learned during
the reflection stage
The properties of each stage are described below:
• Barriers cascade: Problems in earlier stages that affect the following stages
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
7
==PAGE:16==
• Iterative: users can integrate new data, tools or processes as they proceed through
the stages
• User-driven vs. System-driven: User-driven collection is when users track data
on paper or enter information into a spreadsheet or a digital form. When a stage
is system-driven, the system can propose to users the proper tools and information
that will assist them to answer their questions. Also, a system-driven stage means
that the system can collect personal information by using sensors or another kind of
monitoring systems
• Uni-faceted vs. Multi-faceted: Currently, most systems are uni-faceted, which
means that they visualize only one facet of a person’s life. The multi-faceted sys-
tems collect information about different user activities such as computing activity,
communication, and media usage
The application that is implemented during this thesis handles both the Integration and
Reflection stages. This is because the system transforms the raw data into a form that
is easier to use in the selected visualizations and the imported data are visualized in
several graphs so that the user can learn from them and identify possible patterns. The
tool handles only one person’s activity so it is uni-faceted. Also, it is mostly system-driven,
but it may require some user input for the time-series data in case the data are tracked
manually by pressing a button or creating logs.
3.2
Visualizing personal data
According to [Aigner et al. 2011, p. 70-83], three main questions have to be validated
during the designing process of time-series data visualizations:
1. What is presented? - Time and Data It is virtually impossible to design effective
visual representations without knowledge about the characteristics of the given data
and time domain.
Characteristics of time:
• Scale – ordinal vs. discrete vs. continuous
• Scope – point-based vs. interval-based
• Arrangement – linear vs. cyclic
• Viewpoint – ordered vs. branching vs. multiple perspectives
Characteristics of time-oriented data
• Scale – quantitative vs. qualitative:
• Frame of reference – abstract vs. spatial
• Kind of data – events vs. states:
• Number of variables – univariate vs. multivariate
2. Why is it presented? – User tasks In order to understand what we want to get from
a given set of data, a number of tasks that have to be solved in the visualizations
can be listed. fig. 3.2 shows more clearly how the visualization tasks are organized.
Individual data elements are addressed by elementary tasks. Individual values or
groups of data may be included. On the other hand, synoptic tasks involve a general
view and consider sets of values or groups of data in their aggregate. Synoptic
8
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:17==
tasks are further split into descriptive and connectional tasks. The properties of
either a set of references or a set of characteristics are specified in descriptive tasks,
while connectional tasks form connections between at least two sets, taking into
account the relational behavior of two or more variables. The final answer could
be a comparison between values or a single numeric value, which depends on the
question.
Figure 3.2: Taxonomy of visualization tasks [Aigner et al. 2011]
3. How is it presented? – Visual representation There are two things that have to
be considered when deciding how time and associated data are to be represented
visually.
• Mapping of time - Static representation results or dynamic visualizations that
change over time automatically (e.g., slide shows or animations)
• Dimensionality of the presentation space - The presentation space of a visual-
ization can be either 2D or 3D
Although the aforementioned questions could really help to find the proper way of visual-
izing personal data, a list of visualization techniques that could lead to a suitable graph is
also presented in Aigner et al. 2011, p. 148-252.
3.3
Visualization techniques
The bar graph is one of the most popular and well known visual representations of data.
The height of bars depicts the data values of variables that have a natural zero. In this
graph, it is easy to make comparisons between values and get an overview of the data.
The low difficulty in the comparison between values is the main reason why the bar graph
is utilized in more than one visualization in this prototype.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.3: Bar graph visualization [Aigner et al. 2011, p. 154]
Another common data visualizations are the tilemaps. The idea of this graph is to repre-
sent data values in a calendar division using colors in cells to demonstrate the magnitude
of each value. This graph can be easily interpreted, as it is similar to calendars that people
use every day. A similar version is utilized in the Calendar page of the prototype, which
will be presented in chapter 4.
Figure 3.4: Data representation using tile maps [Aigner et al. 2011, p. 178]
Circle view visualization was developed to represent multivariate data. A circle is divided
into several segments that represent a variable. The segments are also divided into time
slots, each one is colored based on the equivalent data value [Keim, Schneidewind, and
Sips 2004].
10
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.5: Circle View showing the evolution of multiple at-tributes over time [Keim,
Schneidewind, and Sips 2004]
Circle view is not selected in this prototype for the representation of the data because the
time-series data for this project is not multivariate. However, two different circle visual-
ization is utilized in this project instead of the aforementioned circle view. The selected
circle representations are the aster plot and the donut chart [fig. 3.6].
(a) Donut chart
(b) Aster plot
Figure 3.6: User interactions with the observations per day graph
3.4
Material design
When coming to design a prototype, apart from visualizations, the designer has to decide
what will be the design framework that will be utilized. Nowadays, one of the most popular
design frameworks is Material Design which is mainly used in android devices. Material
design is an adaptable system of guidelines, components, and tools that support the best
practices of user interface design (Google 2014). According to Google’s I/O developer
conference in 2017, the android operating system has more than 2 billion monthly active
devices all over the world Google 2017. In other words, this design is exposed to the
majority of users all around the world through android devices, even to non-expert users.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
11
==PAGE:20==
That is the reason why it was the design framework that was chosen for the current pro-
totype.
12
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:21==
4
Design
In this chapter, the design of the proposed prototype is analyzed and the final visualiza-
tions are presented.
4.1
Colors
The prototype was designed to facilitate visualization of self-tracking time-series data.
Most of the users that track information about themselves usually want to cure a disease
or improve a health problem that they encounter. That is the reason why the main color
of the prototype is cyan. Cyan is a color that is very close to the color of the uniforms
that doctors mainly use in hospitals and health care centers all over the world. Red is the
color that was chosen for action buttons and black was selected for texts.
Figure 4.1: Cyan, red and black are the colors were chosen as primary, secondary and
text color respectively
4.2
Global Components
The prototype is designed to include two main screens, Statistics, and Calendar. Before
navigating to any of these pages, the user has to first upload the time series data that want
to study. This will be achieved in the File Upload page (fig. 4.2) where the user interface
asks the user for the file with the time-series data. The system support only .csv files for
upload. This means that in case the uploaded file has other types than this, the app will
not work properly. After the user has uploaded the .csv file that includes the time-series
data, the user will be navigated to the Statistics page immediately.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.2: The File Upload page in which the user can upload the time-series data file
Both main screens of the prototype include two global components, Navbar and Filter
Options (fig. 4.3). Navbar is the component that lets the user navigate through the main
screens by containing the main menu of the application. Moreover, it offers to the user the
opportunity to change data. On the other hand Filter Options is the responsible component
for filtering the data to the user preferences. User can specify a date range between the
dates of the uploaded data, by changing Date From and Date To values from the date
picker user interface. This functionality is very common to most of the people since it
exists in most of the accommodation or flight tickets booking websites and applications.
It is also possible for the user to filter the data based on the days of the week.
Figure 4.3: Navbar and Filter Options global components
The Filter Options component includes also two action buttons, Reset Filters and Search.
The former reset the filters to their default values and the latter applies the selected filter
values. As a result, the visualizations are updated according to the user’s preferences.
4.3
Statistics
The first of the main screens, the Statistics page, presents six visualizations from which
the user can have an overview of the data. Basically, each of the six graphs divides the
14
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:23==
time-series data into groups based on the following time criteria: date, month, week, day
of the week, hour, and minute.
Figure 4.4: The flow of the implemented double layer filtering process
All visualizations on the Statistics page are interactive. In other words, the parts of each
graph are clickable and can filter the database on a criterion that corresponds to the clicked
region of the graph. This means that apart from the data filtering that is performed in
the Filter Options component, the Statistics page offers a second filtering layer for the
visualizations of the screen. So, the graphs can operate as filters and not only as visual
representations of data. When this happens and the user clicks a graph to filter the data
based on that criteria, the rest of the graphs are rendered again based on the second
filtering layer. Any clicked part of a graph can be clicked again to undo the filter.
The visualizations in the Statistics page are the following: Observations per day, day
average observations per month, day average observations per week, day average ob-
servations per day of the week, day average observations per hour, and day average
observations per minute. In this project, an observation is a timestamp the user has
tracked.
4.3.1
Observations per day graph
Observations per day are the first graph that is visualized on the Statistics page. Basically,
it is bar graph that displays the number of observations for each day between a selected
date range. The bar graph is the visualization technique that was chosen for this data.
This is because the values can be easily compared between days and also a dataset
of numerous days can be accommodated. The red horizontal line indicates the average
number of observations per day in the current date range.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.5: Bar graph: Observations per day
By placing the mouse over a bar, the exact date of the bar is displayed along with the
number of observations. In case a bar is clicked, the data is filtered based on the clicked
date and the rest of the graphs are updated.
(a) The bar of the date 24/10/2016 is hovered (b) The bar of the date 24/10/2016 is clicked and
the data is filtered based on this date
Figure 4.6: User interactions with the observations per day graph
4.3.2
Day average observations per month graph
This visualization shows the average number of observations per day for each month
in a donut chart. One reason for choosing this visualization technique is that readers
can easily focus on reading the length of the arcs in a donut chart while they can make
comparisons with other arcs. The maximum number of arcs in this donut chart is twelve
as the number of months in a year. In other words, this number of arcs will keep the
effectiveness of reading the data.
16
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.7: Donut chart: Day average observations per month
Donut chart supports hover and click interactions for filtering as it can be seen in fig. 4.8.
By hovering an arc, the month that corresponds to this arc and the average observations
per day are displayed in a popover tooltip.
(a) The arch of December is hovered
(b) The arc of December is clicked and the data
is filtered based on this month
Figure 4.8: User interactions with the day average observations per month graph
4.3.3
Day average observations per week graph
In this graph, the average number of observations per day for each week is displayed.
As it can be seen in fig. 4.9, the visualization technique that was utilized is the bar graph,
because it is possible to have plenty of weeks to display and a bar graph can easily contain
any number of bars. Also, it offers easily comparisons between values.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.9: Bar graph: Day average observations per week
The user interface changes for each interaction are visible in fig. 4.10.
(a) The bar of week 40/2016 is hovered
(b) The bar of week 40/2016 is clicked and the
data is filtered based on this week
Figure 4.10: User interactions with the day average observations per month graph
4.3.4
Day average observations per day of the week graph
This graph shows the average number of observations per day for each day of the week
in a donut chart. The maximum number of arcs that the chart can be divided is seven, as
this is the total number of the days of the week. That is the reason why the donut chart is
the selected visualization for this representation.
18
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.11: Donut chart: Day average observations per day of the week
The interactions user can have with the visualizations are similar to the month graph,
hover, and click which can be seen in fig. 4.12.
(a) The arc of Monday is hovered
(b) The arc Monday is clicked and the data is fil-
tered based on this day of the week
Figure 4.12: User interactions with the day average observations per day of the week
graph
4.3.5
Day average observations per hour graph
The hour graph displays the average number of observations per day for each hour. Aster
plot is the visualization technique that is chosen for this representation. It is divided into
twelve pie slices and each slice represents one hour of the day. Since the day consists
of twenty four hours, a toggle switch is placed in the center of the plot, so the user can
select the time period between AM and PM.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.13: Aster plot: Day average observations per hour
One of the major goals of this thesis is to make data representations friendly for non-
expert users. To this end, we chose the aster plot divided into twelve pie slices for the
hour visualization since it is almost identical to clock that people have learned to interpret
it since their birth.
(a) The hour 1 am is hovered
(b) The hour 1 am is clicked and the data is fil-
tered based on this hour
Figure 4.14: User interactions with the day average observations per hour graph
The aster plot provides interactions as the other graphs. Users can hover a pie slice to
see the details of an hour, while click interactions mean data filtering based on the clicked
hour.
20
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:29==
4.3.6
Day average observations per minute graph
The last visualization that is included in the Statistics page is a bar graph that displays the
average number of observations per day for a selected hour of the day. It is visible only
when an hour from the hour aster plot is clicked. The purpose of this graph is to indicate if
observations at a specific hour have occurred in sequence. This visualization can assist
the user to get more knowledge from the rendered information.
Figure 4.15: Bar graph: Day average observations per minute of a selected hour
This graph does not support any interactions with the user as it is the deepest level of the
time groups and there is no sense by filtering the data by the minute.
4.4
Calendar
The second screen of the application includes a calendar. It is a visualization that is very
common to all the users, irrespective of whether the user is expert or not. The days that
are in the calendar can be filtered using the filter options. Every visible day consists of 25
cells. The first 24 cells contain the number of observations for each hour of the day. In
the last cell, the total number of observations for each day is displayed.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.16: Calendar in second screen of the application
In fig. 4.16, it can be seen that cells with values have a background color. While data are
transformed into a form that calendar can get as input and render the proper visualization,
the maximum number of observations per hour and per day are calculated for the given
data. Having the maximum values for hours and day, the system clusters all the cells’
values into 7 groups. Every group is characterized by color as it can be seen at the color
scale of the legend that is located below the calendar on the right side. In this way, the
calendar operates as a heat map, and users can pinpoint very quickly the hours and days
with the highest number of observations.
The calendar is not interactive. It offers a visual representation of the time-series infor-
mation in a color-scaled calendar. The only action users can do is to scroll horizontally
the calendar in order to see more days if all of them do not fit in the window.
22
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:31==
5
Implementation
In this chapter, the tools and technologies that are chosen during the implementation of
this application will be described.
5.1
Platform
There are several variations in delivering digital content to desktops and mobile devices.
The platform in which content will be implemented depends on the objectives and goals
of a project. Two of the main types of applications are native and web apps. Native
applications are developed for specific platforms (Android, iOS, Windows). These apps
are usually acquired through online stores or marketplaces and installed directly on the
device. One of the major advantages of the native apps is that, in terms of speed, they
outperform other solutions such as web applications. On top of this, native applications
have also no limitations regarding offline storage and security. On the other hand, web
applications are accessible through the web browser of a device by visiting an Internet link
and no installation is needed compared to the native ones. Since the web apps are device
agnostics, the cross-device approach makes the development process much easier than
native apps. HTML, CSS, and Javascript are the languages that are used to develop a
web app. The easy development, maintenance, and support are the main superiorities of
the web-based application.
After a thorough evaluation of both platform solutions, the web application is decided to
be the utilized one. The rationale behind this selection is deliverability. In other words,
the final application will be easily accessed and used through the internet. The choice
of the native app could possibly be an overkill considering the fact that the underlying
application does not perform high performance demanding functionalities, which is the
strongest advantage of native applications.
5.2
Development process
After finishing the design part of the application, the development should be divided into
tasks. The kanban board of the Github website is used to keep track of the develop-
ment process. The kanbard board includes three columns: Todo, In progress, and Done
(fig. 6.1). Apart from that, in order to organize the implementation, version control systems
is needed to store the source code of the project. Git is the version control system that is
utilized during the development phase following the feature branching strategy approach.
Every task is implemented in a separate feature branch and when the task development
is finished, the task card is moved to the Done column and the branch is merged to the
develop branch. The develop branch contains a stable version of the app.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.1: The Github kanban board of the project after the development was finished
5.3
Server side
Although the system is a single-page application and everything is executed on the browser,
a server is mandatory to host the app and serve the app files. NodeJS is chosen to be
the responsible app for serving the VueJs project files to the client-side. The NodeJS
app is hosted on a Heroku instance which is connected with the develop branch of the
project for auto-deployments. This means that when the develop branch is changed, the
live instance of Heroku is updated.
5.4
Client side
As it is mentioned in chapter 4, the application consists of two main screens that include
two same components. In order to improve the performance of the system, it is developed
based on the single-page application (SPA) logic. SPA’s do not require page reloads
during use. They operate inside the browser and the content of the page is dynamically
changed with new data from the server after interactions are made by the user. SPAs aim
to improve interactions speed and make the website feels like a native application.
In order to build a single page application, a client-side framework is needed. There are
various Javascript frameworks for SPA’s development which offer great overall perfor-
mance to the end-user. AngularJS, ReactJS, and VueJS are three of the most popular
SPA frameworks. The current project was developed in VueJS because it is less com-
plicated than the other two frameworks. Due to its simplicity, it is also a good choice for
prototypes. In addition, since the material is the chosen design for this project, Vuetify
is the CSS framework that is used for the user interface of the application. Vuetify offers
material design components that are compatible with VueJS.
The visualizations of the app are developed in D3js. D3 is a library made in Javascript
language that produces dynamic and interactive visualization for web browsers. Basically,
it is a library for DOM manipulation. The modern web standards: SVG, CSS, and HTML
are exploited to create visual representations of data. Usually, D3js is utilized to let the
user explore and interact with data.
24
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:33==
6
Evaluation
After the development was finished, usability testing of the prototype was performed by
testing it on users. In this chapter, the chosen evaluation method, interviews, and results
will be described.
6.1
Usability method
Usability testing focuses on the measurement of a product capacity to finally meet the
intended purpose. The set up of a usability test involves scenarios where the potential
users are asked to execute a number of tasks. During this process, notes are taken based
on the reactions of the user.
Think-aloud evaluation [Lewis 1982] is the usability technique that is used for the eval-
uation phase of the project. This method involves participants to think aloud and while
they are executing a number of given tasks they are asked to mention everything that
comes to their mind. As a result, this allows observers to gain insights into user cognitive
processes. During the test, observers note whatever users say and do, without helping
them or intervene in their actions, even if they are facing difficulties.
6.2
Interviews
According to Nielsen 1994, the recommended number of users for a think-aloud usability
testing is four to five. It is reported by Nielsen, that a large number of testers is not
mandatory. In his experiments, this number of users achieved to find about 75% of the
usability problems.
The text users of the evaluation, as it can be seen in table 6.1, have different backgrounds
and most of them do not have exceptional skills in computers. Due to this fact, it was
expected that different issues would be pinpointed.
Table 6.1: Overview of the participants in Think-aloud usability testing
Gender
Age
Occupation
Male
30
Senior Consultant
Male
29
Musician - Photographer
Male
28
Forwarding Manager
Male
24
Software Engineer
Male
30
Tolls Station Supervisor
Female
30
Literature Teacher
The time-series data was used in the evaluation was from a veteran that suffered from
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The veteran tracked any events regarding his ill-
ness by recording them. As an intro of the evaluation process, test users were informed
about the illness in order to understand the need for time records of the episodes the pa-
tient has experienced. After making clear the situation, 14 tasks (table 6.2) were given to
the users, and results were noted. The duration of these interviews was 30-40 minutes
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
25
==PAGE:34==
approximately. It is important to mention that all participants used their own laptops in or-
der to make them feel more comfortable during the process. At the end of the interviews,
test users were asked about their overall experience with the application.
Table 6.2: The list of tasks the test users were asked to perform
Screen
Id
Task
File upload
1
Upload the file with the time-series data
Statistics
2
Find the date with the most observations
3
Find the month with the most observations/day
4
on Mondays
Find the month with the most observations/day
5
in October
Find the week with the most observations/day
6
in December
Find the weekday with the most observations/day
7
at 11pm on Fridays
Find the month with the most observations/day
8
on Fridays in October
Find the minute with most observations at 8am
9
on Thursdays in November
Find the hour with the most observations/day
10
in the week with the most observations/day
Find the weekday with the most observations/day
11
between October 10th and November 10th
Find the month with the most observations/day
12
October 5th and December 5th on Weekdays
Find the month with the most observations/day between
Calendar
13
between September 16th and November 16th
In calendar, find the day with the most observations
14
between November 16th and December 15th on Sundays
In calendar, find the day with the most observations at 15:00
6.3
Results
Although none of the test users has participated in a usability test before, they did not face
any difficulties in following the procedure. All the users executed the tasks successfully,
but in some points,they were struggled on how to proceed.
Regarding the filter options component, two users said that they did not understand what
is the date range of the uploaded data. They expected at least the system to restrict the
selection of the date range in the filter options, by not allowing the user to select dates
that are not in the data.
In the Statistics page, users spent some minutes to understand that the visualizations are
clickable. It was mentioned, that they understood the click functionality of the graphs while
26
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:35==
they were moving the mouse a top of the graphs. This is because a hand icon replaces
the mouse pointer when the user is hovering the graph parts. After they realized that
graphs are clickable, they claimed that the first bar graph that visualizes the observations
per day should be clickable too.
The majority of the usability issues were found on the Calendar page. Most of the users
did not understand that the calendar is scrollable through the arrows that are placed on
the sides of it. Also, all users said that it is annoying to click the arrows in order to navigate
back and forth. A horizontal scrollbar was the suggestion for a replacement. Moreover,
it was stated by all the testers that the row with the total number of observations per day
should be placed below the last hour (23:00) instead of being detached from the rest of the
calendar. Three of the six users preferred to show dash instead of zeros in the calendar
cell with no observations. Finally, four participants expressed their opinion of having one
legend with color scalesinstead of two.
Figure 6.1: The left screenshot shows the calendar page during the evaluation interviews
and the right one shows the calendar after the changes were made based on the usability
issues
Overall, the users felt comfortable with the application of the data and claimed that they
would use it for studying time-series data. The literature teacher was the only person
that did not like the experience with the app. She understood the logic of the system
and found it useful. However, she does not use computers at all, it was obvious that
the overall experience and feedback would not be positive. Testers also stated that the
difficulties to find the asked values were not enough to prevent them from finishing the
tasks successfully. Also, it was commonly stated that after the third task, the app became
familiar to them and they could find any information. Not to mention the fact that users
pointed out patterns of observations. For instance, the number of observations during the
weekends was larger than the number about the weekdays. This was clearly illustrated
to the test users. In addition, the graph that made the participants feel worried the most
was the bar graph for each week. This is because the users were from Greece and the
utilization of the week numbers is not common to the population of this country. Although
it was not obvious what 40/2016 means at first glance, fortunately, after a few seconds it
was understood by all the users.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 6.2: The responses on the three questions that the test users asked to answer
after the evaluation process
28
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:37==
7
Discussion
The utilization of devices that self-track time-series data has been increasing these days
remarkably. This phenomenon means that proper visualization is required, especially for
non-expert users who are not familiar with scientific graphs and charts. In this study, a
number of visual representations of time-series data are presented through a prototype.
The goal is to allow people with low computer skills to make sense of specific data. This
can be achieved by both clinicians and patients if the generated data describe information
that is related to a disease.
The design process was the most important phase of the project. A great amount of time
was spent regarding the research of visualization techniques. The goal of the research
was to found the proper visualizations so the prototype could give insights into personal
data to non-expert users effectively. Following that, the mockups of the prototype were
designed and the development of the application was launched. The utilization of modern
development technologies offered an effortless implementation process to the developer
of the application by eliminating numerous potential barriers.
The evaluation of the prototype was completed by six potential users and in general, the
feedback was positive. Test users were selected based on their experience with digital
systems. The think-aloud method was utilized for the assessment of the prototype and
the testers were asked to perform a number of tasks. The participants carried out the
tasks successfully and stated that this application would be extremely valuable if they
ever needed to visualize time-series data. The feedback from the Calendar page got ex-
cellent reviews as this user interface is frequently utilized in the everyday life of people.
Nonetheless, a certain number of usability issues were indicated. Users felt uncomfort-
able while performing some interactions and due to this fact, the design of the calendar
was modified accordingly to improve the efficiency of the application. In terms of usabil-
ity, the Statistics page had more complexity than the Calendar and was mentioned during
the evaluation process. Fortunately, users reported that a couple of minutes is needed
to explore the page and get familiar with it. The most positive message from the partic-
ipants was the fact that they were comfortable to find patterns after observing the data
representations.
The reported usability issues after the assessment of the prototype led to a number of
adjustments in the user interface and interaction. Other stated suggestions and ideas for
improvement by the users were thoroughly considered, but did not lead to any modifi-
cations. Finally, the goal of the prototype was achieved based on the given evaluation
results, but further work and research could lead to a result of higher quality than this the-
sis. In chapter 8, a number of ideas and recommendations for future work are described.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
29
==PAGE:38==
30
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:39==
8
Future work
Although the prototype got positive reviews from all the potential users, there are always
opportunities for future research and development. One feature that could be added to
the Statistics page is the multiple filtering options. In other words, users could click more
than one part of a graph. In this case, the data will be filtered by more than one value
of a graph. For instance, if the user wants to see only the observations of November
and December, it will be feasible to click two parts of the donut chart and the data will be
filtered accordingly.
Figure 8.1: Donut chart when data are filtered by November and December
Moreover, the option of adding observations to the data manually will be really valuable to
the end-users. This feature will help the users to include in the visualization data that have
not been recorded using the tracking device. To support this, additional improvement can
be the existence of a database for each user. To further explain, users will be able to store
their uploaded data in a database, so any previous tracked information can be retrieved
any time without the need of uploading them again to the system.
Since today the mobile devices are utilized more often than computers, it is essential
for any application to have a mobile version. Basically, the app should be adaptable
and responsive to any screen resolution. To implement this, research is needed in order
to decide which visualizations can fit into smaller screens of mobile devices. Also, the
scenario of reusing or not the visualizations from this work has to be examined. Probably,
there are more effective ways to visualize time-series data in smartphones and tablets,
something that needs deep exploration and analysis.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
31
==PAGE:40==
32
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:41==
9
Conclusion
In our days, a variety of self-tracking devices for time-series data are offered to people
through mobile or wearable devices. However, there is an inadequacy in tools that visu-
alize this kind of information so the users can understand the recorded data and proceed
to actions, especially when users have no proficiency in the digital world. In this study,
a web-based application that displays visual representations of time-series data is pre-
sented. The user interface and the user experience of the tool target non-expert users,
so the challenge of this study was to find visualizations that are familiar to everyday people
in order to make sen of this personal data and identify patterns.
Through the think-aloud methodology with six test users, the prototype was evaluated and
the feedback was positive. However, a number of usability issues were indicated by the
participants while they felt puzzled during the completion of the asked tasks. Fortunately,
all the given tasks were executed successfully by the test users and the noticed issues
were examined thoroughly. The majority of the usability issues were regulated after some
modifications to the user interface in order to make sense.
In the next step, there is a variety of features that can be added to the tool to make it more
flexible to the end-user. Apart from that, further research has to be conducted on how the
efficiency of this tool can be enhanced and offer to non-expert users visualizations that
make sense.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
33
==PAGE:42==
34
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
Patel, A. et al. (2012). Probing the benefits of real-time tracking during cancer care. URL:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23304413/.
Zan, S. et al. (2015). Patient engagement with a mobile web-based telemonitoring system
for heart failure self-management: A pilot study. URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
25842282/.
Lupton, Deborah (2014). Self-tracking Cultures: Towards a Sociology of Personal Infor-
matics. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2686612.2686623.
Lee, J., E. Ribey, and J. Wallace (2016). A web-based data visualization tool for the
MIMIC-II database. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-016-0256-9.
Liang, Z. et al. (2016). SleepExplorer: A Visualization Tool to Make Sense of Correlations
between Personal Sleep Data and Contextual Factors. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00779-016-0960-6.
Rajabiyazdi, F. et al. (2020). Exploring the Design of Patient-Generated Data Visualiza-
tions. URL: https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02861239.
Choe, E., B. Lee, and M. Schraefel (2015). Characterizing Visualization Insights from
Quantified Selfers’ Personal Data Presentations. URL: https : / / ieeexplore . ieee . org /
abstract/document/7106391/authors#authors.
Li, I., J. Froehlich, et al. (2010). Personal informatics in the wild: Hacking habits for health
happiness. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/2468356.2479641.
Li, I., A. Dey, and J. Forlizzi (2010). A Stage-Based Model of Personal Informatics Sys-
tems. URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/1753326.1753409.
Aigner, W. et al. (2011). Visualization of Time-Oriented Data. URL: https://www.springer.
com/gp/book/9780857290786.
Keim, D., J. Schneidewind, and M. Sips (2004). CircleView: A New Approach for Visual-
izing Time-Related Multidimensional Data Sets. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/989863.
989891.
Google (2014). Material Design. URL: https://material.io/design.
– (2017). Google I/O developer festival 2017. URL: https://events.google.com/io2017.
Lewis, Clayton (1982). Using the ”Thinking-aloud” Method in Cognitive Interface Design.
URL: https://dominoweb.draco.res.ibm.com/2513e349e05372cc852574ec0051eea4.html.
Nielsen, Jakob (1994). Estimating the number of subjects needed for a thinking aloud test.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.1994.1065.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
35
==PAGE:44==
36
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:45==
A
Prototype
The online version of the prototype can be found at https://time-series-visualization.herokuapp.com.
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
37
==PAGE:46==
B
Source code
The Github repository that includes the source code of the prototype can be found at
https://github.com/fpegios/time-series-visualization.
38
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
==PAGE:47==
A Personal Data Visualization Tool for Non-Expert Users
39
==PAGE:48==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
