==PAGE:1==
Development of a concept for managing 
plastic waste in rural Cambodia
Mia Katrine Højfeldt, s113132
Master’s thesis
Design & Innovation, DTU Management
14 July 2020
==PAGE:2==
 
TITLE PAGE 
English title: ​Development of a concept for managing plastic waste in rural communities in 
Cambodia 
Danish title: ​Udvikling af et koncept for håndtering af plastikaffald i landdistrikter i Cambodia 
 
Master’s thesis 
MSc. Design & Innovation 
Technical University of Denmark 
2 January - 14 July 2020 
30 ECTS points 
130 pages 
 
Author:​ Mia Katrine Højfeldt, S113132, stud.MSc Design & Innovation, DTU Management 
Supervisor: ​Jaap Daalhuizen, Associate Professor at DTU Management 
External supervisor: ​Dr Nick Brown, Lecturer at RMIT Chemical and Environmental Engineering 
 
This master’s thesis documents a design project that has been produced in collaboration with DTU
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Management, RMIT School of Engineering and Engineers Without Borders Australia.  
 
 
            
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
ABSTRACT 
Plastic waste is a global problem that is impacting public health, the environment and people’s
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
livelihood. This is especially the case in rural areas in developing countries such as Cambodia due to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the lack of a waste management system. This project aims to develop a sustainable plastic waste
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
management system appropriate for rural Cambodia that will improve public health as well as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
minimise the environmental burden that plastic waste presents in rural Cambodia.  
 
Research on the topic has been conducted by reviewing literature addressing the plastic waste problem
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as well as solutions on how to sustainably manage waste in developing countries. Additionally,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fieldwork was conducted to gain a comprehensive understanding of the plastic waste challenges and
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
opportunities in rural Cambodia. Following the research, the Social Implication Design method has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been applied for the development of the vision and concept.  
 
The vision developed for the domain ‘Managing plastic waste in rural Cambodia’ in 2025 aims for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rural Cambodians to experience accomplishment and gain independence and creative confidence
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
while reducing or reusing plastic waste.  
 
The vision created a clear focus which led to the development of the concept. 
 
The concept developed is a locally managed and community-based plastic waste management system 
that allows for the reduction and reuse of plastic waste in rural Cambodia. It consists of three system 
components; (1) A plastic waste collection service where plastic waste is stored in a Plastic Waste 
Bank (2) A workshop for local women to reuse plastic waste for community projects and souvenirs 
(3) A business opportunity for the local shop to reduce plastic waste by selling products by weight. 
The concept is a low-tech solution that is well-integrated into its local context and aims to create 
social, economic and environmental benefits for the people of rural Cambodia. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
MOTIVATION FOR THE PROJECT 
It has been important for me that my final project as a Design & Innovation student represents what I,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
as a future engineer, am passionate and driven about. Having followed the full Design & Innovation
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
program (BSc and MSc) at DTU, I have been working on many different projects which has given me
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
insight into which projects I find the most interesting working on. Projects that have a humanitarian
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
and environmental angle have been the type of projects that I have been the most invested and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
interested in. It fulfils me to know that my work will improve the quality of life for someone who
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
really needs it or that my work will help save the planet in some way. The sweet spot for me is finding
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
projects that can do both. 
 
During my last year of studying, I went on exchange to Melbourne to study Humanitarian and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Engineering at RMIT. One of the courses I enrolled in was OENG1114 Humanitarian
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Engineering taught by Dr Nick Brown. During the course, I worked on the 2019 Engineers Without
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Borders Challenge. The challenge was to design a concept appropriate for rural communities in
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Timor-Leste. My team and I, Bá Verde, designed a system that would allow for plastic waste to be
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reused in rural communities. Early on, I found that this specific project hit the sweet spot for what
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
drives me. Both the humanitarian and environmental engineering aspects were present and I started
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
seeking out the possibility of doing a similar project for my master’s thesis.  
 
After consulting with Dr Nick Brown, he suggested for me to join Engineers Without Borders Design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Summit. By attending the Design Summit, I would be able to visit a rural community in Cambodia
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
and do my own fieldwork and get hands-on insights into the plastic waste challenge in rural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cambodia. When I got accepted to join the Design Summit, it was finally official that my master’s
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
thesis would work on managing plastic waste in rural Cambodia. 
 
In December 2019, I left Australia to go to Cambodia and my master’s thesis journey began. 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to give a big thank you to all the people who helped contribute to this project in one way 
or another. Without their help and guidance this master’s thesis would not have been possible. 
 
First, I would like to thank my supervisor Jaap Daalhuizen, Associate Professor at DTU Management, 
for his excellent guidance and input throughout this whole project. Half way through the project, 
COVID-19 changed the world including my plans and working conditions so I am thankful that Jaap 
has been so understanding and flexible throughout this turbulent process. 
 
Second, I would like to thank my external supervisor Dr Nick Brown, Humanitarian Engineering 
Lecturer at RMIT, for his guidance and knowledge from having worked as a humanitarian engineer in 
rural Cambodia and for providing me with relevant and excellent feedback throughout this whole 
project. 
 
A very special thank you to my Cambodian host family, the Seng family, for welcoming me with 
open arms, sharing their personal stories and letting me stay in their wonderful home. 
 
A special thank you also goes to Khoun Tola, Business Program Manager and Duch Phiya, 
Operations Manager from Cambodian Rural Development Team (CRDT), who have provided me 
with valuable information and knowledge on the local context. Additionally, thank you to Khoun Tola 
for continuously engaging with me over email and providing me with constructive feedback on the 
concept and its implementation plan.  
 
Thank you to Dr Janneke Blijlevens, Senior Lecturer at RMIT, for providing me with new knowledge
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on consumer behaviour and introducing me to how behaviour change is created. 
 
Thank you to Dr Kylie Fisk, Research Fellow at International Women’s Development Agency
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(IWDA), for providing me with her expertise and knowledge on the topic from having worked in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
similar contexts as Koh Phdao and for reviewing and editing this report. 
 
Thank you to George Goddard, Research, Learning & Influence Specialist and Alison Stoakley,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Engineering Education Manager from Engineers Without Borders Australia for showing interest and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
providing me with feedback throughout the whole project. 
 
Thank you to Dr Tanja Rosenqvist, Humanitarian Engineering Lecturer at RMIT, for excellent input
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
and constructive and honest feedback on the vision, concept and the implementation plan. 
 
Thank you to Raksmey and Vandet for helping translate during my visit to Koh Phdao. Thank you for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
providing me with valuable local knowledge on rural Cambodia and giving me feedback on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept. 
 
Thank you to Xenia Kamenjuk, Feaba Mariam Babu and Lee Fisk for helping me review and edit this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
report. 
 
Lastly, a big thank you to my friends and family and especially to my partner, Farouq Scott, for the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
support during the project. 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
LEARNING OBJECTIVES 
A graduate of the MSc Eng programme from DTU.. 
 
●
can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction between 
the various components that make up an issue 
 
●
can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at an 
international level to develop ideas and solve problems 
 
●
masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity to take a 
holistic view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader academic and societal 
perspective and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible actions 
 
●
can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes for solving 
technological problems 
 
●
can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing is familiar 
with and can seek out leading international research within her specialist area 
 
●
can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development and 
specialisation 
 
●
masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the capacity 
to work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation of timetables, design, 
solution and documentation 
 
●
can navigate in a complicated system that takes place in an unfamiliar context and is able to 
manage and analyse this system by using a systems mapping method 
 
●
can apply the Appropriate Technology considerations (Murphy, McBean & Farahbakhsh 
2009) when designing a concept that takes place in developing countries 
 
●
can elicit and understand the stakeholders’ needs and take them into consideration when 
designing a concept 
 
●
can use prototyping as a method to both develop and communicate a concept 
 
●
can use a Strengths-based approach when designing a concept (Caritas Australia 2018) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
READING GUIDE 
The report is divided into chapters describing the different stages of the project.  
 
Chapter 1  
will introduce the project and the methodology used.  
Chapter 2 
will present a literature review based on the challenges and impact of plastic waste in 
rural Cambodia as well as present how to sustainably manage plastic waste. 
Chapter 3 
will describe the local context, Koh Phdao, and analyse its current plastic waste 
system. 
Chapter 4 
will frame the context and present the vision for the project. 
Chapter 5 
will detail the vision by adding interaction qualities, design qualities and design 
requirements.  
Chapter 6 
will present the concept developed for managing plastic waste in Koh Phdao.  
Chapter 7 
will present the concept’s implementation and operation plan.  
Chapter 8 
will validate the concept by consulting experts on the topic. 
Chapter 9 
will present a discussion and conclusion of the project.  
Chapter 10 
will present literature, figure and image references. 
 
Figures, images and tables are referenced as Figure/Image/Table X.Y. E.g. Figure 3.1 refers to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
first figure presented in chapter 3. Figure and image references can be found at the end of the report
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
under Figure references and Image references. 
 
Appendix is referenced to as (AX.Y). E.g. (A4.2) refers to the second appendix presented in chapter 4.
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
The appendix can be found in the Appendix report.  
 
RMIT Harvard has been used as the reference type for this report. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS 
 
CHAPTER 1: ​INTRODUCTION & METHODOLOGY
1 
          ​INTRODUCTION
2 
          ​METHODOLOGY
4 
CHAPTER 2:​ ​LITERATURE REVIEW
1​0 
          ​LITERATURE REVIEW
1​1 
CHAPTER 3:​ UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT
24 
          ​KOH PHDAO COMMUNITY
28 
          ​PLASTIC WASTE SYSTEM ANALYSIS
37 
CHAPTER 4:​ ANTICIPATING THE FUTURE
45 
          ​DOMAIN AND TIMEFRAME
47 
          ​UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT
48 
          ​STRUCTURING THE CONTEXT
53 
          ​FRAMING THE CONTEXT
6​1 
          ​VISION
67 
CHAPTER​ 5:​ DETAILING THE VISION
69 
          ​INTERACTION QUALITIES
70 
          ​DESIGN QUALITIES
72 
          ​DESIGN CONSTRAINTS
73 
          ​DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
74 
CHAPTER​ 6:​ CONCEPT
76 
          ​PLASTIC WASTE SYSTEM
78 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
          ​ALIGNING WITH THE VISION
94 
CHAPTER 7:​ IMPLEMENTATION AND OPERATION PLAN
95 
          ​BUSINESS STRATEGY
96 
          ​5-YEAR IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
10​0 
          ​BUDGETING
10​3 
          ​RISK ASSESSMENT
1​05 
          ​MONITOR AND EVALUATE
1​06 
CHAPTER 8:​ VALIDATION
1​07 
          ​FEEDBACK
1​09 
CHAPTER 9:​ DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
11​1 
          ​DISCUSSION
11​2 
          ​CONCLUSION
11​4 
CHAPTER 10:​ REFERENCES
11​5 
          ​REFERENCES
11​6 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
 
Chapter 1: 
INTRODUCTION & METHODOLOGY 
 
1 
==PAGE:11==
INTRODUCTION 
We live in a world where plastic is a part of our everyday life. Our food is wrapped in plastic, toys are
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
made of plastic, almost everything is made of plastic. Plastic can come in all shapes and sizes and has
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
become a popular material to use due to its versatile properties and low price. Plastic has a high
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
strength-to-weight ratio, great thermal properties, electrical insulation, reacts and interacts with few
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
materials and is easy to mold (Omwughara et al. 2013; Aumanate, Kiesel & Rudolph 2017;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subramanian 2019). These same properties are what makes plastic disastrous for the planet’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ecosystems​ ​(Abbing 2019).  
 
Plastics’ largest market has become packaging because of the global shift from reusable containers to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
single-use containers (Geyer, Jambeck & Law 2017). Many products are designed for single-use
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which leads to a large amount of accumulated plastic waste every day (Geyer, Jambeck & Law 2017).
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Plastic waste poses a threat to public health and the environment because there are no existing
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions that sustainably deals with plastic waste on a global level. If we do not change our
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumption behaviour or waste management practices, roughly 12 billion tonnes of plastic waste will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be in landfills or in the natural environment by 2050 (Geyer, Jambeck & Law 2017).  
 
The responsibility of this change lies with both companies, governments and consumers who all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contribute to producing plastic waste (Wilson et al. 2015). Some people may believe that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consumers alone are responsible for producing plastic waste but this is not the case. Companies carry
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
a big part of the responsibility. Companies need to start rethinking their business models so consumers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have the possibility to make a sustainable choice when shopping. As of right now, companies have
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
made it difficult for consumers to live a plastic free life. Additionally, governments can also
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contribute to the change by making regulations that will push companies in a sustainable direction that
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
promotes a circular economy.  
 
In developing countries such as Cambodia it is even more difficult to make a sustainable choice when
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
compared to developed countries. Products such as shampoo, conditioner, washing powder and coffee
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are sold in small portion sized plastic sachets to make the products accessible and affordable for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cambodians (Wilson et al. 2015). Additionally, due to the lack of clean drinking water in Cambodia, a
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
large amount of plastic bottles are purchased (Water.org n.d.; Ellis-Petersen 2018). In many cities and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communities in Cambodia there is not a waste management system which leads to plastic waste
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accumulating in the environment. The Cambodian Ministry of Environment is working towards
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solving the waste problem in urban Cambodia, but there is currently no strategy targeting how to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
solve the waste challenge in rural communities such as the village, Koh Phdao (Sotheary 2020). 
 
 
 
2 
==PAGE:12==
CHALLENGE 
The villagers of Koh Phdao are currently managing their plastic waste by either burning, burying or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disposing of it into the environment. These practices are unsustainable and pose a threat to public
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
health, the environment and tourism in Koh Phdao. 
 
The villagers wish to manage their plastic waste in a sustainable way as they are gaining awareness of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the consequences that plastic waste presents but due to lack of infrastructure, education, government
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strategy and financial resources, the villagers have no other options than to continue with these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
unsustainable practices. 
 
Therefore, an opportunity exists to develop a sustainable plastic waste system that is appropriate for 
the Cambodian village, Koh Phdao.  
PROJECT AIM 
The aim of the project is to develop a sustainable plastic waste system appropriate for the Cambodian
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
village, Koh Phdao, by applying the Social Implication Design approach. 
 
The objectives of the project are: 
●
Conduct a literature review describing the challenges and impacts associated with plastic 
waste  
●
Conduct research in Koh Phdao to understand the local context, its challenges and 
opportunities 
●
Analyse the current plastic waste system in Koh Phdao 
●
Develop a vision and concept that is appropriate for Koh Phdao 
●
Validate the vision and concept 
 
 
 
3 
==PAGE:13==
METHODOLOGY 
Social Implication Design (SID) is a design approach that targets designing for a society and not just
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
for a single user (Tromp & Hekkert 2019). ​SID is a variation of the established design approach
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vision in Product Design (ViP) by Paul Hekkert and Matthijs Van Dijk (Hekkert & Dijk 2011). SiD
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
differentiates itself from ViP by ​focusing on designing for communities instead of designing for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individual.  
 
The SID approach focuses on how design can create behaviour change in society. It focuses on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
importance of creating valuable designs for the future and not just for this present moment.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additionally, the method focuses on not only designing things but also designing the experience that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the users have when interacting with the design. Another speciality of the approach is how it scopes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
the project before developing a design. By framing and structuring the future context, it will scope the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
project and a vision will be created that defines the change that the designer wants to see in society.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This makes the front-end of the project a bit heavier than other design processes but the back-end will
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be simpler as the design will have a clear vision on what it shall fulfil. 
 
The approach consists of four stages; ​Debriefing, Anticipating the future, Goal setting (Statement) and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Detailing the interaction​ (Figure 1.1).  
 
 
 
Figure 1.1. Social Implication Design (SID) model (Tromp & Hekkert 2019) 
 
 
 
4 
==PAGE:14==
THE PROCESS 
The first stage, ​Debriefing​, operates on a world level where the aim is to understand the motivation of
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
the project, where the budget is coming from, etc. by debriefing with the client. Due to the project not
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
having a client, ​Debriefing, ​has been substituted with a literature review and fieldwork which will
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
help to understand the topic and context.  
 
The second stage, ​Anticipating the future​, operates on a world level and includes three steps ​(1)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Domain, (2) Context factors ​and (3) ​Context structure. The aim of this stage is to understand and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
frame the future context that the design shall be developed for. 
 
The third stage, ​Goal setting​, operates on a meditative level and includes the one step, (4) ​Context
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
statement​. The aim is to create a vision that describes how the future design will create a change. 
 
The fourth stage, ​Developing the intervention​, operates on an artefact level and includes the three last
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
steps ​(5) Interaction, (6) Idea and ​(7) Validation​. In this stage, the aim is to design and validate the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
interaction and idea. 
 
The following sections, ​Research ​and ​Design​, will describe the method applied into further detail. 
 
 
5 
==PAGE:15==
RESEARCH 
The ​Research section includes a literature review and fieldwork that has been conducted to obtain a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
comprehensive understanding of the topic and context. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
First step in the project is to review relevant literature to gain knowledge on the topic. By reviewing
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the literature, the research gaps in the literature can be identified.  
UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT  
Once the research gaps have been identified, the next step is to fill the gaps so all possible variables
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are accounted for before designing.  
 
In this particular project, what is unknown is the context. Therefore fieldwork in Koh Phdao in rural
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Cambodia was conducted. The methods used were to conduct interviews with the use of a translator,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
listening to presentations on Cambodia and Koh Phdao, observing the community by taking photos
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and drawing asset maps, and lastly experiencing Koh Phdao firsthand by living with a Cambodian
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
family. 
 
Next, an analysis of the current plastic waste system in Koh Phdao was conducted. For this, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Integrated Sustainable Waste Management (ISWM) framework was applied to gain a comprehensive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
understanding of the system (Figure 1.2) (Wilson et al. 2013). 
 
 
Figure 1.2. Integrated Sustainable Waste Management (ISWM) framework (Wilson et al. 2013) 
 
6 
==PAGE:16==
The framework includes a stakeholder analysis, a mapping of the waste system elements and an
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
analysis of the aspects that are a part of the waste system. By using this framework, it is clear to see
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
where the challenges emerge and where an intervention can be made.  
DESIGN 
The ​Design section includes the three stages, ​Anticipating the future, Goal setting ​and ​Detailing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interaction and the seven steps ​(1) Domain, (2) Context factors, (3) Context structure, (4) Statement,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) Interaction, (6) Idea ​and​ (7) Validation​ (Figure 1.3)​.​ These stages and steps will now be described. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.3. Design process 
 
ANTICIPATING THE FUTURE 
Domain 
The first step towards creating the future context is to define the domain and the timeframe for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project. The domain is to frame the project in a neutral way that is not describing a behaviour e.g. the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
domain cannot be ‘Burning plastic waste in rural Cambodia’. With a neutral domain, it can open up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
the project from new point of views. In addition to the domain, a time frame needs to be set to define
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
when the design will be developed. The further into the future the time frame is set, the more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visionary the vision will be. 
Context factors 
The next step is to generate context factors which are factors that will help describe the future of the
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
domain and time frame. It can be a trend, development, states and principles. Any factors that help to
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
describe and understand the future are relevant. In this project, the context factors have been divided
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into two categories; global context factors and local context factors. This is because the local context
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
7 
==PAGE:17==
differs from the global context. Both categories are important for describing the domain and by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dividing them it ensures that factors in both categories will be present. 
Context structure 
After generating the context factors, it is time to sort the factors into clusters. It is an iterative process
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
where the aim is to sort the context factors until the clusters describe relevant factors of the future.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tromp & Hekkert (2019, p. 91) describe, ‘as you put different factors into clusters, you should be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
looking for patterns that emerge through their association. As a whole, a cluster of factors illustrates
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
one of the forces that drives people’s behaviour in context’. 
 
After having identified a set of clusters the next step is to integrate the clusters. This is done by
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
finding a pattern and understanding how the clusters are connected. There are different methods that
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be utilised but in this project dimensions are used to describe conflicts in the context. Tromp &
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hekkert (2019, p. 94) write: ‘do you see a set (preferably two; if needed three) of dimensions that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
explain opposing forces in the social context, and help you understand people’s diverging mindsets or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behavioural responses?’. There are different ways to interpret the mindsets or behaviours. In this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project, one mindset is chosen as the desirable future mindset and is used in the vision for the project. 
GOAL SETTING 
Statement 
The next step in the process is setting a goal by creating a statement which I have called vision. The
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
vision needs to include the behaviour the design wishes to support, the social implications of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behaviour and the meaning that the behaviour will have for the community it is designed for. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
vision provides the designer with a clear direction and focus which scopes the project and solution
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
space. 
DEVELOPING THE INTERVENTION 
Interaction 
Designing the interaction between the design and users is important as this approach aims to create an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
experience for the user. Users always experience designs one way or another so why not enhance this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience. ​Interaction qualities are identified by understanding the desired experience between the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design and the users. Afterwards, an analogy for this interaction is found. In this project, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interaction is a relationship between two people where one is the design and the other it the users.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Afterwards, ​Design qualities​ are identified by using this analogy. 
 
In addition to SID, ​Design requirements have been added in this project as there are some necessary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements that need to be met for the design to be successful. 
Idea & Validation 
Last part of the approach is to develop a design and validate it. This process is an iterative process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
where the design by briefing of experts and testing will continue to be improved and developed. 
 
8 
==PAGE:18==
THESIS STRUCTURE 
The structure of the project with the SID approach implemented is illustrated below (Figure 1.4). 
 
 
 
Figure 1.4. Thesis structure 
 
 
This chapter has now presented the challenge and project aim as well as the methodology applied in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
this report. Next chapter, ​Chapter 2: Literature review​, will present a literature review about the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
challenges that plastic waste presents and how to develop a sustainable waste management system. 
 
 
 
9 
==PAGE:19==
 
Chapter 2: 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
10 
==PAGE:20==
LITERATURE REVIEW 
This literature review will present the challenges and strategies related to plastic waste in Cambodia
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as well as the plastic pollution impacts on health, the environment and people’s livelihood. It will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
describe how to develop a sustainable waste management system including current solutions on how
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to reduce, reuse and recycle plastic waste.  
PLASTIC WASTE IN CAMBODIA 
Plastic waste presents a significant challenge in Cambodia. Every year, about four million tonnes of
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste is generated in Cambodia, 20% of which is plastic (Sotheary 2020). Plastic waste has become a
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
substantial problem in Cambodia, to the point where some people live amongst plastic waste in parts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
of the country (Image 2.1) (Ellis-Petersen 2018).  
 
 
 
Image 2.1. Plastic waste in the streets of Preah Sihanouk 
 
 
Up until the late 1990’s plastic waste was not an issue in Cambodia (Sokummono & Malis 2020).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When going to the market, Cambodians would bring their empty baskets and carry their items home
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the basket, generating no plastic waste (Sokummono & Malis 2020). Today, the situation is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different due to the global shift from using reusable containers to single-use containers (Geyer,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jambeck & Law 2017). 
 
11 
==PAGE:21==
The consumption of plastic bags in Cambodia is immense, especially in the capital of Cambodia,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phnom Penh, where 10 million plastic bags are used on a daily basis (Beresford et al. 2018).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additionally, water is purchased in plastic bottles due to more than 3 million people in Cambodia
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
lacking access to safe drinking water (Water.org n.d.; Ellis-Petersen 2018). It is estimated that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
amount of waste generated in Cambodia will increase by 15% every year due to a growing population,
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
increased consumption and the limitation of waste recycling facilities (Sotheary 2020).  
 
Globally, the current life cycle of plastic is unsustainable and builds on a linear economy where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
plastic packaging is disposed of directly after use (Figure 2.1) (Wilson et al. 2015). The most common
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
practice of waste disposal in Cambodia is burning which is also the only way of permanently
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
eliminating plastic waste (Open Development Cambodia 2016; Geyer, Jambeck & Law 2017). This is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
especially the case in rural areas due to the lack of waste collection services and access to dumpsites
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(Open Development Cambodia 2016). There are many reasons why waste management and dumping
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of waste is a challenge in rural areas. These include a lack of governmental policy and finance, poor
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste management infrastructure, poor environmental awareness, low market for recyclable materials
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and a resistance to behaviour change (Mihai & Taherzadeh 2017). 
 
 
Figure 2.1. The linear economy and waste management (Wilson et al. 2015) 
 
Creaser, Smith & Thomson (2018) have analysed how waste is managed on the rural island, Koh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dambang, located on the Mekong River in northern Cambodia. A significant amount of the waste in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
Koh Dambang consists of plastic bags (Creaser, Smith & Thomson 2018). Like other rural areas in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cambodia, Koh Dambang does not have a waste management system. This is because the Municipal
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
and District level offices believe that because residents own their own land, they should have the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resources to manage their own waste (Muny 2016). Therefore, each household is currently responsible
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
for their own waste management (Creaser, Smith & Thomson 2018). The most common waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disposal practice is burning. One resident’s burning procedure can be seen in the figure below (Figure
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2.2). Some residents reuse their plastic bottles for pot plants or to store petrol or local wine in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Creaser, Smith & Thomson 2018). The rest of the plastic waste that cannot be reused is either burned,
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
buried or dumped in nature (Creaser, Smith & Thomson 2018).  
 
 
Figure 2.2. Burning of waste procedure in Koh Dambang (Creaser, Smith & Thomson 2018) 
 
12 
==PAGE:22==
The local NGO, Cambodian Rural Development Team (CRDT), has advised Koh Dambang residents
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to burn their waste 20-30 metres away from their house as the smoke is toxic and damaging for their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
health (Creaser, Smith & Thomson 2018). This has led some residents to stop burning their plastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste and start burying it as they have been made aware that burning plastic waste is unhealthy for
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
them (Creaser, Smith & Thomson 2018). 
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE WASTE PROBLEM 
The Cambodian Ministry of Environment is currently working on new policies regarding waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management in urban areas (Sotheary 2020). Part of the new strategy is to create more landfills that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
can absorb the amount of waste produced and additionally reduce the amount of plastic waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
imported (Sotheary 2020). This includes banning the import of single-use plastic products such as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
straws and cutlery (Sotheary 2019). This will reduce the amount of plastic waste generated in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cambodia and allow for Cambodians to start producing straws and cutlery made of natural materials
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creating economic growth in the country (Sotheary 2019).  
 
Due to waste being a substantial problem across Cambodia, the Ministry of Environment has chosen
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to prioritise waste management in urban areas where the population density is the highest (Sotheary
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
2020). This leaves no future government strategies for rural areas on how to solve their waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem. As 76% of Cambodia’s population live in rural areas, a large amount of waste will continue
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
to be burned and disposed of into the environment, impacting people’s health, the environment and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people’s livelihood (The World Bank 2019). 
 
13 
==PAGE:23==
THE IMPACT OF PLASTIC WASTE 
Burning, burying and disposing of plastic waste in the environment is damaging to public health, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
environment and to people’s livelihoods. The following three sections will describe what the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consequences of mismanaged plastic waste are. 
HEALTH 
Plastic waste poses a threat to public health in the following ways: 
 
●
Toxic air pollutants: ​Burning plastic waste releases toxic air pollutants which when inhaled 
increases the risk of heart disease and cancer, respiratory ailment, rashes, nausea, headaches 
and can be damaging to the nervous system  (Verma et al. 2016; Tearfund 2019) 
●
Diseases: ​Discarding plastic waste into the environment​ ​can block waterways which causes 
flooding and can lead to waterborne diseases (Tearfund 2019). Accumulated plastic in 
waterways also creates a breeding ground for disease-carrying flies, mosquitos and vermin 
that spread diseases such as malaria and dengue fever (Tearfund 2019). Furthermore, 
dumping waste in uncontrolled dumpsites leads to the spread of diseases for waste workers as 
well as people living in the neighbouring communities (Wilson et al. 2015). 
●
Ingestion: ​Plastic waste that is discarded in the environment pollutes land and water bodies. 
The accumulated waste breaks down into microplastics as plastic does not break down 
chemically in nature but only physically (Abbing 2019). This leads to microplastics entering 
our food chain by ingestion of water and animals (Tearfund 2019). It is estimated that a 
person on average ingests 5 gram plastic per week (Dalberg 2019). It is still unknown what 
the impacts of ingesting microplastics are (Abbing 2019). 
●
Landslides: ​Overfilling dumpsites can cause plastic landslides which injure and, in worst 
case scenarios, causes the death of waste pickers as well as residents in the dumpsites’ 
neighbouring communities (Wilson et al. 2015).  
 
Due to mismanaged waste up to one million people die every year in developing countries (Tearfund
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
2019).  
 
 
Image 2.2. A river of waste in Phnom Penh 
14 
==PAGE:24==
ENVIRONMENTAL 
Plastic waste poses a threat to the environment in the following ways: 
 
●
Ingestion: ​Animals mistake plastic waste for food and by ingesting pieces of plastic it causes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
them to choke or starve resulting in death (Tearfund 2019; Dalberg 2019). 
●
Entanglement​: By discarding plastic waste such as fishing nets into the ocean, marine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
animals get entangled in the plastic which causes injuries and can lead to their death (Dalberg
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
2019). 
●
Reef damage: ​Plastic waste in the oceans causes reefs to be damaged which is harmful to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
oceans’ ecosystem (Ferronato & Torretta 2019). 
●
Climate change: ​When burned, buried or dumped, plastic waste releases toxic pollutants that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are harmful to the environment which leads to air, water and soil pollution (Kaza et al. 2018).
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Globally, these waste disposal methods contribute to climate change (Kaza et al. 2018). 
 
Plastic waste in our oceans causes more than one million seabirds, 100.000 marine mammals and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
countless fish to die every year (UNESCO n.d.). 
 
 
 
Image 2.3. Albatross died from ingesting plastic waste 
 
 
15 
==PAGE:25==
LIVELIHOODS 
Plastic waste poses a threat to people’s livelihoods in the following ways: 
 
●
Fishing: ​The disposal of plastic waste in oceans is damaging to marine life which causes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fishing livelihoods to be impacted due to the deaths of marine animals (Tearfund 2019). 
●
Agriculture: ​Plastic pollution on land causes cattle and goats to mistake plastic waste for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
food (Tearfund 2019). This can cause animals to starve due to them not being able to digest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their food and therefore feeling full, resulting in their death (Tearfund 2019). This leads to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economic loss for farmers (Tearfund 2019).  
●
Tourism: ​Plastic polluted beaches can decrease tourism, which for many people in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developing countries is their main source of income (Wilson et al. 2015; Elmira et al. 2011). 
 
In Cambodia, plastic pollution is the cause of an economic loss of 2.5 million USD within the fishing
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
industry and tourism sector every year (The World Bank 2020). 
 
 
 
Image 2.4. Cow investigating plastic waste in Cambodia 
 
16 
==PAGE:26==
SUSTAINABLE WASTE MANAGEMENT 
Plastic waste is a subcategory of solid waste and therefore the techniques for solid waste management
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be adopted for managing plastic waste. One way of sustainably managing solid waste is by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementing a six step waste management process (Ikhlayel & Nguyen 2017). These steps are; waste
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
prevention, waste minimisation, separation scheme, waste collection, waste transportation and waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
treatment (Ikhlayel & Nguyen 2017). By implementing the three Rs: reduce, reuse and recycle, this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
process can initiate a circular economy where waste is seen as a resource - not as disposable (Figure
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
2.3) (Joshi, Seay & Banadda 2019).  
 
 
 
Figure 2.3. Circular waste economy 
 
COMMUNITY-BASED WASTE MANAGEMENT 
One solution for sustainable waste management in rural areas in developing countries is creating a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
community-based waste management system (CBWMS) that is locally managed and where all six
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
steps take place within the community (Joshi, Seay & Banadda 2019). This approach empowers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
individuals and creates communities that are not dependent on the government to solve their waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
problem for them (Joshi, Seay & Banadda 2019). A CBWMS provides people with the possibility and
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accessibility to dispose of their waste in a sustainable way. It also prevents uncontrolled burning and
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
dumping leading to social, economic and environmental benefits (Joshi, Seay & Banadda 2019;
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marshall & Farahbakhsh 2013). 
 
When developing a CBWMS, Wilson et al. (2012) and Lenkiewicz & Webster (2017a) outline the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
first step as understanding the local waste challenge and thereafter build upon strengths in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community. The next step is to collect waste data to be able to plan ahead, involve stakeholders in the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
17 
==PAGE:27==
process and develop a business plan. The final step is to find the appropriate solutions on how to
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manage and treat the waste by seeking inspiration from other communities and adopting and adapting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
successful solutions to the local context. 
 
In regards to finding appropriate waste treatment solutions that lead to a circular economy, there are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
some key requirements. These are listed below (Joshi, Seay & Banadda 2019; Wilson et al. 2012). 
The solution should:  
 
●
Be simple 
●
Be affordable 
●
Be economically viable 
●
Be socially acceptable 
●
Have a low environmental impact 
●
Produce a product that can be sold locally 
Community engagement challenges 
Studies in India have shown that CBWMS can be successful but it is crucial that there are motivated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
individuals managing the system and high community engagement for it to be a long-term success
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
(Colon & Fawcett 2006). The challenges in regards to engaging communities have been shown to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(Colon & Fawcett 2006): 
 
●
Lack of solidarity:​ No sense of solidarity in the community. 
●
Lack of leadership:​ Lack of strong leadership to delegate responsibility. 
●
Gender inequality: Men have more responsibility, are more educated and are seen as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
superior in many developing countries, which makes women afraid of engaging with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CBWMS even though they are interested in investing time in the system. 
●
Lack of payment: It is difficult to get people to pay for the waste system as they are already
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
paying high property taxes. 
●
Taboo:​ Managing waste does not provide status and does not interest many people. 
  
Colon & Fawcett (2006) also state that the success of a CBWMS relies upon how well-integrated it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
into the local context. 
 
Given the guidelines and considerations for developing a CBWMS, the next section will present
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions on how plastic waste can be reduced, reused or recycled in developing countries. 
 
 
 
18 
==PAGE:28==
THE 3Rs: REDUCE, REUSE AND RECYCLE 
According to Wilson, Velis & Rodic (2013) and Joshi, Seay & Banadda (2019), a CBWMS should
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
include the 3Rs; reduce, reuse and recycle for it to be sustainable. The following three sections will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
present solutions on how to reduce, reuse and recycle plastic waste. 
Reduce 
Reducing plastic waste is a long-term and sustainable solution towards minimising plastic pollution.
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
However it is difficult to implement as it requires a change in consumer behaviour. According to
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bortoleto (2014), behaviour change is a key element to prevent and reduce waste. Behaviour change
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is difficult because it demands a behaviour that is unfamiliar to people’s ordinary behaviour. It is
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
therefore important to make the transition as easy as possible by considering what motivates people
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and ensuring that the behaviour change does not exceed people’s abilities (Fogg 2020). 
Water filters and reusable water bottles 
A solution to how to prevent the consumption of plastic bottles is to solve the problem at its core and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
provide people with access to clean drinking water. This can be done by building a water filter that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
can produce clean drinking water (Kearns, Knappe & Summers 2014). A water filter can be made by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
using three filters made of gravel, sand and char that filtrates out biological and chemical
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contaminants from dirty water (Figure 2.4) (Kearns, Knappe & Summers 2014). 
 
 
 
Figure 2.4. Water filter (Kearns, Knappe & Summers 2014) 
 
 
In addition to implementing a water filter, reusable water bottles can be introduced to further reduce
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the amount of plastic bottles purchased. An experiment carried out at a Thai university showed that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
when students are provided with reusable water bottles and access to a water dispenser, they found the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
reusable water bottles useful and convenient and reduced the use of single-use bottles and cups
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Thongplew & Kotlakome 2019).  
 
19 
==PAGE:29==
Reuse 
Reusing plastic waste is the second best solution to solving the plastic waste problem. Reusing plastic
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste does not reduce the quality of the plastic and does not require the usage of energy in order to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
melt the plastic waste into its raw material as recycling does. This means that reusing plastic waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
does not have a negative environmental impact.  
Ecobricks 
A solution to reusing plastic bottles and soft plastics which has been applied in developing countries
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such as Guatemala, the Philippines and South Africa is the Ecobrick (Hopkins 2014). Ecobricks are a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
replacement of the traditional brick and can be made by filling plastic bottles with sand or soft plastics
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Taaffe et al. 2014). When densely packed, ecobricks turn plastic waste into robust, highly insulating,
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
light-weight and affordable building material (Hopkins 2014; Taaffe et al. 2014). Ecobricks can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used for constructing walls, flower beds and other constructions (Image 2.5) (Hopkins 2014). Further
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
applications of the Ecobrick are sure to be developed as use becomes more widespread.  
 
 
 
Image 2.5. Ecobricks used to build an outdoors classroom in South Africa 
 
Crocheting 
In Nigeria, local women are participating in a programme called ‘Waste-to-Wealth’ where they use
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
plarn (plastic yarn) to crochet bags (Image 2.6) (Menezes 2017). This process involves cutting up
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic bags to form one long piece of plarn (Lenkiewicz & Webster 2017b).  
 
20 
==PAGE:30==
The programme was initiated by the American University of Nigeria in Yola and includes a one week
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
training programme for local women (Omorogiuwa 2015). The programme empowers local women in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Nigeria and provides them with a source of income (Menezes 2017). The bags can be sold for 3-47
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USD depending on the size and quality of the bags (Menezes 2017). By participating in this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
programme the women can afford to pay for their children’s school fees, buy food for their families
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and help relatives financially (Menezes 2017).  
 
 
 
Image 2.6. Bags made of plarn by Nigerian women 
 
 
 
21 
==PAGE:31==
Recycle 
Recycling plastic waste is a treatment option that often demands expensive resources such as
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
electricity and industrial machinery, as the plastic needs to be melted and moulded to form new raw
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
material. However, there are some cases where recycling of plastic waste has been successful in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developing countries by creating new products that are not plastic products. 
Pavement blocks 
A solution to recycle plastic waste is making plastic bonded sand blocks that can be used as pavement
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Image 2.7) (Kumi-Larbi et al. 2018). This method has been developed in Cameroon where thin
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic sachets are used as binding material when mixed with sand (Kumi-Larbi et al. 2018). The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
blocks are made by melting plastic and stirring it into sand, creating a mouldable mixture (Kumi-Larbi
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
et al. 2018). Afterwards the mixture is poured into a built mould creating a block that can be used
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
locally or sold (Kumi-Larbi et al. 2018). The blocks are cheap to produce and can create economic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
growth if a business is created around it (Kumi-Larbi et al. 2018). 
 
 
 
Image 2.7. Laying plastic bonded sand block 
Plastic to diesel 
In Tbong Khmum Province in Cambodia, one project produces diesel from plastic waste found in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
environment (Rethea 2020). The process of producing diesel from plastic waste can be broken down
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
into three steps: chemical decomposition, filtration and purification (Rethea 2020). The diesel can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sold locally, generating economic growth in the community (Rethea 2020). The production of diesel
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
removes unwanted plastic waste from the ecosystem, however, recycled plastic diesel creates more air
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pollution than regular diesel (Rethea 2020).  
 
 
22 
==PAGE:32==
KEY FINDINGS IN THE LITERATURE 
●
Plastic packaging is produced with the purpose of being used once and disposed of directly 
after use, which creates an unsustainable linear economy where waste will continue to 
accumulate. 
●
Plastic waste is an issue in Cambodia primarily because of the lack of waste management 
infrastructure and governmental policies and finances. 
●
Burning plastic waste is the most common disposal practice in rural Cambodia. 
●
Solving the waste problem in rural Cambodia is currently not on the agenda in the Cambodian 
Ministry of Environment as they have prioritised  urban areas. 
●
Plastic waste is impacting health, the environment and people’s livelihood. 
●
In rural areas, a waste management system should be community-based as it leads to social, 
economic and environment benefits for the community. If the system is not community-based, 
communities will remain in a holding pattern while they are dependent on the government to 
solve their waste problem. 
●
For a waste management system to be successful it needs to be well-integrated into the local 
context. 
●
The 3Rs (reduce, reuse and recycle) should be integrated into waste systems to maximise 
sustainability. 
●
There are successful cases in communities with similar barriers/limitations to rural Cambodia 
where plastic waste has been used to create a business and empower people. 
●
Recycling plastic waste does not suit developing countries as well as reducing and reusing 
plastic waste due to it being resource demanding and can impact public health and the 
environment. 
RESEARCH GAPS 
Through this literature review I have identified the following research gaps: 
 
●
There exists little literature describing rural Cambodia, its infrastructure and the people. 
●
There exists no data presenting the type of plastic waste generated in rural Cambodia. 
●
There exists little data on current waste management systems in rural Cambodia. 
●
There has yet to be developed a solution on how to manage (plastic) waste in rural Cambodia. 
 
 
Due to the research gaps mentioned above, a research trip to Koh Phdao in rural Cambodia has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conducted to identify the gaps.  
 
The next chapter; ​Chapter 3: Understanding the context will describe the local context and analyse
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how plastic waste is managed in Koh Phdao. 
 
23 
==PAGE:33==
 
Chapter 3: 
UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT 
 
24 
==PAGE:34==
UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT 
Following a literature review covering existing knowledge of rural plastic waste management and
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identifying gaps in the literature, the next step is to present findings from primary fieldwork in Koh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Phdao. This chapter will describe the methods used for conducting the fieldwork, a thorough
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
description of Koh Phdao community and lastly, an analysis of Koh Phdao’s current plastic waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system by using the ISWM framework (Wilson et al. 2013). 
METHODS USED FOR FIELDWORK 
In December 2019, I visited Cambodia for two weeks where I spent five of these days in Koh Phdao.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
During my stay in Koh Phdao, I lived with the Seng family in their home with three other engineering
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
students (Image 3.1).  
 
 
 
Image 3.1. Seng family and four engineering students 
 
 
25 
==PAGE:35==
The purpose of the trip was to gain a comprehensive understanding of the Koh Phdao community and
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
its residents as well as understanding how they currently manage their plastic waste. This was done by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
observing the community and taking photographs, conducting resident interviews and analysing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
current plastic waste system (Figure 3.1). 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1. Methods used for fieldwork 
 
 
The trip was arranged by Cambodian Rural Discovery Tours (CRDTours) and included a guide, Duch
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Phiya, and two translators, Raksmey and Vandet. 
 
Before arriving at Koh Phdao, Khoun Tola and Duch Phiya from Cambodian Rural Development
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Team (CRDT) held an introductory presentation describing Koh Phdao and its challenges (A3.1).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRDT is an Cambodian NGO based in north-east Cambodia that strives to make Cambodia free from
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
poverty and environmental degradation. CRDT provides Koh Phdao with development projects as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well as facilitating tours in Koh Phdao under CRDTs social enterprise, Cambodian Rural Discovery
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tours (CRDTours).  
 
During the stay in Koh Phdao, eight interviews with 12 residents were conducted. The residents
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviewed were:  
 
●
Koh Phdao’s tourism chief: Prom Sarin (Image 3.2) (A3.2) 
●
Homestay father: Seng Khim (Image 3.3) (A3.3) 
●
Homestay daughter: Mom (Image 3.4) (A3.4) 
●
4 x school children: Perum, Mari, Sopim and Soknaa (A3.5) 
●
Elderly woman (A3.6) 
●
2 x housewives: Sapeeup and Sita (A3.7) 
26 
==PAGE:36==
●
Shop owner: Prom Sarot (A3.8) 
●
Aluminium waste trader: Dom Nai (A3.9) 
 
 
 
Image 3.2. Prom Sarin 
Image 3.3. Seng Khim 
 
Image 3.4. Mom 
 
After the stay in Koh Phdao, Duch Phiya was interviewed for further understanding of the waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure in Koh Phdao as well as the surrounding area, Kratie province (A3.10). 
 
The following section will describe Koh Phdao in further detail including their livelihood, local
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure, education, culture, recreational activities, the local authorities and a mapping of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
strengths in the community. 
 
 
27 
==PAGE:37==
KOH PHDAO COMMUNITY 
Koh Phdao is located on Koh Rongeav which is the largest island in the Mekong River (Figure 3.2).
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Koh Phdao is a part of Kampong Charm Commune which is located in Sambou district in the Kratie
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
province.  
 
 
Figure 3.2. Koh Phdao 
 
There are four villages located on Koh Rongeav; Samphin village, Koh Phdao village, Kompong
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Krabei village and Ampil Tuek village with approximately 4000 residents spread between them. Koh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phdao has 835 residents, which from now on will be referred to as villagers. In the figure below, facts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
about Koh Phdao are presented (Figure 3.3). 
 
 
Figure 3.3. Koh Phdao demographics 
28 
==PAGE:38==
LIVELIHOOD 
The main livelihoods in Koh Phdao are rice farming, fishing and livestock rearing. The average daily
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
income for a villager is 1.75-2.00 USD. Koh Phdao has two seasons; a wet season (May-October) and
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
a dry season (November-April). During the wet season, the villagers grow rice and harvest rice.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During the dry season, the men and youth leave the island to find work in bigger cities to provide for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
their family. This means that during the dry season it is mostly women, children and elderly villagers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
remaining in Koh Phdao. 
 
In 2008 Koh Phdao community-based ecotourism was established to provide alternative livelihood for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
villagers with a low income. Every year about 400 tourists visit Koh Phdao. When visiting Koh Phdao
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tourists can stay at one of the 12 homestays while exploring the beautiful natural environment and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
seeing the freshwater Irrawaddy dolphins which Koh Phdao is famous for (Image 3.5). The price per
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
night including three home cooked meals is 14 USD per person. Part of the stay can also include
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
volunteering activities such as digging fish and frog ponds, building chicken and duck pens, farming
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and planting fruit trees (Image 3.6). Additionally, tourists can also pay to have a community guide,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
watch a local dance performance or rent a bicycle. Therefore, the ecotourism model in Koh Phdao
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
already leverages tourism to contribute financially and through labour for the benefit of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community. 
 
 
Image 3.5. Irrawaddy dolphin 
 
 
Image 3.6. Chicken pen built through ecotourism 
29 
==PAGE:39==
LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE 
Koh Phdao has a simple road infrastructure made up of one main dirt road running through Koh
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phdao and the other three villages (Image 3.7). By foot it takes about 30-40 minutes to walk from one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
end of Koh Phdao to the other. 
 
 
 
Image 3.7. Koh Phdao’s main road 
 
 
Koh Phdao village has a primary & secondary school, a pagoda, a spirit house, tourism centre and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
shops such as a hairdresser, a motorbike repair shop and convenience shops. In the neighbouring
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
village there is a health centre with one nurse so the villagers do not need to go to the mainland
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hospital unless they require surgery.  
 
To get an overview of Koh Phdao village, a physical map has been made. The map illustrates the main
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
road and the location of public buildings, shops, two homestays and the entrance to the village by boat
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(Figure 3.4). 
 
30 
==PAGE:40==
 
Figure 3.4. Physical map of Koh Phdao 
 
 
31 
==PAGE:41==
Means of transport 
As Koh Phdao is located on an island and there is no bridge connecting Koh Phdao and the mainland,
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it is only possible to get to the island by boat. It takes about 30-45 minutes to get to Koh Phdao from
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
the mainland depending on the current. A return ticket with a long boat costs 6000 KHR (1.50 USD).
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Not many villagers can afford to go to the mainland as it costs about the same as their daily income.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additionally, it can be dangerous to take the boat during the wet season so this also keeps the villagers
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from travelling to the mainland.  
 
The main means of transport in Koh Phdao is by foot, bicycle and scooter. There are no cars in Koh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Phdao. 
Water, electricity and gas infrastructure 
In 2014, a water supply system was implemented which provides approximately 70% of the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
households with clean drinking water (Image 3.8). The system was donated to Koh Phdao by CRDT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which received funding for it by the Japanese government. Currently, the households are boiling the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
water from the water supply system before drinking it as they are unsure if the water is safe to drink.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
The system is maintained by 2-3 villagers who are paid a small amount of money for maintaining it.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These villagers do not wish to continue maintaining it because it is a time-consuming process and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
physically demanding but they see themselves obliged to continue as the villagers will not have clean
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
water if they stop. 
 
 
 
Image 3.8. Local water supply system 
32 
==PAGE:42==
 
Koh Phdao does not have access to on-grid electricity so villagers either have solar panels or car
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
batteries to produce energy. When cooking, villagers use firewood as they do not have a gas
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
infrastructure. The cooking is indoors so the women inhale the smoke from the firewood while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cooking. Some households have bio-digesters which can produce gas that can light up homes or be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used for cooking. These were implemented by CRDT but unfortunately, most of them are broken and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cannot be repaired as the materials needed are expensive and can only be bought in China. Lastly, as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
internet access is expensive (about 1 USD for a limited amount of data), few villagers have access to
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the internet. 
Housing 
Most of the houses in Koh Phdao are built on stilts as Koh Phdao experiences flooding during the wet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
season. Most houses are made of wood and have gaps in the walls so sunlight can light up the house
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
during daytime as electricity is limited. Latrines and baths are not connected to the house but are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
placed outside on the property. Not all households in Koh Phdao have latrines but the tourism chief
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wants for all villagers to have latrines in the future. 
To experience Seng Khim’s homestay, visit this video ​link​. 
EDUCATION 
In Koh Phdao, children recieve primary and secondary education in either the school in Koh Phdao or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
the school in the neighbouring village. Children are taught by ‘read and repeat’ and are therefore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discouraged from
thinking creatively. If the children wish to continue their education at a high
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
school or university they can attend it on the mainland meaning that they will need to leave the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
village. By interviewing four school children, it was found that they all wished to continue schooling
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(one wanted to become a teacher) but due to their families having a low source of income, the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
children need to stay at home with their families to help with rice farming and taking care of their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
younger siblings.  
CULTURE 
Most villagers in Koh Phdao are Buddhists and are spiritual people. As mentioned previously, Koh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phdao has a pagoda where the villagers go to pray, be blessed and make offerings. Koh Phdao also
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
has a spirit house that tourists need to visit when arriving at Koh Phdao. Here the villagers alongside
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the tourists make an offering and the spirits are then asked if they approve the tourists’ stay in Koh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phdao (Image 3.9). The spirits have before helped the villagers in situations of need which is why
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
they respect them so much. 
 
 
33 
==PAGE:43==
 
Image 3.9. Offering to the spirits 
 
 
The speciality of Koh Phdao is that every single villager knows one another. There is a strong
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
community bond where if anybody in the community needs help, they will receive help. As
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Buddhists, it is important for the villagers to share their knowledge with the younger generation as
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
well as being open-hearted and kind towards locals as well as non-locals. This is the Buddhist way of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
life. As for aspirations for the future of the community, villagers wish to see their community develop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
which includes better local health care, road infrastructure, for every household to have a latrine and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
for Koh Phdao ecotourism to continue to grow. 
Recreation 
For recreation, the villagers enjoy dancing, festivals, Khmer New Years and weddings. As these
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
events and traditions are important for the villagers, this is also where they spend a large portion of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
their income. During daytime, the villagers enjoy laying in hammocks where they relax and talk to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their family and friends from the community. 
Gender roles 
The gender roles in Koh Phdao conform with traditional norms wherein women take care of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
children and the house (unpaid domestic labour) while the men go to work and provide for the family
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(paid work). Men are seen as somewhat superior to women and their opinions are more valid and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important than a woman’s. The father at the homestay, Seng Khim, finds this unfair and hopes that
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this will change in the future. 
LOCAL AUTHORITIES 
In Koh Phdao, there is a village chief who has been assigned by the government and is in charge of
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
making important decisions for the villages. If a new project is to be implemented in Koh Phdao, the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
village chief will need to approve the project first.  
 
34 
==PAGE:44==
Koh Phdao also has a tourism chief who has been elected by the villagers. The tourism chief’s
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
responsibilities include welcoming and engaging with tourists as well as ensuring that the ecotourism
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
finances are correct. 
 
Additionally, Koh Phdao has a deputy, an accountant and seven policemen between the four villages. 
ENVIRONMENT 
Koh Phdao has a beautiful natural environment which makes Koh Phdao an attraction for tourists to
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
visit (Image 3.10). The Mekong River is a 1 minute walk from Koh Phdao’s mainroad where beautiful
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sunsets can be seen. The village has many lush areas with palm trees and bushes. Due to the villagers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
being rice farmers, much of the local landscape includes rice fields. Additionally, cattle can be seen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
walking freely in the village as they are not tied up. If a cattle gets lost or walks off, the villagers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
return it to its owner as all villagers know which cattle belongs to which villager. 
To experience a walk down Koh Phdao’s main road with a view of the environment, visit this video
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
link​. 
 
 
Image 3.10. Koh Phdao’s environment 
35 
==PAGE:45==
STRENGTHS-BASED MAP 
To get an overview of Koh Phdao’s strengths, a strengths-based map has been created (Figure 3.5).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The strengths-based approach has been utilised so the concept will build on the Koh Phdao
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community’s strengths which leads to more sustainable development as well as encourages
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community participation (Caritas n.d.). The map will be used while developing the concept to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
integrate as many strengths from the local environment, the community and the villagers as possible.  
 
 
 
Figure 3.5. Strengths-based map for Koh Phdao 
 
 
 
Now that the local context of Koh Phdao has been described, the next step is to analyse how plastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
waste is managed in Koh Phdao. 
 
 
36 
==PAGE:46==
PLASTIC WASTE SYSTEM ANALYSIS 
This section will analyse how plastic waste is managed in Koh Phdao by utilising the Integrated
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainable Waste Management (ISWM) framework (Figure 3.6). Firstly, the current challenges
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
associated with plastic waste in Koh Phdao will be described followed by a description of the waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
system elements including a plastic waste flow diagram. Next, the different aspects will be described
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and recommendations for a future plastic waste system will be presented. Lastly, a stakeholder
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
analysis will present the relationships between the relevant stakeholders. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.6. ISWM framework 
 
CHALLENGES OF PLASTIC WASTE 
Plastic waste in Koh Phdao poses a risk to public health, the environment and ecotourism. The
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
villagers are currently managing their own plastic waste by either burning, burying or open dumping.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The villagers have been made aware of the health risks involved with burning plastic waste by CRDT,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but due to the lack of other options which permanently eliminate plastic waste, burning remains the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
most common disposal practice in Koh Phdao. The villagers are also aware of the damage that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
burying and open dumping of plastic waste can have on their environment. Additionally, the dumping
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of plastic waste in the environment poses a threat to their ecotourism business as tourists do not wish
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to visit a destination where the environment is inundated with plastic waste.  
 
The villagers wish to use new methods to dispose of their plastic waste, but due to lack of knowledge
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
of alternative systems, as well as a lack of resources, the villagers have no option other than to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
continue with their current plastic waste disposal practices. 
37 
==PAGE:47==
WASTE SYSTEM ELEMENTS 
Generation 
The villagers mainly do their shopping at the local convenience shops. However when needing to buy
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
in bulk, the villagers take a longboat to shop at the mainland shops where prices are lower than at the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
local shop. The shops have a variety of items such as shampoo, conditioner, washing powder, coffee,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hot chocolate and snacks all packed in potion-sized plastic sachets (Image 3.11). Other items include
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
spices, sauces, dish washing soap, cigarettes, water, beer and rice wine. Photos of other items sold at
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
the shop can be found in appendix (A3.11). 
 
 
 
Image 3.11. Items sold at the local shop 
 
 
38 
==PAGE:48==
By examining plastic waste from five different households (A3.12; A3.13), it was found that the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
community's plastic waste can be divided into four categories. 
The four categories are: 
 
1.
Plastic bottles 
Examples: 0.5 L bottles, 1.5 L bottles 
2.
Soft plastics 
Examples: Sachets, snacks packaging, small bags, packaging for motorbike equipment 
3.
Hard plastics 
Examples: Shampoo containers, cleaning products containers 
4.
Other types of plastics 
Examples: Lighters, medical equipment, old toys 
 
The predominant type of plastic waste is soft plastics (Image 3.12). 
 
 
Image 3.12. Plastic waste from a household bin 
Separation 
In 2009, CRDT donated 115 plastic waste bins to Koh Phdao for the villagers to separate and store
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their plastic waste in (Image 3.13). The 115 plastic waste bins are shared between the households so if
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
one household does not have a bin, they dispose of their plastic waste in the neighbour’s bin. Each
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
household is in charge of managing their own plastic waste. Other types of waste that are difficult to
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
light on fire such as carton juice boxes are also stored in the plastic waste bin. The villagers do not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have bins for types of waste other than plastic. 
 
39 
==PAGE:49==
 
Image 3.13. Plastic waste bin 
Collection, transfer and transport 
Koh Phdao has previously had a waste collection service where all types of waste were collected from
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
households and afterwards transported to an open area near the school where the waste was burned.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The waste was collected approximately once a week and cost the households 0.50 USD/collection. It
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
is unknown why this service stopped. There is therefore currently no plastic waste collection service
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in Koh Phdao. 
Treatment and disposal 
Since there are no collection services available anymore, most villagers burn their plastic waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behind their house, in front of their house or on the side of the road, 1-2 times a week (Image 3.14).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Other items included in the burning process are batteries, paper and cardboard. Other disposal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
practices include burying or open dumping in the environment. 
 
 
Image 3.14. Mix of waste burned on the side of the road 
40 
==PAGE:50==
Reduction 
In December 2019, water purifiers were brought to Koh Phdao for villagers to purchase (Image 3.15).
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
The water filters can be used for five years and provide the villagers with clean water leading to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reduction of plastic water bottles purchased. 
 
 
Image 3.15. Angkor Water Purifier 
Reuse 
Some of the villagers reuse their plastic bottles and bags for new purposes. 
●
0.5 L plastic bottles are used as plant pots (Image 3.16) 
●
1.5 L plastic bottles are used for catching frogs 
●
Large plastic bags with poked holes in are used for washing vegetables  
 
 
Image 3.16. Plastic bottles used as plant pots 
41 
==PAGE:51==
Recycling 
Plastic bottles are currently the only type of plastic waste that can be sold for recycling. The bottles
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can be sold on the mainland to recycling buyers who transport the bottles to the Vietnam border where
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
they can be recycled. For 1 kg of plastic bottles a villager can get 300 KHR (0.075 USD). Due to the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
low market price for recyclable plastic bottles, not many villagers sell plastic bottles for recycling. 
 
By contrast, aluminium cans are commonly collected in Koh Phdao and sold for recycling on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mainland as their market price is 3000 KHR/kg (0.75 USD/kg), ten times the price of plastic bottles. 
Recovery 
There are currently no ways of recovering energy when burning plastic waste in Koh Phdao. 
Plastic waste flow 
A figure has been made to get an overview of the current plastic waste flow in Koh Phdao (Figure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.7). The figure illustrates how the plastic waste flows through the system, starting with products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
being sold on the mainland, until the final disposal of plastic waste in Koh Phdao and recycling of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic waste in Vietnam. 
 
 
Figure 3.7. Plastic waste flow in Koh Phdao 
 
 
42 
==PAGE:52==
ASPECTS 
This section will describe the relevant aspects involved in  managing plastic waste in Koh Phdao. 
 
Technical 
Koh Phdao has currently no 
technical solution on how to 
manage their plastic waste.  
 
When a plastic waste system is 
to be implemented, it is crucial 
that it is a low-tech solution as 
on-grid electricity is not 
available in Koh Phdao and 
moreover, for it to be 
appropriate for all villagers it 
needs to be technically simple 
as most villagers have limited 
education. 
Environment/health 
The environment is impacted 
by the plastic waste due to the 
current disposal practises. 
Water bodies, soil and air are 
getting polluted by the 
mismanaged plastic waste. 
 
In terms of local health, when 
burning plastic waste the 
villagers inhale the toxic air 
pollutants which is damaging 
for their health in multiple 
ways. 
 
Some of the villagers are 
aware of the impacts of plastic 
waste and are afraid that their 
children will get sick when in 
contact with the mismanaged 
plastic waste. 
 
Financial/economic 
Financially, managing plastic 
waste in Koh Phdao is 
currently free as each 
household manages their own 
waste. 
 
When a plastic waste system is 
to be implemented, it needs to 
be of low cost as the villagers 
have a low income. 
Socio-cultural 
Many of the villagers wish to 
manage their plastic waste for 
health and environmental 
reasons, but there are also 
villagers who prefer to 
manage their own plastic 
waste to save the expense of 
having to pay for a waste 
collection service. 
 
Working with waste is seen as 
a job for the poor so when a 
plastic waste system is to be 
implemented, it needs to be 
financially desirable for the 
villagers. 
Institutional 
CRDT has in over a decade 
worked with Koh Phdao on 
improving their waste 
management practices. CRDT 
has provided Koh Phdao with 
plastic waste bins and advice 
on how to manage their plastic 
waste. 
Policy/legal/political 
There are currently no policies 
or laws on how to manage 
plastic waste in Koh Phdao. 
Instead, the Cambodian 
Ministry of Environment 
provides CRDT with advice 
on how rural communities can 
manage their plastic waste.  
 
When a plastic waste system is 
to be implemented, the system 
will need to be approved by 
the village chief first 
otherwise it cannot be 
implemented. 
 
43 
==PAGE:53==
STAKEHOLDERS 
This section will describe the relevant stakeholders involved in the current plastic waste system in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Koh Phdao. The stakeholders involved are: the mainland and local shops, the villagers (households)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and tourists, CRDT and the Ministry of Environment and the mainland and Vietnam recyclable waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
buyers. In the figure below the interaction between the stakeholders have been mapped out (Figure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.8). Even though the recyclable waste buyers are currently not particularly active in the system, they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have been included as the opportunity to recycle plastic bottles is still a possibility. 
 
 
Figure 3.8. Stakeholder map 
 
 
This chapter has now described Koh Phdao community and presented an analysis of its current plastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste system. Next chapter, ​Chapter 3: Anticipating the future, will use the knowledge gained from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this chapter and from the previous chapter, ​Chapter 1: Literature review, to scope and frame the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
project. 
 
 
44 
==PAGE:54==
 
Chapter 4: 
ANTICIPATING THE FUTURE 
 
45 
==PAGE:55==
ANTICIPATING THE FUTURE 
Up until this point a literature review on plastic waste has been conducted and a description Koh
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Phdao community and an analysis of its current plastic waste system has been presented. Next step is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
to identify the domain, anticipate the future and develop a vision. 
 
The chapter will go through five stages (Figure 4.1). The first stage will describe the domain and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
timeframe the design will be developed for. The second stage will present the context factors that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
describe both the local and global context within the domain. The third stage will structure the context
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
factors into clusters that reveal important factors in the future. In the fourth stage the clusters will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
create a framework where four mindsets will be revealed, and one mindset will be used as inspiration
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the context statement. In the fifth stage the context statement will be generated which will be the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vision for the design. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.1. Anticipating the future process 
 
 
The following five sections will describe these five stages into further detail. 
 
 
 
46 
==PAGE:56==
DOMAIN AND TIMEFRAME 
The first step towards creating the context statement is to identify an aspect of society that will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
examined through the design process. This will be the domain. In this project, the focus is on how to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
manage plastic waste in rural Cambodia where Koh Phdao is used as a case study. It is important that
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
the domain does not describe behaviour, e.g. the domain cannot be ‘Burning plastic waste in rural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cambodia’. This would lead the designer to focus on how to solve that specific problem. Instead a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
neutral domain will be created to create space for new ways of looking at the domain and its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
challenges. 
The domain has therefore been chosen to be: 
 
 
 
Managing plastic waste in rural Cambodia 
 
 
 
Managing plastic waste in rural Cambodia is an urgent challenge but it is also complex as there is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
little established infrastructure built within the domain to allow for quick changes and improvements.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, the timeframe should be set several years into the future to allow for a visionary context
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
statement. For this reason the timeframe has been set to: 
 
 
 
2025 (five years in the future) 
 
 
 
The domain and timeframe have now been identified. Next step is to generate context factors which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
will help to understand the domain and its complexity on a global and local scale. 
 
 
47 
==PAGE:57==
UNDERSTANDING THE CONTEXT 
A number of context factors have been generated to describe and understand the domain. There are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
two categories of context factors; global context factors and local context factors. This is to get a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
comprehensive understanding of the whole domain and not only the local part of the domain.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Moreover, the context factors have been split into types that represent factors from the present and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
future. Lastly, to help generate context factors that cover most aspects of the domain, eight fields have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been used. The types and fields are listed below: 
 
 
      Types 
●
Trends 
●
Developments 
●
States 
●
Principles 
     ​ Fields 
●
Biological 
●
Cultural 
●
Demographics 
●
Economic 
●
Political 
●
Psychological 
●
Sociological 
●
Technological 
 
 
The context factors have been generated with the knowledge from the two previous chapters; ​Chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2: Literature review and ​Chapter 3: Understanding the context​. Additionally, desktop research
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regarding plastic waste and interviews have been conducted. Senior lecturer in Experimental methods
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
and consumer behaviour and design researcher, Dr Janneke Blijlevens has been interviewed with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
aim of understanding people’s desires and how to create behaviour change (A4.1). Lastly,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Women’s Development Agency (IWDA) research fellow, Dr Kylie Fisk, has been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interviewed because of her expertise within social psychology and knowledge from working in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developing contexts in Asia and the Pacific islands (A4.2). 
 
 
 
48 
==PAGE:58==
GENERATING CONTEXT FACTORS 
89 context factors were generated and the distribution of them can be seen below (Table 4.1). Not all
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fields have the same amount of context factors. It depends on the domain which fields will be the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
most dominant. In this case the ​biological​, ​economic​, ​psychological and ​sociological fields are the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
largest fields, which appears logical when the domain is set to ‘Managing plastic waste in rural
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cambodia’. Plastic leads to the biological context factors. Economics is essential for why plastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sachets is a problem in developing countries. Psychology and sociology describe the people and their
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
actions with regard to managing plastic waste. The context factors describe factors that will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relevant for the future of the domain.  
 
 
 
 
Table 4.1. Context factors 
 
 
The following three pages will present the global and local context factors. The context factor
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
references can be found in the appendix (A4.3). 
 
49 
==PAGE:59==
GLOBAL CONTEXT FACTORS 
Biological 
1. Plastics are made from 
natural, organic materials such 
as cellulose, coal, natural gas, 
salt and, of course, crude oil [P] 
  
2. Plastics have a number of 
desirable properties [P] 
  
3. None of the commonly used 
plastics are biodegradable [S] 
  
4. Plastic breaks down in nature 
physically by the influence of 
sunlight, oxygen and wave 
action - not chemically [P] 
  
5. A study suggests that the 
average person ingests 5 grams 
of microplastics per week 
through inhalation, beverages 
and food [S] 
  
6. It has yet to be discovered the 
consequences from ingesting 
microplastics and nanoplastics 
on a daily basis [S] 
  
7. Up to a million people die 
every year due to mismanaged 
waste [D] 
  
8. By 2050 it is estimated that 
there could be more plastic than 
fish in the world's oceans [D] 
  
9. Animals are dying from 
eating plastic waste because 
they mistake it for food [S] 
 
10. Bioplastic is a rising 
renewable substitute for 
oil-based plastic [T] 
 
11. Glass and metal can be 
recycled infinitely [P] 
 
 
12. By 2025, Unilever and 
Nestle aim to make their 
packaging reusable, recyclable 
or compostable [D] 
 
13. Environmental protection is 
one of the primary drivers for 
solid waste management [D] 
Cultural 
14. The throw-away mentality 
[T] 
 
15. Most of plastic packaging 
leaves the ‘use stage’ the same 
year it is produced [T] 
 
16. Your home is a reflection 
of you - people remove ugly 
elements when having visitors 
[S] 
Demographic  
17. Global waste is estimated 
to increase by 70% in 2050 due 
to rapid urbanisation and a 
growing population [D] 
 
18. There are parts of Asia 
where people live on plastic 
waste [D] 
Economical 
19. Oil companies in the USA 
are investing in building large 
oil factories to be able to 
produce more plastic resin [D] 
 
20. Nestle, Unilever, ITC, The 
Coca Cola Company and 
Pepsico are some of the biggest 
contributors to plastic waste in 
developing countries [D] 
 
 
 
21. To be able to make products 
more affordable the quality of 
plastic products has decreased 
[D] 
 
22. It is cheaper to extract oil 
and make new products than it is 
to use recycled plastic [S] 
 
23. Sachets were introduced by 
corporate companies to create a 
new market in developing 
countries [S] 
 
24. Money is power [S] 
 
25. People with a low income 
rarely have bank accounts [D] 
 
26. There are limited resources 
when working in a developing 
context [S] 
 
27. Consumer interest in 
sustainable alternatives to 
plastics and more efficient 
technologies is pushing 
companies to change their 
business models [T] 
 
28. Some people collect 
recyclable waste as a day job 
[D] 
 
29. The "right" waste is worth 
money [D] 
 
30. Resource value of waste is 
one of the primary drivers for 
solid waste management [S] 
 
50 
==PAGE:60==
 
Political 
31. Zero Waste International 
Alliance is a worldwide 
organisation that is working 
towards a world without waste 
[D] 
 
32. The Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG) 
targets to leave no one behind 
[D] 
 
33. Laws and regulations can 
create behaviour change [P] 
 
34. In Timor-Leste, they passed 
a law according to which people 
will be fined for burning their 
plastic waste even when there is 
no other option [S] 
Psychological 
35. Most people are myopic, but 
for those in grinding poverty the 
self-discipline required to save 
up money is greater and the 
consequences of failure worse 
[S] 
 
36. People do not dispose of 
their waste properly if the 
distance to the nearest waste 
collection is too far [P] 
 
37. We all want to feel we are 
creating a legacy of a 
meaningful life [P] 
 
38. Villagers care about their 
health and well-being [P] 
 
39. Waste is seen as dirty and 
disposable [S] 
 
40. One person's waste is 
another person's treasure [T] 
 
 
 
41. Money buys you happiness 
to the extent of being able to 
afford basic necessities [P] 
 
42. To keep people engaged 
with a project they need to feel 
a sense of ownership [P] 
Sociological 
43. People like sharing their 
experiences with others [P] 
 
44. People seek inspiration 
from other people on Social 
Media [T] 
 
45. Smiling can help increase 
positive, prosocial behaviours 
[P] 
 
46. People get motivated by 
other people's behaviour [P] 
 
47. Older, wealthier, more 
educated people and women 
have been shown to recycle 
more [S] 
 
48. Education alone cannot 
create behaviour change [P] 
 
49. Public health is one of the 
primary drivers for solid waste 
management [D] 
 
50. Doing beach and ocean 
clean-ups is a short-term 
solution to keep waste out of 
the environment [T] 
 
51. We want to be recognised 
for doing good [P] 
 
52. People tend to change 
behaviour if they feel like they 
are being monitored [P] 
Technological 
53. Recycling of plastic is not a 
long-term solution towards 
minimising plastic waste [P] 
 
54. Recycling plastic sachets is 
possible according to Unilever 
with the CreaSolv Sachet 
Recycling technology [S] 
 
55. Recycling plastic 
downgrades the quality [P] 
 
56. Plastics can be recycled 2-3 
times before used for clothing 
[S] 
 
57. Converting plastic into fuel 
and making plastic blocks from 
plastic waste are methods being 
used in parts of Cambodia to 
reduce the amount of waste 
entering the ecosystem [T] 
 
58. Knowledge is being shared 
online [D] 
 
 
51 
==PAGE:61==
LOCAL CONTEXT FACTORS 
Biological 
59. Villagers use their organic 
waste as fertiliser or for animal 
feed [S] 
Cultural 
60. Villagers value their family 
and community very highly [S] 
 
61. The villagers are very 
spiritual [S] 
 
62. Ceremonies and festivals are 
important for the villagers [S] 
 
63. Cambodians spend a large 
amount of money on weddings 
[S] 
 
64. Villagers burn their plastic 
waste so the amount of plastic 
waste in the community is 
minimised [S] 
Demographic 
65. Villagers do not have 
on-grid electricity [S] 
 
66. Few villagers have internet 
access [S] 
Economical 
67. A villager's daily income is 
1.75-2.00 USD [D] 
 
68. CRDT financially supports 
Koh Phdao with ecotourism and 
developing projects [D] 
 
69. Villagers seek work in the 
bigger cities because of the lack 
of work in rural areas [D] 
 
 
 
 
70. Villagers rarely leave the 
island because it is too 
expensive for them [S] 
 
71. Ecotourism provides an 
income for villagers [S] 
 
72. Ecotourism is an increasing 
business opportunity for rural 
communities in Cambodia [T] 
 
73. Cambodia’s annual GDP 
growth is 7.5 % [D] 
Political 
74. There are no laws or 
restrictions in Koh Phdao 
regarding solid waste 
management [S] 
 
75. The ministry of 
environment and CRDT 
provide advice and guidelines 
to the villagers regarding solid 
waste management [S] 
Psychological 
76. Villagers find it inspiring 
that tourists pick up waste and 
it encourages them to do it too 
[T] 
 
77. There is a desire from the 
villagers to be able to manage 
their waste in a sustainable way 
[T] 
 
78. Villagers like sharing 
knowledge and giving each 
other advice [S] 
 
79. Villagers fear their children 
will get sick from touching 
plastic waste [D] 
 
 
 
80. Villagers keep the 
environment clean because 
tourists don't like seeing plastic 
waste in the environment [S] 
Sociological 
81. Village children are taught 
about the importance of 
collecting and separating waste 
in school  [D] 
 
82. Village children want an 
education but most can't 
because they need to stay home 
or work in the city to support 
the family [S] 
 
83. Education in Koh Phdao is 
'read and repeat' [S] 
 
84. Villagers in Koh Phdao 
know and help each other [S] 
 
85. Villagers separate and 
manage entirely their own 
waste [T] 
 
86. Plastic waste bins are also 
used to hide items that the 
village children should not 
touch [T] 
 
87. Some villagers reuse plastic 
waste such as bottles and bags 
for new purposes [T] 
Technological 
88. It is not possible for 
villagers to repair their 
belongings if materials can’t be 
bought locally [S] 
 
89. Recycling of the villagers' 
plastics, aluminium and iron is 
done in Vietnam [S] 
52 
==PAGE:62==
STRUCTURING THE CONTEXT 
Structuring the context factors into clusters is a time-consuming process where the aim is to create
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
clusters that describe important factors that will be relevant within the domain ‘Managing plastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste in rural Cambodia’ in 2025. The context factors have been written down on small pieces of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
paper with their type, field and category (A4.4). This makes it possible to have a dynamic process
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
when forming the context clusters.  
 
 
Figure 4.2. Context factor card 
 
 
The clusters were rearranged several times but at one point the same clusters kept reappearing. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
resulted in seven clusters describing important and relevant factors of the future within the domain. 
 
The clusters are: 
 
●
People inspire people 
●
Ecotourism as a financial driver 
●
Being dependent on others 
●
Health concerns 
●
Strong community drive 
●
Towards circular economy 
●
The power of governance 
 
The next sections will describe the seven clusters into further detail. 
 
 
53 
==PAGE:63==
PEOPLE INSPIRE PEOPLE 
The first cluster, People inspire people​, describes how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behaviour change can happen when people inspire
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each other through their actions.  
An example of this happening is through ecotourism,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when tourists visit Koh Phdao and a culture exchange
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
takes place between tourists and villagers. Villagers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inspire tourists to live a simpler life where fewer
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
resources
are
needed
and
in
regards
to
waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management tourists inspire villagers to pick up plastic
 
 
 
  
 
 
waste in the environment. People enjoy sharing
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge and experiences and by inspiring others
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with
their
actions
unsustainable
behaviours
can
 
 
 
 
 
 
change. 
Another example is how people inspire each other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
online on platforms such as Youtube and Instagram.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
People like sharing their knowledge and experience so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other people can get inspired. The Instagram profile,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
zerowkh,
shares
her
journey
towards
living
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
zero-waste life as a Cambodian woman. She posts tips
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
on how others can minimise their waste. 
With ecotourism remaining a business opportunity in
 
 
  
 
 
Koh Phdao and Social Media being used to share
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knowledge, ​People inspire people, will be a cluster
 
 
 
 
 
  
that needs to be taken into account when designing for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the future. 
           Image 4.1. Family collecting plastic waste  
 
Global context factors 
People like sharing their experiences with others 
[P] 
 
People seek inspiration from other people on 
Social Media [T] 
 
Smiling can help increase positive, pro-social 
behaviours [P] 
 
People get motivated by other people's 
behaviour [P] 
 
Knowledge is being shared online [D] 
Local context factors 
Villagers find it inspiring that tourists pick up 
the waste and make them want to do it too [T] 
 
 
 
 
 
 Image 4.2. Zerowkh’s Instagram profile 
 
 
54 
==PAGE:64==
ECOTOURISM AS A FINANCIAL DRIVER 
The second cluster, ​Ecotourism as a financial driver,
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
describes how villagers through ecotourism have a
 
 
 
 
 
  
financial motivation for managing their plastic waste.
 
 
 
 
 
 
One of the reasons for tourists to visit Koh Phdao is to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
experience the beautiful natural environment that
 
 
 
 
 
 
exists in rural Cambodia. Plastic waste poses a threat
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
to this image. If the villagers don’t manage their plastic
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
waste and keep it out of the environment, tourists will
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
stop visiting Koh Phdao and the villagers will lose an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important source of income. 
 
In addition to this, villagers might also be cleaning the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
environment because they wish to present themselves
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the best way possible for tourists. Most people can
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
relate to this behaviour. It tends to be quite common
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
for people to clean their homes before having guests,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as their home is a reflection of themselves. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
villagers might experience the same thoughts and
 
 
 
 
 
 
feelings. 
 
Because of ecotourism, there is a financial motivation
 
 
 
   
 
for the villagers to manage their plastic waste. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will remain an important force in the future. 
 
Global context factors 
Your home is a reflection of you - people 
remove ugly elements when having visitors [S] 
 
Money buys you happiness to the extent of being 
able to afford basic necessities [P] 
 
Cambodia’s annual GDP growth is 7.5 % [D] 
 
To keep people engaged with a project, they 
need to feel a sense of ownership [P] 
 
We want to be recognised for doing good [P] 
 
People tend to change behaviour if they feel like 
they are being monitored [S] 
Local context factors 
A villager’s daily income is 1.75-2.00 USD [S] 
 
Ecotourism is an increasing business opportunity 
for rural communities in Cambodia [T] 
 
Ecotourism provides an income for villagers [S] 
 
Villagers keep the environment clean because 
tourists don't like seeing waste in the 
environment [S] 
 
 
 
Image 4.3. Men Vichaka by community sign 
 
 
 
 
 
Image 4.4. Dessert workshop 
55 
==PAGE:65==
 
BEING DEPENDENT ON OTHERS 
The third cluster, ​Being dependent on others​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
describes how the Koh Phdao community is very
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dependent on others for support and development.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Koh Phdao is located on an island with limited
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
access to electricity, work and education. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
villagers’ daily income of 1.75-2.00 USD leaves
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
them with limited resources to pay for other things
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
besides food. 
 
Few children in the community get a high school or
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
university degree because they need to stay at home
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
with
their
family
to
help
with
harvesting
 
 
 
 
 
 
rice/vegetables and help with the household while
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the men or older siblings are off the island to work.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The lack of education makes it difficult
for the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
villagers to follow development alongside the rest
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the world. 
 
Due
to
limited resources and education, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
villagers see themselves dependent on tourists,
 
 
 
 
 
 
NGOs and the government to provide them with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community
development
projects,
money
and
 
 
 
 
 
advice. This creates an unsustainable way of living
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where Koh Phdao will remain dependent on others
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in the future if nothing changes. 
 
Image 4.5. Sponsored water supply system 
 
 
Image 4.6. CRDT presentation in Koh Phdao 
 
Global context factors 
People with a low income rarely have bank accounts 
[S] 
 
There are limited resources when working in a 
developing context [S] 
 
Most people are myopic, but for those in grinding 
poverty the self-discipline required to save up 
money is greater and the consequences of failure 
worse [S] 
 
People do not dispose of their waste properly if the 
distance to the nearest waste collection is too far [P] 
 
Education alone cannot create behaviour change [P] 
Local context factors 
Villagers do not have on-grid electricity [S] 
 
Few villagers have internet access [S] 
 
CRDT financially supports Koh Phdao with 
ecotourism and developing projects [D] 
 
There are no laws or restrictions in Koh Phdao 
regarding solid waste management [S] 
 
The ministry of environment and CRDT provide 
advice and guidelines to the villagers regarding solid 
waste management [D] 
 
Village children are taught about the importance of 
collecting and separating waste in school [D] 
 
Village children want an education but most can't 
because they need to stay home or work in the city 
to support the family [S] 
 
Villagers seek work in bigger cities due to no work 
in rural areas [D] 
 
Villagers rarely leave the island because it is too big 
expensive for them [S] 
 
Education in Cambodia is 'read and repeat' [S] 
 
It is not possible for villagers to repair their 
belongings if materials cannot be bought locally [S] 
 
56 
==PAGE:66==
HEALTH CONCERNS 
The fourth cluster, ​Health concerns​, describes how
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic waste contributes to the villagers’ health
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concerns. 
Villagers fear that their children will get sick from
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
touching plastic waste lying around either from being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discarded or burned in the community. If the children
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(or villagers in general) do get sick they need to take a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
boat to the nearest hospital which is located on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mainland. The trip is time-consuming which presents
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an additional threat if it is an urgent sickness. 
 
Furthermore, the travel and medical bills are expensive
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and with a low income, the villagers cannot afford
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
unforeseen expenses like this. The villagers' solution to
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
minimising
plastic
waste
in the environment is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore
to
burn
it,
which
produces
toxic air
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
pollutants. This also poses a threat to public health.
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Some villagers are aware of this but without any other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
options, they choose to burn the plastic waste instead
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of discarding it into the environment because of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
financial reasons mentioned in the cluster ​Ecotourism
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as a financial driver​ and the related health concerns. 
Health concerns regarding plastic waste will remain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the same in the future unless new solutions on how to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manage plastic waste in the community are found. 
Image 4.7. Bottles by the Mekong river 
 
Image 4.8. The remains of a plastic waste fire 
 
Global context factors 
None of the commonly used plastics are 
biodegradable [S] 
 
Plastic breaks down physically in nature by the 
influence of sunlight, oxygen and wave action - 
not chemically [P] 
 
A study suggests that the average person ingests 
5 grams of microplastics per week through 
inhalation, beverages and food [S] 
 
It has yet to be discovered the consequences of 
ingesting microplastics and nanoplastics on a 
daily basis [S] 
 
Up to a million people die every year due to 
mismanaged waste [S] 
 
Animals are dying from eating plastic waste 
because they mistake it for food [S] 
 
Villagers care about their health and well-being 
[P] 
 
Waste is seen as dirty and disposable [S] 
 
Public health is one of the primary drivers for 
solid waste management [D] 
Local context factors 
Villagers burn their plastic waste so the amount 
of plastic waste in the community is minimised 
[D] 
 
Villagers value their family and community very 
highly [S] 
 
Villagers fear their children will get sick from 
touching plastic waste [D] 
 
Plastic waste bins are also used for items that the 
village children should not touch [T] 
 
There is a desire from the villagers to be able to 
manage their waste in a sustainable way [T] 
 
57 
==PAGE:67==
STRONG COMMUNITY DRIVE 
The fifth cluster, ​Strong community drive, describes
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
how the villagers have a strong bond to each other and
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
have a shared compassion for the community and a
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
desire to see it develop. Everybody in the village
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
knows and helps each other. If one villager knows of a
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
new method on how to e.g. manage plastic waste, it
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be shared with the rest of the community. 
 
Buddhism,
family,
the
community
and
their
 
 
 
 
 
relationships to people is what is the most valuable to
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
the villagers. The community is especially strongly
 
 
 
 
 
 
connected
through
Buddhism,
ceremonies
and
 
 
 
 
 
festivals. This is also where they spend a large amount
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
of their money because it is important to them. 
 
The villagers’ hopes and dreams include seeing their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community
develop
(e.g.
building
a
road)
and
 
 
 
 
 
 
providing a sustainable future for the next generations.
  
 
 
 
 
 
This includes knowing how to manage their plastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste. The villagers are open to development that will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve their community. 
 
Koh Phdao has a strong community drive and this will
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
be a relevant aspect to include when designing for the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
year of 2025. 
 
Image 4.9. Koh Phdao villager, Seng Khim 
 
Global context factors 
We all want to feel we are creating a legacy of a 
meaningful life [P] 
Local context factors 
The villagers are very spiritual [S] 
 
Ceremonies and festivals are important for the 
villagers [S] 
 
Cambodians spend a large amount of money on 
weddings [S] 
 
Villagers in Koh Phdao know and help each 
other [S] 
 
Villagers like sharing knowledge and giving 
each other advice [S] 
 
Villagers separate and manage their own waste 
[T] 
  
 
 
Image 4.10. Koh Phdao art group 
 
 
   Image 4.11. Cambodian women 
58 
==PAGE:68==
TOWARDS CIRCULAR ECONOMY 
The
sixth
cluster,
​Towards
circular
economy,
 
 
 
 
 
describes
how
individuals
and
companies
are
 
 
 
 
 
starting to reduce, reuse and recycle plastic waste.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are two sides to this cluster. On one hand it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
good to recycle plastic so less virgin oil will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
extracted. On the other hand, recycling plastic just
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
postpones the inevitability of the final disposal.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unlike glass and metal, plastic cannot be recycled
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infinitely but can only be recycled 2-3 times before
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the quality becomes too poor to be recycled. 
 
Therefore, companies are starting to explore new
 
 
 
 
 
 
solutions on how to reduce, reuse and recycle their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
packaging as part of their business model. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
includes looking into substituting plastic with other
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
materials such as metal or finding compostable
 
 
 
 
 
 
materials. 
 
Until companies find a solution, individuals need to
 
 
  
 
 
 
find their own solutions on how to reduce, reuse and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
recycle plastic. Currently in Koh Phdao, plastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
bottles can be sold on the mainland and recycled
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
afterwards in Vietnam. Circular economy is the
 
 
 
 
 
 
future and therefore this cluster will be important for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the future of the domain. 
 
Image 4.12. Substituting plastic with metal 
 
 
Image 4.13. Washing detergent refillery 
Global context factors 
Bioplastic is a rising renewable substitute for 
oil-based plastic [T] 
 
Glass and metal can be recycled infinitely [P] 
 
By 2025, Unilever and Nestle aim to make their 
packaging reusable, recyclable or compostable [D] 
 
Consumer interest in sustainable alternatives to 
plastics and more efficient technologies is pushing 
companies to change their business models [T] 
 
Recycling plastic downgrades the quality [P] 
 
Plastics can be recycled 2-3 times before used for 
clothing [S] 
 
Doing beach and ocean clean-ups is a short-term 
solution to keep waste out of the environment [T] 
 
Recycling of plastic is not a long-term solution 
towards minimising plastic waste [P] 
 
Recycling plastic sachets is possible according to 
Unilever with the CreaSolv Sachet Recycling 
technology [S] 
 
Some people collect recyclable waste as a day job [S] 
 
The "right" waste is worth money [S] 
 
Resource value of waste is one of the primary drivers 
for solid waste management [D] 
 
One person's waste is another person's treasure [T] 
 
Converting plastic into fuel and making plastic 
blocks from plastic waste are methods being used in 
parts of Cambodia to reduce the amount of waste 
entering the ecosystem [T] 
 
Older, wealthier, more educated people and women 
have been shown to recycle more [S] 
 
Environmental protection is one of the primary 
drivers for solid waste management [D] 
Local context factors 
Villagers use their organic waste as fertiliser or for 
animal feed [S] 
 
Some villagers reuse plastic waste such as bottles and 
bags for new purposes [T] 
 
Recycling of the villagers' plastics, aluminium and 
iron is done in Vietnam [S] 
59 
==PAGE:69==
THE POWER OF GOVERNANCE 
The seventh cluster, ​The power of governance​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
describes how companies and governments have the
 
 
 
 
 
 
power to solve the plastic waste problem if they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
choose to. Companies blame consumers for not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
disposing of their plastic waste properly but in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reality if companies did not create a business around
  
 
 
 
  
 
single-use
plastic,
the
world
would
not
be
 
 
 
 
 
 
overflowed by plastic. The responsibility lies with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the companies and their business models. 
 
Like companies, governments also have great power.
 
 
 
 
 
 
If the Cambodian government chooses to make
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cambodia plastic free, the plastic waste problem
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
could be solved and it would push companies
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
towards rethinking their business models. When
 
 
 
 
 
 
companies have a financial motivation to change
 
  
 
 
 
 
their business model, they will. 
 
It is vital to include company and government
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strategies and the power they have in order to get a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
comprehensive description for the future of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
domain. 
 
 
Image 4.14. Plastic sachets 
 
 
Image 4.15. Cambodian government 
Global context factors 
Plastics are made from natural, organic materials 
such as cellulose, coal, natural gas, salt and, of 
course, crude oil [P] 
 
Plastics have a number of desirable properties [P] 
 
By 2050 it is estimated that there could be more 
plastic than fish in the world's oceans [D] 
 
The throw-away mentality [T] 
 
Most of plastic packaging leaves the ‘use stage’ the 
same year it is produced [S] 
 
Global waste is estimated to increase by 70% in 
2050 due to rapid urbanisation and a growing 
population [D] 
 
There are parts of Asia where people live on plastic 
waste [D] 
 
Oil companies in the USA are investing in building 
large oil factories to be able to produce more 
plastic resin [D] 
 
Nestle, Unilever, ITC, The Coca Cola Company 
and Pepsico are some of the biggest contributors to 
plastic waste in developing countries [D] 
 
To be able to make products more affordable the 
quality of plastic products has decreased [D] 
 
It is cheaper to extract oil and make new products 
than it is to use recycled plastic [S] 
 
Sachets were introduced by corporate companies to 
create a new market in developing countries [S] 
 
Money is power [D] 
 
Zero Waste International Alliance is a worldwide 
organisation that is working towards a world 
without waste [D] 
 
The Sustainable Development Goals targets to 
leave no one behind [D] 
 
Laws and regulations can create behaviour change 
[D] 
 
In Timor-Leste, they passed a law according to 
which people will be fined for burning their plastic 
waste even when there is no other option [S] 
60 
==PAGE:70==
FRAMING THE CONTEXT 
The seven clusters describe different aspects of the future that are relevant within the domain
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘Managing plastic waste in rural Cambodia’ in 2025 (Figure 4.3).  
 
 
 
Figure 4.3. Context clusters within the domain 
 
 
DIMENSIONS 
The next step is to identify two dimensions that explain opposing forces in the domain and will help to
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
understand the villagers’ diverging mindsets. Four dimensions were initially identified but after
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
careful consideration two were chosen (A4.5). The two dimensions will create four quadrants where
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
each represents a particular mindset. The mindsets do not describe four different types of villagers but
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
four different mindsets within the same villager. When the four mindsets have been identified, one
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mindset will be chosen as inspiration for the context statement. 
 
The two dimensions will be described on the following pages. 
 
61 
==PAGE:71==
DIMENSION 1: MOTIVATION 
The first dimension is motivation. When looking at the clusters, four clusters stood out where two
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presented intrinsic motivation and two presented extrinsic motivation (Figure 4.4).  
 
 
Figure 4.4. Motivation dimension 
 
Intrinsic motivation 
The two clusters; ​People inspire people and ​Strong community drive​, represent the intrinsic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
motivation in the villagers. ​People inspire people describes how villagers get inspired by tourists
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when they pick up plastic waste and inspires them to do the same. Additionally, the villagers also
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enjoy sharing information and inspiring others. ​Strong community drive focuses on their hopes and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dreams for the village. It is an internal desire for the villagers to see their community evolve and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
develop and they wish to create a sustainable future for the next generations. 
 
These two clusters are actions villagers do because they want to and there is an internal motivation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
This is contrary to extrinsic motivation, where there will be negative tangible consequences if they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
don’t manage their plastic waste. 
Extrinsic motivation 
The two clusters; ​Ecotourism as a financial driver ​and ​Health concerns​, represent the extrinsic
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
motivation in the villagers. ​Ecotourism as a financial driver describes how villagers can lose a source
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
of income by not managing their plastic waste. The presence of the tourists indirectly forces the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
villagers to manage the plastic waste because if they choose not to, fewer tourists will visit the village.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Health concerns describe the extrinsic motivation of the villagers not managing their plastic waste as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their children, family or community might get sick from the plastic waste clogging up in waterways or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
as a consequence of direct contact with it. 
  
Both clusters have negative consequences if the villagers do not manage their waste, and this is what
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
identifies them as extrinsic motivations. 
 
Both the intrinsic and extrinsic motivation are feelings and behaviours that exist in the villagers but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
due to the villagers limited resources and fear of losing family members because of poor waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management, extrinsic motivation is the main driver for waste management in Koh Phdao. 
 
62 
==PAGE:72==
DIMENSION 2: DEPENDENCY 
The second dimension is dependency. This dimension emerged from the cluster ​Being dependent on
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
others​. When looking at the other clusters, I found that in some ways the villagers are very dependent
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on others but in other ways they are independent (Figure 4.5). 
 
 
Figure 4.5. Dependency dimension 
 
 
Independent 
The two clusters; ​Strong community drive and ​Towards circular economy represent the independent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behaviour within the villagers. ​Strong community drive ​describes that the villagers are independent
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
because they are good at sharing knowledge and passing on advice to each other. They are also good
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
at helping each other so in that sense they are independent. The aspect of ​Towards circular economy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where the villagers are independent is in regards to the informal recycling system. The villagers can
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sell their plastic bottles to a buyer on the mainland and can thereby minimise the amount of plastic
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bottles they need to burn. The villagers are not dependent on others to do these actions for them. 
 
Dependent 
The three clusters; ​Ecotourism as a financial driver, Being dependent on others ​and ​The power of
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
governance represent the dependant behaviour within the villagers. ​Ecotourism as a financial driver
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
describes how the villagers are dependent on tourists to visit their village to earn a source of income.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Being dependent on others describes how the villagers are dependent on tourists, NGOs and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
governments to provide them with advice on how to manage their plastic waste or development
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
projects. 
  
The power of governance is more indirect and not something the villagers think about in their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
everyday life. However, the villagers are dependent on companies to start developing new business
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
models that include solutions on how to manage plastic waste or simply substitute plastic with another
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
material. Lastly, if the government implements some regulations e.g. making Cambodia plastic free or
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other initiatives that will reduce or make reusing or recycling of plastic waste more accessible, it will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
relieve the amount of plastic waste in the community. In that way, the villagers are dependent on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
companies and the government to create the change so it will be easier for them to manage their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic waste. 
 
The independent and dependent clusters exist - more or less - in all the villagers, but currently the
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dependent clusters are the most dominant in the villagers. 
 
63 
==PAGE:73==
REVEALING FOUR MINDSETS 
Next step is to connect the two dimensions that will create four quadrants resulting in four mindsets.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
As explained previously, the four mindsets are not four different types of people or personalities but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
are more four states of mind that a villager can experience (Figure 4.6). 
 
 
 
Figure 4.6. Four mindsets 
 
 
The four mindsets will be described in further detail on the next page. 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
==PAGE:74==
Mindset 1: Independent and passionate 
The first mindset describes a villager that is independent and driven by intrinsic motivation. This
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mindset is the most sustainable one of the four. With this mindset, the villagers know how to solve
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community challenges and do not have concerns about money or health but are driven by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community and getting inspired and inspiring each other. 
Mindset 2: Passionate but dependent on others 
The second mindset describes a villager that is driven by intrinsic forces but still dependent on others
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for community development. This mindset is less sustainable because being dependent on others
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
leaves the villagers in a waiting position where they cannot do community-led development. On the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
positive side, this mindset is more focused on helping the community and inspiring others and less on
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
money and health concerns.  
Mindset 3: Problem-solving oriented yet concerned 
The third mindset describes a villager that is independent and driven by extrinsic motivation. The
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
villagers are independent to the extent of being able to find solutions to challenges in the community
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
but they are unable to find solutions on how to generate more income and how to manage their plastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
waste. It is when a solution to this is found that the villagers will start to focus on intrinsic motivation. 
Mindset 4: Concerned and vulnerable 
The fourth mindset describes a villager that is dependent on others and driven by extrinsic motivation.
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This mindset is the least desired mindset because the villagers are scared and concerned if they have
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
enough money and if their family will get sick. Furthermore, the villagers are dependent on tourists to
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
provide an income, NGOs to provide community development and the government to implement
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic waste regulations. Having this mindset leaves the villagers vulnerable and helpless.  
 
 
The four mindsets describe different states of mind where some of the mindsets are less desired than
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
others. The next page will describe which mindset the vision will target. 
 
65 
==PAGE:75==
CHOOSING DIRECTION 
The four mindsets show different states of mind in the villagers. The mindsets that are the least
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
desired are ​Mindset 3 and ​Mindset 4 which operate on extrinsic motivation. The villagers are already
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
very driven by extrinsic motivation due to their low income and health concerns. ​Mindset 1 ​and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Mindset 2 both focus on intrinsic motivation but one mindset is independent and the other is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dependent. ​Mindset 2 is focused on being dependent on others for development which is not a
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
sustainable mainset. The context statement will therefore aim to make ​Mindset 1: Independent and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
passionate ​a more predominant mindset within the villagers (Figure 4.7). The intrinsic motivation
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should be more present than it is now by the villagers being passionate about inspiring each other and
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tourists and passionate and driven by community-led development. The villagers should become more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
independent by learning how to manage their plastic waste and thereby being less dependent on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
external forces for obtaining advice and development. 
  
It is important to state that when focusing on one mindset, it does not mean that the other mindsets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will disappear. By making ​Mindset 1: Independent and passionate predominant, the aim is for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
other mindsets to become less dominant over time. 
 
 
Figure 4.7. Choosing the desired mindset 
 
The following page will present the context statement created for the domain ‘Managing plastic waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in rural Cambodia’ in 2025. 
66 
==PAGE:76==
VISION 
Multiple context statements were generated in the process of finding the appropriate context statement
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the domain ‘Managing plastic waste in rural Cambodia’ (A4.5).  
 
By focusing on ​Mindset 1: Independent and passionate​, the context statement will target to make the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
villagers more independent and driven by intrinsic motivation. Tromp & Hekkert (2019, p. 75) state
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that the context statement should describe the following: 
 
1.
The behaviour you wish to support through design 
2.
What the social implications of this behaviour are and how those implications address or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contend with collective concerns 
3.
What meaning this behaviour has (or will have) for people and why this is the case in light of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
any individual concerns 
 
In the following three paragraphs, I will describe the desired behaviour, the social implications of the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
behaviour and the meaning the behaviour will have for the villagers 
1. Behaviour 
Through research, I have found that recycling plastic waste is an unsustainable practice. It postpones
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
the inevitable fate of plastic waste which is incineration, landfill or ending in the environment. In this
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
project, recycling has been identified as the process where material is heated to form a new product.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
This is the process that leads to the downgrading of plastic. Therefore, I have chosen to scope the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
behaviour to; The villagers shall reduce or reuse plastic waste. 
2. Social implications 
Due to the villagers burning plastic waste and having health concerns, one of the social implications is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
to improve public health. Furthermore, the villagers wish to keep the environment clean of plastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste due to multiple reasons that are; protecting the environment, keeping the children from touching
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the plastic and ensuring tourists will continue to visit Koh Phdao. Therefore, the second social
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implication is to minimise the environmental burden that plastic waste presents in Koh Phdao. 
3. Meaning 
The aim is for villagers to become more independent and to be more driven by intrinsic motivation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The pathway to gaining more independence can happen through gaining creative confidence. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
means to have the confidence to share ideas, create projects and to not be afraid of failure (Kelley &
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Kelley 2012). Due to the villagers being educated by ‘read and repeat’, the villagers are not supported
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in being creative. The behaviour should support this. Furthermore, the villagers should experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accomplishment. Accomplishment will be experienced when inspiring people and helping the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community. Accomplishment will also lead to creative confidence which leads to more independence. 
 
With all the elements of the context statement covered, they will now be integrated creating the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
context statement which can be found on the next page. 
67 
==PAGE:77==
CONTEXT STATEMENT 
 
 
To improve public health and minimise the environmental burden that plastic waste presents in rural 
Cambodia, I want villagers to experience accomplishment when reducing or reusing plastic waste 
whilst gaining more independence and creative confidence 
 
Definitions 
Accomplishment 
The villagers should be driven by a sense of intrinsic motivation. In this project, intrinsic motivation is
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
defined as inspiring and helping each other in the community. When the villagers are able to inspire
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
people (other villagers and tourists) and help the community (keeping the community clean and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contributing to development) they will experience a sense of accomplishment. 
More independence 
Through learning how to reduce and reuse their plastic waste, the villagers and the community will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
gain more independence. This should lead the villagers to be less dependent on others for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development and especially in regards to plastic waste management. 
Creative confidence 
The concept should encourage the villagers to start thinking creatively and to be confident that they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can find their own solutions to local challenges i.e. community driven development. By gaining
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creative confidence, the villagers will also gain more independence. 
 
The context statement will be used as the vision for the domain and timeframe ‘Managing plastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste in rural Cambodia’ in 2025. 
 
 
Next step is to describe the vision into further detail by adding interaction qualities, design qualities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and design requirements. This will be described in the next chapter; ​Chapter 5: Detailing the Vision​. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 
==PAGE:78==
 
Chapter 5: 
DETAILING THE VISION 
 
69 
==PAGE:79==
DETAILING THE VISION 
After creating the context statement, the next step in the process is defining what the relationship
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between the villagers and the design should embody. These are called interaction qualities. Moreover,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an analogy for the interaction will be identified to better understand the relationship. With guidance
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
from the analogy, design qualities will be identified and lastly, the design constraints and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements will be described. 
INTERACTION QUALITIES 
The interaction between the villagers and the design should be characterised by: 
Accomplishment 
The villagers should be driven primarily by a sense of intrinsic motivation and less by extrinsic
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
motivation. The intrinsic motivation is defined as feeling inspired or inspiring other people and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
wanting to help the community and fellow villagers. The extrinsic motivation is characterised by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
money and health concerns. By focusing on intrinsic motivation, the villagers should feel pulled
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
towards the design and less pushed towards the design by extrinsic motivation. By acting on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
intrinsic motivation, the villagers should feel accomplished.  
Exploration 
Exploration should spark a sense of curiosity in the villagers. It should provide the villagers with
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
choices and possibilities and should keep the villagers interested and engaged when interacting with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the design. Exploration alongside accomplishment can lead to gaining creative confidence. 
Personal development 
People seek personal development to gain more independence in their life. It might be acquiring a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
new set of skills. It might be learning something new about yourself or educating yourself. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
options are endless. For this interaction, it is important that the villagers experience internal
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development coherent with the development of the design. 
Community development 
A desire from the villagers is to see their community blossom and develop. Therefore, the interaction
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
should allow for community development when the villagers engage with the design. Community
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development will provide the villagers with a more sustainable future. 
 
 
 
70 
==PAGE:80==
ANALOGY 
To get a clearer understanding of the interaction between the villagers and the design, an analogy for
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the interaction has been identified. The analogy will afterwards help generate the design qualities.  
The ‘student-teacher relationship’ analogy 
 
 
Image 5.1. Student-teacher relationship 
 
 
The interaction between the villagers and design can be seen as the relationship between a student and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
teacher. The student is an analogy for the villagers and the teacher is an analogy for the design.  
 
The student can be receptive but might also need that little extra understanding of why it is important
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
to be in school. The student wants to learn and develop her personal skills and wants to explore her
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
strengths and what she is good at.  
 
The teacher is kind, inspirational, passionate, wise and structured. She wants to help her students
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
achieve their goals and push them beyond what they believe they are capable of. A good teacher is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
also fun and makes learning interesting and engaging. 
 
The relationship between the student and the teacher is defined by the four interaction qualities:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accomplishment, exploration, personal development and community development. A student’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experience of ​accomplishment through a teacher can be triggered by tangible factors such as grades
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
but also intangible factors such as feeling understood and acknowledged as an individual. A teacher
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
helps you to ​explore your strengths and helps you gain new ones. A teacher helps you develop on a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
personal level by educating you in more ways than one. Lastly, a teacher helps the class to ​develop as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
a community​ by doing group projects and thereby learning and developing together.  
71 
==PAGE:81==
DESIGN QUALITIES 
The design qualities have been generated by using the teacher personality characteristic as inspiration
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for what the design qualities should be. 
 
The design should be: 
Inspirational 
By having an inspirational design, it should lead the villagers to feel curious and wanting more. An
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inspirational design should inspire the villagers to generate their own ideas on how to reduce and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reuse plastic waste.  
Supportive 
The design should support the villagers by guiding them through the experience when interacting with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the design. A supportive and guiding design will make the villagers feel safe. It will also support the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
villagers when exploring the design space and beyond. With a supportive design there is room for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
doing something new and different that might not have been possible prior to implementing the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design. 
Inclusive 
The villagers need to feel as they are a part of the design. The design should be an extension of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community and make the villagers feel social acceptance when interacting with the design. An
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
inclusive design should also make it more comfortable and natural for the villagers to interact with the
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
design. 
Wise 
The design should aim at facilitating the sharing of knowledge and should be designed in a smart way
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
that embraces this. Emerging from Buddhism and the monks, knowledge sharing is already an
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
important part of the villagers’ way of living and engaging with others. They wish to leave a legacy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
full of knowledge and learnings and the design should do the same. 
 
 
 
 
72 
==PAGE:82==
DESIGN CONSTRAINTS 
The SID method does not include design constraints and requirements but due to the context being
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
complex and different from a developed country, there are some essential constraints and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
requirements that need to be included so the design will be appropriate for Koh Phdao.  
APPROPRIATE TECHNOLOGY 
According to Murphy, McBean & Farahbakhsh (2009, p. 160), there are 10 appropriate technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considerations to take into account when designing in developing countries. The purpose of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considerations is to ensure that the design will be appropriate for the context it is developed for. If a
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
design is appropriate it is more likely to be successful and sustainable. The 10 considerations for
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appropriate technology are: 
 
1. 
Meet the basic needs of the users 
6. 
Sustainability 
2. 
Sound technology 
7. 
Encourages local participation 
3. 
Flexible technology 
8. 
Culturally/socially appropriate 
4. 
Meet local capabilities 
9. 
Gender consideration 
5. 
Affordability 
10. 
Appropriate technology transfer mechanisms 
 
The 10 considerations will all be taken into account during the design process to ensure that a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
sustainable and appropriate concept will be developed. The two considerations ​Meet local capabilities
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and ​Affordability​ lead to the following constraints. 
 
The design is constrained by: 
No access to on-grid electricity 
Koh Phdao does not have an on-grid electricity network and has a limited amount of electricity on the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
island powered by small solar panels and car batteries.  
Location 
Koh Phdao is one of four villages located on an island 30-45 minutes boat trip to the mainland. There
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
aren’t any bridges connected to the island so the only way to reach Koh Phdao is by longboat. 
Transportation means 
There are no cars in Koh Phdao. The primary means of transportation is by scooter, bicycle or foot. 
Cost 
The villagers have a daily income of 1.75-2.00 USD so appropriate pricing is essential for the design
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
to be successful.  
73 
==PAGE:83==
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
The design requirements have been identified through the clusters and the design constraints. 
 
The design shall: 
Not pollute air or contaminate water 
The design aims to improve public health and minimise the environmental burden that plastic waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
presents in rural Cambodia. Therefore the design shall not generate air pollutants or contaminate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
water sources. 
Not recycle plastic waste 
Through the cluster ​Towards circular economy​, it has been identified that recycling plastic waste is a
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
short-term solution and will eventually lead to burning plastic waste. Therefore, the design shall not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
recycle plastic waste. 
Operate without the supply of on-grid electricity 
Due to the villagers of Koh Phdao not having access to on-grid electricity, the design shall operate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
without the supply of on-grid electricity. If the design needs electricity it should be powered by solar
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
power. 
Only use local resources 
Through the cluster ​Dependent on others it was identified that Koh Phdao is dependent on others for
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
development. For this reason, it is important that the villagers are able to operate and maintain the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
design by use of local resources only. Local resources are defined as resources that can be found in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sambou district. 
Be transportable on sand, dirt and by longboat 
Because of Koh Phdao’s location and road infrastructure, the design shall be possible to transport on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
sand, dirt and by a longboat. 
 
 
The next page will present the full vision including the context statement, interaction and design
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
qualities and design requirements. The next chapter, ​Chapter 6: Concept​, will present the concept
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
developed for the vision. The context statement will from this point be referred to as the vision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 
==PAGE:84==
 
VISION 
CONTEXT STATEMENT 
To improve public health and minimise the environmental burden that plastic waste presents in 
rural Cambodia, I want villagers to experience accomplishment when reducing or reusing plastic 
waste whilst gaining more independence and creative confidence 
 
INTERACTION QUALITIES 
Accomplishment 
Exploration 
Personal development 
Community development 
DESIGN QUALITIES 
Inspirational 
Supportive 
Inclusive 
Wise 
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
Shall not pollute air and contaminate water 
Shall not recycle plastic waste 
Shall operate without the supply of on-grid electricity 
Shall only use local resources 
Shall be transportable on sand, dirt and by longboat 
 
 
 
 
 
75 
==PAGE:85==
 
Chapter 6: 
CONCEPT 
 
76 
==PAGE:86==
CONCEPT 
The vision has now been detailed including interaction and design qualities and design requirements.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Next step is to develop a concept that aligns with the vision.  
 
Several ideas have been developed through brainstorming (A6.1). After brainstorming the ideas were
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
combined into concepts and weighed against each other according to how well they aligned with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vision (A6.2; A6.3). The concept that aligned with the vision the best was a hybrid of three concepts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(A6.4).  
 
The development of the concept has been an iterative process where the concept has continued to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
developed and improved by adjusting the concept to feedback provided by stakeholders and experts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
on the topic. The stakeholders and experts consulted were: 
 
●
Khoun Tola, Business Program Manager at CRDT (A6.5) 
●
Raksmey Tem, Cambodian resident living in a rural Cambodian village (A6.6) 
●
Tanja Rosenquist, Design engineer with experience from working in Cambodia (A6.7) 
 
 
This chapter will now present the proposed concept and its anticipated benefits for ‘Managing plastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste in rural Cambodia’ in 2025 as well as presenting how the concept aligns with the vision. 
 
 
77 
==PAGE:87==
PLASTIC WASTE SYSTEM 
The concept developed for Koh Phdao is a locally managed plastic waste system (PW system) that
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will reduce and reuse plastic waste in the community. The system consists of the following three
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
components (Figure 6.1): 
 
●
System component 1: Plastic Waste Bank 
A plastic waste collection service where plastic waste will be stored at a Plastic Waste Bank 
●
System component 2: Women’s workshop 
A workshop for local women to reuse plastic waste for community projects and souvenirs 
●
System component 3: Pay by weight 
A business opportunity for the local shop to reduce plastic sachets in the community 
 
The figure shows how the system’s actors interact with one another and how the plastic waste (red
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
arrow) and money (yellow arrow) flows through the system. The essential activities and products
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(green arrow) are also illustrated and described. ​Koh Phdao community includes all of the actors in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
dotted grey line and the grey filled circles illustrate the three system components. 
 
 
Figure 6.1. The PW system 
 
 
In the following sections, the system components will be described in further detail. 
 
 
78 
==PAGE:88==
SYSTEM COMPONENT 1:  
PLASTIC WASTE BANK 
 
Figure 6.2. Plastic Waste Bank 
 
The first component of the system is the ​Plastic Waste Bank (PWB) (Figure 6.2). The PWB will be
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
managed by two Plastic Waste Ambassadors (PWA). The PWA are local women who are passionate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and motivated to manage a PW system that revolves around keeping the community clean and reusing
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic waste. Having motivated and passionate PWA is essential for the system to be successful as
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they will be the ongoing owners of the PW system.  
 
The PWA collect plastic waste from the tourism centre, school, pagoda and households on a daily
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
basis. The tourism centre, school and pagoda are central and busy areas in the community and by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collecting plastic waste at the school, it will educate children on how to dispose of their plastic waste
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
properly.  
 
Households will gather their plastic waste into the plastic waste bin exactly the same way as they do
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
now. Plastic waste will be collected all year round. It will be cleaned (if needed), separated and stored
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
at the PWB which will be located next to the tourism centre.  
 
The system is funded through a weekly collection fee of 0.50 USD paid by the households. By paying
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the weekly collection fee, the households will get their plastic waste collected once a week and 10%
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
of the payment will go towards community development projects such as improving the local
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
infrastructure.  
 
 
79 
==PAGE:89==
The PWA’s salary will be 130 USD/month and they will work Monday-Friday, 6 hours per day. By
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
working 6 hours per day, the women will still have free time to spend with their families. The PWA’s
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
salary has been calculated according to the hourly minimum wage for Cambodia in 2020 (A6.8).  
WASTE SYSTEM ELEMENTS 
Household separation 
The 115 bins that have been donated to Koh Phdao by CRDT will continue to be used for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collection of plastic waste (Image 6.1). Most villagers already use these so there will be no behaviour
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
change required from most villagers. Not all households have a plastic waste bin so those who do not
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can use their neighbour’s plastic waste bin to dispose of their own plastic waste. 
 
A challenge with the plastic waste bins is that they are difficult to empty because of their high weight
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
and round shape. The households will therefore be provided with textile bags for their plastic waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bins which will make the PWA’s job more ergonomically efficient when collecting the plastic waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Image 6.2).  
 
             
 
                   Image 6.1. Plastic waste bin                        Image 6.2. Large textile bag for plastic waste 
 
Collection and transport 
The PWA will daily collect plastic waste, Monday to Friday, from 28 households and the tourism
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
centre, school and pagoda. This will add up to all households getting their plastic waste collected once
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a week.  
 
The PWA will transport the plastic waste in a cart. A cart is already available for use in Koh Phdao so
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
there will be no need to purchase on the mainland. By adding sheets of wood to the sides and a hinged
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
door in the front, the cart will be transformed into the PW system’s collection cart (Figure 6.3). By
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adding sides it will prevent collected plastic waste from polluting the environment and increase
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
transportation efficiency.  
80 
==PAGE:90==
 
Figure 6.3. PW system collection cart 
 
The PWA will be provided with gloves, pick-up tools, hats and disinfection gel to create a safe and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
healthy working environment. 
PWB separation 
When returning with the plastic waste to the PWB, the PWA will separate the plastic waste into four
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
categories (Figure 6.4): 
 
●
Bottles 
●
Soft plastics 
●
Hard plastics 
●
Other plastics 
 
 
 
Figure 6.4. Plastic categories 
 
The main type of plastic waste that Koh Phdao generates are ​Bottles, Soft plastics and Hard plastics
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which can all be reused for community projects and souvenirs. Other plastic wastes they generate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
include medical or sanitary products that cannot be reused. This type of plastic waste can be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dangerous to both individuals and the environment so it will therefore all be collected together in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
category ​Other plastics​.  
 
81 
==PAGE:91==
If required, soap and water will be used to clean the plastic waste from the three categories; ​Bottles,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Soft plastics ​and ​Hard plastics​. As Koh Phdao is located in the Mekong River, which is already
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
substantially polluted, efforts will be done to minimise the amount of cleaning products entering the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
river by cleaning the dirty plastic in bulk. After cleaning the plastic waste, it will be placed to dry in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
the sun. If it is a windy day the plastic waste will be washed the next day to prevent the plastic waste
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
from blowing away and polluting the environment. 
 
The plastic waste will be separated into large textile bags identical to the ones provided to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
households so it will be easy to move the plastic waste in the PWB when it is needed for the second
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
system component, ​Women’s workshop​. Furthermore, by packing the plastic waste in textile bags the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
soft plastics can be densely compressed  allowing for a greater  total storage volume  in the PWB. 
Storage 
The plastic waste will be stored at the PWB located next to the tourism centre (Figure 6.5). This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
location has been chosen because there is an empty building that is currently not being used next to
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the tourism centre and it will also be visible for tourists to see as soon as they arrive at Koh Phdao.
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
The PWB will be an indoors storage space preventing the plastic waste from getting wet during rainy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
periods. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.5. Plastic Waste Bank location 
 
 
The final setup of the PWB will be developed with the PWA to ensure the most optimal working and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
storage conditions. The tools and materials needed for the PWB inventory can be found in appendix
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(A6.9). 
 
82 
==PAGE:92==
SYSTEM COMPONENT 2:  
WOMEN’S WORKSHOP 
 
Figure 6.6. Women’s workshop 
 
The second component of the system is a ​Women’s workshop facilitated by the PWA where local
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
women (workshop women (WW)) together with the PWA will reuse plastic waste for community
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
projects and souvenirs that can be sold to tourists (Figure 6.6). Tourists can support through a paid
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
engagement experience with the WW to learn how to reuse plastic waste. This system’s component
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will provide the community with a solution on how to reuse their plastic waste in a way that will not
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
need any electricity, will not pollute the environment and which will create a community for local
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
women to be socially and economically empowered. 
 
For community projects, plastic waste will be used to make ecobricks that can be used to build
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community flower beds (Image 6.3; Image 6.4).  
 
83 
==PAGE:93==
        
            
 
                         Image 6.3. Ecobrick                               Image 6.4. Flower bed made of ecobricks 
 
 
The ecobrick has been chosen because of the following reasons: 
 
●
Ecobricks reuses bottles and soft plastics which is the main source of plastic waste they have 
in Koh Phdao 
●
No need for electricity 
●
Simple and easy process to learn 
●
It can be used as a building material which can be used for community projects 
●
When making ecobricks it allows for the PWA and WW to engage with each other during the 
process 
 
The plastic waste souvenirs can take any shape or form. Soft plastics can be used for purses or if the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
WW are good at painting they can use the inside of a plastic bag as their canvas. Hard plastics can be
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used to create bowls or planters that can be decorated (Image 6.5). The WW can use their creativity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and use their strengths to find ways on how to reuse plastic waste for souvenirs. Creating a sellable
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
souvenir will be difficult and will take time. Initially it is proposed to create many different types of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
souvenirs and from offering tourists a variety of souvenirs, it will reveal what the tourists are the most
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interested in purchasing.  
 
 
Image 6.5. Plastic bottle planters 
84 
==PAGE:94==
Souvenirs have been chosen because of the following reasons: 
 
●
To create economic growth in the community 
●
To encourage the women to explore their creativity 
●
To give tourists the option to leave with a special memory from their trip to Koh Phdao 
 
The workshop is a place for the women to engage with each other, make community projects and
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
souvenirs and to share their creative ideas on what they think plastic waste can be reused for. There
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be set time aside for a brainstorming session during the workshop where the women can share
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their ideas on how to reuse plastic waste. This will lead to them gaining a more creative mindset and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
feel empowered. The aim of the workshop is to empower the women in the community and strengthen
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
their bond with each other. The workshop will create a support system for the women in addition to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
providing a pathway to economic empowerment by selling souvenirs to tourists.  
 
The workshops will be held twice a month during the dry season (November-April). This has been
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
chosen because the villagers are occupied with rice farming during the wet season. Moreover, by only
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
having the workshops during the dry season, enough plastic waste will be collected during the wet
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
season to be used for community projects and souvenirs.  
During the dry season, men and the youth leave the island to seek work which leaves the children,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
women and elderly with spare time on their hands when not hosting tourists. This time can therefore
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be used to participate in the workshops.  
 
The ​Women’s workshop will as mentioned offer engagement experiences for the tourists where they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
can make ecobricks and flower beds together with the WW. This will be a contribution to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Ecotourism engagement experiences that already exists in Koh Phdao. This experience will be a good
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
way for the WW and the tourists to engage with each other and for the WW to show the tourists how
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
to reuse plastic waste. The tourists will pay for this experience which will go towards community
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
development. The price of the engagement experience has yet to be determined. This will be a part of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
further work. 
When the tourists leave Koh Phdao, they can buy a souvenir made by the WW. This will be a good
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
way for the tourists to remember Koh Phdao. There are currently no souvenirs to be purchased in Koh
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Phdao so there will be a new market for this. 
 
The workshops will consist of five WW and two PWA. The WW will be paid 6 USD per workshop
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
they participate in. This is the equivalent daily salary to the PWA’s (A6.8). Tools and materials from
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the PWB inventory will be used in the workshops (A6.9). 
 
 
85 
==PAGE:95==
PROTOTYPING 
Ecobricks 
The organisation WasteAid has created a step-by-step guide on how to make ecobricks and how to use
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
them for both vertical and horizontal use (Image 6.6; Image 6.7) (A6.10). 
 
 
             
 
               Image 6.6. Vertical ecobricks                                    Image 6.7. Horizontal ecobricks 
 
Few villagers can speak and read English so a translator will help translate the guide into Khmer so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the PWA will be able to understand it. 
 
To get an understanding of the physical requirements that it takes to make an Ecobrick, I quickly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
found out how tough it is on the hands to both hold the bottle and packing the bottle with a bamboo
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
stick (Image 6.8).  
 
 
Image 6.8. Making the first Ecobrick 
 
86 
==PAGE:96==
I found that by using a cloth around the bamboo stick as a grip, my hands did not hurt afterwards.
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Switching between standing and sitting positions and fixating the bottle also felt the most
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ergonomically correct (Image 6.9). It is therefore proposed for the WW and PWA to fixate the bottle,
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
use a cloth as a grip and switch between standing and sitting position when making the ecobricks. 
 
 
Image 6.9. Applying new methods when making Ecobrick 
Souvenirs 
Through prototyping, I have made a simple purse of plastic by turning a plastic bag inside out (Image
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
6.10). I added some pink plastic to the bottom and wrote happiness in Khmer in the middle. The top is
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
sealed with three small pieces of velcro. This is an example of how plastic waste can be used for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
souvenirs. As mentioned, the WW and the PWA will need to spend time on exploring which
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
souvenirs that the tourists will be the most interested in. 
 
 
Image 6.10. Plastic waste purse prototype 
87 
==PAGE:97==
SYSTEM COMPONENT 3:  
PAY BY WEIGHT 
 
 
Figure 6.7. Pay by weight 
 
 
The final system component, ​Pay by weight​, will aim to reduce the number of plastic waste sachets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
generated in the community. Due to many villagers lacking resources to buy larger amounts of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shampoo, conditioner and shower gel, they are currently buying small, non-reusable plastic sachets.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To discourage households from buying sachets they need to have another option. This is where the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
local shop will make its contribution to the system (Figure 6.7). The shop owner will purchase big
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bottles of shampoo, conditioner and bars of soap which the shop owner will sell by weight to the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
villagers (Image 6.11; Image 6.12). The villagers will either bring their own container or get a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
reusable container from the shop. The shop will receive these containers from the PWA.  
 
88 
==PAGE:98==
        
     
 
   Image 6.11. Pay by weight (shampoo/conditioner)                Image 6.12 Pay by weight (soap) 
 
This solution will make it more affordable for the villagers to buy shampoo, conditioner and soap
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
instead of sachets. Not only will it reduce the number of plastic waste sachets in the community but it
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
will also save the villagers money without impacting the shop owner’s profit. The shop owner will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provided with a calculator and a scale to be able to weigh and calculate the prices for shampoo,
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
conditioner and soap. 
PRICING 
The shop owner is currently making a 33% profit on selling shampoo, conditioner and shower gel
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sachets. It will be proposed to raise the profit to 50% so there is a financial incentive for the shop
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
owner to implement the Pay by weight products. It will remain cheaper for the villagers to buy
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shampoo, conditioner and soap by weight even though the shop owner gains more profit. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following table will compare the sachet prices to the pay by weight prices (Table 6.1). The sachets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contain 6 ml of shampoo, condition or shower gel. To be able to compare the prices, the pay by
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weight price will be for 6 g of shampoo, condition and soap. 
 
 
 
Sachets (6 ml) (USD/KHR) 
Pay by weight (6 g) (USD/KHR) 
Shampoo & conditioner 
0.13/500 
0.07/292 
Soap 
0.13/500 
0.05/180 
Table 6.1. Sachets and Pay by weight comparison 
 
 
The table shows that the pay by weight is cheaper. With pay by weight, shampoo and conditioner is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
approximately 40% cheaper and soap  is approximately 60% cheaper compared to sachets. 
 
89 
==PAGE:99==
To make it easier for the shop owner to calculate the prices for shampoo, conditioner and soap the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
villagers will pay per 10 g they buy. The prices for shampoo, conditioner and soap are (Table 6.2): 
 
 
 
Pay by weight per 10 g (USD/KHR) 
Shampoo & conditioner 
0.13/500 
Soap 
0.08/300 
Table 6.2. Pay by weight product prices 
 
 
The villagers will pay the same price as they currently are paying for the shampoo and conditioner but
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will receive 66% more shampoo and conditioner. For soap they will save 40% of the price whilst
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
receiving 66% more soap. The pay by weight calculations can be found in appendix (A6.11). 
 
When implementing the pay by weight products, the shop owner will need to have some initial
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
training on how to calculate the price for each product. Because the products will be paid per 10 g
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
which is a very small amount, it will require the shop owner to be focused and precise when weighing
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
the products. If not the profit will be less than 50%. 
 
 
 
90 
==PAGE:100==
A WELL-INTEGRATED PW SYSTEM 
The three system components work as one big system which allows for the reduction and reuse of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic waste in Koh Phdao.  
 
An essential part of developing the concept has been to make the PW system appropriate for Koh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phdao. The literature has shown that a locally managed CBWMS in rural areas in developing
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
countries empowers communities and creates social, economic and environmental benefits.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Furthermore, the fieldwork has shown that due to Koh Phdao being isolated on an island and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
travel to the mainland is resource demanding, most villagers stay on the island which would make a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
centralised system inappropriate for Koh Phdao. Therefore, the PW system developed is locally
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
managed community-based. 
 
Additionally, it has been crucial to develop a PW system that uses as much of the local infrastructure
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as possible as well as build upon the strengths in the community to encourage local participation. As
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
found in the literature, community participation is one of the main challenges when implementing a
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
CBWMS. Because of this a strengths-based approach has been incorporated to enhance the possibility
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
of the PW system becoming a success as well as sustainable. The main strengths of Koh Phdao that
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have been incorporated into the concept have been the strong community bond, the ecotourism
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
business and the fact that Koh Phdao has two seasons one of which women have more time available.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the concept development phase, these strengths worked as the inspiration for the women’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workshop by focusing on empowering the local bond between the women as well as only having the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workshops during the dry season. Additionally, the workshops create plastic waste souvenirs as well
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
as creating engagement experiences for tourists which builds on the ecotourism business strength.  
 
Lastly, the pay by weight addresses the strength that Koh Phdao wants their community to develop.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Changing consumer behaviour can be difficult but due to the desire for development the pay by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weight system component was found appropriate for the local context. 
 
This resulted in a locally managed community-based PW system that is well-integrated into its local
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
context, uses local materials and resources, creates job opportunities for local women which will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encourage community participation as well as allow for community-led development. The PW system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will empower the community and lead to a sense of community independence as they will not be in a
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
holding pattern waiting for the government to solve their plastic waste challenges.  
 
 
91 
==PAGE:101==
THE NEW PLASTIC WASTE FLOW 
When comparing the current waste system that they currently have in Koh Phdao to the new PW
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system, it shows how the new PW system creates a simpler plastic waste flow where the only way to
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
dispose of plastic waste is into the plastic waste bins (Figure 6.8). The villagers will no longer have to
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
dispose of their plastic waste in an unsustainable way by burying, burning or disposing of it into the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
environment. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.8. Current system vs. the new PW system 
 
 
92 
==PAGE:102==
COMMUNITY BENEFITS 
The system will provide the community with many benefits that will create development in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community. The triple bottom line for sustainable development (social, environmental, economic) has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
been used to frame the benefits. 
Social 
●
Women empowerment:​ The PWA will be empowered by managing the system and the WW 
will be empowered through by creating community projects and souvenirs 
●
New support system: ​By having the Women’s workshop, the local women will make new
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
friendships and will gain a new support system among each other 
Environmental 
●
Awareness: ​By having bins at the tourism centre, school and pagoda it will create awareness 
for villagers and tourists  
●
Behaviour change: ​The children of Koh Phdao will learn from a young age where to dispose 
of their plastic waste and know that plastic waste can be reused 
●
Inspiring others: ​By implementing the PW system it can encourage and inspire other 
villages on the island and tourists to reduce and reuse their plastic waste 
Economic 
●
Job opportunities: ​Implementation of the PW system will lead to a monthly income for the 
PWA, a supplementary income for the WW and increased profit for the shop owner 
●
Saving money: ​The villagers will save money when buying shampoo, conditioner and 
shower gel by weight instead of in single-use plastic sachets 
●
Tourists: ​The PW system will create a new source of income for the community through 
engagement by attracting tourists with new engagement experiences and locally made 
souvenirs  
 
 
93 
==PAGE:103==
ALIGNING WITH THE VISION 
VISION 
To improve public health and minimise the environmental burden that plastic waste presents in rural 
Cambodia, I want villagers to experience accomplishment when reducing or reusing plastic waste 
whilst gaining more independence and creative confidence 
PUBLIC HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
Implementing the PW system reduces the need for individual households to manage their own plastic
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
waste. This will keep plastic waste from being burned and thereby improve public health. Because the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic waste will be placed in closed bins at households, collected by PWA and stored at the PWB,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the plastic waste will be kept out of the environment. This will minimise the environmental burden
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that plastic waste presents currently. Lastly, by introducing Pay by weight at the local shop, it will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
create awareness and long-term behavioural change where less single-use plastic is used. 
ACCOMPLISHMENT 
The villagers will experience a sense of accomplishment when sorting their plastic waste into the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic waste bin. By doing this the villagers will know that they are contributing to keeping the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community clean, minimising the amount of plastic waste being burned and providing plastic waste to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
be reused for community projects and souvenirs. 
The PWA will experience a sense of accomplishment by managing the system and facilitating the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workshops where they will inspire and teach the WW and tourists how to reuse plastic waste.  
The WW will experience a sense of accomplishment by seeing their community projects around the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community as well as making souvenirs that can be sold to tourists. 
MORE INDEPENDENCE 
The villagers will gain more independence by knowing how to reduce and reuse their plastic waste. In
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the future, the PWA can choose to manage other types of waste which will lead to further
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
independence. The system can also inspire other villages to implement a similar system which will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
lead to a sense of independence in other villages as well.  
CREATIVE CONFIDENCE 
The PWA and WW will gain creative confidence by sharing and exploring their ideas on how to reuse
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
plastic waste. The women will gain further creative confidence by seeing the community projects
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
come to life and selling their locally made souvenirs to tourists. The women’s creative confidence will
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
improve over time alongside with how many projects and souvenirs they make. 
 
 
The next chapter, ​Chapter 7: Implementation and operation plan​, will present the concept’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementation and operation plan. 
94 
==PAGE:104==
 
Chapter 7: 
IMPLEMENTATION & OPERATION PLAN 
95 
==PAGE:105==
IMPLEMENTATION & OPERATION PLAN 
The PW system including a detailed description of the three system components has now been
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
described. This chapter will focus on describing the PW system’s business strategy, a 5-year
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
implementation plan, budgeting, risk assessment and how the system will be monitored and evaluated.  
BUSINESS STRATEGY 
This section will describe the business strategy for the PW system. The desirability, feasibility and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
viability of the PW system will be described first. The Business Model Canvas has been utilised to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
describe these three elements (A7.1). Afterwards, it will describe how the PW system will include
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community engagement as a part of the business strategy.  
DESIRABILITY 
The value creation that villagers will gain from implementing the system will be: 
 
●
Improvement in public health 
●
A cleaner environment 
●
Community development 
●
Economic empowerment 
●
Expansion of ecotourism 
●
Women’s empowerment 
 
These values are directly connected to the aspirations that the villagers have for their community.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
They wish for their family and community to be of good health, the environment to be clean and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
beautiful and to see their community evolve for the common good. They wish for a higher income
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
which ecotourism will contribute to, in order for them to be able to provide for their families. The
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shared values of the community are aligned with the system design and these values will be further
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
encouraged by implementing the system. Through system implementation, Koh Phdao women will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
create a locally-owned and empowering community where they can feel accomplished, independent
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and gain creative confidence. 
FEASIBILITY 
Koh Phdao will be the first location for the implementation of the PW system. If the system is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
successful it will be implemented in other villages, starting with the three villages located on the same
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
island as Koh Phdao (Samphen, Kompong Kru Bei, Om Pel Terk). When implementing the system in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
other contexts, it is important to conduct market research to ensure that the system will be appropriate
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for these contexts. 
 
The key partners of the system are CRDT and the local shop owner. CRDT will help introduce the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system to the community and engage with tourists, and the local shop owner will partner with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PWA to reduce plastic waste by introducing pay by weight zero-waste shampoo, conditioner and soap
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
products.  
96 
==PAGE:106==
 
The key resources are:  
 
●
The PWB and its inventory 
●
The PWA 
●
The WW 
●
The shop owner 
 
As three of the four key resources are human resources, it is crucial that the people involved in the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system are engaged and motivated. 
VIABILITY 
The cost structure and revenue stream can be seen in the figure below (Figure 7.1). The revenue is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
gained from households and tourists. The costs consist of start-up costs and running costs. During the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
first 3 months after implementing the PW system, the households will not pay the weekly collection
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fee. This 3 month period allows for households to experience the benefits of the system prior to
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
paying for it. This strategy has been decided on after consulting with the Business Program Manager,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Khoun Tola from CRDT, regarding previous experiences with household payments for waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management. The previous challenge has been collecting the collection fee from the households
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which suggests that the community will need to experience the benefits of any new system prior to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
paying for it. 
 
 
Figure 7.1. Revenue stream and cost structure 
97 
==PAGE:107==
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT 
The business strategy recognises community engagement as an essential part of the system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementation. As mentioned previously, the primary challenge with implementing the system will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be collecting the weekly collection fee from the households. For voluntary compliance, the villagers
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will need to experience and be confident in the value that the PW system provides and this is why
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
community engagement is a crucial part of the implementation for the PW system to be successful. 
 
This section describes the process of engagement with the community, including how the system will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be introduced to the villagers, how a locally owned business contributes to community engagement,
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and how villagers will individually contribute to the system. 
The PW system presentation 
When introducing the system to the community, at least one woman from each household will be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
invited to join. Men and children will be invited and welcomed, but due to the system being run by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
women, the women’s participation is essential. The following will be presented at the presentation: 
  
●
The plastic waste challenge in Koh Phdao 
●
Describing the PW system 
●
Organic waste as an analogy for plastic waste to enhance the understanding of the system’s 
process 
●
The value creation of the PW system 
●
Job recruitment (PWA and WW) 
Organic waste analogy 
An important aspect of the presentation is for the villagers to accept and understand the PW system.
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organic waste has been identified as an analogy for plastic waste. In Koh Phdao, after having
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
harvested and eaten their meals, the villagers use the leftovers for animal feed and fertiliser so their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
organic waste is reused (Figure 7.3). This is analogous with the system’s reuse of plastic waste for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community projects and souvenirs (Figure 7.4).  
 
 
Figure 7.3. Reusing organic waste for animal feed and fertiliser 
98 
==PAGE:108==
 
Figure 7.4. Plastic waste reuse 
 
The analogy will contextualise the process of the PW system and create a feeling of relatability for the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
villagers given that they are familiar with reusing organic waste. This will make the villagers more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
likely to understand and embrace the PW system. 
A locally owned business 
An important outcome of the system is empowerment of the community, and women in particular.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Two full-time positions will be available for two motivated and passionate women to manage the PW
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
system (PWA). Five local women will be hired for the Women’s workshops during the dry season
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(WW). The local shop owner will earn an extra profit by introducing the Pay by weight system.  
 
Opportunities for local businesses and employment include: 
 
●
2 PWA who will earn a monthly salary 
●
5 WW who will be paid for each workshop they participate in 
●
1 shop owner with increased profits 
 
This creates livelihood opportunities for eight individuals in the community. 
The villagers’ contribution to the system 
Another aspect of community engagement is to provide the villagers with the possibility of customer
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feedback. Any complications or improvements suggested by villagers will be handled directly by the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PWA. The PWA will formally receive feedback on the system once every three months during weekly
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
collection. This will make the villagers feel included in the PW system and provide them with a sense
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
of ownership.  
 
Additionally, 10% of the weekly collection fee will go towards community development projects.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Villagers will be able to vote on their priority community projects at regular community meetings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
when community project options will be presented. 
99 
==PAGE:109==
5-YEAR IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
This section will describe the 5-year implementation plan for the PW system. The implementation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plan includes the essential steps towards implementing the PW system in Koh Phdao and a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
neighbouring village on the island, Koh Rongeav (Figure 7.6). 
 
 
Figure 7.6. 5-year implementation plan 
100 
==PAGE:110==
YEAR 0 
The first step towards implementing the PW system is getting the PW system approved for
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementation by the village chief and tourism chief. CRDT will help with communicating the PW
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system to the chiefs. If the system does not get the approval, a dialogue will be initiated to find a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
solution on how to make the system appropriate for the village. After reaching an agreement, funding
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be applied for. 
 
The next steps before implementing the system are (1) presenting the PW system to the community,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) recruiting employees, (3) training them and (4) setting up the system. These steps will all take
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
place during dry season where villagers will have time to participate in these activities.  
YEAR 1/2 
After approximately ½ year, the PW system will be ready for implementation. The first three months
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic waste collection will be free for the villagers. After these months the villagers will be able to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
give feedback on the system to the PWA. After 3 months of villagers paying the collection fee, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PWA will evaluate the first ½ year of managing and operating the system and will optimise the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system according to this. 
YEAR 1 
Women’s workshops will commence during dry season of Year 1. Tourists will be included from the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
following dry season so the WW will have time to learn how to make Ecobricks, souvenirs and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
establish a good bond between the PWA and WW. After the first season of Women’s workshops, the
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workshops will be evaluated and optimised for next season. 
YEAR 2 
The PWA will do market research in the three other villages on the island to see if there is a demand
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
for collecting plastic waste in the other villages.  
During Year 2, the Women’s workshop will open up for engagement experiences for tourists. After
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this season the workshops will be re-evaluated to see if tourists find working with plastic waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
interesting and, if not, how this could be made more appropriate for ecotourism. 
YEAR 3 
A PW system implementation handbook for rural communities will be developed. The handbook will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be distributed to NGOs that can implement the PW system in other rural communities in Cambodia or
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
similar contexts at different scales.  
YEAR 4 
The PW system will be extended to one of the three villages which have been assumed to be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approximately the same size as Koh Phdao. An additional PWA and five extra WW will be hired. It is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
assumed that after 3 years, the PWA will have enough experience to only need to hire one more PWA
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
101 
==PAGE:111==
to be able to manage the PW system all year round for two villages. The PWB in Koh Phdao will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
remain the only PWB and will store the plastic waste from both villages. The Women’s workshop will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
also remain in Koh Phdao where the new WW from the other village will attend the workshop with
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the WW from Koh Phdao. 
 
The PW system implementation in the last two villages on the island will be determined at a later
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
date. 
 
 
102 
==PAGE:112==
BUDGETING 
This section will describe the revenue stream and cost structure of the first five years of implementing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the PW system. In terms of financing, the first step towards implementing the PW system is to seek
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
funding. A 1600 USD grant will be applied for which will cover 3 months salary for the PWA, the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PW system inventory and the initial materials for the Women’s workshop.  
 
The first year of revenue includes the grant and 40 weeks of weekly collection fees from the 174
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
households in Koh Phdao. The costs include the PWA salary, WW’s salary, the PW system inventory,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Women’s workshop materials and savings towards community development projects. The savings
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
equal approximately 450 USD each year which is 10% of the 174 households’ collection fee payment.  
 
In the figure below, the revenue, cost and accumulated profits for the first five years have been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
illustrated (Figure 7.7). It is estimated that after the first year, the PW system will make a profit of 266
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
USD. In the second year, the accumulated profit is 710 USD. The profit is higher in the second year
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
because money will not be spent on the PW system inventory. The third year has the same revenue
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and cost as the second year reaching an accumulated profit of 1153 USD. During the fourth year, a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
new grant for 1600 USD will be sought for the purpose of extending the PW system to a neighbouring
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
village. The accumulated profits will be 3519 USD for this year . Lastly, after having the PW system
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
running in both Koh Phdao and the neighbouring village for two years, the accumulated profits will be
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6009 USD.  
 
 
Figure 7.7. 5-year budget plan 
 
The profits will be used by the PWA who will work on how the profit can be utilised to create more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
economic growth within the community. It can e.g. be used to open up a new PW system that can
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
103 
==PAGE:113==
manage the plastic waste in the two remaining villages on the island. Another solution could be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
supporting new local business ideas. 
 
The earnings from the tourists have not been included in the budget. Until it has been tested, it is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
uncertain how much tourists will pay for community engagement experiences and Women’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
workshop souvenirs, and the system should not necessarily rely on tourist profits to be able to operate.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Once operational, these earnings should be split between the WW and community development
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
projects. Allocation of tourism profits should be handled by the tourism chief and the PWA. 
 
The calculations for the 5-year budget plan can be found in the appendix (A7.2). 
 
 
 
104 
==PAGE:114==
RISK ASSESSMENT 
This section will outline barriers and risks for implementation, along with mitigation strategies.  
What if households do not pay the weekly collection fee? 
It is not guaranteed that all households will want to pay the weekly collection fee. This can be due to a
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
combination of having a low source of income and not being able to see the value that the system
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provides to the community. 
Risk mitigation 
It will continuously be emphasised to the villagers that 10% of the collection fee will go
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
towards community projects to provoke the intrinsic motivations in the villagers for wanting
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to see their community develop. Once community development projects are underway, there
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will be an incentive for the villagers to participate in the system. Lowered fees and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
scaled-back community projects could be implemented if resistance to payment is significant. 
What if there is too much plastic waste? 
Gross plastic waste accumulation in the village has yet to be discovered. What will happen if there is
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
too much plastic waste to be stored in the PWB? 
Risk mitigation 
If there is too much plastic waste, a temporary PWB will be located and used for storage.
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
There are some abandoned houses in Koh Phdao that can temporarily be used for storage until
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a new PWB has been built or located. 
What if there is not enough plastic? 
As mentioned above it is unknown how much plastic waste the villagers accumulate. A challenge can
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
prove itself if there is not enough plastic waste to be used for community projects and souvenirs.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Could this lead to villagers purchasing more plastic products? 
Risk mitigation 
Koh Phdao is one of four villages on the island, Koh Rongeav. If Koh Phdao does not have
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
enough plastic waste the PWA can explore the other villages or clean the environment to find
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
more plastic waste to use for community projects and souvenirs. 
What about the plastic waste that cannot be used for community 
projects or souvenirs? 
Some of the plastic waste in Koh Phdao consists of medical waste and in general there are other types
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
of plastic waste that can be difficult to reuse or can be dangerous to be in contact with. 
Risk mitigation 
Further research in Koh Phdao should be done to find a solution on how to dispose of this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste in a sustainable way. One solution can be to create a sanitary landfill away from the
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
households where the plastic waste can be buried.  
105 
==PAGE:115==
MONITOR AND EVALUATE 
This section will describe which Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) will help to monitor and evaluate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
the system which will determine if it is successful or not. The PWA will be in charge of monitoring
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and evaluating the four KPIs below. 
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
90% of households pay the weekly collection fee after 1 year 
The PW system is a success when 90% of the households pay the weekly collection fee after 1 year.
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
This will indicate the potential of a sustainable system where less plastic waste is burned and less
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic waste is disposed of into the environment. It indicates that the villagers see the value of the PW
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
system.  
School children use the plastic waste bins at school 
When the school children use the plastic waste bins, it will be an indicator of the beginning of a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
long-term behaviour change. This will mean from a young age children will be familiar with the
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
plastic waste bins and know the value of sorting the plastic waste.  
Plastic waste is used for community projects and souvenirs 
After having the first season of workshops, the PW system will be successful if the plastic waste has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
been used for community projects and souvenirs. This means that less plastic waste has been burned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and less plastic waste has been disposed of into the environment. If the plastic waste has not been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
used, new solutions on how to use it should be researched.  
Shop owner is still offering Pay by weight products after 1 year 
The idea behind introducing Pay by weight is to reduce the amount of plastic waste and more
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specifically plastic sachets in the community. If the shop owner after one year of selling Pay by
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
weight products is still selling them, it indicates that it has been a success. Furthermore, if the shop
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
owner has implemented Pay by weight to other products, it indicates that the amount of plastic waste
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sachets in the village has been reduced further. 
 
 
After having described the concept and its implementation and operation plan, the next step is to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
validate the concept. This will be presented in the next chapter: ​Chapter 8: Validation​, where three
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
experts with expertise in development, humanitarian engineering and sustainability have provided
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their feedback on the concept. 
 
 
106 
==PAGE:116==
 
Chapter 8: 
VALIDATION 
 
107 
==PAGE:117==
VALIDATION 
The previous two chapters, ​Chapter 6: Concept ​and ​Chapter 7: Implementation and operation plan​,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
have presented the locally managed PW system with its implementation and operation plan developed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for Koh Phdao village. This chapter will present the next step which is to validate the concept.  
 
Unfortunately, it has not been possible to get feedback from the PW system’s users, the villagers, as
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they live in rural Cambodia with limited access to the internet. Instead, three experts with expertise in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
development, humanitarian engineering and sustainability have been consulted and asked for their
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feedback on the PW system. All three experts either live or have lived in Cambodia.  
The three experts consulted are: 
 
●
Khoun Tola (KT), Business Program Manager at CRDT (A8.1) 
●
Tanja Rosenqvist (TR), Lecturer in Humanitarian Engineering at RMIT (A8.2) 
●
George Goddard (GG), Research, Learning and Influence Lead at EWB Australia (A8.3) 
 
The three experts have each been given a document with the vision for ‘Managing plastic waste in
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rural Cambodia’ in 2025, a description of the concept and its implementation and operation plan and a
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
feedback form with four questions.  
The four feedback questions asked were: 
 
●
Do you believe that the vision is appropriate for its context? 
●
What do you see as the strengths of the PW system? 
●
What do you see as the challenges of the PW system? 
●
Do you think that the PW system has the potential to be successful? Why/why not? 
 
The following section will present the three experts’ feedback. 
 
 
108 
==PAGE:118==
FEEDBACK 
VISION APPROPRIATENESS 
All three experts believe that the ​vision is appropriate​ for rural Cambodia.  
 
TR, however, ​questions if a vision concerning managing plastic waste in rural Cambodia should
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
include ‘independence’ and ‘creative confidence’​. TR writes: ‘I’m raising this question as a
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
provocation - to highlight that we (us in the ‘Western world’) tend to promote solutions that place
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
responsibility for basic public services such as water, sanitation, and solid waste management, on
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
communities and households in low-income countries, assuming that taking on such responsibility
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
will ‘empower’ them. Turning the same solution on ourselves – ​would we feel ‘independent’ and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
‘creative’, if we had to manage our own plastic waste?’ 
PW SYSTEM STRENGTHS 
All three experts mention ​empowerment of women as a strength. TR writes: ‘In Cambodia, women
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
are (broadly speaking) more concerned about and focused on the need to improve household and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community health and wellbeing than men. Development projects, especially those related to health,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
therefore often have women at the centre. This program will furthermore provide much needed
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
employment opportunities for women​, allowing them to become financially independent.’ GG
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
states that the PW system will also provide ​social opportunities for women ‘which should not be
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
undervalued.’ 
 
KT and GG both agree that the PW system will be ​beneficial for tourism​ in Koh Phdao. 
 
KT also writes that it is a very ​clear system that can ​easily be managed and operated locally and
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adds that the ​PWA’s salary​ ​is good​. 
 
The key strength of the PW system according to TR is ‘​the systemic perspective applied to this
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
highly complex challenge​. Rather than one simple solution, the PW system includes a range of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
stakeholders and activities that together seek to improve the reduction and reuse of plastic waste in
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Koh Phdao.’ TR also adds that an important strength is to ​monitor and evaluate the PW system as
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
this is ‘an essential part of any development plan.’  
PW SYSTEM CHALLENGES 
KT and TR believe that a main challenge will be ​local motivation and engagement​. KT writes that
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
local authority engagement is a challenge ‘as it is not their priority and their knowledge of plastic
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
waste is the same as villagers.’ Additionally, TR writes: ‘The long-term sustainability and success of
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concepts like this rely strongly on the interest and active engagement of community members and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
leaders. It requires community leaders who can and will champion the program, not just for a short
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
term but continuously, and it requires community members who are willing to take active part and
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
contribute to providing ongoing funding (to cover salaries).’ 
 
109 
==PAGE:119==
KT states as a challenge that ‘the system seems ​not to solve the root of the plastic waste which is
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
local education and the use of unnecessary plastic​’. Additionally, KT adds that there have not been
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any successful projects using ​Ecobricks in Cambodia which will make it ‘​hard to persuade villagers
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
to make it​.’ 
 
GG mentions that a challenge might be ​collecting the weekly collection fee as there can be ‘​issues
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with safety in some cases if women are seeking to collect fees from households where men may be
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
antipathetic.’ Additionally, GG adds that the ​weekly collection fee might need to be benchmarked
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘against existing fee collection for services in the community (in particular water).’  
PW SYSTEM’S POTENTIAL TO BECOME A SUCCESS 
All three experts believe that the PW system has the potential to become a success.  
 
KT believes this because it ​builds on the strengths of Koh Phdao’s tourism​. Villagers involved in
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
tourism are likely to engage with the PW system because they already receive an alternative income
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
through tourism and are aware that tourists want to see a clean environment. Additionally, KT adds
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
that there is a small ​market for selling plastic souvenirs which is good motivation. Lastly, KT
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
mentions that because villagers ​already have basic knowledge about waste management and the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
salary for the PWA is good​, it is more likely to become a success. 
 
TR thinks that the success of the PW system ‘​will depend largely on the willingness and interest of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
community leaders and community members to actively engage and contribute.​’ TR suggests to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
further develop the concept by engaging the community in evaluation and development of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
concept. Lastly, TR states: ‘Ultimately, it will be up to them whether the PW system will become a
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
success or not, and they should, therefore, be the ones to judge whether to implement it or not –
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
ideally, there would be strong community commitment to the project before applying for grant
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
funding.’ 
 
GG believes that the PW system is likely to succeed as it is ​‘well considered and challenges are
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
relatively light.​’ GG adds that he ‘​could see this scaling to other communities with ecotourism,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
islands or otherwise’ as many of the steps ‘address the realities on the island would transfer.’ Lastly,
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GG mentions that in contexts where the PW system can not be directly transferred, the ‘​vision would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
still be a useful reference point​ for refining and reimagining the system.’ 
 
 
After having received feedback on the PW system from three experts, the next step is to discuss and
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
conclude the project. This will be done in the next chapter: ​Chapter 9: Discussion and conclusion​. 
 
 
 
 
110 
==PAGE:120==
 
Chapter 9: 
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION 
 
111 
==PAGE:121==
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION 
This chapter will discuss the benefits of using strengths-based approach as well as how well the 10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
appropriate technology considerations were implemented in the concept. ​Additionally, expert
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feedback and project limitations will be discussed as well as further work. Finally, the conclusion will
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
address if the project aim and objectives have been met. 
DISCUSSION 
STRENGTHS-BASED APPROACH  
Throughout this project, it has been essential for me to utilise the community’s strengths to increase
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
the possibility of the concept becoming a success. The aim has been to apply these strengths and
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
consider local infrastructure so the concept will be well-integrated into the local context. The expert
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
feedback suggests that this has been achieved. 
APPROPRIATE TECHNOLOGY 
An essential part of developing the concept has been to make it appropriate for its context. This has
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
been done by incorporating the 10 appropriate technology considerations as incorporating them into
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the design requirements as well as in the design process. The 10 appropriate technology
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
considerations are listed below. 
 
1. 
Meet the basic needs of the users 
6. 
Sustainability 
2. 
Sound technology 
7. 
Encourages local participation 
3. 
Flexible technology 
8. 
Culturally/socially appropriate 
4. 
Meet local capabilities 
9. 
Gender consideration 
5. 
Affordability 
10. 
Appropriate technology transfer mechanisms 
 
I believe that the concept is appropriate for Koh Phdao due to the following reasons:  
 
1.
It meets the basic needs of the villagers by providing them with a solution on how to 
sustainably manage their plastic. 
2.
It is a simple and low-tech solution to a complex problem that is appropriate for Koh Phdao.  
3.
Due to the previous, the concept is flexible technology as it allows for the possibility of 
implementation in similar local and global contexts to Koh Phdao. 
4.
It meets the local capabilities with locally managed as well as utilising local resources. 
5.
The concept focuses on being affordable for the villagers while still ensuring it being a 
sustainable and a long-term solution. 
6.
It has the potential to be financially sustainable as the relevant economic factors were a 
fundamental consideration throughout the design process. It is socially sustainable through the 
112 
==PAGE:122==
Women’s workshop and finally, environmentally sustainable as it minimises the 
environmental burden of plastic waste. 
7.
The concept encourages local participation by being locally managed as well as having 
workshops for women.  
8.
It is culturally and socially appropriate in the sense of being a low-tech solution that solves 
Koh Phdao’s needs by using local resources as well as building on the community strengths.  
9.
It considers gender as the concept highlights the important roles of local women. 
10. It has incorporated user and stakeholder feedback during the design process which has created 
a solution that is more likely to be a success. 
EXPERT FEEDBACK 
One of the main challenges that the experts believe that the concept faces is motivating the villagers to
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
engage with the concept. Throughout the design process, I have acknowledged the difficulty of
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
motivating the villagers to work with plastic waste and to pay the weekly collection fee. Due to local
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
perception of working with plastic waste, it is an undesired job and it will be difficult to collect the
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
weekly collection fee due to the villagers low income. I have targeted this challenge by addressing the
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
villagers’ intrinsic motivation which is the desire for community development but also remained
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
realistic and addressed their extrinsic motivation by creating a good salary for the concept’s
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
employees. As mentioned by one of the experts it is essentially up to the community to decide if the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
concept will be a long term solution. By further engagement with the community, it will be possible to
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
ensure that the concept will motivate and encourage local participation. 
LIMITATIONS 
The main limitation of the project has been the lack of physical and digital access to Koh Phdao. This
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
has meant that I have not been able to include the villagers in the design process by using co-design
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
which would have been beneficial for determining which plastic waste projects the villagers would
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
find interesting. Additionally, it has also meant that assumptions have been made in terms of which
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
tools and materials are locally available in Koh Phdao. 
 
The limitation of the concept is that it only reuses specific types of plastic waste. Koh Phdao generates
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
different types of plastic waste which will need to be addressed in further development of the concept.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Optimally, a complete waste management system would be developed so the villagers will not need to
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
individually manage their waste. 
FURTHER WORK 
Further work for the concept includes: 
 
●
Validation:​ Presenting the concept to the community to see if there is an interest for it 
(including identifying possible PWA and WW) or if adjustments can be made to make it 
desirable for the community 
●
Further research and concept development​:  
○
Collection of plastic waste data in the community 
○
Researching solutions on how to reuse the plastic waste that cannot be used for 
ecobricks and souvenirs 
113 
==PAGE:123==
○
Finding a solution on how to collect the weekly payment fee 
○
Identifying a solution on how to collect plastic waste during the wet season when th 
village is flooding 
○
Researching solutions on how to manage other types of waste 
 
CONCLUSION 
The aim of the project has been to develop a sustainable plastic waste system appropriate for Koh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phdao, by applying the Social Implication Design approach. 
 
A literature review and fieldwork has been conducted to give a comprehensive understanding of the
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
current plastic waste challenge and opportunities in rural Cambodia and more specifically in Koh
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phdao. This research led to the development of a vision which aims for villagers to experience
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
accomplishment and gain independence as well as creative confidence while reducing and reusing
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their plastic waste. From this vision a concept was developed. 
 
The developed concept is a locally managed and community-based plastic waste system which allows 
for villagers to reduce and reuse their plastic waste. The concept empowers the local community, 
especially the local women of Koh Phdao, and targets the triple bottom line for sustainable 
development by providing social, economic and environmental benefits to the community. The key 
has been to develop a concept that is appropriate and well-integrated into its local context to increase 
the chance of the concept succeeding. This has been done by utilising local resources and materials as 
well as utilising the strengths of the community. Finally, the vision and concept has been validated by 
consulting experts which believe that the concept has potential to become a success. 
 
 
 
 
114 
==PAGE:124==
 
Chapter 10: 
REFERENCES 
 
115 
==PAGE:125==
REFERENCES 
LITERATURE REFERENCES 
Abbing, MR 2019, Plastic soup : an atlas of ocean pollution, Island Press, Washington [District of Columbia]. 
 
Aumnate, C, Kiesel, R & Rudolph, N 2017, Understanding Plastics Recycling : Economic, Ecological, and 
Technical Aspects of Plastic Waste Handling, Hanser. 
 
Beresford, N, Edgar, G, Jensen, MS & Sargren, M 2018, 'Our plastic problem is out of control. Here’s how we 
can fight it', <​https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/06/how-to-fight-our-plastic-problem/​>. 
 
Bortoleto, AP 2014, Waste Prevention Policy and Behaviour: New Approaches to Reducing Waste Generation 
and its Environmental Impacts, Taylor and Francis. 
 
Caritas Australia 2019, Strengths Based Approach, <www.caritas.org.au/learn/strengths-based-approach>. 
 
Colon, M & Fawcett, B 2006, 'Community-based household waste management: Lessons learnt from 
EXNORA's ‘zero waste management’ scheme in two South Indian cities', Habitat International, vol. 30, no. 4, 
pp. 916-931. 
 
Creaser, E, Smith, J & Thomson, A 2018, 'Perspectives of solid waste management in rural Cambodia', Journal 
of Humanitarian Engineering, vol. 6, no. 2. 
 
Dalberg 2019, 'No Plastic in Nature: Assessing Plastic Ingestion From Nature to People'. 
 
Ellis-Petersen, H 2018, ''Mountains and mountains of plastic’: life on Cambodia's polluted coast', 
<www.theguardian.com/world/2018/apr/25/mountains-and-mountains-of-plastic-life-on-cambodias-polluted-co
ast>. 
 
Elmira, S, Behzad, N, Mazlin Bin, M, Ibrahim, K, Halimaton Saadiah, H & Nadzri, Y 2011, 'Integrated Models 
for Solid Waste Management in Tourism Regions: Langkawi Island, Malaysia', Journal of Environmental and 
Public Health, 2011, no. 2011, pp. 159-163. 
 
Ferronato, N & Torretta, V 2019, 'Waste Mismanagement in Developing Countries: A Review of Global Issues', 
Int J Environ Res Public Health, vol. 16, no. 6, p. 1060. 
 
Fogg, B 2020, Fogg Behaviour Model, www.behaviourmodel.org, <www.behaviormodel.org/>. 
 
Geyer, R, Jambeck, J & Law, K 2017, 'Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made', Science Advances, 
vol. 3, p. e1700782. 
 
Hekkert, P & Dijk, Mv 2011, Vision in design : a guidebook for innovators, ViP : vision in design, a guidebook 
for innovators, BIS Publishers, Amsterdam. 
 
Hopkins, R 2014, 'EcoBricks and education: how plastic bottle rubbish is helping build schools', 
<www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/29/ecobricks-and-education-how-plastic-bottle-rubbish-is-helpin
g-build-schools>. 
 
116 
==PAGE:126==
Ikhlayel, M & Nguyen, LH 2017, 'Integrated Approaches to Water Resource and Solid Waste Management for 
Sustainable Development', Sustainable Development, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 467-481. 
 
Joshi, C, Seay, J & Banadda, N 2019, 'A perspective on a locally managed decentralized circular economy for 
waste plastic in developing countries', Environmental Progress & Sustainable Energy, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 3-11. 
 
Kaza, S, Yao, L, Bhada-Tata, P, Van Woerden, F & Ionkova, K 2018, What a waste 2.0 : a global snapshot of 
solid waste management to 2050, World Bank Group, Washington, DC. 
 
Kearns, JP, Knappe, DRU & Summers, RS 2014, 'Synthetic organic water contaminants in developing 
communities: an overlooked challenge addressed by adsorption with locally generated char', Journal of Water, 
Sanitation and Hygiene for Development, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 422-436. 
 
Kumi-Larbi, AJ, Yunana, D, Kamsouloum, P, Webster, M, Wilson, DC & Cheeseman, C 2018, 'Recycling 
waste plastics in developing countries: Use of low-density polyethylene water sachets to form plastic bonded 
sand blocks', Waste Manag, vol. 80, pp. 112-118. 
 
Lenkiewicz, Z & Webster, M 2017a, Making Waste Work: A Toolkit. Community Waste Management in Low 
and Middle Income Countries, WasteAid UK, www.wasteaid.org, <www.wasteaid.org.uk/toolkit>. 
 
Lenkiewicz, Z & Webster, M 2017b, Making Waste Work: A Toolkit. How to crochet film plastic into bags and 
mats, WasteAid, <https://wasteaid.org/toolkit/how-to-crochet-film-plastic-into-bags-and-mats/>. 
 
Marshall, RE & Farahbakhsh, K 2013, 'Systems approaches to integrated solid waste management in developing 
countries', Waste Management, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 988-1003. 
 
Menezes, F 2017, 'How crocheting colourful bags from plastic waste is empowering women in Nigeria', 
<www.brightvibes.com/593/en/how-crocheting-colourful-bags-from-plastic-waste-is-empowering-women-in-ni
geria>. 
 
Mihai, F-C & Taherzadeh, MJ 2017, 'Introductory Chapter: Rural Waste Management Issues at Global Level', in 
Solid Waste Management in Rural Areas. 
 
Muny, M 2016, Survey Report on Waste Management Practices At Municipality/District Level. 
 
Murphy, HM, McBean, EA & Farahbakhsh, K 2009, 'Appropriate technology – A comprehensive approach for 
water and sanitation in the developing world', Technology in Society, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 158-167. 
 
Omorogiuwa, O 2015, 'Exxon Mobil Largesse: Sustainability Office Trains More Yola Women', 
<www.aun.edu.ng/index.php/news-events/news/exxon-mobil-largesse-sustainability-office-trains-more-yola-wo
men>. 
 
Onwughara, N, Chukwu, C, Alaekwe, I & Lackson, A 2013, 'Focus on potential environmental issues on plastic 
world towards a sustainable plastic recycling in developing countries', International Journal of Industrial 
Chemistry, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1-13. 
 
Open Development Cambodia 2016, Solid waste, www.opendevelopmentcambodia.net, 
<https://opendevelopmentcambodia.net/topics/solid-waste/>. 
 
117 
==PAGE:127==
Rethea, P 2020, 'A man’s journey to reduce plastic waste by turning it into diesel', 
<www.phnompenhpost.com/lifestyle-creativity-innovation/mans-journey-reduce-plastic-waste-turning-it-diesel?
fbclid=IwAR0246swZrD2j-EePLmwNjSCje5wO98it1sJsoQkuI1kl--wnwdaLMUMFZs>. 
 
Sokummono, K & Malis, T 2020, 'Solving Cambodia's Plastic Problem Seen as Key to Minimizing Waste', 
<www.voanews.com/east-asia-pacific/solving-cambodias-plastic-problem-seen-key-minimizing-waste>. 
 
Sotheary, P 2019, 'Environment Ministry prepares to ban single-use plastic products', 
<www.khmertimeskh.com/659041/environment-ministry-prepares-to-ban-single-use-plastic-products/>. 
 
Sotheary, P 2020, 'Government formulates new policy on urban waste management', 
<​www.khmertimeskh.com/684363/government-formulates-new-policy-on-urban-waste-management/​>. 
 
Subramanian, MN 2019, Plastics waste management : processing and disposal, Second edition. edn, Wiley, 
Hoboken. 
 
Taaffe, J, O’sullivan, S, Rahman, ME & Pakrashi, V 2014, 'Experimental characterisation of Polyethylene 
Terephthalate (PET) bottle Eco-bricks', Materials and Design, vol. 60, pp. 50-56. 
 
Tearfund 2019, No time to waste: tackling the plastic pollution crisis before it’s too late, Tearfund, viewed 
Access date, Apo database, <https://apo.org.au/node/235941>. 
 
The World Bank 2019, Rural population (% of total population) - Cambodia, The World Bank, 
www.data.worldbank.org, 
<https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS?end=2019&locations=KH&start=1960&view=chart>. 
 
The World Bank 2020, Cambodia: Solid Waste and Plastic Management Improvement Project, ESRSC01160, 
The World Bank. 
 
Thongplew, N & Kotlakome, R 2019, 'Getting a drink: An experiment for enabling a sustainable practice in 
Thai university settings', Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 218, pp. 294-303. 
 
Tromp, N & Hekkert, P 2019, Designing for society : products and services for a better world, Bloomsbury 
Visual Arts, London. 
 
UNESCO n.d., Facts and figures on marine pollution, www.unesco.org, 
<www.unesco.org/new/en/natural-sciences/ioc-oceans/focus-areas/rio-20-ocean/blueprint-for-the-future-we-wa
nt/marine-pollution/facts-and-figures-on-marine-pollution/>. 
 
Verma, R, Vinoda, KS, Papireddy, M & Gowda, ANS 2016, 'Toxic Pollutants from Plastic Waste- A Review', 
Procedia Environmental Sciences, vol. 35, pp. 701-708. 
 
Water.org n.d., Cambodia’s water and sanitation crisis, www.water.org, 
<https://water.org/our-impact/where-we-work/cambodia/#:~:text=Cambodia's%20water%20and%20sanitation%
20crisis,disproportionately%20affects%20its%20rural%20communities.>. 
 
Wilson, DC, Velis, C & Rodic, L 2013, 'Integrated sustainable waste management in developing countries', 
Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers. Waste and Resource Management, vol. 166, no. 2, pp. 52-52. 
 
Wilson, DC, Rodic, L, Modak, P, Soos, R, Rogero, AC, Velis, C, Iyer, M & Simonett, O 2015, Global Waste 
Management Outlook. 
118 
==PAGE:128==
 
Wilson, DC, Rodic, L, Scheinberg, A, Velis, CA & Alabaster, G 2012, 'Comparative analysis of solid waste 
management in 20 cities', Waste Manag Res, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 237-254. 
 
Zorpas, AA, Voukkali, I & Loizia, P 2017, 'Effectiveness of waste prevention program in primary students' 
schools', Environ Sci Pollut Res Int, vol. 24, no. 16, pp. 14304-14311. 
IMAGE REFERENCES 
CHAPTER 2 - LITERATURE REVIEW 
Image 2.1: Peren, N 2018, ​A woman sweeps her restaurant shopfront​, photograph, viewed 8 July 2020, 
<​www.theguardian.com/world/2018/apr/25/mountains-and-mountains-of-plastic-life-on-cambodias-polluted-co
ast​>. 
 
Image 2.2: Mouret, F 2017, ​The clogged waterway from above, ​photograph, viewed 8 July 2020, 
<​https://www.khmertimeskh.com/13666/river-of-waste/​>. 
 
Image 2.3: Jordan, C 2009, ​Midway: Message from the Gyre​, photograph, viewed 8 July 2020, 
<​http://www.chrisjordan.com/gallery/midway/#CF000313%2018x24​>. 
 
Image 2.4: Slaght, S 2019, ​A cow investigating plastic waste in Cambodia​, photograph, viewed 8 July 2020, 
<​https://traveltalesoflife.com/plastic-waste-decreasing-plastic-pollution/​>. 
 
Image 2.5: Vernon, N & Hopkins, R 2014, ​A view of the school​, photograph, viewed 8 July 2020, 
<​https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/may/29/ecobricks-and-education-how-plastic-bottle-rubbish-is
-helping-build-schools​>. 
 
Image 2.6: Benjamin Yakubu, B 2016, ​300 IDPS empowered through UNHCR-backed waste-to-wealth 
program, ​photograph, viewed 8 July 2020, 
<​http://www.aun.edu.ng/index.php/news-events/news/300-idps-empowered-through-unhcr-backed-waste-to-we
alth-program​>. 
 
Image 2.7: Lenkiewicz, Z 2018, ​Research paper: How to recycle plastic waste into paving tiles​, photograph, 
viewed 8 July 2020, <​https://wasteaid.org/research-paper-how-to-recycle-plastic-waste-into-paving-tiles/​>. 
CHAPTER 3 - KOH PHDAO 
Image 3.2: WWF n.d, ​Irrawaddy Dolphin, ​photograph, viewed 9 July 2020, 
<​www.worldwildlife.org/species/irrawaddy-dolphin​>. 
CHAPTER 4 - ANTICIPATING THE FUTURE 
Image 4.1: T​irac​hardz​ 2020, ​Asian young happy family activists collecting plastic waste on beach. asia 
volunteers help to keep nature clean up and pick up garbage. concept about environmental conservation 
pollution problems,​ photograph, viewed 14 June 2020, 
<​www.freepik.com/free-photo/asian-young-happy-family-activists-collecting-plastic-waste-beach-asia-voluntee
rs-help-keep-nature-clean-up-pick-up-garbage-concept-about-environmental-conservation-pollution-problems_7
685874.htm​>. 
 
Image 4.2: Højfeldt, M 2020, ​Screenshot of Zerowkh Instagram profile​, screenshot, viewed 14 June 2020, 
<​www.instagram.com/zerowkh/?hl=en​>. 
119 
==PAGE:129==
 
Image 4.3:00 CRDT 2017, ​Ecotourism changed my vision, ​photograph, viewed 14 June 2020, 
<​www.crdt.org.kh/2017/01/ecotourism-changed-my-vision/​>. 
 
Image 4.5: CRDT 2016, ​The water supply system community of Koh Phdao, ​photograph, viewed 14 June 2020, 
<​www.crdt.org.kh/2016/07/the-water-supply-system-community-of-koh-phdao/​>. 
 
Image 4.6: Chanpheaktra, S 2014, ​10478435_674028682679682_7146890608080017916_n​, photograph, 
viewed 14 June 2020, 
<​www.crdt.org.kh/2014/08/cleaning-pond-water-in-koh-phdoa-village-with-em-mud-balls/10478435_67402868
2679682_7146890608080017916_n/​>. 
 
Image 4.9: Hageman, P n.d.,​ Community based eco-tourism,​ photograph, viewed 14 June 2020, 
<​www.crdt.org.kh/where-we-work/​>. 
 
Image 4.10: CRDT 2012, ​Koh Pdao art group​, photograph, viewed 14 June 2020, 
<​www.crdt.org.kh/2012/05/the-koh-pdao-art-group/​>. 
 
Image 4.11: CRDT 2015, ​crdt_casestudy__2​, photograph, viewed 14 June 2020, 
<​www.crdt.org.kh/2015/11/capacity-building-on-professional-photography-for-crdt-members/​>. 
 
Image 4.12: Häagen-Dazs n.d., ​Introducing: Loop X Nestlé​, photograph, viewed 15 June 2020, 
<​www.haagendazs.us/about/news/introducing-loop-x-nestle​>. 
 
Image 4.13: Unilever n.d., ​Shifting from disposable to durable: reuse-refills & ‘no plastic’ solutions​, image, 
viewed 15 June 2020, 
<​www.unilever.com/sustainable-living/reducing-environmental-impact/waste-and-packaging/rethinking-plastic-
packaging/​>. 
 
Image 4.14: Cochrane, P 2017, ​Unilever unveils technology to recycle plastic sachets​, photograph, viewed 15 
June 2020, 
<​www.cosmeticsbusiness.com/news/article_page/Unilever_unveils_technology_to_recycle_plastic_sachets/129
228​>. 
 
Image 4.15: National Assembly 2017, ​Prime Minister Hun Sen and Minister of Interior Sar Kheng vote on 
proposed amendments at the National Assembly in Phnom Penh​, photograph, viewed 15 June 2020, 
<​www.rfa.org/english/news/cambodia/amendments-10162017172345.html​>. 
CHAPTER 5 - DETAILING THE VISION 
Image 5.1: Fring, G 2020, ​Focused young woman and girl drawing together at home​, photograph, viewed 29 
June 2020, <​www.pexels.com/photo/focused-young-woman-and-girl-drawing-together-at-home-4173332/​>. 
CHAPTER 6 - CONCEPT 
Image 6.2: Wordans n.d., ​Westford mill WM216 - Premium cotton stuff bag​, photograph, viewed 18 June 2020, 
<​www.wordans.com.au/westford-mill-wm216-premium-cotton-stuff-bag-423192/c195-natural/s780426-xs?gcli
d=Cj0KCQjwoPL2BRDxARIsAEMm9y-6SfUt6kluW4BwY2f34r1X8GC5BFBLYiqRQl9wdj5MlTkEHC5FNP
waAj1oEALw_wcB​>. 
 
Image 6.4: Bedwell, S 2019, ​What can you do with an Ecobrick?​, photograph, viewed 18 June 2020, 
<​https://plasticgeneration.com/ecobricks-an-alternative-building-material/​>. 
120 
==PAGE:130==
 
Image 6.5: Gatuna, M 2014, ​Plantpot and cat​, photograph, viewed 29 June 2020, 
<​www.brudiy.com/blog/posts/maceta-gatuna/​>. 
 
Image 6.6: Hatfield, S 2017, ​Timber-framed ecobrick building​, drawing, viewed 18 June 2020, 
<https://wasteaid.org/toolkit/how-to-turn-mixed-plastic-waste-and-bottles-into-ecobricks/>. 
 
Image 6.7: Hatfield, S 2017, ​Curved walls can withstand strong winds​, drawing, viewed 18 June 2020, 
<​https://wasteaid.org/toolkit/how-to-turn-mixed-plastic-waste-and-bottles-into-ecobricks/​>. 
FIGURE REFERENCES 
CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION AND METHODOLOGY 
Figure 1.1: Tromp, N & Hekkert, P 2019, Designing for society : products and services for a better world, 
Bloomsbury Visual Arts, London. 
 
Figure 1.2: Wilson, DC, Velis, C & Rodic, L 2013, 'Integrated sustainable waste management in developing 
countries', Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers. Waste and Resource Management, vol. 166, no. 2, 
pp. 52-52. 
CHAPTER 2 - LITERATURE REVIEW 
Figure 2.1: Wilson, DC, Rodic, L, Modak, P, Soos, R, Rogero, AC, Velis, C, Iyer, M & Simonett, O 2015, 
Global Waste Management Outlook. 
 
Figure 2.2:  Creaser, E, Smith, J & Thomson, A 2018, 'Perspectives of solid waste management in rural 
Cambodia', Journal of Humanitarian Engineering, vol. 6, no. 2. 
 
Figure 2.4: Kearns, JP, Knappe, DRU & Summers, RS 2014, 'Synthetic organic water contaminants in 
developing communities: an overlooked challenge addressed by adsorption with locally generated char', Journal 
of Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for Development, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 422-436. 
CHAPTER 7 - IMPLEMENTATION AND OPERATION PLAN 
Figure 7.3: ‘Rice plant: 
www.123rf.com/photo_70736284_stock-vector-hand-drawn-vector-illustration-of-rice-plant-grain-sketch-vector
-eps-8-.html​’  
‘Bowl of rice: ​www.clipartkey.com/view/bTomRR_transparent-cereal-bowl-clipart-rice-bowl-with-chopsticks/​’ 
‘Cow: ​www.pinterest.dk/pin/240872280044792693/​’ 
 
Figure 7.4: ‘Plastic bottle: ​www.dreamstime.com/drink-bottle-isolated-sketch-image126935798​’ 
‘Chips bag: ​www.vectorstock.com/royalty-free-vectors/sketch-snacks-vectors​’ 
‘Woman drinking: 
https://depositphotos.com/131259262/stock-illustration-sketch-of-woman-drinking-water.html​’ 
‘Flower bed: ​https://wasteaid.org/toolkit/how-to-turn-mixed-plastic-waste-and-bottles-into-ecobricks/​’ 
 
 
 
121 
