==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
A combined literature and targeted experiments to establish
technical performance of nanofiltration technology for
commercial succinic acid production
Author:
Peter Styrbæk (s134046)
Christian Bjergholt (s134055)
Supervisors:
Manuel Pinelo, Associate Professor
Enrico Mancini, PhD student
Isuru Udugama, Postdoc
29-07-2020
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Succinic acid is an important building block chemical. Its production is primarily through petro-
chemical reactions but it can be produced via fermentation. This work investigates bio-succinic acid
production and how membrane technology can improve it. The first part of this work identifies
the best nanofiltration membrane out of those commercially available and the optimal separation
conditions for isolating succinic acid through lab-scale testing, based on the retention and filtration
flux. It was clearly found that of the 4 tested membranes, NF270, NTR7450, TS40 and Osmonics
DL, NF270 performed best at a succinic acid concentration of 5 g L−1 and pH 7, with a retention
of 92.4 ± 1.4%. The other retentions at those conditions were: Osmonics DL at 91.1 ± 1.0%, TS40
at 87.2 ± 4.9% and NTR7450 at 82.8 ± 0.2%. The filtration times at these conditons were: NTR7450
at 20 min, NF270 at 20 min, TS40 at 28 minutes and Osmonics DL at 50 minutes. The second part
is a Techno-economic analysis of 3 major producers of bio-succinic acid: Reverdia, Bioamber and
Corbion. The information gained from this TEA is combined with extensive literature research, and
especially the works of Pateraki et al. and Ferone et al., to design and analyze a theoretical new pro-
cess based on nanofiltration technology dubbed ”Packed-bed biofilm continuous fermentation with
in situ electrochemical removal”. The analysis shows the new process is significantly more profitable
than the other processes, based on a 10-year operation period. Its capital investment costs are up
to 60% cheaper than the other processes, it’s operational costs are up to 25% cheaper than the other
processes and it is the only process that has a positive average return of investment at 28.29% y−1
with a SA sales price of 2.75 $ kg−1.
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This work was originally intended identify the optimal membrane, pH and concentration for sepa-
ration of succinic acid from a fermentation broth. The plan was to continue experimentation with
mixtures of succinic acid and other organic acids and then real fermentation broth using optimal
membrane identified through synthetic broth experiments. A techno-economic analysis was then
planned, in order to evaluate the potential of separating succinic acid from fermentation broth with
nanofiltration. Due to the outbreak of COVID-19 laboratory access was suddenly denied and as a re-
sult only the experiments with pure succinic acid solutions were finished. Instead more focus is put
on the techno-economic analysis where the production processes of three of the existing commercial
SA producers, Bioamber, BASF and Reverdia, is investigated. A potential new produtions process is
also suggested based on an extensive literature study and compared to the existing processes. While
this shift in focus was necessary to continue working, the lack of the final experiments means that
there is no good continuity between the experimental part and the techno-economic analysis. It was
therefore decided to split the work into two parts, ”part I” with the experimental results and ”part
II” with the techno-economic analysis.
Authors
Contribution to work
Christian Bjergholt (s134055)
50%
Peter Styrbæk (s134046)
50%
ii
==PAGE:4==
Table 0.1: List of abbreviations used in this work
Abbreviation
Meaning
ABS
Ammonium bisulfate
AS
Ammonium sulfate
CAPEX
Capital expenditures
Cp
Heat capacity
DAS
Diammonium succinate
EISR
Electrochemical in situ removal
Hvap
Heat of evaporation
MAS
Monoammonium succinate
MF
Microfiltration
MW
Molar weight
NF
Nanofiltration
NR
Net return
OPEX
Operating expenditure
P-BiSER
Packed-bed biofilm continuous fermentation with in situ electrochemical removal
PP
Payback period
ROI
Return of investment
SA
Succinic acid
TEA
Techno-economic analysis
UF
Ultrafiltration
WP
Water permability
WPPF
Water permeability post filtration
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Succinic acid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Challenges with commercial production of succinic acid through fermentation . . .
2
1.3
Downstream unit operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Nanofiltration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Important Effects in Nanofiltration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Research motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
I
Experimental work on NF for purification of SA
13
2
Methodology
13
2.1
Materials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.1
Filtration cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.2
Membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.3
Chemicals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.4
HPLC analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Results and Discussion
15
3.1
Potential sources of errors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Conclusion
21
4.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
II
Techno-economic analysis of SA production
23
5
Global succinic acid production from fermentation
23
5.1
Analysed production companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Promising technologies for commercial SA production
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Process steps and data analysis
25
6.1
Pretreatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.2
Fermentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.3
Evaporation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
iv
==PAGE:6==
6.4
Crystallization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.5
Membrane filtration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.6
Ion exchange . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.7
Thermal decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.8
Waste disposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.9
Capital costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.10 Economic viability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7
Results and Discussion
33
7.1
Reconstruction of commercial production processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.1.1
Bioamber process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.1.2
Succinity process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.1.3
Reverdia process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.2
A novel production process using emerging technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7.3
Economic results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.3.1
Operational costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.3.2
Capital costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3.3
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.4
Technological readiness level assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8
Conclusion
46
8.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Appendices
A1
A Enlarged figures
A1
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Succinic acid
Succinic acid (1,4-butanedioic acid) is a dicarboxylic acid with pKa values of 4.21 and 5.72 at stan-
dard conditions [1]. It is a white odorless powder that is easily dissolved in water and is commonly
found in nature as a part of the citric acid cycle. SA is potentially a very useful compound as two
acid groups and simple structure makes it ideal as a platform chemical for production of a wide
variety of compounds like polymers, surfactants, adhesive, detergents etc. [2]. It is likely that SA
will become even more important in the future as the shift away from petrochemical production
necessitates alternative production routes for polymer and especially plastic production [3].
Figure 1.1: Chemical structure of succinic acid
SA is produced either as a result of chemical processing of petrochemicals, levulinic acid or from a
fermentation. SA can be and has traditionally been produced from maleic anhydride which can be
obtained from oxidation of benzene or butane [4]. Maleic anhydride can then be reduced by hydro-
genation (Ni,Pd cat; T=120-180 ℃) into succinic anhydride that can be turned into SA by oxidation
[5]. Another potential syntheses path is from levulinic acid. [5, 6]. Levulinic acid can be obtained
from lignocellulose and is already in production in Caserta, Italy [7] but the conversion from lev-
ulinic acid to SA can be problematic [6] and has so far not been implemented in full-scale production
[5].
The amount of lignocellulosic waste from food production has been increasing significantly in recent
times, which holds potential for products that use it as feedstock such as SA from fermentation [5].
SA is a common chemical to many organisms as it is a byproduct from the Krebs cycle [2, 5] and can
therefore be obtained through fermentation, but in order to offer competitive yields bioengineered
microorganisms have to be used. Bacteria and yeast can typically achieve SA concentrations around
35-40 g L−1 [2, 8].
The biggest obstacle to biologically produced SA is not the yield of the organisms, but the down-
1
==PAGE:8==
stream processes where it is isolated from the fermentation broth. These processes consists of sev-
eral steps to remove all the compounds and the water from the SA and is responsible for 50-80% of
the total production cost [5, 8, 9].
1.2
Challenges with commercial production of succinic acid through fer-
mentation
A fermentation broth contains impurities such as sugars, proteins, pigments and other organic acids,
all of which make isolating and purifying the SA difficult. The separation steps account for as much
as 50-80 % of the production cost and still results in poor purity and yields [5, 8, 9]. Compared to
the petrochemical industry where SA is the only end product [5], bio-SA requires significantly more
work.
Many companies are however, becoming more interested in ”greener” alternatives for various rea-
sons such as the increased price of crude oil, government restrictions and taxation and a larger con-
sumer focus on eco-friendliness. Thus, production of SA through fermentation processes becomes
more feasible.
Figure 1.2: Overview of a few potential uses for succinic acid. Copied from E. Mancini et al. [5]
2
==PAGE:9==
1.3
Downstream unit operations
SA from fermentation needs to be isolated from the fermentation broth and purified, before it can
be sold. As mentioned before, the main usage of SA is as a platform chemical to synthesize other
organic chemicals. A very high purity of SA is therefore paramount, as impurities can create unpre-
dictable side reactions. Isolation of SA can be achieved with several different unit operations. Below
are described some of the most common ones.
Crystallization: Crystallization operations are perhaps the most common unit operations for SA
isolation. It is used by three industrial size (10-30 kt y−1) producers [9, 10, 11] and is well documented
in literature [12, 13, 14]. While other unit operations are used to isolate and clean, crystallisation is
often used also as a finishing step to get dry SA in crystal form. The goal of crystallization is to force
the desired solute to crystallize in pure solid-crystal form. This is usually done with a combination of
lowering the solubility of the desired solute and feeding seed crystals. Seed crystals can be crystals
of the desired solute or just high surface area particles [15]. These help catalyze the crystallization
by giving the solubilized molecules an easy surface to grown on. Seed crystals can also be used
to control the growth, size and shape of the forming crystals [15]. Crystallization operations can
be distinguished based on the method used to drive the crystallization. For organic acids like SA a
stronger acid can be added to force it out in a similar way to the salt-out effect [12]. In evaporative
crystallization the solution is evaporated, concentrating the solute until crystallization occurs. In
cooling crystallization the temperature is instead lowered to reduce solubility. Of the four produc-
tion processes described in part II of this work, two use acid crystallization, one uses evaporative
crystallization and one use cooling crystallization to isolate SA [9, 11, 10].
Liquid/liquid extraction: In liquid/liquid extraction a pure solvent is mixed with the original
solution. Components in the solution that have better affinity/solubility with the solvent will then
move to the solvent given enough time and exposure. SA can thus be moved from the broth, which
is almost always a water solution, to another cleaner solvent. The most important part is finding
a solvent that is immiscible with water, has a high affinity with SA and low affinity with the other
components in the broth (cells, proteins, pigments, other acids, minerals ect..). Liquid/liquid extrac-
tion does not seem to be very prevalent in the commercial bio-SA production processes. None of
the processes explored in this work make use of it [9, 10, 11, 16], although the process described by
the producers of Succinity, BASF and Corbion [9], uses a solid/liquid extraction with methanol as a
purifying step late in the downstream process.
3
==PAGE:10==
Adsorption/Ion-exchange: In an adsorption operation the solute is adsorbed from the solution
to solid particles/surface (liquid/solid extraction) [15]. This can be used to both remove impurities
from the solution or remove the desired solute. If the desired solute is removed in this way it is of-
ten necessary to remove it from the adsorption particles/surface (often a resin) into another solvent.
Ion-exchange is a bit similar to adsorption but specific ions, called counter-ions, are pre-adsorbed
to a resin. When the solution is passed through the ion-exchange resin, ions in the solution can
exchange places with the pre-adsorbed counter-ions. This can be very useful when exchanging un-
wanted ions with more benign ones, often H+ and Na+. Due to the need for neutralization agents
in the fermentation, SA will often be found as sodium succinate or diammonium succinate (DAS).
Ion-exchange with H+-ions can convert this into standard SA. The standard adsorption operation
does not seem to be prevalent in the current SA industry but ion-exchange is used [10, 11]. Two of
the processes analysed in part II of this work use ion-exchange to remove lingering impurities and
convert DAS into SA.
Selective reactions: Reactions can be used to eliminate or facilitate the removal of different im-
purities. Due to the high number of different compounds in a fermentation broth, trying to remove
them all in this way is unlikely to succeed. If a few selected compounds are causing problems how-
ever, a selective reaction to convert them could be a solution if the converted form are easier to
handle/remove. For example enzymes could be used to break down proteins or make them agglom-
erate for better separation and calcium carbonate can be used to eliminate oxalic acid [17]. The
work done by López et. al [18] also illustrates this concept by oxidizing pigments using manganese
peroxidase in a enzymatic membrane bioreactor. Doing something similar was considered in part 2
of this work but it proved unnecessary in the final design. There are a lot of possibilities in selective
chemical reactions but that also makes it difficult to sort through. Potential downsides include un-
foreseen side reactions due to the many different compounds in fermentation streams and the cost of
adding reactants. Additionally, everything added to a stream likely needs to be removed later in the
process again, such as pH buffers, unprocessed nutrients/feedstock and cells, potentially adding cost.
Membrane filtration: Membrane filtration uses a sheet of semi-permeable material called a mem-
brane to separate a process stream into two parts: one going through the membrane, called the
permeate, and one not going though the membrane, called the retentate. The membrane material
will allow passage of some solutes while retaining others. This means that retained solutes will be
concentrated in the retentate and largely removed from the permeate. Membrane operations have
4
==PAGE:11==
been used in industry since around the 1940s [15] and they are divided into several categories: micro-
filtration, ultrafiltration, nanofiltration, reverse osmosis, forward osmosis, dialysis, electrodialysis,
pervaporation, gas permeation and membrane distillation [19]. This work is focused on nanofiltra-
tion and its ability to successfully separate SA, as has been proven by N. Thuy et al. [20, 21]. Three of
the processes analysed in part II of this work use NF operations but only to cleanse the fermentation
broth not to separate SA.
1.4
Nanofiltration
Nanofiltration (NF) is a unit operation of membrane technology that normally deals with compounds
in the 200-1000 g mol−1 range and usually has a pore size of 1-10 nm. NF has rejection rates of >99%
for multivalent ions and up to 70% for monovalent ions. The rejection for compounds larger than
the allowed MW is >90% [22].
A NF process is dependent on the interactions between molecules and membrane, and therefore
also the membrane composition. The efficiency of NF membranes is generally attributed to 3 fac-
tors: The sieving effect, affinity between membrane-solute and the electrical field. (I) The sieving
effect is simple size exclusion. (II) The affinity between membrane and solute affects how quickly
the solute can enter the membrane. High affinity between solute and membrane means that the
molecules easily dissolve into the membrane in order to pass through it. If the molecule is not solu-
ble in the membrane it will be either harder or impossible for it to pass through. This factor is more
important the smaller the pores and especially for dense membranes without pores, such as those
used for reverse osmosis (RO). (III) The electrical field is only relevant with charged molecules. A NF
membrane will generally have charged groups on the surface which repels or attracts other charges.
The charge on the membrane is related to the pH and the pH at which any particular membrane
has no charge is called the isoelectric point, below that it is positively charged and above that it
is negatively charged [22, 23]. There are other, more situational factors that play a role in NF, but
these 3 must always be considered.
NF membranes are typically made from polyamides, polyethylene sulfone (PES) or cellulose ac-
etate [23], see fig 1.3. They are almost always subjected to post-treatment that makes them very
hydrophilic with many charged groups on the surface.
5
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.3: Example of basic polyamide(top left), polypiperazine a specific polyamide (top right), PES
(bottom left) and cellulose acetate (bottom left)
NF is widely used in industry since it is simple to implement, energy efficient and effective. For
example the biopharmaceutical industry uses it to produce the human antibody IgG, because it can
separate IgG from harmful viruses [24]. In the dairy industry it is used to simultaneously concen-
trate and demineralize whey products [25]. NF can also be used as a replacement of RO for waste
water treatment given its significantly lower energy usage and ability to reject most organic sub-
stances, like disinfectants and other organic compounds with the sieving effect and a large amount
of inorganic salts with the charged electrical field [23].
1.5
Important Effects in Nanofiltration
There are several known effects that can impact the selectivity or flux in a membrane operation. For
clarity some of them are briefly described below.
Steric hindrance - Size exclusion is one the common exclusion factors in membrane technology.
This is especially important for membranes with large pore structures like those used for microfiltra-
tion. It is based on the size of the particle and the average pore size of the membrane. Particles bigger
than the pore size will be rejected. At NF scale particles are usually composed of single molecules
and the size is measured by molar weight. However circumstances such as molecule folding, long
side chains and bulky side groups can give a molecule a steric hindrance much different than what
6
==PAGE:13==
would be assumed based on MW.
SA is a relatively straight molecule and has a molar mass of 118 g mol−1. The tightest membrane
used in this work has a measured pore size of 150-300 g mol−1. It is therefore unlikely that the acid
will be rejected based on size exclusion. Other common acids likely to be found in a SA fermentation
broth, such as lactic acid (90 g mol−1), pyruvic acid (88 g mol−1) and acetic acid (60 g mol−1), have
even lower MW and are also unlikely to be rejected.
Iso-electric point - Most NF membranes possess carboxylic and amine groups able to dissociate
depending on pH conditions. The membrane surface will gradually become more or less charged as
these groups dissociate. The pH at which a particular membrane has equal amount of positive and
negative charges and therefore becomes neutral, is called its iso-electric point. A pH below this will
give a increasing positive surface charge while a pH above this point gives an increasing negative
surface charge. This is illustrated in fig. 1.4.
Figure 1.4: Membrane potential at changing pH for Trisep TS80 and Desal HL membranes in 10 mM
KCl [26].
The membranes used in this work have isoelectric points in the pH range 3.5-4.0, see tab. 2.1, and
are composed of either poly-amide or polyether sulfone. The charge of the membrane therefore
becomes more negative as the pH rises above 4, exemplified on fig. 1.5, and SA becomes more dis-
sociated with rising pH, resulting in repulsion between the negatively charged SA and membrane.
SA has pKa values of 4.2 and 5.6 [27] so it will be almost completely dissociated at pH 7 and above
(see fig. 3.3), thus increasing the repulsion from the membrane.
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 1.5: Amide group getting negatively charged in a basic environment
Gibbs–Donnan effect - Is when the pull between two ions of opposite charge (e.g. Na+ + Cl−)
causes both to be rejected by the membrane if one of them are rejected. This phenomena arises from
the need to balance the ion charges. If an amount of charged ions passes though a membrane with-
out an accompanying amount of opposite charged ions it will create an electric potential difference
between the two membrane sides. This is called the Donnan potential and will create a strong pull
between ions to equalize the charge. This pull is often strong enough that the ions will be unable
to pass through the membrane. The Gibbs-Donnan effect can be especially useful for rejecting salts
and charged organic molecules [28]. This is illustrated in fig. 1.6. In the figure the retention of
different salts at various pH can be seen. The NF membrane used has an iso-electric point around
pH 6. At this point the charge on the membrane is overall neutral and retention of the salts is very
low. Moving in any direction on the pH scale makes the membrane more negatively or positively
charged causing retention to rise as one of the ions will be repelled by the membrane. Ions with
higher charges tend to dominate over lower charged ones and direct where both end up [28]. Magne-
sium chloride will have high rejection at low pH when the membrane is positively charged because
Mg2+ cannot pass easily but will have low rejection at high pH because Mg2+ easily passes the
membrane and help pull the Cl−ions though.
This is relevant when SA is in its dissociated state at neutral pH and there are other positive ions
present, such as the Na+ ions from the pH adjustment.
8
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.6: Limited retention of 1 mmol L−1 concentration single salt solutions at different pH. Taken
from review performed by Lou et al. [28]
Co-ions competition - The ability of a larger ion to facilitate a smaller ion to pass through a mem-
brane pore. When a molecule is stopped by the membranes charge it does so at a certain distance.
When a smaller molecule then approaches the membrane, forced by the pressure, it can become
sandwiched between this layer and the membrane which increases the local concentration of the
smaller molecule thus increasing its permeation. This can even lead to negative retention of the
smaller molecules (such as NaCl in a solution with lactic acid) [28].
This only has an impact on situations in which there are different ions in the same solution, for
example a fermentation. It can lead to lower retention of certain ions, and thereby a lower purity of
product, which, if it is significant enough, will have to be handled in a separate unit operation.
Charge induced concentration polarisation - In addition to normal concentration polarisation
(CP), the charge on the membrane can cause ions of the opposite charge to concentrate near the
membrane. This phenomenon, called charge induced concentration polarisation [26], will poten-
tially reduce rejection of the ion due to the higher concentration. It can also cause an increase in
viscoelectricity that will reduce the membrane flux.
Viscoelectricity - The amount of ions can change the viscosity of water in relation to the electric
field generated. It is essentially a reduction of the volumetric flow forward caused by electro-osmotic
backflow, that increases the apparent viscosity [29]. This can often be significant with high salt con-
centrations and at higher pH where the membrane is more negatively charged. At these conditions
large numbers of positive ions will accumulate on the membrane surface and attract the negative
9
==PAGE:16==
ions to form an electric double layer with strong viscoelectric forces [28].
The viscoelectric effect itself can work to lower the flux of the system but should not affect selectivity.
However the formation of the electric double layer in concert with charge induced concentration
polarisation can potentially change the selectivity. This, in particular, is the case for charged solutes
that have trouble breaking though the electric forces of the layer or be caught up and incorporated
as part of the layer. Even for neutral molecules there is a possibility that a dense layer will block
transmittance with steric hindrance. In this case if either large molecules are better at forcing their
way though the layer or smaller molecules are better at slipping between the layer, a change in
selectivity will occur. A lot of this is conjecture as the electric interactions between ionic solute and
membranes are complex and can still benefit from further study.
Hydration energy - The amount of energy that is released when 1 mole of ion undergoes hydration
(dissolves in water). The cations and anions of a salt reacts with the positive and negative dipoles of
water and thus increase its relative size via hydrogen bonds. These bonds can be broken like regular
hydrogen bonds, by introducing more energy into the system, for example by heating [30]. When
dealing with NF, the solute that passes through the membrane has to dissolve in the membrane, and
must therefore first break the hydrogen bonds it has made with water, thus increasing the enthalpy
of reaction, and thereby the Gibbs free energy.
When dealing with divalent ions, like SA at neutral pH, this will naturally occur and it can lower
the water permeability by increasing the energy necessary to flow through the membrane. This is
likely more obvious at low operating pressures, because less energy is applied over time.
Salt in/out effect - The presence of salts in the solvent can increase or decrease the solubility of
certain solutes. In some cases solubilized salt ions can increase the solubility of another solute. This
is referred to as salting in and usually happens at low salt concentrations. The effect is believed to
be caused by salt counterions surrounding the solute particles and through screening effects lower
the electrostatic repulsion between solute and solvent. At higher salt concentrations the effect is
often opposite and the solubility of the solute is decreased. This is referred to as salting out and
occurs because the salt ions and the solute starts to compete for the solvent molecules at higher
concentrations [31].
While this has little effect on the NF itself, it has an effect on downstream unit operations where SA
10
==PAGE:17==
is dissolved or crystallized. As such, poor membrane filtration can lead to higher ion concentrations
which can have a negative impact, such as impure product.
1.6
Research motivation
Making bio-SA production commercially competitive requires lower production prices [32] than
currently seen. This in turn requires better technology or methods. Finding out what the current
production processes are, and where they can be improved is therefore of vital import for the in-
dustry. Membrane technology has great potential here, since it is capable of separating compounds
at a molecular level, provided the correct membrane and the correct circumstances. Given the size
of SA (118 g mol−1), NF is a good choice, since it has a small enough pore size to reject it. NF is
already widely used in industry for purifying solutions and isolating solutes, but separation of SA
from other organic acids with NF has not been applied in industry. The current large scale facilities
use NF/UF to clean fermentation broths but not to actually isolate SA [9, 10, 11]. Separation of SA has
been tried in lab scale, yet further study is required in order to properly understand the governing
forces behind three important factors: (I) Membrane selectivity, especially optimal conditions for
retention of SA. (II) Filtration flux, which is important in order to minimize the size and amount of
NF modules. (III) Fouling of the membrane, which can significantly lower flux and retention. These
three factors are very important to understand for commercial application because a good selectivity
increases yield of the process and purity of the product and high flux and low fouling means faster
and cheaper production [5].
To our knowledge only one of the three companies previously mentioned is still producing bio-SA.
This work will investigate three of these major companies that have produced bio-SA, Bioamber,
Succinity and Reverdia, in order to determine what the current production methods are and pro-
pose a promising original process that can make bio-SA production economically viable. To fully
comprehend all the processes, an in depth Techno-economic analysis of them is required. This en-
tails a thorough look into the individual unit operations, their mass and energy balances, how they
fit together and their operational and capital costs.
This thesis is in two parts, both of which explore membrane technology. The first aims to find
the correct membrane technology and the optimal separation conditions for isolating SA through
lab-scale testing. The second is a TEA of Bioamber, Succinity, Reverdia and an original process
dubbed the Packed-bed biofilm continuous fermentation with in situ electrochemical removal (P-
11
==PAGE:18==
BiSER). This original process is analyzed and compared to the current production trends.
The membrane technology part will be done through extensive lab-scale testing of select commer-
cially viable NF membranes to discover an optimal membrane and the pH and SA concentration that
gives the filtration conditions with the highest rejection and water permeability possible. Initial test-
ing will be performed with a SA solution of 50 g L−1 at around pH 2.2 and 7, with additional tests
of pH 5 to determine the difference with changes in pH. Subsequent testing will be done at a SA
concentration of 5 g L−1 at pH 2 and 7. Examining the rejection of SA at different concentrations
has been done before, but not alongside the filtration time and that holds potential for improving
the fundamental knowledge of NF membranes used to isolate organic acids and similar ions.
The TEA will be based on patents and papers describing the unit operations and the microorgan-
isms involved. Their reported values will be tied together in a worksheet; which, with added values
from literature together with mass balances and energy calculations, will be used to define the pro-
cesses. Operational and capital costs will then be calculated based on mass and energy flows and
information from the supplier or in literature describing similar values or appropriate models. Other
TEA studies on SA-production focused on computer simulations to make a new process [33] or ex-
plored process intensification [34], but to our knowledge a study of this magnitude on the current
processes has not been attempted. The P-BiSER process combines NF membrane technology with
other proven technologies in a novel way, that has the potential to significantly improve bio-SA
production. This process is built on a literature review by E. Mancini et al. [5] and a substantial
effort has gone into finding accurate, authentic data to facilitate proper analysis and comparison
between the companies and this original process.
12
==PAGE:19==
Part I
Experimental work on NF for purification of SA
This part focuses on the experimental work done on separation of SA with NF membranes. It details
what experiments were done, how they were performed and explains what results were found. This
data was then analysed and suggestions were made for future experiments.
2
Methodology
Figure 2.1: Picture of lab setting for filtration experiments
2.1
Materials
2.1.1
Filtration cell
A 50 mL Amicon stirred cell was used to carry out the experiments. It has a membrane area of
0,00134 m2, a maximum operating pressure of 5 bars and is used for dead-end batch filtration. The
cells were pressurized using nitrogen gas.
Flux data was acquired with a Sartorius Entris scale coupled with a laptop running a matlab file
we compiled to record the weight every 5 seconds.
13
==PAGE:20==
2.1.2
Membrane
4 different commercially available membranes were used: TS40, NF270, NTR7450 and Osmonics DL.
They are all thin film composite membranes (TFC). The properties of the membranes can be seen in
tab: 2.1.
Table 2.1: Properties for the different membranes
Manufacture
Series
Pore size
Material
Isoelectric point
Operating pH
Std retention
Dow Filmtec
NF270
200-400 MW
Polypiperazine-amide
3.6[35]
2-11
99.2% MgSO4
Nitoo Denko
NTR7450
-
Polyether sulfone
3.6[36]
2-11
50% NaCl
TriSep
TS40
200 MW
Polypiperazine-amide
3.5[37]
2-11
90.0% MgSO4
GE Osmonics
DL
150-300 MW
Polyamide
4.0[38]
2-10
98.0% MgSO4
2.1.3
Chemicals
The SA was procured from Sigma-Aldrich and had a purity of >99%. Deionized water was used for
water permeability test and ultrapure water was used to make solutions.
For the experiments, 50 g L−1 and 5 g L−1 solutions of SA in milliq were used with pH ranging
from 2.2 to 7.12. For solutions with pH >2.2 (natural pH for SA solutions) the pH was adjusted using
20 M NaOH (>98 purity, from Sigma-Aldrich) and 5 M HCl (37% wt/w, from Sigma-Aldrich).
2.1.4
HPLC analysis
For concentration measurements a Shimadzu UFLC HPLC machine was used. The analysis were
performed with 12 mM H2SO4 eluent and a run-time of 20 min at 60 ℃and 52 bar. The eluent flux
was 0.6 ml min−1.
2.2
Methods
Each experiment was carried out at least in duplicate on two simultaneously running identical setups
(see fig. 2.1). Membranes were chosen, inspected for tears and ruptures and put into a cell. The
membrane was then compressed for minimum 10 min. Then water permeability (WP) tests were
carried out at 2 bars, 3 bars and 4 bars. Each test was 5 minutes at the respective pressures and the
flux was calculated from the weight and time measurements, the WP was then found using eq. (2.1b).
The test was repeated if WP did not reach a constant value. The WP values were also checked to see
if they were consistent with previous membranes of the same type. Membranes were discarded if a
14
==PAGE:21==
big difference in membrane performance compared to the average was observed.
f lux
(
L
m2 · h
)
=
mp
A · ρ · t
(2.1a)
WP
(
L
m2 · h · bar
)
=
mp
A · ρ · t · P
(2.1b)
In the above equations, mp is the mass of the permeate in grams, ρ is the density in g ml−1, P is
filtration pressure in bar and h is the filtration time in hours.
After the WP test the cell was disassembled, the membrane put aside, and the cell was thoroughly
dried. The membrane was then put back and the cell reassembled and filled with SA solution. Note
that membranes were not dried, as this could potentially damage them, and therefore contained a
small amount of deionized water. 4 bars was chosen as the operating pressure for the SA because
of limitations of the membrane cell and pressure outlets in the lab. For each test 20 mL SA solution
was added to the cell, and it ran until 5 g was measured in the permeate. Permeate and retentate
were then collected and samples prepared for the HPLC analyis. Higher concentrations (ex. 50 g
L−1) were diluted to stay within detection range using the same 12 mM H2SO4 eluent as utilized
in the HPLC machine. After retentate was collected from the cell, the membrane was washed by
letting 30 mL of water run through at 4 bars. Then post filtration water permeability (WPPF) was
tested using the same method as the initial WP tests.
Based on the HPLC data from the SA solution, retentate and permeate rejection of SA were cal-
culated using eq. (2.2).
R(%) =
[
1 −
( Cp
CR
)]
· 100
(2.2)
R is the rejection, Cp is the permeate concentration in g L−1 and CR is the retentate concentration
in g L−1.
3
Results and Discussion
A set of 72 experiments were conducted to get a good overview of membrane performances at dif-
ferent conditions. All four membranes were tested (see tab: 2.1) at pH 7, 5, and 2.2 with a 50 g
L−1 SA concentration in pure water. Additionally NF270, TS40 and NTR7450 were tested at pH 4.
The membranes were also tested with a 5 g L−1 SA solution to give an indication of concentration
effects. These were made at pH 2.2 and 7. Finally all membranes were also used to filter a solution
15
==PAGE:22==
of 0.43 M (64.6g L−1) xylose at pH 7, 5 and 2.2. The results from this set of tests can be seen in fig.
3.1 and fig. 3.2 and are further discussed below. Fig. 3.3 shows the filtration time overlaid with the
SA dissociation curve for better understanding.
(a) SA solution containing 50 g L−1 SA.
(b) SA solution containing 5 g L−1 SA.
Figure 3.1: Rejection for filtration of 5 ml SA solution in Amicon cell at 4 bar.
(a) SA solution containing 50 g L−1 SA.
(b) SA solution containing 5 g L−1 SA.
Figure 3.2: Filtration time for 5 ml SA solution in Amicon cell at 4 bar. A larger version of fig (a) is
available in Appendix fig. A.1
16
==PAGE:23==
(a) SA solution containing 50 g L−1 SA.
(b) SA solution containing 5 g L−1 SA.
Figure 3.3: Filtration time for 5 ml SA solution plotted with SA disassociation graph.
The highest retention of SA for all membranes occurs at 7 pH with the 5 g L−1 solution (see fig. 3.1b).
At these conditions, average retentions are: 92.4%, 82.8%, 87.2% and 91.1%, for NF270, NTR7450, TS40
and OS-DL respectively. At the 50 g L−1 concentration and pH 7, SA seems to run through the mem-
branes (fig. 3.1a), average SA retentions are: 3%, 15.5%, 0% and 0% for NF270, NTR7450, TS40 and
OS-DL respectively. At pH values lower than 7, SA also shows low retention at both concentrations,
with the highest being OS-DL at 5 g L−1 pH 2.2 with average 32.9%. All other SA retentions are
under 20% on average at pH < 7. This is possibly due to the counteracting forces of diffusion and
electrostatic repulsion. The electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged membrane and
the SA ions will help with rejection. At pH 7 the membrane is strongly negatively charged and most
SA is dissociated (see fig. 3.3) and also negatively charged. But at higher concentration it could be
that the diffusion effects are dominating the electrostatic repulsion, resulting in low rejection. The
electrostatic repulsion also becomes weaker with higher concentration due to the screening effect
[8].
The best retention is achieved by NF270, average 92.4% at pH 7 and solution of 5 g L−1 SA. OS-
DL and TS40 have close to the same rejection at these conditions, average of 91.1% and 87.2% (0.3%
and 5.6% lower) respectively, with the lowest retention from NTR7450 at average 82.8% (see fig.
3.1b). 92.4% is a decent rejection but 99% rejections have been reported for other divalent ions using
NF [22]. The rejection might improve with addition of other monovalent organic acid due to co-ion
competition [28] but this requires further study.
17
==PAGE:24==
Table 3.1: SA Retention and filtration time change for the membranes when switching between condi-
tions. Note that TS40 and OS-DL have zero SA retention at 50 g L−1 pH 7.
SA Retention decrease from 5 g L−1 to 50 g L−1
pH
NF270
NTR7450
TS40
OS-DL
7
96.8%
81.3%
100.0%
100.0%
2
19.0%
59.3%
13.2%
73.3%
SA Retention decrease from pH 7 to pH 2.2
Concentration
NF270
NTR7450
TS40
OS-DL
50 g L−1
-183.3%
69.0%
-
-
5 g L−1
88.6%
85.7%
91.3%
63.9%
Filtration time increase from 5 g L−1 to 50 g L−1
pH
NF270
NTR7450
TS40
OS-DL
7
1400.0%
5.3%
1900.0%
1000.0%
2
150.0%
66.7%
250.0%
140.0%
Filtration time increase from pH 2.2 to pH 7
Concentration
NF270
NTR7450
TS40
OS-DL
50 g L−1
2900.0%
100.0%
1685.7%
2191.7%
5 g L−1
400.0%
216.7%
212.5%
400.0%
Filtration time increase from pH 2.2 to pH 5
Concentration
NF270
NTR7450
TS40
OS-DL
50 g L−1
250.0%
30.0%
128.6%
116.7%
Interestingly the flux seems to be dramatically lower at higher pH, as demonstrated by the longer
filtration time (fig. 3.2 and tab. 3.1). Filtration time for OS-DL at 50 g L−1 went from 24 min at
pH 2.2 to 52 min (116.7% increase) at pH 5 and then to 550 min (2191.7% increase) at pH 7. NF270
went from 10 min at pH 2.2 to 35 min (250% increase) at pH 5 and then to 300 min (2900% increase)
at pH 7. The lowering of the flux occurs even though there is no noticeable increase in retention
at 50 g L−1 concentration, actually NF270, TS40 and OS-DL all have lower retention at pH 7 than
pH 2.2. It is unlikely to be internal membrane fouling as the WP remains the same before and after
filtration. An experiment was run using neutrally charged xylose at 64.6 g L−1 (molar equivalent
to 50 g L−1 SA), and no similarly significant increase in filtration time was found due to pH change,
at most going from 29 min at pH 2.2 to 58 min (100% increase) at pH 7 for NF270 (see fig. 3.2). At
neutral pH, SA is completely disassociated and therefore is negatively charged. By testing a solute
18
==PAGE:25==
with no charge it was confirmed that neither the neutral pH in itself nor the presence of a solute at
equimolar amounts to SA at 50 g L−1 caused the decrease in flux, and it is therefore reasonable to
assume the increase is related to the charge of the SA molecule.
The NTR7450 membrane does not show this increase of filtration time or decreases in retention
at high concentration. It shows the same filtration time increase from 10 min at pH 2.2 to 20 min
(100% increase) at pH 7 for both 50 g L−1 and 5 g L−1 concentrations. This is the same time increase
percentage observed in the most affected of the xylose experiments. This suggests that the NTR7450
is indifferent to the charge of the molecule with regards to flux and that higher concentration also
does not increase flux. This is possibly due to it being PES and not polyamide based (see fig. 1.3 and
tab. 2.1), but more work needs to be done before anything conclusive can be said about this.
A potential reason for the lower flux could be the hydration energy barrier. The hypothesis is that
SA bonds with water and makes an agglomerate that is too big for the pores, and requires additional
energy to break up. This will change the flux because the energy required for the water to enter
the membrane is increased. This happens at both high and low concentration, and a possible reason
why the high concentration sees the effect so much more, is because the amount of SA is higher and
therefore the amount of hydrogen bonds is higher. Essentially the required energy for water to pass
through is higher due to more water-SA bonds, but the pressure remains the same [30]. While the
hydration energy barrier will not naturally change retention because the SA affinity for the mem-
brane remains the same, it is possible that the bonded water molecules help screen the charged SA
which can make it easier for SA to pass through the membrane. This might be the reason why 3
membranes shows lower retention with higher pH at high concentration (50 g L−1 SA), but do not
seem to be the case at lower concentration (5 g L−1 SA) were experiments showed higher retention
at higher pH.
Another reason could be that the higher concentration of ions at neutral pH, i.e. disassociated SA
and NaOH added to neutralize the solution, could act to form an electric double layer on the charged
membrane with high viscoelectric forces [28, 29]. It is possible that the Na+ ions form a layer on
the membrane that attracts the succinate which then forms a second layer. This layer formation is
a version of concentration polarization called charge induced concentration polarization [26]. At
lower pH the ion concentration will be smaller because (I) less SA is dissociated (see fig. 3.3) and (II)
less NaOH is added to adjust pH. The membrane will similarly be less charged meaning an electric
double layer will either not form or be substantially weaker at low pH. This would therefore explain
19
==PAGE:26==
the decrease in flux at higher pH. As previously mentioned in sec. 1.5, an electric double layer can
change selectivity and this can explain why higher pH at low concentration gives higher retention.
The lower retention at high concentration can still be explained with dominating diffusion effects,
especially as the electric double layer is a form of concentration polarization. As a concentration
polarization possible ways to avoid it could be a CP drawer or cross-flow membrane. A CP drawer,
is an outlet pipe that removes the solute layer from the membrane surface via suction, and is a sim-
ple and efficient method [39]. A cross-flow filtration consists of a membrane with a tangential flow.
This is often the preferred as it helps to reduce both fouling and concentration polarization.
As only low concentrations of SA yielded any significant rejection, 5 g L−1 at pH 7, it is likely
that any attempt to filter SA from real broth will require significant dilution at some point. This
can make this approach more appealing for fermentation processes that do not achieve a high final
concentration, like continues fermentation with high throughput. The current production strategies
[9, 10, 11, 40] analysed in the second part of this work all strongly favor high final fermentation con-
centrations. So a process based on NF can potentially open up new options. For this NF270 would be
a good choice as it shows high retention and low filtration time. It should be noted that the current
processes use UF/NF but only to clean the fermentation broth, not to isolate SA.
3.1
Potential sources of errors
In order to get a pH 7 solution it was necessary to add an amount of NaOH equal to the amount
of dissociated SA. This means there was an equimolar amount of SA and Na+, which could bond
and increase the size of the SA molecule, reducing its ability to pass through a NF membrane. The
lower pH solutions had progressively less ions added. The difference in ion concentration could po-
tentially affect the performance of the different solutions beyond the change in pH due to attraction
and repulsion phenomena.
At one specific condition the average retention was slightly negative, -0.9% for TS40 and -6% for
OS-DL both at 50 g L−1 concentration and pH 7. Not all of the tests for TS40 and OS-DL at these
conditions showed negative retention but the average values still gave a negative retention. Because
there is no good explanation for these negative retention values and as they are inconsistent it was
assumed to be an measuring error due to very low retention and the average values was set to zero
for these experiments.
20
==PAGE:27==
4
Conclusion
Experiments run with the four membranes (see tab. 2.1) showed a retention of 92.4 ± 1.4%, 82.8 ±
0.2%, 87.2 ± 4.9% and 91.1 ± 1.0% for NF270, NTR7450, TS40 and OS-DL respectively when filtering
a 5 g L−1 SA in water at 4 bar and pH 7. NF270 gave the best performance at these conditions with
highest retention and lowest filtration time, with TS40 and DL-OS being 125% and 250% slower on
average. NTR7450 filtration time at 5 g L−1 pH 7 is equal to NF270 but retention is 9.6 percent points
lower.
Only test performed at pH 7 with low concentration SA (5 g L−1) showed rejection above 80%.
It was demonstrated that isolating SA with NF can be achieved with high rejection but only at low
concentrations (5 g L−1 SA). The works of Choi et al [41] and Kang et al [42] have shown similar
results working with SA diafiltration. Considering the SA concentration from fermentation is typ-
ically 30-50 g L−1 [5] up to 10 times dilution is needed. This is not very compatible with existing
production methods (see part II) that rely heavily on concentrating SA before crystallization.
Concentration and pH has a significant impact on filtration time, going from less than 20 min at
pH 2.2 with a concentration of 5 g L−1, to well over 8 hours at pH 7 with a concentration of 50 g
L−1. The cause is likely one of three things: (I) The hydration energy barrier is too high for succinate
to comfortably dissolve into the membrane without significantly more pressure than was applied
because of hydrogen bonds or bonds with Na+ [30], (II) the viscoelectric forces caused by Na+ accu-
mulating on the membrane surface causing formation of an electric double layer that increases the
solutions apparent viscosity [29] or (III) a combination of (I) and (II). Interestingly NTR7450 shows
only a slight increase in filtration time at higher pH, 10 min to 20 min from pH 2.2 to 7. This may be
caused by the difference in membrane material but further study is needed to support this.
4.1
Future work
In order to test if the hydration energy is the cause of the long filtration times, an experiment with
heating of the solution could be carried it out, since heating water reduces the amount of hydro-
gen bonds [43]. A suggestion could be to select one type of membrane, along with the 50 g L−1
concentration of SA at pH 7, and test the filtration time at different temperatures, e.g. 20℃, 30℃,
40℃…70℃, otherwise using the method described in section. 2.2.
Testing different concentrations at pH 7 could help specify when rejection of SA happens, and how
21
==PAGE:28==
the curve behaves. So far 5 g L−1 concentrations gives a high retention and 50 g L−1 concentration
gives a low retention, but more points are needed before a trend can be drawn. A suggestion could
be to select a membrane and test solutions at concentrations between 10 g L−1 and 40 g L−1, other-
wise using the method described in section 2.
All experiments were carried out a maximum pressure of 4 bar, which is relatively low compared
to normal NF pressures. It would be interesting to test at conditions closer to real NF and see if the
same issues and trends are present. As high pressure makes working with small volumes difficult
pilot-scale experiments would help significantly in reaching closer to real conditions.
Using a real fermentation broth for this experiment would allow testing of other salts/proteins/or-
ganic acids effect on filtration time and rejection of SA as well, and should also be carried out. After
testing both, they can be combined to give conditions even closer to a real fermentation.
22
==PAGE:29==
Part II
Techno-economic analysis of SA production
This part of the work focuses on analysing three existing bio-SA production strategies to better un-
derstand the technologies used in current industry. This knowledge together with emerging and
promising experimental processes is then applied to suggest a new potential production method. It
should be noted that no simulation software is used in this work. A decision was made to use actual
methods and values found from literature in order to obtain an analysis as faithful as possible to
real SA production processes. The four production processes were reconstructed entirely in excel
by making mass and energy balances for all unit operations, using the methods and values from lit-
erature, to calculate the in flows, out flows and utility costs of each and to calculate total operational
and capital costs.
5
Global succinic acid production from fermentation
Few companies in the world are currently engaged in SA production from fermentation on an indus-
trially relevant scale. The big push started back around 2010 when oil prices were skyrocketing [44].
Four big plants were constructed around this time to produce SA from fermentation feedstock. The
hope was to provide a cheaper more environmentally friendly way to produce a variety of plastics,
adhesives etc. normally derived from oil. Unfortunately due to improvements in extracting technol-
ogy (oil fracking) and other global circumstances the oil price plummeted in 2014 [44]. This meant
a fierce competition between SA produced from fermentation and from oil.
One of the SA plants capable of producing 14 kt y−1, build in Lake Providence, LA, USA in 2013
by a company called Myriant (now known as GC Innovation America) have since ceased produc-
tion. Cenan Ozmeral, the former CEO of Myriant has stated in an interview that ”the technology
behind biosuccinic acid is sound but that the industry could not compete when a flood of shale oil
and gas brought down prices for petrochemicals” [32]. Another one of the big beginners was a Cana-
dian company called BioAmber. In 2013 they build a plant in Sarnia, Ontario and used it to produce
30 kt y−1 SA from fermentation [45]. But they suffered from severe financial issues and was finally
dissolved and removed from all listed tradeable stock exchanges d.22-03-19. The third plant build in
2014 in Montmeló, Spain were a cooperative effort by the two companies BASF and Corbion. The
plant used to produce 10 kt y−1 of their trademarked SA product Succinity® but is reported idle at
23
==PAGE:30==
this time [45]. The last of these big plants was build in Cassano, Italy by a company called Reverdia,
a joint venture between DSM and Roquette. The plant is able to produce 10 kt y−1 of their succinic
acid product called BIOSUCCINIUM® utilizing a trademarked fermentation process. At d.01-04-
19 DSM announced Reverdia dissolved, however the partners, DSM and Roquette, transferred the
rights to the production plant to Roquette, which will continue to produce BIOSUCCINIUM® under
a non-exclusive license from DSM [32].
5.1
Analysed production companies
Based on a literature study, the production processes of 3 major bio-SA production companies were
reconstructed.
Bioamber: The first of the processes constructed as part of this work is based on the process de-
scribed by Bioamber. Bioamber has patented a technique were they use sequential evaporative
crystallization steps to isolate monoammonium succinate (MAS) from fermentation broths. MAS
can then be converted to SA and sold.
Succinity: The second process is based on work by BASF and Corbion for their production of a
brand of bio-SA called Succinity®. They use ammonium bisulfate (ABS) to convert diammonium
succinate (DAS) from fermentation into SA and crystallize it at the same time. They also apply a
methanol purification step to clean the produced SA.
Reverdia: The third process is based on work by DSM and Roquette for their joint SA producing
company Reverdia. The technique described use acid crystallization with HCl to recover SA from
fermentation broth.
5.2
Promising technologies for commercial SA production
Pateraki et al. [14] have shown in a recent work that incorporating membrane electrolysis into a
fed-batch fermentation of SA using B. succiniciproducens gives significant improvements. Testing
with a fed-batch control and the integrated membrane electrolysis system showed an average in-
crease in SA concentration of 6.83%, 10.50% and 29.14% (average 15.49%) when using spent sulphite
liquor, glucose and xylose as feedstock respectively. SA yield was likewise increased by 15.09%,
15.25% and 12.50% (average 14,28%) and productivity by 31.26%, 24.32% and 9.52% (average 22.04%).
Additionally the extracted SA solution from the integrated system was demonstrated to be clean
24
==PAGE:31==
enough that SA with purity of 99% w/w could be obtained after a concentration step using vacuum
evaporation and two crystallization steps, with a water wash between. They hypothesized that the
increase in general performance of the fermentation was likely caused by the production of H2 at
the cathode giving extra reductive power to the microorganism. The extraction of organic acids dur-
ing fermentation, limiting their inhibitive effects, also helped increase performance. They faced two
potential problems in their work. (I) Minerals leaked though the anion membrane used for electrol-
ysis necessitating an increase in fed nutrients. (II) Significant biofilm was formed on the membrane
potentially limiting the flux of acid extraction.
Ferone et al. [46] proved that A. succinogenes has a good production of SA in a packed-bed bioreac-
tor. They achieved a concentration of 43 g L−1, at a yield of 0.88 g SA per g glucose and the cell mass
managed to immobilize itself without assistance. In a later literature review they found that both SA
yield and volumetric productivity of A. succinogenes was higher in a biofilm than in a suspension.
They reported yields of 0.74 g SA per g glucose and volumetric productivity of 17.1 g L−1 h−1 for
the biofilm and yields of 0.48 g SA per g glucose and volumetric productivity of 1.83 g L−1h−1 in
suspension [47], which corresponds to more than a 50% increase for the yield and almost 10 times
increase for the productivity. They hypothesized this was because of a higher reducing power for
the SA producing pathway caused by the immobilized cells sharing reduction potential [47].
6
Process steps and data analysis
To understand the current SA production processes used in industry the processes of three major SA
producers were investigated in this work. The three processes are reconstructions of those used by
the commercial plants for bio-SA production, i.e. Reverdia, Bioamber, and Succinity, based on the
patents released by the companies [9, 10, 11] and other publications [40]. The individual processes
are described in sec. 7.1. For the study, 30 kt y−1 production plants were assumed as this is the same
production capacity reported by Bioamber [5]. All processes were assumed to have used identical
equipment for their shared unit operations where applicable. This is because the goal was to examine
the companies based on their entire processes, not their equipment.
6.1
Pretreatment
Due to the lack of information about the real feedstock used by the companies, it was decided to use
corn stover for every process because it is considered one of the most relevant feedstocks for bio-SA
25
==PAGE:32==
production [5]. Thus, the same pretreatment method used by Schell et. al. [48] was also included
in the process of every company. The dilute acid pretreatment consists of 1% H2SO4 loading, 15%
water loading, at 179 ℃, in an archimedean screw centrifuge (see fig. 6.1). The primary carbon source
from this process was xylose and yields upwards of 77% have been reported in literature using this
method [48]. The residence time is 6.2 min and the feedstock is treated and separated at the same
time. After separation, the feedstock enters the fermenters while the water, acid and dissolved
impurities are disposed of. For the sake of calculating the required heating it was assumed that 30%
of the water evaporates during treatment and the efficiency of heating was 80%. Additionally for
simplicity only heating of the water was considered. The feedstock is unlikely to contribute much
to the required heating as (I) it only accounts for 15% mass of the stream. (II) the heat capacity
of biomass is approximately half that of water [49] and (III) a little over 50% of the total required
heating is due to water evaporation alone.
Figure 6.1: Picture of an Archimedean screw centrifuge, an industrial decanter. [50].
6.2
Fermentation
For the fermentation process, beside the feedstock, also water, nutrients, buffer and CO2 were con-
sidered in the analysis. The amounts of each of them were calculated based on the targeted 30 kt
y−1 bio-SA produced and the yield and concentration of the host microorganism reported by the
companies [9, 10, 11, 46, 51]. The feedstock and water required for the fermentation were calculated
based on reported microorganism yields and SA concentrations from literature (see tab. 6.1). The
final mass of water and feedstock were found by balancing all unit operations in downstream such
as to get a final amount of produced SA equal to 30 kt y−1. The nutrients were added until 12.28
gL−1 [52] and CO2 was added stoichiometrically with the needed SA, calculated from the reaction
shown in fig. 6.2 (0.5 mole CO2 per mole SA).
To buffer the fermentors’ pH, Succinity, Bioamber and Reverdia used ammonium, while NaOH was
used for the P-BiSER process presented in sec. 7.2. The amount of NH3 or NaOH required to buffer
26
==PAGE:33==
the fermentation was calculated stoichiometrically on the produced bio-SA using eq. (6.1).
n(NH3) = 2n(SA)
(6.1a)
m(NH3) = n(NH3) · M(NH3)
(6.1b)
Figure 6.2: Possible metabolic pathway of a organism modified to only produce succinic acid [53].
Glu=glucose, PEP=Phosphoenolpyruvate, Pyr=Pyruvate, AcCoA=acetyl coenzyme A, Fum=Fumarase,
Mal=malate, OXA=oxaloacetate, SA=succinic acid.
To maintain the optimal temperature between 30-37℃(depending on the microorganism) in the fer-
menters, chilling was applied against (I) the exothermic reaction of SA production, calculated from
heat of formation, using see eq. (6.2)), and (II) the estimated heat of metabolism from the microorgan-
ism. The heat of metabolism used was the one found in the work by Russell [54] and was assumed
to be the same for all the microorganisms. Cooling was assumed to be from Vapor-compression
refrigeration and a factor of 0,2604 W per W cooling needed [55] is used to calculate the cost. SA
formation was assumed to be the most prolific and significant reaction, so the cooling calculation
did not consider any other reactions except the base metabolic heat. [40, 53, 54].
Oxygen was added to the growth phase assuming an oxygen uptake rate (OUR) of 100 mol h−1
m−3 [56]. Bioamber, Reverdia and Succinity used 72 hour fermentation batches and the P-BiSER
process is a continuous fermentation with an assumed residence time of 24 hours.
27
==PAGE:34==
Heat of reaction for SA fermentation was calculated using Hess law, assuming the reaction path-
way from fig. 6.2 and enthalpy of formation values are from Physical chemistry by Peter Atkins
[57]:
∆HR = ∆Hf,SA −(∆Hf,Glu · 7
12) −(∆Hf,CO2 · 1
2)
(6.2a)
(−940.26) −(−1271 · 7
12) −(−393.5 · 1
2) = −2.0933
kJ
molSA
(6.2b)
Table 6.1: Yield (kg-SA per kg-feedstock) and final succinic acid concentration (g L−1) of the microor-
ganisms used in the four production processes.
Process
Organism
Yield (wt%)
Concentration, g L−1
Reference
Bioamber
C. krusei
0.69
48.2
[47]
Succinity
B. succiniciproducens
0.69
77.6
[9, 58]
Reverdia
S. cerevisiae
0.74
43
[11, 51]
P-BiSER process
A. succinogenes
0.88
43 (49.66)∗
[46]
∗with a 15.49% improvement over base value
6.3
Evaporation
It was assumed that all evaporators were multi-effect evaporators with a heat efficiency of 80%. The
concentration factor and operating temperatures were based on information from the patents [9, 10,
11]. For the P-BiSER process it was assumed 80% water was removed at 120℃, which is comparable to
the other processes. The heating required for the evaporation steps was calculated based on the heat
capacity (CP) and heat of evaporation (Hvap) values for water. The Succinity process has methanol
distillation, an evaporation unit operation which uses the Cp and Hvap values for methanol instead.
It was assumed the dissolved organic acids and salts would have a low impact on CP and Hvap
even though specific heat capacity decreases as the concentration of ions increases [59]. This was a
simplifying assumption that might have increased the calculated heating a little.
28
==PAGE:35==
Table 6.2: Evaporation methods for the processes
Process
Unit operation
Operating temperature (°C)
SA conc. before/after (gSA kg−1
stream)
Reverdia
Evaporation
75
46.5 / 329
Reverdia
Evaporative crys-
tallization
80
400 / 989
Succinity
Evaporation
100
87.1 / 242
Succinity
Methanol distilla-
tion
70
59.9 / 89.9
Succinity
Methanol evapo-
rator
70
200 / 1000
Bioamber
Evaporation
135
44.8 / 475.2
Bioamber
Evaporative crys-
tallization 1
60
288.2 / 688.1
Bioamber
Evaporative crys-
tallization 2
40
80.1 / 210.8
Bioamber
Evaporative crys-
tallization 3
20
163.1/ 326.1
Bioamber
Evaporative crys-
tallization 4
100
392 / 653.3
P-BiSER
Evaporation
120
49.7 / 245.8
6.4
Crystallization
There were several different crystallization operations in the four processes. The Reverdia process
adds HCl to facilitate bio-SA crystallization and it operates at 25℃. The P-BiSER process (see sec. 7.2)
includes crystallization as final step at 4℃with no added acid as seen in literature [12, 14, 20]. The
amount of crystallized acid for both processes was determined based on solubility data [12, 60]. The
Bioamber process uses evaporative crystallization where a conversion from diammonium succinate
(DAS) to monoammonium succinate (MAS) helps drive the crystallisation of MAS, later converted
to SA. These steps have been calculated using information from the patent [10] that also contains
solubility data for MAS/DAS/SA mixtures. The Succinity process adds ammonium bisulfate that
reacts with the MAS and DAS to generate crystallized SA and ammonium sulfate. The efficiency
of Succinity’s crystallization was not apparent from the patent or from any other data investigated,
29
==PAGE:36==
and it was assumed that 70% of the SA crystallizes. Solubility data can be seen in fig. 6.3 and fig. 6.4.
It was assumed all crystallization steps were followed by centrifugation to separate crystals from
mother liquor. The exact kinetics for the crystallizations were also unknown so it was assumed all
crystallizations had a space time of 12 hours and that all would reach equilibrium (based on solubility
data).
Figure 6.3: SA solubility at different temperatures (left) and different pH at 25 ℃(right). pH is changed
with HCl and NaOH. [12]
Figure 6.4: MAS solubility data from Bioamber patent [10]
6.5
Membrane filtration
Each process, except the P-BiSER process (see sec. 7.2), uses both MF and NF to purify their streams.
Both Bioamber and Succinity use MF and NF right after fermentation. Reverdia uses it after the
first crystallization step and with recycled broth. The P-BiSER process includes an anion exchange
membrane built into the fermentation. The operational cost for MF uses a value of 0.1 $ per m3
30
==PAGE:37==
filtered liquid. This accounts for membrane replacement, power and chemicals [61]. For NF the
price is 1.8 $ per m3 filtered liquid [62]. For the P-BiSER process, the operation costs is based on the
electrical performance reported by Pateraki [14], assuming it can be scaled linearly.
6.6
Ion exchange
Ion exchange columns are used by Reverdia and Bioamber before the final crystallization. The resin
is regenerated with HCl an NaOH and the required amount was calculated stoichiometrically with
SA production. It was assumed that the resin needed replacing every 4 years [63]. The stream was
heated to 50℃[64] with 80% efficiency, and it was assumed there was no significant evaporation.
6.7
Thermal decomposition
The Succinity process reacts ABS with DAS, converting it ito SA and generating AS. The AS is re-
covered and thermally decomposed at 300℃into ABS and ammonia which are then reused in the
fermentation and crystallization steps. Ideally the salt will be completely reusable, but here it was
assumed that 5% would be lost with every cycle.
The heat required was calculated assuming pure AS (Cp = 1.4 kJ kg−1 C−1), evaporation of am-
monia (Hvap = 23.37 kJ kg−1) and a heat of decomposition for AS of 2935.2 kJ kg−1 [57].
6.8
Waste disposal
Waste is divided into hazardous and non-hazardous. The hazardous waste was assumed to come
from other organic acids (lactic, acetic, formic) also produced during fermentation. For all of the
processes, the amount of non-SA organic acid was estimated to be 15.2 g L−1 broth found from
B. Succiniciproducens [58]. The non-hazardous waste consisted primarily of dirty water from the
pretreatment and leftover biomass after fermentation.
6.9
Capital costs
Capital costs of all units were based on models from Coulson and Richardson’s Chemical engineer-
ing; Vol. 6: Chemical engineering design [65]. Tank, fermentor and reactor prices were taken from
the book while equipment not found in the book was taken from various suppliers. Some equipment
prices were scaled using the scaling factor, eq. (6.3), also from Coulson and Richardson. For the in-
dex ”n”, a value of 0.6 was used. This value, called the six-tenths rule, is a well known average index
31
==PAGE:38==
value [65]. Prices from the book are from 2004 and were updated to 2020 using the chemical indexes
172.2 (2004) and 290.6 (2020) [66] and eq. (6.4). Membrane module prices were based on a paper by S.
Sethi and M. R. Wiesner [67]. Anion exchange membrane price was given directly by supplier [68]
after estimating the size of the membrane by geometrically scaling-up the in situ electrochemical
extraction process of Pateraki [14]. The cost was then estimated with the eq. (6.3). A 10% delivery
and instalment price increase was applied to each piece of equipment. The total equipment cost,
excluding membranes where this cost is already included, was multiplied by a Lang factor of 3.6
which is appropriate for mixed solid/liquid plants [65], to get the fixed capital cost.
C2 = C1 ·
(S2
S1
)n
(6.3)
Cyear,A = Cyear,B · indexyear,A
indexyear,B
(6.4)
C is the cost in dollar and S is the size. Subscript 1 and 2 refer to the original size and the required
size, respectively. n is the scaling index, a value of 0.6 is used in this work.
Table 6.3: Buying prices for the different chemicals. Sourced from various online suppliers. The SA
price is taken from Morales et al. [69].
Chemical
Price ($ kg−1)
Chemical
Price ($ kg−1)
Succinic Acid
2.75 [69]
K2HPO4
1.20 [70]
Water
0.01 [71]
Biotine
850.00 [72]
NH4OH
0.10 [73]
Thiamine
40.00 [74]
NH4HSO4
1.65 [75]
Ampicilline
30.00 [76]
Corn stover
0.16 [77]
ZnSO4*7H2O
0.0032 [78]
H2SO4
0.23 [79]
MnSO4*H2O
1.40 [80]
NH3
0.60 [81]
H3BO3
1.20 [82]
HCl
0.14 [83]
Na2MoO4*2H2O
10.00 [84]
NaOH
0.10 [85]
Al2(SO4)3*18H2O
0.50[86]
CO2
1.40 [87]
FeSO4*7H2O
0.0032 [88]
Yeast extract
0.80 [89]
CaCl2*2H2O
0.03 [90]
MgSO4*7H2O
0.09 [91]
6.10
Economic viability
The economic viability of the processes was assessed based on a 10-year operation period with an
additional 3-year construction period. A standard depreciation period of 5-years was assumed along
32
==PAGE:39==
with a construction inflation rate of 0.02% y−1, SA price inflation rate of 0.02% y−1, production cost
inflation rate of 0.01% y−1, an income tax rate of 0.35%, 274 days of production per year, and a SA
sales price of 2.75$ kg−1 [69]. After the 10-year operation period the return of investment (ROI) and
net return (NR) was calculated. The payback period after operation starts was also calculated but is
only applicable to the P-BiSER process as the others operate at a loss. The equations used to calculate
ROI, PP and NR are illustrated below. The results are summarized in the cash flow statements for
OPEX and CAPEX and can be found in tab. 7.1 and tab. 7.2 respectively.
ROI = 100% · SANP
YR · CI
(6.5)
PP =
CI
SANP
YR
(6.6)
NR = SANP
YR −CI · ACDR
(6.7)
PP is payback period, CI is capital investment, SANP is sum of annual net profit, YR is years running,
NR is net return and ACDR is annual compounding discount rate.
7
Results and Discussion
7.1
Reconstruction of commercial production processes
The processes as they have been constructed in this work are described below. Flowcharts with
calculated annual production flows and electricity usage for unit operations are detailed in fig 7.1,
fig 7.2 and fig 7.3.
7.1.1
Bioamber process
The Bioamber patent starts with the feedstock being fermented using an engineered strain of the
yeast Candida krusei. The specific strain is called ”Pichia kudriavzevii 13723” and is described in a
work by Jung Ho et. al [92]. During fermentation the produced SA is neutralized with ammonia to
keep the pH around 3.4. The ammonia bonds with SA to form DAS. The broth from the fermentation
is clarified by passing though membranes, which are assumed to be one MF and one NF. The MF is
used to remove the cells and similar sized particles and the NF is used to clear anything larger than
DAS, like pigments and smaller proteins. After the membranes, the permeate is sent to a reactive
evaporation step, where the broth is concentrated and more ammonia is added to transform remain-
ing SA into a combination of DAS and MAS. The MAS is then separated in a three step evaporative
crystallization.
33
==PAGE:40==
In the evaporative crystallization steps, the water from the broth is evaporated to increase MAS/-
DAS concentration until MAS starts to precipitate. MAS has a lower solubility than DAS and will
therefore start to precipitate first. When MAS precipitates, DAS will start to convert to MAS to
maintain equilibrium. This increase in MAS will in turn keep the precipitation going, creating a
”pump effect” that effectively converts and precipitates almost all succinate in the form of MAS [10].
The three evaporative crystallization steps can in collaboration capture 95% of the succinate from
the fermentation broth [10].
The separated MAS is redissolved in water and passed through an ion exchange column to convert
MAS into SA and to remove any impurities. A last evaporative crystallization step is then used to
obtain pure SA crystals [40]. Uncrystallized SA from this step is recycled to the reactive evaporation
step.
Figure 7.1: Constructed process flow diagram of Bioamber plant in Sarnia, based on data from Nghiem
et al [40] and patent [10]. Concentration values refer to SA, kt y−1 is kilotons total production stream
per year and kWh y−1 signifies the electricity usage for the unit operation per year. Enlarged version
can be found in Appendix fig. A.2
7.1.2
Succinity process
The Succinity process uses B. succiniciproducens a Gram-negative bacteria known for its ability to
produce SA. This bacteria strain has been further modified to promote SA production and is patented
by BASF (owner of Succinity) [40]. The fermentation is performed at around pH 7 and the SA is neu-
tralized with ammonia creating DAS.
34
==PAGE:41==
The fermentation broth is first subjected to a filtration process to remove cells and proteins followed
by an evaporation step to concentrate the broth. The next step is an acid crystallization where ABS
is added. The ABS reacts with DAS to form SA and AS. The reaction is illustrated in eq. (7.1). The
addition of ABS lowers the pH of the broth to around 1.5. At this point the solubility of SA will be
very low, causing it to precipitate.
2NH4HSO4 + C4H4O4(NH4)2 −→C4H6O4 + 2(NH4)2SO4
(7.1)
The precipitated SA is separated from the solution and dissolved in methanol. SA has a good solubil-
ity in methanol while any co-precipitated AS has a very low solubility [93]. The methanol solution
is separated from the undissolved impurities and evaporated to obtain crystallized SA.
Methanol is also added to the liquid solution from the acid crystallization to extract as much of the
remaining SA as possible. The methanol will cause AS to precipitate while SA remains in solution.
The solution is then distilled to recover methanol and the rest is recycled back to the concentration
evaporation step.
The precipitated AS is fed to a thermal cracker and heated to 300℃. At this temperature AS de-
composes into ABS and ammonia. The ammonia is captured and used to feed the fermentation and
the ABS is recycled back to the acid crystallization step. This means that almost all chemicals are
recycled and very little is wasted [9].
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 7.2: Constructed process flow diagram of BASF plant in Montmeló, based on data from patent
[9]. Concentration values refer to SA, kt y−1 is kilotons total production stream per year and kWh y−1
signifies the electricity usage for the unit operation per year. Enlarged version can be found in Appendix
fig. A.3
7.1.3
Reverdia process
Reverdia uses an engineered and optimized strain of the yeast S. cerevisiae, developed by Royal DSM.
It is designed for ethanol-succinic acid co-production using the ethanol production to provide ATP
for the SA production [40].
The first downstream process is an evaporation to remove 80% of the water, followed by the stream
being cooled in a crystallization. This is followed by a centrifugation where the mother liquor and
solid SA is separated. Reverdia uses acid crystallization, where they lower the pH with HCl, using
the fact that SA is less soluble at lower pH. The mother liquor is sent to MF, then NF to remove
impurities, and recycled into the evaporation. Solid SA is re-solubilised and then purified in an
anion-exchange column at 50℃[64]. Then 60% of the water is evaporated and the rest is sent to
crystallization and centrifugation. The precipitated SA is dried, and the mother liquor is sent to MF,
then NF and recycled into the first evaporation step [11].
36
==PAGE:43==
Figure 7.3: Constructed process flow diagram of Roquette plant in Cassano, based on data from patent
[11]. Concentration values refer to SA, kt y−1 is kilotons total production stream per year and kWh y−1
signifies the electricity usage for the unit operation per year. Enlarged version can be found in Appendix
fig. A.4
7.2
A novel production process using emerging technologies
This process is hypothetical and based on other publications, particularly that of (I) Pateraki et al
[14] using electrochemical in situ removal of SA, (II) the work of Ferone about continuous fermenta-
tion from immobilised cells [46], (III) a review about bioreactors for bio-SA production [47]. It has
been dubbed ”Packed-bed biofilm continuous fermentation with in situ electrochemical removal”
(P-BiSER).
The P-BiSER process utilizes electrodes, electricity and an anion exchange membrane to separate
SA from the fermentation broth continuously. It utilizes a continuous fermentation with immobi-
lized cells growing in bio-film. In the work of Pateraki et al [14] they showed that going from a
normal fed-batch fermentation to the electrochemical process gave an average increase of 15.49%
for the final concentration. It is assumed that this will also hold true with the P-BiSER process the-
orized in this work. The work of Pateraki et al. [14] also showed increase in productivity and yield
but this has not been accounted for here, as the A. succinogenes [46] has an SA yield from pretreatred
corn stover that is almost 0.2 higher than the B. succiniciproducens [58] used in their work.
The P-BiSER process is envisioned to ferment corn stover using A. succinogenes but in a continuous
fermentation unlike the other processes. A. succinogenes will grow in a packed-bed biofilm reactor
37
==PAGE:44==
and SA is removed in situ using electrodialysis with an anion exchange membrane. The P-BiSER
process will extract succinate through the membrane and convert it into SA. The anion exchange
membrane does not transmit most impurities from the broth (cells, proteins, pigments etc.), creating
a permeate consisting only of organic acids and small negatively charged ions and minerals. This
means further filtration steps are unnecessary.
The permeate from P-BiSER is concentrated in a multi effect evaporator, removing 80% of the water
and is subsequently crystallized at 4℃[12]. The SA left in the liquor is disposed of, as it proved not
to be economically feasible to recycle it.
One of the ideas behind the P-BiSER is to cut down the number of unit operations by combining
many functions into one. The in situ electrochemical removal combines the fermentation and fil-
tration into one unit operation. The anion exchange membrane filters out most impurities and the
electrical system extracts SA out of the broth and also converts succinate into SA at the anode. Be-
cause succinate is converted at the anode, a later operation like acid crystallization or ion-exchange
is not needed to ensure complete conversion. The forced removal of SA from the broth has the
potential to create a higher SA concentration in the permeate than in the fermentation broth. As
mentioned, the work by Pateraki et al. [14] demonstrated an average of 15.49% increase in SA con-
centration using electrochemical removal. This is not enough for crystallization so an evaporative
concentration operation is still needed.
Using bio-film will improve culture stability and potentially also tolerance to high SA concentra-
tions [46]. It has been shown that A. succinogenes gives increased yield when growing in biofilm,
likely because the cells can share reducing power [94, 95]. It will also help prevent washout at higher
dilution rates. It is hoped that immobilising the bio-film inside the fermenter will also reduce or pre-
vent bio-film formation on the anion exchange membrane, a problem mentioned by Pateraki et al.
[14].
38
==PAGE:45==
Figure 7.4: Process flow diagram of the theoretical electrochemical plant proposed in this work. Con-
centration values refer to SA, kt y−1 is kilotons total production stream per year and kWh y−1 signifies
the electricity usage for the unit operation per year. Enlarged version can be found in Appendix Fig. A.5
7.3
Economic results
For each process the operating and capital costs are summarized in tab. 7.1 and tab. 7.2 respectively.
7.3.1
Operational costs
Evaporation is the most costly unit operation, amounting to 30-50% of total utilities cost for the
processes. A common way to reduce heating expenses is steam recycling. It could have an impact
on the profitability of the processes, especially if multiple process plants are run in close proximity,
and is therefore worthy of further considerations [96]. For this work it is assumed there is no steam
recycling as the processes are analysed as singular plants. Because of the high cost of evaporation,
the SA concentration achievable in the fermentation stage has a high impact on the net profit. One
potential benefit of an in situ electrochemical removal process is the ability to get a high concentra-
tion after fermentation. In his work Pateraki [14] only demonstrated an average 15.49% increase in
SA concentration when the fermentation ended. However, in one particular experiment they con-
tinued to remove SA long after the fermentation activity was terminated, which resulted in a final
increase in SA concentration of 178.54% from the fed-batch control. Reaching this SA concentration
took four times as long as the fermentation. This indicates that the production of SA was signifi-
cantly faster than the removal. It is therefore possible that a better balance between SA removal-
and production speed will lead to increased SA concentration after fermentation. Further study into
adapting the electrical SA removal to better fit fermentation performance, especially at larger-scale,
would be beneficial as even small increases in SA concentration can lower the cost of evaporation.
39
==PAGE:46==
Table 7.1: OPEX cash flow statement for the four processes
Reverdia
Bioamber
Succinity
P-BiSER
Notes
Pretreatment, 106 $ year−1
Raw materials
7.32
8.47
9.02
5.88
Feedstock assumed to be corn stover
Water
3.03
3.50
3.73
2.45
Utilities
7.48
7.21
9.21
6.05
Fermentation, 106 $ year−1
Nutrients
13.86
10.66
13.15
13.49
Include CO2 and pH adjustment
Water
6.60
7.00
4.44
5.95
Utilities
7.41
7.96
6.78
4.95
Downstream, 106 $ year−1
Evaporation
34.23
35.28
29.13
26.69
Membrane filtration
0.28
1.42
0.97
-
Ion-exchange
- Water
0.45
0.48
-
-
- Utilities
0.27
0.28
-
-
- Chemicals
2.83
3.00
-
-
Used to regenerate the column
- Resin
0.39
0.68
-
-
Assumed 4 year lifetime
Methanol evaporation
-
-
5.24
-
Crystallization
11.78
10.73
7.30
1.19
Overhead 106 $ year−1
Operators salary
1.02
1.02
1.02
1.02
Maintenance & repairs
1.80
2.13
1.60
0.56
Assumed to be 6% of FCI
Distribution & selling
1.65
1.65
1.65
1.65
Assumed to be 2% of Sales
Waste disposal
11.82
13.66
14.55
9.29
Total, 106 $ year−1
112.22
115.16
107.78
79.16
Production, $ kg−1SA
3.74
3.84
3.59
2.68
Net return, 106$
-20.32
-22.39
-12.50
1.54
Assuming 2.75 $ kg−1 sales price
The P-BiSER process’s increase in performance has only been shown in lab scale, and although it is
assumed in this work that electricity required scales linearly, this is not necessarily true and can po-
tentially become problematic at large-scale. The electricity consumption is affected by the amount
of removed SA and other acids, but also removed minerals and likely from H+ and OH−fluxes
across the anion membrane [14]. The exact mechanisms are not well understood and this makes it
hard to predict how it will change when scaled up. Therefore larger-scale experiments, including
pilot tests, are required for verification. The consequences of non-linearly scaling electricity con-
sumption are considered in the sensitivity analysis (see sec. 7.3.3). It should also be mentioned that
40
==PAGE:47==
the method suggested in this work is not the same as the one performed by Pateraki et al [14]. The
method in this work is a continuous fermentation using immobilised microorganisms, instead of
fed-batch, and using an engineered strain of A. succinogenes that should have better performance
than an unoptimized strain of B. succiniciproducens [46]. This should allow a higher productivity
and yield than a similar size reactor using the method by Pateraki et al. [97].
The crystallization cost of the P-BiSER process is 6-10 times lower than the others due to it hav-
ing only one such step at the end, as can be seen on tab. 7.1. The other processes have multiple
crystallization steps or equivalents to increase the purity, which is unnecessary in the P-BiSER pro-
cess as the stream post fermentation has already been cleansed of everything but organic acids and
trace amounts of minerals. It has been shown in lab-scale that one crystallization is sufficient [12,
14] to achieve purity upwards of 99% SA. In large-scale production a second crystallization stage
could potentially be needed to ensure high purity but this again needs verification.
Figure 7.5: Cake diagrams showing the distribution of OPEX.
41
==PAGE:48==
7.3.2
Capital costs
Table 7.2: CAPEX cash flow statement for the four processes
Reverdia
Bioamber
Succinity
P-BiSER
Pretreatment, 106 $
0.06
0.07
0.07
0.05
Fermentation, 106 $
7.08
7.30
4.83
1.93
Downstream, 106 $
Evaporation
0.18
0.20
0.54
0.12
Membrane filtration
0.12
1.17
0.80
0.71∗
Ion-exchange
1.70
2.95
-
-
Methanol evaporation
-
-
0.50
-
Crystallization
0.39
0.99
1.21
0.41
Total delivery cost of equipment, 106 $
9.53
12.68
7.96
3.23
Fixed Capital Investment, 106 $
29.97
35.49
26.58
9.64
ROI, % y−1
-40.16
-36.81
-23.08
28.29
Payback period, y
-
-
-
1.51
∗membrane filtration price for P-BiSER refers to the anion-exchange membrane inside the fermenter
The equipment costs used to calculate CAPEX in this work are based on information from actual
online suppliers and the engineering reference book by Coulson and Richardson [65]. In reality,
prices can change significantly through deals between companies and construction location. The
equipment cost in this work must therefore be considered as a guideline. This is no different from
similar work [33, 98]. In the sensitivity analysis (sec. 7.3.3) it can be seen that variations in equip-
ment cost have very little impact on the economic viability of the three current processes. This is
because they all operate at a loss with the assumed SA price of 2.75 $ kg−1 [69]. It is more relevant
for the P-BiSER process but an equipment cost increase of 100% is needed before the process stops
being economically viable over 10 years operation, see fig. 7.6.
The P-BiSER process has by far the lowest capital costs. This is because (I) the continuous pro-
cess requires far smaller reaction tanks than batch processes [99] and (II) because of the method
used for separating SA from the fermentation broth does not require as many unit operations as the
other processes, post-fermentation.
Since the P-BiSER uses a novel way of making a fermenter a precisely matching piece of equip-
ment could not be found for purchase. The price is therefore assumed to be equal to the price of the
fermentor plus the price of the electrochemical removal unit. The price might be significantly dif-
42
==PAGE:49==
ferent, since specialized equipment is usually more expensive. This is likely not a problem as (I) the
CAPEX of the P-BiSER is already significantly lower thant the other processes, (II) it is possible to
connect a normal fermentor to a separate electochemical removal unit and cycle the broth between
them instead of using one integrated unit.
7.3.3
Sensitivity Analysis
It can be seen in fig. 7.6 that all processes follow the same trends, with only the P-BiSER process
having an ROI of above 0% at standard conditions. Out of all of them, the SA sales price has the
highest impact on ROI as a function of variation. Here it as assumed the price is 2.75 $ kg−1 [69]. It
only takes a 10% decrease in sales price for even the P-BiSER process to be unprofitable, and around
a 20% increase for the others to be profitable. The sales price is a factor that is hard to influence since
it is determined entirely by the market, and attempts at improving the processes should therefore
not focus on it except as a measurement for success.
Utilities have almost as high an impact, even the P-BiSER process becomes unprofitable if it’s utility
expenses increase by just 15%. This makes testing the assumption of whether the electricity require-
ment of the fermentation scales linearly or not, quite important since it accounts for a significant
portion of the utilities for the P-BiSER process. Placing the plant in an area with low electricity
prices would help the issue but is not always an option. A large part of the utility costs comes from
heating expenses, therefore steam recycling or more efficient evaporators will be highly beneficial.
Feedstock is not particularly relevant to ROI. For Bioamber, Succinity and Reverdia even if the sup-
plied feedstock is free it does not make any of the processes profitable. The P-BiSER process is more
vulnerable to changes here, but it still requires a 70% price increase before it becomes unprofitable.
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 7.6: Spider-type sensitivity analysis plots showing the change in ROI with variation in process
variables.
Equipment cost is only important for the P-BiSER process, where a 50% increase or decrease causes
the ROI to become about 75% or 10% respectively. The other processes are not significantly affected.
Even for the P-BiSER it takes over a 100% increase in cost for the process to become economically
nonviable. It should be noted that for the sensitivity analysis the cost of maintenance is changed
44
==PAGE:51==
proportionally with the price of equipment, which gives a direct impact on OPEX aside from the
higher capital investment.
Cost of chemicals has somewhat of an impact. Chemicals here include: HCl, H2SO4, NaOH, NH3,
CO2, purified water, nutrients and ion-exchange resin replacement. If the combined price of those
increase with 30%, the P-BiSER process is unprofitable, and if it decrease with 40% then Succinity is
profitable. The other processes need more than a 60% decrease before they are profitable. Chemical
prices are hard to ascertain and likely to change over time as the market fluctuates, but since the
sensitivity of the processes is not that high it is unlikely it will be an important issue. Private deals
between supplier and consumer can also have a high impact but this is beyond the scope of this
work.
7.4
Technological readiness level assessment
The Bioamber, Succinity and Reverdia processes are all based on existing industrial-scale plants
(10-30 kt SA year−1) and can therefore be considered technologically viable if not necessarily eco-
nomically. The electrochemical process uses well established methods for evaporation and crystal-
lization, however the in situ electrochemical extraction of SA during fermentation does not seem to
have been attempted at large-scale. Large-scale electrodialysis and fermentation are both well estab-
lished technologies and in situ electrodialysis during fermentation has been well demonstrated in lab
work [14, 100, 101]. No articles showing this in large-scale have been found and the authors of this
work knows of no cases from industry. This will per the European definition lock the technology at
readiness level 4 as seen in tab. 7.4.
Table 7.3: Keywords search on articles using Scopus.
Keywords
Hits
electrodialysis, industrial
340
electrodialysis, industrial, acid
77
electrodialysis, fermentation
222
electrodialysis, fermentation, industrial
17
electrodialysis, industrial, succinic acid, fermentation
3
45
==PAGE:52==
Table 7.4: Definition of Techology readiness leves from eruopean commission 2020[102]
Readiness level
Benchmark
TRL 1
Basic principles observed
TRL 2
Technology concept formulated
TRL 3
Experimental proof of concept
TRL 4
Technology validated in lab
TRL 5
Technology validated in relevant environment (industri-
ally relevant environment in the case of key enabling tech-
nologies)
TRL 6
Technology demonstrated in relevant environment (indus-
trially relevant environment in the case of key enabling
technologies)
TRL 7
System prototype demonstration in operational environ-
ment
TRL 8
System complete and qualified
TRL 9
Actual system proven in operational environment (compet-
itive manufacturing in the case of key enabling technolo-
gies; or in space)
8
Conclusion
Of the four bio-SA production processes analysed in this work the P-BiSER process is the best option,
since it is the only profitable process at the assumed prices and conditions. Its cost of SA production
is 2.68 $ kg−1, while the cost of SA production found for the Bioamber, Succinity and Reverdia pro-
cesses is 43.3% (3.84 $ kg−1), 34% (3.59 $ kg−1) and 39.6% (3.74 $ kg−1) higher respectively. P-BiSER
also has significantly cheaper capital costs at 3.23 M$ compered to the other processes which are
292.6% (12.68 M$), 146.4% (7.96 M$) and 195.0% (9.53 M$) more expensive respectively.
In total, the bio-SA from the P-BiSER process is at minimum 25% cheaper to produce than the other
processes and the plant is minimum 60% cheaper to build.
The ROI for each process was calculated from the SA production price, the capital costs and an as-
sumed sales price of 2.75 $ kg−1. For the P-BiSER, Bioamber, Succinity and Reverdia their respective
46
==PAGE:53==
ROI was found to be 28.29%, -36.81%, -23.08% and -40.16%. This shows that the three real manufac-
turing processes are not profitable at these conditions. This somewhat matches expectations since
both Bioamber and Succinity have gone of the SA market [45]. From this it can be concluded that
new methods/technologies are needed if bio-SA is to compete against petrochemically produced SA.
The sensitivity analysis showed that the most important of the process variables is the utilities cost.
Reducing this, either through relocation for cheaper electricity or by having more energy efficient
unit operations, is the best way of improving the ROI. The sales price of SA does have the greatest
impact on the ROI but it is also something controlled largely by the market.
The P-BiSER process shows great promise with marked improvement over the current processes.
However, it is based on lab-scale experiments and theory and needs to be tested in pilot-scale and/or
full-scale.
8.1
Future work
Plans are underway to run experiments on a pilot-scale P-BiSER. Results from this experimentation
can hopefully help refine the economic evaluation of this process.
A thorough look at process optimization and system integration would also be of great benefit. In
general trying to incorporate more green solutions and ”zero waste concepts” [34] into the process
seems to be the future. Many of these measures saves money and are good for business in general
but for bio-SA the sustainability is really its greatest advantage over SA from petroleum.
47
==PAGE:54==
References
[1]
“Data for biochemical research. 3rd edition”. eng. In: General Pharmacology 18.18 (1987),
p. 673. issn: 18790011, 03063623. doi: 10.1016/0306-3623(87)90059-0.
[2]
Rafael Luque et al. “Chemical transformations of succinic acid recovered from fer-
mentation broths by a novel direct vacuum distillation-crystallisation method”. eng. In:
Green Chemistry 11.2 (2009), pp. 193–200. issn: 14639270, 14639262. doi: 10 . 1039 /
b813409j.
[3]
Paris IEA. “The Future of Petrochemicals”. In: Tech. rep. (2018).
[4]
Kurt Lohbeck et al. Maleic and Fumaric Acids. eng. American Cancer Society, 2000. isbn:
9783527306732.
[5]
Enrico
Mancini
et
al.
“From
second
generation
feed-stocks
to
innovative
fer-
mentation
and
downstream
techniques
for
succinic
acid
production”.
eng.
In:
Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology (2019), pp. 1–45. issn: 15476537,
10643389. doi: 10.1080/10643389.2019.1670530.
[6]
Ryosuke Kawasumi et al. “One-step Conversion of Levulinic Acid to Succinic Acid Using
I2/t-BuOK System: The Iodoform Reaction Revisited”. eng. In: Scientific Reports 7.1 (2017),
p. 17967. issn: 20452322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-17116-4.
[7]
BiofuelsDigest. GFBiochemicals reaches commercial-scale in renewable levulinic acid project.
url: http : / / www . biofuelsdigest . com / bdigest / 2015 / 07 / 22 /
gfbiochemicals - reaches - commercial - scale - in - renewable -
levulinic-acid-project/ (visited on 13/03/2020).
[8]
Panwana Khunnonkwao et al. “A two steps membrane process for the recovery of succinic
acid from fermentation broth”. eng. In: Separation and Purification Technology 207 (2018),
pp. 451–460. issn: 18733794, 13835866. doi: 10.1016/j.seppur.2018.06.056.
[9]
Sanjay Yedur et. al. “Method for making succinic acid, bacterial variants for use in the process,
and methods for obtaining variants”. U.S. pat. US 6,265,190 B1. 24 July 2001.
[10]
Olan S. Fruchey et. al. “Processes for producing monoammoniumsuccinate from fer-
mentation broths containing diammoniumsuccinate, monoammoniumsuccinate and/or suc-
cinic acid, and conversion of monoammoniumsuccinate to succinic acid”. U.S. pat. US
2011/0237831 A1. 18 March 2011.
48
==PAGE:55==
[11]
Baptiste et. al Boit. “Method for making succinic acid, bacterial variants for use in the process,
and methods for obtaining variants”. U.S. pat. US 10,189,767 B2. 29 January 2019.
[12]
Qiang Li et al. “One step recovery of succinic acid from fermentation broths by crys-
tallization”. eng. In: Separation and Purification Technology 72.3 (2010), pp. 294–300. issn:
13835866, 18733794. doi: 10.1016/j.seppur.2010.02.021.
[13]
Yiwen Xiao et al. “Two-Stage Crystallization Combining Direct Succinimide Syn-
thesis
for
the
Recovery
of
Succinic
Acid
From
Fermentation
Broth”.
eng.
In:
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 7 (2020), p. 471. issn: 22964185. doi:
10.3389/fbioe.2019.00471.
[14]
Chrysanthi Pateraki et al. “Direct electrochemical extraction increases microbial succinic
acid production from spent sulphite liquor”. eng. In: Green Chemistry 21.9 (2019), pp. 2401–
2411. issn: 14639270, 14639262. doi: 10.1039/c9gc00361d.
[15]
Henley Seader and Roper. Seperation Process Priniples. eng. Wiley Inc., 2011. isbn: 978-0-
479-48183-7.
[16]
Mark A. Shmorhun. “BER.Myrant Succinic Acid Biorefinery”. In: Tech. rep. (2015).
[17]
Kou Guangzhi Li Changtao Zhao Shijie Zhou Yijiang Qin Xubin Jiao Guangming. “Method
for eliminating oxalic acid during citric acid fermentation process”. U.S. pat. CN103641708B.
25 November 2013.
[18]
C. López et al. “Dye Decolorization by Manganese Peroxidase in an Enzymatic Membrane
Bioreactor”. eng. In: Biotechnology Progress 20.1 (2004), pp. 74–81. issn: 15206033, 87567938.
doi: 10.1021/bp030025c.
[19]
Richard W. Baker. Membrane Technology and Applications. eng. John Wiley and Sons, 2012,
Online–Ressource (xiv, 575 p.) (unknown). isbn: 9780470743720, 1118359682, 9781118359716,
9781118359686, 1283644983, 1118359712, 0470743727, 1118359690. doi: 10 . 1002 /
9781118359686.
[20]
Nguyen Thi Huong Thuy and Apichat Boontawan. “Production of very-high purity suc-
cinic acid from fermentation broth using microfiltration and nanofiltration-assisted crys-
tallization”. eng. In: Journal of Membrane Science 524 (2017), pp. 470–481. issn: 18733123,
03767388. doi: 10.1016/j.memsci.2016.11.073.
49
==PAGE:56==
[21]
Nguyen Thi Huong Thuy et al. “Fermentation and crystallization of succinic acid from Actin-
obacillus succinogenes ATCC55618 using fresh cassava root as the main substrate”. eng. In:
Bioresource Technology 233 (2017), pp. 342–352. issn: 09608524, 18732976. doi: 10.1016/
j.biortech.2017.02.114.
[22]
Endre Nagy. Basic equations of mass transport through a membrane layer. eng. Elsevier,
2018, pp. 1–545. isbn: 9780128137222, 0128137223, 0128137231. doi: 10.1016/c2016-
0-04043-3.
[23]
H. K. Shon et al. “Nanofiltration for water and wastewater treatment – a mini review”. eng. In:
Drinking Water Engineering and Science Discussions 6.1 (2013), pp. 59–77. issn: 19969481.
doi: 10.5194/dwesd-6-59-2013.
[24]
Buchacher et al. “Current Manufacturing of Human Plasma Immunoglobulin G”. eng. In:
Biopharmaceutical Processing: Development, Design, and Implementation (2018), pp. 857–
876. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-08-100623-8.00043-8.
[25]
HC Vanderhorst et al. “Use of nanofiltration for concentration and demineralization in
the dairy-industry - model for mass-transport”. eng. In: Journal of Membrane Science 104.3
(1995), pp. 205–218. issn: 18733123, 03767388. doi: 10 . 1016 / 0376 - 7388(95 )
00041-A.
[26]
A. R.D. Verliefde et al. “The role of electrostatic interactions on the rejection of organic
solutes in aqueous solutions with nanofiltration”. eng. In: Journal of Membrane Science 322.1
(2008), pp. 52–66. issn: 18733123, 03767388. doi: 10.1016/j.memsci.2008.05.
022.
[27]
David R. Lide. CRC handbook of chemistry and physics. eng. Taylor
Francis, 2005,
Forsk.pag. isbn: 0849304865, 9780849304866.
[28]
Jianquan Luo and Yinhua Wan. “Effects of pH and salt on nanofiltration-a critical review”.
eng. In: Journal of Membrane Science 438 (2013), pp. 18–28. issn: 18733123, 03767388. doi:
10.1016/j.memsci.2013.03.029.
[29]
W.Richard Bowen and Frank Jenner. “Electroviscous Effects in Charged Capillaries”. eng. In:
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science (1995). issn: 10957103, 00219797. doi: 10.1006/
jcis.1995.1339.
50
==PAGE:57==
[30]
Razi Epsztein et al. “Activation behavior for ion permeation in ion-exchange membranes:
Role of ion dehydration in selective transport”. eng. In: Journal of Membrane Science 580
(2019), pp. 316–326. issn: 18733123, 03767388. doi: 10.1016/j.memsci.2019.02.
009.
[31]
FA LONG and WF MCDEVIT. “ACTIVITY COEFFICIENTS OF NONELECTROLYTE
SOLUTES IN AQUEOUS SALT SOLUTIONS”. eng. In: Chemical Reviews 51.1 (1952), pp. 119–
169. issn: 15206890, 00092665. doi: 10.1021/cr60158a004.
[32]
Green Chemicals Blog. The changing landscape of bio-based succinic acid. url: https://
greenchemicalsblog.com/2019/02/24/the-changing-landscape-
of-bio-based-succinic-acid/ (visited on 06/03/2020).
[33]
Cagri Efe, Luuk A. M. van der Wielen and Adrie J. J. Straathof. “Techno-economic ana-
lysis of succinic acid production using adsorption from fermentation medium”. eng. In:
Biomass and Bioenergy 56 (2013), pp. 479–492, 479–492. issn: 18732909, 09619534.
[34]
Nipun Garg et al. “Sustainable solutions by integrating process synthesis-intensification”.
eng. In: Computers and Chemical Engineering 126 (2019), pp. 499–519. issn: 00981354,
18734375. doi: 10.1016/j.compchemeng.2019.04.030.
[35]
Andrea J.C. Semião and Andrea I. Schäfer. “Estrogenic micropollutant adsorption dynam-
ics onto nanofiltration membranes”. eng. In: Journal of Membrane Science 381.1-2 (2011),
pp. 132–141. issn: 18733123, 03767388. doi: 10.1016/j.memsci.2011.07.031.
[36]
TOSHINORI TSURU et al. “Peptide and Amino Acid Separation with Nanofiltration Mem-
branes”. In: Separation Science and Technology 29.8 (1994), pp. 971–984. doi: 10.1080/
01496399408005611.
[37]
Shirin Mal Ganji. “Process optimization for the recovery of bioactive compounds and nat-
ural pigments from peach processing waste by enzyme assisted extraction and membrane
filtration”. In: Tech. rep. (2018).
[38]
SJ Macnaughton et al. “Application of nanofiltration to the treatment of uranium mill efflu-
ents”. In: Tech. rep. (2002).
[39]
Yinhua Wan et al. “Method, equipment and specific drawer for membrane separation utiliz-
ing concentration polarization”. U.S. pat. US8252184B2. 28 July 2012.
[40]
Nhuan P. Nghiem, Susanne Kleff and Stefan Schwegmann. “Succinic acid: Technology devel-
opment and commercialization”. eng. In: Fermentation 3.2 (2017), p. 3020026. issn: 23115637.
doi: 10.3390/fermentation3020026.
51
==PAGE:58==
[41]
Jae-Hoon
Choi,
Kensuke
Fukushi
and
Kazuo
Yamamoto.
“A
study
on
the
re-
moval of organic acids from wastewaters using nanofiltration membranes”. eng. In:
Separation and Purification Technology 59.1 (2008), pp. 17–25. issn: 13835866, 18733794.
doi: 10.1016/j.seppur.2007.05.021.
[42]
Sang Hyeon Kang and Yong Keun Chang. “Removal of organic acid salts from
simulated
fermentation
broth
containing
succinate
by
nanofiltration”.
eng.
In:
Journal of Membrane Science (2004). issn: 18733123, 03767388. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
memsci.2004.08.014.
[43]
Abhishek Rastogi, Amit K. Ghosh and S. J. Suresh. “Hydrogen Bond Interactions
Between Water Molecules in Bulk Liquid, Near Electrode Surfaces and Around Ions”. eng.
In: Thermodynamics - Physical Chemistry of Aqueous Systems (2011). Ed. by Juan Carlos
Moreno-Pirajan, pp. 351–64, 351–364.
[44]
Investopidia.
Why did oil prices drop so much in 2014?
url:
https : / / www .
investopedia.com/ask/answers/030315/why- did- oil- prices-
drop-so-much-2014.asp (visited on 10/03/2020).
[45]
Chemicals Engineering News. Succinic acid, once a biobased chemical star, is barely being made.
url: https : / / cen . acs . org / content / cen / articles / 97 / i12 /
Succinic-acid-once-biobased-chemical.html (visited on 06/03/2020).
[46]
Mariateresa Ferone et al. “Continuous succinic acid fermentation by Actinobacillus succino-
genes in a packed-bed biofilm reactor”. eng. In: Biotechnology for Biofuels 11 (2018). issn:
17546834. doi: 10.1186/s13068-018-1143-7.
[47]
Mariateresa Ferone et al. “Bioreactors for succinic acid production processes”. eng. In:
Critical Reviews in Biotechnology 39.4 (2019), pp. 571–586. issn: 15497801, 07388551. doi:
10.1080/07388551.2019.1592105.
[48]
Daniel J Schell et al. “Dilute-sulfuric acid pretreatment of corn stover in pilot-scale re-
actor: investigation of yields, kinetics, and enzymatic digestibilities of solids”. eng. In:
Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology 105 -108 (2003), pp. 69–85, 69–85. issn: 15590291,
02732289. doi: 10.1385/abab:105:1-3:69.
[49]
Capucine Dupont et al. “Heat capacity measurements of various biomass types and pyrolysis
residues”. eng. In: Fuel 115 (2014), pp. 644–651. issn: 18737153, 00162361. doi: 10.1016/
j.fuel.2013.07.086.
52
==PAGE:59==
[50]
Alibaba.com. Model PDC Decanter Centrifuge Dehydrate Machine for Sewage Treatment Plants.
url: https : / / www . alibaba . com / product - detail / Model - PDC -
Decanter - Centrifuge - Dehydrate - Machine _ 60016691858 . html
(visited on 21/07/2020).
[51]
Jose ́ Manuel Otero et al. “Industrial systems biology of Saccharomyces cerevisiae 12 BioMed
Research International enables novel succinic acid cell factory”. eng. In: (2016).
[52]
Guillaume Filey. “Process for the crystallization of succinic acid”. U.S. pat. EP 2 371 802 A1.
30 March 2010.
[53]
Carel D. van Heerden and Willie Nicol. “Continuous and batch cultures of Escherichia coli
KJ134 for succinic acid fermentation: Metabolic flux distributions and production character-
istics”. eng. In: Microbial Cell Factories 12.1 (2013), p. 80. issn: 14752859. doi: 10.1186/
1475-2859-12-80.
[54]
J B Russell. “Heat production by ruminal bacteria in continuous culture and its relation-
ship to maintenance energy”. eng. In: Journal of Bacteriology 168.2 (1986), pp. 694–701. issn:
10985530, 00219193. doi: 10.1128/jb.168.2.694-701.1986.
[55]
James R. Couper, W. Roy Penney and James R. Fair. Chemical Process Equipment Revised 2E.
eng. Elsevier Inc., 2010. isbn: 9780123725066. doi: 10.1016/C2009-0-25918-6.
[56]
C. Galleher J. Crater and J. Lievense. “Consultancy on Large-Scale Submerged Aerobic Cul-
tivation Process Design”. In: Tech. rep. (2018).
[57]
Peter Atkins and Julio de Paula. Physical Chemistry ; Vol. 1: Thermodynamics and Kinetics.
eng. Oxford university, 2010. isbn: 978-1-4292-3127-5, 1-4292-3127-0.
[58]
Davinia Salvachúa et al. “Succinic acid production from lignocellulosic hydrolysate by Basfia
succiniciproducens”. eng. In: Bioresource Technology 214 (2016), pp. 558–566. issn: 18732976,
09608524. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2016.05.018.
[59]
FD
Rossini.
“Heat
capacities
in
some
aqueous
solutions”.
eng.
In:
Bureau of Standards Journal of Research 4.1-3 (1930), pp. 313–327. issn: 00911801. doi:
10.6028/jres.004.023.
[60]
Pubchem. Succinic acid (Compound). url: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov / compound / Succinic - acid # section = Solubility (visited on
30/06/2020).
53
==PAGE:60==
[61]
A. Rosengart et al. “Development of an ultrafiltration predictive model to estimate the cost
of downstream in biorefineries: Effects of epistemic experimental uncertainties”. eng. In:
Energy Conversion and Management 149 (2017), pp. 875–884. issn: 18792227, 01968904. doi:
10.1016/j.enconman.2017.03.043.
[62]
A. Rosengart et al. “Development of an ultrafiltration predictive model to estimate the cost
of downstream in biorefineries: Effects of epistemic experimental uncertainties”. eng. In:
Energy Conversion and Management 149 (2017), pp. 875–884. issn: 18792227, 01968904. doi:
10.1016/j.enconman.2017.03.043.
[63]
Inc. M.L. Ball Company. How Does Ion Exchange Resin Work, and How Long Does It Last?
url: https://mlball.com/2019/11/how-does-ion-exchange-resin-
work-and-how-long-does-it-last/ (visited on 09/07/2020).
[64]
Anonymous. “Microbial succinic acid producers and purification of succinic acid”. eng.
In: Official Gazette of the United States Patent and Trademark Office Patents (2015). issn:
15549550, 00981133.
[65]
Ray
K.
Sinnott,
J.
F.
Richardson
and
J.
M.
Coulson.
Coulson and Richardson’s Chemical engineering ; Vol. 6: Chemical engineering design.
eng. Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, 2005. isbn: 1280948639, 008049255x, 0750665386,
9786610948635.
[66]
Federal Bank of St. Louis. Producer Price Index by Industry: Chemical Manufacturing. url:
https : / / fred . stlouisfed . org / series / PCU325325 (visited on
01/07/2020).
[67]
S Sethi and MR Wiesner. “Cost modeling and estimation of crossflow membrane filtra-
tion processes”. eng. In: Environmental Engineering Science 17.2 (2000), pp. 61–79. issn:
15579018, 10928758. doi: 10.1089/ees.2000.17.61.
[68]
Membranes International Inc. Anion membrane sheet quotation. url: asd (visited on
30/06/2020).
[69]
Merten Morales et al. “Sustainability assessment of succinic acid production technologies
from biomass using metabolic engineering”. eng. In: Energy and Environmental Science 9.9
(2016), pp. 2794–2805. issn: 17545706, 17545692. doi: 10.1039/c6ee00634e.
54
==PAGE:61==
[70]
Alibaba.com.
Food Grade Dipotassium Phosphate CAS No.7758-11-4.
url:
https
:
/ / www . alibaba . com / product - detail / Food - Grade -
Dipotassium - Phosphate - CAS - No _ 262757128 . html ? spm = a2700 .
galleryofferlist.0.0.55414271RjRf6H&s=p&fullFirstScreen=
true (visited on 24/07/2020).
[71]
ELGA
LabWater.
Freshly prepared lab water or commercially bottled pure water?
url:
https://www.elgalabwater.com/blog/freshly- prepared- lab-
water - or - commercially- bottled - pure - water- part- 4 (visited on
24/07/2020).
[72]
Alibaba.com. High Quality water-soluble vitamin 98% d biotin. url: https : / / www .
alibaba . com / product - detail / High - Quality - water - soluble -
vitamin-98_62495609425.html?spm=a2700.galleryofferlist.0.
0.29c43527taAw9F&s=p (visited on 24/07/2020).
[73]
Alibaba.com. Top Purity 99% min Ammonium Hydrogen Sulphate. url: https://www.
alibaba . com / product - detail / Top - Purity - 99 - min - Ammonium -
Hydrogen_50038466962.html?spm=a2700.7724857.normalList.32.
7d9d19762gPBxi (visited on 24/07/2020).
[74]
Alibaba.com.
FCC-STANDARD/ FOOD GRADE/ Vitamin B1/ Thiamine Hcl Powder.
url: https : / / www . alibaba . com / product - detail / Graphic -
Customization-Vitamin-Hcl-FCC-STANDARD_62491870366.html?
spm=a2700.galleryofferlist.0.0.457453ecTQmmb8&s=p (visited on
24/07/2020).
[75]
Alibaba.
57% Ammonium Bisulfate Solution agriculture liquid fertilizer NH4HSO3.
url:
https : / / www . alibaba . com / product - detail / 57 - Ammonium -
Bisulfate - Solution - agriculture - liquid _ 60762904982 . html ?
spm = a2700 . galleryofferlist . 0 . 0 . 411826acmY1WeD (visited on
15/07/2020).
[76]
Alibaba.com. High Quality Powder Cas 69-53-4 Ampicillin With Best Price. url: https :
//www.alibaba.com/product-detail/High-Quality-Powder-Cas-
69-53_1600059845280.html?spm=a2700.galleryofferlist.0.0.
58651d56YkAgmf&s=p (visited on 24/07/2020).
55
==PAGE:62==
[77]
Jena L. Thompson and Wallace E. Tyner. “Corn stover for bioenergy production: Cost es-
timates and farmer supply response”. eng. In: Biomass and Bioenergy 62 (2014), pp. 166–173.
issn: 18732909, 09619534. doi: 10.1016/j.biombioe.2013.12.020.
[78]
Alibaba.com. High grade 99.5% magnesium sulfate heptahydrate CAS No.10034-99-8. url:
https : / / www . alibaba . com / product - detail / High - grade -
99 - 5 - magnesium - sulfate _ 62146526660 . html ? spm = a2700 .
galleryofferlist.0.0.2bcc7a401LpCRh&s=p (visited on 24/07/2020).
[79]
Alibaba.com. Sulfuric Acid 98 H2SO4 Best Price. url: https : / / www . alibaba .
com / product - detail / Sulfuric - Acid - 98 - H2SO4 - Best -
Price _ 60760971161 . html ? spm = a2700 . 7724857 . normalList . 2 .
6e662218l87Dnz&s=p (visited on 24/07/2020).
[80]
Alibaba.com. Food grade Manganese Sulphate Monohydrate. url: https : / / www .
alibaba . com / product - detail / One - Stop - Service - Manganese -
Sulphate-Food_60574673921.html?spm=a2700.galleryofferlist.
0.0.487b38b9XlQstK&s=p (visited on 24/07/2020).
[81]
Alibaba.com.
Factory Bulk Supply 99.9% Purity R717 NH3 liquid ammonia for sale.
url:
https : / / www . alibaba . com / product - detail / Factory - Bulk -
Supply - 99 - 9 - Purity _ 62233049491 . html ? spm = a2700 . 7724857 .
normalList.2.35fad441uBZUv0&s=p (visited on 24/07/2020).
[82]
Alibaba.com.
Low Price Of 99.5% Purity H3BO3/B(OH)3 Boric acid CAS:10043-35-3.
url:
https://www.alibaba.com/product-detail/With-Free-Sample-
Boric - Acid - Manufacturer _ 60691046901 . html ? spm = a2700 .
galleryofferlist.0.0.19143378taPj07&s=p (visited on 24/07/2020).
[83]
Alibaba.com. Hydro Chloric Acid. url: https://www.alibaba.com/product-
detail / Hydro - Chloric - Acid _ 111035092 . html ? spm = a2700 .
7724857.normalList.86.75e36203NqIrUF (visited on 24/07/2020).
[84]
Alibaba.com. High purity Sodium molybdate dihydrate. url: https://www.alibaba.
com / product - detail / White - Powder - High - Purity - Sodium -
Molybdate_60740196054.html?spm=a2700.galleryofferlist.0.
0.30a833a1qSonTq&s=p (visited on 24/07/2020).
56
==PAGE:63==
[85]
Alibaba.com.
CAS NO 1310-73–2 caustic soda / sodium hydroxide factory in china.
url:
https://www.alibaba.com/product-detail/CAS-NO-1310-73-2-
caustic_60763271661.html?spm=a2700.7724857.normalList.2.
cf441e204PgXqx (visited on 24/07/2020).
[86]
Alibaba.com.
Water Treatment Flake Granular Powder Buy Aluminum Sulfate.
url:
https://www.alibaba.com/product- detail/Water- Treatment-
Flake - Granular - Powder - Buy _ 1600065155642 . html ? spm = a2700 .
galleryofferlist.0.0.7ae96591RzLVg6&s=p (visited on 24/07/2020).
[87]
Linde Group. Carbon Dioxide Cylinder, Industrial Grade, Compressed Gas. url: https :
//www.boconline.co.uk/shop/en/uk/carbon-dioxide-cylinder#
product1 (visited on 24/07/2020).
[88]
Alibaba.com. High grade 99.5% magnesium sulfate heptahydrate CAS No.10034-99-8. url:
https : / / www . alibaba . com / product - detail / Industrial -
Grade - High - Grade - 99 - 5 _ 62146526660 . html ? spm = a2700 .
galleryofferlist.0.0.299e11e56cNddD&s=p (visited on 24/07/2020).
[89]
Alibaba.com. yeast extract. url: https : / / www . alibaba . com / product -
detail / yeast - extract _ 60764696568 . html ? spm = a2700 .
galleryofferlist.0.0.2acf66866J4gd4&s=p (visited on 24/07/2020).
[90]
Alibaba.com. Good quality calcium chloride dihydrate food grade with good service. url:
https : / / www . alibaba . com / product - detail / Good - quality -
calcium - chloride - dihydrate - food _ 62323704226 . html ? spm =
a2700 . galleryofferlist . 0 . 0 . 7a1c64a6t9phcB & s = p (visited on
24/07/2020).
[91]
Alibaba.com. high purity Magnesium sulphate heptahydrate crystal. url: https://www.
alibaba . com / product - detail / Industrial - Grade - Mgso4 -
7h2o - Magnesium - Sulfate _ 62472245157 . html ? spm = a2700 .
galleryofferlist.0.0.7f01ccd5LMaFWT&s=p (visited on 24/07/2020).
[92]
Jung Ho Ahn, Yu Sin Jang and Sang Yup Lee. “Production of succinic acid by metabolically
engineered microorganisms”. eng. In: Current Opinion in Biotechnology 42 (2016), pp. 54–
66. issn: 18790429, 09581669. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2016.02.034.
[93]
Nicholas P Greco. “Method for separating ammonium sulfate from an aqueous solution of
ammonium bisulfate and ammonium sulfate”. U.S. pat. US3902859A. 2 September 1975.
57
==PAGE:64==
[94]
K. Maharaj, M. F.A. Bradfield and W. Nicol. “Succinic acid-producing biofilms of
Actinobacillus
succinogenes:
Reproducibility,
stability
and
productivity”.
eng.
In:
Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 98.17 (2014), pp. 7379–7386. issn: 14320614,
01757598. doi: 10.1007/s00253-014-5779-3.
[95]
Michael F. A. Bradfield and Willie Nicol. “Continuous succinic acid production from xyl-
ose by Actinobacillus succinogenes”. eng. In: Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering 39.2
(2016), pp. 233–244. issn: 16157605, 16157591. doi: 10.1007/s00449-015-1507-3.
[96]
Seyed Soheil Mansouri et al. “Resource recovery from bio-based production processes: a
future necessity?” eng. In: Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering 18 (2017), pp. 1–9. issn:
22113398. doi: 10.1016/j.coche.2017.06.002.
[97]
Jason Crater et al. “Consultancy on Large-Scale Submerged Aerobic Cultivation Process
Design”. In: Tech. rep. (2016).
[98]
Bruno C. Klein et al. “Process development and techno-economic analysis of bio-based
succinic acid derived from pentoses integrated to a sugarcane biorefinery”. eng. In:
Biofuels, Bioproducts and Biorefining 11.6 (2017), pp. 1051–1064. issn: 19321031, 1932104x.
doi: 10.1002/bbb.1813.
[99]
Easy Biology Class. Batch Fermentation vs Continuous Fermentation. url: https : / /
www.easybiologyclass.com/batch-fermentation-vs-continuous-
fermentation - process - similarities - and - differences - a -
comparison-table/ (visited on 24/07/2020).
[100]
Jiyun Baek et al. “Separation of acetate produced from C1 gas fermentation using an
electrodialysis-based bioelectrochemical system”. eng. In: Energies 11.10 (2018), 2770 (12 pp.),
2770 (12 pp.) issn: 19961073. doi: 10.3390/en11102770.
[101]
Ludwig Selder et al. “Co-cultures with integrated in situ product removal for lactate-based
propionic acid production”. eng. In: Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering 43.6 (2020),
pp. 1027–1035. issn: 16157605, 16157591. doi: 10.1007/s00449-020-02300-0.
[102]
European Commission. Technology readiness levels (TRL). url: https://ec.europa.
eu/info/index_en (visited on 15/07/2020).
58
==PAGE:65==
A
Enlarged figures
Figure A.1: Filtration time for 5 ml SA solution, 50 g L−1 in Amicon cell at 4 bar.
A1
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.2: Constructed process flow diagram of Bioamber plant in Sarnia, based on data from Nghiem
et al [40] and patent [10]. Concentration values refer to SA, kt y−1 is kilotons total production stream
per year and kWh y−1 signifies the electricity usage for the unit operation per year.
A2
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.3: Constructed process flow diagram of BASF plant in Montmeló, based on data from patent
[9]. Concentration values refer to SA, kt y−1 is kilotons total production stream per year and kWh y−1
signifies the electricity usage for the unit operation per year.
A3
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.4: Constructed process flow diagram of Roquette plant in Cassano, based on data from patent
[11]. Concentration values refer to SA, kt y−1 is kilotons total production stream per year and kWh y−1
signifies the electricity usage for the unit operation per year.
A4
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.5: Process flow diagram of the theoretical electrochemical plant proposed in this work. Con-
centration values refer to SA, kt y−1 is kilotons total production stream per year and kWh y−1 signifies
the electricity usage for the unit operation per year.
A5
