==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis:
Individual user tracking in dynamic
environments using machine vision and
monocular cameras
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
By Mads Lyngsaae Nielsen
==PAGE:2==
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and
monocular cameras
Thesis period:
20/01/2020 - 20/07/2020
Education:
Master of science, Msc
Study programme:
Electrical Engineering
Rights:
© Mads Lyngsaae Nielsen, 2020
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared over six months, from the 20th of January to
the 20th of July.
It has been made in cooperation with DTU compute at the
Technical University of Denmark, DTU, and in cooperation with Mobile Industrial
Robots, MiR. The thesis is a partial fulﬁlment for the degree of Master of science
in Electrical Engineering. It has been designed as a two-sided print version, and
therefore blank pages may appear.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge within the ﬁelds of computer
vision and deep learning.
The thesis report has been solely written by Mads Lyngsaae Nielsen, who there-
fore has the full authorship of the report.
Mads Lyngsaae Nielsen - s147098
Signature
Date
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
i
==PAGE:4==
Abstract - English
This thesis report provides detailed explanation and a critical evaluation of two
diﬀerent methods that can be applied to track a speciﬁc person using only visual
inputs from a monocular camera. The task has been developed in collaboration
with Mobile Industrial Robots (MiR), a company that supplies robots for stor-
age facilities among others. In those settings, it would be very useful for MiR if
their robots, equipped with a monocular camera, could follow a user once a body
posture signal is given.
The two applied methods both contain a human detection network in form of
YOLO and a pose estimation network in form of PoseNet to be able to detect
certain posture signals. Finally a Siamese network is included in both methods
to generate feature vectors, which are necessary to re-identify the user. All of the
networks use images as inputs.
While Method 1 is built around the previous mentioned networks; YOLO, PoseNet
and a Siamese network, Method 2 also includes a action-decision network (AD-
Net). Initially, ADNet was supposed to be implemented instead of YOLO and the
Siamese network in order to make Method 2 faster and allow for the ADNet output
to potentially directly control the robot. Through the implementation of ADNet it
became clear that ADNet network is not yet good enough on its own, and therefore
demands a YOLO and a Siamese network.
After conducting several tests to compare the performance between Method 1 and
Method 2 in diﬀerent situations, it is shown that Method 1 is better at tracking
the user in more complex situations. These included situations with multiple
people in the frame and people temporarily occluding the image. Method 1 is
better than Method 2 in complex situations because it updates both of its buﬀers
containing the feature vectors for all the people in the scene. Method 2, however,
only updates both of the buﬀers when it uses the YOLO network, whereas it only
updates the buﬀer containing the feature vectors of the target user when it uses
the ADNet. This makes it more diﬃcult to re-identify the target user in situations
where ADNet has been used for a longer period.
In summation, while Method 2 has the potential of working faster and being
used to control the robot directly through the ADNet output, Method 1 has more
reliable performance in complex situations. As these situations are very likely
to happen at storage facilities, where MiR robots are mostly used, it is of high
importance for the applied method to still perform reliably. Thus, for the task
given by MiR as the objective for this thesis, Method 1 is overall the more desirable
of the two methods and should be chosen for a reliable and stable performance.
Both methods have been implemented in Python. To see the full implementation,
see Github repository:
https://github.com/Lyngsaae/Individual-user-tracking---MscThesis_DTU_Spring2020
ii
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:5==
Abstract - Danish
Denne specialerapport giver en detaljeret beskrivelse og en kritisk evaluering af to
forskellige metoder, der kan blive anvendt til at tracke en bestemt person ved brug
af et visuelt input fra et monokulært kamera. Opgaven er blevet udviklet i samar-
bejde med Mobile Industrial Robots (MiR), som er et ﬁrma, der sælger robotter til
lagerfaciliteter blandt andre. I disse omgivelser vil det være meget anvendeligt for
MiR, hvis deres robotter, der er udstyret med et monokulært kamera, kan følge
efter en bruger, efter at et signal er modtaget i form af en bestemt kropsposition
hos brugeren.
De to anvendte metoder benytter sig begge af et detektionsnetværk for mennesker
i form af YOLO, og et kropspositions estimeringsnetværk i form af PoseNet, hvilket
bliver brugt til at detektere bruger inputs. Til sidst er et Siamese network også
inkluderet i begge metoder til at generere feature vektorer, som er nødvendige for
at genkende brugeren. All disse netværk benytter sig af billede inputs.
Hvor Metode 1 er bygget på baggrund af YOLO, PoseNet og et Siamese netværk,
indeholder Metode 2 også et Action-decison netværk (ADNet). I første omgang var
det meningen at ADNet skulle implementeres i stedet for at bruge YOLO og det
Siamese netværk, for derved at gøre Metode 2 hurtigere samt have mulighed for
at bruge ADNets output til at kontrollere robotten direkte. Men igennem imple-
menteringen af ADNet blev det klart, at ADNet ikke er godt nok endnu til at klare
trackingen selv. Derfor var der brug for en kombination med YOLO og et Siamese
netværk.
Efter at have udført gentagne forsøg for at sammenligne de to metoders præsta-
tion i forskellige situationer, blev det påvist, at Metode 1 er bedre til at tracke en
bruger i mere komplekse situationer. Det inkluderer situationer med ﬂere per-
soner i billedet og midlertidig okklusion af brugeren. Grunden til at Metode 1 er
bedre end Metode 2 til at håndtere disse mere komplekse situationer er, at Metode
1 opdaterer sine 2 buﬀere efter hvert nyt billede. Buﬀerne indeholder alle per-
soner i billedets feature vector. Derimod opdaterer Metode 2 kun begge buﬀere
når YOLO bliver brugt, hvorimod når ADNet benyttes opdateres kun buﬀeren,
der indeholder feature vektorer af brugeren. Det gør det sværere at genkende
brugeren i situationer hvor ADNet har været brugt i længere tid.
Konklusionenen er, at selvom Metode 2 har potentiale til at køre hurtigere og
blive brugt til direkte kontrol af robotten, er Metode 1 mere ønskelig, idet den
præsterer mere stabilt i komplekse situationer. Særligt fordi, at det er forventeligt,
at MiRs robotter bliver brugt i lagerfaciliter hvor disse mere komplekse situationer
forekommer. Som endelig opsummering, viser Metode 2 altså potentiale til at
køre hurtigere og blive brugt til direkte kontrol af robotten, mens Metode 1 er
mere stabil i forhold til at tracke brugere i komplekse miljøer. Derfor er Metode 1
formentlig den mest ønskelige for MiR, idet det forventes at MiRs robotter bliver
benyttet i relativt komplekse miljøer.
Begge metoder er blevet implementeret i Python.
Alt implementeret kode kan
ﬁndes i følgende Github repository:
https://github.com/Lyngsaae/Individual-user-tracking---MscThesis_DTU_Spring2020
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Anders Bjorholm Dahl, Professor MSO, DTU
I would like to thank Anders for being my main supervisor for this thesis and ar-
ranging the weekly advisory meeting with supervisory PhD students and other
master students, who are currently writing their thesis.
Elias Sørensen, Team leader, Mobile Industrial Robots
I would like to thank Elias for supplying the task for this master thesis and for
giving advice and support throughout the project.
Janus Nørtoft Jensen, Ph.D student, DTU
I would like to thank Janus for all his inputs through the weekly supervisory meet-
ings.
Morten Hannemose, Ph.D student, DTU
I would like to thank Morten for all his inputs through the weekly supervisory meet-
ings.
iv
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1 Project introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2 Project description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3 Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4 Prerequisite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5 Thesis report structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1 Pose signal detection: PoseNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2 Object detector: YOLO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3 Re-identiﬁcation: Siamese network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4 Single object tracker: Action-Decision Network . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Implementation of neural networks
13
3.1 PoseNet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2 YOLO
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3 Siamese network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4 Action-Decision Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Methods
23
4.1 Signal detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2 Re-identiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3 Method 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4 Method 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Results
35
5.1 Method 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2 Method 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3 Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Discussion
41
6.1 Common functionalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2 Method 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.3 Method 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.4 Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7
Future Improvements
45
7.1 Retrain YOLO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.2 Retrain ADNet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.3 Signal detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8
Project plan discussion
47
9
Conclusion
49
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
v
==PAGE:8==
References
51
List of Figures
52
List of Tables
53
A Appendix
54
A.1 Project schedule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A.2 Project plan task description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.3 PoseNet structure: MobileNetV1 100 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.4 Test video descriptions and results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.5 Test video comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
vi
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Project introduction
In today’s world, autonomy is becoming more and more important. We are see-
ing a revolution going from manual labour to automated labour in all kinds of
sectors; from home vacuum cleaner robots to self driving cars. One of the corner-
stones for these autonomous robots is the ability to see and interpret the world.
There are many ways to do this today, such as using ultrasound, laser in form
of LIDAR and of course vision in form of video input. Today, vision in form of im-
ages is gaining a lot of attention with the revolution of deep learning and higher
computing performance with GPU’s.
This thesis will try to take advantage of these current developments in deep learn-
ing to solve the problem of individual user tracking with a monocular camera. The
idea for this project originates from Mobile Industrial Robots (MiR), who wished
to improve their autonomous robots. MiR is a robot ﬁrm founded in Odense in
2013. They specialize in creating industrial robots for small and medium sized
companies (Figure 1.1). The main function of their robots is autonomous trans-
portation.
Figure 1.1: Example of MiRs robots. Original image found at [12].
The robots are using a combination of cameras and lasers to navigate their sur-
roundings autonomously. MiR now looks for further improvement of their robots,
to enable them to detect a users posture signal to either initiate or terminate the
process of following the user.
1.2
Project description
To help MiR with this task, the main focus of this thesis is to apply two diﬀerent
methods to track individual users in dynamic environments, ultimately ﬁnding
the preferred method. The preferred method should be able to track users from
simple situations, where only one human is detected in the image, to more com-
plex situations with many humans and temporary full occlusion of the user. A
comparison between two methods will be made to discover advantages and dis-
advantages.
In addition to the implementation and comparison of these two
methods for tracking users, this thesis will also focus on the ways of detecting
posture signals from a user to initiate and terminate the tracking process.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
1
==PAGE:10==
The two methods were designed based on research for approaches and methods
used to track individuals. The core idea behind the selected designs for the two
methods can be summarised as follows:
Method 1 is build on the fully convolutional neural network (CNN) YOLO for
human detection, combined with a Siamese neural network, which incorporates
one shot learning for user re-identiﬁcation. The Siamese network will be used to
detect the same user in each frame despite multiple humans appearing.
Method 2 applies an Action-Decision network (ADNet).
This type of networks’
function is to track users given a crop of the user in the initial frame, which
then has to be adapted for each frame output to keep tracking the user. In addi-
tion YOLO is used for the process of detecting humans. The detections are then
used as an initialisation for ADNet. The method will further include the Siamese
network, to ensure tracking of the same user.
Initially Method 1 was designed and considered an appropriate method for solv-
ing the given task. Throughout the research process the possibility of applying
the Action-decision network (ADNet) was discovered and evaluated. Since AD-
Net could potentially hold some advantages compared to the networks found in
Method 1, ADNet was implemented as the core of Method 2. One advantage of
ADNet is that it is able to track an object by itself. Therefore it can be faster
than Method 1, where both the YOLO and the Siamese network are required for
tracking the same object. Additionally, ADNet could be an interesting approach
for solving the task as it outputs an action on how to change the image to capture
the object. This action could then be transferred directly to one of MiR robots as
a control input to the movement of the robots, thus simplifying the connection
between the tracking process and the robot control.
1.3
Project plan
A schedule for this thesis has been made in the beginning, based on previous
research. This schedule is to be followed to maintain a structured work process.
The schedule is a guide, which might be adapted throughout the thesis due to
problems or realisations of better ways to structure the tasks and the time line
alongside. Table 1.1 shows the initial schedule.
Table 1.1: Initial thesis schedule. See table A.1 in Appendix A.1 for bigger version.
See Appendix A.2 for a detailed description of each task.
2
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:11==
1.4
Prerequisite
To give the reader an insight into the prerequisite for understanding this thesis,
a list of courses found at Technical University of Denmark and projects that have
built a basis for this thesis can be seen here.
• 02504 Computer Vision - Spring 2018
• 02506 Advanced Image Analysis - Spring 2019
• S01 Deep Learning in Computer Vision - Spring 2019
• 02514 Deep Learning - Fall 2019 - Reinforcement learning project
Furthermore the author has previously written a bachelor thesis concerning bird
tracking around windmills in ocean-based wind farms. This project was done
without deep learning and instead it applied more classical image processing
through openCV.
The author further works at JLI Vision, programming a UR robot, which should
be able to pick up objects autonomously based on image inputs, to present them
to speciﬁc cameras for quality inspection.
All of these courses and projects have provided knowledge and experience that
has been applied to work on this task in a master thesis setting.
1.5
Thesis report structure
This section will give a short overview of this thesis reports structure.
Section 1 is the introduction to this thesis. This includes an overview of the
main objective of this thesis project and the schedule used to plan and structure
the work. Finally it also includes the prerequisites the reader is excepted to have.
Section 2 provides the reader background knowledge about the purpose of the
neural networks that will be used in the two methods and explains how those
networks function.
Section 3 then explains how each of the networks have been implemented.
Section 4 provides information regarding how the two methods actually work
and how they are implemented.
Section 5 contains the results from diﬀerent tests conducted with the two meth-
ods.
Section 6 and 7 focus on a critical discussion of the implemented methods and
possible improvement options for the future.
Section 8 contains a reﬂection of the conducted project plan and a comparison
to the original plan.
Section 9 is the ﬁnal conclusion about the advantages and disadvantages of the
two methods explored in this thesis project.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:13==
2
Background
This chapter will provide the reader with the necessary background knowledge of
some speciﬁc neural networks to understand the methods designed to solve the
tracking of humans in dynamic environments. All the background knowledge
has been gained during the period of this thesis.
Neural networks have been known for many years and have been of increas-
ing importance within the last decade, primarily due to major improvements to
graphical processing units (GPU). Neural networks are currently used for many
applications, such as speech and image processing. Since they are particularly
good at extracting high level information from images, they are an ideal basis for
the task of this thesis.
Before going into detail about the actual methods, it is important to understand
the types of neural networks that build the core for these methods. This section
will thus provide an overview of the 4 neural networks that have been applied.
2.1
Pose signal detection: PoseNet
PoseNet is used to detect key features of the human body, which will be used in
this context for detecting visual posture signals. The network has been developed
by Google. PoseNet is estimating the position of joints and facial structures in
humans. It detects 17 points in total, including eyes, ears and nose as shown in
ﬁgure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Example of PoseNet detecting joints and facial structures in a human.
Original post found at [10].
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
5
==PAGE:14==
PoseNet generates two types of outputs: a heat map and an oﬀset vector output.
The heat map can be considered a grid size classiﬁcation of the original image.
The grid sizes can be regulated for in-/decreased accuracy and a slower/faster
speed performance. The heat map is generated as a tensor with the height and
width corresponding to the grid resolution and the depth corresponding to the 17
point estimations as shown on ﬁgure 2.1. Each grid position is given a conﬁdence
score describing how likely it is that the speciﬁc joint is shown within that grid
cell. The second output, the oﬀset vector output, is also a tensor. It uses the
same type of grid structure found in the heat map. But instead of classifying
whether the joint is there or not, it gives an oﬀset vector, which is used to ﬁnd
the joint more accurately within the image. The oﬀset vectors are split into an
x and y component, resulting in an output depth of 2*17. An example of this
structure can be seen in ﬁgure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: PoseNet outputs example. Original ﬁgure found at [10].
PoseNet is not only able to handle images with one person, but also images with
multiple people. When handling multiple people, PoseNet "connects the dots"
using an algorithm to group the points. PoseNet then generates two displacement
outputs to help with the sorting. Further information regarding the grouping of
points can be found in the original paper [11] and more detailed information
about PoseNet is given in the article [10].
2.2
Object detector: YOLO
The ﬁrst task for the methods is to detect the user, who in this thesis is a human.
You Only Look Once (YOLO) is a detection network, which can detect multiple ob-
jects of multiple types within an image. It is currently one of the fastest detection
networks and is designed to split the image into a grid as shown in ﬁgure 2.3.
6
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: 5x5 YOLO grid. Original ﬁgure found at [7].
Each grid cell is then supposed to detect whether the objects’ center lies within
or outside of the cell. In the original YOLO each cell could only predict one type
of object. For each grid cell, YOLO has two predeﬁned boxes in which the ob-
ject could be. Each box is deﬁned with four numbers: an x and y coordinate,
which deﬁne the center of the box, and a height and width of the box. For each
bounding box prediction, a corresponding conﬁdence interval is also calculated
describing how likely that prediction is. The conﬁdence interval lies within 0 to
1. A conﬁdence threshold can be chosen to ignore all objects below a certain
threshold for the further processing. Furthermore each grid cell has a vector of
probabilities for that bounding box to belong to a class. In the original YOLO
network, there were 20 classes and the image grid was 7x7. Therefore, the to-
tal output for the original YOLO network would be 7x7(grid size) x (2(boxes) x (
1(conﬁdence) + 4(coordinates)) + 20(classes)), as shown in ﬁgure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Original YOLO output size. Original ﬁgure found at [7].
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
7
==PAGE:16==
To deal with the problem of multiple boxes detecting the same object, as shown
in ﬁgure 2.5, YOLO uses non-maximum suppression.
Figure 2.5: Example for the problem of multiple bounding boxes detecting the
same object. Original ﬁgure found at [7].
In non-maximum suppression the program ﬁrst ﬁnds the bounding box with the
highest conﬁdence. Then it looks at the Intersection over Union (IoU) with all
other bounding boxes of the same class. If the IoU is higher than a predeﬁned
threshold, the corresponding bounding box with the lower conﬁdence is removed
and the bounding box with the highest conﬁdence is then considered the ﬁnal
detection and will not be considered by the Non-maximum suppression algorithm
any further. Afterwards the algorithm is repeated to ﬁnd the bounding box with
the highest conﬁdence within the remaining bounding boxes and then proceeds
as explained before. This cycle is repeated until all boxes have been processed,
either by choosing them as ﬁnal detection or by erasing them.
Since the original YOLO only allowed one detection per grid cell, the output was
quite limited as there could often be more than one object within one grid cell.
This is now solved in YOLO 3 by giving each grid cell 3 anchor boxes, which each
have the same properties as mentioned before (conﬁdence, coordinate and class
vector). This allows for more classiﬁcations within the same grid cell.
YOLO 3 is also predicting at 3 diﬀerent scales and thereby has 9 anchor boxes
equal to 9 predictions leading to a better detection of small objects. Finally YOLO
3’s classiﬁcations are not mutually exclusive, meaning that the network can ﬁnd
the same bounding box twice, but with diﬀerent labels e.g. ’human’ and ’woman’.
For further detailed explanation of YOLO see [7].
8
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:17==
2.3
Re-identiﬁcation: Siamese network
Another very important aspect for the functioning of the methods, is the ability
to detect the same user in between frames. This task is commonly called a re-
identiﬁcation task in scientiﬁc literature. Since the system should be able to be
used by any user, a classiﬁcation of a limited number of users is not feasible.
Therefore a one shot learning method in form of a Siamese network should be
applied. Instead of learning a binary classiﬁcation, the system seeks to generate
a feature vector of the input. This feature vector can then be compared to another
generated feature vector. The aim of the system is then to make visually similar
objects’ feature vectors very similar according to a chosen metric, and at the same
time very diﬀerent from dissimilar objects. This makes it possible to distinguish
between objects/humans given only one example.
Figure 2.6: Example of Siamese structure. Original ﬁgure found at [1].
Figure 2.6 shows the general structure of the Siamese network. Inside this net-
work, two identical convolutional neural networks exist. Each of these networks
are producing a feature vector of each of the input images. These two feature
vectors are then being "merged" in form of a metric to measure the distance be-
tween the two feature vectors. The output σ of this metric is then the ﬁnal output
of the Siamese network. This output/distance is supposed to be very small for
similar objects, like the same user seen from diﬀerent angles, and very large for
dissimilar objects/users.
Training: Supervised Learning
For training the Siamese network, supervised learning is used, which means
that during the training the system will sample diﬀerent image pairs, for which
it knows whether the same user/type can be seen on the images. The triplet and
the quadruplet loss will be used for training the Siamese network.
The triplet loss needs an anchor image, a true image of the same object as the
anchor and a negative image of a diﬀerent object with respect to the anchor. The
loss then tries to maximise the diﬀerences between the anchor and the negative
image, while at the same time minimising the distances between the anchor and
the true image. The triplet loss is given by:
L(A, P, N) = max(∥(f(A) −f(P))∥2 −∥(f(A) −f(N))∥2 + a, 0)
(2.1)
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
9
==PAGE:18==
Here A is the anchor, P is the positive sample and N is the negative sample. f is
the neural network, that generates the feature vector and a is the margin, which
also prevails the network from learning to always output the same feature vector.
The quadruplet loss is very similar to the triplet loss. The main diﬀerence is that
instead of using one negative sample, the loss needs two negative samples, which
each is of two diﬀerent objects. The quadruplet loss is then given by:
L(A, P, N) = max(∥(f(A) −f(P))∥2 −∥(f(A) −f(N1))∥2 + a1, 0)
+max(∥(f(A) −f(P))∥2 −∥(f(N2) −f(N1))∥2 + a2, 0)
(2.2)
Here all the symbols have the same meaning as in the triplet loss (equation 2.1),
except from the two negative samples that are represented by N1 and N2 and the
two margins a1 and a2, where a1 has to be larger than a2. According to the paper
[2] the quadruplet loss trained network is supposed to be better at diﬀerentiating
objects outside the training data, since it also tries to maximise the distances
between the two negative samples.
2.4
Single object tracker: Action-Decision Network
Instead of ﬁnding the right object for each frame using YOLO and a Siamese
network, an action-decision network (ADNet) can be used to solve both of those
tasks at once. The ADNet is made for continuously tracking an object. At ﬁrst
the position of the object is initialised - for example through YOLO. Then, when
the next frame is received, it crops out the known previous position of the object
in the new frame and uses this patch p as an input for ADNet.
Figure 2.7: Example of action-decision network structure. Original ﬁgure found
at [17].
The network is then supposed to output an action a, for how to move the crop to
best ﬁt the object. The ADNet has a ﬁnite action space in which it can change the
crop. In the original paper [17] 11 moves were implemented, as shown in ﬁgure
2.7. The crop could be moved up, down, right and left and could be scaled up
and down. Finally the network also contains the action ’Stop’, which terminates
the tracking given the current frame. Furthermore the network has a conﬁdence
output, which tells how likely it is that the ADNet has found the object. If the
action isn’t ’Stop’, then the system performs the action to get a new crop and it
feeds in the new crop together with the previous actions d to ADNet. The previous
10
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:19==
actions are set to be 11 (one Hot encoding for the actions) times 10 (the amount
of previous actions to consider) vector in the original paper [17]. This technique
allows for tracking the object in each frame eﬀectively, when the object is visible
or partly visible and the crop only contains one object of those which are to be
tracked.
Training 1: Supervised Learning
To start the training of the ADNet, a supervised learning approach is used. Here
the dataloader samples a batch of images with their corresponding bounding
boxes. Hereafter the dataloader performs a random action within ADNets’ action
space on the bounding box. The new bounding box is then used to crop out
a patch of the original image. This patch together with the reverse action and
a conﬁdence score of 1 is returned as a data pair for the supervised learning.
Furthermore the dataloader also has a chance to generate a random crop, which
has none or a very small overlap with the original bounding box. This is then
returned with the stop action and the conﬁdence score of 0.
The network is further trained using the binary cross-entropy loss both for the
action and the conﬁdence:
L(p, Atrue,Ctrue) = LBCE(fa(p), Atrue) + LBCE(fc(p),Ctrue)
(2.3)
In equation 2.3 p is the input patch to the ADNet f, where a and c describe the
action and the conﬁdence score output respectively. Atrue is the true action and
Ctrue is the true conﬁdence, which are both One Hot encoded.
Training 2: Reinforcement Learning
The next step of the training is using reinforcement learning. Here the agent is
set up to be the neural network ADNet, that can perform the 11 discrete actions
in the environment based on the current stage. The environment consist of the
current frame and the stage is the current crop. The agent receives a +1 reward
whenever the intersection over union (IoU) is above 0.7 and performs the action
’stop’. If it has an IoU below 0.7 and performs the action ’Stop’, it gains a reward
of -1. Since the supplementary material stated in the original ADNet paper [17]
was not available, multiple small adjustments have been made to the reward
system, which will be discussed in the implementation chapter.
ADNet will be trained given the environment and using policy gradient descent
and Q-learning. To see more details about the these training methods, see article
[8] for policy gradient descent and article [6] for Q-learning.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:21==
3
Implementation of neural networks
In this chapter the implementations of the neural networks used in the two meth-
ods will be explained. The chapter will be going into details about the networks
structure and how they are trained, if not a pre-trained network is used.
All implementations have been made using Python, while Pytorch has been used
for the handling of the neural networks and Pycharm has been used as IDE for
implementing the code. The training of the networks has then been done using
Google Colab.
3.1
PoseNet
PoseNet has been implemented using a pre-trained PoseNet found at GitHub [13].
Network structure
PoseNet is a fully convolutional neural network. It consists of 27 convolutions,
each followed by a Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (ReLU), which generate the features from
the image. Following the feature extraction is a convolution together with a sig-
moid function generating the heatmap output, a convolution for generating the
oﬀset vector output and two convolutions for generating the displacements, used
for grouping joint points. The ﬁnal output tensors have the following size:
• Heat map: resolution x resolution x 17
• Vector oﬀset: resolution x resolution x 34
• Displacement: forward resolution x resolution x 32
• Displacement: backward resolution x resolution x 32
Theses output tensors are then used to ﬁnd the estimated joint position, as ex-
plained in section 2.1. A detailed list of all the convolutions is provided in Ap-
pendix A.3.
3.2
YOLO
The YOLO network used for Method 1 and Method 2 has been implemented by
using the pre-trained network YOLO3-416. In this network 416 refers to its native
input resolution of 416*416. The pre-trained YOLO3-416 network comes from the
original creator of YOLO [14]. The network has been trained on the COCO dataset,
which contains 80 classes. Since the only important class for this project is the
"Human"-class, all other classes have been ignored in the output.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
13
==PAGE:22==
Network structure
The YOLO network is implemented using Darknet structure, which can be found
on the same website [14] as the pre-trained network.
Darknet has 106 fully
convolutional layers underlying the architecture for YOLO3 as illustrated in ﬁgure
3.1.
Figure 3.1: YOLO3 structure. Original ﬁgure found at [9].
3.3
Siamese network
Network structure
The network structure was inspired by structures suggested in an article about
Siamese networks used for facial recognition [4]. In this article the input image
was chosen to have a size of 100*100, ﬁtting to a face crop which is roughly a
square. However, to capture an upright human body the crop has to be more
rectangular. Therefore, the input size was changed to 200*100, in order to cause
less disturbance to the image, when preparing it for the network.
Furthermore, additional layers have been added to the model, to meet the chal-
lenge of describing more than just the facial features. The full network structure
is illustrated on ﬁgure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Siamese network structure.
14
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:23==
The Siamese network consists of ﬁve convolutional layers, each followed by a
batch normalization and a ReLU. In addition, a maxpool is performed after the
fourth convolution.
After the convolutional layers, the data is unfolded into a vector, which is then
used for the fully connected layers. In total, there are three fully connected layers.
Following the ﬁrst two layers is a ReLU. The ﬁnal output then comes from the
third fully connected layer.
Training
The training data for the Siamese network is a combination of multiple datasets
including the CUHK datasets [5], the VIPeR dataset [3] and the GRID dataset
[15]. All of these datasets contain multiple views of the same person.
For the training of the Siamese network, a dataloader was ﬁrst created to ac-
commodate the need of data pairs for the triplet and quadruplet loss. The data
loader ﬁrst grabs a random image and ﬁnds another image of the same person,
after which it ﬁnds one or two images of diﬀerent people. The dataloader then
performs data augmentation, including colorjitter to simulate diﬀerent light sit-
uations and a 50% chance of a random crop to make the network robust for only
seeing part of the same human. In the end, the dataloader resizes the image to
ﬁt the Siamese input size of 200*100.
In order to optimise the training process, a hardpair miner from the Python li-
brary pytorch_metric_learning has been applied. This was done to maintain an
eﬀective model learning, after it has learned to separate most of the easy cases.
The hardpair miner ﬁnds pairs that are hard to distinguish, since they are very
close in the feature space despite belonging to diﬀerent objects/people.
The network is also trained using dropout on all the convolutional layers as well
as on the two ﬁrst fully connected layers, with a dropout rate of 5%.
As explained in section 2.3 the triplet and the quadruplet loss have been used to
train the Siamese network.
During the training using the triplet loss with a margin of 10, a learning rate of
0.0001 has been applied together with the Adam optimizer. The results of the
training can be seen in ﬁgure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Siamese network training using the triplet loss. The orange curve
shows the average loss over 50 steps.
In ﬁgure 3.3 the random pairs and hard pairs graph visualise the loss throughout
the training.
As explained earlier, the batch changes between using random
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
15
==PAGE:24==
pairs, and using hard pairs. Each loss is then calculated using the corresponding
random/hard pairs. Both graphs show that the network is learning. However,
as expected, the hard pairs are being learned more slowly and has a way higher
loss. The ﬁnal graph shows the accuracy for every epoch on a validation data set,
with the validation accuracy ending up around 87 %. It is also worth mentioning
that the validation accuracy starts relatively high, since it could be expected that
the accuracy would lie around 50% due to the chance of getting the answer right
(the same, or not the same). The reason for it being so high might very well be,
that images of the same person are very similar, both regarding the person and
the surroundings in the image, where there is no such guarantee for an image
with another person.
For the training using the quadruplet loss, with a margin of 10 and 5, a learning
rate of 0.0001 has been applied together with the SGD optimizer. The quadru-
plet loss is only used on the random pairs.
This is due to the miner in the
pytorch_metric_learning library only generating pairs of 3, which is not enough
for the quadruplet loss. The results of the training can be seen in ﬁgure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Siamese network training using the quadruplet loss and triplet loss.
The orange curve shows the average loss over 50 steps.
Figure 3.4 shows the same as 3.3. Compared to the training only using the triplet
loss, the hard pairs loss becomes a little smaller, which might be expected, since
it now optimizes for even more data, because it gets two negative samples when
using the quadruplet loss.
This also leads to a higher validation accuracy of
around 95%, which is again interesting as the initial validation accuracy is very
high. This is probably due to the same reasons mentioned previously regarding
the validation accuracy for the triplet loss.
Both the learning rate and optimizer for both trainings have been found by trial
and error.
The results lead to the suggestion of using the Siamese network
trained with the quadruplet and triplet loss for Method 1 and 2.
3.4
Action-Decision Network
Network structure
For the action-decision network (ADNet) two structures have been designed. The
same input size is used for both of them. The input size is 100*50, which is the
same ratio as the one discussed in section 3.3 and for the same reason. The
reason why it is smaller than the one used in the Siamese network, is because
the network should not need as much detail, but more just be able to detect the
shapes of a human. And therefore less data is needed, which should also make
the problem easier for the network. The rest of the network structure is also very
16
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:25==
similar to the one found in the Siamese network. The ﬁrst network structure is
designed to be similar regarding inputs and outputs, as the network discussed
in the paper [17]. The structure is illustrated in ﬁgure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Original ADNet structure.
From ﬁgure 3.5 we can see that the network contains ﬁve convolutional layers,
where each one also includes padding to keep the output the same size as the in-
put. Following each convolutional layer is both a batch normalization and a ReLU.
A maxpool operation is performed before the last convolutional layer, whereafter
the data is unfolded into a vector. This vector is then used as input for the fully
connected layers. Here the networks has three fully connected layers, where the
ﬁrst two layers are followed by a ReLU. After the second layer, the data is concate-
nated with the last 10 actions in a One Hot encoding. This new vector is then fed
to the last fully connected layer. The output vector is then split into two blocks;
one block containing the two conﬁdence scores and one block containing all the
11 actions. A softmax operation is used on each of these two blocks separately
to get the ﬁnal output.
The second type of structure for ADNet is almost the same as the one shown in
ﬁgure 3.5, but instead of using the 11 actions, this network has 17 actions. In
the original paper, there are 11 possible actions the network can perform. The
actions can move and scale the box, but it is not possible to change the ratio of
the bounding box. Therefore, the new type of network gets to be able to move
each side of the bounding box independently. The action space will then look
like this:
Figure 3.6: Modiﬁed ADNet actions.
On ﬁgure 3.6 the dark red sides of the boxes indicate which side is to be moved,
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
17
==PAGE:26==
the arrows show the direction of the movement and the amount of arrows are
proportional to the length of the movement. This action space gives the network
the ability to change the ratio of the bounding box. Thereby it should be easier
for it to only capture the target, even if the target should turn, bend or do other
types of movement that changes the ratio of the target seen from the camera.
Following these modiﬁcations to the action space the original network structure
had to be modiﬁed to accommodate it.
Figure 3.7: Modiﬁed ADNet structure for more actions.
Figure 3.7 shows the new modiﬁed structure for the ADNet. The only real dif-
ference being that the previous actions input is now 17*10 long and the action
output is now 17 long.
Training 1: Supervised learning
is the ﬁrst way to train ADNet. To do this,
states, in the form of cropped images, paired with the correct actions and con-
ﬁdence scores are needed. Therefore the ﬁrst thing needed is a dataloader that
generates these data pairs. First the dataloader grabs a random image together
with the corresponding bounding box description.
Afterwards the dataloader
generates an action and a conﬁdence score, which can be done in 2 ways:
The ﬁrst way is that it performs a random action on the bounding box, like move
the right side right. Then it crops the image with this new bounding box and
returns it together with the opposite action, like move the right side left, and a
conﬁdence of 1, since it knows that the true bounding box is there and therefore
has an IoU higher than 70%. This type of pair generation happens 40% of the
time.
The second way how the dataloader can generate a data pair, is to perform a
number of random changes to the bounding box, which leads to an IoU of max
10% with the ground truth bounding box. It then checks which action would
increase the IoU the most, if at all. This action is then returned with the new
cropped image using the new bounding box and a conﬁdence of 0. This is done to
teach the network when to return a conﬁdence score of 0. This way of generating
a data pair happens 60% of the time.
For both cases the dataloader also returns a previous action vector full of zeros,
since that part is not known when generating data pairs this way.
To further optimise the supervised learning, a second dataloader is used. This
second dataloader is highly inspired by a reinforcement environment. Essentially
instead of outputting a completely new random data pair every time, it outputs
18
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:27==
a series of continued actions performed on an environment, which would be a
video following a human. At ﬁrst the environment is reset, which means it ﬁnds a
random frame/image and makes a bounding box which has an IoU of around 60%
with the ground truth. It also sets the previous action vector to all zeros. After
resetting the environment, it is possible to get a sample/data pair by stepping in
the environment as shown in ﬁgure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: Reinforcement environment
inspired data loader.
Here
stepping
("Step")
in
the
dat-
aloader ﬁnds the action that provides
the highest increase for the IoU com-
pared to the ground truth. If the ini-
tial IoU is more than 90%, then the ac-
tion will simply be ’Stop’ and the conﬁ-
dence will be one, followed by updating
the frame for the next step. Otherwise
it ﬁnds the action which leads to the
highest increase to the IoU. If this ac-
tion leads to an IoU of less than 40%,
then the action is set to be ’Stop’ and
the conﬁdence to be zero, since this is
considered a situation where the tar-
get is lost. If the IoU is however higher
than 40%, the found optimal action
is selected together with a conﬁdence
of one.
Finally the "Step" generates
a Done signal, that indicates whether
the environment should be reset before
the next step. This is happening when
the current frame is the last one in the
series or if the new IoU is lower than
35%, which indicates that the target
object is lost.
It can also happen if
more than 100 actions have been per-
formed. This leads to more varied se-
ries of state action pairs, where they
are not all from the same video.
Af-
terwards the new crop is returned to-
gether with the action, the previous
action vector and the Done signal. If
the Done signal then is "True", a re-
set of the environment should be per-
formed.
After each step the returned crop, action, previous action vector and conﬁdence
pair is then pushed into a memory that can contain up to 100000 pairs. The
point is to make it possible to sample from this memory, and thereby get none or
very little correlated data batches, which also contain a previous action vector,
that contains real information.
During training the system will at every optimizing step take a step in the environ-
ment and generate new data for the memory, but only sample from the memory
at every second optimizing step and the other time it will sample from the ﬁrst
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
19
==PAGE:28==
explained dataloader. This is done to provide the system with a realistic scenario
from the second dataloader and a scenario that teaches it more when to set the
conﬁdence to 0 from the ﬁrst dataloader.
The data [16] used for the dataloader are image sequences, where a human is
followed during diﬀerent situations. The training progress can be seen on ﬁgure
3.9 and 3.10. For the training an Adam optimizer has been used with a learning
rate of 10e-6.
Figure 3.9: ADNet with 11 actions supervised training results. The orange curve
shows the average loss over 50 steps
Figure 3.10: ADNet with 17 actions supervised training results. The orange curve
shows the average loss over 50 steps.
The training process from both networks ends up being very similar. It is clear
that both networks learn, since the loss is falling and the accuracy is increasing.
Both of the networks end up with a training accuracy around 80%. The only
small diﬀerence between the trainings is that the loss in ﬁgure 3.9 seems to have
a bit lower variance than the one found in ﬁgure 3.10. This might be because
the loss from the network with 11 actions is easier to optimise then the network
with 17 actions, since it has less to learn.
From the trainings there are no networks that seem better than the others. How-
ever, by testing the networks on some image series, it became clear, that the net-
work with 17 actions performs overall better, because it can adapt more to the
size of the target. The network with 11 actions more often gets stuck, because
the crop often contains more objects, that have nothing to do with the target,
which likely confuses the network. Therefore the networks with 17 actions is the
desired network for implementation in Method 2.
20
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:29==
Training 2: Reinforcement learning
is used for continuing the training of
ADNet, after it has been pre-trained through the supervised learning. In the pa-
per [17] the authors provide a limited amount of information regarding how to
use reinforcement learning for training the ADNet. Though they do explain, that
they are using policy gradient descent for training and are providing some infor-
mation about the reward system. Because of the sparse information, diﬀerent
approaches of training trough reinforcement learning have been tried.
For the reinforcement learning the environment will consist of diﬀerent image
sequences following a human. These image sequences come from [16]. The en-
vironment is initialised with a bounding box used to crop the image, which is
considered the stage. This stage is then resized to 100*50 to ﬁt the neural net-
work input size and is then returned to the agent. The agent can perform all the
original 11 or the 17 actions shown in ﬁgure 3.6 in the environment. Each time
the agent takes a step through an action, the environment returns the next state,
based on the action together with a reward. As stated in section 2.4, the original
reward in the paper [17], gave a reward of 1 if the IoU is above 0.7 and the agent
performs the ’Stop’ action. If the IoU is less than 0.7 and the agent performs the
’Stop’ action, the reward is -1. Otherwise the agent receives a reward of 0. Since
this was a very sparse reward system, and did not lead to any good results, an
additional reward is given equal to the new IoU minus the previous IoU times
0.1. This provides the agent with info regarding whether it is moving in the right
direction and the multiplication of 0.1 makes it less important compared to the
’Stop’ action.
Finally the environment also provides the agent with a Done signal. The Done
signal is "True", when the agent performs the ’Stop’ action, without the IoU being
higher than 0.7 together with a -1 reward. Same values are returned, if the agent
has performed more than 100 actions, without using the ’Stop’ action. This is
designed to teach it to use the ’Stop’ action, and to prevent the agent from getting
stuck in a loop. After the Done signal is set to be "True", and is returned to the
agent, the environment resets.
The network was trained both through the suggested policy gradient descent
method and Q-learning. For the Q-learning a replay buﬀer was used for storing
the previous experiences, in the form of a stage, an action, a next stage, a reward,
and a Done signal. Furthermore the Q-learning was using an epsilon greedy
strategy.
For both training methods the bounding box was ﬁrst initialised as the bounding
box corresponding to the previous frame in the sequences, but this always led
to the network learning only to perform the ’Stop’ action.
This makes sense,
since then it is very likely to receive a high reward to begin with. Therefore the
initialisation of the starting bounding box was changed to be random, but have
an IoU just below 0.6. This assured that the agent could not just perform the
’Stop’ action to begin with, which led to the result of the agent not only learning
to perform the ’Stop’ action.
Figure 3.11 shows the training duration for both the Q-learning and policy gra-
dient descent training using both the originally suggested 11 actions and the
modiﬁed 17 actions.
During the Q-learning training the Adam optimizer has
been used together with a learning rate of 10e-6, a replay memory, and a target
network with update frequency of 2000. For the policy gradient descent learning
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
21
==PAGE:30==
a SGD optimizer has been used with a learning rate of 10e-6. The optimizers
and learning rates have been chosen using trial and error. Furthermore they
both use a method of epsilon greedy, which assures that in the beginning the
agent performs random actions 15% of the time, but the randomness decreases
each episode, where an episode is deﬁned as the time/steps between the environ-
ments resets. This is done to make sure, that the agent explores the environment,
without being too much, since that could ruin the pre-trained network from the
supervised learning.
Figure 3.11:
ADNet reinforcement training for 11 and 17 actions, using Q-
learning and policy gradient descend.
The orange graph indicates the mean
duration over 50 episodes.
From ﬁgure 3.11 it becomes clear, that the agent doesn’t learn much. Both from
the 17 and 11 actions training using Q-learning and policy gradient descent, the
duration is less than 10 frames on average before the target is lost. This means
that the agent only learns to track the target for 10 frames, before it looses the
target. The Q-learning for the 11 actions seems to perform a bit better, since it has
more episodes, where it gets through more than a 100 images. The networks have
afterwards been tested on some other image sequences, which made it clear, that
the reinforcement learning part destroyed more or less everything the network
had learned through the supervised learning. Therefore the ADNet trained only
trough the supervised learning, will be the network, that will be used in Method
2.
In the paper [17] it is also stated, that they are only able to gain 1.9 % precision
improvement compared to the ADNet only trained through supervised learning.
Therefore no more training has been attempted for the ADNet.
22
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:31==
4
Methods
This chapter will provide information about the two implemented methods, which
will be used to solve the tracking of individual users in dynamic environments.
Both methods are designed around the networks described and implemented in
chapter 2 and 3.
Before starting the explanation of Method 1 and 2, an explanation of how and
which user signals are detected and how the re-identiﬁcation is implemented, is
needed to further understand the overall methods described in section 4.3 and
4.4.
4.1
Signal detection
Figure
4.1:
Example
of
the
’Start’ signal.
The blue dots
mark the joint positions.
The signal detection is based on the PoseNet
joint position detections. Out of the 17 original
position detections, only the following six have
been used for user signal detection: shoulders,
wrists and elbows on each side. By calculating
the angles between these chosen joints, it is
possible to detect certain posture signals from
the observed user.
Figure 4.1 illustrates the ’Start’ signal for the
system. If the system detects that the average
of the 5 shown vectors angles are less than 10
degrees and that the variance between the Y-
coordinates is less than a fourth of the length
of the vector between the shoulders, a ’Start’
signal is detected.
In ﬁgure 4.2 the 6 detectable posing signals are depicted.
Figure 4.2: Implemented posing signals. The blue dots mark the joint positions.
Signal 1 is used as a ’Start’ signal, as previously shown, which indicates that the
system should start tracking the user. Signal 2 is used to terminate the systems’
current tracking. Signal 3 and 4 are used when a tracking has been started, but
the user cannot be found anymore. Then, by using signal 3 and 4, the system
resets and starts tracking the user, who performed that signal. Signal 5 and 6
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
23
==PAGE:32==
currently do not have a function. They have been implemented, in case a need
for further signals arises.
The signal detection has then been built into Method 1 and 2. The implemen-
tation of the signal detection in Method 1 and 2 will be explained in section 4.3
and 4.4.
To make the detections more robust, multiple detections in a row are needed.
Therefore, a start process, as described in section 4.1.1, as well as similar ap-
proaches for the detection of "Stop" and "Reset" signals as described in 4.1.2 have
been implemented.
4.1.1
Start process
In order for the system to know when to start tracking and who to track, the
system will use a visual ’Start’ pose signal observed through the camera. A ’Start’
signal will be detected if a human spreads out his arms, through using PoseNet
to detect the wrist, elbow and shoulder positions, as previously described. To
assure that the signal is not detected by coincidence, the function checks for
’Start’ pose signals multiple times.
Figure 4.3: Flowchart representing the
starting process.
Figure 4.3 shows the ﬂowchart of the
start process. The system starts set-
ting the start signal counter equal to
zero and by grabbing a new frame. It
then uses the YOLO network to ﬁnd
the bounding boxes containing hu-
mans within the image. Afterwards it
checks all the bounding boxes for con-
taining a human performing the ’Start’
signal. If the ’Start’ signal is detected,
the start signal counter is increased by
one. If the start signal counter is more
than ﬁve, the feature buﬀers are up-
dated, which will later be used by the
Siamese network for re-identiﬁcation.
The feature buﬀers will be explained
more detailed in section 4.2. The start
signal counter is required to be above
ﬁve to avoid false detection and thereby
false feature vectors. If then the start
signal counter is equal to 10, the sys-
tem locks onto that user. Thus, once
the system leaves the start process, it
can’t be started again before the cur-
rent tracking session has been termi-
nated.
This is done to prevent other
users from intentionally or acciden-
tally triggering the tracking.
After-
wards it goes backs and repeats the
cycle.
If the ’Start’ pose signal is not detected, the starting counter is decreased by 0.2.
Afterwards it is checked if the start signal counter is bigger than 10. In that case
24
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:33==
the starting process stops, because it has found the ’Start’ signal multiple times
and has initialised the feature buﬀers. If however the counter is not bigger than
10, the start signal counter is updated and it returns to grab a new frame and
repeats the cycle.
4.1.2
Stop and reset detection
The detection of the ’Stop’ and ’Reset’ signal is very similar to the methods de-
scribed in section 4.1.1, since the signal needs to be observed multiple times in a
row to allow for a robust detection. However, the search for the ’Stop’ and ’Reset’
signal is only done during the tracking process.
The ’Stop’ signal can be used, when a current tracking is ongoing. If the system
then detects the ’Stop’ signal from the target user more than 3 times, it stops
tracking that user and resets the feature buﬀers.
The ’Reset’ pose signal can only be detected in case the system can’t recognize
the user, even though the user is in the frame. If the user then performs the
posture to signal ’Reset’, and the distance between the users’ current feature
vector and the closest feature vector in the true feature buﬀer is lower than 4,
a reset will be triggered. A reset means that the system resets the fake feature
buﬀer, and updates the true feature buﬀer with the new feature vector from the
user performing the ’Reset’ signal. The feature buﬀers will be explained in section
4.2.
4.2
Re-identiﬁcation
The Siamese network will be used for re-identifying the target both for Method 1
and 2, by computing a feature vector for each detection, as explained in section
2.3. To design the re-identiﬁcation process, it is important to understand some
key issues of the re-identiﬁcation.
As the initial method, the Siamese network was used to generate a feature vector
for the target only. This feature vector is used to identify the target again between
frames by measuring the euclidean distance between the newly found feature
vectors, and the previous known feature vector. After having re-identiﬁed the
target, the new feature vector would then be stored in a buﬀer containing a limited
amount of previous observed feature vectors, which leads to a better comparison
when re-identifying the target, since more perspectives are taken into account.
This feature buﬀer would then be used to calculate the mean distance between
a newly found feature vector and the ﬁve closest feature vectors.
If then the
mean distance is lower than a certain threshold, the new target is considered
a candidate for updating the feature buﬀer. If multiple targets are found in the
frame by YOLO, then the proﬁle with the smallest mean distance is selected as
the true target. The new found feature vector is then stored in the true feature
buﬀer. This process is comparable to the one described in the Faster ADNet paper
[18].
Following some light testing of this initial method it was evident, that the Siamese
network is not perfect at separating diﬀerent people in the feature space. There-
fore, the method sometimes detects the wrong target if that person has a similar
feature vector to the real user. This potentially leads to a bad feedback loop, since
the wrong feature vector is then stored in the true feature buﬀer and used for
re-identiﬁcation.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
25
==PAGE:34==
Another problem the system is struggling with, is how to set the distance thresh-
old between the new feature vector and the feature vectors in the true feature
buﬀer. This is especially a problem, if the true target disappears from the frame
and another human with similar characteristics stays within the image. In this
case the system will wrongly re-identify that person as the target.
Figure 4.4: Examples of problems for the Siamese network.
Some of these problematic situations are shown in ﬁgure 4.4: In image 1 the
target is in clear view, but the other human in the image has some similarities
with the target, which can lead to the system wrongly re-identifying the target. In
image 2 and 3 the target cannot be seen either due to full occlusion or due to the
user leaving the frame. In both cases, the system is likely to wrongly re-identify
the other human as the target.
The solution for these two problems is to create a second feature buﬀer, which
will contain all the feature vectors of other humans detected. This buﬀer will be
called the false feature buﬀer. This makes use of YOLO already having detected
multiple bounding boxes, which makes it easy to update the false feature buﬀer
every time YOLO is being used.
Figure 4.5: Diagram depicting the updating of buﬀers.
Figure 4.5 illustrates the updating of the two buﬀers. After having grabbed a new
frame, and YOLO having detected all the bounding boxes containing humans, the
Siamese network generates a feature vector for each of the bounding boxes. These
new feature vectors are then used for a test to ﬁnd the target user.
This is done ﬁrst by calculating the euclidean distance between the new feature
vector and each of the vectors in the true feature buﬀer and the false feature
26
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:35==
buﬀer.
Afterwards there are multiple criteria that need to be fulﬁlled for the
proﬁle to be considered a true target:
• If the closest distance to one of the fake vectors is less than two, then this
feature vector is seen as a fake vector, since it is too similar to a fake proﬁle.
• If the mean of the three smallest distances between the new feature vector
and the true feature buﬀers vectors is less than 1.5, the proﬁle is considered
as the true target, since the distance is so small.
• If the mean distance between the new feature vector and all the feature
vectors in the true feature buﬀer is smaller than a dynamic threshold, which
is between 3 and 4.5, and the smallest fake distance is bigger than the
mean of the three smallest distances between the feature vector and the
false feature buﬀers vectors, the new feature vector is considered to be the
target.
• In any other case, the feature vectors are not to be considered to belonging
to the target.
The distance between two similar people is normally lower than 3, even though
it is not uncommon that the distance between a true feature vector and a similar
false feature vector can be around 4. Otherwise false feature vectors normally
have an euclidean distance of 5 or more to the true feature vector. The dynamic
threshold used, is updated for every frame. If a target is found, then the threshold
decreases by 0.01, otherwise it increases by 0.01. The threshold is limited to
the interval between 3 and 4.5. The dynamic threshold is used to avoid wrong
classiﬁcations in situations where the target is disappearing, and a fake target
appears, since it then takes some time for the threshold to increase again.
4.2.1
Buﬀer update
For the actual update of the buﬀers, some criteria has to be fulﬁlled. For the
true feature buﬀer to be updated, there cannot be an IoU higher than 5% with
another bounding box in the frame. This is to avoid getting false feature vectors
into this buﬀer. This could otherwise happen, if proﬁles should cross each others
paths in the frame, and therefore a bounding box might contain multiple people.
The update of the false feature buﬀer can happen in two ways: If the true target
is found, then the IoU between the targets’ bounding box and each of the other
found bounding boxes is measured. If the IoU is lower than 5 %, then the feature
vector corresponding to the other bounding box is stored in the false feature
buﬀer. If the IoU is in the interval between 5-40%, the bounding box for the
not-target-users is updated, to avoid parts of the target users features going into
the false feature buﬀer. The update of the bounding box is done as illustrated in
ﬁgure 4.6.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.6: Bounding box updating process.
First the intersection area is found. Then the two areas are calculated, based on
either cutting the "Not target" bounding box width or height, so that it won’t have
any intersection with the target users’ bounding box. Then the biggest area, con-
taining the most information, is selected. Finally the "Not target" bounding box
is cropped with half the overlapping width or height, depending on which area is
bigger, so that the new bounding box still has some intersection with the the tar-
get users bounding box. This is done again to preserve as much information as
possible, and since the bounding boxes’ information close to the borders regard-
ing the person in the bounding box are often quite sparse, this amount of overlap
has been found to be a good trade oﬀ. Finally this new bounding box is used to
crop a new image, which is then used to create a new feature vector through the
Siamese network. This feature vector is then stored in the false feature buﬀer.
The second way the false feature buﬀer can be updated, happens if the target user
is not found. In that case, the update of the false feature buﬀer is depending on
all of the following criteria:
• The IoU between the bounding box at focus and all other bounding boxes
must be lower than 5%. This is due to protection of the true target, since
the true target might not be re-identiﬁable, if only parts of the person are
visible, due to occlusion by another person. This prevents storing the true
target in the false feature buﬀer.
• The smallest distance between the new feature vector and the true feature
buﬀer vectors is higher than 1.5. This is to avoid a feature vector in the
false feature buﬀer, that looks too much like the true target, since that is
likely to obscure the re-identiﬁcation process.
• Finally either the mean distance between the feature vector at focus and
all the feature vectors in the true feature buﬀer, must be above 7.5. This
threshold is selected, so that the feature vector is diﬀerent enough to be
certain, that the feature vector corresponds to another person. Or if the
smallest distance between the feature vector at focus and the false feature
buﬀers vectors is lower than 2.5. This is due to the fact, that it then is very
likely, that that person has already been seen and considered a false feature
vector before.
28
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:37==
Each of the buﬀers contains 20 feature vectors. The amount has been chosen
in order for the target feature buﬀer to contain only the last most relevant fea-
ture vectors. The same applies for the false feature buﬀer, since it can also be
assumed that it is unlikely for more than 20 fake proﬁles to appear in one frame.
Furthermore, by keeping the buﬀer small, the algorithm functions faster as it
has to do less comparisons.
Updating of the buﬀers is done by replacing the oldest stored feature vectors,
with one exception for the target feature buﬀer. For the target feature buﬀer, the
ﬁrst two feature vectors detected are never exchanged. This is done to simplify
the detection of the ’Reset’ pose signal, as described in section 4.1.2, since the
system then always knows how the user looks like from the front, because the
ﬁrst detections of the user are made
Figure
4.7:
Flowchart
representing
Method 1.
during
the
’Start’
signal
detection
where the user faces the camera.
Thereby the buﬀer always contains
this perspective, whereas otherwise
it might only contain feature vectors,
representing the target seen from be-
hind, which can then lead to diﬃcul-
ties re-identifying the user from the
front.
4.3
Method 1
In this section an overview of the
implementation of Method 1 will be
given, based on the principles and
techniques explained in the previous
chapters.
Method 1 is built around the idea
of
using
the
YOLO
network
as
a
detector
and
the
Siamese
network
for re-identiﬁcation.
In connection,
the Posenet has also been added to
Method 1 to be able to detect user sig-
nals. Figure 4.7 illustrates the ﬂow of
Method 1.
The ﬂowchart depicts that the track-
ing starts by using the "Start process"
to initialise the feature buﬀers as de-
scribed in section 4.1.1. Following the
initialisation, the system grabs a new
frame, which is then used by YOLO to
detect bounding boxes containing hu-
mans. If YOLO cannot detect any hu-
mans, the system goes back and grabs
a new frame until a human has been
recognized.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
29
==PAGE:38==
The system then checks whether the Not_found_count is above 20, which indi-
cates, that the target hasn’t been found for 20 frames or more. If it is below 20,
the method continues to the Re-Identiﬁcation module.
Figure 4.8 illustrates what is happening inside the Re-Identiﬁcation module shown
in ﬁgure 4.7. The module loops over each found bounding box, in order to crop
out the bounding box, generate the feature vector and append the feature vector
to a list of all feature vectors. Hereafter the module tries to ﬁnd the true user
as previously described in section 4.2. If a true user is found and the euclidean
distance between the feature vector and the 3 most similar feature vectors in the
true feature buﬀer is less than min_distance, the index of this user is saved and
the min_distance is updated.
Afterwards the buﬀers are updated as described in section 4.2.1.
Figure 4.8: Illustration of the re-identiﬁcation module.
If the true user couldn’t be found, the system increments the Not_found_count
and repeats the cycle by going back and grabbing a new frame. If the true user
is found, the Not_found_count is set to 0 and the system then checks if that user
is performing the ’Stop’ pose signal using PoseNet. If the ’Stop’ pose signal is
detected, the tracking stops and returns to the "Start process" looking for a new
’Start’ signal. If the ’Stop’ signal is not detected, the system repeats the circle by
going back and grabbing a new frame.
30
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:39==
In case the system loses track of the user and thereby the Not_found_count in-
creases above 20, the method enters the re-identiﬁcation and signal detection
module as illustrated in ﬁgure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Illustration of the re-identiﬁcation and signal detection module.
This module is almost the same as the Re-identiﬁcation module, but here the
system also looks for the ’Reset’ signal, as described in section 4.1.2. However,
the signal detection through the PoseNet is only performed if the mean distance
of the 3 smallest distances between the new feature vector and the feature vectors
in the true feature buﬀer is less than 4. The distance needs to be less than 4 to
make sure that the true target is performing the ’Reset’ signal, despite it possibly
having been stored in the false feature buﬀer, and therefore not being detected
any more.
This also prevents other people in the frame from accidentally or
intentionally stealing the system.
If the ’Reset’ signal has been detected, the false feature buﬀer is emptied to remove
the user from that buﬀer and the index to that user and the min_distance is set
to -1.
Afterwards the buﬀers are updated as described in section 4.2.1.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
31
==PAGE:40==
4.4
Method 2
Method 2 is built upon on an updated version of the original ADNet algorithm
from the Faster-ADNet for Visual Tracking paper [18].
The ﬂowchart from the
paper can be seen in ﬁgure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Example of the action-decision algorithm structure. Original ﬁgure
found at [18].
Here the system is initialised with a bounding box and a new frame. The system
then uses the ADNet to ﬁnd the human in the new frame as described in section
2.4. If the conﬁdence is lower than a certain threshold, the system continues
to another type of conﬁrmation, which is based on a Siamese network. From
the initialisation and previous successful ﬁndings of the target, the system has
created a buﬀer with previous samples of the target, which it then used together
with the current crop to identify the target. If the new score from the Siamese
network is above a certain threshold, the system simply continues its tracking
by repeating the tracking for a new frame. In case the score is lower than the
threshold, the system has to do a re-detection. In the original paper the system
described samples random crops. Though for the version implemented in Method
2, the system uses the YOLO algorithm to ﬁnd all humans and then uses the
Siamese network to ﬁnd the right target.
Figure 4.11 shows the ﬂowchart of the updated program implemented in Method
2.
The ﬂowchart starts using the "Start process" described in section 4.1.1. Here
it initialises the bounding box and the buﬀers used by the Siamese network
to recognize the target and the ReDetect counter is set to 5. After having been
initialised, the method grabs a new frame and crops out the bounding box. The
crop frame is then fed to the AD Tracking module.
32
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:41==
Figure
4.11:
Flowchart
representing
Method 2.
The AD Tracking, as depicted in ﬁgure
4.12, basically does the same thing
as the original ADNet [17], which is
explained more detailed in 2.4. How-
ever, the implemented version also
limits the AD Tracking to perform
at max 20 actions.
If it performs
more, the object is considered to be
lost, since it should not take more
than ﬁve actions on average to ﬁnd
the the target. Therefore the output
AD_conﬁdence is set to "False", which
also happens if the ADNet outputs
a conﬁdence lower than a thresh-
old of 0.4.
Otherwise, if the conﬁ-
dence is higher than 0.4 and the AD-
Net performs the ’Stop’ action, the
AD_conﬁdence is set to "True".
If the AD_conﬁdence is "True", the
method
runs
the
Re-identiﬁcation
module (see ﬁgure 4.8) on the new
crop based on the frame and the
bounding box from the AD Tracking
module.
Afterwards the same be-
haviour as the one seen in Method 1
follows; ﬁrst it updates the buﬀers,
then it checks if the user has been
found. If the user has been found a
ReDetect counter is incremented. Af-
terwards it checks whether either the
ReDetect is above ﬁve or the ’Stop’ sig-
nal has been detected.
If the ’Stop’
signal has been detected, the method
goes back to the "Start process" to
await a new starting signal.
If the
’Stop’ signal has not been detected
but the ReDetect counter is above ﬁve,
the algorithm simply goes back, grabs
a new frame and continues the track-
ing using the AD Tracking again. Oth-
erwise it goes back, grabs a new frame
and uses YOLO to re-detect the tar-
get. This branch is essentially apply-
ing the same algorithm as in Method
1, with the diﬀerence of the Re-Detect counter.
This branch is used for re-
initialising the bounding box, before the ADNet takes over again.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
33
==PAGE:42==
The reason why the ReDetect counter has to be above ﬁve is to ensure that the
method has found the user multiple times, before using the ADNet. This is done
to make sure that ﬁve new good representations of the target have been obtained
in case the system should lose track of the target.
Figure 4.12: Illustration of the AD Tracking module.
If the AD_conﬁdence is "False", meaning that the target user hasn’t been found,
ReDetect is set to zero and a re-detection process is started by running YOLO on
the frame. Then, if no objects are found, the system sets the ReDetect counter
to zero again and grabs a new frame, which is then fed to YOLO to re-detect the
target again. If one or more object are found by YOLO, all the found bounding
boxes are then fed to the Re-identiﬁcation and signal detection module to re-
identify the target using the Siamese network (see ﬁgure 4.9). The buﬀers are
then updated, and the system goes into the same loop as explained earlier after
the Re-identiﬁcation module.
34
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:43==
5
Results
Both methods have been implemented in Python. To see the full implementation,
see Github repository:
https://github.com/Lyngsaae/Individual-user-tracking---MscThesis_DTU_Spring2020
For actually being able to conclude anything regarding the two implemented
methods, a system test has been created. For this test 20 test videos have been
recorded. Each of these test videos is slightly diﬀerent and tries to explore how
well the systems handle diﬀerent types of scenarios.
Table 5.1: Test video descriptions.
Figure 5.1 provides an overall description of the 20 test videos. The "Target User
ID" is used to show, that diﬀerent people have been used as target user, and
some target users have been used in multiple videos.
The ’Start’, ’Stop’ and
’Reset’ signal indicates whether that signal has been performed in that video. Max
occlusions tells roughly how much of the target user has been been occluded in
the video. "Other person crossing" refers to another person crossing in between
the camera and the target user.
To test the methods, they will ﬁrst be evaluated for some given success criteria
for Method 1 and 2. The success criteria are as follows:
• Start signal detected: Checks if the ’Start’ signal is detected, if performed.
• Stop signal detected: Checks if the ’Stop’ signal is detected, if performed.
• Reset Signal Detected: Checks if the ’Reset’ signal is detected, if performed.
• Continuous tracking: Checks if the target user is found in more or less
every frame, where the target is visible and checks if it only tracks the target
user, and not other people, if they appear in the frame.
• Re-detect target, when lost: Checks whether the system can redetect the
target, after it lost the target, either due to occlusions or other things hap-
pening in the frame.
• Re-detect target, when reset: Checks if the target can use the ’Reset’ sig-
nal, for re-detection after it was lost intermediately.
• Re-detect target with people crossing: Checks if the system can re-detect
the target user after other humans crossed in between the camera and the
target user.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
35
==PAGE:44==
• Re-detect target, with multiple people: Checks if the system can re-detect
the target user if lost and multiple people are in the scene.
• Tracked user using ADNet (only Method 2): Checks if ADNet has been
used for tracking.
Furthermore the IoU between the two methods will be calculated, every time both
of the methods have detected a bounding box for the same frame.
Finally the test will also look at the frame rate for each of the methods.
The methods have been tested using a Surface Book 2 laptop, with an Nvidia
1050 GPU and an Intel core i7 8th generation CPU.
5.1
Method 1
Table 5.2 shows the results of the test criteria for Method 1. A "Yes" means, that
it fulﬁlled the criterion for that video, whereas a "No" means that it did not. If the
ﬁeld is left empty, it means that the criterion is not relevant for that video, since
the scenario has not occurred in the video. In the last column, the percentage of
"Yes" results within the conducted tests in that category is given.
Table 5.2: Method 1 success criteria results.
The test results suggest that in general Method 1 is good at tracking the target
user in diﬀerent scenarios. A list of comments for each video is given in Appendix
A.5 . The comments explain what went wrong for the corresponding video and
potentially why. A short summary of the comments and results is given here:
36
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:45==
• The system almost always detects the user signals. The most common rea-
son for it not to detect a signal, is if the target user has been lost after having
started the tracking.
• It can be hard for YOLO and PoseNet to detect users correctly, if the back-
ground is very similar to their clothing.
• If the user disappears from the frame, and then shows up again seen from
a new angle, the re-identiﬁcation process might be challenged, if the colour
or shape of the users clothing varies a lot depending on the angle.
• Method 1 can be confused if a new person, and in particular a very similar
looking person, shows up while the target user is or already has exited the
camera view.
For each video the frames per second were also measured. This resulted in an
average of 4.98 frames per second. See ﬁgure A.2 in Appendix A.4 for the speciﬁc
frame rates for each video.
5.2
Method 2
Table 5.3 shows the results of the test criteria for Method 2. A "Yes" means, that
it fulﬁlled the criterion for that video, whereas a "No" means that it did not. If the
ﬁeld is left empty, it means that the criterion is not relevant for that video, since
the scenario has not occurred in the video. In the last column, the percentage of
"Yes" results within the conducted tests in that category is given.
Table 5.3: Method 2 success criteria results.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
37
==PAGE:46==
The test results suggest that Method 2 is in general good at tracking the target
user in diﬀerent scenarios. A list of comments for each video is given in Appendix
A.5 . The comments explain what went wrong for the corresponding video and
potentially why. A short summary of the comments and results are given here:
• The system almost always detects the users’ signals.
The most common
reason for it not to detect a signal, is if the target user has been lost.
• It can be hard for YOLO and PoseNet to detect users correctly, if the back-
ground is very similar to their clothing.
• ADNet sometimes struggles to correctly create a bounding box that covers
the whole target. There seems to be some angles that are harder for ADNet
than others.
• Method 2 seems to struggle with people crossing paths with the target user.
Either if it then continues tracking, by tracking the wrong person, or if the
false feature buﬀer hasn’t been updated because it has only used the ADNet
for tracking, while new people have entered the scene. In the last case, if
the new person in the scene looks a bit like the user, it might wrongly target
and track that person.
For each video the frames per second were measured. This resulted in an average
of 5.89 frames per second. It was also investigated how long it took to run the
tracking through YOLO versus ADNet. By using YOLO for tracking/re-detection,
it had a frame rate of 8.09, whereas ADNet had a frame rate of 17.02. The reason
why the total frame rate is lower than these two frame rates, is because in the
overall frame it also measures the time for grabbing a new frame, drawing on the
frame etc. See ﬁgure A.3 in Appendix A.4 for the speciﬁc frame rates for each
video.
5.3
Comparison
In this section, a comparison between the two methods will be made. This will
be done by comparing the results from the previous two test sections of Method
1 and 2. Furthermore this section will also try to compare the two methods by
looking at their IoU between the detected bounding boxes.
To start the comparison, a table containing the Yes-% of the success criteria for
the methods has been created.
Table 5.4: Comparison between Method 1 and Method 2.
38
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.4 provides a good overview of how similar the two methods perform,
and whether one methods is better than the other.
The ﬁgure indicates that
the signal detection is behaving more or less the same way for both methods,
which is to be expected, since the signal detection method is almost identical.
For the rest of the success criteria it appears that Method 1 in general has a
higher Yes-%, meaning a higher success rate. This is particularly clear under
the "Re-detect target with people crossing the path" and "Re-detect target with
multiple people", where Method 1 clearly outperforms Method 2. It is however
worth mentioning, that theses two success criteria are not mutually exclusive,
meaning that situations that tests these two criteria might happen at the same
time. Therefore there might be a very high correlation between these two criteria.
Finally it is also worth noticing from ﬁgure 5.4, that Method 2 actually has a 18%
higher frame rate than Method 1.
5.3.1
Intersection over Union
A good way to evaluate how similar Method 1’s and Method 2’s bounding boxes
actually are, is by looking at their IoU. The IoU can both say something about
how often they detect the same object and exactly how similar the two methods
are.
The IoU has only been measured when both methods detect a bounding box, in
order to make it a more "fair" comparison, regarding how similar the bounding
boxes are. Furthermore the IoU between Method 1 and Method 2 when using
the ADNet and when using YOLO has also been measured, to see how similar
the ADNet performs to the YOLO detector. The results can be seen in table 5.5.
Table 5.5: IoU between Method 1 and Method 2.
From the results it is clear that on average the two methods have a quite high
IoU at 90%. By then looking at the IoU between Method 1 and when Method 2
uses YOLO, it is very clear that they perform very similar. The IoU is close to
100%, which is to be expected, since the YOLO network in Method 1 should per-
form similar to when Method 2 uses YOLO. Finally by looking at the IoU between
Method 1 and when Method 2 uses ADNet, it is clear, that they are generating
similar bounding boxes with an IoU average of around 88%. This is also the IoU
that pulls down the total IoU between the two methods.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:49==
6
Discussion
In this chapter both methods will be discussed based on the test results and
experience obtained during the implementation process.
First the common parts between the two methods will be discussed, then Method
1 and Method 2 separately and ﬁnally a discussion over the comparison of the
two methods will follow.
6.1
Common functionalities
6.1.1
Signal detection
At the beginning of the project, the idea was to retrain YOLO for signal detection,
meaning adding a class for each signal. Through some research it became clear,
that in order to retrain YOLO a lot of data is needed. As a downside, there could
not be found any pre-existing datasets with human poses big enough for training,
and it did not seem feasible to generate such a dataset within the time span of this
thesis. Therefore the PoseNet was chosen, since it was a more straight-forward
implementation, which could be used for posture signals.
The signal detection system proved in the test to be able to detect user signals
most of the time. The signal detection did struggle a little, if the user and the
background had very similar colors, since this seemed to make it harder for the
PoseNet. This point is valid for the detection of all the signals. A second discovery
regarding ADNet is that it did not seem that stable from the testing. The joint
positions varied a lot, which made it sometimes harder to detect the user signal,
and this problem forces the user to show the signals very clearly. This problem
occured particularly for the ’Start’ signal, since the PoseNet seems to struggle
more with stretched arms, where it then has a harder time ﬁnding the wrist and
elbow joints.
6.1.2
YOLO
The YOLO network is very eﬀective for the detection of humans. It worked very
fast and reliable. It managed to detect people at very diﬀerent scales. This could
cause a bit of a problem, if it detected a human far away, which then had to be
scaled up for the re-identiﬁcation. This up-scaled version sometimes caused the
re-identiﬁcation system to wrongly identify it as the target user. Therefore the
size of the bounding boxes, used for re-identiﬁcation, was also ﬁltered based on
their sizes.
Sometimes YOLO detects only one bounding box for multiple people, when they
are going in front of each other. That is of course very understandable, but it
makes it very hard for the re-identiﬁcation process, if multiple people are showing
up in the same frame, and the algorithm doesn’t know about it.
6.1.3
Siamese Network
In principle the Siamese network should be able to create feature vectors, that
should be so unique for each individual person, that the system would easily be
able to re-identify the user. However that was not exactly the case.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
41
==PAGE:50==
The Siamese network proved to be able to generate a feature vector for each per-
son in the frame, that was somehow diﬀerentiable from the others when using
the euclidean distance as metric. What was tricky, was where to set the distance
threshold, for when to re-identify a target user, since the distance seemed to vary
signiﬁcantly. The distance between feature vectors of the same person was nor-
mally pretty small, compared to people with signiﬁcantly diﬀerently looks. But
when a user is somehow similar looking to another person, the distance can be-
come quite small - however not as small as the distance can get between the
targets’ own feature vectors, but small enough to get hard to see if that is the
target user seen from a new/harder angle or if it is a another somehow similar
person. This is also the reason why a buﬀer holding both the true user feature
vectors and a buﬀer holding other peoples feature vectors was needed. These
buﬀers proved to be very eﬀective for keeping track of the target user and par-
ticularly keeping track of all other people in the image.
By doing this, it led
to the re-identiﬁcation system to working well enough for handling most cases
presented to it throughout this master thesis.
6.2
Method 1
The Method 1 results described in section 5.1 were a clear indicator, that the
method checks a lot of the success criteria. Even though the test dataset was
very small, it managed to test a lot of diﬀerent aspects.
Method 1 was particularly good at re-identifying the target user, even if the user
had been gone from the view for multiple frames or in cases where another person
crossed in-between the target user and the camera.
The reason why the re-
identiﬁcation worked so well, was because Method 1 consistently updates the
true and false feature buﬀers, and thereby keep tracks over all the people in the
frame. That said, the system could be fooled, if for example the target user is not
in the frame and a new unseen similar person arrives into the camera view. Since
the Siamese network is not perfect at separating people in the feature space and
the new person in the image has not be registered in the false feature buﬀer, that
person is very likely to be wrongly re-identiﬁed as the target user.
Another problem is happening when the target user is exiting the frame and a
new person enters in the same ﬁeld of view for the camera, meaning that it might
not ﬁrst detect the new person, and thereby that person might become part of
the true feature buﬀer. Therefore when the target user exits the camera view, the
new person is likely to be tracked.
Both of these situation are of course special cases and there is probably more
cases like theses, which just haven’t been observed yet. However as mentioned
earlier, Method 1 is good at tracking and re-identifying the target user under most
normal circumstances. That said, it would be worth it, to invest more time in the
re-identiﬁcation process and the Siamese network, for making it more robust.
This will be discussed further in chapter 7.
42
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:51==
6.3
Method 2
The Method 2 results described from section 5.2 were a clear indicator, that the
method checks a lot of the success criteria as well.
But as mentioned previ-
ously the test dataset was quite small, and therefore it only gave an indication
of the methods performance. The detection throughYOLO worked very well, as
an initialisation. Both because it found the target user and it helped generating
feature vectors of other people in the frame. But this is also a serious problem
for Method 2, because it only generates feature vectors for all people in the frame
when YOLO is used, which is not the case, when the method runs on ADNet. This
means that, when the method tracks a user using the ADNet and a new person
enters the camera view, the method would not have any record of this person not
being the target user. So if the target user disappears or the ADNet fails to track
the target user while that new person in the camera view is somehow similar
looking, Method 2 is very likely to wrongly classify that person as the target user.
Another problem with ADNet is when people are crossing paths, since ADNet
might change to track the other person and thereby the system starts to store
false feature vectors in the target users feature buﬀer. This problem could poten-
tially be solved by training ADNet to be better at handling crossings. For example
the conﬁdence from ADNet could be set to 0 if multiple people are in the crop.
ADNet seems to struggle with always capturing the whole target user. It some-
times misses the head, or has way too much space above the users head. It also
seems to struggle a bit with certain angles and light conditions. These prob-
lems might be based on the quite limited data used for training the ADNet. If the
dataset was to become bigger and more diverse, these problems might become
solved through more training.
Finally ADNet is fundamentally depending on small movements of the user rel-
ative to the size of the bounding box. This means that the frame rate and the
movement speed of the user have to be in some ways aligned. If not, then ADNet
will struggle or not be able to track the user at all. Even though the current im-
plementation runs at a relatively low frame rate of around six frames per second,
it is to be expected that this method can be optimised with respect to the frame
rate. However this is not something, that has been a focus within this thesis.
The training of the version of ADNet implemented in Method 2, was only built
on supervised learning and not the Re-enforcement learning. This was due to
ADNet not learning enough through the reinforcement learning and the paper
[17] saying that the performance improvement using reinforcement learning was
very low. This suggests that it is at least very hard to train the ADNet through
reinforcement learning and therefore it might be even harder to train ADNet to
actually control the robot movements, since the environments space mathemat-
ically is very big.
This all means that Method 2 is very good and fast at tracking the target user,
if the target user is not crossing paths with other people and if the target user
doesn’t leave the frame while a new undetected person is in the frame.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
43
==PAGE:52==
6.4
Comparison
At the beginning of the project Method 1 was considered to be very diﬀerent
from Method 2. After having found the paper Faster ADNet [18], and reading
about them using the Siamese network together with some kind of re-detection
method, it became clear, that the two methods had a lot in common. In fact, the
reinitialisation of the bounding box in Method 2, is more or less exactly the same
as Method 1. The IoU between the two methods’ bounding boxes also suggests,
that they perform very similar in many situations. But even though they are very
similar they end up performing quite diﬀerently in some situations. This can also
be seen by looking at the list of comments for each test video in Appendix A.5 -
there are a lot more comments considering Method 2 than 1. This implies that
Method 2 seems to have more problems than Method 1, since comments only
happen, when the method doesn’t perform as it should.
The main reason why it would seem that the two methods are behaving diﬀer-
ently, would be the way they generate and store feature vectors. Method 1 gener-
ates and stores feature vectors for all the people in the frame at each new frame.
Whereas Method 2 only updates the false feature vectors, when it reinitialised
the bounding box by using YOLO. This key diﬀerence between the two methods
is the main reason why Method 2 often has a harder time handling multiple
people. Therefore Method 1 is the more desirable of the two methods.
44
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:53==
7
Future Improvements
From the test and discussion multiple improvable aspects of the two methods
became more clear. Therefore this section provides some ideas for further im-
provements for both methods.
7.1
Retrain YOLO
The implemented YOLO version is detecting 80 diﬀerent classes, and the methods
are currently only using one. YOLO3 is a fairly deep neural network, which could
potentially be reduced in size, because it only needs to detect humans for this
task. By making YOLO less deep, and able to detect fewer classes, a potential
speed up in performance might be achieved. Smaller versions of YOLO already
exist, which could be used as the ﬁrst step.
Another improvement for YOLO could be to implement the classes of diﬀerent
humans performing the postures for signalling the system. By doing this, PoseNet
could be excluded for both Method 1 and 2. It would though be necessary for
Method 2 to run YOLO on the bounding box found by ADNet, to detect any signals,
unless ADNet is change to also contain signal classiﬁcation.
Finally it should be considered to look into the new YOLO4, which has been
released at the end of this thesis, and therefore has not been considered, because
the YOLO3 was already implemented. The YOLO4 is supposed to be faster and
and more accurate, therefore it might be worth implementing this YOLO version
before doing any of the previous mentioned optimisations.
7.2
Retrain ADNet
From the reinforcement learning of the ADNet it was found, that it did not learn
any desirable behaviour, at least compared the ADNet only trained through su-
pervised learning. One of the reasons for this, could be that during the rein-
forcement training, the conﬁdence output was completely neglected. This neglect
could potentially be a big reason why the reinforcement learning did not work.
Therefore it might be desirable to also consider the conﬁdence from the ADNet,
when evaluating the reward given the state and action.
Another improvement to the ADNet could be to add a ﬁxed number of user signal
classiﬁcations to the output of ADNet. By doing this, it would be possible to get
rid of PoseNet or any other pose estimation network/method, which would speed
up Method 2.
7.2.1
ADNet as robot controller
One of the reasons why the ADNet originally was chosen, was the potential for
using its’ outputs as direct steering inputs to the robot, instead of using them to
change the crop. The best way to do this would probably be to use reinforcement
learning together with video data and a corresponding bounding box generated
from one or multiple of MiRs robots. But training through reinforcement learn-
ing can be very hard to do, particularly for very high dimensional data like real
images, which also has been illustrated throughout this thesis.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
45
==PAGE:54==
This means that using the ADNet as an end to end solution for making the robot
follow users, would potentially be a very rewarding network for this type of prob-
lem, and therefore should be researched more in future work - but it is also a
very hard problem to solve using a single network. Nevertheless, this is probably
one of the problems today car makers face when trying to make fully automated
cars, meaning that it is probably feasible, particularly in smaller environments,
like indoor storage facilities, but to do this is still a hard problem to solve.
7.3
Signal detection
Since it was found that the PoseNet seems not too accurate and not too stable
regarding the positions of the joints, which sometimes makes it hard to detect
user signals, it might be a good idea to investigate other types of networks for
pose estimation. One could be the network AlphaPose, since it seems more ac-
curate and stable. This has not been tested, meaning that this is only a qualiﬁed
suggestion.
Except from another network for user signal detection, the amount of signals
could be expanded. The two implemented, but currently unused signals, could
for example be used for getting the robot to get closer to the user or go further
away.
Finally the system is missing a more critical signal, in a form of a "Kill" signal, that
stops the robot completely. As an improvement this signal should be detected no
matter who performs it in the frame, so that it is possible for everybody to "kill"
the robot, if it should perform some unwanted behaviour.
7.3.1
Optimise the re-identiﬁcation process
Since the Siamese network does not always create very diﬀerent feature vectors
between diﬀerent people, it might be reasonable to retrain the network. During
the retraining of the network multiple improvements can be done.
The ﬁrst one would be to gain more data and more varying data, in the form of the
same person but seen from multiple angles in multiple environments, whereto
the network will not be able to use the background information, when creating
the feature vector.
Another way could be through supervised learning, where it is more a matter of a
classiﬁcation together with a regression. Here the classiﬁcation could be in form
of the person wearing a dress or long pants ect. The regression could be used for
colour classiﬁcation. This would required more labelled information about the
data, but it could potentially lead to a better segmentation of diﬀerent people.
Finally an improvement to the re-identiﬁcation process could be to make the
feature buﬀer for the target user contain vectors, representing the user seen for
as many angles as possible. By doing this, the system would be better able to
re-identify the user from a new angle. This could be implemented by adding a
regression output to the Siamese network, which would contain how the user is
turned with respect to the camera. The output would lie within the range of 0-
360 degrees. By hereafter using this information, it should be possible to update
the feature buﬀer in a more smart way.
46
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:55==
8
Project plan discussion
In this chapter the project development and the plan will be discussed.
Table 8.1 shows the original project plan, which was developed at the beginning
of the thesis period. The ﬁgure shows a clear ﬂow of how to progress with each
sub task of the thesis.
Table 8.1: Original project plan. See table A.1 in Appendix A.1 for bigger version.
As the thesis progressed multiple things changed, which is a condition frequently
seen during projects in general. The ﬁrst thing which changed, was the plan
of going to MiRs’ oﬃce in Odense to see and study their robots. This change
took place mainly due to the corona crisis and partially due to the geographical
distance. Therefore the focus of the project changed a bit away from the direct
application on one of MiRs robots, to more focussing on the methods themselves.
The actual project development can be seen in table 8.2
Table 8.2: Final project plan. See table A.2 in Appendix A.1 for bigger version.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
47
==PAGE:56==
In general the ﬁrst 10 weeks of the project did follow the initial project plan quite
well, except from working at MiR with their robots. The theory was found and
implemented successfully. During the project it became quite clear, that with all
the new information, the writing of the thesis had to be done in parallel with the
more practical work. Therefore a couple of weeks in the middle of the project were
added, to ensure that the newly obtained theory could be documented properly
in the report.
Another thing that was changed a bit, was the discovery of how to deal with the
signal detection. Therefore PoseNet was found, understood and implemented.
The test videos were originally supposed to be generated by MiR, but because of
a a change of plans, they were not able to deliver. Therefore the test videos had
to be recorded. This was done over a longer period, since multiple people were
needed in the videos. This period when the videos were recorded made some time
available for other tasks to be ﬁnished. Therefore both the optimisation based
on some of the test videos, the comparison between the methods and the report
writing was more or less all done in parallel, during the last weeks of the period.
As a ﬁnal remark, the plan of using a week for testing after each of the imple-
mented parts, was discovered to be redundant, because the implemented code
was tested in parallel with the development and implementation. Therefore it has
often just been considered a part of the implementation.
Next step
At the beginning of the project, the idea was also to implement the methods on
the robot. But it quickly became clear, that it could be very time consuming to
implement the methods on the speciﬁc hardware and the focus should rather lie
on the methods’ development instead of a speciﬁc application. Furthermore the
corona crisis also made working with the robot impossible.
Therefore the next step for this project is to ﬁrst choose between the two methods
and hereafter start to look at the speciﬁc implementation of the method for MiR’s
application.
48
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:57==
9
Conclusion
This thesis has examined two diﬀerent methods to solve the task of tracking
users that MiR is faced with. The two methods were initially very diﬀerent in
the design, but the ﬁnal implementations of the two methods made them very
similar, as they ended up consisting of some of the same building blocks.
Method 1 was based on YOLO as a detector, PoseNet as a posture detector for user
inputs and a Siamese network for re-identiﬁcation of the users. The method in-
cluded a buﬀer containing the feature vectors generated by the Siamese network
for the user and another buﬀer containing the feature vectors from other people
in the image. Both of the buﬀers were updated at every frame, and therefore the
system was very good at keeping track of the user and other people in the camera
view.
Method 2 was also based on YOLO for initialisation and re-detection of the bound-
ing box containing the user in the image. Furthermore it also used PoseNet as
a posture detector for user inputs and a Siamese network for re-identiﬁcation of
the users. The core of Method 2 is ADNet, which is able to track the user con-
tinuously between frames, if the users position doesn’t change much and no, or
very little, occlusion is happening. Method 2 also contains two feature buﬀers
for the user and other people observed by the camera. The feature buﬀer con-
taining the feature vectors from the user is updated every frame, but the feature
buﬀer containing the feature vectors from other users is only updated, when the
YOLO network gets used. This only happens in the beginning, when the method
is looking for a start signal or when re-detection is happening after the system
has lost track of the target. Because of this updating system, Method 2 has a
harder time detecting the correct user, when performing a re-detection of the
user. Furthermore ADNet can currently confused, if other people are crossing
paths with the user. In this case, the ADNet might track the wrong user.
By comparing the two methods, it became clear that Method 1 is more stable
in diﬀerent environments, because of the way it handles multiple people in the
frame. Therefore Method 1 is the preferred of the two methods for tracking indi-
vidual users in dynamic environments using a monocular camera.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:59==
References
[1]
Tirmidzi Faizal Aﬂahi. Improving Siamese Network Performance. 2017. url:
https://medium.com/@kuzuryu71/improving-siamese-network-performance-f7c2371bdc1e.
[2]
Weihua Chen et al. Beyond triplet loss: a deep quadruplet network for person
re-identiﬁcation. 2017.
[3]
D. Gray, S. Brennan, and H. Tao. “Evaluating Appearance Models for Recog-
nition, Reacquisition, and Tracking”. In: Proc. IEEE International Workshop
on Performance Evaluation for Tracking and Surveillance (PETS) (2007).
[4]
Harshvardhan Gupta. Facial Similarity with Siamese Networks in PyTorch.
2017. url: https://medium.com/hackernoon/facial-similarity-with-siamese-networks-
in-pytorch-9642aa9db2f7.
[5]
The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Person Re-identiﬁcation Datasets.
data retrieved from The Chinese University of Hong Kong, last viewed: 29-
06-2020, http://www.ee.cuhk.edu.hk/~xgwang/CUHK_identiﬁcation.html.
[6]
Jonathan Hui. RL DQN Deep Q-networkl. last viewed: 29-06-2020, https:
//towardsdatascience.com/policy-gradients-in-a-nutshell-8b72f9743c5d.
[7]
Amro Kamal. YOLO, YOLOv2 and YOLOv3: All You want to know. last viewed:
29-06-2020, https://medium.com/@amrokamal_47691/yolo-yolov2-and-yolov3-all-
you-want-to-know-7e3e92dc4899.
[8]
Sanyam Kapoor. Policy Gradients in a Nutshelll. last viewed: 29-06-2020,
https://towardsdatascience.com/policy-gradients-in-a-nutshell-8b72f9743c5d.
[9]
Ayoosh Kathuria. Whats new in YOLO v3? last viewed: 29-06-2020, https:
//towardsdatascience.com/yolo-v3-object-detection-53fb7d3bfe6b.
[10]
Dan Oved. Real-time Human Pose Estimation in the Browser with Tensor-
Flow.js. last viewed 29-06-2020, https : / / medium . com / tensorﬂow / real - time -
human-pose-estimation-in-the-browser-with-tensorﬂow-js-7dd0bc881cd5.
[11]
George Papandreou et al. PersonLab: Person Pose Estimation and Instance
Segmentation with a Bottom-Up, Part-Based, Geometric Embedding Model.
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1803.08225.pdf.
[12]
Redakcja. Sukces MiR: Szybszy i zwinniejszy MiR250 prowadzi we wszys-
tkich parametrachl. last viewed: 29-06-2020, http://www.narzedziapolska.pl/
sukces-mir-szybszy-i-zwinniejszy-mir250-prowadzi-we-wszystkich-parametrach/.
[13]
Joseph Redmon. PoseNet. pretrained network retrieved from, last viewed:
29-06-2020, https://github.com/rwightman/posenet-pytorch.
[14]
Joseph Redmon. YOLO. pretrained network retrieved from, last viewed: 29-
06-2020, https://pjreddie.com/darknet/yolo/.
[15]
The QMUL underGround Re-IDentiﬁcation. data retrieved from, last viewed:
29-06-2020, http://personal.ie.cuhk.edu.hk/~ccloy/downloads_qmul_underground_
reid.html.
[16]
Visual Tracker Benchmark. data for training ADNet retrieved from, last viewed:
29-06-2020, http://cvlab.hanyang.ac.kr/tracker_benchmark/datasets.html.
[17]
Sangdoo Yun et al. Action-Decision Networks for Visual Tracking with Deep
Reinforcement Learning. 2017.
[18]
Tiansa Zhang et al. Faster-ADNet for Visual Tracking. 2019.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
51
==PAGE:60==
List of Figures
1.1 Example of MiRs robots. Original image found at [12]. . . . . . . . .
1
2.1 Example of PoseNet detecting joints and facial structures in a hu-
man. Original post found at [10]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2 PoseNet outputs example. Original ﬁgure found at [10]. . . . . . . .
6
2.3 5x5 YOLO grid. Original ﬁgure found at [7]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4 Original YOLO output size. Original ﬁgure found at [7]. . . . . . . .
7
2.5 Example for the problem of multiple bounding boxes detecting the
same object. Original ﬁgure found at [7]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6 Example of Siamese structure. Original ﬁgure found at [1]. . . . . .
9
2.7 Example of action-decision network structure. Original ﬁgure found
at [17]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1 YOLO3 structure. Original ﬁgure found at [9]. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2 Siamese network structure.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3 Siamese network training using the triplet loss. The orange curve
shows the average loss over 50 steps. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4 Siamese network training using the quadruplet loss and triplet loss.
The orange curve shows the average loss over 50 steps. . . . . . . .
16
3.5 Original ADNet structure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.6 Modiﬁed ADNet actions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.7 Modiﬁed ADNet structure for more actions.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.8 Reinforcement environment inspired data loader. . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.9 ADNet with 11 actions supervised training results. The orange curve
shows the average loss over 50 steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.10ADNet with 17 actions supervised training results. The orange curve
shows the average loss over 50 steps. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.11ADNet reinforcement training for 11 and 17 actions, using Q-learning
and policy gradient descend. The orange graph indicates the mean
duration over 50 episodes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.1 Example of the ’Start’ signal. The blue dots mark the joint positions. 23
4.2 Implemented posing signals. The blue dots mark the joint positions. 23
4.3 Flowchart representing the starting process.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4 Examples of problems for the Siamese network. . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5 Diagram depicting the updating of buﬀers.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.6 Bounding box updating process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.7 Flowchart representing Method 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.8 Illustration of the re-identiﬁcation module.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.9 Illustration of the re-identiﬁcation and signal detection module. . .
31
4.10Example of the action-decision algorithm structure. Original ﬁgure
found at [18]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.11Flowchart representing Method 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.12Illustration of the AD Tracking module.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
A.1 Test video descriptions and results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.2 Other test results from method 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
52
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:61==
A.3 Other test results from method 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.4 Test video comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
List of Tables
1.1 Initial thesis schedule.
See table A.1 in Appendix A.1 for bigger
version.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
5.1 Test video descriptions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2 Method 1 success criteria results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3 Method 2 success criteria results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4 Comparison between Method 1 and Method 2.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.5 IoU between Method 1 and Method 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.1 Original project plan. See table A.1 in Appendix A.1 for bigger version. 47
8.2 Final project plan. See table A.2 in Appendix A.1 for bigger version.
47
A.1 Initial thesis schedule.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
A.2 Final thesis schedule. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
53
==PAGE:62==
A
Appendix
A.1
Project schedule
Table A.1: Initial thesis schedule.
Table A.2: Final thesis schedule.
54
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:63==
A.2
Project plan task description
Make project description and work schedule (week 1).
• Create a project description, explaining the project more in detail with re-
spect to the task at hand.
• Use the project description to generate a work schedule on a weekly basis.
Get to know the robots, the navigation environments and software inter-
faces (week 1).
• Get a general overview over the robots and the hardware being used, with
the main focus on the cameras and computational resources available for
the system.
• Get to know MiRs user interface, to be able to use the robot.
• Figure out how to implement the developed code and which language to use.
• examples of the environments the robot needs to be able to navigate in, to
ﬁgure out what the system should be able to hand and thus how robust it
should be.
Research
Find diﬀerent methods for solving the tracking problem (week
1-4).
• Research methods that can be used to solve the tracking problem in the
web, scientiﬁc papers and DTU theses.
• Focus on methods using Deep learning to solve this problem.
Research Find diﬀerent methods for solving the signalling problem (week
2-4).
• Find methods that can be used to solve the signalling problem by research-
ing the web, scientiﬁc papers and DTU theses.
• Find one basic method, and one method using hand gestures.
• Focus on methods using Deep learning to solve this problem.
Evaluate the diﬀerent methods found through discussion with the supervi-
sors (week 3-4).
• During the research weeks, talk to the advisor’s and ﬁgure out which meth-
ods they consider best to solve the problems at hand.
Method 1/2: Implement detector - YOLO (week 3-4).
• Implement a detector for detecting humans, and possibly signals for track-
ing.
• YOLO will be used as a detector. A Pretrained network will be used.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
55
==PAGE:64==
Methods 1/2: Implement comparator - Siamese Networks (week 3-5).
• Implement a comparator, to check if the system is tracking the same person
as before.
• The comparator will be build based on a Siamese network.
• See if it is possible to use the HPC at DTU to train neural networks, if needed.
Method 1: Build/implement (week 5-6).
• Combine the detector and comparator to build method 1.
Method 1: Test (week 6)
• Test methods 1 in diﬀerent dynamic environments.
Method 2: Implement tracker - Action-Decison Network (week 7-9).
• Implement a tracker the tracker will be based on a Action Decion network,
because its output might be used directly to command the robot.
• The training will ﬁrst be done using supervised learning, and afterwards
reinforcement learning.
• See if it is possible to use the HPC at DTU to train neural networks, if needed.
Methods2: Build method (week 11-12).
• Combine the detector, the tracker and comparator to build method 2.
Methods2: Test method (week 13).
• Take the webcam setup to some of the environments the robots should be
able to navigate in and test if the program is able to see signals and to track
the user.
• Success criteria:
– The system can detect the starting signal in diﬀerent scales and rota-
tions.
– The system can ﬁnd the user in the image.
– The system can keep tracking the user continuously in the image.
– The system can track the same person, despite multiple other people
in the image.
– The system can handle losing sight of the user for a short period of
time.
Methods 1/2: Retrain YOLO for signal detection (week 14-16).
• Retrain the yolo network, so it now only has 3 categories (person, start
signal, stop signal).
Methods 1/2: Implement Signal detection (week 16-18).
• Implement the new yolo network in both methods.
56
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:65==
Method 1/2: Test signal detection (week 18-19).
• Take the webcam setup to some of the environments the robots should be
able to navigate in and test if the program is able to see the signals.
• Success criteria:
– The system can detect the starting signal from the user.
– The system can detect the stop signal from the user.
– The system can detect diﬀerent signals from diﬀerent distance.
Test both methods in diﬀerent dynamic environments (week 19-20).
• Make multiple test scenarios, where both systems will be tested on.
• Success criteria:
– The system can detect user signals.
– The system can continuously track the user even when other people
are observed, and the user is lost out of sight shortly.
– The tracking is more stable compared to not using the laser informa-
tion.
– The robot can continuously follow the user with a static distance.
Compare methods from the test (week 20).
• Compare accuracy and precision.
• Compare frame rate
Report writing (week 21-25).
• Write the ﬁnal report
this will also continuously happen throughout the
whole period.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
57
==PAGE:66==
A.3
PoseNet structure: MobileNetV1 100
features :
Conv2d(3, 32, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (2, 2), padding = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(32, 32, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (1, 1), padding = (1, 1), groups = 32)
Conv2d(32, 64, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(64, 64, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (2, 2), padding = (1, 1), groups = 64)
Conv2d(64, 128, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(128, 128, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (1, 1), padding = (1, 1), groups = 128)
Conv2d(128, 128, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(128, 128, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (2, 2), padding = (1, 1), groups = 128)
Conv2d(128, 256, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(256, 256, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (1, 1), padding = (1, 1), groups = 256)
Conv2d(256, 256, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(256, 256, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (2, 2), padding = (1, 1), groups = 256)
Conv2d(256, 512, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(512, 512, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (1, 1), padding = (1, 1), groups = 512)
Conv2d(512, 512, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(512, 512, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (1, 1), padding = (1, 1), groups = 512)
Conv2d(512, 512, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(512, 512, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (1, 1), padding = (1, 1), groups = 512)
Conv2d(512, 512, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(512, 512, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (1, 1), padding = (1, 1), groups = 512)
Conv2d(512, 512, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(512, 512, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (1, 1), padding = (1, 1), groups = 512)
Conv2d(512, 512, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(512, 512, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (1, 1), padding = (1, 1), groups = 512)
Conv2d(512, 1024, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
Conv2d(1024, 1024, kernelsize = (3, 3), stride = (1, 1), padding = (2, 2), dilation = (2, 2), groups =
1024)
Conv2d(1024, 1024, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1)))
58
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:67==
heatmap:
Conv2d(1024, 17, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1))
vector oﬀset :
Conv2d(1024, 34, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1))
displacement_fwd :
Conv2d(1024, 32, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1))
displacement_bwd :
Conv2d(1024, 32, kernelsize = (1, 1), stride = (1, 1))
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
59
==PAGE:68==
A.4
Test video descriptions and results
Figure A.1: Test video descriptions and results
Figure A.2: Other test results from method 1
60
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.3: Other test results from method 2
• YOLO trackings: How many time has the YOLO network been used.
• YOLO trackings found: How many time the YOLO network has been used
and where a user has been found.
• ADNet trackings: How many times ADNet has been used.
• Re-detections: How many times has the user been re-detected.
• Track frames: How many frames has the system actually tracked a user.
• Frames per second: How many frames the method handles per second.
• ADNet time: How many frames the ADNet part of method 2 handles per
second.
• ADNet time: How many frames the YOLO part of method 2 handles per
second.
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
61
==PAGE:70==
A.5
Test video comments
Figure A.4: Test video comments
62
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
==PAGE:71==
Individual user tracking in dynamic environments using machine vision and monocular cameras
63
==PAGE:72==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 1, Bygning 101A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 45 25 25 25
www.dtu.dk
