==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Numerical model of the thermal behaviour
of steel doors in fire
Ainara Sofia Franco Vergara
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Tlf: +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Fire doors are exposed to high temperatures and therefore their thermal response is a
very important design field as thermal distortion could significantly affect the safety
behaviour of the door. In this project, fire doors have been subjected to standard fire
tests in a Finite Element model, where the temperature rise follows a well-defined
trend and therefore can be validated through a comparison with experimental mea-
surements obtained by means of the Dansk Brand- og Sikringsteknisk Institut (DBI),
confirming that the proposed numerical models can be a a valid way of predicting the
thermal behaviour of fire doors.
As an end product, the Input File for an Abaqus FE model has been obtained for a
fire door of big dimensions.
==PAGE:4==
ii
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Masters’ thesis was prepared at the department of Civil Engineering at the
Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
Masters degree in Civil Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 17, 2020
Ainara Sofia Franco Vergara
==PAGE:6==
iv
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Developing this project has been an interesting and challenging experience with the
objective of becoming a more knowledgeable professional. As a civil engineer, fire
safety is a field that must always be on our mind when doing structural designs, as
the thermal behavior of materials plays an important role in construction. Therefore,
I would like to thank my supervisor Luisa Giuliani for sharing her passion and knowl-
edge on fire engineering, which made me interested in developing this project on the
first place.
I would also like to thank Ilias Thanasoulas and DBI (Dansk Brand- og Sikring-
steknisk Institut) for providing me with real data from laboratory tests, which were
crucial to validate my Finite Element Abaqus model.
Lastly, I would like express my gratitude to my friends and family for always support-
ing me and keeping me motivated throughout the entire duration of the project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Previous studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Object and aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical background
5
2.1
Heat transfer mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Fire model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Transient Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Finite Element Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Introduction to Abaqus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Case Study
11
3.1
Preliminary studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Numerical benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.3
Calibration of the numerical models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Optimization of the models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Numerical models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.1
General input for the models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3.2
2D models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.3
3D model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.4
Numerical results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4
Exporting data to the Structural model
45
4.1
Adiabatic Surface Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
==PAGE:10==
Contents
4.2
Mesh compatibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Coupled model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Conclusion
49
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A Exercise 1: Un-insulated beam
53
A.1 Input Constant Temperature of Surface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.2 Constant Heat flux . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
A.3 Constant Sink Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
B Exercise 2: Insulated beam
59
C Exercise 3: Transient state
63
D Abaqus manual for Heat Transfer Analysis
69
Bibliography
73
viii
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
FEM
Finite Element Method
HRR
Heat Release Rate
Symbols - Greek
α
Diffusivity
∆l
Distance between nodes
∆
Gradient between two values
λ
Thermal conductivity
ρ
Material density
σ
Stefan-Boltzmann coefficient
ε
Emissivity
Symbols - Latin
˙q”
Heat flux
c
Specific heat capacity
h
Convection coefficient
L
Thickness of element
T
Temperature
t
Time
x
Distance
==PAGE:12==
x
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background and motivation
When designing buildings and structures against fire, it is crucial for the elements
forming it to ensure resistance to high temperatures. It must be guaranteed that all
the people in the endangered area can evacuate it safely before the structure collapses.
Therefore, fire propagation has to be avoided and the most common way to do it is
by using steel fire doors.
The thermo-mechanical behavior of steel fire doors can be tested by placing the door
into a furnace where heat is applied, and the response of the door is recorded. More-
over, FEM can be used to predict their nature when exposed to high temperatures but
there are limitations on the door’s dimensions according to IMO’s recommendations
[1]. Thus, for the case of fire doors with larger dimensions there is no reliable FE
model and performing a fire test is of high expense and makes this a suitable project
for providing the industry with a numerical model that can predict the thermal be-
havior of steel fire doors of higher scale when exposed to fire.
It has been proven that the thermo-mechanical behavior of fire doors plays a big
role in preventing flame and smoke propagation [2]. Therefore, the integrity of the
door will have to be ensured, as they would limit fire propagation as well as avoid
structural failure of the building where the doors are located, giving the occupants of
the area sufficient time of evacuation besides giving firemen enough time to intervene
and end the fire [3].
This project will focus on the prediction of the thermal distribution on fire doors
for the model to be later coupled (if possible) with a mechanical model done in a
brother-project by the student Carmen del Mar Perez. By merging the two models, it
is expected to predict the thermo-mechanical behavior of steel doors when exposed to
fire and possibly optimize the construction materials used in them. This combination
of FE models is of high importance when wanting to know how much of an impact
the thermal distortion has in the door’s mechanical behavior, making it bend away
from its supporting frame.
==PAGE:14==
1 Introduction
1.1.1
Previous studies
In order to improve the already existing steel fire doors, numerical and experimen-
tal tests have been done being the latter of high cost in the case of doors with big
dimensions. Moreover, different designs have been computationally tested [4] with
the aim of seeing if a new composition of the doors could be a possible solution to
improving the thermo-mechanical response of the doors and frames when exposed to
fire. These innovative designs are very recent and need further development. Conse-
quently, this project will extend the investigation on thermal computational models
based on the already existing fire door designs with the intention of providing the
industry with an effective and less expensive method of testing doors of different di-
mensions and thermal properties by analyzing their failure mode and behavior. The
complexity of the project comes from having to model the fire doors considering all
the relevant properties (thermal conductivity, heat capacity, density, etc.) and their
dependence on fire-exposure time, as most of them vary rather than being a constant
value through time. Furthermore, the way the different properties and/or elements
have been modelled should also be considered, as they would simplify the usability
of the model for the user.
The results obtained with the final numerical models are expected to be compared
with the experimental measurements obtained by DBI (Dansk Brand-og Sikring-
steknisk Institut) in standardized fire tests confirming that the proposed numerical
models can be a valid tool for the prediction of the thermo-mechanical performance
of steel fire doors of big dimensions.
1.2
Object and aim
The project consists on the thermal numerical modelling of steel doors exposed to fire,
getting the model to predict the door’s thermal behaviour in different fire scenarios.
A numerical model will be performed on doors with different dimensions and insula-
tion properties in order to calibrate the numerical model as close to reality as possible.
Currently, the design of fire doors is done by taking into account the thermal re-
quirements the door must fulfil in the case of fire exposure according to the existing
regulations. In reality, thermal distortion could also affect the mechanical response of
the door, making it bend and therefore making the propagation of flames and smoke
easier to happen. Therefore, the validated final model will be merged with a mechan-
ical model in order to see how these two properties behave when they are influenced
by each other.
In the case of fire doors with big dimensions, the non-uniform temperature distri-
bution that leads to the bending of the door from the supporting frame has not been
modelled due to its complexity and non-linear behavior, leading to the uncertainty of
2
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Method
how big the influence of the heat distribution across the door affects the mechanical
properties. Different options have been proposed in order to create more uniform heat
distribution in such fire doors, changing the disposition of the constructive elements
forming the door for instance. But if the thermal FE modelling could be performed
correctly, it could be used in the industry without the need of creating new designs
for fire doors and not needing to perform fire test regardless of the door dimensions
as it would predict the failure mode effectively.
Once the modelling for those doors is completed and validated through the exist-
ing data, the dimensions and properties of the door will be changed, making its
composition more complex. Different types of insulation properties and thicknesses
will be implemented into the model, giving the future users the possibility to change
the design as desired. By modelling doors with different characteristics, it is hoped
to achieve a way of predicting the behaviour of bigger fire doors without needing a
fire test and therefore reducing its cost in the industry.
The ultimate goal is to deliver a thermal numerical model which can be used for
any steel door, thus making the fire test not compulsory to perform. By achieving
the objective of the project, the future thermo-mechanical analysis of fire doors would
be optimized, both in time and cost, having a major impact on the industry.
1.3
Method
The project will be done by using the Finite Element (FE) software Abaqus. This
software allows the computation of heat transfer analysis, resulting in a full thermal
prediction of the element. Moreover, by using the mentioned software, it will be pos-
sible to easily compare the obtained results with already made studies as the same
program was used.
To begin with, a simple plate will be modelled and once the results obtained are
validated analytically, the plate will be changed so it resembles more to the compo-
sition of a steel fire door, which are composed of two steel plates with an insulation
material in between. Dimensions and material properties will be changed accordingly,
and the obtained results will be validated in every step with the already existing data
from different experiments or by analytical calculations. The supporting frame of
the door will be modelled as well, once the plate-insulation-plate element has been
validated. This last step will be done in order to see how the supporting frame affects
in the behavior of the door when it is exposed to high temperatures.
Both thermal and mechanical models will be developed (the mechanical model will
be developed by the already mentioned brother-project). In order to be able to en-
sure a relation/dependence between the two models, one-way coupling will be used.
The latter means that the results obtained in one of the models will determine the
3
==PAGE:16==
1 Introduction
second model. If two-way-coupling were applied however, it would resemble more to
an iterative process between the results of both models. In order to be able to merge
both models, the authors of the projects will work together ensuring communication
between each other.
Additionally, different parameters will be taken into account, the most important
one being the conductivity of the insulation. The value of the latter will determine
the best type of insulation to be used when trying to avoid the bending and buckling
of the door. The value of most parameters will be obtained from the data provided
by DBI of already tested fire doors. For the relative conductivity of the insulation
however, two approaches can be taken. The first option would be to give the con-
ductivity a known value and validating the results of the model shaped by it. The
second option would be to calibrate the parameter, meaning that the door would
be modelled in a way so that it fulfils the requirements and regulations [5] and the
parameter would be found after the model is completed.
The said method will be applied for both the thermal and mechanical models.
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Theoretical
background
This chapter presents the main theoretical considerations on which the investigations
for this project were based, both for the analytical studies and the numerical ones.
2.1
Heat transfer mechanisms
When there is a temperature difference between two points in space and/or an ele-
ment, it is an indicator that heat transfer has occurs. This is due to the movement
of the thermal energy, which transfers particles with higher temperatures to particles
of lower temperatures.
In order to get a better understanding of the heat transfer occurring in all the cases,
it is important to be familiarized with the basic mechanisms of heat transfer: conduc-
tion, convection and radiation.
Conduction determines the rate of heat flow in and through solids and is expressed
by Equation 2.1 as a heat flux, where λ is the thermal conductivity, ∆T represents
the temperature difference in between two points and ∆x the distance between such
points. It should be noted that the thermal conductivity increases with temperature.
˙q” = −λ∆T
∆x
[W m−2]
(2.1)
Convection is the heat transfer happening to or from a solid involving movement
of a surrounding fluid.
The convective heat transfer coefficient h [W m−2 K−1] is
necessary to calculate it as it is dependant on it as expressed in the equation below.
˙q” = h∆T
[W m−2]
(2.2)
It should be taken into account that h is not a material constant as it depends on
the characteristics of the system, geometry of the solid and the properties of the pre-
viously mentioned fluid. The typical values lie in the range 5-25 [W m−2 K−1]for free
==PAGE:18==
2 Theoretical background
convection and 10-500 [W m−2 K−1]for forced convection in air [6].
To finalize, radiation is the transfer of energy by electromagnetic waves and it does
not require an intervening medium between the heat source and the receiver. The
heat transmitted by radiation is defined by the Stefan-Boltzmann equation (Equa-
tion 2.3), where σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann coefficient with the value of 5.67 · 10−8
[W/m2K4] and ε represents the emissivity of the system.
˙q” = σε(T 4
1 −T 4
2 )
[W m−2]
(2.3)
ε =
1
1
εflame +
1
εsteel −1 =
1
1
0.75 +
1
0.8 −1 = 0.631
[7]
(2.4)
The emissivity is a measure of the fraction of incident radiation energy absorbed and
radiated by the object. This depends to a large extent on how shiny the object is. If
an object reflects a lot of energy, it will absorb (and radiate) very little, whereas if it
reflects very little energy, it will absorb and radiate quite efficiently. Black objects,
for example, generally absorb radiation very well, and would have emissivities close
to 1. This is the largest possible value for ε, and an object with ε = 1 is called a
perfect blackbody.
2.2
Fire model
Fires are usually modelled through a time-temperature or time-Heat-Release-Rate
(HRR) fire development curve. There are several temperature developments given
by multiple standards, but they all have four phases during the fire development, as
shown in the figure below.
Figure 2.1 Fire development curve [8]
1. Incipient ignition phase: the fuel source starts heating.
6
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Transient Analysis
2. Growth phase: the fuel ignites and there is visible flaming combustion. As
the fire grows, it might become fully developed within the compartment and
reach the so-called flashover condition, which sets the start of the third phase.
3. Burning phase: This is the most severe stage of the fire as the temperatures
are so great within the compartment that all exposed surfaces are burning.
During this phase causes the greatest effects on the building elements.
4. Decay phase: Once the fuel for the fire exhausts, the fire starts to die out.
This stage usually begins when approximately 70% of the combustible materials
in the compartment have burned.
When laboratory tests are performed, the test-door is usually exposed to a standard
fire (Equation 2.5) in a furnace and the temperatures are recorded, which is a widely
used time-temperature development is given by the standard fire curve ISO834 [9].
The ISO834 temperature development is represented in Figure 2.2.
T = 20 + 345 + Log(8t + 1)
(2.5)
Figure 2.2 ISO 834 Temperature Curve [9]
2.3
Transient Analysis
With the aim of obtaining reliable results in Abaqus for the transient-state analysis,
the minimum time increment has to be defined, because if time increments smaller
than the calculated value are used, spurious oscillations may appear in the solution
given by Abaqus as shown in Figure 2.3.
7
==PAGE:20==
2 Theoretical background
Figure 2.3 Example of wrong use of time increment [10]
According to the Abaqus manual [10], the equation that defines the minimum time
increment is the following:
∆t = ρ · c · ∆l2
6 · k
(2.6)
Where ρ is the material density, c the heat capacity, λ is the previously mentioned
thermal conductivity and ∆l the distance between nodes in the model. In other words,
the time increment is related to the thermal diffusivity (α), which measures the rate
of transfer of heat of a material from the hot surface to the cold one and the distance
at which temperature concavity is ”smoothed out” to a constant value. Therefore,
the distance in between the nodes chosen in the Abaqus model plays an important
role.
The latter equation is derived by the consideration of the element as a semi-infinite
slab with an initial temperature of T0, whose surface temperature is suddenly in-
creased to T∞. Thus, there is a relationship between the heating time and thickness,
as it limits the thickness to which this equation can be applied.
T
T∞
= 1 −erf
x
2
√
(αt)
(2.7)
with the error function expressed as Equation 2.8.
Although this error function
cannot be evaluated analytically, according to [6] it has been evaluated numerically
in multiple publications.
erfξ =
2
√π
∫ξ
0
e−η2 · dη
(2.8)
8
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Finite Element Method
In the case of setting the difference in temperature between the rear face and the
ambient temperature to 0.5%, then Equation 2.9 is obtained, which indicates that a
wall/slab of thickness L can be considered as a semi-infinite solid with a negligible
error, provided that L> 4
√
αt.
L
2
√
αt ≈2
(2.9)
In many fire engineering problems however, it has been stated that it is suitable to
assume a semi-infinite behaviour if L > 2
√
αt [11] [12] as the error is still small. Thus,
the consideration of Abaqus of L>6
√
αt ensures that when deriving those limits to a
similar form as Equation 2.6, the minimum time step used in Abaqus is in between
the previously mentioned values.
2.4
Finite Element Method
Heat transfer problems can be defined as partial differential equations, which may
result in advanced mathematical equations to solve when the boundary conditions
and the geometry of the elements are complex. Thus, the so-called Finite Element
Method (FEM) is commonly used as it provides the engineers with the necessary
tools to solve these numerical problems more efficiently.
The principle of this method consists on dividing the structure being analyzed into X
number of finite elements, which will be connected at the nodes, allowing the struc-
ture to have flexibility. Each element is synchronized with the rest by a mesh system,
giving the combination of all elements the behaviour the actual structure would have.
Hence, the greater the number of elements, the more accurate the results will be.
Having too many elements however, leads to unnecessary computational cost, thus,
the number of elements forming the structure have to be optimized in order to have
the most effective FE model.
Additionally, a great advantage of the FEM is that as the material properties can
vary between elements the created models and obtained results can closely resemble
to a real life structure.
2.5
Introduction to Abaqus
The Finite Element Method software used for this project has been chosen to be
Abaqus, as it is widely known and compatible with multiple other softwares. It was
created by Dassault Systems and can be used in many engineering fields.
It consists of a few different software products, where three of the most know are
Abaqus/Standard, Abaqus/Explicit and Abaqus/CAE. The one used on this Mas-
ters’ Thesis has been Abaqus/CAE, which provides the user with a complete solution
9
==PAGE:22==
2 Theoretical background
for modelling, managing, monitoring and visualizing results (Complete Abaqus Envi-
ronment). This full environment allows the experienced engineers who use it to make
the most efficient numerical models.
When operating in Abaqus, the user is guided though the work presses by modules,
each one defining an aspect of the modelling process.
10
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Case Study
The main study consists on the analysis of the thermal behavior of a steel fire door of
big dimensions with the objective of developing a mathematical model which could
give a realistic prevision of the heating process. This simulation would be used in the
design phase in order to reduce as much as possible the number of fire tests. Moreover,
for the case of large sized doors most of the standard equipment is not feasible to
perform a experimental trial, making the numerical model a very useful tool.
3.1
Preliminary studies
3.1.1
Sensitivity analysis
A sensitivity analysis was performed prior to modelling the final numerical models of
the steel fire doors with the main objective of getting to know if the uncertainties are
aleatory or epistemic.
The exercise was performed with a constant value of the convection coefficient h,
thermal conductivity λ and thickness of the beam for each case, and on each study,
one of the parameters was changed in order to see the influence each parameter has.
The values analysed for λ have been of materials commonly used in construction and
fire insulation.
==PAGE:24==
3 Case Study
Table 3.1 Material and their correspondent thermal conductivity
ID
Material
λ at 20◦C
A
Fire retardant plaster
0,01
Mineral wool slab
0,038
Mineral wool sprayed
0,045
Lightweight concrete
0,15
B
Concrete
1,2
C
Steel (Cr-Ni)
16
D
Gypsum plaster
21
E-I
Steel (Chrome)
30-60
F-H
Steel (Carbon)
35-55
G
Steel (Manganese)
38
J
Steel (Tungsten)
62
K
Aluminium
204
Figure 3.1 shows the effect the conduction coefficient has on the unexposed surface
temperature, which will help analyzing the influence of a constant value of λ can have
in a thermal behavior prediction when compared to one with variable conductivity
depending on the temperature.
Figure 3.1 Variation of non-exposed surface temperature depending on λ for a 0.5m
thick element and h = 25W/m2K
It is clear that the higher the thermal conductivity, the higher the temperature in the
non-exposed side will be because the temperature takes less time to go through the
material and therefore it does not have time to cool down. That is the main reason
why insulating materials have low thermal conductivity values. This is the case for
Steady-state analysis.
12
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Preliminary studies
Additionally, the effect of h depending on the thickness of the element was also stud-
ied and plotted. When analyzing the effect of the previously mentioned parameters
in a steel beam, it was noticed that the higher its value, the temperature difference
between T1 and T2 (fire exposed and unexposed surfaces) was greater. Therefore,
the higher the convection coefficient, the higher the necessary flame temperature to
obtain T1=500◦C in the exposed nodes and the lower T2 would be. Moreover, as
the thickness of the beam increases, the higher that temperature difference will be,
as observed in Figure 3.2. The analysis was also done for materials like mineral wool
and concrete due to their difference in conductive coefficient values and the results
can be seen in Figure 3.3, which leads to a similar conclusions for materials with low
thermal conductivity coefficient λ, but the difference in surface temperatures is much
greater.
Figure 3.2 Difference between fire exposed and unexposed surface temperatures for
different convection coefficients. Material, steel (λ = 30W/mK). h in W/m2K.
13
==PAGE:26==
3 Case Study
Figure 3.3 Variation of temperature along thickness for different λ.
Dashed lines:
λ = 0.038W/mK, dotted lines:λ = 1.2W/mK and continuous line:λ = 30W/mK.
h
in W/m2K.
The difference of temperatures depending on both the thickness and the thermal
conductivity is noticeable. In ranges λ of 0-1, the thickness of the element barely
has an effect on the temperature of the non exposed surface whereas as the ther-
mal conductivity increases, the thickness of the element has a bigger impact on the
differences in temperature in between the exposed and non-exposed surfaces. As λ
varies depending on the temperature and therefore the fire exposure time, it will play
an important role when trying to predict the exact thermal behavior of steel fire doors.
Another parameter that influences this behavior is the convection coefficient h. In
order to see its effect, the following graphs were obtained by performing the applying
a surface temperature of 500◦C on the exposed side. The results for a steady state
analysis are shown in Figures 3.4,3.5 and 3.6 . The results for a transient state are
shown in Appendix C.
14
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Preliminary studies
Figure
3.4
Difference in temperature for different convection coefficients (λ
=
0.038W/mK)
Figure 3.5 Difference in temperature for different convection coefficients (λ = 1.2W/mK)
15
==PAGE:28==
3 Case Study
Figure 3.6 Difference in temperature for different convection coefficients (λ = 30W/mK)
As it can be seen, the greater the λ, the bigger the temperature difference between
the flame temperature and the surface temperature will be. Additionally, for the case
of thermal conductivities of values below 1W/mK, it was seen that the higher the h,
the smaller the difference between the sink and surface temperatures on the exposed
side is, thus the lower the temperature of the non-esposed side, while the contrary
happens for bigger values of λ.
3.1.2
Numerical benchmarks
The benchmarks have the purpose of validating the work performed in this thesis. A
series of benchmark exercises were performed to assess the thermal behaviour of steel
and mineral wool, in order to take the most optimal approach, and thus reducing the
computational cost for the future numerical models. The obtained conclusions will
be therefore used to limit the extent of use of the Abaqus models.
3.1.2.1
Heat dissipation and border effect
When performing a numerical model where heat dissipation can occur at any side of
the element being analyzed, the border or edge-effect should be taken into account.
This is defined as the influence of two or more boundaries have into each other, cre-
ating a transitional zone of certain extent, depending on the length of the previously
mentioned boundary. This phenomena occurs in the edges of fire doors, as the tem-
peratures on each surface vary and therefore the resulting isotherms are not always
orthogonal to the main heat transfer direction.
This first study was performed in a 7m long beam made entirely of one material and
16
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Preliminary studies
temperature was applied on different surfaces. As shown in Figure 3.7, the isotherms
are all parallel to the side in which the temperature is applied (bottom side) whereas
in the case of having non-adiabatic sides (left and rigth sides of the beam), the inner
temperature of the element does not have a monodirectional isotherms, therefore the
surface temperature in the non-exposed side does not have the same value along its
length, as seen in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.7 Results obtained numerically when there sides are adiabatic
Figure 3.8 Results obtained numerically when adding side exposure
Therefore, in order to see the length at which there is no border effect, a beam el-
ement of different thicknesses and materials was analyzed in order to further detail
the effect of the heat dissipation. The heat exposed surfaces were chosen to be the
bottom, left and right ones, to which a nodal temperature of 500◦C was applied.
By analyzing the results, it can be determined that for the case of a steel beam
of thickness of 0.5m, the border effect is present in a length equal to its thickness.
Figure 3.9 shows the temperatures obtained for both cases. It is worth mentioning
that the border effect was considered gone once the temperature difference between
the cases was less than 5%.
17
==PAGE:30==
3 Case Study
Figure 3.9 Comparison of temperature of the non-exposed side for a 0.5m thick steel
beam
By performing the same analysis in beams with different materials and therefore dif-
ferent thermal conductivities, it was seen that the distance at which the same amount
of heat is dissipated varies depending on the thickness of the beam as well as its ma-
terial, as the thermal conductivity varies with it.
For λ with values bigger than 1, it was seen that the previously mentioned distance
approximates the same value as the thickness of the beam, whereas for smaller λ
values (which is the case of insulation materials such as mineral wool), the distance
decreased to approximately half of the thickness of the beam.
Figure 3.10 Comparison of temperature of the non-exposed side for different materials
18
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Preliminary studies
Figure 3.11 Comparison of temperature of the non-exposed side for different materials
Figure 3.12 Comparison of temperature of the non-exposed side for different materials
In the graphs above (Figures 3.10, 3.11 and 3.12) it is very clearly displayed at which
distance the border effect has an influence and from where onwards there is no effect
(or this one can be neglected). Moreover, it can be seen that the lower the λ, the
less border effect there is. The values for the conduction coefficient λ were considered
constant through temperature, which in reality does not occur. This simplification
was done in order to have a better understanding of the obtained results. The used
values for each materials were the following:
Table 3.2 Material and their correspondent thermal conductivity
Material
λ[W/mK]
Mineral wool slab
0,038
Concrete
1,2
Steel
30
19
==PAGE:32==
3 Case Study
In conclusion, if the heat dissipation is happening on all the surfaces of the element,
one must be aware that in the case of it having a width of smaller value than its
height or viceversa, there edge effect will affect the entirely of the element, as the
isotherms will be curved because the border effect not only would affect the surface
with heat dissipation, but also the one located on its opposite side.
3.1.2.2
Edge effect in fire door
Fire doors are composed of various materials and as their front-view dimensions are
much bigger than their cross-sectional ones, the repercussions of the border effect
will be noticeable in a small area of the door. The different thermal properties of the
materials used to form a fire door will obviously affect the border effect.
In the previous exercise a beam was studied to have a better understanding of the
edge effect. But in reality, the heat is not always applied in the same way and the
dimensions of the doors vary. Therefore, heat was applied in three different ways to
one surface of a fire door in order to see if the previous conclusions were applicable
when combining more than one material.
The analyzed element consists of two steel plates of thickness 0.5mm with a layer
of mineral wool of 100mm in between them.
The dimensions can be seen in Fig-
ure 3.13. With the objective of simplifying the numerical model, only one quarter
of the element was modelled as it is an axisymmetric geometry. Additionally, the
thermal properties used for this study were the ones provided by Eurocode 3 [13] and
the Swedish Institute of Steel Construction [14].
Figure 3.13 Dimensions of the analyzed element
20
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Preliminary studies
(a) Steel
(b) Mineral wool
Figure 3.14 Thermal conductivity variation
(a) Steel
(b) Mineral wool
Figure 3.15 Specific heat variation
Firstly, a standard fire of a duration of 1h was applied and it can be seen in the
plot below that the edge effect is approximately the same length as the thickness of
the element. The latter can be concluded because the plotted lines, which represent
isotherms, start to be parallel to the exposed surface at that distance.
21
==PAGE:34==
3 Case Study
Figure 3.16 Temperature change in nodes after 1h standard fire
Similar results were obtained for the case of applying a constant sink temperature of
500◦C for the same duration, as shown in Figure 3.17.
Figure 3.17 Temperature change in nodes after 1h of constant ambient temperature of
500◦C
For the case of applying a constant heat flux however, it can be seen that the edge
effect has a more extended length, despite having applied the equivalent heat flux
necessary to obtain a sink temperature of 500◦C. This incongruity can be due to the
fact that the calculated equivalent heat flux is done by the basis of a steady state,
as it is calculated analytically with the same procedure followed in Appendix A. In
reality, this element is still on a transient state regarding heat transfer, therefore the
results obtained are not valid when validating the previously made conclusion.
22
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Preliminary studies
Figure 3.18 Temperature change in nodes after 1h of constant Heat flux of 10kW/m3
Hence, it can be concluded that when having an element with multiple materials
and thus multiple thermal conductivity coefficients, the border effect will be mostly
influenced by the one with the higher λ. Moreover, it is recommended to apply the
fire exposure as a nodal temperature or as an ambient temperature as this inputs will
give the right results for both transient and steady states.
3.1.3
Calibration of the numerical models
In order to validate the numerical model that is intended to be used for the prediction
of thermal behavior of a fire door of big dimensions, a small-scale version of the door
was modelled. This decision was made due to two reasons: simplify the model and
therefore the computational cost, and be able to compare the results with the actual
experimental results provided by DBI (Dansk Brand og Sikringsteknisk Institut), con-
firming the validity of the computational model.
The analysis was performed in a specimen of dimensions of 550x550x100mm, con-
sisting of 0.6mm thick steel plates and mineral wool of density of 150kg/m3. The fire
exposure was set to be an standard fire of a duration of 1h.
23
==PAGE:36==
3 Case Study
Figure 3.19 Dimensions of the small-scale specimen
On the first try, the thermal properties of the insulation were set to be constant
through temperature, and the thermal conductivity and specific heat used were the
ones obtained from [14] and Rockwool® catalogues for 20◦C, which tend to be the
values that are found the easiest to find in literature.
Regarding the convection
coefficient h, it was given the value of 25W/m2K, as it has been proven in subsec-
tion 3.1.1 that this does not have a big effect when the conduction coefficient has a
value lower than 1. Therefore, with all the information inputted in the Abaqus model,
the obtained results are the ones shown in Figure 3.20 and 3.21.
Table 3.3 Values used for thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity at 20◦C
λ [W/mK]
c [J/kgK]
0.038
710
24
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Preliminary studies
Figure 3.20 Temperatures of both exposed and unexposed sides
Figure 3.21 Temperatures of the unexposed side
Considering the fact that the used values are the ones for a temperature of 20◦C ,
the results will obviously not be the correct ones. Especially for the values of the
temperature of the unexposed side, as the thermal conductivity in particular, has a
big effect on the heat development. Thus, it was determined to use the values of
λ and c for the average temperature throughout the duration of the fire, being this
450◦C approximately, as seen in Figure 3.22.
25
==PAGE:38==
3 Case Study
Table 3.4 Values used for thermal conductivity and specific heat capacity at 400◦C
λ [W/mK]
c [J/kgK]
0.127
980
Figure 3.22 Estimation of the average temperature
An approximation of the results can be obtained by calculating the surface temper-
ature of the unexposed side analytically, applying the equations for a steady state
analysis (Appendix A). By doing so, the result can be estimated and therefore know
if the used thermal properties are valid. In this case, the obtained temperature was
57◦C, which is slightly bigger value than the one obtained in the computational anal-
ysis.
26
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Preliminary studies
Figure 3.23 Temperatures of both exposed and unexposed sides
Figure 3.24 Temperatures of the unexposed side
As it can be seen in Figure 3.24, the trend that the temperature follows resembles the
trend of the conductivity (Figure 3.14b), thus, in order to obtain a similar trend, the
best would be to either increase the value of λ or use the variable values dependant
on temperature [14]. The specific heat capacity could also be changed and calibrated,
but its value through temperature is not as well documented. Additionally, the effect
that the c has on the final value of the temperature is not as big as the λ has. Hence,
it would be recommended to calibrate the value of the conductivity only instead.
27
==PAGE:40==
3 Case Study
3.1.3.1
Validation with experimental data
The experimental test was able to provide this project with the temperatures of the
furnace, exposed surface and unexposed one by thermocouples placed on the surfaces
of interest, as seen in Figure 3.25. It should be noted that the temperatures referred
as Exposed and Unexposed sides are not really the surface temperatures of the steel,
but the temperatures of the interface between the furnace and the steel(Figure 3.25).
The applied furnace temperature was a standard fire (Equation 2.5) for a duration of
1h. In Figure 3.26 the experimental results are displayed.
Figure 3.25 Experimental test performed by DBI with visible thermocouples
Figure 3.26 Experimental results
28
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Preliminary studies
An Abaqus model of the same dimensions and the same fire exposure was created and
the results obtained were later compared with the experimental ones. It should be
noted that the material thermal properties inputted on the model were the density
of the mineral wool and a temperature dependant conduction coefficient and specific
heat (same as in Figure 3.14b and Figure 3.15b). Regarding the convection coefficient
h, it was given the value of 25W/m2K, as it has been proven in subsection 3.1.1 that
this does not have a big effect when the conduction coefficient λ has a value lower than
1. Therefore, with all that information added to the numerical model, the obtained
results can be compared with the experimental ones.
Figure 3.27 Experimental results compared to numerical results
29
==PAGE:42==
3 Case Study
Figure 3.28 Experimental results compared to numerical results for the unexposed sur-
face
As it can be seen in the graphs above, the obtained temperatures resemble the ones
obtained by DBI. In the first 10 minutes however, the temperatures of the exposed
side do not match, being the ones obtained with the Abaqus model higher. This could
be due to the lack of consideration of the moisture in the material, giving the material
a lower specific heat capacity than in reality. Despite having different temperatures
in the exposed side for the first period of the thermal analysis, the final temperatures
are approximately the same, making the model suitable for an hour long duration fire.
Also, as the obtained temperatures are higher than the real ones, the model could be
considered on the safe side as it provides the engineer with a worse scenario.
3.2
Optimization of the models
Complex models can take up a long time to compute. Hence, in this section it has
been studied and determined which is the thickness limit for it not to be needed to be
modeled in Abaqus. To do so, different cross sections of the door were modeled, all
of them having an insulation layer 80mm thick. The thickness of the steel plates was
then changed into different values (10mm, 5mm, 2mm and 1mm) so the difference
in temperature could be seen. If the temperatures of the surfaces (both the exposed
and unexposed to fire) match the ones obtained in the models in which the entire
thickness of the door is considered to be an insulation material, it will mean that
there is no need to model the steel and can be thus neglected from the numerical
model.
30
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Optimization of the models
Plate thickness of 10mm
Figure 3.29 Comparison of temperatures through the thickness of model with steel plates
and model with only insulation material
(a) Exposed side
(b) Unexposed side
Figure 3.30 Temperatures through the thickness of the fire door
As it can be seen, the development of the temperature through the thickness of the
door varies in big ranges.
On the surfaces of the door however, those differences
are not as noticeable (10◦C approximately) when comparing it to the temperature
difference in the insulation layer, in which the difference can be up to 200◦C. As a
result, the steel plates would have to be modelled in the case of being 1mm or thicker.
31
==PAGE:44==
3 Case Study
Plate thickness of 5mm
The same analysis is run in a fire door with thinner steel plates and as it can be
seen in the graphs below, the difference in temperature is still big enough for the
engineers to have to model the plates in a computational manner.
Figure 3.31 Comparison of temperatures through the thickness of model with steel plates
and model with only insulation material
(a) Exposed side
(b) Unexposed side
Figure 3.32 Temperatures through the thickness of the fire door
32
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Optimization of the models
Plate thickness of 2mm
In this case, the temperatures are still not matching in the unexposed section of
the door, therefore, the steel plates should be modelled when wanting to see the heat-
ing process throughout the thickness of the element but not necessarily on the cases
in which only the surface temperatures are of interest. The Figures below showcase
the obtained results.
Figure 3.33 Comparison of temperatures through the thickness of model with steel plates
and model with only insulation material
(a) Exposed side
(b) Unexposed side
Figure 3.34 Temperatures through the thickness of the fire door
33
==PAGE:46==
3 Case Study
Plate thickness of 1mm
Finally, a door with steel plates of 1mm of thickness was modelled.
Figure 3.35 Comparison of temperatures through the thickness of model with steel plates
and model with only insulation material
(a) Exposed side
(b) Unexposed side
Figure 3.36 Temperatures through the thickness of the insulation material
As it can be seen in Figure 3.36, the trend that the temperature follows is the same
for both the case of modelling only the insulating material and the case of modelling
the steel as well. The only noticeable difference can be spotted in the non-exposed
region of the door, in which the temperatures are higher for the case of the door with
only insulation. This difference can be seen in the last 10mm of the thickness of the
door, which represents a relatively small part of its entirety.
Consequently, by comparing the temperatures obtained by the two models, we can
see that the thinner the steel plate, the less difference there is in between the surface
34
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Numerical models
temperatures in either side.
The difference in temperature is minimal when the
thickness of the plate is 1mm or thinner, thus, for the final Abaqus models of the fire
door, the steel plates will not be modelled, as their thickness is 0.5mm.
3.3
Numerical models
In this chapter the different Abaqus models used will be introduced to finally de-
termine which model is more suitable for each analysis and which one is more com-
putationally optimal to determine the thermal behavior of a steel fire door of big
dimensions.
In order to validate the final models, different exercises were performed with the
objective to get familiarized with the software and its abilities and functions. Thus,
the project was started by analytically solving basic thermal problems and then val-
idating the inital Abaqus models with the obtained results. Those exercises can be
seen in Appendix A and B.
3.3.1
General input for the models
The Abaqus models in this project will be concerning a 2.8x2.8m door with a cross
section of thickness of 81mm, which consists of two steel plates of thickness 0.5mm
separated by a mineral wool layer of 80mm. This size has been chosen on behalf of
the data provided by Ilias Thanasoulas on behalf of DBI, which match the dimensions
of a common steel fire door in naval usages.
Figure 3.37 Geometry of the door
Multiple numerical models have been created in order to find the simplest way of
performing a thermal analysis and behavior prediction in the real door. The different
input formats are:
35
==PAGE:48==
3 Case Study
• Nodal temperature: Abaqus allows the user to input a certain surface tempera-
ture into the model, therefore, if the surface temperature of the door is known,
it could be inputted into the model.
• Ambient temperature: Sometimes the surface temperature of the steel is un-
known but the fire temperature is easy to obtain/determine. For example, the
temperatures of a standard fire (Equation 2.5) are commonly used in labora-
tory tests and its curve throughout time is well known. This can be inputted
by creating an ”Amplitude” (check Appendix D for a more detailed explanation
on how to create it).
• Heat flux: the heat flux applied to the surface of the door or the one going
through the body can also be inputted.
With the aim of simplify the model further, only one quarter of the door can be
modelled instead of the entirety of it, reducing the time needed by the software to
run the data.
The room temperature has been set to 20◦C, which is defined in Abaqus as a prede-
fined field for the entire element in the beginning of the analysis. Also, the thermal
properties of the materials have been the ones plotted in Figures 3.14 and 3.15.
It should be noted that as the thickness of the steel plate is so thin, the latter has
been neglected from the final model, being the entirety of the thickness modelled as
an insulation layer with its own thermal properties. This simplification can be done
because in the study performed in section 3.2it was proven than when the thickness of
the steel plate is smaller than 1mm, the temperatures measured in each side (exposed
to fire and unexposed) are approximately the same to the ones measured in models
were the steel was modelled. Additionally, this simplification will allow the user to
save time while modelling, as only one material has to be taken into account and no
partitions have to be made when creating the geometry of it.
The temperatures which the surfaces will have during the exposure time are cru-
cial to know when analyzing the thermal behaviour and are necessary to predict the
mechanical behavior of it in the twin project Study of the mechanical behavior of steel
doors under fire using a numerical model [15].
36
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Numerical models
3.3.2
2D models
The door was first created as a 2D model. Both the front view and side/cross section
were defined in two independent models in order to get a better understanding of
how the heat transfer occurs from the fire exposed surface to the protected one. The
Element Type selected for this case was DC2D8, which indicates that the created
elements will be 2D 8-node biquadratic bricks with one active degree of freedom core-
spondent to the temperature. The mesh is always discretized considering the Abaqus
limitation mentioned in section 2.3.
As mentioned before, the fire exposure can be modelled in different ways, depend-
ing on which side of the door we are modelling: the front plate or the cross section.
When modelling the front section of the door (or the exposed side to the fire), the
software Abaqus does not allow the user to input an ambient temperature, therefore,
nodal surface temperatures or the incident heat flux should be inputted instead. In
the case of modelling the cross section of the door however, the option of inputting
the ambient temperature is allowed.
In order to have the most realistic input data as possible, it was opted to perform
the analysis by setting the ambient temperature equivalent to an standard fire of a
duration of an hour, as it is most commonly used in laboratory and furnace tests.
Thus, the analysis was performed on the cross section of the door. Additionally, two
different models were done: one where the sides of the door (thickness) were adiabatic
and one where heat dissipation is allowed. By doing so, the differences in temperature
distribution along the thickness of the door can be seen.
37
==PAGE:50==
3 Case Study
(a) Adiabatic sides
(b) Non adiabatic sides
Figure 3.38 Cross section of the entire door
Note that in the figures above, the mesh appears to be too big for a proper detailed
thermal analysis. This is due to the fact that when the mesh is made thinner, the
isotherms are not as clearly seen visually. The actual analysis has been done by using
a mesh of 0.0001m.
The front view of the door was also modelled but it was determined that it was
not necessary to get obtain the nodal temperatures, as with the cross-section and the
border-effect pattern (subsubsection 3.1.2.1) we can get to know the temperatures of
both the fire exposed and unexposed sides, as well as the temperatures across the
thickness of the door for any time period. Also, as the temperature on the exposed
surface of the door is applied as uniform all over the surface, there is no need on
modeling the front view of the door.
38
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Numerical models
3.3.3
3D model
The same exercise was performed in a 3D model and the results were obtained. In
this case, the element type chosen was a DC3D8, which is the same type of element
as used in the 2D model but adjusted for a 3D model.
Figure 3.39 Temperature distribution in 3D model with non adiabatic sides
Moreover, in order to reduce the computational cost, it was found that it is only
necessary to model the insulation material because the thickness of the steel plates
is very thin and therefore no mayor changes would be obtained in the results when
modelling the steel as well. However, the presence of the steel can still be modelled
by different methods:
• Create a shell element representing the thin steel plate. This way, the mesh in
the model could be differentiated for the solid insulation layer and the thin steel
plates. The only inconvenient of this method would be modelling the connection
between the two Parts ( steel and insulation), as the nodes would have to be
merged in the connection points.
39
==PAGE:52==
3 Case Study
• Create a skin of the desired thickness that wraps the insulation Part. By doing
so, the nodes would not have to be merged but the element types of both sections
would have to be compatible.
For the cases in which the steel plates are thicker than 1mm, any of these two methods
would be recommended for usage. As for this project, these more detailed modelling
methods have been found not necessary according to section 3.2.
3.4
Numerical results
When laboratory tests are performed, the test-door is usually exposed to a standard
fire in a furnace and the temperatures in the surface are recorded. The same was
recreated by a numerical model in Abaqus for the results to be used in a mechanical
model in a twin project [15].The results obtained can be seen in Figure 3.41, and
correspond to door shown in the figure below. Only one quarter of the door needs to
be modelled due to axisymmetry.
Figure 3.40 In red, the modelled section of the door
40
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Numerical results
Figure 3.41 Temperature of the fire and exposed and unexposed surfaces
As it can be seen, the temperature on the exposed side follows the trend of the applied
fire, and this phenomena would happen for all types of fire. The temperatures of the
non-exposed side however, increase linearly over time in a much slower rate, following
the already predicted behavior in the previous sections of this project. Regarding its
accuracy, it can be said that as the material thermal properties have been inserted as
temperature dependant, the results should be a valuable prediction of the steel fire
door.
The evolution through time of the surface temperatures measured in the exposed
and unexposed sides as well as the ones in the middle of the cross section can be
seen in the graph below. This analysis was performed by applying the well known
standard fire on the exposed side and two cases were considered: heat dissipation was
allowed on the cross sectional sides of the door and the case in which those sides were
adiabatic.
41
==PAGE:54==
3 Case Study
Figure 3.42 Temperature through time in different sections of the door
By comparing the results, it can be concluded that when there is heat dissipation
along the thickness of the fire door, the temperatures in the mid-section are de-
creased immensely, but the temperatures in the unexposed side remain very similar
in comparison.
Figure 3.43 Temperature along the cross section
After 1h of fire exposure, it can be seen that the temperatures obtained in the case
of adiabatic door sides are higher but the temperature of the unexposed steel place is
42
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Numerical results
almost the same. This temperatures where taken for the middle section of the door
(Figure 3.44). If the temperatures had been plotted for a point closer to the edges,
due to the border effect previously explained in subsubsection 3.1.2.1 the values would
have been lower.
Figure 3.44 Representation of the middle section of the door
Considering the fact that the temperatures of all nodes can be easily obtained from
Abaqus at any given time, an effective way of performing a thermal analysis would
be to model just the cross section of the door in a 2D model, as the border effect can
be assumed and the heat exposure can be inputted in any way (nodal temperature,
ambient temperature or heat flux).
43
==PAGE:56==
44
44
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
Exporting data to the
Structural model
In order to predict the structural performance of a steel fire door in fire, the results
obtained in the thermal model will be used. The issue comes when having to select
which parameter values from the fire model are required to transfer information at
the gas-solid interface.
According to [16] the net heat flux to a surface computed by a fire model is often
seen as a valuable information to be used in structural model to perform detailed
heat transfer calculation within the structural elements. However, the net heat flux
calculated in the fire model depends on the corresponding surface temperature and is
therefore limited to be used in thermal calculations only with the same structural ge-
ometry as used in the fire model. Thus, the concept of Adiabatic Surface Temperature
(AST) will be introduced.
4.1
Adiabatic Surface Temperature
The adiabatic surface temperature is defined as the temperature of a surface which
cannot absorb or lose heat to the environment, thus, is the temperature a perfect in-
sulator would have on its surface. It can also be referred as effective gas temperature.
The interface is fairly simple. At every surface point at which the fire model (FM)
computes an incident radiation heat flux, ( ˙qinc,F M”), and a corresponding gas temper-
ature adjacent to the surface, an implicit equation will be solved for TAST , assuming
that the emissivity and convective heat transfer coefficient are constant.
==PAGE:58==
4 Exporting data to the Structural model
Figure 4.1 Heat transfer by radiation to a surface
Hence, the AST will be used as an intermediary between both models. It should
be noted that the incident heat flux is used for the calculations instead of the net
heat flux because the latter is dependent on the corresponding surface temperature
computed by the same fire model and the results might not be of great accuracy
depending on the model. Additionally, it does not always occur that the heat flux
inputted into the model is a prescribed one, whereas the incident heat flux remains
the same.
As it has been explained in this project, the total heat transfer to a surface is ob-
tained by adding the contributions by radiation and convection:
˙q”tot = εσ(T 4
r −T 4
s ) + h(Tg −Ts)
(4.1)
Where Tr and Tg represent the boundary temperatures of radiation and gas tem-
peratures. By combining these two temperatures the AST is obtained, and as it is
defined as the temperature of an ideally perfectly insulated surface when exposed
to radiation and convection heat transfer, the heat balance equation would give the
following equation:
εσ(T 4
r −T 4
AST ) + h(Tg −TAST ) = 0
(4.2)
By combining equations 4.1 and 4.2 the total heat transfer may be written as
˙q”tot = εσ(T 4
AST −T 4
s ) + h(TAST −Ts)
(4.3)
In conclusion, by knowing the surface temperature and the heat flux, the AST can
be obtained and a time-temperature fire curve can be derived for it to be used in the
structural model, simplifying the computational datasets and therefore the cost.
4.2
Mesh compatibility
Another problem that can occur when trying to predict the mechanical behaviour of
steel fire doors is the incompatibility of the thermal model with the structural one.
46
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Coupled model
This could happen due to two different people being in charge of each study, which
could lead to having used different FE softwares or even in the case of using the same,
the incompatibility of the meshes or nodal coordinates.
If the latter were the case, the temperatures obtained in the Fire Model would have
to be extrapolated in order to match the mesh and nodal locations of the Structural
Model, which would take a really long time for the engineers to obtain. This issue
could be voided by performing a Coupled model, in which both the structural and
thermal behaviour can be analyzed in within the same FE model.
4.3
Coupled model
The software Abaqus provides the user with a modelling option in which the thermal
behaviour influences the mechanical one. Such modelling option is called ”Coupled
temperature-displacement analysis”. This analysis is useful when wanting to know
the simultaneous solution of the temperature and the stress/displacement fields.
There are two types of coupled analysis:
• One way coupling: the thermal behaviour influences and affects the mechanical
behaviour by degrading its properties, but not the other way around.
• Fully coupling: Fully coupled thermal-stress analysis is needed when the stress
analysis is dependent on the temperature distribution and the temperature
distribution depends on the stress solution. Therefore, when there is reciprocate
influence in both fields.
The use of these type of numerical models however, can result in too complex output
files and a bigger expertise is needed in order to properly understand the results in
the FE scale. Moreover, the computational cost is much higher, which for simple
models such as fire steel doors (rectangular shapes) is not necessary.
47
==PAGE:60==
48
48
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
In this project a finite element analysis has been made concerning steel fire doors
exposed to fire with the aim of finding the most optimal way to do so. The software
program Abaqus has been the mean to do this FEA, were two different types of mod-
els have been created and analyzed, namely a 2D model and a 3D model.
First, it was concluded that due to the double-symmetry of the door, only one quarter
of it can be modelled instead of its entire dimension. It would be recommended to
find a symmetry axis in the future numerical models, as it reduces the number of
nodes and elements and allows the user to create a much finer mesh, mostly because
the running-time of the FE analysis would not take as long as in the model with the
full dimensions of the door having the same thin mesh.
Regarding the type of model more efficient to perform a thermal analysis, it de-
pends on the desired accuracy of the results. If an approximation of the temperature
is necessary at any point of the thickness of the door, a 2D model of the cross section
would be enough to get the results. The border effect could be taken into account
when wanting to know any temperature along the width of the door, as it has been
determined that its effect is related to the thickness of the door and the conduction
coefficient of the materials forming it. This conclusion is valid for a uniformly dis-
tributed fire along the surface, therefore, in the case of having different sections of
the door with different thermal loads, a 3D model would be more recommendable.
In many structural cases, engineers and professionals are interested in the behav-
ior of the structural element at a certain temperature, thus, at a certain time. This
means that instead of needing the variation of thermal parameters such as λ and/or
c dependant on temperature, the model can be created with an equivalent value of
those parameters. This simplifies the numerical models’ computational cost. For the
calibration of a numerical model however, the engineer needs a minimum amount of
data that needs to be inputted in order for it to run the analysis as well as knowledge
and understanding on how those parameters affect the heating process.
==PAGE:62==
5 Conclusion
The necessary data for the materials is the following:
• Density
• Thermal conductivity
• Specific heat
• Convective coefficient (if the ambient temperature is the chosen method of fire
input)
• Emissivity (if the ambient temperature is the chosen method of fire input)
With this in information, the user would be able to model a heat transfer analysis
that will approach the desired temperature. The engineer should start the analysis
by giving the listed parameters suitable and realistic values, and then by knowing the
effect each one has ( as previously mentioned), the user should be able to calibrate
the model. For example, it should be known by the user that by increasing the λ the
obtained temperatures will be higher. It is very common to find challenging to acquire
the exact values of the thermal conductivity and the specific heat capacity, specially
since they vary depending on temperature, therefore, the user must be very careful
with the data inputted into the model. A simple way to estimate the temperatures
of different points of the element would be to calculate the average temperature of
the fire during the exposure time and trying to find one value of λ and c for a similar
temperature. It should be noted that the calibration of the conductivity coefficient is
much more important as the specific heat for insulation materials, as its order varies
much more and the model is much more sensible to its variation. Moreover, having
a lower c (usually the one given by manufacturers is the one at 20◦C) increases the
value of the final temperature of the nodes, giving overestimated results and therefore
on the safer-side.
In this project it was also concluded that the effect of the convective coefficient h
has a low impact for insulation materials (or materials with λ<1) giving the user
more freedom when selecting the value of the parameter in the case of needing it.
With respect to the optimization of the numerical model, it was determined that
there is no need to model the steel if its thickness is smaller than 1mm, as it will
barely affect the heat distribution. By not modelling the plates, the issue of creating
a very thin mesh for the steel material is avoided and therefore the computational
cost reduced.
All the conclusions made during the project seem to be correct as the numerical
results match almost perfectly with the experimental and analytical ones.
50
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Future work
5.1
Future work
Despite the fact that the results in this project seems to correspond very well with
the real life situation, additional research would still be beneficial for a numerical
model with a more precise results on the prediction of the behaviour of a steel fire
door exposed to fire.
On the one hand, it would be recommended to perform more analysis with different
types of fires of thermal loads and be able to compare the results with experimental
data in order to validate the numerical model. Unfortunately for this project, only
an experimental test with a standard fire was provided.
On the other hand, it would be beneficial to include thermal stops in the cross sec-
tion, as they are commonly used in the construction of fire doors. Moreover, the
effect the frame of the door has on the heat distribution and dissipation would be
very interesting to analyze.
51
==PAGE:64==
52
52
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX A
Exercise 1:
Un-insulated beam
This exercise consists on determining the temperature distribution on a steel beam for
three different cases. For each case, the calculations have been done by considering
heat applied only in the bottom surface and all surfaces but the top one (Figure A.1
and Figure A.2). In order to validate the results, both an analytical and numerical
approach have been considered. The software Abaqus has been used to model the
beams thermal behavior.
Figure A.1 Exercise set-up with adiabatic sides
Figure A.2 Exercise set-up with exposed sides
The dimensions of the beam have been considered to be 0.5m high and 7m long, made
entirely of steel with a thermal conductivity of 30W/mK, which will have an effect
on how the heat is transferred through the beam.
==PAGE:66==
A Exercise 1: Un-insulated beam
Figure A.3 Exercise set-up
Therefore, as it is known that for the case of a steady state analysis the net heat flux
is constant across each layer, the following equations are obtained.
Figure A.4 Temperature change through set-up
˙q” = hh(Th −T1) + σε(T 4
h −T 4
1 )
(A.1)
˙q” = λ(T1 −T2)
∆x
(A.2)
˙q” = hc(T2 −TC) + σε(T 4
2 −T 4
C)
(A.3)
Being Th and TC the ambient temperatures in each side of the beam whereas T1 and
T2 are the temperatures of the steel right in the surface as shown in Figure A.4. More-
over, in order to simplify the calculations, the thermal conductivity and convection
coefficient have been considered constant through time, meaning that they will not
vary with temperature change.
With the system of equations A.1,A.2 and A.3 the missing values of the surface
temperatures and heat flux can be determined, as they are the only unknowns. To
begin with, the equations A.2 and A.3 are equalized, leaving T2 as the only unknown.
λ(T1 −T2)
L
= hc(T2 −TC) + σε(T 4
2 −T 4
C)
54
==PAGE:67==
A.1 Input Constant Temperature of Surface
30(500 −T2)
0.5
= 25(T2 −20) + 5.67 · 10−80.631(T 4
2 −204) −→T2 = 312.477◦C
Similarly, the heat flux can be determined and results in a value of ˙q” = 11251.38W/m2.
The ambient temperature in the fire exposed area is determined to be Th = 606.15◦C.
Figure A.5 Results obtained analytically
With these results, the same exercise will be inputted in the software Abaqus in
order to check which method could be the most efficient when modelling the different
scenarios.
A.1
Input Constant Temperature of Surface
The first case consists on fixing a surface temperature in the steel (chosen to be
T1=500◦C) and determining the temperature change through the steel beam.
The fixed temperature will be applied as a Boundary Condition. Moreover, as the
radiation and convection have to also be taken into account in the model, a surface
film condition has to be applied in the side which does not have a temperature imposed
in their nodes. For the Convection, a ”surface film condition” has been chosen with
the desired convection coefficient and the right sink temperature, whereas for the
radiation a ”surface radiation” interaction has been inputted.
As it can be seen in Figure A.6, the results obtained have been the same as the ones
calculated analytically.
55
==PAGE:68==
A Exercise 1: Un-insulated beam
Figure A.6 Results obtained numerically
A.2
Constant Heat flux
For this case, a constant heat flux is applied instead of a temperature. This is done
by adding a load instead of a boundary condition. The surface where the load will
be applied is selected and the convection and radiation interactions are added by
following the same procedure as in the previous case. The obtained results are exactly
the same as the ones shown in Figure A.6.
A.3
Constant Sink Temperature
For this case, the sink temperatures for each side were set to be 606.15◦C and 20◦C
respectively. As the ambient temperatures are known, they will both be inputted into
the model when applying the convection and radiation interactions, because in this
case, the films must be applied in both sides (exposed and non exposed). Once again,
this method of modelling is validated because the obtained results are the same as
for the previous two cases as shown in the figure below.
56
==PAGE:69==
A.3 Constant Sink Temperature
Figure A.7 Results obtained numerically with adiabatic sides
57
==PAGE:70==
58
58
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B
Exercise 2: Insulated
beam
For the second exercise, two insulation layers have been added on each side of the
beam, in order to see the effect of the insulation when the beam is exposed to fire.
For this particular exercise, the insulation types has been chosen to be mineral wool,
and it is located in between two steel plates.
Figure B.1 Set-up for exercise 2
The same principle is used for calculating the temperatures through the element, but
in this case, as the insulation layers have been added, the total number of unknowns
will increase. The system of equations is the following:
˙q” = hh(Th −T1) + σε(T 4
h −T 4
1 )
(B.1)
==PAGE:72==
B Exercise 2: Insulated beam
˙q” = λh(T1 −T2)
L1
(B.2)
˙q” = λi(T2 −T3)
L2
(B.3)
˙q” = λC(T3 −T4)
L3
(B.4)
˙q” = hC(T4 −TC) + σε(T 4
4 −T 4
C)
(B.5)
Regarding the values taken for each parameter/coefficient, they have been the follow-
ing:
T1
=
500
°C
TC
=
20
°C
hh and hC
=
25
W/m2K
λh and λC
=
30
W/mK
λi
=
0.038
W/mK
L1 and L3
=
0.1
m
L2
=
0.5
m
By reshaping the equations B.2,B.3 and B.4, the temperatures T2,T3 and T4 can be
expressed in terms of the heat flux as follows:
T2 = T1 −˙q”L1
λh
(B.6)
T3 = T1 −˙q”L1
λh
−˙q”L2
λi
(B.7)
T4 = T1 −˙q”L1
λh
−˙q”L2
λi
−˙q”L3
λC
(B.8)
Therefore, by implementing the latter equations in Equation B.5, the value of the
heat flux can be determined to be 36.3638W/m2, as it becomes the only unknown
in the equation. With ˙q” calculated, the rest of the temperatures can be determined
by inserting the heat flux in each of the previous equations, giving the following
results(also displayed in Figure B.2):
T2
=
262.32
°C
T3
=
260.81
°C
T4
=
23.126
°C
Th
=
501
°C
60
==PAGE:73==
B Exercise 2: Insulated beam
Figure B.2 Results obtained by analytical calculation
By checking the obtained results the effect insulation layers have is notorious, as the
temperature in the non-exposed side has been drastically reduced when it is compared
to the one obtained in Exercise ??.
Figure B.3 Results obtained in Abaqus
As it can be seen, the Abaqus model can be validated as the obtained results are the
same.
61
==PAGE:74==
62
62
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX C
Exercise 3: Transient
state
A system is said to be in a transient state when a process varies or variables change
over time before reaching a steady value.
In order to proceed with the analysis
in Abaqus, the density and the heat capacity of the material need to be inputted.
As the chosen material is steel, the values of the parameters have been chosen to be
7850kg/m3 and 544J/kgK respectively. As in Exercise 1 (Appendix A), the convection
and radiation films have been applied following the same procedure. As well as the
Boundary Condition of 500 ◦C in the flame exposed surface.
In order to obtain reliable results, the minimum time increment has to be defined and
it is defined as shown below, because if the time increments smaller than this value
are used, spurious oscillations may appear in the solution given by Abaqus.
∆t = ρ · c · ∆l2
6 · λ
(C.1)
Where ρ is the material density, c the heat capacity, k is the previously mentioned
thermal conductivity and ∆l the distance between nodes in the model (0.05m).
With these values, the minimum time increment to input in the numerical model ends
up being 60 seconds. With all values set, the model can be run and the temperature
change in each node can be plotted. Figure C.1 shows the temperature change in
the nodes located in the middle of the beam and the times for each step are listed in
Table C.1.
==PAGE:76==
C Exercise 3: Transient state
Figure C.1 Temperature change over time
Table C.1 Time corresponding to each step
sec
min
h
step 0
0
0
0
step 1
9000
150
2,5
step 2
18000
300
5
step 3
27000
450
7,5
step 4
36000
600
10
step 5
45000
750
12,5
It is clear that the temperature change does not follow a linear trend during the
entirety of the time frame, especially in the first steps of the analysis (see Figure C.2).
64
==PAGE:77==
C Exercise 3: Transient state
Table C.2 Time corresponding to each step
sec
min
h
step 0
0
0
0
step 1
1800
30
0,5
step 2
3600
60
1
step 3
5400
90
1,5
step 4
7200
120
2
step 5
9000
150
2,5
step 6
10800
180
3
step 7
12600
210
3,5
step 8
14400
240
4
step 9
16200
270
4,5
step 10
18000
300
5
Figure C.2 Nodal temperatures through the thickness of the beam
Additionally, when taking a closer look at the temperatures of the unexposed sides,
it can bee seen in Figure C.3 the change on it until it reaches steady state.
65
==PAGE:78==
C Exercise 3: Transient state
Figure C.3 Temperature of unexposed side varying in time (until step 10)
When comparing the results obtained for different convection coefficients, it was seen
that in the first steps, the difference in h does not have a noticeable influence in
the nodal temperature, whereas when approaching the steady state equilibrium, the
higher the convection coefficient, the lower the temperature is.
The steps in the
following graphs are the ones in Table C.1.
Figure C.4 Nodal temperatures in the first time step
66
==PAGE:79==
C Exercise 3: Transient state
Figure C.5 Nodal temperatures in the second time step
Figure C.6 Nodal temperatures in the third time step
67
==PAGE:80==
C Exercise 3: Transient state
Figure C.7 Nodal temperatures in the fourth time step
Figure C.8 Nodal temperatures in the fifth time step
68
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX D
Abaqus manual for
Heat Transfer Analysis
The purpose of the heat transfer analysis is to determine the temperatures along the
constructive element for different cases. It should be noted that the software does
not include units when adding parameter values, therefore, SI units will be used.
Moreover, before running the model, the temperature scale and Stefan Boltzmann
coefficient have to be defined. This is done by editing the attributes of the model,
which can be accessed by ”right-clicking” on the ”Model” tab. The chosen can be
seen in the Figure below.
Figure D.1 Model Attributes in Abaqus
This step can be done at any point but must be defined before running the model.
The steps that have to be followed when creating a heat transfer analysis of elements
are the following:
==PAGE:82==
D Abaqus manual for Heat Transfer Analysis
1. Create geometry of element. This is done by creating a ”Part” and defining
its dimensions. For a simpler model, a 2D element can be created rather than a
3D one. The parts can be solid or shell elements, depending on their thickness
and properties.
2. Create material. The necessary material properties need to be defined. When
performing a steady state analysis, only the thermal conductivity needs to be
defined whereas if performing a transient state analysis, the density and heat
capacity of the material need to be inputted as well. Multiple materials can be
created for later use.
3. Assign material into sections as needed. In order to perform a heat trans-
fer analysis, solid homogeneous sections will be used. After that, the materials
will be assigned to each section according to the model properties. Lastly, all
sections have to be assigned to the Part (Figure D.2). A ”skin” can also be
created and then assigned as a section in the model. The ”skin” allows the user
to ”wrap” the solid element with a membrane-like element to which a thickness
is applied.
Figure D.2 Assignment of sections to the Part in Abaqus
4. Create step for heat transfer analysis. When creating a step, the option of
choosing a steady state or transient state analysis is presented. For each type,
the software gives the user a different option (it can be edited if desired).
a) Steady state: Any load applied will have a ramp amplitude, meaning that
it will increase linearly over the duration of the step until it reaches its
final value
b) Transient state: any load applied will reach its final value instantaneously.
70
==PAGE:83==
D Abaqus manual for Heat Transfer Analysis
For the case of a Transient analysis, the minimum time increment must be
calculated according to the Equation given by the Abaqus Manual [10]
∆t = ρ · c · ∆l2
6 · λ
Moreover, in order to the numerical model to work, an ”Instance” has to be
created from the already created ”Part”. This will be dependent on the Part,
meaning that the mesh will be made on the Part and not on the instance itself.
5. Apply boundary conditions to the desired surface. If no boundary con-
dition is applied, the software will interpret the surfaces as adiabatic.
For
creating boundary conditions on certain time steps, a ”Predefined field” should
be created instead.
6. Create load. In this case, the load will be the heat flux. The distribution of
the heat flux will be chosen to be uniform, but it can also be defined according
to an equation.
7. Add interactions:In Heat transfer problems, the interaction between the en-
vironment and the element must be defined.
Depending on the interaction,
different parameters will have to be inputted.
a) Convection: The interaction type ”Surface Film Condition” has to be cho-
sen. Input the surface film coefficient and the sink temperature around the
selected surface of the element. The amplitude can be changed as desired.
b) Radiation: it can be done by creating a surface radiation interaction for
distributed radiation or by concentrated radiation to ambient for a node
or node-set.
In order to simplify the model, the first option is chosen.
We choose the heat transfer to be to the surrounding environment. The
emissivity needs to be imputed and it needs to have a value in between 0
and 1. The amplitude can be changed as desired.
8. Mesh the part. The element type has to be defined as shown in Figure D.3
and then by selecting the tab ”Seed” the sizing controls for the mesh can be
edited (example in Figure D.4).
71
==PAGE:84==
D Abaqus manual for Heat Transfer Analysis
Figure D.3 Definition of the Element Type in Abaqus
Figure D.4 Global seeds in Abaqus
9. Create heat transfer job
10. Check the results
72
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1]
International Maritime Organization. Recommendation for the evaluation of fire
performance and approval of large fire doors. MSC.1/Circ.1319. 2009.
[2]
Paolo Boscariol, Francesco De Bona, Alessandro Gasparetto, et al. “Thermo-
mechanical analysis of a fire door for naval applications”. In: Journal of Fire
Sciences 33.2 (2015), pages 142–156.
[3]
Daniel Joyeux. “Experimental investigation of fire door behaviour during a nat-
ural fire”. In: Fire safety journal 37.6 (2002), pages 605–614.
[4]
Luciano Moro, Paolo Boscariol, Francesco De Bona, et al. “Innovative design
of fire doors: computational modeling and experimental validation”. In: Fire
Technology 53.5 (2017), pages 1833–1846.
[5]
International Maritime Organization. Safety regulations for different types of
ships. 2020.
[6]
Dougal Drysdale. An introduction to fire dynamics. John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[7]
Luisa Giuliani. Lecture notes of Course 11023: Structural Fire Safety Design.
DTU, 2019.
[8]
Andrew H Buchanan and Anthony Kwabena Abu. Structural design for fire
safety. John Wiley & Sons, 2017.
[9]
BS ISO. “834-11: 2014 Fire resistance tests”. In: Elements of building construc-
tion. Specific requirements for the assessment of fire protection to structural
steel elements ().
[10]
ABAQUS.INC. Introduction to Abaqus. 2004.
[11]
FA Williams. “Mechanisms of fire spread”. In: Symposium (International) on
Combustion. Volume 16. 1. Elsevier. 1977, pages 1281–1294.
[12]
BJ McCaffrey, JG Quintiere, and MF Harkleroad. “Estimating room tempera-
tures and the likelihood of flashover using fire test data correlations”. In: Fire
Technology 17.2 (1981), pages 98–119.
[13]
Jean-Marc Franssen and Paulo Vila Real. Eurocode 3: Design of steel structures;
Part 1-2: General rules–Structural fire design. John Wiley & Sons, 2012.
[14]
Ove Pettersson, Sven-Erik Magnusson, and Jörgen Thor. Fire engineering de-
sign of steel structures. Swedish Institute of Steel Construction Stockholm, 1976.
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography
[15]
Carmen del Mar Perez. Study of the mechanical behavior of steel doors under
fire using a numerical model. DTU Master Thesis, 2020.
[16]
Ulf Wickström, Dat Duthinh, and Kevin McGrattan. “Adiabatic surface tem-
perature for calculating heat transfer to fire exposed structures”. In: Proceedings
of the Eleventh International Interflam Conference. Interscience Communica-
tions, London. Volume 167. 2007.
74
