==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The following MSc thesis elaborates on the work and results obtained during the
experimental investigation of two-way and one-way energy capture by an oscillating
water column (OWC) wave energy device. It focuses on the assessment of a vented
OWC and compares the results to a conventional OWC configuration.
The thesis is presented in three parts: an introduction and background, which
provides a brief history of wave energy, OWC devices and previous projects that are
directly related to this one. It focuses on the main results and factors that influenced
the design of the model used for this project.
Chapter 3 focuses on the theoretical framework and an explanation of the hy-
drodynamics involved. Since the analysis is based on regular waves, the governing
equations of linear wave theory are presented. Then, a description of the hydrody-
namics involved in OWC devices is given. This was the basis for the calculations
made in the next chapters.
Then, Chapter 4 explains in depth the experimental work carried out during the
project. In each section, the equipment used is described, followed by an explana-
tion of the experimental procedure and the calculations made to generate the results
needed for the assessment of each condition. First, an accuracy characterization of the
wave gauges used during the experiments is done. Afterwards, five conditions were
experimentally investigated in a wave flume; without the OWC chamber in place
to characterize the wave conditions; with the chamber open, to assess the internal
surface free undamped response; with a two-way orifice plate, to assess the two-way
energy capture; with a one-way orifice plate, venting on the up-stroke; and with a
one-way orifice plate, venting on the down-stroke.
In Chapter 4, the hydrodynamic response and energy capture of each chamber
configuration is assessed individually. The procedure for the calculations is also pre-
sented in depth, describing the assumptions made and the factors involved.
In Chapter 5, the three chamber configurations are assessed together. A compar-
ison of the key results and parameters is made to present a comprehensive project
outcome. The valve system functionality is assessed and an explanation on the dif-
ferences noticed in the resulting energy captured of each configuration is given.
Finally, some recommendations are made for further projects. A proposal is given
to improve the valve system and optimize the energy capture in a one-way configura-
tion.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This MSc thesis was prepared at the department of Mechanical Engineering, section
of Fluid Mechanics, Coastal and Maritime Engineering at the Technical University
of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a MSc degree in Civil
Engineering with specialization in Marine Technology and Coastal Engineering.
Supervisors:
Harry B. Bingham
hbb@mek.dtu.dk
Bárdur Joensen
bajoe@mek.dtu.dk
Kim Nielsen
KIN@ramboll.com
Robert Read
rrea@mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to gratefully acknowledge the invaluable help and knowledge provided
from my supervisors during these months of work.
To Bárdur, for his close guidance, teaching and advice during the experimental work.
To Harry, Robert and Kim, for their expertise and knowledge on the subject, which
helped me to achieve a satisfactory outcome from the project.
To my brother and parents, for their continuous support in every project and goal I
set for myself and to my grandparents for always being an inspiration.
And last but definitely not least, to my wife, for her unconditional love, support and
help throughout this and all our projects.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Ocean Wave Energy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Oscillating Water Column Concept & History . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
KNSwing and Related projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theoretical Framework
13
3.1
Motion of an Ideal Fluid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Linear Wave Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Hydrodynamics in OWC Devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Experimental work
21
4.1
Wave Gauges accuracy characterization. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Tests without the chamber in place . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Free undamped response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Two-way energy capture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.5
One-way energy capture, venting on the up-stroke
. . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.6
One-way energy capture, venting on the down-stroke . . . . . . . . . .
85
5
Discussion
99
6
Further work & recommendations
105
7
Conclusion
107
A Appendix
109
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
Bibliography
115
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The growth of global energy consumption and world climate change have pushed
energy companies and research industry into finding new and better solutions to
alternative renewable energy sources. Ocean wave energy is a promising technology,
but most projects are currently at a developing stage. Thus, there is still a long way
to go in the implementation of a cost efficient alternative.
An oscillating water column (OWC) wave energy converter (WEC), consists of
a submerged body with a hollow structure and an opening at the immersed bottom
end, which allows the entry of the water flow driven by the motion of waves. The
air trapped above the inside water surface, is subsequently forced by the wave action
to flow through a turbine.
Therefore, most OWC projects built to date, harness
energy through a two-way configuration, i.e. the energy is harnessed through a bi-
directional turbine to exploit the air flow in the upstroke and downstroke of the inside
water column.
However, this project consisted of a round of experiments to assess one-way en-
ergy capture by an OWC wave energy device. Counterintuitively, a one-way OWC
configuration aims to capture more energy in only one half cycle than a two-way con-
figuration in one complete cycle of oscillation. Theoretical explanations will be given
in the following.
The main feature of the project is a passive valve system that vents the chamber
in one half cycle and seals the chamber in the other half cycle, by doing so, the inside
water column response allegedly increases on the vented half cycle and increases
the amount of energy captured on the other half cycle of oscillation; otherwise with
a completely sealed system, the damping force inhibits the inside surface elevation
response and reduces the energy capture.
Furthermore, a uni-directional turbine
would be implemented instead, which would result in a more efficient and simpler
power take-off (PTO).
The following thesis will compare and assess the energy captured and chamber
response during the experiments performed in three configurations: (1) two-way, en-
ergy capture, (2) one-way energy capture, venting on the upstroke and (3) one-way
energy capture, venting on the downstroke. A passive valve system was designed
and built for the one-way configuration. Prior to this, more experiements were done
to characterize the wave gauges accuracy, the wave conditions and assess the free
response of the chamber.
==PAGE:12==
2
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Ocean Wave Energy
Due to the continuous growth of global energy consumption [1] and the fight against
world climate change, reduction of fossil fuel sources and other economic, environ-
mental and political factors, renewable energy sources are a promising solution to
the global energy demand crisis. As it is known, wind and solar energy sources have
already covered a broad ground with research and have been extensively studied to
maximise their potential and contribution to the energy market. According to the
renewable 2019 global status report, renewable energy sources provided an estimated
26% of global electricity generation at the end of 2018. In 2018, wind energy cov-
ered an estimate 14% of the EU’s annual electricity consumption, and Denmark met
40.8% of its annual electricity consumption with wind energy[30]. But unfortunately
the gap between regions is still dramatically large and there are countries that do not
point in the same direction.
Moreover, the world energy outlook 2019 projects that if the world continues along
its present path, energy demand will rise by 1.3% each year until 2040 [1]. While 60%
of the projected power generation in the same year is estimated to be derived from the
current available renewable energy sources in order to mitigate the weather climate
change. It is noticeable that the current available energy sources will not be capable
of satisfying the global energy demand by the year 2040 [11] and efforts to find more
efficient solutions and alternatives ought to be made.
On the other hand, ocean wave energy which has been less exploited and har-
nessed to date, is a promising, reliable and powerful energy source. The main factors
behind these statements are the higher accuracy in energy prediction, little energy
loss due to the long distance over which the wave is propagated and forecast-ability of
the ocean conditions [11]. Furthermore, wave energy holds a lot more power intensity
(2-3 kW/m2, vertical plane perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation) com-
pared to solar (0.1-0.2 kW/m2, horizontal surface) and wind energies (0.4-0.6 kW/m2,
vertical plane perpendicular to the direction of wind propagation)[11, 5].
Even though the resource potential of ocean energy is huge, it still represents the
smallest share of the renewable energy market and most projects are on relatively
small scale and pilot stage. Even so, it is estimated that wave energy could produce
at least 10% of the world’s electricity demand if economic factors and only feasible
sites are taken into account, so efforts on research and new technologies are growing
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Background
with time [18].
Like every renewable energy source, wave energy highly depends on natural con-
ditions and it will only be feasible in certain locations around the globe. Wave energy
level is defined in terms of power per unit length, perpendicular to the direction of
wave propagation (kW/m) and the most suitable locations for harnessing wave energy
are those located in moderate to high latitudes, more specifically in sites located in
the south west of Australia, south west of South America, North Atlantic Ocean and
in the west coast of North America [29]. Figure 2.1 shows an overview of the potential
for harnessing ocean wave energy worldwide.
Figure 2.1: Annualised average wave energy resource (kW/m) worldwide[28]
With continuous investment and research, wave energy will eventually move for-
ward from shoreline-based to larger scale and offshore devices, where they could be
combined with offshore wind farms, taking advantage of the infrastructure to reduce
construction and operational costs. Wave energy converters (WECs) in deep water
also have the advantage of higher theoretical absorption width and lower mooring
loads, which are mainly due to the exploitation of internal (non-rigid-body) degrees
of freedom [15].
Within WEC technology, three different working principles are identified as the
most common ones: Oscillating water column (OWC), oscillating bodies and over-
topping devices, OWC devices being one of the most promising technologies[22] due
to their additional attractive characteristic of having only one moving mechanism: a
turbine, located above water level (no moving parts submerged) and driven by the
air flow that is compressed and decompressed by the wave action.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Oscillating Water Column Concept & History
5
2.2
Oscillating Water Column Concept & History
As previously mentioned, oscillating water column based mechanisms comprise a large
category of ocean wave energy harnessing devices and a large variety of technologies
have been studied, proposed and even tested at full scale models in real ocean con-
ditions. The main principle of an OWC device, is based on a partially or totally
submerged body with a hollow structure, open at the immersed bottom end, which
traps air above the inner free-surface. Upward and downward wave action compress
and decompress the inside trapped air and forces it to flow through a turbine, which
rotates at a relatively high velocity, directly driving a conventional electrical gen-
erator. This mechanism is one of the most reliable and developed technologies to
harness ocean wave energy due to its attractive feature of having only one moving
mechanism and no moving parts below the water surface, which makes maintenance
and operation much more feasible than any other technology [22]. A schematic draw-
ing of the conventional OWC concept is shown in Figure 2.2, showing one full cycle
of the process. Since the air flow through the turbine changes direction every half
cycle, the turbine has to be self-rectifying, i.e. it rotates in the same direction re-
gardless of the direction of the air flow. Even though important developments on the
bi-directional turbines have already been done, the mechanism is still quite robust
and not as efficient as desired, substantially increasing the cost of energy [14].
Figure 2.2: Basic concept of an Oscillating Water Column WEC, showing a full cycle
with a bidirectional turbine
Even though the concept was invented in the 1890s, the OWC designation was
published for the first time in 1978 and it has been used ever since. The invention may
be attributed to Yoshio Masuda (1925-2009), who was a Japanese navy officer and
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Background
first developed a navigation buoy powered by wave energy that was equipped with an
air turbine. These buoys were the first devices that were successfully deployed into
the ocean since 1965 in Japan and were equipped with conventional uni-directional
air turbines[13].
Later in Europe, studies and technology development began around 1973 with
an ambitious plan to develop a 2 GW wave energy plant funding different types
of wave energy converters, OWC included.
The National Engineering Laboratory
in Scotland also studied different concepts and options for large OWC plants. The
design consisted of a set of fixed structures with the shape of a breakwater and housing
several oscillating water columns. The project was suddenly terminated due to lack
of funding without any full size prototypes[13].
Another but less ambitious project took place at Toftestallen, Norway in 1985
with a full-sized OWC attached to a cliff, which housed a vertical-axis Wells turbine.
The plant was destroyed in 1988 by a storm and nothing was published about its
performance. After this, during the 1990’s, activity and research in Europe remained
at an academic level. While some other larger prototypes equipped also with Wells
turbines were installed in Asia. This projects revealed that even though the efficiency
of the turbines was close to the expected, the hydrodynamic performance of the wave
energy absorption was not satisfactory in either of the prototypes [13].
In 1991, The European Commission made the decision of including wave energy
in their research and development programs on renewable energies, stimulated two
full-sized OWC pilot plants: one on the island of Pico, Azores, Portugal completed
in 1999 and another one on the island of Islay, Scotland, completed in 2000. Both
were equipped with Wells turbines and were fixed-structure plants. Other shoreline
OWC plants in China, South Korea and Australia followed these pilot projects. An-
other alternative due to the reduction of construction, operational and maintenance
costs are the breakwater-integrated OWCs, where these expenses are shared with the
breakwater and the operation of the power plant becomes much more feasible. The
first plant where this was implemented was located in Japan, in 1990 and followed
by a plant built in 2008 in the port of Mutriku, in the Basque Country, Spain. More
recently, some u-shape OWC full scale protoypes have been installed in breakwaters
located at the mediterranean sea, close to the port of Civitavecchia, Italy [24].
So far, most WECs have been built for experimental purposes and due to the
operational difficulties and surveillance requirements this entails, most of them have
been built near the shore-line.
Even so, the future of wave energy aims to build
offshore power plants, which combined with wind farms, could take advantage of its
construction, operational and maintenance costs. Offshore wind energy is already
broadly developed and WEC developments should take advantage of this knowledge,
mainly regarding to operational and construction issues.
Additionally, in 2013 an article published by Paul Stansell and David J. Pizer
from Pelamis Wave Power Ltd. theoretically proved the advantages of line absorbers
over point absorbers [31]. In order to increase the capture width, the energy loss due
to radiated waves should be minimized and the added degree-of-freedom of length on
a line absorber can be used to reduce the spread of radiated waves, which will achieve
==PAGE:17==
2.3 KNSwing and Related projects
7
a higher energy absorption and lower energy loss from the wave structure interaction.
The article also demonstrates theoretically that point absorbers have a limit on their
capture width, which is restricted by the incident wavelength, whereas line absorbers
can be scaled-up indefinitely in volume and length to increase their capture width
and power generation. Pizer and Pelamis proved that a line absorber with a volume
equal to the maximum usable volume of a point absorber could absorb 80% more
power. Thus, it is evident the economical benefits that these type of line attenuators
could bring to the industry[31].
Following this direction, some experimental and numerical studies have been per-
formed in Europe and Asia on floating OWC devices and multi-OWC floating devices,
an example is the Seabreath, which is a floating attenuator developed at Padova Uni-
versity that comprises several chambers connected to a longitudinal duct that feed a
uni-directional turbine [21]. A similar project is the LEANCON, which is also con-
nected to a uni-directional air turbine; experimental investigations on a 1:40 scale
model were performed at Aalborg University, Denmark [10].
Furthermore, inspired by the same principle, H. Bingham, R. Read and K. Nielsen
from the Technical University of Denmark and Ramboll, began the KNSwing project.
The project comprises numerical modelling and experimental research on a 1:50 scale
model long ship-like structure oriented parallel to the main direction of wave propa-
gation. The model is a prototype of a 150 m length device with twenty pairs of OWC
chambers and experiments have so far proved the feasibility of the model in extreme
sea conditions and provide a basis of knowledge on the attenuator motion and power
absorption [15].
Parallel to these developments and projects, the Australian company Wave Swell
Energy, launched the project UniWave200. The WEC device is currently under de-
velopment but it is being built close to the shoreline with a uni-directional turbine
instead of a bi-directional one like previous projects, capturing energy only on the
downstroke, this is expected to result in a simpler turbine with a more efficient en-
ergy conversion. The people behind the project claim that more energy is captured
on a single downstroke with a uni-directional turbine than on the sum of the up and
downstrokes with a bidirectional turbine [7].
2.3
KNSwing and Related projects
As mentioned before, the previous findings and developments by Pizer and Stansell
inspired in 2013 a group of researchers from DTU and Rambøll to develop numerical
models and perform experimental work on an I-Beam OWC attenuator. An exper-
imental model was built at DTU and transported to the Hydraulic and Maritime
Research Center (HMRC) at University College Cork, Ireland[16]; with the main pur-
pose of investigating the power absorption capability of the ship shaped wave energy
converter. The experiments were performed on a 1:50 scale model, but the full scale
was planned to operate in the Danish part of the North Sea, with a water depth of
around 50 m, a 50 year design wave height of 9.5 m and a peak period of 13 s.
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Background
The final design of the model consisted of twenty pairs of OWC chambers dis-
tributed along the hull of the 150 m length device, which was defined by the average
wave period of 8 s in the North Sea and the condition that stationary ships start
pitching in head waves when the wave length is longer than 70% of the length of the
ship. The length of each chamber was 6 m, which was restricted by the shortest waves
encountered in the North Sea, a 1.5 m wall divided each chamber. The Power Take
Off (PTO) system was initially thought to be based on impulse turbines driving a
generator, but it was simulated by an orifice on each chamber with a diameter of 14
mm, which was 1.3% of the OWC surface area in order to give the optimal damping;
the absorbed power on each chamber was calculated from the pressure measured on
the orifices. In Figure 2.4 and 2.3, schematic drawings of the 1:50 scale model taken
from[16].
Figure 2.3: Top view of the 1:50 scale model tested at the HMRC in 2014, with
dimensions in mm[16]
Figure 2.4: Cross section of the 1:50 scale model tested at the HMRC in 2014, with
dimensions in mm[16]
==PAGE:19==
2.3 KNSwing and Related projects
9
The experiments were done with two main objectives: First, to optimize and eval-
uate its power absorption performance under different wave conditions; furthermore,
to assess its survival conditions in different wave conditions, i.e., the device seawor-
thiness and definition of the required mooring system. By the end of the experiments,
the results showed a maximum measured capture width ratio CWR=30% in regular
waves and 27% in irregular waves with respect to the length of the attenuator L=150
m and the structure demonstrated seaworthiness in the most extreme wave conditions.
It is recommended to consult the complete paper [16] and thesis [12] in order to fully
understand the experiments and its conditions.
Afterwards, another round of experiments was performed in a wave flume at DTU
but in a fixed single chamber.
The experiments were done in a 1:50 scale model
made out of wood in order to determine the hydrodynamic behaviour inside the
chamber and to measure the absorbed power by a single chamber. At the end of
the experiments, the results for one double chamber showed a maximum CWR=0.90
with respect to the length of the structure L =7.5 m, in waves with steepness of
H/λ =0.025.
Later, the fixed single chamber and the attenuator-type OWC were modeled and
analyzed numerically by [15]; the analysis was based on linearized potential flow
theory and afterwards compared with the measurements obtained in the experiments
performed in the fixed single chamber at DTU [8] and with the freely floating model
experiments at HMRC [16].
Briefly speaking, a very good agreement was found
between the calculations and the experiments, giving a real estimate on the power
absorption potential of the device. At this stage, a proposal of a valve system has
already been raised, but to connect all the chambers and drive the air flow through
a larger uni-directional turbine would make even more efficient the power absorption
of the device.
In 2017, a third round of experiments were performed also in a wave flume at
DTU but in a new chamber previously built, in the same scale as before but made
out of Plexiglas in order to have a smoother surface; and three holes to design a valve
system to manipulate the air flow and energy capture[20], which is the same prototype
used in this project. Even though at this stage, the chamber was already designed
to include a valve system to measure one-way energy capture, the experiments were
done only with a two-way orifice plate because the valve system was not yet designed.
On this round of experiments, a CWR =1.2 for a double chamber was achieved in
wave periods close to resonance, with respect to the length of the model L =0.15 m
with H/λ =0.025.
As is explained later on, the oscillation of the water column inside the chamber is
the mode on which the energy capture in OWC devices mostly relies on. The forces
acting on the water column are dynamic wave excitation forces, hydrostatic restoring
forces, which is due to the OWC structure´s inner and outer water level differences
and damping forces [4], which among other factors, depend on the turbine selected
for each OWC device. In a conventional OWC, the only opening above the water
column is through the turbine, so the pressure drop inside the chamber increases the
damping force substantially and dissipates the free motion of the inside water column;
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Background
in [20] the piston mode with the lid in place is reduced to around 40% of the piston
mode with no lid, i.e. in an undamped condition.
A valve system that vents the air-flow to the atmosphere in only one direction,
i.e. upstroke or downstroke and seals the chamber in the opposite direction may be a
solution. This system would reduce to the minimum the pressure drop and the damp-
ing force during every half cycle (when the chamber is venting) and subsequently
increase the stroke and therefore capturing more energy in the other half cycle. Fig-
ure 2.6 shows the concept of a device venting on the upstroke and capturing energy
on the downstroke with an inflow turbine and Figure 2.7 shows a device venting on
the downstroke and capturing energy on the upstroke with an outflow turbine. Both
cases will be investigated in this project.
Another advantage and strong motivation to investigate one-way energy cap-
ture is the implementation of a uni-directional turbine instead of a self-rectifying
bi-directional turbine. So far, the bi-radial and twin-rotor turbines are the best per-
forming mechanisms for a conventional two-way OWC device, with an efficiency of
79% and 74% in steady flow conditions. In real ocean conditions, this efficiency is
reduced by 5% to 10% though, due to the high fluctuations of the flow across the tur-
bine and due to the stoppage every half wave period to change direction[14]. On the
other hand, uni-directional turbines have efficiencies higher than 85% [25], so if the
theoretical energy capture on a one-way OWC device is at least equal to the energy
captured by a conventional OWC device, the efficiency of the implementation of a
uni-directional turbine instead, would be reason enough to use a one-way OWC alter-
native. Furthermore, the manufacturing and maintenance costs of a uni-directional
turbine would drop substantially due to the less robust mechanism, reducing as a
consequence the cost of energy of the device.
Figure 2.5: Sketch of a radial-inflow twin-rotor turbine used in a conventional OWC
device on the left and a uni-directional radial-inflow turbine for a one-way OWC on
the right. [25]
==PAGE:21==
2.3 KNSwing and Related projects
11
Figure 2.6: Sketch of a vented OWC WEC, showing a full cycle with a uni-directional
turbine capturing energy in the downstroke.
Figure 2.7: Sketch of a vented OWC WEC, showing a full cycle with a uni-directional
turbine capturing energy in the upstroke.
==PAGE:22==
12
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Theoretical Framework
3.1
Motion of an Ideal Fluid
Given the obvious nature of the environment within, it is necessary to briefly describe
and sum up the governing equations for the hydrodynamics involved in the topic of
interest. The aim is to establish and explain the concepts behind the principles and
assumptions but mathematical procedures will not be explained in depth.
In an ideal fluid, viscous effects and shear stresses are neglected and it can be
described by potential flow, which physically means that the flow can be described as
an equilibrium between inertial forces, pressure forces and gravitational forces [17].
3.1.1
Irrotational Flow
An irrotational flow means that vorticity is zero throughout the fluid. Since the fluid
is ideal and there are no shear stresses acting within the fluid, the rotation rate of
the fluid particles will not change. Therefore, any motion that was initially at a state
of rest will remain irrotational and the circulation about any material contour will
vanish[19].
To sum up, the fluid is irrotational if it fulfills the condition stated in Equation 3.1,
where in Cartesian coordinates, u, v and w represent the velocity field [17].
∂u
∂y −∂v
∂x = 0,
∂v
∂z −∂w
∂y = 0,
∂w
∂x −∂u
∂z = 0.
(3.1)
3.1.2
Velocity Potential
Since the given flow is irrotational, a mathematical function called the velocity po-
tential function ϕ may apply. Such function for an, irrotational flow in the xyz-plane
is defined as a function of each one of the coordinates, so that the partial derivative
ϕ with respect to displacement in any given direction equals the velocity in the same
direction. Thus, the velocity potential is represented by Equation 3.2.
u = ∂ϕ
∂x,
v = ∂ϕ
∂y ,
w = ∂ϕ
∂z .
(3.2)
This statement indicates that the velocity potential increases in the direction of
the flow. Therefore, the continuity equation is recalled in Equation 3.3 and written in
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Theoretical Framework
terms of ϕ in Equation 3.4, which is the Laplace equation that expresses conservation
of fluid mass for potential flows [17].
∂u
∂x + ∂v
∂y + ∂w
∂z = 0
(3.3)
∇2ϕ ≡∂2ϕ
∂x2 + ∂2ϕ
∂y2 + ∂2ϕ
∂z2 = 0
(3.4)
3.1.3
Bernoulli’s Equation
The general Bernoulli’s Equation represents the principle that an increase on velocity
of a fluid occurs simultaneously with a decrease in pressure and it is related to the
principle of conservation of mechanical energy. It is valid for steady, incompressible,
irrotational, inviscid flow along a streamline. The unsteady version of Bernoulli’s
equation is used in the wave theory and is represented by Equation 3.5, where z is a
vertical coordinate, p is the pressure and V is the velocity [17].
p
ρ = ϕt + V 2
2 + gz
(3.5)
3.2
Linear Wave Theory
The water surface elevation η for a wave with height H propagating with a phase
celerity c is defined by Equation 3.6, where ω is the angular frequency and k is the
wave number [17, 26].
η = H
2 cos(ωt −kx)
(3.6)
If we are at a fixed position, i.e. x = 0, η is reduced to Equation 3.7
η = H
2 cos(ωt)
(3.7)
The angular frequency is defined by Equation 3.8, where T is the wave period.
Meanwhile k is described by Equation 3.9, in which λ corresponds to the wave length.
ω = 2π
T
(3.8)
k = 2π
λ
(3.9)
ω and k are related through the linear dispersion relation (Equation 3.10), which
is typically solved with respect to k for a given depth h and a given ω.
ω2 = gk tanh(kh)
(3.10)
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Hydrodynamics in OWC Devices
15
The propagation speed of the surface profile is defined by c and can be described
by Equation 3.11, which is the general equation for celerity of small sinusoidal waves
at an arbitrary water depth.
c = ω
k =
√g
k tanh(kh)
(3.11)
For shallow water, kh will tend to 0, so Equation 3.11 approaches Equation 3.12
c =
√
ghtanh(kh)
kh
→
√
gh
for
kh →0
(3.12)
For deep water kh →∞, so that tanh(kh) →1, which yields in Equation 3.13
c →
√g
k
(3.13)
3.3
Hydrodynamics in OWC Devices
The theory behind the hydrodynamic analysis of the OWC device used in the present
project, relies on the work by Evans [33], which considers a fixed and partially sub-
merged structure open at the bottom end, and closed at the top end, trapping a
volume of air in a series of separate sections each having its own internal free surface.
The effect of the incident wave causes the internal free surface to oscillate at the same
frequency as the incident wave, driving the trapped air flow to oscillate through the
turbine. It is assumed that the turbine characteristics are linear and the pressure
drop across the turbine is proportional to the volume flow through it.
The standard first-order, radiation-diffraction theory is extended to include the
response of one or more partially enclosed OWC chambers, together with the rigid-
body motions. A more detailed explanation is provided in [15], but a brief explanation
of the theory is given in the following, in order to state the basis of the calculations.
Cartesian coordinates are taken with z as the vertical axis, and z = 0 the undis-
turbed free surface. Starting from the linear wave theory, the flow is described by a
total velocity potential Φ(x, t), satisfying the Laplace equation in the fluid. Thereby,
Φ is represented in the frequency domain by Equation 3.14, which is a superposition
of a number of time harmonic solutions at different wave frequencies.
Φ(x, t) = ℜ
{
ϕ(x, ω)eiωt}
(3.14)
As has been discussed earlier, linearity is assumed for the turbine characteristics
and therefore, the PTO is required to be a linear function of the response inside the
chamber. In order to relate the wave interaction with the internal pressure surface, a
set of radiation modes j = 7, 8, ..., 6 + Mp are defined, where Mp is the total number
of chamber modes defined. A complex amplitude ξj and a mode shape nj(x, y) is
assigned to each pressure mode, and the total pressure applied to the interior free
surface of the OWC chamber Si is given by Equation 3.15.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Theoretical Framework
p0(x, y) = −ρg
6+Mp
∑
j=7
ξjnj(x, y)
(3.15)
The body surface includes now the internal chamber free surface as Sb = S0 + Si,
where the generalized unit normal vector is set to zero on Si for the rigid-body modes
j = 1, 2, ..., 6 and set to zero on S0 for the pressure modes j > 6. Moreover, the
applied pressure modifies the Bernoulli equation on the free surface to
iωϕ + gζ = −p0
ρ
iωζ −∂zϕ = 0
}
on
z = 0
(3.16)
And combined with Equation 3.15 yields
∂zϕ −ω2
g ϕ = −iω
ρg p0 = iω
6+Mp
∑
j=7
ξjnj,
on
z = 0
(3.17)
Furthermore, the potential is decomposed into radiation and diffraction compo-
nents as
ϕ = ϕR + ϕD,
ϕD = A (ϕI + ϕS) ,
ϕR = iω
6+Mp
∑
j=1
ξjϕj
(3.18)
The diffraction potential ϕD represents the solution for a fixed body, with p0 = 0,
subjected to an incident wave of amplitude A and incident angle β. The incident
wave is defined by
ϕI = ig
ω
cosh[k(z + h)]
cosh(kh)
e−ik(x cos β+y sin β).
(3.19)
While the forcing in the diffraction problem comes only from the solid boundary
condition
∂nϕS = −∂nϕI
on
S0.
(3.20)
The radiation potentials ϕj correspond to the applied oscillatory pressure on the
interior free surface, at frequency ω, satisfying the generalized boundary conditions
∂zϕj −ω2
g ϕj = nj,
∂nϕj = nj,
(3.21)
where the pressure modes and the normal rigid-body modes are expressed in the
same basic form.
As explained before, in an OWC, power is extracted from the air flowing through
a turbine which is forced by the motion of the water inside the chamber. Hence, the
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Hydrodynamics in OWC Devices
17
air flux inside the chamber is the critical quantity and what will define the power
extraction ability of the device. The mode shapes nj, which define the pressure dis-
tribution inside the chamber is chosen as a set of orthogonal standing modes and the
mean (piston-mode) elevation inside the chamber is the only mode that contributes
to the flux through the chamber, and consequently to power extraction. In the fol-
lowing, since the OWC is analyzed as a single fixed chamber, two pressure modes
are considered: the first standing wave (sloshing-mode) ξ8 and the piston-mode ξ7,
so that this modes represent the mean pressure inside the chamber and the only one
contributing to the air flux through the turbine.
The total volume flux through the chamber is given by
q =
∫
Si
∂zϕdS =
∫
Si
∂zϕDdS +
∫
Si
∂zϕRdS = qD + qR
(3.22)
The mean power extracted by the turbine over one period of oscillation is given
by
W = 1
T
∫T
0
ℜ
{
p0eiωt}
ℜ
{
qeiωt}
dt = 1
2ℜ{p∗
0q}
(3.23)
Generally, there is a quadratic relation between the flux and the pressure inside the
chamber, but to find an equivalent linearized damping coefficient Bj0, which extracts
the same power over one cycle of oscillation, a linearization of the relationship is
made, such that
q =
6+Mp
∑
j=7
qj,
qj = Bj0pj0
(3.24)
Where Bj0 is a damping coefficient on the internal chamber surface Sj. Thus, the
total mean power extracted by a single fixed chamber is given by
W = 1
2B0p∗
0p0
(3.25)
The efficiency of wave energy absorption is expressed as a capture width ratio
CWR by scaling it with the maximum available power passing through a section of
the free surface of length Lc along a wave crest,
Wmax = 1
2ρgA2cgLc
(3.26)
Thus, the capture width ratio with respect to a length-along-the-crest of Lc can
be written in terms of non dimensional quantities as Equation 3.27, where Lc will be
the length of the device.
W =
W
Wmax
=
6+Mp
∑
j=7
¯Bj0 ¯ξ∗
j ¯ξj
¯cg
L
Lc
(3.27)
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Theoretical Framework
The solution for the pressure surface mode response ξ7 on a fixed, single degree
of freedom OWC chamber is explicitly given by Equation 3.28. ξ7 is a pressure head
measured in meters, i.e. it is a translational mode.
ξ7 =
¯X7
[
−¯ω2 ¯A77 + ¯c77 + i
(
¯ω2 ¯B77 +
¯
B0
¯ω
)]
(3.28)
The optimum power take-off damping ¯B0 can be derived by inserting Equa-
tion 3.28 into Equation 3.25 and setting the derivative with respect to B0 to zero
to get
( ¯B0
)
opt = ¯ω
√
¯c2
77 −2 ¯A77¯c77¯ω2 +
( ¯A2
77 + ¯B2
77
)
¯ω4
(3.29)
It is worth to note that when the chamber is in resonance, B0 is defined by Equa-
tion 3.30, which is the optimum condition for a single degree of freedom mechanical
WEC tuned to resonance.
¯ω0 =
√
¯c77
¯A77
( ¯B0
)
opt = ¯ω3 ¯B77
(3.30)
In the following, an impulse turbine is chosen to be modelled to extract power
from the chamber as the power take-off (PTO). In theory, it produces a quadratic
relation between pressure and flux and it is modelled by an open orifice with an area
of around 1% of the total interior free surface area. In this project, the orifice will
have a diameter of 16 mm.
Ignoring compressibility effects which are neglected at model scale, the pressure
drop across the orifice is proportional to the square of the flow velocity (or flux)
through the orifice. This is described by Equation 3.31
p(t) = 1
2ρa
( 1
Cda
)2
Q(t)2 sign(Q) = 1
B1
Q(t)2 sign(Q)
(3.31)
where ρa = 1.225 kg/m3 is the air density, a is the area of the orifice, and Cd is
an effective area coefficient which should vary depending on the chamber and orifice.
This relation can be used directly in the time domain, but to do the analysis in the
frequency domain requires the estimation of an equivalent linear damping coefficient
that dissipates the same cycle-averaged power. To do this, an oscillatory flux in the
chamber is assumed, which could also be defined as the time derivative of ξ7 · Si.
dξ7
dt · Si = Q(t) = |q| sin(ωt)
(3.32)
From Equation 3.23, the mean power loss is defined by Equation 3.33. So, inserting
Equation 3.31 and Equation 3.24 into Equation 3.33, using Equation 3.32, and finally
equating the two results gives the relation shown in Equation 3.34.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Hydrodynamics in OWC Devices
19
W = 1
T
∫T
0
p(t) · Q(t)dt
(3.33)
B0 = 3π
8|q|B1
(3.34)
The magnitude of the flux in the chamber is given by Equation 3.35, which leads
to Equation 3.36 as the equivalent linearized damping coefficient.
|q| = B0 |p0| = ρg |ξ7| B0
(3.35)
B0 =
√
3π
8ρg |ξ7|B1
(3.36)
==PAGE:30==
20
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Experimental work
The aim of the project is to investigate one-way energy capture on a 1:50 scale model
of a fixed, single chamber OWC device, which resembles a single chamber on the
KNSwing I-Beam Attenator and assess its performance and results, comparing them
with two-way energy capture experiments on the same device and numerical models.
As explained before, one of the main motivations of investigating one-way energy
capture is the possibility of acquiring a similar amount of air flux through the PTO
system but installing a uni-directional turbine instead, which is significantly more
efficient than a self-rectifying turbine. Thus, the efficiency and benefits of a one-way
energy capture model are assessed through the experimental investigation.
Apart from the mentioned above, a characterization of the accuracy of the wave
gauges (WG) used to measure and assess the wave conditions and water column inside
the OWC was performed through more experimental work prior to the tests on the
OWC device. Figure 4.1, shows the experimental plan for the project, which lasted
six months in total.
Figure 4.1: Flow diagram of the experimental work conducted at DTU.
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Experimental work
The experiments have been performed at wave flume 1 of the Hydraulic Engi-
neering Laboratory in Building 114 of the Technical University of Denmark. The
prototype used was fabricated before for previous projects, but a valve system was
designed and built during this period for the one-way energy capture scheme.
4.1
Wave Gauges accuracy characterization.
The first part of the experimental work consisted of characterizing the accuracy of
the wave gauges that were going to be used during the tests on the flume to measure
the wave height on each test. Since the experiments and results rely on a very small
scale model, to know the precision of the measurements taken with the probes was im-
portant for the assessment of the OWC performance; any error on the measurements
at this scale would represent significant errors on a 1:1 scale model. Moreover, a new
model of wave gauges was used during the project which was presumably better but
information about its accuracy was lacking.
The work comprised a precise calibration of the wave gauges followed by a round
of tests that consisted of inducing different sinusoidal motions on the wave gauges,
which were submerged in a plastic barrel filled with water, in order to characterize the
accuracy of the measurements and its variation with different amplitudes and periods.
The measurements of the wave gauges were compared with the original desired motion
profile, measurements taken with a laser displacement device and with a draw-wire
sensor. The gauges were moved by a linear motor actuator in a barrel filled with
water, so the measurements were taken in still water. A schematic drawing of the set-
up and its functionality is shown in Figure 4.2 and pictures of the set-up are shown
in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.2: Diagram of the set-up, how the wave gauges were moved and the mea-
surements acquired.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Wave Gauges accuracy characterization.
23
(a) Set-up of the Wave gauges on the linear
motor actuator.
(b) Set-up of the laser and reflective plate on
the linear motor actuator.
Figure 4.3: Set-up for the wave gauge accuracy characterization, next to flume 1.
4.1.1
Equipment
4.1.1.1
Wave Gauges
The wave gauges used for the experiments are manufactured by Edinburgh Designs
(ED), which operate by measuring the resistance of the water between a pair of
parallel rods; resistance between the rods is inversely proportional to the immersion
depth. Therefore, the water level and consequently the wave height is measured at a
desired data rate.
The gauges are connected to a controller box, which transfers the data to a PC
through a USB hub. The USB hub is also connected to a National Instruments (NI)
data acquisition device (DAQ) in order to synchronize the data obtained from the
wave gauges with other devices.
A description of the wave gauges functionality can be found in [9, 27], the instal-
lation procedure and software manual are well described along with linearity investi-
gations and the influence of water temperature on the measurements. Pictures from
the gauges, controller and USB hub are found in the appendix.
4.1.1.2
Linear Motor Actuator
To generate the desired motion of the probes, a linear motor actuator manufactured
by LinMot, which consists of a stator and a slider was used. The stator contained
the motor that was connected to a waveform generator feeding a controlled signal to
produce a desired motion profile and to the controller software LinMot Talk, which
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Experimental work
controls the settings of the motor. The motor controller was set to an analog input
and a source range between 0-10 V, being 0 V = 0 mm and 10 V = 520 mm and a
home position at 10 mm. Even though the full stroke of the slider is 540 mm, it was
set up as described with the sole purpose of avoiding that the slider plate reached the
top and the bottom of the stroke.
The motor was vertically placed over the water barrel on a cage built with unistrut
profiles, two steel plates were manufactured to attach the stator to the cage and a
PVC plate was also manufactured to attach the wave gauges to the slider plate. Apart
from these pieces, a reflective plate was fabricated for the laser displacement device.
The detail drawings of the manufactured plates can be found in the appendix.
The PVC plate, reflective plate, wave gauges, rods and slider plate were weighted
in order to update the additional weight set in the LinMot controller. The total
weight of the accessories was 4,540 g and the default configuration was set to 3,830
g; thus, a difference of 710 g was added.
4.1.1.3
Waveform generator
The linear motor actuator moves its slider depending on the voltage which it is fed
with, so in order to feed the motor with the desired voltage, a waveform generator
manufactured by Keysigth model 33500B Series was used. The generator was con-
nected to the linear motor and to a data acquisition device in order to monitor the
function generated in real time .
4.1.1.4
Laser displacement sensor
A laser displacement sensor manufactured by Micro-epsilon model ILD1402-600 was
used to compare its measurements with that of the wave gauges. The device has a
voltage output between V = 1.86 −9.85 V and a measured resistance of R = 497.8
Ω. With Ohm’s law I = V/R, the current output yields between I = 3.74 −19.78
A. Even though the technical data sheet of the sensor specifies a measuring range
between 200 and 800 mm, it is necessary to verify the calibration curve to find the
most accurate relation.
In order to find the slope and offset of the calibration curve, the laser is connected
to the same DAQ device to capture the voltage output from the laser and three 50
mm gauge blocks were used to produce a precise measured length. Then, the laser
was placed and fixed over a table pointing at a steel plate that was attached to the
same table exactly at 210 mm away from the laser; a point was drawn in the plate
to make sure that the laser was pointing at the same position. The laser was placed
behind one of the gauge blocks and the voltage output was recorded during 30 sec,
this voltage output corresponded to the initial position V , i.e. 210 mm. Afterwards,
without moving either the plate or the first gauge block, a second block was added
behind the first one and the laser was moved behind the second block, recording the
V output in that position. Finally, the same procedure was done a third time by
adding a third gauge block. The calibration curve is shown in Figure 4.4 with the
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Wave Gauges accuracy characterization.
25
recorded V outputs and corresponding positions. Equation 4.1 shows the calibration
relation for the laser displacement device.
x = 75.723 · V + 54.524
(4.1)
where x is displacement in mm and V is the voltage output.
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
150
200
250
300
350
 
y = 75.723*x + 54.524
Figure 4.4: Calibration curve for the laser displacement device.
An offset was added to Equation 4.1, so that the zero position of the laser corre-
sponded to the zero or middle position of the Wave gauges and motion profile.
The laser displacement device was mounted behind the stator of the linear motor
on a separate unistrut in order to avoid the transfer of vibrations from the motor and
any distortion on the measurements. The manufactured reflective plate was attached
to the slider plate.
The verticality of the sensor was an important issue, so it was verified by drawing
a point in the reflective plate and verifying that the laser dot was pointing at the
same exact point through the complete motion. Figure A.3 shows the laser pointing
at the reference point in two different positions.
4.1.1.5
Draw-wire sensor
A draw-wire sensor was also installed to have a second reference on the measurements
and to verify the accuracy of the laser. The device is manufactured by Kübler and
has a measuring range of 0 - 1 m, with an absolute accuracy of ±0.1 %. The encoder
is supposed to generate a voltage output from 0 - 10 V, but the V-mm relation needs
to be verified to have a precise measurement.
The draw-wire sensor was calibrated following the same procedure as in the laser
displacement device calibration. It was connected to the DAQ and placed over a table
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Experimental work
behind a gauge block fixed to the table, the other end of the cable was also fixed to
the table at the same height. The voltage output was recorded on that position and
the procedure was repeated moving the device box behind the second and third gauge
blocks, recording the corresponding voltage output on each position. The calibration
curve is shown in Figure 4.5 and Equation 4.2 shows the calibration relation.
x = 100.69 · V
(4.2)
where x is the displacement in mm and V is the voltage output.
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
 
y = 100.69*x 
Figure 4.5: Calibration curve for the draw-wire sensor.
An offset was added to Equation 4.2 the same way as in the laser calibration, so
that the zero position of the draw-wire corresponded to the zero position of the WG.
The device is attached to the unistrut structure holding the linear motor and to
a profile attached to the slider plate. Pictures of the device and its setup on the cage
can be found in the appendix.
4.1.1.6
DC Power supply
The DC voltage converter used to power the laser sensor and the draw-wire sensor
was generating a lot of noise and disturbing the signal from the function generator.
Thus, a DC power supply maufactured by Keysight model E36312A was used for the
laser and draw-wire sensor to smooth their signal and get rid of the noise; the device
has an output noise < 350 µVrms.
One output was set for the laser device to a voltage of 24 V and a current of 100
mA and another output was set for the draw wire sensor to a voltage of 24 V and a
current of 50 mA.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Wave Gauges accuracy characterization.
27
4.1.2
Tests on Wave gauges
4.1.2.1
Motion profiles
In order to generate a controlled motion on the wave gauges, the linear motor was fed
with a sinusoidal voltage function. As explained before, the motor induces a motion
on the plate depending on the voltage fed in it. Thus, different motion profiles were
created, varying the amplitude and period on each one of them; the periods and
amplitudes were of the same magnitude as the tests planned for the wave flume,
Table 4.1 shows the test matrix for the wave gauges characterization, tmax being the
duration of each test. To check repeatability, all 30 tests were run three times.
T [s]
A1 [m]
A2 [m]
tmax [s]
0.57
0.0065
0.0105
84
0.74
0.0105
0.0170
65
0.78
0.0120
0.0190
62
0.79
0.0125
0.0195
60
0.81
0.0130
0.0205
59
0.82
0.0130
0.0210
58
0.83
0.0135
0.0215
58
0.84
0.0140
0.0220
57
0.86
0.0145
0.0230
55
0.90
0.0160
0.0250
52
0.98
0.0185
0.0300
47
1.15
0.0250
0.0395
38
1.31
0.0310
0.0495
32
1.47
0.0370
0.0595
27
1.64
0.0435
0.0690
24
Table 4.1: Test matrix for the tests performed for the accuracy characterization of
the WG
The function was created in MATLAB to reproduce the desired motion profiles
but transferred from meters to voltage in order to store them in the function generator
device that fed the linear motor actuator. To avoid an abrupt displacement on the
LinMot when triggering the function generator, the created signal needed to start
from 0 volts, which was the home position on the controller, then ramped up to
5 V with an increment of 1 V/s and then the sinusoidal motion began, which was
determined by the function in Equation 4.3; afterwards, the voltage was ramped down
to 0 V again with the same decrement of 1 V/s. Finally, a .csv file was created from
each function and stored into the function generator device in order to trigger the
desired signal into the actuator.
V (t) = A · sin ωt
(4.3)
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Experimental work
where A is the amplitude and ω the angular frequency ω = 2π
T .
Figure 4.6a shows the motion profile in Volts stored in the waveform generator to
feed the LinMots on a test with T =0.90 s and A =16 mm. 30 different profiles were
created to perform the test matrix in Table 4.1.
4.1.2.2
Wave gauges calibration
Since the WG measurements rely on the conductivity of the water and this was
subject to temperature variations during the day, the wave gauges needed to be
calibrated before each session and every 4-5 hours if the sessions were too long. The
calibration was done by inducing a motion on the WG to eleven predetermined points,
at every 50 mm through the full stroke and manually setting the height of each point
through the Edinburgh Designs software. Therefore, apart from the function files
created for the tests, another function .csv file was created to include the calibration
points in the profile before the sinusoidal motion started. This was to ensure that
the calibration was done right and the measurements from the wave probes were in
sufficient agreement with the laser and function generated.
The calibration procedure through the ED software began by defining the gain
of the WG at 50% before starting the calibration. The next step was to start the
calibration, set the gain when the slider moved to the center position and manually
calibrate each point through the software. Afterwards, when the slider went back
to the center position, the zero position was defined in the software. Finally, the
calibration window was closed and the data capture triggered. When the slider was
back at the home position, the data capture was stopped.
Figure 4.6b shows the calibration motion profile in Volts created with five bottom
calibration points, then five above calibration points and one at the center position.
After the calibration points were set, a time lapse was included to set the zero position
again before the oscillation started.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Wave Gauges accuracy characterization.
29
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
time [ms]
104
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Volts
(a) Function fed into the linear motor ac-
tuator T = 0.90 s and A = 16 mm.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
time [ms]
105
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Volts
(b) Calibration function fed into the linear
motor actuator.
Figure 4.6: Functions created for the waveform generator which fed the linear motor.
When feeding the voltage to the LinMot, a small voltage drop was noticed, so
the calibration points were not exactly as desired. Thus, a first test was made with
the calibration profile to find the actual calibration points measured with the laser
displacement device.
This way both, laser and wave gauge measurements should
match, taking the laser as the reference measurement.
4.1.2.3
Experimental measurements
With everything set-up, the tests were ready to be performed. The output data from
the function generator and laser displacement device was acquired through a DAQ
device connected to a PC on a .txt file to further process it. The measurements taken
with the WG were acquired through the Edinburgh Designs software in a separate .txt
file, so both files needed to be combined and synchronized in time to further compare
the measurements.
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Experimental work
Figure 4.7: Screenshot of DAQ software on a random test, acquiring data from the
laser displacement device, function generator and wave gauges pulse output.
The process to combine the two files is well described in [27], but a brief description
of the procedure is described in the following. The WG USB Hub is connected through
a BNC cable with the DAQ device, so when the data capture is triggered in the ED
software, a 5 V pulse output is generated into the DAQ and when the data capture
stops, it drops again to 0 V, meaning that the measurements from the WG will be
captured during that period of time. A MATLAB script was also created by [27] to
find the first sample where the voltage on the DAQ, corresponding to the WG’s pulse
output is greater than 5 V, i.e. the time when the data capture was triggered on the
WG interface and the last sample where the voltage is greater than 5 V, i.e. when the
data capture on the WG interface stopped. Afterwards, the data captured by the ED
software and the one captured by the DAQ are combined into a third .txt file, taking
the DAQ time samples as the reference time and inserting the measurements from
the WG along the previously found time window. Since the sampling rate in both
devices may not be the same, the data from the WG is previously interpolated. Even
though a difference in the sampling rate would be taken care of by the interpolation,
both devices were set at the same sampling rate of 512 Hz to minimize any error
when combining the two files.
The procedure above resulted in the combination and synchronization of the func-
tion generator output, the laser measurements and the WG measurements, which
were now ready to be analyzed. Figure 4.7 shows a screenshot of the real time data
captured by the DAQ on a random test, where the three outputs are displayed. The
red line shows the laser displacement voltage output, the blue line shows the function
generator output and the green line shows the pulse output from the WG. All the
calculations were made from the created combined .txt file.
After placing the wave gauges in the slider plate of the LinMot with the PVC
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Wave Gauges accuracy characterization.
31
plate and the reflective plate, a gap between the bottom of the rods and the bottom
of the barrel was still remaining. Hence, the still water level in the barrel was set
at 66 cm water depth to which the center of the rods were going to be placed when
moving the slider to the center position. This way, when calibrating the gauges and
setting the gain at 50% in the zero position, the center position of the rods would
match the still water level.
To characterize the accuracy of the wave gauges measurements, the laser displace-
ment device was taken as the reference measurement, which was at the same time
guided by the linear motor actuator, that was moved by the function generator. The
measurements were assessed by comparing the displacement of the laser measure-
ments and the wave height measurement on the gauges in amplitude and in time,
verifying that both measurements were satisfactorily synchronized.
After the three set of tests were performed, the draw-wire sensor was installed to
have a second reference measurement and to verify the accuracy of the laser displace-
ment device.
4.1.3
Calculations & Results
With the data acquired and both .txt files combined, the measurements were ready
to be processed. Even though the DC power supply took care of some of the noise
induced by the laser displacement device, the LinMot was still inducing some distor-
tion to the signals. Thus, the output signal from both, laser and function generator
output were filtered through a Savitzky–Golay (SG) filter to make them smoother
and easier to analyze. The filter was applied to the 10th order and a frame length of
13 points. Figure 4.8 shows the raw signals from the function generator and the laser
displacement device voltage output, the measurements from the wave gauges were
taken from the raw signal.
37.5
38
38.5
39
39.5
40
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
5
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
(a) Function generator output.
38
38.5
39
39.5
40
40.5
41
5.4
5.6
5.8
6
6.2
6.4
(b) Laser displacement device output.
Figure 4.8: Raw and smoothed signals from a test with T = 1.64 s and A = 43.5 mm.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Experimental work
After the filter was applied, the function generator output was plotted together
with the three measurements but a time delay on the pulse output from the WG was
noticed. Hence, it was required to identify the exact time delay on each case and
try to identify a pattern, if it existed, either as a function of the amplitude or the
frequency of the motion. Figure 4.9 shows a comparison of the measurements from
the wave gauges and the laser displacement device on the two most extreme cases,
where the time delay on the WG is noticed.
36
36.2
36.4
36.6
36.8
37
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
(a) Motion with A = 6.5 mm and T = 0.57
s.
34
34.5
35
35.5
36
36.5
37
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
(b) Motion with A = 69 mm and T = 1.64
s.
Figure 4.9: Comparison of the measurements and function generator output.
The time delay was found by identifying the positive zero crossings of the signals
from both laser and WG measurements; Figure 4.10 shows a scatter plot of the time
delay of each test with respect to the motion A and motion T.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Wave Gauges accuracy characterization.
33
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0.3
0.305
0.31
0.315
0.32
0.325
0.33
0.335
0.34
0.345
0.35
(a) Time delay of each test with respect to
the amplitude of the motion
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0.3
0.305
0.31
0.315
0.32
0.325
0.33
0.335
0.34
0.345
0.35
(b) Time delay of each test with respect to
the period of the motion
Figure 4.10: Scatter plots of the time delay found in each one of the 90 tests.
The time delay varied between 0.32-0.34 s with respect to the laser measurements,
with a mean value of 0.329 s. The time delay was found to be more repeatable
in motions with higher amplitudes and longer waves but it didn’t have a constant
increment when inducing faster or shorter motion into the gauges. Therefore, it was
concluded that the time delay was due to a constant delay in the electronics of the
WG USB hub when triggering the pulse output and not in the data capture itself,
so when the data files were combined, the time delay was automatically included in
the first measurement. It is important to mention that the wave periods from the
WG matched with the one from the laser measurements and the function generator
output, so the time delay was constant through any given test and it was not due to
a phase shift on the data capture of the wave probes.
Once the time delay was identified, the signals from the WG were automatically
shifted in time according to the previously calculated delay in each test, this way
it was possible to compare the measurements and characterize their accuracy. Fig-
ure 4.11 shows the comparison of the measurements of the four most extreme cases,
two from each wave steepness. Even though the measurements from the WG were
shifted to match those from the laser, it was noticed that the largest instantaneous
difference between the measurements was located on the zero down-crossings because
the two periods didn’t match exactly. Here, the maximum instantaneous difference
was 2 mm but located in the zero-crossing. Thus, the amplitudes from both measure-
ments were compared in Figure 4.12a and Figure 4.12b, where the difference in the
measured amplitudes is normalized by the amplitude of the corresponding motion. A
maximum difference of 0.7 mm is noticed in the measured amplitudes, regardless
the characteristics of the motion. The amplitudes of the measurements were taken
from the first harmonic amplitude after making an harmonic fit to each motion as
described in 4.2.2.3. In the shortest wave cases, a maximum amplitude difference of
7% is observed, which would correspond to a difference of around 0.45 mm. While
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Experimental work
in longer waves, the amplitude difference lies in between 1-2% with respect to the
amplitude of the motion, which corresponds to a difference of 0.7 mm.
36
36.2
36.4
36.6
36.8
37
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
(a) A = 6.5 mm and T = 0.57 s
36
36.2
36.4
36.6
36.8
37
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
(b) A = 10.5 mm and T = 0.57 s
34
34.5
35
35.5
36
36.5
37
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
(c) A = 43.5 mm and T = 1.64 s
34
34.5
35
35.5
36
36.5
37
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
(d) A = 69 mm and T = 1.64 s
Figure 4.11: Comparison of the measurements with the WG measurements shifted to
match that from the laser, over a time scale of 2T
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Wave Gauges accuracy characterization.
35
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
(a) Difference in measured amplitudes.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
(b) Normalized measured A difference.
Figure 4.12: Difference in A between WG and laser measurements
After the wave gauges measurements were assessed with respect to the laser mea-
surements, the draw wire was connected to verify the accuracy of both measurements.
First, the raw data signal was filtered by a SG filter to the 10th order and a frame
length of 13 points. Figure 4.13 shows a comparison between the raw signal and the
filtered signal in two tests.
62.6
62.8
63
63.2
63.4
63.6
4.02
4.04
4.06
4.08
4.1
4.12
4.14
(a) Test with A = 6.5 mm and T = 0.57 s
36
36.5
37
37.5
38
38.5
39
3.4
3.6
3.8
4
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
(b) Test with A = 69 mm and T = 1.64 s
Figure 4.13: Draw-wire sensor output raw signal and filterd signal for the two most
extreme test cases
Then, the two measurements from the draw-wire and the laser were plotted to-
gether with the measurements from the two WG and the function generator output.
Figure 4.14 shows a comparison of the five signal outputs, with the WG measurements
shifted by the time delay found in each test. In short waves, a good agreement can be
seen between the laser and the draw-wire measurements; in the crest and trough, the
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Experimental work
instantaneous difference is between 0.5-1.0 mm and in the zero crossings, the agree-
ment improves. The instantaneous difference between both measurements is shown
with a red line. In longer waves, the difference increases at the crest and at the trough
of the motion but in the zero crossing the agreement is seen to be excellent. The large
difference in the crest and trough could be due to an error on the connection of the
wire with the slider, i.e. the angle plate used to connect the wire could have been a
bit loose and this induced a minor displacement on the draw-wire.
Finally, the difference between the laser and the draw-wire measured amplitudes
taken from the first harmonic after a harmonic fit was made, is plotted in Figure 4.15.
Here a maximum difference of 0.5 mm in the measured amplitudes is seen. Then,
Figure 4.16 shows the difference between the measured amplitudes from the wave
gauges and the draw wire sensor, where a maximum difference of 0.8 mm is seen,
which means a 5% of the motion amplitude. This is consistent with the difference
found before when comparing the measurements from the wave gauges and the laser.
36
36.2
36.4
36.6
36.8
37
37.2
37.4
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
(a) A = 10.5 mm and T = 0.74 s
40
40.2
40.4
40.6
40.8
41
41.2
41.4
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
(b) A = 17 mm and T = 0.74 s
34
34.5
35
35.5
36
36.5
37
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
(c) A = 43.5 mm and T = 1.64 s
34
34.5
35
35.5
36
36.5
37
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
(d) A = 69 mm and T = 1.64 s
Figure 4.14: Comparison of the laser and draw-wire measurements, over a time scale
of 2T
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Tests without the chamber in place
37
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
-0.6
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(a) Difference in measured amplitudes
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
-0.025
-0.02
-0.015
-0.01
-0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
(b) A = 17 mm and T = 0.74 s
Figure 4.15: Normalized measured A difference
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
(a) Difference in measured amplitudes
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
0.05
(b) Normalized measured A difference
Figure 4.16: Difference in A between WG and draw-wire measurements
4.2
Tests without the chamber in place
Once the wave gauges accuracy was characterized and their performance was suf-
ficiently satisfying, the tests in the flume for the OWC scale model were ready to
begin.
The aim of this set of tests was to characterize the wave conditions without any
obstacle in the flume, get the desired wave cases and calculate the main parameters
within. Since all the tests were run with the conditions set in this section, it was
important to get the most accurate possible results.
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Experimental work
4.2.1
Equipment
4.2.1.1
Wave Flume & Wave Maker
The flume used in the experimental work was 25 m long, 0.60 m wide, 0.80 m tall and
it was filled with water to h = 0.65 m. The wave maker was located at one end and
a wave absorber at the other end in order to avoid the reflection of the waves during
the tests. Pictures of the flume are shown in the appendix.
The wave maker was a piston type wave maker driven byDHI Wave synthesizer
2.40 software. The piston is equipped with a potentiometer that was connected to the
DAQ in order to monitor its stroke and have control over the waves ran during the
tests. In order to measure the stroke of the wave maker, a calibration function was
obtained by placing a ruler next to the piston, setting three different positions of the
wave maker through the DHI software, measuring the actual distance that the piston
moved and recording the voltage for 30 s at each position.
Then, the measured
distance was divided by the mean Voltage measured in each position, yielding in
Equation 4.8, where V is the voltage and S0 is the piston stroke length in m. The
calibration function was updated every test session.
S0 = 0.1171 · V
(4.4)
4.2.1.2
Wave Gauges
Six wave gauges were installed along the flume in order to measure the wave condi-
tions during the tests without the chamber in place. The first one was installed at
approximately 4h from the wave maker, one just before where the chamber was going
to be placed, two where the chamber was going to be placed (one at the center and
one at the chamber position), one just after the chamber position and the last one at
the end of the flume; Figure 4.17 shows the position of the probes and set up in the
flume. It also shows a 7th probe that was placed for the tests on the chamber.
Figure 4.17: Schematic drawing of the set up in the flume, showing the position of
the used wave gauges from a top view.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Tests without the chamber in place
39
The wave gauges were calibrated at least every 4-5 hours through the Edinburgh
Designs software, taking into account as calibration points 5 positions of the gradu-
ated rods (from -100 mm to +100 mm), which has a position every 50 mm. The rods
were attached to different uni-strut structures and their verticality was verified with
the aid of an electronic level.
In order to verify the calibration repeatability and the level of uncertainty in the
WG measurements, the wave gauges were calibrated at the end of each session and if
the session was too long, a calibration at the middle of the day was done.
(a) Wave flume with WG1 in place.
(b) Wave flume with central WGs in place.
Figure 4.18: Flume with wave gauges in place for the tests without chamber.
4.2.2
Experimental measurements
The test matrix consisted of 15 monochromatic wave periods, each with two wave
heights indicated by H1 & H2 making a total of 30 conditions shown in Table 4.2.
These wave heights correspond to (linear) wave steepness values of H/λ = 0.025 and
H/λ = 0.040 respectively, in a water depth of h = 0.65 m. All 30 cases were run
three times to establish the level of repeatability. The data was collected for each
case up to the time tstop shown in Table 4.2, with the wave maker turned off after
the time tmax; both time limits were established through the ED and DHI software
respectively. The wave heights in between runs were monitored through the extended
gauge view of the ED software as shown in the appendix; before starting each test,
the wave amplitudes were reduced below 0.1 mm.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Experimental work
T [s]
λ [m]
T/T0
H1 [m]
H2 [m]
tmax [s]
tstop [s]
0.57
0.51
0.70
0.013
0.021
84
140
0.74
0.85
0.90
0.021
0.034
65
109
0.78
0.94
0.95
0.024
0.038
62
103
0.79
0.98
0.97
0.025
0.039
60
100
0.81
1.02
0.99
0.026
0.041
59
98
0.82
1.05
1.00
0.026
0.042
58
97
0.83
1.07
1.01
0.027
0.043
58
96
0.84
1.11
1.03
0.028
0.044
57
94
0.86
1.15
1.05
0.029
0.046
55
92
0.90
1.26
1.10
0.032
0.050
52
87
0.98
1.49
1.20
0.037
0.060
47
79
1.15
1.98
1.40
0.050
0.079
38
64
1.31
2.48
1.60
0.062
0.099
32
53
1.47
2.98
1.80
0.074
0.119
27
46
1.64
3.46
2.00
0.087
0.138
24
41
Table 4.2: Monochromatic wave cases at model scale for the tests in the flume, tmax
is the wavemaker running time and tstop is the total data recording time in seconds.
4.2.2.1
WG calibration curves & Level of uncertainty
As it was previously described, the wave gauges were calibrated at the beginning and
at the end of each session; and if the session was too long, a calibration was done
at the middle of it. Thus, a txt file was saved after each calibration containing the
position and the corresponding voltage ratio output.
From these files, the calibration points for each wave gauge were plotted together
with the voltage ratio in order to compare the slope and offset of the calibration
curve obtained at the beginning with the one obtained at the end of the same session.
This way, an error or level of uncertainty in the measurements could be verified. The
procedure follows the description in [27], where the level of uncertainty is defined by
Equation 4.5. Here, m stands for the slope, b for the offset of each linear fit and
V2 the voltage ratio output of the second calibration curve. Figure 4.19 shows the
comparison of the calibration curves of the two sessions with the largest uncertainty
level calculated in wave gauge number 3.
ϵ = (m1 · V2 −b2) −(m2 · V2 −b1)
(4.5)
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Tests without the chamber in place
41
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
(a) Tests performed on May 21, 2020.
T1 = 19.8°C, T2 = 19.9°C
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
(b) Tests performed on May 22, 2020.
T1 = 20.0 °C, T2 = 20.1 °C
Figure 4.19: Comparison of calibration curves during two sessions. T1 is the tempera-
ture measured at the beginning and T2 the temperature measured at the end of each
session.
The measurements on the WG depend on the conductivity of the water, which
may have minor variations through time, mainly due to changes in temperature of
the water. Hence, during the tests without the chamber in place, in the worst case
scenario, an uncertainty of 1.67 mm was calculated. This was due to variations in
the water temperature from the beginning to the end of the session.
4.2.2.2
Wavemaker Transfer Function
According to linear wavemaker theory, a piston type wavemaker with a motion defined
in Equation 4.6 will generate a far field wave defined by Equation 4.7.
x1(t) = S0
2 sin ωt
(4.6)
η = H
2 cos(ωt −kx)
(4.7)
S0 = H · 2kh + sinh(2kh)
4 sinh2(kh)
(4.8)
where x1 is the displacement of the piston and S0 is the stroke length of it, which
may be defined by Equation 4.8 as a function of the wave height. Hence, the theoret-
ical stroke needed on the wavemaker to generate the wave height on the test matrix
shown in Table 4.2 was calculated through the equations written above and shown
in Table 4.3. The period of the motion in the wavemaker will be equal as that of the
desired wave.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Experimental work
T/T0 [s]
λ [m]
S1 [m]
S2 [m]
0.70
5.13 E-01
6.41 E-03
1.03 E-02
0.90
8.47 E-01
1.06 E-02
1.70 E-02
0.95
9.44 E-01
1.18 E-02
1.89 E-02
0.97
9.84 E-01
1.24 E-02
1.98 E-02
0.99
1.02 E+00
1.29 E-02
2.06 E-02
1.00
1.05 E+00
1.32 E-02
2.11 E-02
1.01
1.07 E+00
1.34 E-02
2.15 E-02
1.03
1.11 E+00
1.40 E-02
2.24 E-02
1.05
1.15 E+00
1.46 E-02
2.33 E-02
1.10
1.26 E+00
1.61 E-02
2.58 E-02
1.20
1.49 E+00
1.97 E-02
3.15 E-02
1.40
1.98 E+00
2.91 E-02
4.65 E-02
1.60
2.48 E+00
4.17 E-02
6.67 E-02
1.80
2.98 E+00
5.74 E-02
9.18 E-02
2.00
3.46 E+00
7.58 E-02
1.21 E-01
Table 4.3: Piston wavemaker stroke lengths for the tests in Table 4.2
Nevertheless, it was noticed in previous projects that the actual measured wave
height was around 15% smaller than the H requested on the DHI software, which
is automatically calculated from Equation 4.8. This is mainly due to a gap between
the piston and the walls of the flume, causing leakage of water around the piston
edges. This leakage creates vorticity around the piston and subsequently energy loss
in the wave generation. Hence, a transfer function needed to be made in order to
find the correct stroke length, which also varies as a function of the water depth in
the flume. Since the conditions and test matrix were the same as in [20] and the
tests at that time were run in the same flume, the input H from [20] was taken as a
first approach, expecting that the behaviour of the piston and therefore the transfer
function wouldn’t change much.
That said, a first set of tests was performed requesting in the DHI software the
H shown in [20], but it was noticed that the actual stroke length of the wavemaker
was around 15% larger than the requested S0, so the requested H was closer to the
expected H and a different transfer function was needed. Figure 4.20a shows the
relation between the measured H and the requested H in the DHI software, the
dotted gray line shows a relation where x = y in order to show the deviation of the
measured H from the requested H, the dotted orange line shows the linear fitting used
to find the new transfer function. Whereas Figure 4.20b shows the relation between
the measured S0 and the requested S0, which is calculated from linear wavemaker
theory with Equation 4.8 according to the requested H.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Tests without the chamber in place
43
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
 
y = 1.023*x - 2.829
(a) Requested H and measured H.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
 
y = 1.167*x + 0.0003848
(b) Requested S0 and measured S0.
Figure 4.20: Relation between requested and measured values for H and S0.
From Figure 4.20a, it can be seen that the requested wave height needed to be
increased by only 2.3% in order to generate the desired wave established in Table 4.2,
since the measured stroke length is around 16.7% higher than the requested. The
cause of this increased stoke length is still unknown and will need further investigation.
4.2.2.3
Harmonic analysis in measured signals
In order to analyse the measurements from the wave gauges, a clean periodic signal
needed to be reconstructed. Therefore, a harmonic analysis of the time series was
done by a least-squares fitting to the original data, which estimates the signal under
analysis as a sum of time-varying sinusoids at frequencies which are multiples of the
fundamental frequency ω, plus a mean value. The harmonic fit for the reconstructed
surface elevation η is given by Equation 4.9, where η is the mean value of the time
series, N is the number of harmonics to take into account, aC
n is the cosine component
of the amplitude of the nth harmonic, aS
n is the sine component of the amplitude of
the nth harmonic and ωn is the frequency of the nth harmonic, which is a multiple of
the fundamental harmonic frequency ω, i.e. ωn = n · ω.
η(t) = η +
N
∑
n=1
aC
n · cos(ωnt) + aS
n · sin(ωnt)
(4.9)
The frequency of the fundamental or first harmonic was found by identifying the
zero crossing values of the original signal and calculating the wave period T from it,
since it is known that ω = 2π
T .
So as to achieve a reliable harmonic fit, a portion of the original data was extracted
between the arrival of the wave front at the analyzed wave gauge and the time when
any reflection was perceived. This way, a uniform and undisturbed data signal was
taken into account for the required analysis.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Experimental work
4.2.3
Calculations & Results
First, the stroke of the wavemaker was monitored according to the desired S0 found
in 4.2.2.2. From Figure 4.21b, it can be seen that the measured stroke length S0
was in agreement with the desired S0 to achieve the desired wave height. Thus, after
doing a harmonic fit to the measurements from the wave gauges, it is noticeable from
Figure 4.21a that the measured H was in agreement with the desired H, which is the
wave height for each test case from Table 4.2; this S0 will be the one taken as desired
in all further tests.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
(a) Desired H and measured H.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
(b) Desired S0 and measured S0.
Figure 4.21: Relation between desired and measured values for H and S0 in the tests
without the OWC.
As a first approach to better understand the wave conditions to run in the tests, the
diagram by [6] shown in Figure 4.22 is used to identify their linearity. The blue dots
show the cases with H/L = 0.025 and the red dots the cases with H/L = 0.040. It can
be seen that the cases with T = 0.57−0.90 s resemble deep water waves and the cases
with T = 0.98 −1.64 s are a replication of intermediate depth waves. Since all cases
but the two with the highest waves rely on Stokes 2nd order theory, it is expected a
contribution from the second harmonic in the surface elevation reconstruction. While
for the two highest wave cases with H/L = 0.040, it is expected to have also a small
contribution from the third harmonic.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Tests without the chamber in place
45
Figure 4.22: Limits of validity for various wave theories according to [6] and the
wave cases ran during the tests. h stands for the water depth, g for the gravitational
acceleration and τ for the wave period. Blue dots indicate H/L = 0.025 and red dots
H/L = 0.040.
After the harmonic analysis was done on the experimental data, the expectations
from Figure 4.22 are demonstrated. In the cases with H/L = 0.025, a small con-
tribution from the second harmonic is perceived in T = 0.57 −0.9 s; while in cases
with T ≥0.98 s the contribution from the second harmonic increases but the third
harmonic is still negligible. On the other hand, in the cases with H/L = 0.040, there
is a larger contribution from the second harmonic in all wave cases and a slight contri-
bution from the third harmonic starts to appear in cases with T ≥0.74 s, increasing
a little its magnitude in waves with T ≥0.98 s.
Even though, the first to third harmonic ought to be enough to reconstruct η, it
is taken up to the sixth harmonic in order to have the best possible fit. Figure 4.23
shows the reconstructed η of the two most extreme cases of each wave steepness. First,
the original experimental data measured with WG no. 3 is plotted with a blue line
and the extracted portion taken for the harmonic analysis is highlighted. The bottom
plots show the reconstructed η with a dotted orange line, together with the original
η in blue and the first to sixth harmonics in lilac in order to show their contribution
to the reconstructed η. The residual of the least-squares fit is also written in the plot
legend.
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Experimental work
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
-5
0
5
35
35.5
36
36.5
37
-10
-5
0
5
10
(a) H = 0.013 m and T = 0.57 s
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
-10
-5
0
5
10
35.4
35.6
35.8
36
36.2
36.4
36.6
36.8
37
37.2
37.4
-10
-5
0
5
10
(b) H = 0.021 m and T = 0.57 s
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-50
0
50
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-50
0
50
(c) H = 0.087 m and T = 1.64 s
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-50
0
50
100
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-100
-50
0
50
100
(d) H = 0.138 m and T = 1.64 s
Figure 4.23: Harmonic analysis and reconstruction of η in the four most extreme
cases for the tests without chamber.
As it is mentioned, the portion of η extracted for the harmonic analysis is suffi-
ciently uniform. A larger wave height is visualized at the arrival of the wave front
but after that, only small fluctuations are noticed. Even in the cases with longer
waves, i.e. λ = 3.46 m, no reflections are perceived in any of the wave gauges and the
measured H is quite consistent and repeatable. Only small magnitude fluctuations
are noticed in the tests with T = 0.57 s but the variation is of less than 1 mm from
one crest to another.
Finally, the properties of each wave are calculated from the measurements and the
mean value for each case is shown in Table 4.4. These measured values were taken as
the incoming wave parameters for the analysis of further cases.
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Free undamped response
47
T [s]
λ [m]
H1 [m]
H2 [m]
k [m−1]
c [m/s]
0.57
0.51
0.014
0.020
12.360
0.879
0.74
0.86
0.022
0.034
7.342
1.141
0.78
0.95
0.025
0.038
6.604
1.203
0.79
0.97
0.026
0.040
6.448
1.217
0.81
1.02
0.028
0.042
6.144
1.247
0.82
1.05
0.027
0.043
5.976
1.264
0.83
1.07
0.028
0.044
5.848
1.278
0.84
1.10
0.029
0.045
5.706
1.293
0.86
1.15
0.031
0.047
5.450
1.323
0.90
1.26
0.033
0.052
4.980
1.383
0.98
1.49
0.038
0.061
4.219
1.499
1.15
2.00
0.052
0.081
3.145
1.714
1.31
2.48
0.064
0.102
2.532
1.872
1.47
2.97
0.077
0.122
2.113
1.994
1.64
3.47
0.088
0.139
1.810
2.089
Table 4.4: Mean measured properties of the waves ran during the tests in the flume
without chamber. k denotes the wave number and c the wave celerity.
4.3
Free undamped response
After the wave conditions were measured and characterized, the OWC chamber was
placed in the flume but without the lid in place. The aim was to measure the piston-
mode ξ7 and the first transverse standing wave ξ8 (sloshing-mode). These measure-
ments allowed to analyze the behaviour of the inside water column when no damping
force is present.
The chamber was placed in the middle of the flume and fixed to one of the walls
which was used as a symmetry plane. It was attached to a unistrut structure built
next to the flume with the inside bottom surface at 15 cm below the still water level.
Two wave gauges were placed inside the chamber to measure and calculate ξ7 and ξ8,
both WG were lowered as close as possible to the bottom of the chamber in order
to capture the complete motion of the inside water column. WG4 was placed closer
to the bottom opening and WG7 closer to the wall of the flume.
The other five
WGs were left at the same position as in the previous tests. Figure 4.24 shows the
configuration of the chamber and WGs ready for the tests.
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Experimental work
(a) Chamber in place for the tests.
(b) Two WG inside the chamber
Figure 4.24: OWC attached to the wall of the flume with the wave gauges in place
for the tests with an undamped response.
4.3.1
Equipment
4.3.1.1
Oscillating Water Column
The only additional equipment used during this set of tests was the 1:50 scale model
of the OWC, which was built for the project in [20]. The chamber was made out of
Plexiglas to have a smooth surface and allow a visual inspection of the motion of the
inside water column. The model has three holes of ⊘= 80 mm with three aluminum
manifolds attached used to manipulate the air flow for the one-way energy capture
tests; in this set of tests the manifolds were sealed with an aluminum plate.
The chamber has an internal width W = 10 cm (parallel to the wave front),
length Lc = 12 cm (perpendicular to the wave front) and 40 cm of height, with a wall
thickness of 1.5 cm. The opening at the submerged bottom end has a width of 12 cm
and a height of 10 cm, making the area of the opening equal to the internal water
surface area.
4.3.2
Experimental measurements
The same test matrix shown in Table 4.2 was run three times, with the same transfer
function found in subsubsection 4.2.2.2 for the wavemaker.
As it is known from
[15], ξ7 is the mode response driving the air flow up and down inside the chamber.
Even though in this configuration there is no air trapped inside the chamber, it is
important to characterize its undamped response in order to have a reference for the
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Free undamped response
49
next configurations. It is expected that since there is no damping force applied, ξ8
will be significantly large, leading to strong nonlinear effects which are difficult to
capture numerically.
Figure 4.25 shows the decomposition of the internal chamber surface elevation
into one ξ7 and one ξ8, along with two elevation measurement positions at distances
c1 and c2 from the internal chamber walls. In this configuration, it was easy to place
the two wave gauges at c1 = c2 = 2 cm, to simplify the calculations.
Figure 4.25: Schematic drawing of the assumed free-surface form with two modes ξ7
(piston) and ξ8 (first transverse standing wave).
Based on this, the measured wave elevation time-series are assumed to be defined
by Equation 4.10 and 4.11, where W is the internal chamber width.
a1(t) = ℜ
{[
ξ7 + ξ8 cos
( π
W c1
)]
eiωt}
(4.10)
a2(t) = ℜ
{[
ξ7 + ξ8 cos
( π
W (W −c2)
)]
eiωt}
(4.11)
Therefore, a1 and a2 are taken from the raw measurements of each of the two
wave gauges. Then, the sum and difference measured elevations are defined by Equa-
tion 4.12 and 4.13.
a+ = a1 + a2 = ℜ
{[
2ξ7 + ξ8
(
cos
( π
W c1
)
+ cos
( π
W (W −c2)
))]
eiωt}
(4.12)
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Experimental work
a−= a1 −a2 = ℜ
{[
ξ8
(
cos
( π
W c1
)
−cos
( π
W (W −c2)
))]
eiωt}
(4.13)
Thus, after forming a+ and a−, a harmonic fit to each of the two signals is made
the same way as in 4.2.2.3 and the first-harmonic amplitudes are extracted in order
to calculate ξ7 and ξ8 from Equation 4.14 and 4.16, which are the equations used
when c1 = c2.
ℜ{ξ7} = a+
C
2
ℑ{ξ7} = −a+
S
2
(4.14)
ℜ{ξ8} =
a−
C
2 cos (π/Wc1)
ℑ{ξ8} = −
a−
S
2 cos (π/Wc1)
(4.15)
Where the sub-scripts C & S indicate the cosine and sine components of the
first-harmonic amplitudes obtained from the least-squares fit.
4.3.2.1
Level of uncertainty
The level of uncertainty in the measurements was characterized the same way as
in 4.2.2.1.
The wave gauges were calibrated at the beginning and at the end of
each session, so it was possible to define a maximum uncertainty from the worst
case scenario.
Figure 4.26 shows the comparison of the calibration curves of the
two sessions with the largest uncertainty level in the wave gauges placed inside the
chamber.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
-0.12
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
(a) Calibration curve in WG4 for tests
performed on June 03, 2020.
T1 = 19.6°C,
T2 = 19.9°C
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
-0.12
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
(b) Calibration curve in WG7 for tests
performed on June 04, 2020.
T1 = 18.2°C,
T2 = 18.6°C
Figure 4.26: Comparison of calibration curves during two sessions. T1 is the tempera-
ture measured at the beginning and T2 the temperature measured at the end of each
session.
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Free undamped response
51
The level of uncertainty was higher than in the tests without chamber, mostly due
to a larger increase in the water temperature during the tests. It is worth to mention
that it was not possible to take more than three positions as calibration points for
the wave gauges inside the chamber.
4.3.2.2
Wavemaker Stroke
Finally, the wavemaker motion was monitored during all the tests to have control over
the desired wave height. Figure 4.27 shows a comparison between the measured and
the needed stroke lengths and periods of the wavemaker to generate the desired waves
in Table 4.2. The desired S0 is the stroke length found after the transfer function in
4.2.2.2 and the measured S0 is the stroke length measured during the tests. The gray
dotted line in both plots, show a relation of x = y, so it is seen that both S0 and T
of the piston motion are as desired.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
(a) Relation between desired and measured
S0.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
(b) Relation between desired and measured
T.
Figure 4.27: Relation between desired and measured stroke length and period of the
wavemaker during the tests with an open chamber.
4.3.3
Calculations & Results
4.3.3.1
Sloshing-mode
As described in 4.3.2, the internal transverse sloshing-mode is expected to become
significantly large with an undamped free response of the internal water column. In
order to calculate ξ8, the difference between the measurements of the two probes
placed inside the chamber, was calculated from the raw signal to form a−. Then, a
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Experimental work
harmonic fit was made to the signal as described in 4.2.2.3. Figure 4.28a and 4.28b
show the reconstruction of a−in the two cases with T = 0.82 s, which are the nearest
cases to the resonant T; these cases were expected to have the largest transverse
standing wave. Figure 4.28c and 4.28d show the reconstruction of a−in the two cases
with the longest waves, i.e. T = 1.64 s. In the harmonic fit of a−, it was included up
to the 10th harmonic.
Before making the harmonic fit, the measurements from the two wave gauges
inside the chamber were analyzed separately to find a proper section to extract for
the harmonic analysis, between the arrival of the wave front and before any reflections
are perceived. Figure 4.28 shows with a blue line the original a−and with an orange
dotted line the extracted portion of the signal. Then, the harmonics considered for
the least-squares fit are shown in lilac in the four bottom plots.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-20
-10
0
10
20
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-20
-10
0
10
20
(a) a−in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-20
0
20
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-40
-20
0
20
40
(b) a−in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-5
0
5
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-5
0
5
(c) a−in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-10
0
10
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-20
-10
0
10
(d) a−in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.040.
Figure 4.28: Harmonic analysis of a−in four wave cases. The residual of the least-
squares fit is displayed as Res.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Free undamped response
53
Afterwards, the first-harmonic amplitude was extracted to calculate ξ8 with Equa-
tion 4.16, where W = 10 cm and c1 = 2 cm.
ℜ{ξ8} =
a−
C
2 cos (π/Wc1)
ℑ{ξ8} = −
a−
S
2 cos (π/Wc1)
(4.16)
|ξ8| is then plotted for the 30 regular wave cases and as predicted, it increases
near the resonant period. Figure 4.29a shows a comparison between the experimental
measurements and the predicted dimensional sloshing-mode response. Close to the
peak, an over prediction from the numerical model is noticed. This over prediction
may be due to turbulence and nonlinear effects that are not captured by the numerical
model. In the longer wave cases though, the numerical model seems to be under
predicting the dimensional |ξ8|. However the experimental measurements behaved
quite similar to that in [20].
In Figure 4.29b, the dimensionless sloshing-mode response is shown, where |ξ8| is
normalized by the incoming wave amplitude calculated from the experimental mea-
surements in the tests without the chamber in place. Here, the same over prediction is
noticed close to the peak but a very good agreement is found away from the resonant
period, where the sloshing-mode is reduced.
A large variability is noticed in the measurements, this may be due to an uncer-
tainty in the measurements taken with the WG. However, this variability seems to
be inside the uncertainty limit calculated in 4.3.2.1.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10-3
(a) sloshing-mode response amplitude.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
(b) sloshing-mode response amplitude, nor-
malized by the incoming wave amplitude.
Figure 4.29: Measured and predicted internal transverse sloshing-mode response am-
plitude in the free undamped chamber configuration for the regular wave tests.
4.3.3.2
Piston-mode
The piston-mode ξ7 was also calculated for the free undamped response. First the
mean surface elevation η = a+
2 was calculated from the raw measurements in the two
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Experimental work
wave gauges inside the chamber. Then, the same way as before, a harmonic fit was
made to a section of η as described in 4.9, including up to the sixth harmonic to
reconstruct the signal.
The time window considered for the harmonic fit was the same as in the sloshing-
mode, analyzing individually the measurements from the two WG in order to find
the best section to extract. Figure 4.30a and 4.30b show the reconstruction of η in
the two waves with the T closest to the resonant T, where the dimensionless |ξ7| is
expected to be larger. Figure 4.30c and 4.30d show the reconstruction for the two
cases with the longest waves.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-40
-20
0
20
40
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-50
0
50
(a) η in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-50
0
50
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-50
0
50
(b) η in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-50
0
50
16
17
18
19
20
21
-50
0
50
(c) η in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-50
0
50
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-100
-50
0
50
100
(d) η in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.040.
Figure 4.30: Harmonic analysis of η in four wave cases. The residual of the least-
squares fit is displayed as Res.
In the cases with H/L = 0.025 the behaviour of η is quite linear, with a small
contribution from the second harmonic in all cases. In the case with the longest wave,
i.e. T = 1.64, the contribution from the second harmonic can be seen to increase. On
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Free undamped response
55
the other hand, in the cases with H/L = 0.040, the contribution from the third and
fourth harmonic is still small but is almost equal as the contribution from the second
harmonic. In longer waves, the linearity of η can be seen to increase with a smaller
contribution from the higher harmonics.
After the harmonic fit was made, the amplitude of the first-harmonic was extracted
and taken as the dimensional piston-mode for each one of the 90 tests. Figure 4.31a
shows the piston-mode response, which is over predicted near resonance due to the
nonlinear effects that are not captured in the numerical calculations. However, as
noticed in the harmonic analysis, the internal chamber motion becomes more linear
in longer waves away from resonance, so the agreement between the numerical calcu-
lations and the experimental measurements in longer waves is seen to be excellent.
Furthermore, Figure 4.31b shows the dimensionless free undamped internal sur-
face elevation, normalized by the incoming wave amplitude. Here, both cases of wave
steepness are seen to behave quite similar away from resonance, with the internal
surface elevation amplitude being of the same magnitude as the incoming wave am-
plitude. Close to resonance, however, ξ7 is twice the magnitude of the incoming wave
amplitude for H/L = 0.040 and 2.5 times in the cases with H/L = 0.025.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
(a) piston-mode response amplitude.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
(b) piston-mode response amplitude, normal-
ized by the incoming wave amplitude.
Figure 4.31: Measured and predicted internal piston-mode response amplitude in the
free undamped chamber configuration for the regular wave tests.
Some variability is noticed also in the results for the free undamped piston-mode,
but is also inside the limits found in 4.3.2.1. Nevertheless, the trend of the results
is found to be quite similar to the numerical calculations and to the experimental
results found previously in [20].
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Experimental work
4.4
Two-way energy capture
After the free undamped response was characterized, the lid was put in place in order
to simulate the PTO system as described in 3.3. It is chosen an impulse turbine
that could be modelled by forcing the air flow through an open orifice with an area
of around 1% of the total interior free surface area. In this project an orifice of 16
mm of diameter is drilled in the lid, the area of this orifice corresponds to 1.67% of
the internal free surface area Si. The same two wave gauges (WG4 and WG7) were
placed inside the chamber through some orifices previously drilled in the lid. In order
to seal as best as possible the holes for the WG, some adhesive putty was used around
the probes.
The piston-mode and sloshing-mode were measured the same way as in 4.3.2, but
to calculate the mean absorbed power, the pressure inside the chamber needed to be
measured. A pressure sensor was also installed with the lid to further calculate the
pressure drop through the orifice, more adhesive putty was used to seal the hole used
for the pressure measurements. Figure 4.32 shows the set up of the OWC with the
equipment used for the measurements.
(a) Set up of the chamber lid.
(b) Set up of the pressure sensor.
Figure 4.32: Set up of the OWC and pressure sensor for two-way energy capture tests.
4.4.1
Equipment
4.4.1.1
Pressure sensor
In order to measure the pressure drop across the chamber orifice, a differential pres-
sure sensor manufactured by First −Sensor model BTEL5P05D4A was used. The
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Two-way energy capture
57
aim was to measure the change in pressure inside the chamber with respect to the
atmosphere. Hence, the high pressure port was connected to the chamber through
a small plastic pipe and the low pressure port was left open to the atmosphere, Fig-
ure 4.32b shows the set up of the sensor.
Due to the low differential pressure, a very sensitive device was required. Thus,
the calibration was an important step in the process. The measuring range of the
sensor is between 1-10 mbar. The mating plug was connected to the DAQ in order
to capture the output voltage. The technical data sheet is found in [32].
To calibrate the sensor, a handheld pressure calibrator was used together with a
multi-meter to read the voltage output from the pressure sensor. The calibrator was
connected to the high pressure port of the sensor varying the pressure from 5 to -5
mbar in a 0.5 mbar step. The voltage output was then read through the multi-meter
and registered, resulting in the calibration curve shown in Figure 4.33 and the relation
represented by Equation 4.17.
p = 1.2731 · V −7.6978
(4.17)
where p is the pressure in mbar and V is the voltage output.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
 
y = 1.2731*x - 7.6978
Figure 4.33: Calibration curve for the differential pressure sensor.
4.4.2
Experimental measurements
Once the set up was complete, the test matrix from Table 4.2 was performed again to
calculate the piston-mode and the sloshing-mode. It is important to note that when
the lid was placed on the chamber, the wave gauges were not equally spaced anymore.
Due to some small bending on the probes of the WG, it was difficult to place them in
the same position. Thus, the space between the probes was measured to be: c1 = 8
mm and c2 = 4 mm.
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Experimental work
Apart from the internal surface elevation, the differential pressure inside the cham-
ber was measured in order to calculate the absorbed power from Equation 3.33. First,
the pressure sensor was connected to the DAQ together with the wavemaker and the
WG USB hub to have all the measurements synchronized. Two .txt files were ob-
tained with the measured data from the devices, so the same procedure described in
4.1.2.3 was followed to combine both files and synchronize them in time. However,
since a time delay was found during the wave gauge accuracy characterization, the
data from the WG was shifted in time by 0.329 s. This was the mean value obtained
in 4.1.3 and it ought to be enough to take into account the time delay caused by the
pulse output.
Figure 4.34 shows a screenshot of the real time data captured by the DAQ on a
random test, displaying the voltage output from the wavemaker, the pressure sensor
and the pulse output from the wave gauges. Both data capture devices, WG and
DAQ were set to a sampling rate of 512 Hz to minimize any possible error when
creating the combined file
Figure 4.34: Screenshot of DAQ software on a random two-way energy capture test,
acquiring data from the pressure sensor, wavemaker and wave gauges pulse output.
4.4.2.1
Level of uncertainty
Again, the level of uncertainty is defined as described in 4.2.2.1, calibrating the WG
at the beginning and at the end of the experimental sessions. Figure 4.35 shows the
calibration curves of the two sessions with the largest uncertainty level in WG4 and
WG7, which were the gauges placed inside the chamber.
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Two-way energy capture
59
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
-0.12
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
(a) Calibration curve in WG4 for tests
performed on June 18, 2020.
T1 = 19.5°C,
T2 = 19.7°C
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
-0.12
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
(b) Calibration curve in WG7 for tests
performed on June 18, 2020.
T1 = 19.5°C,
T2 = 19.7°C
Figure 4.35: Comparison of calibration curves during two sessions. T1 is the temper-
ature measured at the beginning and T2 the temperature at the end of each session.
4.4.2.2
Wavemaker stroke
The stroke length of the wavemaker was also monitored during the tests to have
control over the desired waves. Figure 4.36 compares the desired S0 and the measured
S0 of the piston. It can be seen that the measured stroke length was as desired. Thus,
as described in 4.2.2.2, the waves ought to be also as desired.
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
(a) Relation between desired and measured
S0.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
(b) Relation between desired and measured
T.
Figure 4.36: Relation between desired and measured S0 and T of the wavemaker
during the tests with a two-way orifice.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Experimental work
4.4.3
Calculations & Results
4.4.3.1
Sloshing-mode
The sloshing-mode with a two-way orifice plate is calculated the same way as in
4.3.3 but in this and in the following cases, c1 ̸= c2. The difference between the
two measurements was calculated from the raw signal to calculate a−and then, a
harmonic fit was made in it, following the procedure in 4.2.2.3.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-2
0
2
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-4
-2
0
2
4
(a) a−in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-5
0
5
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
(b) a−in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-5
0
5
(c) a−in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-40
-20
0
20
(d) a−in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.040.
Figure 4.37: Harmonic analysis of a−in four wave cases. The residual of the least-
squares fit is displayed as Res.
First, the measurements from WG4 and WG7 were analyzed individually to find
the best section to extract between the arrival of the wave front and before any
reflection is noticed. Then, the harmonic fit was made to reconstruct a−, including
up to the 10th harmonic. Figure 4.37 shows the reconstruction of a−in the two wave
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Two-way energy capture
61
cases closest to resonance and in the two longest wave cases. The natural period of
the first ξ8 is expected to be T = 0.355 s, so the corresponding ω is included in the
harmonic fit.
Following the same procedure as in the undamped configuration, the first harmonic
is extracted to calculate ξ8, but now the general expression is used, which yield in
Equation 4.18.
ℜ{ξ8} =
a−
C
C1 −C2
ℑ{ξ8} = −
a−
S
C1 −C2
(4.18)
where C1 = cos (π/Wc1) and C2 = cos (π/W (W −c2)).
|ξ8| is then plotted in Figure 4.38 together with the predicted values from the
numerical calculations. As expected, the sloshing-mode was significantly reduced due
to the damping force, the reduction of ξ8 is also evident by visual inspection during
the experiments.
Figure 4.38b shows the dimensionless sloshing-mode, where |ξ8| is normalized by
the incoming wave amplitude. It is noticed that the sloshing-mode is larger than
in the numerical calculations, where the first natural frequency can be seen approxi-
mately at T = 0.355 s. The variability on the results of ξ8 is a special concern, which
can be due to non-linear effects and due to the uncertainty in the wave gauge mea-
surements. The largest difference between two results of the same wave condition is
1.5 mm which is less than the level of uncertainty calculated in 4.4.2.1. However the
experimental results follow the trend predicted by the numerical model. As predicted,
ξ8 was substantially reduced from the undamped configuration. The variability is also
greater that in [20] but the results are within the same order of magnitude.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
10-3
(a) sloshing-mode response amplitude.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
(b) sloshing-mode response amplitude, nor-
malized by the incoming wave amplitude.
Figure 4.38: Measured and predicted internal transverse sloshing-mode response am-
plitude with a two-way orifice plate.
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Experimental work
4.4.3.2
Piston-mode
Following the same procedure as in the free undamped configuration, η is calculated
from the raw measurements of WG4 and WG7 but now, since c1 ̸= c2, Equation 4.19
is used.
ℜ{ξ7} = 1
2
(
a+
C −C1 + C2
C1 −C2
a−
C
)
ℑ{ξ7} = −1
2
(
a+
S + C1 + C2
C1 −C2
a−
S
)
(4.19)
where C1 = cos (π/Wc1) and C2 = cos (π/W (W −c2)).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-10
-5
0
5
10
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-20
-10
0
10
20
(a) η in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-10
0
10
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-20
-10
0
10
20
(b) η in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-40
-20
0
20
40
16
17
18
19
20
21
-50
0
50
(c) η in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-50
0
50
16
17
18
19
20
21
-100
-50
0
50
100
(d) η in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.040.
Figure 4.39: Harmonic analysis of η in four wave cases. The residual of the least-
squares fit is displayed as Res.
Then the harmonic fit was made with the sum of the first six harmonics. Fig-
ure 4.39 shows the harmonic analysis in the two wave cases that are closer to reso-
==PAGE:73==
4.4 Two-way energy capture
63
nance and in the two longest wave cases. It is clear that the linearity in η increases
from the undamped configuration, only a very small contribution from the second
and higher harmonics is noticed in all the wave conditions.
After the harmonic analysis was made, the piston-mode was calculated from the
first harmonic amplitude. Figure 4.40a shows the dimensional piston-mode response
with respect to the wave period, both for the experimental results and for the pre-
dicted numerical model. Due to the damping force caused by the lid on, ξ7 is sub-
stantially reduced compared to the undamped response ξ7, specially near resonance.
It is worth to mention, that the numerical model plotted here, does not consider any
mirror effects from the flume, which is why in the experimental results, a drop in ξ7
near the resonant period can be seen. Even though the experimental results are below
the expectations, the agreement on the trend is seen to be good. The dimensionless
piston-mode amplitude is shown in Figure 4.40b, where the mirror effect near reso-
nance is more evident. However, the results are very similar to those obtained in [20].
In the cases with H/L = 0.025, the piston-mode amplitude is around the same order
of magnitude as the incoming wave amplitude; while in the cases with H/L = 0.040,
ξ7 is around 80% of the incoming A and is likely to increase a bit in longer waves. In
both cases of wave steepness, the maximum dimensionless |ξ7| is noticed in T = 0.98
s.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
(a) piston-mode response amplitude.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
(b) piston-mode response amplitude, normal-
ized by the incoming wave amplitude.
Figure 4.40: Measured and predicted |ξ7| in the two-way orifice configuration.
4.4.3.3
Pressure drop across the chamber orifice
In order to further compute the mean absorbed power, the pressure drop across
the chamber orifice needed to be calculated from the differential pressure inside the
chamber.
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Experimental work
23.8
24
24.2
24.4
24.6
24.8
25
25.2
-0.05
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
(a) Test with H/L = 0.025, T = 0.74 s.
17.5
18
18.5
19
19.5
20
-0.25
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
(b) Test with H/L = 0.040, T = 1.31 s.
Figure 4.41: Raw and smoothed signal from the pressure sensor in two random tests.
First, the raw signal from the pressure sensor is smoothed through a SG filter
to the 10th order and a frame length of 13 points. Figure 4.41 shows a comparison
between the raw signal and the filtered signal.
Afterwards, a harmonic fit is made to the smoothed signal following the procedure
in 4.2.2.3, taking up to the sixth harmonic to reconstruct the pressure measurements.
The time window for the reconstruction was exactly the same as the one taken for the
analysis of a+ and a−, so the extracted signal ought to be uniform enough. Figure 4.42
shows the harmonic analysis on the pressure measurements for the two wave cases
that are closest to resonance and the two longest wave cases, i.e. T = 0.82 s and
T = 1.64 s. The residual from the least-squares fit is also shown in the plot legend.
==PAGE:75==
4.4 Two-way energy capture
65
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-0.05
0
0.05
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-0.05
0
0.05
(a) p in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
(b) p in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-0.1
0
0.1
16
17
18
19
20
21
-0.1
0
0.1
(c) p in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-0.2
0
0.2
16
17
18
19
20
21
-0.2
0
0.2
(d) p in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.040.
Figure 4.42: Harmonic analysis of measured p in four wave cases. The residual of the
least-squares fit is displayed as Res.
The differential pressure is then plotted together with the mean surface elevation
inside the chamber to understand its behaviour. In Figure 4.43 it can be seen that
ηmax and ηmin agree in time with a pressure measurement of p = 0 kPa.
Thus,
as expected, the pressure of the air inside the chamber is greater than that in the
atmosphere during the whole upstroke of the inner water column.
Inversely, the
pressure of the air inside the chamber is lower than that at the atmosphere during
the downstroke of the water column.
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Experimental work
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-10
-5
0
5
10
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
(a) Test with H/L = 0.025, T = 0.82 s
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
(b) Test with H/L = 0.040, T = 0.82 s
Figure 4.43: Measured p and η, indicating the intersection points between η and p.
The pressure inside the chamber reach a maximum and a minimum value when
η is at its middle elevation point. In Figure 4.43, ηmax and ηmin are indicated with
a vertical dotted line, while p = 0 kPa is indicated with a horizontal dotted line to
demonstrate the previously explained.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
(a) Pressure amplitude in the chamber.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
(b) Dimensionless pressure amplitude.
Figure 4.44: Measured pressure amplitude in the chamber with a two-way orifice of
⊘= 16 mm, ρa = 1.225 kg/m3 and A is the incoming wave amplitude.
Then, the pressure amplitude is plotted as a function of the different wave periods
in Figure 4.44a. The pressure drop across the orifice is seen to be larger than the
expected by numerical calculations, probably due to a wrong assumption of Cd in
Equation 3.31, specially in longer waves. It is important to note that in the wave
case with T = 1.64 s and H/L = 0.040, the internal surface elevation falls beyond
the top edge of the chamber opening, venting the chamber to the atmosphere for a
==PAGE:77==
4.4 Two-way energy capture
67
fraction of time and subsequently causing a sudden fluctuation in the pressure inside
the chamber.
In Figure 4.44b, the pressure amplitude is normalized by the incoming wave ampli-
tude, measured in the tests without the chamber in place. Here, a decrease in |p| near
the resonant T is clearly noticed, caused by the same drop in the piston-mode due
to mirror effects in the flume. Therefore, the maximum dimensionless |p| is reached
around T/T0 = 1.20, in accordance with the piston-mode results.
4.4.3.4
Linearized damping coefficient
Additionally, as described in [15], a damping coefficient can be estimated from the
relation between the flux through the chamber and the pressure drop across the cham-
ber orifice from Equation 3.31, i.e. the pressure drop across the orifice is proportional
to the square of the flow velocity (or flux) through the chamber.
The flux Q(t) is oscillatory and is driven by the piston-mode. Thus, it is calculated
from the time derivative of ξ7 multiplied by the internal chamber surface area, as
shown in Equation 4.20; where ξ7 is taken from the first-harmonic.
Q(t) = dξ7
dt · Si
(4.20)
Then, the effective area coefficient Cd is the only unknown in Equation 3.31. So it
is calculated from the measured Q(t) and from the measured p(t) inside the chamber.
This way, a value of Cd is defined for each wave case, varying between 0.56 and 0.62.
Table 4.5 shows the effective area coefficient for each case. In [15], Cd is experimentally
defined to be Cd = 0.64 but the orifice used in those tests was of ⊘= 14 mm.
Cd
Cd
T [s]
H1
H2
T [s]
H1
H2
0.57
0.59
0.63
0.86
0.57
0.60
0.74
0.58
0.60
0.90
0.58
0.60
0.78
0.57
0.60
0.98
0.59
0.61
0.79
0.58
0.60
1.15
0.59
0.60
0.81
0.59
0.60
1.31
0.57
0.59
0.82
0.59
0.61
1.47
0.58
0.60
0.83
0.58
0.60
1.64
0.56
0.71
0.84
0.58
0.60
Table 4.5: Estimated Cd for each wave case. H1 and H2 stands for H/L = 0.025 and
H/L = 0.040 respectively.
In Figure 4.45, the measured data of p(t) and Q(t) is plotted together with both,
p(t) calculated from measured Q(t) and Q(t) calculated from measured p(t).
To
==PAGE:78==
68
4 Experimental work
calculate p(t) and Q(t) in each test, the corresponding Cd from Table 4.5 was used. A
good agreement between the measured data and the computed relation can be seen.
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
10-3
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
(a) T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
10-3
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(b) T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040
Figure 4.45: Pressure drop across the chamber orifice vs flux through the chamber
Afterwards, a damping coefficient for each case is solved from Equation 3.36,
resulting in the values shown in Figure 4.46.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 4.46: Linearized damping coefficients corresponding to the response shown in
Figure 4.40.
4.4.3.5
Power absorption
The power absorption can be computed from Equation 3.33 in three ways: (1) from
the measured pressure and the time derivative of the measured internal chamber
==PAGE:79==
4.4 Two-way energy capture
69
elevation, (2) from the measured p and Q calculated from Equation 3.31 or (3) from
the time derivative of the measured internal chamber elevation and p calculated from
Equation 3.31. Even though the three ways should give very similar results, it has
been decided to calculate W from the measurements of p and η.
First, η is formed from the raw measurements and multiplied by Si. Then, its time
derivative is calculated to get Q(t) and multiplied by the measured p(t), resulting in
an instantaneous absorbed power W(t).
Afterwards, a harmonic fit is made over a defined analysis section.
Here, the
section is redefined to take exactly five cycles but within the same time window
defined for the analysis of ξ7 and p. Figure 4.47 shows two examples of the harmonic
fit and reconstruction of the instantaneous absorbed power.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
1
2
10-4
26.5
27
27.5
28
28.5
29
-1
0
1
2
10-4
(a) T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
1
2
3
4
5
10-4
26.5
27
27.5
28
28.5
29
29.5
-2
0
2
4
6
10-4
(b) T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040
Figure 4.47: Harmonic analysis on the absorbed power in the two cases closest to
resonance.
Finally, the mean absorbed power over one cycle of oscillation is computed from
Equation 4.21, where W(t) is the reconstructed signal obtained with the harmonic
analysis.
W = 1
T
∫T
0
W(t)dt;
where
W(t) = p(t) · Q(t)
(4.21)
In Figure 4.48a, the experimental results from Equation 4.21 are plotted together
with the predicted absorbed power by a single chamber, based on the numerical
model. A decrease in W is noticed close to resonance in the experimental results;
this is related with the decrease in ξ7 and p at the same period. It is worth to note
that the numerical model does not take into account the mirror effects caused by the
flume.
It is also important to note that in the wave case with T = 0.82 s and H/L = 0.040,
the absorbed power is substantially reduced. This was caused by the fluctuation in
==PAGE:80==
70
4 Experimental work
the pressure inside the chamber that is mentioned above. This fluctuation was caused
at the point where the internal surface elevation dropped beyond the bottom opening
of the chamber. Apart from that, the experimental results are seen to follow the same
trend as the numerical model.
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
(a) Mean absorbed power over one cycle of
oscillation by the single chamber.
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
(b) Capture width ratio of one double cham-
ber based on the length 0.15 m.
Figure 4.48: Mean absorbed power by the single chamber and CWR of one double
chamber.
In Figure 4.48b, the capture with ratio CWR of one double chamber is plotted
as a function of the incoming wave period. As explained in 3.3, the CWR is the
power extracted by the chamber, normalized by the maximum available power passing
through a section of the free surface, i.e. the length of the structure or the chamber.
Therefore the experimental results for W are computed in Equation 4.22 and simply
multiplied by 2 to take into account the double chamber. In Equation 4.22, A is the
incoming wave amplitude, Lc is the length of the chamber in the x-direction and cg
is the group velocity, which is calculated from Equation 4.23 with the results shown
in Table 4.4.
W
Wmax
,
Wmax = 1
2ρgA2cgLc
(4.22)
cg = c
2
(
1 +
2kh
sinh(2kh)
)
(4.23)
It can be seen from Figure 4.48b, that the numerical results are over predicting
the absorbed power near the resonant T. This over prediction could be due to the
walls of the flume, which are not included in the calculations. However, away from
the peak, the agreement is seen to be very good.
It can be concluded that in waves with a T/T0 = 1 and H/L = 0.025, one double
chamber would capture around 93% of the maximum available power. While in waves
with H/L = 0.040, the device would capture around 80% of Wmax.
==PAGE:81==
4.5 One-way energy capture, venting on the up-stroke
71
4.5
One-way energy capture, venting on the
up-stroke
The aim of the project was to investigate the ability of the chamber to capture en-
ergy during only one half cycle of oscillation, i.e. during the downstroke or during
the upstroke of the water column. Thus, after the tests with a two-way orifice were
completed, the chamber was modified to capture energy during the downstroke only.
This, through a valve system that vented the air flow from the chamber during exha-
lation. From now on, this configuration will be referred as inflow configuration, since
the energy would be captured through an inflow turbine.
The same devices used in the two-way configuration were used to measure the
water surface elevation and the pressure inside the chamber.
30 more tests were performed, three times each to check repeatability. The wave
conditions of the tests were the same as in the previous experiments.
4.5.1
Valve system
As explained in 4.4.3.3, the rise of the chamber water level causes positive air pressure
inside the chamber and in this condition, a passive one-way valve system was designed
and built to allow the air to escape to the atmosphere. During the second half of
the cycle, the water column falls, causing a negative pressure inside the chamber,
subsequently the valves close and the air flow is forced through the PTO model.
Due to the small magnitude of the air differential pressure inside the chamber, a
very light material was needed. Thus, the flaps were made out of balsa wood sheets
of t =0.8 mm with a specific weight of only 0.2 g/m3. Even though it is a very light
material it also provides some stiffness to the flaps, which helped to their functionality.
For the flap hinges, an electric flyer hinge tape was used at the top edge of the flap,
making sure to seal the complete length of the edge. This type of tape is specially
used to build model airplanes, so it resulted in a very low-friction, flexible hinge.
To seal the edges of the flap when it was closed and subsequently ensure air-
tightness, a 1 mm NBR rubber sheet was custom cut and attached to the valve edges,
facing the inside part of the flap.
The valves were attached to flexible couplings
that were mounted to the existing aluminum manifolds. Initially, the idea was to
attach the flaps to new aluminum manifolds but the workshop was not available at
the moment.
A second configuration was made to increase the venting area with the same
material and principle but instead of attaching the flap to a flexible coupling, it was
attached to a separate plastic box with a squared opening. Then, the plastic box was
connected to the chamber through a flexible PVC hose that was smooth on the inside
to help with the air flow.
In both configurations, the flaps were mounted at a small angle, so the gravity
could help close the flaps faster and improve the air-tightness. Even though the DTU
workshop was not available at the moment, all the valve elements were made with
==PAGE:82==
72
4 Experimental work
sufficient precision.
Figure 4.49 is a schematic drawing of a valve venting in the
upstroke, showing all the elements to a better understanding.
(a) Lateral view of a valve with flap open
(b) Front view of a valve with flap closed
Figure 4.49: One-way exhalation valve mounted on an aluminum manifold.
(a) One-way exhalation valves with a ventila-
tion area of aflap = 0.33Si.
(b) One-way exhalation valves with a ventila-
tion area of aflap = 0.50Si.
Figure 4.50: One-way exhalation valves mounted on the aluminum manifolds.
In order to vary the ventilation area and investigate the piston-mode in each
configuration, three valves as the one shown in Figure 4.49 were made. In the first
configuration (Figure 4.50a), only two valves were used and the third manifold was
kept sealed, having a total ventilation area of 0.33 with respect to Si. In the second
==PAGE:83==
4.5 One-way energy capture, venting on the up-stroke
73
configuration (Figure 4.50b), the three valves were used, having a ventilation area of
0.5 with respect to Si.
A third configuration was made using the plastic box for a ventilation area of 0.75
with respect to Si (Figure 4.51a). Finally, a fourth configuration was made also in the
plastic box, having a ventilation area of 1.0 with respect to Si (Figure 4.51b). The
plastic box was connected through the previously described PVC hose, and attached
to the aluminum manifolds.
(a) One-way exhalation valve with a ventila-
tion area of aflap = 0.75Si.
(b) One-way exhalation valves with a ventila-
tion area of aflap = 1.00Si.
Figure 4.51: One-way exhalation valve built in the separate plastic box.
Before doing the complete test matrix from Table 4.2, a set of tests with the four
different vented chamber configurations was done to define the optimal ventilation
area. This first set of tests was done on each one of the four valve configurations but
only running the two wave cases where T = 0.82, which is the resonant period.
Since the internal surface elevation should be completely undamped during the
upstroke, the fourth configuration with aflap = 1.0Si is supposed to give better results
in terms of the piston-mode response. However, the first set of tests aims to give a
feeling on the variation of the piston-mode response and on the ability of the valves
to seal and maintain the negative air pressure during the downstroke.
4.5.2
Experimental measurements
The measurements for the calculation of the sloshing-mode, piston-mode and pressure
drop were obtained the same way as in 4.4.2.
==PAGE:84==
74
4 Experimental work
4.5.2.1
Level of uncertainty
A level of uncertainty was defined the same way as in 4.4.2.1, from the calibration
curves obtained at the beginning and at the end of each session. Figure 4.52 shows
the calibration curves of the two sessions with the largest uncertainty level in the
wave gauges inside the chamber.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
-0.12
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
(a) Calibration curve in WG4 for tests
performed on June 30, 2020.
T1 = 20.0°C,
T2 = 20.3°C
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
-0.12
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
(b) Calibration curve in WG7 for tests
performed on June 24, 2020.
T1 = 19.6°C,
T2 = 19.9°C
Figure 4.52: Comparison of calibration curves during two sessions. T1 is the temper-
ature measured at the beginning and T2 the temperature at the end of each session.
4.5.2.2
Wavemaker stroke
The stroke length of the wavemaker was also monitored during the one-way energy
capture tests. Similarly to 4.4.2.2, the desired S0 was compared with the measured
S0 and plotted in Figure 4.53.
==PAGE:85==
4.5 One-way energy capture, venting on the up-stroke
75
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
(a) Desired and measured S0 relation.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
(b) Desired and measured stroke T.
Figure 4.53: Relation between desired and measured S0 and T of the wavemaker
during the tests with a one-way orifice, venting in the upstroke.
4.5.3
Calculations & Results
4.5.3.1
Ventilation area
In order to decide which configuration to use for the complete test matrix, a first set of
tests was done in each one of the four valve configurations. Two wave conditions were
run during these set of tests: T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025 and T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040.
These were the two conditions where the piston-mode was expected to increase the
most with a vented OWC.
After the two wave conditions were performed with each valve configuration, the
piston-mode was calculated as described in 4.3.3. Figure 4.54a shows a comparison
of the piston-mode response as a function of the flap area. A value of 0 in the x-axis,
corresponds to the two-way orifice configuration. The experimental results of the free
undamped response is also plotted with an asterix marker to have it as a reference.
As expected, it can be seen how ξ7 increases with a larger ventilation area, but the
curve also seems to stabilize at aflap/Si = 0.75.
The pressure drop amplitude inside the chamber is also plotted in Figure 4.54b,
to have an idea of how the negative pressure inside the chamber behaves with the
different valve configurations. The value of 0 in the x-axis, corresponds also to the
two-way orifice configuration, where the air inside the chamber is both pressurized
and depressurized. In the vented configurations, the pressure inside the chamber only
goes from 0 to a negative value, so the pressure amplitude drops only during half cycle.
It can be seen in Figure 4.54b, that the negative pressure is better maintained with a
lower aflap/Si, possibly due to a better sealing in the flaps and a better performance
when the flap needs to close.
==PAGE:86==
76
4 Experimental work
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
(a) Dimensionless piston-mode response with
different valve configurations.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.4
0.42
0.44
0.46
(b) Dimensionless pressure drop amplitude re-
sponse with different valve configurations
Figure 4.54: Piston-mode response and pressure amplitude inside the chamber.
Afterwards the mean absorbed power over one cycle of oscillation was calculated
as described in 4.4.3 for each valve configuration. Figure 4.55 shows the absorbed
power with the four different valve configurations and with the two-way orifice. Due
to the increase in the piston-mode with the vented configurations, the flux through
the chamber during the downstroke is substantially increased.
Hence, the power
absorption during the downstroke with a vented OWC varies between 25% and 30%
more than with the two-way configuration during the complete cycle. The CWR is
larger with a configuration of aflap/Si = 1.00 but the curve seems to stabilize at
aflap/Si = 0.75. It is worth to mention that the effective area of ventilation in each
configuration was unknown.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.11
(a) Mean absorbed power with different valve
configurations.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
(b) CWR of the single chamber with different
valve configurations.
Figure 4.55: Absorbed power by a single chamber with different valve configurations.
==PAGE:87==
4.5 One-way energy capture, venting on the up-stroke
77
After these tests, it was decided to run the complete test matrix with a valve
configuration of aflap/Si = 1.00, i.e.
with the separate box connected with the
PVC hose.
Apart from the previous results, visual inspection showed that when
aflap/Si < 0.75, some of the air flow was still being perceived through the orifice.
4.5.3.2
Sloshing-mode
The sloshing-mode was calculated as described in 4.4.3, from the two wave gauges
inside the chamber. Figure 4.56 shows the harmonic analysis in a−in the two wave
cases closest to resonance and in the two longest wave cases. The plots at the top,
show the original signal and the extracted section for analysis.
The plots at the
bottom show the original signal, the harmonics taken into account for the harmonic
fit and the reconstructed signal, over a time window of 2T. The section for analysis
was considered within the same time window as in the two-way configuration.
==PAGE:88==
78
4 Experimental work
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-5
0
5
10
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
(a) a−in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-10
0
10
20
(b) a−in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-5
0
5
10
(c) a−in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
(d) a−in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.040.
Figure 4.56: Harmonic analysis of a−in four wave cases. The residual of the least-
squares fit is displayed as Res.
Afterwards, the sloshing-mode was calculated with Equation 4.16 and plotted with
the predicted results from the numerical model. Figure 4.57a shows the dimensional
results of ξ8 and Figure 4.57b the dimensionless ξ8, normalized by the incoming
wave amplitude. The sloshing-mode is larger than that calculated in the two-way
configuration, visual inspection during the experiments confirmed this.
A large variability is noticed in ξ8, even larger than the uncertainty level calcu-
lated for the WGs. When the measurements from the wave gauges were analyzed
individually, a large variability from test to test in WG7 was noticed. This wave
gauge was the one placed next to the wall of the chamber that was adjacent to the
wall of the flume. The distance between the probe and the chamber wall was only 4
mm and some splashing was noticed, specially at resonance. The variability in the
results could be due to the sensibility in the WG and to the proximity of the WG to
==PAGE:89==
4.5 One-way energy capture, venting on the up-stroke
79
the chamber wall.
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
10-3
(a) sloshing-mode response amplitude.
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
(b) sloshing-mode response amplitude, nor-
malized by the incoming wave amplitude.
Figure 4.57: Measured and predicted internal transverse sloshing-mode response am-
plitude in the one-way energy capture configuration, venting in the upstroke.
4.5.3.3
Piston-mode
Then, the piston-mode response was calculated as described in 4.4.3. Figure 4.58
shows the harmonic fit made in η of the two wave cases closest to resonance and
of the two longest waves. The piston-mode response is still quite linear but not as
much as in the two-way configuration. In longer waves, a larger contribution from
the second harmonic is perceived and the downstroke is seen to be less steep than the
upstroke. The analysis section was the same as the one taken for the sloshing-mode
calculations.
==PAGE:90==
80
4 Experimental work
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-20
-10
0
10
20
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-20
0
20
40
(a) η in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-40
-20
0
20
40
(b) η in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-40
-20
0
20
40
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-50
0
50
(c) η in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-50
0
50
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-100
-50
0
50
100
(d) η in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.040.
Figure 4.58: Harmonic analysis of η in four wave cases. The residual of the least-
squares fit is displayed as Res.
Then, the piston-mode response amplitude was calculated from Equation 4.14,
as described in 4.3.3. Figure 4.59a shows the dimensional piston-mode response am-
plitudes for the 90 tests. While Figure 4.59b shows the dimensionless piston-mode
response amplitudes, where ξ7 is normalized by the incoming wave amplitude.
A
decrease in ξ7 is noticed near the resonant period, but is less evident than in the
two-way configuration. Even though the numerical model does not take into account
the mirror effects from the flume, the experimental results are seen to be very close
to the expected results. Thus, the numerical model could be under predicting the
piston-mode response.
A large variability in the results is noticed, specially in less steeper waves and close
to resonance. This could be also due to a poor control in the flap motion, causing a
variability in the damping force from one test to another. However the trend of the
experimental results is seen to be in good agreement with the numerical model.
==PAGE:91==
4.5 One-way energy capture, venting on the up-stroke
81
It can be seen in Figure 4.59b, that close to resonance and in less steep waves, the
internal surface elevation rises between 1.6 and 1.8 times the incoming wave amplitude.
In steeper waves, the internal surface elevation rises only between 1.3 and 1.4 times
the incoming wave amplitude. While in longer waves, the wave steepness does not
have that much influence in the internal surface elevation. In chapter 5, the response
amplitude is compared with that in the two-way configuration.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
(a) Piston-mode response amplitude.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
(b) Piston-mode response amplitude, normal-
ized by the incoming wave amplitude.
Figure 4.59: Measured and predicted internal piston-mode response amplitude in the
one-way energy capture configuration, venting in the upstroke.
4.5.3.4
Pressure drop across the chamber orifice
The differential pressure inside the chamber was measured to further calculate the
pressure drop across the chamber orifice. The calculations were done as described in
4.4.3, doing a harmonic fit to an extracted section within the same time window as
in the analysis for a+ and a−.
Then, the pressure amplitude was plotted for the 90 tests in Figure 4.60. The rise
in the piston-mode near the resonant period, creates a large flux through the orifice
during the downstroke and an increase in the dimensionless pressure drop across the
chamber orifice.
In longer waves though, ξ7 does not increase that much in relation with the incre-
ment of T, so the air flux remains in the same order of magnitude than in the waves
with a T near resonance. Thus, the pressure drop amplitude during downstroke, does
not increase that much with longer waves, causing a drop in the dimensionless p as
the T increases.
In waves with H/L = 0.040 and T > 1.15, the internal surface elevation fell below
the bottom opening of the chamber, causing an undesired ventilation of the chamber
and increasing the vented time. This happened also in the tests with H/L = 0.025 and
==PAGE:92==
82
4 Experimental work
T = 1.64. This behaviour is reflected in a reduction of the pressure drop amplitude
for longer waves.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
(a) Pressure amplitude in the chamber.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
(b) Dimensionless pressure amplitude.
Figure 4.60: Measured pressure amplitude in the chamber in a one-way configuration,
venting in the upstroke. ρa = 1.225 kg/m3 and A is the incoming wave amplitude.
A time scale of the pressure inside the chamber is plotted together with η in
Figure 4.61. As expected, the pressure is equal to that in the atmosphere during the
full upstroke, i.e. when the chamber is venting. Then, the pressure inside the chamber
remains negative (in relation with the atmosphere) during the full downstroke, i.e.
when energy is captured and the valves are closed.
Figure 4.61 shows the experimental data, smoothed only through the SG filter.
This was done to have a better feeling on the valve performance and its timing to
seal during the downstroke. Generally speaking, the valve behaved sufficiently well
for a passive system. When the internal surface starts to rise, the air flow pushes
the flap and the internal chamber pressure has a minor positive increment in relation
to the atmospheric. Then the pressure fluctuates over an atmospheric pressure value
while the flap is open, so the damping force is expected to be close to the minimum.
Finally, when the internal surface rises to its maximum point, the valve closes and
remains sealed during the full downstroke. The time between ηmax and when the
pressure starts to drop is calculated to be between 0.03 and 0.05 s.
In the tests with T > 1.15 s, a small fluctuation is noticed in p at the same time
when η drops to an elevation of η = −50 mm. This elevation is where the bottom
opening was located, so when the internal surface elevation fell below that point, an
undesired ventilation happens in the chamber. This causes a decay in the air flux
forced through the turbine and subsequently a decrease in the power absorption.
==PAGE:93==
4.5 One-way energy capture, venting on the up-stroke
83
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
(a) Test with H/L = 0.025, T = 0.82 s
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
-0.18
-0.16
-0.14
-0.12
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
(b) Test with H/L = 0.040, T = 0.82 s
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
(c) Test with H/L = 0.025, T = 1.64 s
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
-0.2
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
(d) Test with H/L = 0.040, T = 1.64 s
Figure 4.61: Measured p and η, indicating the intersection points of p = 0 kPa with
ηmax and ηmin.
4.5.3.5
Power absorption
Finally, the air flux was calculated in order to estimate the mean absorbed power.
Q(t) was calculated the same way as in 4.4.3, with Equation 4.20. Then, W(t) was
calculated from the measured pressure in the chamber and the flux in the chamber,
forming W(t) and making an harmonic fit over an analysis section defined by exactly
five cycles but within the time window defined in the analysis for ξ7 and ξ8.
Figure 4.62 shows the harmonic fit made over W(t). Unlike the two-way configu-
ration, it can be seen that the device is capturing energy during only half of the cycle.
However, if the plots are compared to those in Figure 4.48a, it can be seen that the
maximum W(t) in the one-way configuration is around two times the maximum W(t)
in the two-way configuration.
==PAGE:94==
84
4 Experimental work
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
1
2
3
4
5
10-4
26.5
27
27.5
28
28.5
29
-2
0
2
4
6
10-4
(a) T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
5
10
10-4
26.5
27
27.5
28
28.5
29
29.5
-5
0
5
10
10-4
(b) T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040
Figure 4.62: Harmonic analysis on the absorbed power in the two cases closest to
resonance.
The mean absorbed power by a single chamber is calculated as described in 4.4.3
from Equation 4.21. The results from each test are shown in Figure 4.63a, where
a clear decrease in the absorbed power can be seen in the tests with T > 1.31.
This decrease is related to the fluctuations of the pressure inside the chamber when η
dropped below the bottom opening, leading to an undesired ventilation of the chamber
through the bottom opening.
A large variability is noticed in the absorbed power in longer waves. This vari-
ability is much larger than that in the two-way configuration, so it could be because
of the poor control on the flap motion.
==PAGE:95==
4.6 One-way energy capture, venting on the down-stroke
85
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
(a) Mean absorbed power over one cycle of
oscillation by the single chamber.
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
(b) Capture width ratio of one double cham-
ber based on the length 0.15 m.
Figure 4.63: Mean absorbed power by the single chamber and CWR of one double
chamber capturing energy only in the downstroke.
The experimental results for the CWR of one double vented chamber are plotted in
Figure 4.63b, together with the expected results from the numerical model. Similarly
to the two-way configuration, the numerical model seems to be over predicting the
results close to resonance. Away from the peak, in longer waves, the CWR is also less
than expected due to the undesired ventilation of the chamber through the bottom
end opening.
For the one-way configuration, with the chamber venting in the upstroke and
capturing energy in the downstroke, it can be concluded that: in waves with T/T0 =
1.00 and H/L = 0.025, one double chamber would capture around 120% of the
maximum available power.
While in waves with H/L = 0.040, the double OWC
would capture around 100% of the maximum available power passing through the
chamber.
4.6
One-way energy capture, venting on the
down-stroke
Following the experimental work plan described in Figure 4.1, the remaining configu-
ration was the vented OWC, but venting in the downstroke and capturing energy in
the upstroke. Thus, another valve system was designed but based in the same princi-
ple as the one used in 4.5. From now on, this configuration will be referred as outflow
configuration, since the energy would be captured through an outflow turbine.
==PAGE:96==
86
4 Experimental work
4.6.1
Valve system
As described in 4.5, the rise of the internal surface causes positive air pressure inside
the chamber and, opposite to the configuration in 4.5, the energy will be captured
through the PTO system. During the second half of the cycle, the water column falls,
causing a negative pressure (with respect to atmospheric) inside the chamber. The
negative pressure will subsequently open the valves and the air in the atmosphere will
be sucked through them instead of the PTO.
The conditions are similar to those in 4.5, so the same materials were used. The
difference was that the flaps were mounted in the inside part of the balsa wood cover,
opening to the inside when the air was sucked. The NBR rubber sheet used to seal
the valve when closed, was attached also to the inside part of the valve, facing the
flap.
Similar to that in 4.5, a second configuration was built in the separate box. The
flap was attached to the squared opening in the box, which was subsequently con-
nected to the chamber through the PVC flexible hose. The flaps were also mounted
at an angle to have the gravity in favour of the flap closing, improving the air tight-
ness. Figure 4.64 shows a schematic drawing of an inhalation valve mounted in an
aluminum manifold for a better understanding. The valve mounted in the box was
based in the same principle and design.
(a) Lateral view of a valve with flap open
(b) Front view of a valve with flap closed
Figure 4.64: One-way inhalation valve mounted on an aluminum manifold.
The ventilation area was also modified through different valve configurations. In
the first one (Figure 4.65a), two valves were coupled to the chamber and the third
manifold was kept sealed, having a ventilation area of 0.33Si. Then, the third valve
was coupled to the chamber for a ventilation area of 0.50Si (Figure 4.65b).
==PAGE:97==
4.6 One-way energy capture, venting on the down-stroke
87
(a) One-way inhalation valves with a ventila-
tion area of aflap = 0.33Si.
(b) One-way inhalation valves with a ventila-
tion area of aflap = 0.50Si.
Figure 4.65: One-way inhalation valves mounted on the aluminum manifolds.
Afterwards, the plastic box was used for a third configuration with a ventilation
area of 0.75Si (Figure 4.66a).
The last configuration was made in the same box,
having a ventilation area of 1.0Si (Figure 4.66b).
(a) One-way inhalation valve with a ventila-
tion area of aflap = 0.75Si.
(b) One-way inhalation valves with a ventila-
tion area of aflap = 1.00Si.
Figure 4.66: One-way inhalation valve built in the separate plastic box.
==PAGE:98==
88
4 Experimental work
At this point of the project, the last valve configuration was more likely to be
used. This, to have an equal comparison of the inflow and outflow vented chamber
configurations. However, the feeling on the internal surface response was still needed.
4.6.2
Experimental measurements
4.6.2.1
Level of uncertainty
The level of uncertainty in the WG measurements was defined as described in 4.2.2.1,
from the two calibration curves obtained at the beginning and at the end of each
session. The two worst case scenarios are shown in Figure 4.67.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
-0.12
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
(a) Calibration curve in WG4 for tests
performed on July 03, 2020.
T1 = 19.9°C,
T2 = 20.2°C
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
-0.12
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
(b) Calibration curve in WG7 for tests
performed on July 08, 2020.
T1 = 20.1°C,
T2 = 20.3°C
Figure 4.67: Comparison of calibration curves during two sessions. T1 is the temper-
ature measured at the beginning and T2 the temperature at the end of each session.
4.6.2.2
Wavemaker stroke
As in previous tests, the wavemaker stroke was monitored to have control over the
waves in the flume. Figure 4.68a shows the relation between the desired S0 and the
measured S0.
==PAGE:99==
4.6 One-way energy capture, venting on the down-stroke
89
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
(a) Desired and measured S0 relation.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
(b) Desired and measured stroke T.
Figure 4.68: Relation between desired and measured S0 and T of the wavemaker
during the tests with a one-way orifice, venting in the downstroke.
4.6.3
Calculations & Results
4.6.3.1
Ventilation area
Following the same procedure as in 4.5, a first set of tests was done with the different
valve configurations. The tests were performed with the same conditions: T = 0.82
s, H/L = 0.025 and T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040.
Then, the piston-mode was calculated as described in 4.4.3 and plotted as a func-
tion of the flap area. Figure 4.69a shows the dimensionless piston-mode in each valve
configuration. The response in the two-way configuration is plotted as reference with
a aflap/Si = 0. The free undamped response is also plotted with aflap/Si = 1. The
piston-mode response is seen to behave very similar to that in Figure 4.54a, where
the chamber was venting in the upstroke. ξ7 increases to a maximum value in a valve
configuration of aflap/Si = 1, but it is also seen that the curve stabilizes in a value
of aflap/Si = 0.60.
The pressure amplitude inside the chamber is also plotted in Figure 4.69b. Here,
it can be seen that even though the flux is greater in the valve configuration where
aflap/Si = 1, the pressure amplitude is less.
==PAGE:100==
90
4 Experimental work
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
(a) Dimensionless piston-mode response with
different valve configurations.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0.32
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.4
0.42
0.44
0.46
(b) Dimensionless pressure drop amplitude re-
sponse with different valve configurations
Figure 4.69: Piston-mode response and pressure amplitude inside the chamber.
Afterwards, the power absorption in each valve configuration was assessed by
calculating the mean absorbed power over one cycle of oscillation as described in
4.4.3.
The results are shown in Figure 4.70a, where an increase in the absorbed
power is seen for the valves mounted in the manifolds. However, the absorbed power
decreases with the valves attached to the separate box.
Finally, the CWR is plotted in Figure 4.70b as a function of the different valve
configuration. The same behaviour as in Figure 4.70a is obviously seen. A decrease in
the CWR is noticed with the valves attached to the box. However, the CWR during
the upstroke in a vented chamber is seen to be very similar to that in the two-way
orifice configuration during the full cycle.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
(a) Mean absorbed power with different valve
configurations.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
(b) CWR of the single chamber with different
valve configurations.
Figure 4.70: Absorbed power by a single chamber with different valve configurations.
==PAGE:101==
4.6 One-way energy capture, venting on the down-stroke
91
As previously mentioned, the complete test matrix was performed in a valve con-
figuration with aflap/Si. This, to have an equal comparison with the inflow configu-
ration.
4.6.3.2
Sloshing-mode
Once the test matrix in Table 4.2 was run, the sloshing-mode was calculated as
described in 4.4.3.
The harmonic analysis made to a−in four tests is shown in
Figure 4.71. The time window considered for the analysis was the same as in 4.4.3
and 4.5.3. The natural period of the first sloshing-mode was also considered for the
least-squares fit.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-10
-5
0
5
10
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-10
-5
0
5
10
(a) a−in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-20
-10
0
10
20
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-20
-10
0
10
20
(b) a−in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
-10
0
10
20
(c) a−in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-20
-10
0
10
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-20
-10
0
10
20
(d) a−in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.040.
Figure 4.71: Harmonic analysis of a−in four wave cases. The residual of the least-
squares fit is displayed as Res.
Then, |ξ8| was calculated with Equation 4.16 for each test. The results are shown
==PAGE:102==
92
4 Experimental work
in Figure 4.72a and they are seen to be in the same order of magnitude as those from
the inflow configuration. The variability in the results is also similar to that found in
the inflow configuration.
The dimensionless sloshing-mode is shown in Figure 4.72b, where the large vari-
ability is also noticed. The experimental results are significantly larger than expected.
However, a similar behaviour to that noticed in the inflow configuration is seen in the
results when capturing energy in the upstroke.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
10-3
(a) sloshing-mode response amplitude.
0.5
1
1.5
2
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
(b) sloshing-mode response amplitude, nor-
malized by the incoming wave amplitude.
Figure 4.72: Measured and predicted internal transverse sloshing-mode response am-
plitude in the one-way energy capture configuration, venting in the downstroke.
4.6.3.3
Piston-mode
The piston-mode response was then calculated as described in 4.4.3. A harmonic fit
was made in all the tests as described in 4.2.2.3, including up to the 6th harmonic in
the reconstructed η. The behaviour of the internal surface elevation was similar to
that noticed in the inflow configuration. However, in all wave cases the contribution
from the second harmonic is seen to be larger, close to resonance a contribution from
the third harmonic is noticed. Opposite to the inflow configuration, the trough of
the surface elevation is seen to drop, being steeper than the crest. This behaviour is
more evident in the wave cases with a T near resonance and it is caused by larger
damping force during the upstroke, when the valves are sealed.
==PAGE:103==
4.6 One-way energy capture, venting on the down-stroke
93
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-20
-10
0
10
20
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-40
-20
0
20
(a) η in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-40
-20
0
20
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
(b) η in T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-40
-20
0
20
40
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-50
0
50
(c) η in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.025.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-50
0
50
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-100
-50
0
50
100
(d) η in T = 1.64 s, H/L = 0.040.
Figure 4.73: Harmonic analysis of η in four wave cases. The residual of the least-
squares fit is displayed as Res.
Afterwards, the first harmonic amplitude is extracted and |ξ7| is calculated for each
case. Figure 4.74a shows the results of the piston-mode response amplitude in each
test, while Figure 4.74b shows the same results but normalized by the incoming wave
amplitude. |ξ7| is substantially increased in the outflow configuration near resonance,
rising around 1.8 times the incoming A in waves with H/L = 0.025 and around 1.5
times in waves with H/L = 0.040. The numerical model is seen to be under predicting
the results close to resonance, but away from the peak the agreement is seen to be
good.
In this outflow configuration, the downstroke was vented and the damping mini-
mized during that half cycle. Therefore the η fell to an even lower position than the
two other configurations, causing that in waves with H/L = 0.040 and T > 0.98 s,
ηmin was below −50 mm which is where the bottom end opening is located. The
same happened in waves with H/L = 0.025 but with T > 1.47 s.
==PAGE:104==
94
4 Experimental work
The variability in the experimental results is still present.
In some cases, the
difference between two results of the same wave condition is around 5 mm. However,
a trend in the results is well shaped and a pattern in the behaviour can be followed.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
(a) Piston-mode response amplitude.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
(b) Piston-mode response amplitude, normal-
ized by the incoming wave amplitude.
Figure 4.74: Measured and predicted internal piston-mode response amplitude in the
one-way energy capture configuration, venting in the downstroke.
4.6.3.4
Pressure drop across the chamber orifice
The pressure drop across the chamber orifice was calculated as described in 4.4.3.
After the harmonic fit was made over the analysis section, the pressure amplitude
was plotted in Figure 4.75. In waves with a period close to resonance, the flux is large
enough to increase the pressure inside the chamber.
==PAGE:105==
4.6 One-way energy capture, venting on the down-stroke
95
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
(a) Pressure amplitude in the chamber.
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
(b) Dimensionless pressure amplitude.
Figure 4.75: Measured pressure amplitude in the chamber in a one-way configuration,
venting in the downstroke. ρa = 1.225 kg/m3 and A is the incoming wave amplitude.
In order to understand the behaviour of the valves and the pressure inside the
chamber, a time scale of the measured p was plotted together with a time scale of η.
The results of four cases are shown in Figure 4.76, where a vertical line was plotted
in ηmax and ηminto show the intersection points with p.
As expected, the pressure inside the chamber arises to a positive value (in relation
with that in the atmosphere) during the full upstroke. Then, the surface elevation falls,
the valves open, and the pressure inside the chamber fluctuates over an atmospheric
pressure value.
When the surface elevation falls to ηmin, i.e. at the trough, the pressure inside the
chamber remains at p = 0 kPa for a fraction of time, even when the surface elevation
starts to rise. The fraction of time between ηmin and when the pressure starts to
rise, has been calculated to be around 0.08 s, which is greater than that found in the
inflow configuration.
==PAGE:106==
96
4 Experimental work
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
(a) Test with H/L = 0.025, T = 0.82 s
28.5
29
29.5
30
30.5
31
31.5
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
(b) Test with H/L = 0.040, T = 0.82 s
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
(c) Test with H/L = 0.025, T = 1.64 s
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
(d) Test with H/L = 0.040, T = 1.64 s
Figure 4.76: Measured p and η, indicating the intersection points of p = 0 kPa with
ηmax and ηmin.
There are three important points to emphasize in the plots showed in Figure 4.76:
First, if the time scale of η is individually analyzed, it can be seen that the upstroke
is less steep than the downstroke. This reduces directly the flux (or flow velocity)
through the chamber during the upstroke, influencing directly the capture of energy.
The previous claim is explained by the existence of a larger damping force during the
upstroke, when the valves are closed.
Secondly, in the two wave cases which are closer to resonance (Figure 4.76a and
4.76b), a sudden reduction in the steepness of the upstroke can be seen in the second
part of it. This fluctuations will also have a direct influence in the power absorption
during the upstroke.
Finally in longer waves, the internal surface elevation fell below the bottom end
opening during the downstroke, causing an increase in the ventilation time. If Fig-
ure 4.76c and 4.76d are analyzed, it can be seen that the pressure starts to rise at
the same point in time when η rises above -50 mm. This reduces the air flow forced
==PAGE:107==
4.6 One-way energy capture, venting on the down-stroke
97
through the turbine and therefore the power absorption in longer waves.
4.6.3.5
Power absorption
Finally, the flux is calculated with the time derivative of the measured chamber
elevation, as discussed in 4.4.3. Then, the instantaneous absorbed power is formed
by W(t) = p(t) · Q(t) and a harmonic fit is made to a section with exactly five cycles.
The two cases which are closer to resonance, are shown in Figure 4.77. It can
be seen that, unlike the inflow configuration, the chamber is capturing energy during
the upstroke only.
However, it is noticed that the peaks of W(t) in this outflow
configuration, are around 2 times the peaks found in Figure 4.48a for the two-way
configuration.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
1
2
3
4
10-4
27
27.5
28
28.5
29
29.5
30
-2
0
2
4
10-4
(a) T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.025
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
2
4
6
8
10-4
27
27.5
28
28.5
29
29.5
-5
0
5
10
10-4
(b) T = 0.82 s, H/L = 0.040
Figure 4.77: Harmonic analysis on the absorbed power in the two cases closest to
resonance.
It is also noticed that the power absorption is not as smooth as in the inflow
configuration. A second lower peak can be seen in Figure 4.77a and 4.77b. This drop
in W(t) might be related to a decrease in the flux during the upstroke, which is at
the same time related to the reduction in the steepness of η noticed in Figure 4.76a
and 4.76b before reaching the crest.
As discussed earlier, due to the damping force during the upstroke, the surface
elevation is less steep during the upstroke, which reduces the flux through the chamber
and subsequently diminishes the power absorption. This behaviour is more evident
in longer waves, so a reduction in the power absorption is noticed.
The mean absorbed power is shown in Figure 4.78a. Similar to what happened
in the inflow configuration, a reduction in the absorbed power is noticed in longer
waves. This is caused by the undesired ventilation through the bottom opening when
η < −50 mm, which happens in more cases than in the inflow configuration.
==PAGE:108==
98
4 Experimental work
In Figure 4.78b, the CWR for one double chamber is plotted together with the
expected values. Similar to the two other configurations, the numerical model is seen
to be over predicting the results.
For the one-way configuration, venting in the downstroke, it can be concluded
that near resonance, in waves with H/L = 0.025, one double chamber would capture
around 105% of the maximum available power. While in waves with H/L = 0.040,
it would capture around 85% of the maximum available power passing through the
chamber.
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
(a) Mean absorbed power over one cycle of
oscillation by the single chamber.
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
(b) Capture width ratio of one double cham-
ber based on the length 0.15 m.
Figure 4.78: Mean absorbed power by the single chamber and CWR of one double
chamber capturing energy only in the upstroke.
==PAGE:109==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
The aim of the project was to assess the ability of the OWC scale model to capture
energy during the downstroke or upstroke only and compare the results with the
conventional two-way energy capture. In chapter 4, the experimental work has been
explained and the procedure of the calculations and results obtained in each configu-
ration have been analyzed individually. Hence, in this chapter, a general discussion
and comparison between the three configurations will be made, along with potential
benefits of one-way energy capture.
As it was previously explained, two factors define the power absorption of the
chamber: the flux through the chamber and the pressure drop across the chamber
orifice, both depend directly on the internal surface elevation response. Therefore, it is
important to first compare the piston mode response amplitude in each configuration.
In the plot shown in Figure 5.1, a comparison of the dimensionless |ξ7| in the three
different configurations is charted.
In the two-way configuration, the piston-mode response amplitude in waves with
H/L = 0.025 is in the same order of magnitude as the incoming wave amplitude.
While in waves with H/L = 0.040, |ξ7| is around 0.8A. This response is reached at
resonance and it is seen to be constant in longer waves. In waves with a T close to
resonance though, the walls of the flume are seen to have an influence over ξ7, reason
why the experimental results might not be as expected.
In both one-way configurations, the damping force is substantially minimized dur-
ing half cycle (downstroke or upstroke). Thus, the piston-mode response amplitude
was expected to increase. In waves with a T close to resonance, |ξ7| is seen to be larger
in relation to that in the two-way configuration. In both wave steepness conditions
and in both one-way configurations, |ξ7| is around 80% larger than in the two-way
configuration. In longer waves though, the difference is seen to diminish, but it is
still present.
==PAGE:110==
100
5 Discussion
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Figure 5.1: Piston-mode response amplitude in the three configurations. The orange
line represents the numerical results of Two-way, H/L = 0.040, the blue line: numer-
ical two-way, H/L = 0.025, the yellow dotted line: numerical one-way, H/L = 0.040
and the purple dotted line: numerical one-way, H/L = 0.025.
However, the amplitude is not the only factor that influences the power absorp-
tion. It is necessary to analyze the surface elevation behaviour in time in order to
understand how the flux changes from one configuration to another. To do this, the
η of the three configurations is plotted together. Figure 5.2 shows the comparison of
the two cases closer to resonance and the two longest wave cases.
In Figure 5.2a and 5.2b, it is evident how the internal surface amplitude is in-
creased in both vented configurations. Then, if the inflow configuration is analyzed
first (black line), it is seen that its ηmax rises to a higher elevation than the other two
configurations. This is what was expected, since the damping force is minimized dur-
ing the upstroke. In the second half of the cycle (dowstroke), η drops with a larger
steepness than the one seen in the one-way configuration and to a lower elevation.
This creates a larger flux, which will subsequently create a larger pressure drop and a
larger power absorption. The steepness of the downstroke in the inflow configuration
is seen to be even similar to the one seen in the outflow configuration during the
downtroke, even though the latter is undamped in this half cycle.
Looking now into the outflow configuration (magenta line), it is seen that during
the vented half cycle (downstroke), ηmin drops to the lowest elevation. In the second
half of the cycle (upstroke), ηmax rises to a higher elevation than the two-way config-
uration ηmax. This should cause a larger power absorption than that in the two-way
==PAGE:111==
5 Discussion
101
configuration. However, the damping force during the upstroke, causes some fluctu-
ations and a reduction in the surface elevation steepness, causing a decrease in the
flux and subsequently a reduction in the power absorption.
In Figure 5.2c and 5.2d, it is seen that the difference between the three configura-
tions in ηmax and ηmin is much less than in the cases close to resonance. Apart from
this, if the inflow configuration (black line) is analyzed together with the two-way
configuration, it is noticed that the steepness of the two surface elevations during
the downstroke is very similar. The same happens with the outflow configuration
(magenta line) but during the upstroke. Thus, the power absorption in both one-way
configurations for longer waves should be less than that in the two-way configuration.
29.2
29.4
29.6
29.8
30
30.2
30.4
30.6
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
(a) Test with H/L = 0.025, T = 0.82 s
29.2
29.4
29.6
29.8
30
30.2
30.4
30.6
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
(b) Test with H/L = 0.040, T = 0.82 s
17
17.5
18
18.5
19
19.5
20
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
(c) Test with H/L = 0.025, T = 1.64 s
17
17.5
18
18.5
19
19.5
20
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
(d) Test with H/L = 0.040, T = 1.64 s
Figure 5.2: Comparison of internal surface elevation in the three configurations.
Now, the pressure inside the chamber in the three configurations is plotted to-
gether and shown in Figure 5.3. In the two cases close to resonance, it is evident how
==PAGE:112==
102
5 Discussion
the magnitude of the pressure increases in both one-way configurations. In the case
with H/L = 0.040, the magnitude of the negative pressure in the inflow configuration
is larger than the magnitude of the positive pressure in the outflow configuration.
This should result in a higher power absorption for the inflow configuration. The
difference in the pressure drop might be due to the previously explained differences
about the flux behaviour in each condition but it might be also influenced by how
well were the valves sealed during the energy capture half cycle.
In longer waves, the magnitude of the pressure in both one-way configurations is
much lower than the one seen in the two-way configuration. This will obviously result
in a lower power absorption in long waves for a vented OWC. The reason for this is
the undesired ventilation through the bottom end opening when the internal surface
elevation falls below -50 mm.
29.2
29.4
29.6
29.8
30
30.2
30.4
30.6
-0.1
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
(a) Test with H/L = 0.025, T = 0.82 s
29.2
29.4
29.6
29.8
30
30.2
30.4
30.6
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(b) Test with H/L = 0.040, T = 0.82 s
17
17.5
18
18.5
19
19.5
20
-0.15
-0.1
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
(c) Test with H/L = 0.025, T = 1.64 s
17
17.5
18
18.5
19
19.5
20
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
(d) Test with H/L = 0.040, T = 1.64 s
Figure 5.3: Comparison of the pressure inside the chamber in the three configurations.
Afterwards, the CWR calculated in all tests, is plotted and shown in Figure 5.4,
==PAGE:113==
5 Discussion
103
the aim is to compare the power absorption in the three configurations. First it is
important to say that for both one-way configurations, the experimental results were
lower than expected, even though the piston-mode response amplitude behaved as
expected. Thus, the decrease in the power absorption might be due to flaws in the
valve system during the energy capture half cycle.
In waves with a T close to T0, it is seen that the inflow configuration (one-way,
down) has the highest CWR for both wave steepness cases. The outflow configuration
has a CWR similar to that in the two-way configuration for waves with H/L = 0.040.
In waves with H/L = 0.025, the outflow configuration captures more energy than the
two-way configuration, but less than the inflow configuration. In longer waves though,
both one-way configurations capture less energy than the two-way configuration.
These results confirm the previously explained about the behaviour of the flux
through the chamber in the different configurations. In the outflow configuration,
the damping force during the upstroke induces some fluctuations into the internal
η, which diminish the surface elevation velocity and subsequently the flux through
the chamber, reducing the power absorption. While in the inflow configuration, the
downstroke surface elevation is seen to be much smoother, enhancing the flux through
the chamber, which increases the power absorption.
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Figure 5.4: Comparison of the capture width ratio of one double chamber in the three
configurations.
The experiments in this project showed a better performance in the inflow con-
figuration, venting the airflow during the upstroke and capturing energy during the
==PAGE:114==
104
5 Discussion
downstroke. However, other factors should be taken into account to make a complete
assessment of the three configurations.
The main feature of a one-way OWC is the implementation of a uni-directional
turbine instead of a bi-directional turbine. In [23] an assessment of the three different
turbine configurations was made through CFD simulations, the thre configurations
were: (1) a two-way OWC with a bi-directional turbine, (2) a one-way OWC with an
inflow turbine and (3) a one-way OWC with an ouflow turbine. The results show that
for a vented OWC, the inflow turbine yielded a better performance than the outflow
turbine and obtained comparable power to a bi-directional configuration. However,
the outflow turbine demonstrated some advantages over the inflow turbine, such as
smaller size in full scale, higher backflow prevention and less sensitivity to RPM
variations. The above, gives another reason to lean towards an inflow configuration,
but the features of an outflow turbine should not be disregarded.
According to this project experimental results, the CWR in one double chamber
would be optimized from 0.80 to 1.00 in waves with H/L = 0.025 and from 0.93 to 1.20
in waves with H/L = 0.040 with a T close to T0. This represents an optimization of
25%-30% in power absorption if an inflow uni-directional turbine is used instead of a
bi-directional. This CWR optimization, added to the presumable better performance
of a uni-directional over a bi-radial turbine, should give encouraging results for a
significant reduction of the levelized cost of energy of the WEC device.
According to [3], the cost of the PTO in the KNSwing, represents between 8%-
10% of the CAPEX. The substitution of the bi-directional turbine for a less robust
turbine, would have a direct impact on the above. Furthermore, according to [2], a
20% increase in the efficiency of the air turbine, would decrease the cost of energy by
roughly the same amount.
==PAGE:115==
CHAPTER 6
Further work &
recommendations
During the project, a passive one-way valve system was designed to investigate one-
way energy capture. Several valve configurations were tested and even though they
worked well enough to investigate the internal surface response, some improvements
could have been made to achieve better results.
During the tests with different valve configurations, it was noticed that multiple
small valves worked better than one big flap. The leakage on the valves mounted on
the manifolds was noticed to be less and the closing time was also faster. Placing the
valves directly onto the chamber would also bring benefits for the flap sealing and air
tightness, it would also be closer to what could be done in the full scale model.
Looking at Figure 4.55b, it is noticed that the CWR in the inflow configuration
reached a maximum value with a valve configuration where aflap = 0.80Si. Thus, a
valve system with this ventilation area should be enough.
With these recommendations, a proposal is made in Figure 6.1, where multiple
valves are placed in only one wall of the chamber (facing the flume).
Given the
geometry of the KNSwing device, this would be the only face of the chamber where
valves could be placed. Eight valves are proposed with a total area of 96 cm2, which is
the 80% of the internal surface area. The still water level and the maximum internal
surface elevation are drawn as a reference.
The max ξ7 taken into account was
the maximum response obtained in the experiments in this project with the chamber
venting in the upstroke. An angle of 15°between the flaps and the wall of the chamber
ought to be enough for the opening of the valves, considering a weight similar to the
one used in this project.
An active valve system could also bring some benefits. In a passive valve system,
the flaps are open by the air flow and the effective ventilation area is less than the
desired. This area reduction might still be inducing some damping to the piston-
mode response. Thus, an active valve system could be designed to open completely
the valves and subsequently increase the ventilation area. However, an active valve
system could bring a considerable amount of cost to the full scale model.
Furthermore, an alternative to increase the chamber height and lower the bottom
end opening should be evaluated.
This, to increase the energy capture in longer
waves.
==PAGE:116==
106
6 Further work & recommendations
Figure 6.1: Schematic drawing of the proposal for one-way exhalation valves attached
directly to the chamber.
Apart from the experimental work, an assessment through CFD simulations could
clarify the performance of the valve system and optimize it. The air flow when the
chamber is venting, should be directed entirely through the valves. Even though, vi-
sual inspection during the experiments in this project confirmed that with a aflap/Si >
0.75, no air was flowing through the orifice, the uncertainty in this matter was high.
Finally, air compressibility is an important matter when testing OWC scale mod-
els. On full scale OWC devices, the pressure and volume of air can be large enough
to create air compressibility inside the chamber. The air compression and decom-
pression process inside the chamber involves that the density and temperature of the
air inside the chamber are different than those outside, causing a power loss during
the inhalation and exhalation processes which could be of a significant magnitude in
some cases. These effects are not normally taken into account when testing OWC
devices at small scale models, leading to unrealistic over estimations of the WEC
performance when upscaling the results [34].
==PAGE:117==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In the first part of this thesis, the accuracy of the wave gauges used during the project
was experimentally investigated and characterized. These wave gauges were used later
to measure the water surface elevation in the flume and in the OWC scale model.
It has been demonstrated that the pulse output generated through the WG USB
hub induced a time delay of 0.329 s into the DAQ. This caused a time delay when the
WG measurements were synchronized with other devices. Regarding the accuracy in
the WG measurements, it was established a maximum instantaneous discrepancy of
2 mm but the difference in fitted averages was of 0.7 mm, between the WG and laser
displacement device measurements.
Afterwards, the project was focused on the experimental investigation of two-way
and one-way energy capture by an OWC wave energy device. The experimental work
demonstrated that in tests with a T close to resonance the piston-mode response
amplitude increased by around 80 % in both H/L tested. This, by minimizing the
damping force every half cycle through a passive valve system that worked well enough
for the scope of this project.
By increasing the piston-mode response amplitude, the CWR in the inflow config-
uration was optimized by 30% in waves with H/L = 0.025 and by 25% in waves with
H/L = 0.040. In the outflow configuration, the CWR was optimized a bit less, by
13% in waves with H/L = 0.025 and it was very similar in waves with H/L = 0.040.
In longer waves though, the power absorption was reduced even though the piston-
mode response amplitude was increased. This was due to an undesired ventilation
of the chamber through the bottom end opening when the internal surface elevation
fell below z < −50 mm, which is the top edge position of the chamber opening.
This happened in more wave cases for the outflow configuration than for the inflow
configuration.
It can be concluded that an inflow configuration, i.e. a one-way OWC venting on
the up-stroke and capturing energy on the down-stroke is an encouraging alternative
to optimize the CWR of the OWC wave energy device and subsequently reduce its
levelized cost of energy.
==PAGE:118==
108
==PAGE:119==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
(a) Wave gauges USB hub
(b) National Instruments DAQ device
==PAGE:120==
110
A Appendix
(a) Waveform generator device
(b) DC Power supply.
(a) Picture of the slider at the bottom posi-
tion.
(b) Picture of the slider at the top position.
Figure A.3: Pictures of the laser pointing at the reference verticality point.
==PAGE:121==
A Appendix
111
(a) Draw-wire sensor.
(b) Draw-wire sensor installed in the cage.
(a) Piston type wavemaker.
(b) Wave absorber in flume end.
==PAGE:122==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
2800 KGS. LYNGBY
DENMARK
R. READ
J. BRITO
DETAIL DRAWING
LINMOT SUPPORT
APPROVED BY
CREATED BY
DOCUMENT TYPE
PROJECT
2
MILD STEEL
±0.1°
±0.1
QUANTITY
MATERIAL
ANGULAR TOLERANCE
LINEAR TOLERANCE
A3
1:2
1 OF 1
10/02/20
ORIGINAL SIZE
ORIGINAL SCALE
SHEET NUMBER
DATE OF ISSUE
TITLE
DRAWING NUMBER
REVISION
MOTOR SUPPORT PLATES
2020-001
A
ALL DIMENSIONS IN MM
20
100
127
175
202
316
336
30
72
118
160
190
4 HOLES
DRILL THROUGH Ø 13.5
8 HOLES
DRILL THROUGH Ø 9.0
5
5
==PAGE:123==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
2800 KGS. LYNGBY
DENMARK
R. READ
J. BRITO
DETAIL DRAWING
LINMOT SUPPORT
APPROVED BY
CREATED BY
DOCUMENT TYPE
PROJECT
1
PVC
±0.1°
±0.1
QUANTITY
MATERIAL
ANGULAR TOLERANCE
LINEAR TOLERANCE
A3
1:1
1 OF 1
10/02/20
ORIGINAL SIZE
ORIGINAL SCALE
SHEET NUMBER
DATE OF ISSUE
TITLE
DRAWING NUMBER
REVISION
W.G. SUPPORT PLATE
2020-002
A
ALL DIMENSIONS IN MM
35.0
42.0
88.0
95.0
130.0
4 THROUGH HOLES
DRILL AND TAP M8 X 1.25
32.0
55.5
64.0
2 HOLES
DRILL THROUGH Ø
13.5
CBORE Ø 19.25 X
12.5 DEEP
15
15
8.5
==PAGE:124==
35.0
42.0
88.0
95.0
130.0
4 HOLES
DRILL THROUGH Ø 9.0
32.0
55.5
154.0
2 HOLES
DRILL THROUGH Ø
19.25
3
3
8.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
2800 KGS. LYNGBY
DENMARK
R. READ
J. BRITO
DETAIL DRAWING
LASER MEASUREMENTS
APPROVED BY
CREATED BY
DOCUMENT TYPE
PROJECT
1
MILD STEEL
±0.1°
±0.1
QUANTITY
MATERIAL
ANGULAR TOLERANCE
LINEAR TOLERANCE
A3
1:1
1 OF 1
14/02/20
ORIGINAL SIZE
ORIGINAL SCALE
SHEET NUMBER
DATE OF ISSUE
TITLE
DRAWING NUMBER
REVISION
REFLECTIVE PLATE
2020-004
A
ALL DIMENSIONS IN MM
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
[1]
IEA (2019). World Energy Outlook 2019. https://www.iea.org/reports/world-
energy-outlook-2019. Paris: IEA, 2019.
[2]
Babarit A., Soulard T., and Thilleul O. Recommended development plan for the
KNSwing WEC. 2019.
[3]
Babarit A., Soulard T., and Thilleul O. Technical submission request of the
KNSwing WEC. 2019.
[4]
Çelik A. and Altunkaynak A. “Determination of damping coefficient experimen-
tally and mathematical vibration modelling of OWC surface fluctuations”. In:
Renewable Energy 147, pp. 1909-1920 (2020).
[5]
Drew B., Plummer A., and Sahinkaya M. “A review of wave energy converter
technology”. In: Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Bath
(2009).
[6]
LeMéhauté B. An introduction to hydrodynamics & Water waves. New York:
Springer Science+Business Media, 1976, p. 205.
[7]
King Island Council. Notice of planning application. Installation of a single
wave energy converter and associated infrastructure. 2019. url: https : / /
kingisland.tas.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/DA-2019-18-Wave-Energy-
Converter-Grassy-Harbour.pdf. (accessed: 21.07.2020).
[8]
Ducasse D. Theoretical and Numerical Analysis of Oscillating Water Column
Wave Energy Devices. 2014.
[9]
Edinburgh Designs. Edinburgh Designs Wave Gauge Software Manual. Edin-
burgh Designs, 2018.
[10]
The LEANCON Wave energy device. url: http://www.leancon.com/. (ac-
cessed: 23.07.2020).
[11]
Mwasilu F. and Jung J.W. “Potential for power generation from ocean wave
renewable energy source: a comprehensive review on state-of-the-art technology
and future prospects”. In: IET (2018).
[12]
Pors F. and Simonsen M. “A Theoretical and Experimental Study of an Oscil-
lating Water Column Attenuator”. 2013.
[13]
António F.O. Falcao and Joao C.C. Henriques. “Oscillating-water-column wave
energy converters and air turbines: A review”. In: Renewable Energy (2015).
==PAGE:126==
116
Bibliography
[14]
António F.O. Falcao, Joao C.C. Henriques, and Luís M.C. Gato. “Self-rectifying
air turbines for wave energy conversion: A comparative analysis”. In: Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 91, pp. 1231–1241 (2018).
[15]
Bingham H., Ducasse D., Nielsen K., and Read R. “Hydrodynamic analysis of
oscillating water column wave energy devices”. In: Journal of Ocean Engineering
and Marine Energy 1:405-419 (2015).
[16]
Bingham H. and Nielsen K. “MARINET experiment KNSWING testing an
I-Beam OWC attenuator”. In: International Journal of Marine Energy 12 p.
21-34 (2015).
[17]
Fredsøe J. Hydrodynamics. MEK-DTU, 2008, pp. 43–69.
[18]
Chozas J.F. “Technical and Non-Technical Issues Towards the Commercialisa-
tion of Wave Energy Converters”. PhD thesis. 2013.
[19]
Newman J.N. Marine Hydrodynamics. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT
Press, 2017, pp. 107–120.
[20]
Hansen C. L. “En numerisk og eksperimentel undersøgelse af OWC-type bøl-
geenergianlæg til beskyttelse af havne- og off shorekonstruktioner”. Department
of Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2017.
[21]
Martinelli L., Pezzutto P., and Ruol P. “Experimentally Based Model to Size
the Geometry of a New OWC Device, with Reference to the Mediterranean Sea
Wave Environment”. In: Energies, Vol. 6 (2013).
[22]
Delmonte N. et al. “Review of Oscillating Water Column Converters”. In: IEEE
Transactions on industry applications, Vol. 52, No. 2 (2016).
[23]
Nazanin Ansarifard N. et al. “Comparison of inflow and outflow radial air tur-
bines in vented and bidirectional OWC wave energy converters”. In: Energy,
182 (2019), pp. 159–176.
[24]
Nazanin Ansarifard N. et al. “Power take-off selection for a u-shaped OWC wave
energy converter”. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Offshore
Mechanics and Arctic Engineering - Omae, Vol 10 (2019).
[25]
Benreguig P, Kelly J, Pakrashi V., and Murphy J. “Wave-to-Wire Model De-
velopment and Validation for Two OWC Type Wave Energy Converters”. In:
Energies 12 (2019).
[26]
Madsen P. Linear wave dynamics, Lecture notes. 2018.
[27]
Maël Pageaud. “Characterization of the measurement errors associated with the
new wave gauges, Engineering internship report.” Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2019.
[28]
Alcorn R. Future Energy (Second Edition). Cork, Ireland: Springer, 2014, pp. 357–
382.
[29]
Guerrero R. and Martinez J.M. Renewable energies and CO2, Cost Analysis, En-
vironmental Impacts and Technological Trends- 2012 Edition. London: Springer,
2012.
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
117
[30]
REN21. Renewables 2019 global status. Renewable Energy Policy Network for
the 21st Century, 2019.
[31]
P. Stansell and D.J. Pizer. “Maximum wave-power absorption by attenuating
line absorbers under volume constraints”. In: Applied Ocean Research 40 p. 83–
93 (2013).
[32]
Sensor Technics. BTEL5000 / PTUL5000 Series. 2008.
[33]
Evans D. V. “Wave-power absorption by systems of oscillating surface pressure
distributions”. In: Fluid Mech., vol. 114, pp. 481-499 (1982).
[34]
Sheng W. et al. “Investigation to air compressibility of oscillationg water column
wave energy converters”. In: Proceedings of the ASME 2013 32nd International
Conference on Ocean, Offshore and Arctic Engineering. (2013).
==PAGE:128==
==PAGE:129==
