==PAGE:1==
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection
using Deep Learning
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
Master Thesis
June, 2020
By
Thomas Dan Nielsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Department of Information Secu-
rity and Communication Technology at Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
NTNU, and the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science.
Thomas Dan Nielsen - s144458
Signature
Date
ii
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
With the increasing use of digital devices, the capturing and sharing of digital video content
is now commonplace, but so is the editing of video content for either entertainment or ma-
licious intent. The field of video forensics exists to study the abilities for us to authenticate
and/or guarantee the integrity of the content of a video.
The thesis contributes insight into the field of video forensics and the methodologies that
are applied, as well as the document the contribution of a new large-scale, publicly avail-
able unit-selection-based video manipulation dataset containing 1000 videos and the de-
sign of a new detection method build on this dataset able to achieve an equal error rate
of 4.95%.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Ali Khodabakhsh, PhD Candidate, Information Security and Communication Technology,
NTNU
Supervisor
Christoph Busch, Professor, Information Security and Communication Technology, NTNU
Supervisor
Christian D. Jensen, Associate Professor, Head of Section, Department of Applied Math-
ematics and Computer Science, DTU
Supervisor
iv
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Digital Video
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Digital Video Manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Video Splicing and Copy-Move Forgery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Inter-Frame Forgery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Obfuscation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Digital Video Forensics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
Relation to Image Forensics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Literature Review
15
3.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.1.1
Reverse Engineering of Audio-Visual Content Data (REWIND) . . . 15
3.1.2
Image Processing Research Group (GRIP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.1.3
FaceForensics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.1.4
Media Forensics Challenge (MFC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
General Video Tampering Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
Facial Video Tampering Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.4
Related Works
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4.1
General Video Tampering Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.4.2
Facial Video Tampering Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4
General Video Tampering Detection
25
4.1
Media Forensic Challenge Evaluation Datasets (MFC) . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.1.1
The design of the dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.1.2
Evaluation Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2.1
Stream Descriptors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.2.2
Noise and Quantization Residue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.2.3
Deep Convolutional Neural Network for General Graphics Forgery
Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5
Facial Video Tampering Detection
54
5.1
Introduction to Morph-cut
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5.2
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
5.3
Morph-cut Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5.4
Experiment Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.4.1
Dataset Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.4.2
Proposed Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.4.3
Baseline Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.5
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
v
==PAGE:7==
6
Discussion
64
6.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
7
Conclusion
67
Bibliography
68
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
1
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
In the days of the 21st century, most people right now carry one or more devices on them
at pretty much all time, which can capture an image or a video, these can then be viewer
by a large array of people instantly, with the help of the internet information is abound.
This together with the rise of simple and user-friendly editing tools for the alteration of
images and videos means that it has never been easier to make the content according
to what you want, for good or ill. Consider a simple scenario in which the footage from
a CCTV camera is the main piece of evidence in a crime case, if anybody can modify
this vital piece of evidence, with no need for expertise or specialized equipment, what is
to prove the authenticity of this video when it is brought into court. With how the field of
image manipulation is evolving and how the same is happening to video manipulation, it
is only a matter of time before a scenario similar to this is gonna play out.
Now there has indeed been a lot of research going into solving this problem. The ma-
nipulation of any kind of digital content will leave some kind of minute trail, even more so
for content as complicated as video. A video is in the simplest of terms just a sequence
of images called frames. So not only due video manipulations have the same potential
alterations that images have, but due to this increase in dimensionality, a video can be
altered in spatial, temporal and spatio-temporal domains. This makes the authentication
or integrity of digital video content, an exceedingly difficult problem. Now some have at-
tempted to solve this issue be the use of watermarks or embedded information, allowing
the detection of manipulation by the disturbance of these elements. However by far the
majority of digital video content does not have or desire such a solution and even then
this solution fails in the scenario where the manipulation occurs before the watermark or
digital signature is applied. This is why the development of passive video manipulation
detection techniques is important, with the hope of verifying the legitimacy of a video’s
content in the moment. By exploiting the signs left behind when a video is manipulated,
we can hope to detect not only if a video has been altered, but in exactly the way it was
done.
This thesis hopes to dive into the field of video forensics and explore this new field of
forensics by taking a set of state-of-the-art methods with widely differing methodology
and unifying these into a network for the detection of tampered digital video content.
The thesis is structure as such: Section 2 provides the reader with the background for
the field of video forensics and a short summary of the subject of deep neural networks
which is a necessary topic to understand the remainder of this thesis. Section 3 sums
up the most relevant literature that was referenced in the creation of this thesis. Section
4 describes the method of evaluation using the Media Forensics Challenge (MFC) and
the datasets supplied by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, followed by
the reproduction of 3 different state-of-the-art video manipulation detection methods, their
methodology and evaluation using the MFC. Section 5 continues with a deep dive into the
area of facial video manipulation detection and particularly unit-selection-based video ma-
nipulations where we construct a new large-scale dataset for unit-selection-based video
manipulation of which none previously existed and come up with an added proposed
method for detecting these manipulations. Section 6 and 7 provides a discussion on the
results described in this thesis, a discussion on the field of video forensics and this thesis
project as a whole and a final conclusion to the project.
2
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
In this section I describe the basics related to digital video and video manipulations re-
quired for understanding the remainder of this thesis, both what defines digital video and
the different forms of video manipulation and the terms that follow these subjects.
2.1
Digital Video
Digital video was first introduced by Sony in the form of the Sony D1 recording format1
which was an uncompressed standard definition component video signal recorded in a
digital form for the benefits that come with the digital medium. Since then digital video
has evolved substantially and has now completely substituted analog formats for video.
Like with the analog video format before it, digital video consists of a sequence of images,
called frames, displayed in rapid succession to create the illusion of movement. As with
standard images every frame is made of a number of pixels that define the color at every
position in the frame, the number of pixels in each frame in the video, the height and width
of the frame, we refer to as the resolution of the video which is the number of pixels in
each dimension of the frame. The rate at which the frames change when played we refer
to as the frame rate which is measured in frames per second (FPS).
A major part that helps digital video being a practical is the ability to perform compression
on the digital data that makes up the frames in the video footage and the video format it-
self, the general video compression technique involves separating the sequence of frames
into groups which is called groups of pictures (GOP) and as either an intra-frame or an
inter-frame. The structure of the GOP defines in what order the intra- and inter-frames ap-
pear, every GOP starts and ends with an intra-frame also called an I-frame, an I-frame is
a coded image/frame that contains a full image and is so independent of all other frames,
the remaining frames in the GOP are inter-frames which are either P-frames (Predictive
frames) or B-frames (Bipredictive frames). As is described in their name, P-frame and
B-frames are frames that predicted/constructed partially from other surrounding frames,
the P-frame contains data based on the frame that precedes it, in layman terms it adds
new information on top of the previously decoded frame and so only needs to contain
the required changes to the previous frame to construct a new frame, the B-frames are
different in that they contain data based both on the preceding frame, but also the follow-
ing frame, this allows for higher flexibility in compression compared to P-frames in some
scenarios.
The more I-frames present in the video sequence, the less compression is available but
it is faster to seek through the video footage during playback. The exact definitions for
what P-frames and B-frames can and cannot do changes be the exact encoding format
used in the video, but these are the general definitions for these terms.
To when sending data both during encoding and decoding, based on various factors like
resolution, framerate and GOP sizes, the video needs to send a number of bytes per
second to keep up with the demand and ensure quality during playback, the number of
bytes per second is referred to as the bitrate. Most formats allow either a constant bitrate
(CBR) or a variable bitrate (VBR), constant bitrate is generally used to ensure maximum
output on limited bandwidth when streaming, however variable bitrate has mostly replaced
1https://mosdellmedia.blogspot.com/2013/12/understanding-video-technology.html
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 2.1: An example of two GOPs with I, P, and B frames. The GOP size, in this case
is 6 for both GOPs. Illustration from [Mercier et al. 2019]
it as it allows variation in the amount of data that is consumed and so better ensures the
highest quality video even in complex video footage.
2.2
Digital Video Manipulation
Together with the increasing use of digital video, so has the use of software applications to
edit digital video, as unlike with analog video formats, editing digital video requires no spe-
cialized equipment. With the advent of ease of editing digital video comes the opportunity
for malicious individuals to tamper with otherwise harmless video footage to create new
edited footage to upset, disgust, deceive or otherwise harm others and with that comes
the field of detecting video tampering or forgery. Researchers have seen sorted various
forms of video manipulation into separate categorize to define the characteristics of each.
The currently defined video manipulations are as follows:
• Multi-compression: The act of a forger compressing a video multiple times to re-
duce quality and/or hide another attack previously performed. Generally requires a
fixed GOP size and specific bitrate or required to use the MPEG2 format with preset
parameters to be detected. For this thesis, this forgery is considered out of scope
as one is unlikely to ever encounter this attack with modern encoding formats per-
forming very similar structural changes to digital video formats and so this forgery
has been falling out in favor of standard compression methods.
• Region tampering: The act of a forger tampering with a particular region of the video
footage to either add or remove an object in the frame sequence. This includes
adding 3D generated objects and similar tampering where an object is generated,
adding or removing an object using parts of the same video is however considered
a subcategory of region tampering.
– Copy-Move: The adding or removing of an object by copying over a separate
region of the video to cover a different region. Resulting in an object being
duplicated or a region of the video being hidden or removed.
– Video Splicing: The process of adding a part of a separate video to a recipient
video, similar to copy-move.
– Deepfake: Is the act of using deep learning techniques to synthetically replace
an actor in video footage with someone else’s likeness.
• Inter-frame forgery: Is the act of a forger tampering with full frames in various ways,
including duplicating, adding or removing frames from the video.
– Frame insertion: The taking of one or more frames from the same or a different
4
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.2: Various kinds of inter-frame video forgery. (a): Original frame sequence, (b):
frame-insertion forgery, (c): frame-deletion video forgery, (d): frame-duplication. Illustra-
tion from [Kaur and Jindal 2020a]
video and inserting these in a new location in a video to give new meaning to
the video footage.
– Frame deletion: The act of removing one or more frames from a video to hide
content otherwise found in the video.
– Frame duplication: The copying of one or more frames and inserting them
somewhere else in the same video. Can also be used as part of a frame dele-
tion attack to replace frames that would otherwise be removed by the forger.
This defines the various methods of tampering with video footage.
2.2.1
Video Splicing and Copy-Move Forgery
Video splicing is a method of forging a section of video by inserting a part of a separate
video into a recipient video. Similar is video in-painting which is inserting automatically
generated footage into a recipient video, this is generally done in order to erase or oth-
erwise remove undesirable footage or content from the video, that being objects, people
some other undesirable element caught in the video footage. In general, video splicing is
very similar to image splicing, taking a section of an image and pasting it into a recipient
image to cover up a spatial section of the recipient image, adding a temporal dimension
and you got video splicing. The similarities continue with video splicing detection and
image splicing detection, the approach of algorithms targeting both forgeries are rather
similar, trying to detect localized inconsistencies in the spatial dimension of the image or
video, such inconsistencies in the noise patterns or compression coefficients that might
give away that one spatial section has a separate source than the rest. There is however
a problem with using compression coefficients to detect inconsistencies as if the video is
compressed using a constant bitrate reduces the variation through quantization, the re-
duction of large set of possible values to a small set and so reducing variation and creation
consistent pattern where previously there possibly was none.
Nevertheless, a pattern still remains in the noise of the video and given the condition
that there is a limit amount of motion across the majority of the footage, noise estimation
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
5
==PAGE:12==
creates a predictable feature shape, background and functions very well to distinguish
patterns in the noise of the video footage.
A good alternative to these methods are Motion-Compensated Edge Artifact which works
with the temporal dimension and the motion of objects from frame to frame, without requir-
ing the condition that there be a certain amount of motion in view or that the background
content remains relatively still. All these artifacts present in the DCT (discrete cosine
transform) coefficients may retrieved using a threshold or spectral analysis.
Deepfakes
In recent days, the rise of deep learning has turned heads in many fields, including image
and video forensics. In particular the ability for deep learning applications to automati-
cally generating highly realistic looking videos that are difficult to distinguish from actual
unsynthesized video footage. A well-known use of this ability is face-swapping, where you
have a neural network trained to directly replace the face of the individual in a piece of
video footage with the face of another individual. Another use of deep learning is image-
to-image translation, where a model learns convert an image or a piece of video footage
from one domain to another, for example where the network has learned to take a image
or video capture in daytime and converting it to make it look like it was captured at night.
Then comes image in-painting which was also brought forth by deep learning, having a
network automatically generate content for an image or video, in order to replace an ob-
ject or other element present in the image/video with background, effectively erasing an
object or other element from the image or video. All these things that came forth with
the appearance of deep learning have brought a great many new challenges to image
forensics and video forensics.
Because the frames or content of a forgery is artificially generated by the neural network,
this made a great number of problems far more challenging as looking for similarities
inside the image or video itself or looking for more obvious abnormalities or content in-
consistencies became far less relevant for forensics.
As such it is possible that many methods that made use of statistical analysis of different
parameters present in video footage (such as quantization parameters, motion vectors,
heteroscedasticity among others) have become obsolete. Instead, new tampering detec-
tion methods needed to be invented in order to take the consistencies of a scene, color or
shape into account or look for possible artifacts that have been created through the forg-
ing process. For this reason, the challenge of detecting deep-fakes may be more closely
linked to detecting computer-generated images, which is variant of detecting computer
graphics and 3D rendered scenes, than detecting video or image tampering. Face-swaps
would be an exception to this statement as in this case the generated content is inserted
or spliced into an existing video frame or image and so the established definition for video
splicing still holds and methods detecting these should still be useful.
With this there have been a few publications related to detecting face-swaps, testing many
different approaches, old and new [Sabir et al. 2019a], the new approaches for detec-
tion often based on deep learning themselves. Effectively using a deep learning neural
network to the detect the forgeries constructed by another neural network. These new
approaches prove to be very powerful with splicing localization techniques such as the
XceptionNet and the MesoNet work well to detect the forgery performed, at least for video
and images that have only undergone a single compression circle and the majority of the
information present in the video or image remains intact.
Deepfakes have in general became a highly relevant subject, with the high potential of
forgeries created by deep neural networks to disrupt society and create disorder through
6
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:13==
disinformation published on the internet and so causing great amounts of discomfort or
disruption of a single person or whole community. Specially with these techniques being
virtually nonexistent in the year 2016 to becoming a common tool in many fields of both
research and at the workplace and being a central element of the modern day.
2.2.2
Inter-Frame Forgery
Inter-frame forgery is defined as the process of inserting, removing or otherwise replacing
entire frames inside the frame sequence of a video. This type of forgery is specially
relevant in case of video surveillance, where due to the often completely static background
environment in surveillance footage it is far easier to maliciously insert, delete or replace
frames without this being detectable.
Many approaches have been invented to detect the inconsistencies introduced by inter-
frame forgery, often these methods involve motion prediction, the idea of predicting the
motion of objects along the temporal dimension across frames, the mean displacement
over time and the temporal correlation of spatial features use in methods like Local Binary
Patterns (LBP) or velocity fields. However inter-frame forgery like those mentioned above
have become uncommon, simply because of how challenging it is to construct a forgery,
particularly without a static background, that is not easily detectable with the naked eye.
Another problem with inter-frame forgery is that standard editing of video or simply a video
that has been multi-shot, has multiple clips in sequence that have each been capture at
different points in time, are by definition considered to be inter-frame forgeries as they nat-
urally include insertions and removal of predicted frames, even though these can hardly
be considered forgeries as these changes aren’t performed with malicious intent.
2.2.3
Obfuscation
With the act of performing forgeries comes the act of performing additional actions to
hide or otherwise prevent detection of the forgery and further add to the conviction that
the forgery is genuine. This would generally include a great amount of work, having to
carefully clean metadata and video parameters to guarantee consistency across the entire
video. However there is an easy way to perform obfuscation and potentially hide evidence
that tampering has taken place and this is through compression.
Multi-Compression
Video and image compression inherently reduces complexity and variation in the file that
is being compressed, removing or replacing values through quantization, by reducing
the size of the data and so creating patterns where might otherwise not be one and so
both creating noise and removing signs of tampering in the process. This action is also
repeatable, meaning that a good method of performing obfuscation is to take a video,
compressing it to reduce the data size and inducing patterns in the video parameters,
then tampering with the video content, then re-compressing it to merge the forgery into
the pattern of the original video. This action is referred to as multi-compression.
When talking about compression, often this is however not performed maliciously, often a
video would be re-compressed through rescaling or changing format many times, specially
when a video is published on social media or just the internet in general in which case
a video would be naturally re-encoded to particular formats for video streaming. This
means that it becomes very difficult to judge or otherwise detect if a compression is used
to obfuscate evidence of forgery or tampering and thus evidence of compression or multi-
compression, but even if compression does not give any information related to forgery or
tampering, however signs of multi-compressing can be taken as a good indication that
the video has been reprocessed and so possibly edited at some point in time.
Detecting multi-compression is often done by studying the I-frames and estimating the
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
7
==PAGE:14==
amount of quantization performed, very similar to methods of detecting recompression
of JPEG images, though detecting recompression in video is generally considered far
more complicated as the compression algorithms are generally far more complex and so
the methods of detecting recompression in images generally don’t translate to the video
domain. Instead there are methods for detecting multi-compression in video by using the
temporal dimension and studying the temporal behaviour of video parameters, however
these techniques are only relevant for the older MPEG-2 video format as a fixed GOP
size is required for the detection of multi-compression, as such these techniques do not
translate to more modern and complex video formats like H264/AVC/MPEG-4.
2.3
Digital Video Forensics
With the advent of inexpensive, portable and very usable digital media devices, such
cameras, digital recorders and mobilephones among other items, the amount of video
data available has sky-rocketed, the ability to easily generate video content pretty much
without technical or physical constraints has made a video creator out of everyone. This
along with the ability for digital video data to be easily copied, edited and distributed with
very little effort means that authentication and validation of video content has become
far more difficult than previously, and the number of potential alterations that can now
possibly be made to a video even further increases the challenge posed.
These challenges could have especially big consequences for legal disputes, as now it
can become difficult to produce videos or images as legal evidence, videos or images
can no longer be considered ’proof of evidence’ since their origins and integrity cannot
be reliably authenticated. It is the same with copyright, the validation of ownership of a
particular property in the form of a video or image, once a video or image is published it
can be incredibly difficult to identify the original owner.
For all these reasons, recently a great amount of research has been devoted to the sub-
ject of forensics analysis of multimedia data. The far majority of this research has been
dedicated to the field of digital image forensics, the analyses of digital still images, for the
reason that captured digital photographs are often used to provide objective evidence in
a legal, medical or surveillance context.
For digital image forensics a number of techniques have been developed for the purpose
of validation, detecting alterations and recovering the history of the image, the chain of
processing steps performed on the digital image. The particular focus of many techniques
found in digital image forensics focus on:
• Whether an image is original or artificially constructed via cut and paste operations
from different images?
• Which source generated an image, which camera model, vendor etc.?
• Whether the entire image or only parts of it have been altered and how it has been
altered?
• What is the processing history of the image?
All these techniques rely on the consideration that many processing steps that alter an
image are irreversible and leave traces of the process in the image called ’foot-prints’.
Detecting and analysing these foot-prints is what allows one to reconstruct the history of
the processing steps of an image. With foot-prints it is thereby possible to semi reverse
engineer the digital content of the image, in order to identify and order the processing
8
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:15==
steps that have been preformed on the content of image, from capture and forward to it’s
current form.
Despite this great amount of research effort put into the field of digital image forensics,
digital video forensics still has many unexplored subjects and issues, primarily because
of the extra dimension added to this domain compared to images, the number of potential
alterations possible increase greatly since here the alteration can affect a single frame or
a number of frames in the frame sequence of the video, alterations having the potential
of affect a range of frames along the temporal dimension. This can be done to hide or
erasing details from the recorded scene, conceal the original source of the video, redis-
tributing the video without the owners permission or otherwise change the characteristics
of the video. Furthermore, detailed forensics analysis of video content can prove to be
challenging compared to still images since video data is generally only available in a com-
pressed format and with a far higher compression factor used compared to images. This
compression may remove or conceal foot-prints, through the reduction in quality or the
creation of compression patterns, so that the processing history related to the video can
no longer be recovered.
On top of that, forensic analysts also face the problem of anti-forensic techniques, which
consist of modifying the forging process with the purpose of making the alterations per-
formed transparent to current forgery detection techniques. Because each of these anti-
forensic techniques are usually targeted to erase one particular trace left during a ma-
nipulation, anti-forensic methods are very heterogeneous. Nevertheless, all anti-forensic
techniques should satisfy two basic principles:
• Do not hinder significantly the quality of the forged content that is produced.
• Do not introduce artifacts that are easily detectable, so that anti-forensic techniques
could be countered by the content owner.
However most anti-forensic techniques that have been published in the field of digital
forensics have been developed only for still images and there remains only a small number
techniques related to video.
Along with previously mentioned issues come video-related disinformation, the types of
tampering possible are to an extent rather similar to those possible when related to still
images. Thus, these are copy–moving, splicing, in-painting, and whole-video operations
such as filtering or brightness changes. However a major difference is that these al-
terations may have effect along the temporal dimension, an example would be splicing,
typically the insertion of a second video constructed with multiple green-screen frames de-
picting a new object in motion that can then be inserted in the recipient video. Similarly, a
copy–move may be displaced along the temporal dimension, for example, an object ap-
pearing in the video in some frames reappearing later in different frames along the frame
sequence, or be displaced spatially, for example, an object from a frame reappearing
elsewhere on the same frame. Furthermore, along with these image inspired forgeries,
there exists a type of forgery that is only possible in videos, this being inter-frame forgery,
which generally consists of frame insertion or frame deletion. Inter-frame forgery is a spe-
cial type of video manipulation, because it is often very noticeable visually, seen as an
abrupt cut or scene change in the video on playback. However there exists two types of
videos where this form of forgery can be very successful:
• Where the video already contains cuts, edited footage. Here a scene can potentially
be removed or added, changing the interpretation from what was originally intended
with the video.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
9
==PAGE:16==
• Where the video is a CCTV video, surveillance footage or otherwise taken with a
mostly static camera. Here frames can the inserted, deleted or replaced without it
being noticeable visually.
In these cases, an inter-frame forgery can be applied without it being noticeable.
From this one can see that it might not be good to immediately conceptualize digital video
forensics as an extension of digital image forensics, though some problems tackled by
both field can possibly be handled similarly. For example, video splicing could potentially
be detected based on the assumption the part that is inserted in the recipient video has
a different processing history than the recipient video. However this generally does not
work with video and the techniques that were invented for detecting splicing in images do
not give results when applied to videos, this even applies to most generic noise-based de-
tection techniques. It goes pretty much without saying that methods invented specifically
for the JPEG image format perform even worse when attempting to detect or localize
video forgeries. One of the main reasons that this happens and also why video foren-
sics proves so challenging is that modern digital video data is not just a simple sequence
of images as one might immediately think. MPEG compression, the current dominant
compression video format, compresses the video data and information by exploiting tem-
poral interrelations between frames by reconstructing frames by combining sub-blocks
from other frames found in the frame sequence. This process effectively destroys all foot-
prints that image-based detection techniques aim to detect. Furthermore the recompres-
sion performed by online platforms such as YouTube, Facebook and Twitter are far more
disruptive for the traces left behind by manipulation methods compared to recompression
performed on images. Thus, video tampering detection requires specifically created and
targeted techniques specifically made for the video domain. The problem extends even
further as the few techniques designed for the MPEG-2 video format will often fail horribly
when encountering the newer MPEG-4/H.254 video format, which is the current domi-
nant video format as this is being written. Regardless, the majority of video content is
contained online and so techniques developed should generally be evaluated with such
videos or completely fail to generalize to practical use. In any practical video forensics
you would have no control over the capturing process of the video. So similar to pas-
sive image forensics, passive video forensics has a similar structure to the forgeries they
attempt to detect:
• splicing/object insertion
• copy–moving/cloning
• whole-video operations
• inter-frame insertion/deletion
These forgeries were described back in section 2.2.
The major consideration when working with both image forensics and video forensics is
that the majority of related content as contained online and a great amount of this from
social media sources. The problem with this is that the compression required to contain
videos and partially images online largely degrades the traces of tampering that one would
generally use to detect this tampering, this problem becomes only greater as the content
circulates from platform to platform and is re-encoded repeatedly. The traces that most
algorithms look for a very fragile and the constant resampling and/or recompression will
easily erase these traces, making the problem of detecting tampering far more difficult.
Because most online platforms perform these recompression operations on all images
10
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:17==
and videos uploaded to them, this is an incredibly important consideration to keep in mind,
especially when dealing with news-related multimedia sources where the social impact of
the content is at it’s highest.
2.3.1
Relation to Image Forensics
Multimedia forensics is a field with a long history of research into the issue that surround
tampering of multimedia sources, and a great amount of progress has been done in the
field. However, most of this progress is concerned with analysing images rather than
videos. Methods in image forensics are generally sorted into active and passive cate-
gories:
• Active image forensics: Contain methods for the active prevention or discourage-
ment of tampering, usually involve adding an invisible watermark or similar informa-
tion to an image when captured that would be destroyed if the image is altered, the
idea being that the presence of this watermark guarantees an unaltered image and
a destroyed or disrupted watermarks is a sign of tampering.
• Passive image forensics: Methods where no prior information is available and the
only option is the analysis the image to judge if an image is tampered or not. This
category contains the methods that assume to have no information about the image
capturing process.
While the latter category is the tougher task, it is also the most relevant in the majority of
use cases found in the wild, where there typically is no access to any information related
to the capturing of the image or the history of the image prior it being viewer for forensics.
One important distinction to make when talking about image forensics algorithms is dif-
ference between tampering detection and tampering localization. This is basically the
difference between an algorithm that reports if tampering has taken place or if the algo-
rithm points out exactly where the tampering has taken place. It is the difference between
an algorithm that returns a scalar telling how likely the image is to be tampered and an
algorithm that returns the image with highlights showing where it is likely that tampering
has occurred, a sort of per-block or per-pixel probability estimation.
Passive image forensics approaches are generally categorized by what type of modifi-
cation they intend to detect or localize. Three main categories of image modifications
are:
1. Copy-move
2. Splicing
3. In-painting
4. Whole-image operations
similar to the accepted video manipulation categories.
For copy-move, like with its video equivalent, a part of the image is replicated and placed
elsewhere in the image, an example would be copying part of the background to remove
an object or a person, or a crowd is duplicated to make it appear larger. Algorithm for
copy–move detection attempt to detect the forgery by looking for similarities/correlations
within the image. For splicing, a part of one image is placed within another, similar to
copy-move but for two different images used. Splicing detection and localization algo-
rithms are generally based on the idea that, on some level, the area that was spliced in
will differ in some minute way compared with the rest of the image due to their different
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
11
==PAGE:18==
capturing and compression history. For in-painting, a part of the image is erased and
then automatically filled in again using an in-painting algorithm to try and make it appear
like nothing was removed, similar to the previous categories except now the inserted/s-
pliced part is generated rather than taken from an image, detecting these generally rely
on the assumption that the computer-generated part will differ minutely from the rest of
the image. Algorithms designed to detect forgeries such as the previously mentioned may
exploit inconsistencies in the local JPEG compression history, in local noise patterns, or
in the traces left by the capturing device. It is interesting to note that, in many cases,
algorithm made for one forgery can often detect other forgeries as well because there
are so many similarities between these categories. For forgeries where localization is not
necessary and a simple scalar will do, tampering detection algorithms combining filtering
of the image and machine learning have been proposed in the past, these have gener-
ally proven to produce good results with high accuracy within some datasets. The last
category, whole-image operations, is for operations such as rescaling, recompression, or
filtering and it should be obvious that such operations can not be localized and thus are
generally tackled with tampering detection algorithms exclusively.
2.4
Convolutional Neural Network
Neural networks is one of the great tools of the machine learning toolbox that gained even
more prevalence with the rise of deep learning. Simple artificial neural networks achieves
very good results when compared to other Machine Learning techniques. These neural
networks are used to solve numerous classification problems like classifying images or
patterns into categories. The architecture of a neural network consists of huge number of
artificial neurons interconnected with each other and are able to exchanging input data.
There by the design of an artificial neural network is inspired by the network of millions
and millions of neurons in the brain. Just like biological brain neurons, an artificial neural
network learns and transmits data to other neurons and this process repeats until the
neural network is judged to be able to recognizes the input correctly. A neural network
consists of three different types of layers:
1. Input layer: The layer which takes the input and feeds it to the proposed model. The
sum of neurons present in this layer is equivalent to the total number of features the
network is given to observe.
2. Hidden layer: The middle layer/s of the network is the hidden layers where the input
data flows next. The number of hidden layers is not fixed and can be any number
of layers depending on the network and the size of the input data.
3. Output layer: The layer which takes the output from the hidden layer/s and trans-
forms the data into a visible output by the use of a softmax function. The size of the
layer is equivalent to the number of classes the network is trying to learn.
The number of neurons associated with each hidden layer can differ and is usually larger
than the number of features extracted from the input data. The exact types of layers that
make up hidden layers are as follows:
1. Convolutional layer: This layer comprises of a set of filters with each one having a
minor width and height and the depth equal to that of the volume of the input. The
data is passed through these filters. The convolution starts from the top-left corner
of the input and sliding to the right it performs a dot product operation on the input in
a sliding window fashion. This process is repeated until the bottom-right corner of
the frame is reached. Mathematically, the convolution of two variables can be done
12
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: The standard structure of a convolutional neural network. illustration from
[Kaur and Jindal 2020b]
by the following equation:
(x · y)[n] =
∞
∑
m=−∞
x[m −n]y[m]
2. ReLU activation layer: This layer ensures the element-wise activation of input by
captivating the output from the preceding layer and plotting it to the uppermost pos-
itive value. This is completed by using active functions like Rectified Linear Unit
(ReLU). If out is the output value of the ReLU activation and in defines the input fed
to it, then
out = (out)+ = max(0, in)
3. Max pool layer: Pooling is another concept for activation with a difference that it
reduces the dimensionality of the ReLU output further. It aids in dropping memory
necessity, fastens the computations and prevents over-fitting. If outm
n,k signifies neu-
ron in the mth output activation map calculated over (r × r) the section in mth input
map inm
n,k.
4. Fully connected layer: As the title suggests, each output neuron of the preceding
layer (x−1) is linked to the following layer x. FC layer is consistent neural layer that
captures the input from the preceding layers and calculates the class scores. If Nx−1
are the no. of neurons in the preceding layer (x−1), wx(m, n) signifies the weight
from neuron m in (x−1) layer to x layer and bx(n) is the bias of neuron n in layer x.
The output of the nth neuron i.e. (out)x(n) in FC layer x is given by the following
equation:
(out)x(n) = fn (∑Nx−1
m=1 yx−1(m) · wx(m, n) + bx(n)
)
5. Output layer: The hidden layer further transfers the data to the output layer and it
passes through a logistic function called softmax. It creates a probability score for
each classified data. Considering z classes in x training trials {(m1, n1), (m2, n2), ...}
and mi is the ith training sample with yi as the class then the probability p(.) can be
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
13
==PAGE:20==
made on hypothesis hα(mi) as shown in the following equation:
hα(mi) =





p(ni = 1|xi; α)
p(ni = 2|xi; α)
...
p(ni = z|xi; α)





A sequence of these layers is what creates a convolutional neural network.
14
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:21==
3
Literature Review
In this section I will discuss the various pieces of literature used in the construction of this
thesis, including the various papers intended to give overview of the current state of the
field of video forgery detection as well as the various most cited papers in the field and the
most recent papers reviewed. The section ends with related works for the most significant
pieces of literature used in the experiments described in this thesis.
3.1
Datasets
In this section, the datasets with relevance to this thesis project are introduced and de-
scribed. These include the most notable datasets used in current video forensics.
3.1.1
Reverse Engineering of Audio-Visual Content Data (REWIND)
One of the early datasets for video forgery detection was created in 2013, The Surrey
University Library for Forensic Analysis (SULFA) database, they started the REVerse en-
gineering of audio-VIsual coNtent Data (REWIND) dataset[Bestagini et al. 2013b]. The
dataset is targeting the scenario in which a small spatio-temporal region of a video is
replaced, which is far more challenging problem compared to full-frame replacement or
inter-frame forgery. When applied to images, this attack consists of replacing a region of
pixels in an image using another region from either the same image or a different one,
this is a copy-move forgery in image forensics. This dataset was used to validate the
method proposed in the [Bestagini et al. 2013b] paper, the dataset consists of 10 videos
all with a resolution of 320 × 240 and approximately 300 frames each. These 10 videos
are divided into 5 pristine videos and 5 forged videos, these 5 forged videos are the 5
pristine videos altered with a copy-move forgery and the 5 pristine video working as the
ground-truth. The videos are encoded to the H.264/AVC format and a fixed GOP of 150.
This was the main video tampering dataset for several years forward and it was only some
years forward that video forensics started to pick up speed.
3.1.2
Image Processing Research Group (GRIP)
The next notable dataset created for the use in video forensics was released in the year
2017 by Image Processing Research Group (GRIP) of the University Federico II of Naples.
This is the GRIP dataset which was used to test the proposed algorithm for detecting video
splicing in the paper [D’Avino et al. 2017] and was released for use at www.grip.unina.it.
This dataset was constructed primarily due to the high scarcity of datasets for use in video
forensics, as alternative to using videos taken from the internet without knowledge of the
video source, exact type of forgery performed and without ground truth. So to perform
an experiment with a known and controlled conditions. The dataset consists of 10 videos
created in Adobe After Effects to splice two separate videos together via chroma-key com-
position, essentially the removing of a background green-screen and layering the videos
in top of each other, as illustrated in figure 3.2. The background video was captured us-
ing 9 different smartphones, these videos were then spliced together with green-screen
videos taken from the video-sharing platform YouTube under the Creative Common li-
cense. Made to study also realistic cases of videos downloaded from social media, typi-
cally with some reduction in quality. The dataset includes the original background videos
(H.264) and the forged videos with a YouTube video spliced in top (uncompressed AVI),
it also includes the downloaded YouTube videos used for the splicing process. All videos
were cropped at the same size of 720×1280 pixels and the distribution comes out to a total
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.1: An example of the copy-move tampered videos from the REWIND dataset.
Original (left), forged (middle), original frame used as source for copy-move (right). The
red square highlights the location of the copy-move tampering. Illustration from [Bestagini
et al. 2013a]
Figure 3.2: An example of the videos spliced together in the GRIP dataset. Illustration
from [D’Avino et al. 2017]
16
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.3: Frames from the pristine videos contained in the GRIP dataset. Illustration
from [D’Avino et al. 2017]
Figure 3.4: Frames from the forged videos contained in the GRIP dataset. Illustration
from [D’Avino et al. 2017]
of 3459 frames of video with 1907 frames being forged. Figure 3.3 and figure 3.4 shows
some individual frames extracted from each original and forged video, respectively.
3.1.3
FaceForensics
The year after the release of the GRIP dataset in the year 2018 another dataset for video
forensics was released, this time for the detection of deepfakes, this is the FaceForensics
dataset [Rössler et al. 2018]. This was again due to lack of available datasets for video
forensics and in this case for training deep neural networks for video forgery detection.
To help this they made a new dataset containing 1004 forged videos using an automated
Face2Face approach, making up approximately 500,000 forged frames sorted into two
separate categories:
• Source-to-Target: Where facial expression are transferred from one video to another
video by morphing using the Face2Face method.
• Self-Reenactment: Where the Face2Face method is used to reenact the facial ex-
pressions of a video.
Made to evaluate new algorithms for the detection of deepfakes evaluated by classification
and segmentation accuracy, with videos compressed to a comparable level of what you
would find on the internet. The dataset contains 500,000 frames from 1004 videos forged
using automated methods with a pristine source copy of each video and ground truth.
3.1.4
Media Forensics Challenge (MFC)
Meanwhile in year 2016, The National Institute of Standard and Technology (NIST) started
a yearly project as a challenge to image and video forensics and this would now be the
most relevant dataset created for research into video manipulation detection. The Nimble
Challenge from 2017 released with 13,000 images for general image tampering and 23
videos for general video tampering separated into 3 different sets for the development
and testing of solutions to detection image and video tampering. The next year (2018),
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.5: Source-to-Target Dataset. From left to right: original input image of the source
actor, input image of the target actor, reenactment result and face mask that is used during
synthesis of the output image. Illustration from [Rössler et al. 2018]
Figure 3.6: Examples of the FaceForensics Self-Reenactment Dataset. From left to right:
original input image, self-reenacted output image, color difference plot and face mask that
is used during synthesis of the output image. Illustration from [Rössler et al. 2018]
18
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:25==
NIST released the Media Forensics Challenge (MFC) [Guan et al. 2019a] where they
began to use automated methods to create image and video forgeries for their dataset,
resulting in a dataset with 140,000 images and 3000 videos, of which approximately 3000
images are forged and 300 videos are forged. They wish to use this dataset to evaluate
the performance techniques aimed at detecting general image and video tampering. A
full description and analysis of the Media Forensics Challenge and related datasets is
provided in section 4.1.
3.2
General Video Tampering Detection
The topic of passive multimedia forensics has become an active topic in recent years,
even if not to the level of detecting face morphs and deep fakes, but with the advent of
high-quality video cameras build into every phone along with easy to access professional,
yet easy-to-use, video editing software means that the topic of passive multimedia foren-
sics and detecting video manipulations has become a far more relevant topic than it has
ever been and only continues to become more relevant. Many different methods for de-
tecting various video manipulations has been invented, most of them require very specific
parameters for either the video that they are working with or are very specific in what ma-
nipulations they can detect, here I will introduce some of these methods along with where
one can read more about these.
One of the simplest and earliest methods invented for detecting video forgery, in this case
specifically frame duplication, was described in the paper Exposing digital forgeries in
video by detecting duplication[W. Wang and Farid 2007] by Weihong Wang and Hany
Farid, coming up with a simplified and computationally efficient technique for correlating
pairs of frames to detect repeated frames anywhere in a given piece of video footage.
Weihong Wang’s techniques have since gone to become frequently cited in papers dealing
with the subject of detecting video forgery.
Weihong Wang is one of the very early researchers of the subject of detecting video ma-
nipulation, in another of his papers from the same year he continues with exposing digi-
tal forgeries in interlaced and de-interlaced video[“Exposing digital forgeries in interlaced
and deinterlaced video” 2007], he attempts to detect manipulations in interlaced and de-
interlaced digital video footage by studying the correlation between frames that have been
de-interlaced or the correlation the motion between frames for interlaced video footage.
with the topic of detecting video manipulations, studying correlations between elements of
the video footage is now a very common method of attempting to detect forgery, Weihong
Wang was one of the early researchers using these features ingrained in digital video
footage to detect forgeries. Related to this old technique, video interlacing is steadily
becoming less and less common with the rise of higher quality video, though it is still
supported by TV standard organizations even when the IBC 20041 report from the EBU
UER argued against using this technique to increase observed framerate and reducing
required bandwidth at the cost of picture quality.
Another way of using the characteristics/features of digital video footage is to attempt
and take advantage of the general structure of the digital video format, in the paper GOP
based automatic detection of object-based forgery in advanced video[Tan, Chen, and B. Li
2016] by Shengai Chen et al. where they take advantage of the GOPs and the correlations
between the P-frames, B-frames and I-frames in each GOP (Group-of-Pictures) and the
general consistency in a single GOP in pristine videos which can be easily disturbed
1https://web.archive.org/web/20110607082032/http://www.ebu.ch/en/technical/trev/trev_300-ibc-
2004.html
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
19
==PAGE:26==
during manipulations. By studying the motion residuals they can then pinpoint the precise
frames and parts of the frame that have been manipulated. it is worth noting here that
the method they use for feature extraction as part of their detector was originally made
for image steganalysis which is a subject in image forensics, it is an example of using a
technique made for image forensics in video forensics, while they don’t take advantage
of the sequential nature of images in video footage, this remains notable.
In general the proposed methods for detecting video forgery are highly specific and se-
lective in what they can detect, the previously mentioned papers are examples of less
targeted techniques, though they likely function far better against certain video manipula-
tions compared to others. An example of a more targeted method of detecting a forgery
is in the paper titled A video forgery detection algorithm based on compressive sensing[L.
Su, Huang, and J. Yang 2015], the method proposed in this paper is targeting digital
video footage that has a static background where optionally a moving object has been
removed from the foreground with a copy-move attack. The way this is done is by study-
ing the features extracted between frames, by comparing neighbouring frames, extracting
the differences and extracting features from these using K-Singular Value Decomposition
which they can then use to detect inconsistencies and forgery.
Another method that targets the same scenario, stationary background, manipulated fore-
ground, is the paper Detecting Removed Object from Video with Stationary Background[L.
Li et al. 2013] where they detect artifacts in each frame and by observing the motion of
these artifacts as well as the magnitude and orientation of the movement of the artifacts
they are able to distinguish pristine regions and manipulated regions of frames. With this
method they are able to locate removed objects in video footage with otherwise stationary
background.
A different scenario is the case of the frame duplication attack, in this paper they detect du-
plicated frames using a high performing similarity analysis between frames, by extracting
the features of each frame using singular value decomposition and calculating the eu-
clidean distance between each frame, the frames with a low euclidean distance between
them are added as potential duplication candidates and later more carefully compared to
see if they are truly the same frame, with this they can easily determine if any one frame
appears multiple times on the given video footage, thereby reliably detect the frame du-
plication.
Though video manipulation detection remains a rather niche field of research, only really
given attention in recent years, we can see that there has still been a number a papers
published on the subject and this should have provided a reasonable overview of the his-
tory of the field of video manipulation detection.
I would really like to point to the paper written by K. Sitara and B.M. Mehtre titled Digital
video tampering detection: An overview of passive techniques[Sitara and B. M. Mehtre
2016], though this paper is getting old it provides a solid overview of different passive video
tampering detection techniques as well as point of a number of new potential research
areas with unaddressed issues, mind that this paper is from 2016, some which remain
unaddressed to the current day. This paper provided a great amount of help in the early
stages of this thesis.
For the more recent methods for video manipulation detection, there is the paper, Video
Verification in the Fake News Era[Mercier et al. 2019], where they give another overview
of the current state-of-the-art methods related to video inter-frame forgery detection and
20
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:27==
Figure 3.7: Examples of deepfake manipulations from YouTube.
Top: manipulated
videos; bottom: original videos. It is worth noting that in the real videos Obama and
Trump are impersonated by comic actors. Illustration from [Verdoliva 2020]
region tampering detection. They continue to explore the impact of deep learning on tam-
pering detection and the high forensic value that detectors for video tampering provides.
3.3
Facial Video Tampering Detection
The ability to easily manipulate multimedia content has progressed a lot in recent years,
to the point where a great degree of realism can be reached easily without special skills.
With the generating of computer generated media content being done to a near perfect
level, with software applications that can generate realistic looking content easily using
deepfake techniques, creating faceswaps, face2face reenactments and similar generated
content that fools the consumer to believe that something is real when it is actually fake.
Deepfakes have a great potential of being used to influence social and political media
with generated content, but also may be used to commit fraud, discredit an individual
or be used as blackmail, with so many possible applications of deepfakes it is of great
importance that it is possible to detect this generated content when it appears. The field
of video forensics is still trying to keep up with these developments in the generation
of fake media as is done in deep fakes, developing methods of detecting this synthetic
multimedia content and preventing the spread of potential disinformation. Despite this, the
field is currently falling behind in comparison to the development of improved tampering
methods and many current issues remain unsolved with many predicted challenges still
to come [Verdoliva 2020].
Specially now when it is becoming more and more common to see face-swaps on social
media platforms, often created using simple one-click applications that may generate a
deepfake based in a single video, using facial tracking, 3D geometry with a face mesh and
morphing, allowing an application to take a video and manipulating the content to change
the identity, appearance or speech contained within to basically anything else they desire
while making them very challenging to spot with the naked eye [Dale et al. 2011].
The general method of detecting deepfake content generated using deep learning based
methods is by using deep learning. A great deal of research has been put into creating
deep neural networks that are able to distinguish a generated bit of multimedia content
from pristine multimedia content, an example being a convolutional neural network and a
recurrent neural network used in tandum to classify videos as either being manipulated
or not [Güera and Delp 2018].
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
21
==PAGE:28==
3.4
Related Works
3.4.1
General Video Tampering Detection
One of the methods that truly try to take advantage of the correlations that follow any
sequence of frames in digital video footage is the paper by Julian Goodwin and Girija
Chetty, Blind video tamper detection based on fusion of source features[Goodwin and
Chetty 2011]. Here they use a range of different techniques based on detecting corre-
lations between neighbouring frames, 3 different techniques in all, they use these tech-
niques on the noise extracted from each frame in a similar fashion to what is frequently
done in methods for camera identification[Lukáˇ, Fridrich, and Goljan 2006], this extracted
noise is then compared and correlated between neighbouring frames and transformed in
cross-modal subspace where they can detect any abnormalities in the noise pattern and
point out frames where a copy-move attack has been performed.
We Need No Pixels[Güera et al. 2019] is one of the most recent papers realised for the
detection of video forgery and specifically targeting the Media Forensic Challenge Evalu-
ation Datasets (MFC) something I will examine and explain further in section 4.1 for my
own experiments. As the title suggests, in this paper they decide to completely forego
the pixel domain of the video footage and only judge if a video has been manipulated
or not based on the metadata that comes along with the video, this metadata contains
information both for the operating system to sort together with other file formats, but also
contains relevant information for the playback of said video footage, this comes out to a
lot of information to judge the video by despite what it might seem to completely ignore
the pixel domain, resulting in a high reduction in potential data to label each video but an
even higher reduction in noise that could hamper correct labeling of videos.
In more recent proposed methods that do involve the pixel domain, deep learning is having
a deeper and deeper impact. Using deep neural networks to effectively detect inconsis-
tencies and using this to solve problems in other areas of research has proven highly
effective and so deep learning is also becoming common in the area of detecting video
manipulation. In the paper, Deep Convolutional Neural Network for Graphics Forgery
Detection in Video[Kaur and Jindal 2020b], here they use a custom-made deep convolu-
tional neural network to detect abnormalities in each frame to detect inserted objects in
the video footage. This uses the great ability of the DCNN to detect inconsistencies in the
correlation between frames to then label certain frames as being forged, this can then be
feed to a different neural network to detect the precise location of the forgery in frame.
These 3 papers are the ones that I find most relevant for me to explore further in my
experiments, I will be attempting to reproduce these 3 methods and challenge them with
one of the largest and most recent datasets created for video manipulation detection the
MFC dataset. Together these papers provide a broad understanding of the video forensics
field with techniques that vary greatly in both methodology and age.
3.4.2
Facial Video Tampering Detection
For facial video tampering, which is the tampering of digital video with focus on a face
and the alteration of facial features in color, appearance and generally the manipulation
of visual facial characteristics, is often performed either as a faceswap or to supplement
a separate manipulation in the visual or audio content, used to generate or manipulate
visual content based on given audio [Mattheyses and Verhelst 2015]. Mainly used to
show the potential of taking a video containing an individual speaking, usually during an
interview where the individual is the center of attention in each frame, changing the audio
potentially by moving words around in the sentences spoken or by other synthetically
generating new audio to the forgers preference and then using this audio with the source
22
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.8: A screencap of the transition tool created in [Berthouzoz, W. Li, and Agrawala
2012]. Selecting text in the transcript highlights corresponding regions of the timeline.
Vertical bars in the transcript and blue bars in the timeline visualize cut suitability; places
where a cut is least likely to interrupt the flow of the video.
video to generate new visual content that matches the motions in the individuals face to
the new audio.
The first proposed method for doing something like this was made in 1997 [Bregler,
Covell, and Slaney 1997] by creating a database containing in essence mouth shapes
by phoneme (distinct sounds that allow you to distinguish one word from another) ex-
tracted some given existing video footage, allowing them to then construct a new sen-
tence based on this footage and have the database morph visual footage together based
on the phoneme in the new sentence and thereby generating a completely new sentence
that was never actually spoken.
This method was further developed into an editing tool, as shown in figure 3.8, with the
goal of adding invisible transitions into interviews based on a text transcript allowing the
active editing and generation of content based on an existing interview replacing tran-
sitions like b-rolls and jump-cuts in order to create a more seamless interview. This is
a method that was then later refined into the morph-cut transition that is now offered in
programs like Adobe Premiere and Adobe After Effects.
When facial video manipulation is used in the context of video forensics, a huge amount
of research has been aimed at the detection of such facial manipulation [Verdoliva 2020].
Among the propsed methods for detecting such manipulation are [Güera and Delp 2018],
[Amerini et al. 2019] and [Sabir et al. 2019b], where they exploit the inherent inter-frame re-
lationships involved in such methods to detect manipulations frame-by-frame using deep
learning techniques. In the case of [Güera and Delp 2018] a long short-term memory
(LSTM) network is used to study a sequence of frames and pinpoint manipulated frames
and [Sabir et al. 2019b] used a recurrent neural network to similar effect. Some like in the
paper [Amerini et al. 2019] went in a slightly different direction and used an estimation of
optical flow fields together with a convolutional neural network to detect inter-frame incon-
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
23
==PAGE:30==
sistencies that could point to potential manipulation. As such, deepfakes have receive a
lot of attention from both media and researchers, though some manipulations in the area
of facial video manipulation still remain relatively unknown. Later in this thesis I will dis-
cuss a more recent unit-selection-based facial video manipulation that has not received
a great deal of attention but remains very prevalent in media, see section 5 for further
discussion on the morph-cut.
24
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:31==
4
General Video Tampering Detection
The following section will follow and describe the reproduction of 3 major state-of-the-art
methods from various areas and times in the field of video manipulation detection. It be-
gins in section 4.1 with a full description and analysis of the Media Forensics Challenge,
including the datasets released as part of this project. Following is the methods repro-
duced, the methodology involved with each and a full evaluation of these methods using
the modern MFC datasets. The methods described in section 4.2 are:
• Detector using Stream Descriptors[Güera et al. 2019]
• Noise and Quantization Residue Detector[Chetty, Biswas, and R. Singh 2010]
• Deep Convolutional Neural Network for General Graphics Forgery Detector[Kaur
and Jindal 2020b]
4.1
Media Forensic Challenge Evaluation Datasets (MFC)
With the increasing availability of media storage, transmission, editing, and sharing tools,
the potential for encountering tampered multimedia data increases as well, easily chal-
lenging the traditional trust in multimedia content. The generation, modification and distri-
bution of digital media is an extremely simple process to perform even for inexperienced
users, requires only minimal effort and low investment. In addition, with the development
of new deep learning techniques such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs, “deep-
fakes”) and general Computer Generated Imagery (CGI) with a high level of realism, it
becomes increasingly challenging for existing media forensic technologies to identify the
validity and authenticity of visual multimedia content. In order to facilitate the develop-
ment of media forensics research, The National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) started work on the Media Forensics Challenge (MFC) Evaluation for the DARPA
MediFor program in 2015. They designed, collected and assembled a series of compre-
hensive digital forensic databases for the evaluation of media forensic technologies. The
evaluation data contains the following parts:
1. 35 million images and 300,000 video clips downloaded from the internet with their
associated characteristics and labels for forged or pristine.
2. 176,000 pristine, high provenance (HP) images and 11,000 HP videos.
3. Approximately 100,000 manipulated images covering over 100 manipulation types
produced by professional forgers with added manipulation history and annotation
details.
4. 4,000 manipulated videos covering a wide variety of different .
5. A series of evaluation datasets with ground-truth to support several different forgery
detection tasks assembled into the media forensics challenge evaluations across
the last two years.
In the paper [Guan et al. 2019a], they first survey existing datasets and discuss the special
characteristics and challenges found in the area of media forensics and data collection
for media forensics. Based the diversity and complexity found in various media forensic
applications, they propose the following tasks for the MFC:
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
25
==PAGE:32==
• Manipulation Detection and Localization: The task of detecting if an image/video
has been manipulated, and if so, locating what region of the image/video was ma-
nipulated.
• Splice Detection and Localization: The task of detecting if a region of a given donor
image has been spliced into a probe image, and if so, locating the region that was
spliced in both images.
• Provenance Filtering and Provenance Graph Building: The task of reconstructing
an image’s manipulation history given a ‘world’ image pool.
• Camera Verification: The task of verifying if an image/video probe was captured
using a claimed camera sensor.
• Event Verification: The task of verifying if an image is from a claimed event.
Generally detection systems are measured by the use of the Receiver Operating Char-
acteristic (ROC) and the Area Under the Curve (AUC), with localization systems the
preferred method for measuring performance is by the Matthews Correlation Coefficient
(MCC), Provenance Filtering systems are measured by Recall, and Provenance Graph
Building systems are measured by using the Node Link Overlap Similarity Metric (SimNLO).
The authors of [Guan et al. 2019a] present the approaches used to build the different
datasets for the different tasks and how to effectively demonstrate the results. The major
contributions by the MFC described in [Guan et al. 2019a] are:
1. A proposed methodology for MFC evaluation data design.
2. The constructing of several large-scale media forensics evaluation datasets for quan-
titative performance evaluations of systems in media forensics. The data which can
be used directly for system evaluation or customized for evaluating other systems
performing task in the area of media forensics.
3. Providing detailed descriptions about the data, metadata, training data, and ground-
truth in their datasets, which includes but is not limited to the model and identity of
camera/device used for capture, the step-by-step manipulation operations with sup-
plied parameters, the manipulation history graph, the localized manipulated region
for every manipulation operation, the semantic category, the model and parameters
of special filters (e.g. JPEG anti-forensic filter, social media laundering etc.).
4. They sum up the present state-of-the-art media forensics systems as of the year
2016, their evaluation results and their progress over the next two years to the date
of publishing the paper [Guan et al. 2019a] 2018.
4.1.1
The design of the dataset
The dataset was created with the aim of supplying datasets with adequate quality to eval-
uation state-of-the-art media forensic systems, but also give developers the ability to an-
swer the question of what major factors are affecting the performance of their systems
and help judge which systems are suitable for which situations based on the diversity and
specializations of media forensics technologies.
To provide datasets able to assist developers and researchers in such a way as previ-
ously described it is not enough to just have the ground-truth about whether a given piece
of media is manipulated or not. The data, metadata, manipulation data, and reference
data are all crucial for an effective and detailed evaluation of a given system. The addi-
tion of providing a large amount of metadata along with each dataset is what allows the
26
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:33==
large number of possible evaluation metrics previously described in section 4.1, show-
ing that the more metadata is available, the more tasks can be evaluated in the area
of media forensics and the large amount of metadata further increases the quality of a
given dataset. With well-structured data, metadata, and reference data, the evaluation
can provide detailed reports and comparisons using factor analysis, which can help the
researcher better understand their system performance, promote system development,
and provide directions for future development and evaluations.
Alongside these general challenges, the other major challenges for media forensics datasets
as described in [Guan et al. 2019a] are:
• Highly diverse research topics involving multidisciplinary areas: The increasing num-
ber of fields converging on multimedia forensics. Multimedia security, computer
forensics, image processing, computer vision, imaging and signal processing among
many others. The technologies involved with all these areas include things such
as JPEG artifact detection, crop/contrast/clone/splice detection, lighting/shadow/re-
flection consistency, physical/semantic consistency, Electrical Network Frequency
(ENF), audio/video person ID consistency and many others. The evaluation of these
many different types of media forensic systems require a great variety of different
types of meta, training, testing and reference data. Furthermore, some systems
may only function with particular constraints, for example face systems work only
on a face region, clone detectors only work well on cloning operations, which further
increases the complexity and requirements imposed on the evaluation metadata.
• Intrinsically high dimensionality: Next to the expected image or video dimensions
and their associated metadata (EXIF, camera ID etc.), the manipulation operations
and manipulation history of a piece of media is of great importance to media foren-
sics research. The manipulation history generates additional factors which will fur-
ther affect system performance. Furthermore, since manipulations are often done
with a purpose, the meaning of a given manipulation presents yet more factors to
consider. All these factors introduce high complexity and cost for the data and meta-
data collection, manipulation and annotation.
• No post-annotation: The post-annotation approach, a method sometimes used in
biometrics for ground-truth data generation, generally does not function well in the
domain of media forensics. For any given piece of media, even highly trained foren-
sics experts find it very challenging to deduce if the media is manipulated or not,
and even more challenging to compose an exact description of the operations used
and the corresponding manipulated regions. It is generally required that annotations
follow the entire life-cycle of a given manipulated media to increase the quality of
system evaluations in the domain of media forensics.
Given the challenges listed above, the following approaches and solutions are proposed:
• A collection of large and publicly available datasets, with collected data, manipulated
and annotated. Potentially hiring professional manipulators who have expertise us-
ing various media editing software and tools to produce manipulated or otherwise
forged multimedia content suited to represent real-world instances.
• Proposing a defined manipulation history graph representation able to fully capture
and structure the manipulation data’s origins, operations, metadata, reference mask
etc.
• Designing and developing the manipulation Journaling Tool, a software applica-
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.1: An illustration of temporal localization in a manipulated video. Showing frames
in a timeline above and the output of a system below. Illustration from [Guan et al. 2019b]
tion that assists data collectors in generating and annotating the data and asso-
ciated metadata, reference data, and reference ground-truth mask collection effec-
tively and efficiently. The Journaling Tool integrates functions related to seman-
tic and metadata collection, automatic and human annotations, manipulation refer-
ence mask generation, manipulation operation data collection and automatic/semi-
automatic manipulations etc. The Journaling Tool has both online and offline func-
tions to support data collection, generation, annotation and verification based on the
collection requirements.
• Develop an automatic journaling tool, which is able to generates manipulated media
and accompanying manipulation history and metadata from pristine media.
• Develop an extended journaling tool, which analyses and extends partial or com-
plete manipulation history graphs and produces manipulated media from these ex-
isting graphs. Able to automatically generate a large number of manipulated im-
ages/videos using a given manipulation history with associated manipulation filters
and parameters.
• Designing a data collection and evaluation infrastructure which allows the easy shar-
ing of data among different evaluation tasks to reduce the cost of data collection.
All these solutions were reported as implemented in the paper [Guan et al. 2019a], pub-
lished in the year 2018, and links for source code and releases were provided, however
since the publication these have disappeared and are now all unavailable.
Detection and Localization
When related to the field of video forensics, video manipulation detection is the task of
detecting if a given video has been manipulated. The obvious extension to this is video
temporal localization, the task of pinpoint in the temporal dimension of a given video ex-
actly which frame or frames have been edited. The reference for temporal localization is
the intervals where the frames were manipulated. Figure 4.1 shows the frames in a time-
line, the area of the timeline colored blue shows the pristine unedited frames, the area
that is colored green shows the manipulated frames. An example system outputs the re-
sults as shown in the timeline with the negative predictions colored blue and the positive
predictions colored yellow, the predictions are labeled as shown on the illustration based
on ground-truth and the system is evaluated based on these results.
Video Splicing
Video splicing detection and localization is the act of detecting if a region in a given donor
image or video has been spliced into a recipient video and if so provide the mask re-
gion showing the exact region that was spliced in on both pieces of media. The scoring
and evaluation is based on both the temporal and spatial accuracy of the resulting mask
28
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:35==
regions.
The GAN Challenge
The Generated Adversarial Network (GAN) challenge is a particular dataset created for
the MFC project in order to garner interest and research into this new technology and it’s
uses in multimedia forensics. The GAN dataset allows developers and researchers to
evaluate their proposed systems against manipulated media content that was created by
the use of GAN-based manipulations. The created GAN dataset originally released as
a part of the MFC18 dataset contained 1340 manipulated images and 118 videos con-
structed using GAN-based manipulations, these include faceswaps, frame drops, frame
deletion and inpainting. The GAN dataset is no longer publicly available for reasons un-
known.
4.1.2
Evaluation Datasets
The datasets reportedly generated and released under the MFC project banner are as
follows:
• The Nimble Challenge 2016 (NC16) kickoff dataset
• The NC17 development dataset
• The Media Forensics Challenge 2018 (MFC18) development datasets 1 and 2
• The MFC18 evaluation dataset
• The MFC18 GAN image and video challenge datasets
• The MFC18 camera ID verification dataset
• The MFC18 Event Verification development and evaluation datasets
• The MFC19 EP1 image and video datasets
• The MFC19 evaluation dataset
Reportedly all development datasets are publicly available through the contact mfc_poc@
nist.gov, though this is no longer true as of this thesis.
The original data collection process for these datasets started in the summer of 2015, the
data was designed, collected, manipulated and released into the NC16 kickoff dataset,
which only contains single-step manipulations. Since then they data collection process
was evolved and been further automated to create datasets with both better quantity and
quality.
They designed and developed a journaling tool and automatic journaling tool to ease
the process of data annotation and manipulation. Using these tools they created the
NC17 development and evaluation datasets and started the Media Forensics Challenge
to increase awareness for media manipulation and detection. Later these tools were
extended further to generate a large quantity of manipulated testing data at very little
cost.
With this the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) introduced a set
of new datasets into a domain sorely lacking in both quantity and quality on evaluation
datasets, media forensics, containing a wide variety of manipulations and possible eval-
uations. They reportedly continue to collect and generate new data for future datasets to
this day.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
29
==PAGE:36==
Datasets
Image
Video
Size (MB)
Released
NC17 Dev
3.5k
23
379
Y
NC17 EP1
4k
45
3507
Y
NC17 Eval
6k
1083
3600
N
MFC18 Dev 1
5.6k
9
88.8
Y
MFC18 Dev 2
38k
86
524
Y
MFC18 EP1
17k
323
3200
Y
MFC18 Eval
80k
2868
12300
N
MFC18 GAN
2.3k
118
30
Y
MFC18 Cam
3.8k
224
98
Y
MFC18 Event
2.4k
0
5.6
Y
Table 4.1: Datasets summary taken from [Guan et al. 2019a]. There are no publicly
available numbers for datasets released after 2018.
Regarding the current state of these datasets, only a limited number of these datasets are
currently publicly available and able to be requested from NIST. The datasets received for
use in this thesis is:
• The NC17 Dev dataset
• The MFC18 Dev1 dataset
• The MFC18 Dev2 dataset
• The MFC18 Eval dataset
The remaining datasets have been described as no longer available. These 4 datasets
made for the use in video forensics were later used for evaluation in this thesis, see
section 4.2.1, 4.2.2 and 4.2.3. The number of videos available in these datasets sum up to
1595 videos of which 440 videos have been manipulated using at least one manipulation
operations and possibly multiple. These numbers are inconsistent with the numbers given
in table 4.1 and those supplied in the [Guan et al. 2019a] paper. The reason for this
inconsistency remains unknown.
4.2
Methods
In this section a detailed description of each reproduced method is provided, including
noticeable characteristics for each method and precise methodology involved. Each of
the following sections will end with the state-of-the-art method being evaluated using the
MFC datasets described in section 4.1.
4.2.1
Stream Descriptors
It is the case for every video format that certain parameters or information is required
to correctly communicate the original intended method of playback from the video to the
video player during playback, these parameters include the exact video encoding used,
the framerate, the time-base etc. all of these are intended to communicate the method of
playback for this video file. The hypothesis behind the following method for video manip-
ulation detection is that these parameters also hint if the video has been manipulated as
then these parameters would be either changed from the original camera parameters or
be inconsistent if the parameters have not been properly corrected after editing.
This method for detecting video manipulations proposed by David Güera is rather unusual
with how it attacks the problems of spotting video manipulations in that it only uses the
30
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:37==
metadata to judge a video as being manipulated or not. By extracting multimedia stream
descriptors, an example can be seen in figure 4.2, and analyzing these using simple binary
classifiers they can reliably detect if a video file has been manipulated or not.
The method is described as extracting the multimedia stream descriptors of dataset com-
prised of manipulated and pristine videos and encoding these as a feature vector. Ap-
plying median normalization to all numerical values and encoding categorical features as
unique numerical values. This can then be used to train different binary classifiers as
detectors, in this the paper itself they describe using a random forest classifier, an SVM
classifier and an ensemble of the two previous classifiers together, using random search
cross-validation to find the best parameters for each detector.
Figure 4.2: Examples of some of the information extracted from the video stream descrip-
tors. These descriptors are necessary to decode and playback a video. Illustration from
[Güera et al. 2019]
This method is valuable for having a very high level of scalability and it will function using
even limited amounts of data and with a reliable manipulation detection probability score.
The thing to keep in mind with this method of video manipulation detection is that since it
solely uses the stream descriptors used for video playback to detect forgery, this method
is very vulnerable to re-encoding of videos and so the method also loses a fair bit of
generality as it is common for videos in the wild to be re-encoded, but otherwise this
method provides a good estimate if a video has been manipulated while being very simple
and quick to run unlike other methods that study the pixel domain of the video.
Proposed Method
The proposed method involves the processing of all videos into a database, extracting fea-
ture vectors from videos to then later be feed into different binary classifiers and thereby
generating a video manipulation detector. How this proposed method would work in prac-
tice is illustrated in figure 4.3, using a collection of manually labeled videos, the stream
descriptors can be extracted from each video and formed into a feature vector, all these
labeled feature vectors can then be used to train a manipulation detection model, then
when a suspect video is encountered it can go through the stream descriptor extraction
process and analysed by the trained manipulation detection model, which is then able
to give a quick prediction of whether the video has been manipulated. With the training
of a manipulation detection model, more specifically the proposed method is to train 3
different binary classifiers, a random forest classifier, a support vector machine (SVM)
classifier and an ensemble of both detectors. The best parameters for each classifier are
selected by performing a random search cross-validation across 10 splits of the available
data with 1000 trials per split. In the implementation documented in the paper [Güera et
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
31
==PAGE:38==
al. 2019], they use ffprobe1 for extraction stream descriptors and metadata from videos,
all of which can then be converted into feature vectors. For the actual encoding of stream
descriptors into feature vectors, they use pandas2 and scikit-learn3. For the training and
testing of machine learning models their reportedly used the implementations of the SVM,
random forest and ensemble learning models available in the scikit-learn library. There
are issues with using stream descriptors for feature vectors in this fashion however, be-
cause some descriptors are only available in some video formats, some descriptors have
to be considered optional and additional post-processing is required to ensure that the
resulting feature vector can be used with the described learning models. To be more con-
crete, it is required for missing descriptors to be mapped to a fixed numerical value, other
descriptors must also be mapped to numerical values with categorical values being con-
verted to unique numerical values. This should allow all feature vectors to function with
the described learning model algorithms.
It is worth noting again that this method is highly vulnerable to video re-encoding, however
the trade-off is in scalability, with even a very limited amount of available labeled data it is
possible to get fairly decent results as will be shown in section 4.2.1 and 4.2.1. Because
the method is so scalable while ignoring the pixel domain of the video, it would be ideal
to use this method together with a pixel-based detection method for optimal coverage.
With this method it is possible to quickly identify manipulated videos, while minimizing the
need for manually annotated data, due to the low data requirement. This method can then
be used as a sort of ”first assessment” for videos which can then later the analysed and
improve the predictions of pixel-based methods for detection video manipulations.
There however also a conceivable way for a malevolent individual to exploit this method.
Assuming that the individual has access to large amounts of labeled video data, it would
be possible for this individual, using this same method, to identify and single out videos
published by a specific individual, a journalist or informant. For example should the spe-
cific individual use the same device to both capture and publish anonymous controversial
videos and use the same device to capture and publish video on their social media profile,
this would be detectable using this proposed method. To avoid such a scenario, the use
of different physical media devices for capture and publishing should be preferred when
possible and proper sanitization of the video data should be performed.
Another possibility in combating the use of this proposed method can possibly be per-
formed in a similar fashion to the previous example. Assuming a malevolent individual
is able to identify a trusted individuals published videos, it would be possible to perform
a re-encoding of manipulated videos mimicking the descriptors of the trusted individuals
videos and temp the proposed method to give a false prediction, or if taken further and the
malevolent individual has access to the training data for the proposed method, in which
case it is possible to insert falsely labeled video using the trusted individuals descriptors,
thereby targeting only the trusted individual and perform a sort of targeted ’poisoning-of-
the-well’.
Experiments
For evaluation of the proposed method they use the Media Forensics Challenge (MFC)
datasets [Guan et al. 2019a], for training, parameter selection and validation. In the doc-
umented experiments described in [Güera et al. 2019] they use the following datasets:
The NC17 dev dataset, the MFC18 dev1 and dev2 datasets, the MFC18 GAN dataset,
1https://ffmpeg.org/ffprobe.html
2https://pandas.pydata.org/
3https://scikit-learn.org/
32
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.3: (a) Block diagram of the training stage of their proposed method. They process
a labeled database of manipulated and pristine videos to generate a feature vector for
each video from its multimedia stream descriptors. These feature vectors are then used to
train and select the best detector (b) Block diagram of the testing stage of their proposed
method. Given a suspect video, a feature vector is generated and processed by the
previously selected detector. Finally, a manipulation probability for the suspect video is
reported.
the MFC18 evaluation dataset and the MFC19 evaluation dataset.
This gives a total of 1774 videos, of which 503 are manipulated. For training the classifiers
it is decided to use the development and GAN datasets, consisting of 677 videos with
167 being manipulated and for testing the resulting classifiers the evaluation datasets are
used, giving 1097 videos of which 336 have been manipulated.
To then show the scalability of the proposed method and the low computing requirements
necessary, the experiment is designed as follows: They choose few select machine learn-
ing binary classifiers well known for their modeling capabilities even when the number of
training samples are heavily constrained. As was previously described in section 4.2.1
these are the random forest, support vector machine and soft voting ensemble binary
classifiers. To then illustrate the performance of the proposed method under varying data
availability scenarios, all 3 classifiers using 10%, 25%, 50% and 75% of the available
training data with the results being reported at each stage. A stratified shuffle splitting
policy is used to select the subsets of the training data to be used for these stages, mean-
ing the distribution of manipulated to pristine videos is preserved at every stage. Every
stage goes through the entire training process, parameter selection and validation. Fi-
nally, the best validated model is selected for testing at each stage. The evaluation an
resulting precision-recall (PR) curves are shown along with the F1 score, the area under
the curve (AUC) score and the average precision (AP) score reported for each classifier
as recommended by the Media Forensics Challenge when evaluating a detection system
[Guan et al. 2019a].
In their experiments it can be seen in figure 4.4, 4.5, 4.6 and 4.7 that in all cases the voting
ensemble composed of both the random forest and support vector machine outperform
the individual classifiers, with the random forest classifier coming in close second and the
SVM coming in last with by far the poorest performance of the 3 classifiers. Interestingly
it can be seen in their graphs, specifically the 10% scores shown in figure 4.4 and the
75% scores shown in figure 4.7 both produce the best results for the voting ensemble
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.4: The scores from 10% of available training data.
Figure 4.5: The scores from 25% of available training data.
34
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.6: The scores from 50% of available training data.
Figure 4.7: The scores from 75% of available training data.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 4.8: The precision and recall graph for the implemented stream descriptor detector,
including 10% of available training data.
with an F1 score of 0.917, an AUC score of 0.984 and an AP score of 0.984. To further
describe the performance of this method, a baseline which predicts video manipulation at
a constant 0.306 rate was added, this corresponds to the fraction of manipulated videos
present in their test set. This shows how well the proposed method handles scalability
and performs well even with low amounts of training data.
Results
The results of the reproduced method can be seen in the figures 4.8, 4.9, 4.10 and 4.11. All
cases are very comparable to those reported in the original paper [Güera et al. 2019] and
in some cases the reproduction gives even better results compared to the reported. The
support vector machine especially performs far better compared to the reported results,
so much so that it overtakes the random forest classifier in the majority of cases, with the
exception being the case with using 25% of available training data shown in figure 4.9,
where the SVM classifier falls off suddenly for unknown reasons.
Once the amount of available training data increases, the ensemble classifier wins out in
performance compared to the individual classifiers coming out with an accuracy of 90%,
with the SVM classifier coming in second with a 88% and last the random forest classifier
with a 86% accuracy.
The majority of differences between this reproduction and the original paper’s reported
results are likely due to the change in dataset. As the MFC18 GAN dataset and the MFC19
evaluation dataset are not currently available online, these have been excluded as part
of this reproduction, resulting in the the MFC18 Dev2 dataset being used for validation
and the MFC18 Eval dataset alone being used for testing the resulting classifiers. This
also means that the reported baseline described in the original paper [Güera et al. 2019]
would now be a classifier with a constant 0.276 split between morphed and pristine.
The metrics recommended for the MFC dataset evaluation are shown in table 4.2, showing
that the claimed scalability of the method still holds as all classifiers perform well even
with small amounts of training data. There however remains some variation in the results
depending on the amount of training data used and with the changes to the SVM and
36
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.9: The precision and recall graph for the implemented stream descriptor detector,
including 25% of available training data.
Figure 4.10: The precision and recall graph for the implemented stream descriptor detec-
tor, including 50% of available training data.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.11: The precision and recall graph for the implemented stream descriptor detec-
tor, including 75% of available training data.
F1
AUC
AP
10% SVM
.939
.993
.993
10% Random Forest
.911
.968
.968
10% Ensemble
.911
.978
.978
25% SVM
.842
.959
.959
25% Random Forest
.930
.992
.992
25% Ensemble
.930
.990
.990
50% SVM
.939
.993
.993
50% Random Forest
.929
.986
.986
50% Ensemble
.929
.993
.993
75% SVM
.939
.993
.993
75% Random Forest
.930
.992
.992
75% Ensemble
.930
.995
.995
Table 4.2: The F1 score, AUC (Area-Under-the-Curve) score and AP (Average Precision)
score
38
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:45==
random forest classifiers that follow with the changes in amounts of training data, it would
appear that the performance of this method of video manipulation detection is heavily
dependent on the quality of data more so than the quantity of data.
4.2.2
Noise and Quantization Residue
An older method for detecting video manipulation was to attempt an detect inconsistencies
in the noise of the video footage in the temporal domains of the frame sequence. The
method titled as noise and quantization residue [Chetty, Biswas, and R. Singh 2010] is
the idea of using the noise pattern inherent in the images making up the frame sequence
in the video to detect manipulation and other forgeries. The studying of noise pattern is a
technique generally used in camera identification to identify camera brand used or even
specific camera model used to take a picture [Lukáˇ, Fridrich, and Goljan 2006] and image
forensics to detect manipulations in the spatial domain of images [Q. Liu et al. 2013] and
this method does a very similar thing for videos, but now moving into the temporal domain
and attempting to take advantage of sequential nature of video footage.
The method consists of extracting the noise pattern from each frame and correlating these
with neighbouring frames to study the noise pattern between frames. To go into detail, the
method uses a denoising wavelet to remove the noise from a frame then calculating the
difference between this denoised frame and the original to have only the noise remain.
This is done for every frame to extract the noise from every frame individually which can
then be used for later calculations. The idea is then to study the similarity between the
noise in the frames using different techniques for analysing correlation, the techniques of
which are latent symantic analysis, cross-modal factor analysis and the canonical corre-
lation analysis. All of these methods are simply different methods of calculating the simi-
larity between neighbouring elements, in this case between neighbouring frames of noise
to discover patterns in the inherent noise of the frame sequence. Each of these methods
are strong in their own way and are used in different domains, however discussing this I
would consider to be outside the current subject. For their chosen domain which is the
temporal domain of video footage, the best and most telling method of correlation is then
chosen and used to attempt and detect video manipulation using machine learning and a
binary classifier.
This method remains old, but should still be relevant even in the present day as it involves
and element of video footage which is rarely considered in practical video editing as the
features that this method observes are not ones that a viewer would naturally pay attention
to, but which would be naturally disturbed in the process of performing video manipulation.
Proposed Method
This proposed method described in the paper [Chetty, Biswas, and R. Singh 2010] is a
novel approach of detecting video manipulation using the noise and quantization residue
inherent in video footage. The method is based on extracting noise and quantization
residue features in pixel sub-blocks, projecting these into cross-modal subspace to ex-
tract correlation properties between these pixel sub-blocks, the correlation between these
pixel sub-blocks should allow the detection of possible tampering in the pixel domain of
a video. Based on the hypothesis that a typical video manipulation attack will inevitably
disturb the correlation properties in the pixel sub-blocks within the frame of a video and
that these properties allow the distiguishing between pristine and tampered video frames.
This approach is blind, as no prior knowledge about the video is assumed, and passive,
as detection is only performed when requested.
The reasoning behind why this method should work is in considering the processing
pipeline when an image or video is captured, the camera sensor captures the natural
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
39
==PAGE:46==
light passing through the optical system in the camera. Now in most digital cameras, this
light passing through the camera hits a sensor plate in the back of the camera, this sensor
plate holds a huge number of tiny camera sensors (CCD) that each convert the light that
hits it into an electric signal that becomes a pixel. The reason you get noise in images
or videos is because these camera sensors aren’t perfect in their operation and will con-
stantly apply a small variation in their signal even when they aren’t capturing light (This
manifests as ’white-noise’), the method for avoiding visible noise is to overpower these
small signal with more light hitting sensors, making the tiny variations in each sensor in-
significant. Now after the camera sensors, the signals pass through different color filter
arrays, and for the standard digital camera the signal gets color corrected and has missing
pixels interpolated, it then goes through an enhancement and gamma correction process
before the image is finally shown to the photographer. However this noise will always be
present in the image or video from the initial capturing and this pattern of noise produced
by the camera sensors is unique to each device (camera) and so works as an effective
’device fingerprint’. The exact knowledge about the source device and processing (the
precise details of a specific camera’s capturing process) is generally unknown, however
this fingerprint remains as an identifier for the source imprinted at the very start of the
capturing process.
Now, there are many other residual features that are imprinted in the capturing process
of any camera, such as denoising, compression, contrast enhancement, white balancing,
image sharpening and more, however this method only involves noise residue features
and quantization residue features.
The first step for studying the noise and quantization features is extracting these from the
media, to extract these features the idea for this is to subtract the original frame from it’s
noise-free version using a wavelet denoising filter to obtain the noise-free image. The
specific wavelet denoising filter used is described in the paper [Mihcak, Kozintsev, and
Ramchandran 1999] and will be summarized below.
The wavelet denoise filter is a predictor of the appearance of the clean image data with
the model assuming that the given image data Y consists of clean image data corrupted
by additive white gaussian noise (AWGN) with the known variance σ2
n. Based on the
Minimum Mean Square Error (MMSE) estimation procedure, the wavelet denoise filter
attempts to solve this problem assuming independence between values. Under these
assumptions the optimal predictor for the clean image data consists of:
ˆX(k) =
σ2(k)
σ2(k) + σ2n
Y (k)
where σ2(k) is the variance of the k-th clean image data sample X(k). However because
the variance σ2(k) is unknown, the predictor instead estimates this variance using the
surrounding data points in the given data Y :
ˆX(k) =
ˆσ2(k)
ˆσ2(k) + σ2n
Y (k)
where ˆσ2(k) is the estimated variance for the k-th clean image data sample X(k). When
this estimated variance field σ2(k) is estimated over square window, the paper [Mihcak,
Kozintsev, and Ramchandran 1999] proposes using the estimate which minimizes the
MSE, i.e., they use:
40
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.12: Block-diagram of the denoising algorithm. For each observed noisy coeffi-
cient Y (k) we form the ML estimate ˆσ2(k) of the the variance of the corresponding image
wavelet coefficient X(k) using its local neighborhood. Then, we find the MMSE estimate
ˆX(k) of the original image wavelet coefficient.
Figure 4.13: The process of extracting noise from frames
ˆσ(k) = arg min
Θm E[(σ(k) −Θm(k))2]
where Θm(k) can be approximated based on the surrounding data points Nkm, where
m ∈1, 2, ..., M, surrounding the k-th data sample X(k):
Θ2
m(k) = max

0,
∑
l∈Nkm
Y 2(l) −σ2
n


That provides a summary of the denoise filter described in [Mihcak, Kozintsev, and Ram-
chandran 1999], additional proofs and examples are provided in the paper.
In the case of this work, only two types of residual features are used: noise residue fea-
tures and quantization residue features. Using this wavelet denoise, the noise-free ver-
sion of an image is obtained and this version is then subtracted from the original, leaving
only the noise residue features for that frame.
The correlation between the pixel sub-blocks contained in these noise residue features
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.14: Extraction of frame pixel sub-block noise residue features
are then computed as illustrated in figure 4.14. This corresponds to the correlation re-
lationship between subsequent intra-frames and inter-frames pixel sub-blocks. It is pro-
posed to perform the process of extracting features in the intra-frames and inter-frames
respectively, gaining the correlation between subsequent intra-frames and inter-frames
separately.
To then transform the residue features into a cross-modal subspace, three different types
of correlation processes are used:
• The Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA)
• The Cross-modal Factor Analysis (CFA)
• The Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA)
The descriptions for these methods are given below:
A. Latent Symantic Analysis
Latent semantic analysis (LSA) technique is generally
more popular for use in text information retrieval and there it is used to study underlying se-
mantic relationship between different keywords or sentences/paragraphs. The technique
makes it possible to observe the semantic correlation between the pixel sub-blocks. With
LSA there are four steps involved: the construction of a pixel sub-block feature space,
the normalization, the singular value decomposition (SVD), and the semantic association
measurement. Given the features of n inter-frames and m inter-frames for each of the
pixel sub-blocks, the joint feature space can be expressed as:
X = [V1, ..., Vi, ..., Vn, A1, ..., Ai, ..., An] and Ai = (ai(1), ai(2), ..., ai(t))T
Now, different inter-frame and intra-frame pixel sub-blocks will hugely varied and for this
reason the resulting normalized matrix has all elements normalized to a value between −1
and 1 after which the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) can be performed as follows:
ˆX = S.V.DT
42
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:49==
where S and D are both matrices composing the singular vectors and V is a diagonal
matrix of singular values in a descending order. Now by keeping the most important k
singular vectors in S and D the relationship between the intra-frame and inter-frame pixel
sub-blocks can be approximated with high precision while reducing size of the features.
B. Cross-Modal Factor Analysis
For this correlation process, instead of fusing the
intra-frame and inter-frame features together, we will treat them as two separate subsets,
the problem is then to find an optimal transformation that represents the features in these
two different subsets. The optimization criteria for finding the optimal transformation in the
CFA techniques is defined as follows: Assuming that the two feature subsets are used to
construct two mean-centered matrices X and Y , the orthogonal transformation matrices
A and B that minimize the expression are defined as:
||XA −Y B||2
F
Here the matrices A and B define two orthogonal subspaces where the feature subsets
X and Y are projected. in the equation define two orthogonal sub spaces where coupled
data in X and Y can be projected as close to each other as possible. Now following the
CFA technique, the expression can also be expressed as such:
||XA −Y B||2
F = trace(XXT ) + trace(Y Y T ) −2.trace(XABT Y T )
where the trace of a matrix is expressed as the sum of the diagonal elements. From this
it is observed that the term (XABT Y T ) is maximized by matrices A and B which will then
minimize the rest of the expression above. The matrices A and B can be represented as:
{
A = Sxy
B = Dxy
With these definitions the relationships two feature subsets can be represented by the
vectors ˜X and ˜Y . The feature sets can then be reduced to the k most important vectors
using Pearson correlation, preserving the relationships while lowering the dimensions.
C. Canonical Correlation Analysis
The last correlation process is the Canonical Cor-
relation Analysis (CCA) method. In the CCA method, the transformation matrices A and B
are obtained by maximizing the correlation between XA and XB. The following formular
is used to describe this process:
correlation(XA, XB) = correlation( ˜X, ˜Y ) = diag(λ1, ..., λ2 · · · λi)
With both X and Y representing mean-centered matrices and ˜X = Y.B and σi represents
the largest possible correlation translated features in ˜X and ˜Y .
These three correlation processes can then be used in a Gaussian Mixture Model to study
the correlation between the different pixel sub-blocks found in the video footage.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.15: Row 1: Screenshots from streamed video sequences; Row 2: A copy-move
attack on the scene; Row 3: The tampered regions in the scene. Illustration from [Good-
win and Chetty 2011]
Internet streamed movie data subset
Accuracy %
Residue Features in Cross-Modal Subspace
CFA
CCA
LSA
fintra
85.2
85.2
85.2
finter
83.8
83.8
83.8
fintra−inter
83.8
82.13
77.53
˜fintra−inter
82.18
84.82
81.91
fIntra + fIntra−Inter
90.68
90.86
89.29
fIntra + fInter + fIntra−Inter
90.26
90.26
90.26
fIntra + fInter + fIntra−Inter + ˜fIntra−Inter
92.06
91.85
91.22
Table 4.3: Evaluation of noise residue features for copy-move tamper attacks (Accuracy
%)
Experiments
For the experiments documented in the paper [Goodwin and Chetty 2011], the dataset
used is reported as being a set of video sequences from streamed movies based on
actions and genres, the exact content, size or characteristics of this dataset is unknown
and not described further. For each video sequence in their self-made dataset, a copy-
move tampering is then performed by copying a region of the video footage and placing
it somewhere else in the spatial dimension of the video.
The experiment then consists of training a Gaussian Mixture Model with the extracted
noise and quantization residue features which are correlated with the three different cor-
relation processes. The different correlation processes are evaluated independently. The
reported results can be seen in table 4.3. The most important results shown in table 4.3
is the last row which contains the results for all intra-frame and inter-frame features, at
which the CFA method is described as being the correlation process with the best and
most descriptive features, giving the highest accuracy at 92.06%, with the LSA method
being the one with the poorest results by a small margin.
44
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.16: The precision and recall graph for the implemented noise and quantization
detector, showing each correlation process with all frame correlations included
F1
AUC
AP
CFA
.747
.796
.796
CCA
.747
.784
.784
LSA
.596
.646
.646
Table 4.4: The F1 score, AUC (Area-Under-the-Curve) score and AP (Average Precision)
score for each correlation process with all frame correlations included.
Results
When pitting the noise and quantization residue method against the MFC dataset, the
correlation processes fall of quickly. Using the recommended evaluation metrics for the
MFC dataset as described in section 4.1, seen in figure 4.2.2, the Latent Symantic Analy-
sis (LSA) falls off very quickly due to a large number of false positives as these correlations
seem to react largely to the changes in the noise coming from moving edges in the ob-
served image. The same thing happens with the the Cross-modal Factor Analysis (CFA)
and the Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA), though not to the same degree.
Considering that the noise and quantization residue method was created with the goal of
detecting copy-move tampering, this method also works at detecting video splicing. It is
however difficult to conclude anything from the MFC dataset when things are related to
copy-move or video splicing, as there are only 8 videos in total across all the datasets that
contain these types of tampering. An example of a detected video splicing can be seen
in figure 4.17.
The final results for the noise and quantization residue method when used on the MFC
datasets are shown in table 4.4, with the CFA correlation process giving the best results
with an F1 score of 0.747, an AUC score of 0.796 and an AP score at 0.796. This is however
still significantly worse than results reported in other current state-of-the-art methods.
4.2.3
Deep Convolutional Neural Network for General Graphics Forgery
Detection
From using machine learning it seems natural to continue to and apply deep learning
methods to domain of video manipulation detection, though this is a relatively new thing
to consider as the topic has been rather neglected up to the present day. Deep learning
is more or less the modern method of studying correlation, patterns and abnormalities, in
this case we are looking for inconsistencies or abnormalities in the frames of videos.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.17: A snapshot of a video contained in the MFC Dev2 dataset. The detected
video splicing pixel sub-blocks are marked in green.
It has been a very common thing to use in the field of image forensics [Wen and Xu 2019]
and many other areas of study, however using deep learning for video manipulation detec-
tion remains a rather new subject of study as the area of detecting video manipulations
still seems to remain rather underdeveloped. It is far more common for deep learning
to be used to solve problems such as facial recognition, object recognition and similar
classification problems.
In this case, in this very recently invented method, it is a rather direct attempt at using a
convolutional neural network to detect abnormal frames/images, however quiet strangely
it doesn’t go the full way to use a 3-dimensional CNN to observe full frame sequences,
but instead it only observes single frames and is intended to pick out anything unusual.
Proposed in the paper [Kaur and Jindal 2020b] is the most recent state-of-the-art deep-
learning-based method for video manipulation detection.
Along with the detection of frame abnormalities, the idea proposed is to perform semantic
segmentation to separate objects contained in the specific frame judged to be manipulated
and using a separate neural network to then detect the part or object that is standing out
in an abnormal fashion. With this the intend is to detect region tampering performed on a
video, pointing out both the frames where it is performed and the exact location in these
frames.
Defining the Convolutional Neural Network
Building on the hypothesis setup in the paper [Kaur and Jindal 2020b], that a video se-
quence contains a set of consecutive frames that are largely similar with the sole differ-
ence being moving objects in an otherwise analogous background. These frames can be
resized for faster computation and a CNN model can take these frames as input, extract-
ing significant features with increasing complexity for each consecutive layer.
Each video frame is resized to the resolution of 114 × 114 × 3, 114 in width, 114 in height
and 3 RGB color channels. The input layer of the network should take these frames,
where these should be zero centered and normalized in order regulate the spatial extent
46
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:53==
of the output, before continuing to a 12-layered CNN. The 12 layers CNN configuration is
described in figure 4.19.
The input layer takes the video frames stored in a folder and grasps the raw pixels of the
frames. Their video frame is 114 × 114 × 3 i.e. 114 wide, 114 in height, and contains 3
color RGB channels. Their input is Zero Center normalized as it is always appropriate to
pad input volume around the border with zeros to regulate the spatial extent of the output
volume. Now they define layers of the deep convolutional neural network (DCNN). The
12-layered CNN configuration is described in the following figure 4.19.
The defined convolutional neural network described in figure 4.19 consists of 3 sets of
convolutions, a ReLU activation and a max pooling, these finally leading into 3 fully con-
nected and a softmax classification.
Each hidden layer in this CNN is given weight and bias that apply to each feature matrix
as the features move through the neural network, giving each feature map it’s own weight.
These weights are described as follows:
Weight = Dp × Wk × Hk
where Dp is the preceding layers descriptors, Wk is the width of the kernel and Hk is the
height of the kernel. All weights are initialized using 32 high-pass filters with a 5 × 5 × 3
size.
Looking at the convolutional neural network defined in figure 4.19, the first convolutional
layer is 5 × 5 × 3 with 1 stride and 4 zero-padding on all sides. The filtered matrix given
as output from the convolutional layer is then fed to a ReLu activation and max pooling
layer with 2 stride and no padding (0) to reduce the complexity of the feature matrix. After
all, the resulting feature matrix coming from a hidden layer is partially defined by these
parameters, so if W is the width, H is the height and St is the stride, then the height Hfm
and width Wfm of the resulting feature matrix is defined by:
Wfm = (Wimage −Wfilter)/St + 1
Hfm = (Himage −Hfilter) · St + 1
This set of 3 layers, the convolution, ReLU activation and max pooling is repeated 2 more
times with an increasing size in the convolution, attempting to extract the most important
features. While training the network, the performance is evaluated by a Stochastic Gradi-
ent Descent with Momentum (SGDM) optimizer with a value of 0.9. The Learn Rate Drop
Factor is 0.5, Learn Rate Drop Period is 10, L2 Regularization is 0.004 and Mini Batch Size
is 100 with 1000 Max Epochs.
Correlation Classification
For the classification of frames comes the assumptions made at the beginning of the paper
[Kaur and Jindal 2020b], that any one video is made up of analogous frames with the
solitary differences being objects in motion. So with the background in each frame being
comparable, at can be expected that there will be a great level of similarity between frames
due to these comparable backgrounds. Because of the inherent dimensions in video,
it is simple to consider these similarities to be of two different types, spatial correlation
and temporal correlation. Spatial correlation would then be the indicator of the similarity
between two regions contained in two different frames, while temporal correlation would
be the similarity between two different frames in a sequence.
The spatial correlation can be defined as the matching between ni non-overlapping blocks
from a frame and nj overlapping blocks of another frame, the correlation between these
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
47
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.18: The pipeline proposed by the paper. Illustration from [Kaur and Jindal 2020b]
48
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:55==
Figure 4.19: The convolutional neural network used for classification. Illustration from
[Kaur and Jindal 2020b]
blocks can then be captured in a ni × nj matrix. The correlation between two arrays X
and Y can be computed by using the following equation:
Cor(X, Y ) =
∑
m
∑
n(Xmn −Xmean)(Ymn −Ymean)
√
(∑
m
∑
n(Xmn −Xmean)2) · (∑
m
∑
n(Ymn −Ymean)2)
When performed in this context where each array is a spatial block or region from a frame,
this can then be used to calculate the spatial correlation of frames.
For the calculation of the temporal correlation, that being the correlation between a frame
Xn and another frame Yn, we can compute this with the following equation:
Rxy(m) = E{Xn+mY∗n} = E{XnY∗n−m}
That would give the full correlation between two frames. The spatial correlation and tem-
poral correlation can be used to categorize a frame as being either pristine or forged,
with the correlation coefficients being considered the degree of similarity. With this the
algorithm for categorizing frames as either pristine or forged goes as follows:
1. Get the number of frames to be classified as NF.
2. For NF, calculate temporal correlation between frames.
3. For length 1 to NF −1, calculate spatial correlation between blocks within frames.
4. Using correlation values Cor, calculate average correlation Coravg for all frames.
5. If Cor > Coravg, the frame is classified as pristine.
6. If
{
Cor > Coravg
, classified as pristine
Cor < Coravg
, classified as forged
Semantic Segmentation
Continuing the process proposed in the paper [Kaur and Jindal 2020b], once a frame has
been classified as either pristine or forged, the frames categorized as forged are to be
feed to another neural network for segmentation and localization of the tampered region/s.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.20: The illustrated result for the GRIP Tank video. (a) Pristine frames, (b) forged
frames, (c) ground-truth, (d) forged region detected in pink shade. Illustration from [Kaur
and Jindal 2020b]
The frames should be segmented semantically into meaningful fragments and the neural
network should then be trained to classify each fragment individually as being pristine or
forged. segmentation is done by partitioning the frame into numerous smaller fragment
with each fragment representing an object in the frame, the aim is then to train the neural
network on the segmented frames. The paper [Kaur and Jindal 2020b] defines a 90
layer convolutional neural network for training. The input layer should normalize the input
before sending it on to the hidden layers, further, each activation layer should normalize
the output from the preceding layer by subtracting the mean and isolating the standard
deviation. The first 45 layers is a set of convolution, normalization, ReLU activation and
max pooling layers. The last 45 layers are the set decoding layers, the layers that allow
the network to classify the fragment as pristine or forged. The goal is then to use the
segmentation and this neural network to create a binary-mask for distinguishing regions
in each frame and marking each region as either pristine or forged.
Experiments
For evaluation of their method proposed in the paper [Kaur and Jindal 2020b], they used
the REWIND dataset and the GRIP dataset, both datasets are described in section 3.1
(Section 3.1.1 and 3.1.2 respectively). Reportedly using their proposed method of classi-
fication, the correlation between different frames are spatially and temporally compared
and the mean correlation is calculated for each video, classifying each frame falling be-
low the mean correlation of the video as being forged. The supposed robustness of the
method is shown in figure 4.20 and 4.21, showing the results from the GRIP dataset, the
tank video and girl video respectively. Reportedly the method reaches a detection accu-
racy of 100% on the GRIP and REWIND datasets, with the first epoch giving a 98% test
accuracy for both the temporal detection and the spatial detection and reaching a 100%
test accuracy after an approximate 1000 epochs of training, this is visualized in figure 4.22
where the learning progress for the segmented classifier is shown. Their final ROC curve
is shown in figure 4.23 with the expected 1.0 AUC score from a 100% model.
50
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.21: The illustrated result for the GRIP Girl video. (a) Pristine frames, (b) forged
frames, (c) ground-truth, (d) forged region detected in pink shade. Illustration from [Kaur
and Jindal 2020b]
Figure 4.22: The learning progress of the segmented classification model. Illustration
from [Kaur and Jindal 2020b].
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
51
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.23: The ROC curve showing 100% accuracy. Illustration from [Kaur and Jindal
2020b].
F1
AUC
AP
.361
.508
.021
Table 4.5: The F1 score, AUC (Area-Under-the-Curve) score and AP (Average Precision)
score for the implemented deep convolutional neural network.
These results are compared to the 92.6% result of another recent method proposed in the
paper [L. Su and C. Li 2018], though it should be noted that both methods use different
datasets even if this is not mentioned in the original paper.
Results
The results when pitting this convolutional neural network against the MFC datasets can
probably rightly be described as poor. Before getting to the segmentation and fragment
classification described in the previous section, we have the frame-level classification.
The precision and recall curve for the frame-level classification can be seen in figure
4.24. Here it can be seen that the ability for this neural network to extract meaningful
features and reliably distinguish manipulated frames from pristine ones, is pretty much
none-existent. To the network, there is no distinguishing factors found that can allow it
to separate the manipulated frames from the pristine ones. This is further seen in table
4.5, where the AP score shows .021 giving basically no precision at all and with a low F1
score of .361 showing that the classifier remains in the area of randomly guessing even
after extended training.
The reason for this is likely the extreme variety contained in these general manipulation
datasets, the MFC datasets, which means that the network is challenged to effectively
learn the multiple different features that will separate each manipulation from a pristine
frame and it fails to do so with the amount of data given. The original experiment for this
method was one using only a small dataset, the GRIP and REWIND datasets, which is
completely focused on copy-move attack and no other form of manipulation. This would
also mean that because the MFC datasets contains almost no instances of this manip-
52
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.24: The precision and recall graph for the implemented deep convolutional neural
network for general graphics forgery detector
ulation, being a dataset with no particular focus, would mean that this general graphics
forgery detector is actually designed and developed as a copy-move detector and is un-
fairly pitted against this dataset.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
53
==PAGE:60==
5
Facial Video Tampering Detection
5.1
Introduction to Morph-cut
With the rise of computer generated multimedia content and the improvements to the
methods of fabricating realistic-looking visual and audio content, so has the concerns re-
lated to being able to distinguish fabricated content from the pure (non-generated/tampered)
content. When talking of generated multimedia content, the thoughts will generally move
towards things like fully or partially computer generated scenes or characters like deep-
fakes, which aims to fool the viewer into thinking that a piece of media is genuine and true
to reality when in fact it is not.
Deepfakes, computer generated content created using artificial neural networks is now a
well researched subject after it was given media attention and potential for misuse of tech-
niques such as deepfakes were made public. With this a great amount of research has
gone into studying these methods as well as how to detect them [Verdoliva 2020]. How-
ever the necessary computing-power and expert knowledge required to create a deepfake
also means that the techniques have not become as prevalent as may have been previ-
ously believed. For common use, unit-selection-based methods remain far more common
though less researched as these are far more flexible when in use and are often provided
as one-click solutions in video editing applications such Adobe Premiere.
Only rarely will the ideas for generated content go towards things related to inter-frame
forgery, the manipulation or generation of full frames. It does not help that it is often chal-
lenging to come up with or find examples of inter-frame forgery that are not immediately
visible to the naked-eye. It has been shown through subjective tests that methods such as
this remain far more difficult for humans to detect compared to something like intra-frame
forgery [Khodabakhsh, Ramachandra, and Busch 2019]. When video forensics does look
into inter-frame forgery the research is often aimed at the discovery of insertions, deletions
or duplications of frames, however there is a rather recent video manipulation method that
is in common use by editors of TV, documentaries and other such media content, but has
so far (to our knowledge) not been studied. The morph-cut, as it is generally referred to
specially among users of Adobe’s video editing software applications, is video transition
that involves the joining of two separate video segments via the generation of new syn-
thetic in-between frames, giving the illusion of a single continuous video segment where
it is actually several segments joined together. Even when done with minimal effort, this
transition has shown to be very effective at deceiving viewers into believing that a piece
of content is authentic, when in fact it is not.
The goal of this transition is indeed to be invisible and to make it seem to a viewer that
no actual cut from one piece of video footage to another took place, effectively hiding
what could potentially be jarring jump-cuts and improving the experience for the viewer.
As such, this and similar transitions are now often used by editors working on interviews
and content involving an actor on a static background to remove pauses in the conversa-
tion, ’Um’s and ’Eh’s or other such speech disfluency, the potential is even there to jump
between completely different segments of an interview, all while having the viewer never
notice it happened. These invisible transitions are very common in media as they gen-
erally go unnoticed (as is the intend) and notice is only ever given to then when they go
very wrong, for example when a child appeared out of thin air during an interview on UK
54
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:61==
Reference Frame
Target Frame
Constructed Frames
Figure 5.1: An example of a morph-cut transition.
television causing great confusion among viewers1. Of course it then goes that with this
great potential to harmlessly deceive viewers, there comes great potential for a malicious
individual to deceive in far more harmful ways. With techniques similar to those used in
[Berthouzoz, W. Li, and Agrawala 2012] it would be a simple process to edit an interview in
such a way that you could sort out single words or vocalisations and join them together to
produce entirely new sentences, diametrically opposite or entirely unrelated to what was
actually said, potentially causing great harm by seeding distrust, spread disinformation,
damage an individual’s integrity or worse.
A problem with studying methods such as the Adobe morph-cut is that the exact algorithms
for how these methods are generally considered to be trade secrets and so no public infor-
mation is available about these methods other than their visual observed effects. As such
a level of hypothesising is needed to decode the characteristics of methods such as those
used in Adobe’s Morph-Cut or Avid’s2 Fluid Morph. Based on the names and effects it can
be easily assumed that morphing of the image is the core of the method, with the algorithm
using the visible joining frames to gradually transition between the frames using a combi-
nation of interpolation, warping and/or morphing to construct new in-between frames. An
example morph-cut created by Adobe Premiere is shown in figure 5.1, showing the two
reference frames on each side with the constructed frames marked in the middle of the
figure. Likely similar to methods such as those used in face-specific warping [Dale et al.
2011], intermediate frame mining [Berthouzoz, W. Li, and Agrawala 2012] or other such
warping and morphing methods, used to create a sequence of intermittent frames in a
similar way to how single-image face morphing is performed in biometrics and the related
detection methods developed [Scherhag, Rathgeb, Merkle, et al. 2019].
5.2
Dataset
The first issue that comes up when looking into the detection of unit-selection-based video
manipulation, is that no datasets are available of a reasonable size and focus on such
manipulations. In order to stimulate further research into the area of inter-frame forgery
detection and the study of unit-selection-based video manipulations, we hope to provide
a generated dataset of videos with a quantity that would allow the data to support current
deep learning-based methods and would provide a representative level variation to sup-
port the development of robust detection methods for the detection of unit-selection-based
video manipulations. In this section the process of creating a new dataset of morph-cuts
is documented.
The development of deep learning-based methods requires a great quantity of applicable
data, far more than any other learning algorithm invented to this day. The amount of data
required for a dataset to support deep learning methods effectively means that the man-
ual generation of data of this quantity would be highly impractical, instead requiring the
1https://metro.co.uk/2018/12/13/viewers-baffled-child-appears-teleport-tv-interview-8244024/
2https://www.avid.com/
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
55
==PAGE:62==
process of data generation to be automated. For the generation of morph-cut videos we
choose to use Adobe Premiere Pro, a very popular video edition application that features
the seamless morph-cut transition. To help with the process of automation, Adobe pro-
vides a scripting language called Extendscript which runs directly together with an Adobe
application and allows for partial automation of repetitive tasks. This is what partially al-
lows us to use the Adobe morph-cut transition in our new dataset. There are however
limitations to this, which means that others methods were required to fully automate the
process of creating our morph-cut dataset. Making use of various automation scripting
languages running on the Microsoft Windows platform, it is was possible to fully automate
the process of generating precise morph-cuts to our specifications.
In order to achieve representative results with the transition being as seamless as possi-
ble, we wrote a script which solo purpose was to select the cutting points for a morph-cut
in each video. Taking into account attributes such as background, body posture and struc-
tural similarity using the structural similarity index [Z. Wang and Bovik 2009a], the script
would rate every pair of frames for their potential for a morph-cut. The script rates each
pair and for each video it picks out the most fit pair for a morph-cut, the most fit pair are
however not the most structurally similar frames, as near perfect one-to-one frames would
produce perfectly invisible morph-cuts which are not representative for how a morph-cut
is used. As such a perfect or near-perfect pair of frames is not allowed, instead the script
picks the most fit pair that still have slight differences between them, an approximate 5%
difference in total at best.
For the selection of videos, in order to ensure the quality of the generated dataset, we re-
lied on a large database of publicly available interviews from which we could select videos
for use in our set. Based on supplied data concerning the movement of a face bounding-
box, we were able to quickly rank each video and select the most suitable candidates for
the application of the morph-cut.
As a final step in the process of creating the dataset, we investigated all the resulting ma-
nipulated videos manually for abnormalities and all videos that contained visible artifacts
were discarded to ensure the data quality.
5.3
Morph-cut Detection
In the case of the morph-cut and techniques like it, we assume that to create a smooth tran-
sition between two separate frames, an amount of frame interpolation has to be done to
create new intermittent frames for the transition. These frames would by necessity be con-
structed based on information extracted from the frames before and after the transition, in
order to avoid abrupt changes in the visual content during the transition. This would imply
that, because these new frames are constructed based on information from surrounding
frames, then no new information is added to the constructed intermittent frames. This is
in contrast to the natural variability of authentic frames in video footage, where the con-
tent of frames evolve in a partially unpredictable fashion, so even should you know the
content of two frames separated by a single frame, this single intermittent frame would by
necessity contain tiny variations that are unpredictable with just the information contained
in the two surrounding frames.
Consider that a frame consists of two factors, redundant information that is predictable p
from the frame before and after, content that does not change significantly between frames
and information that is unpredictable u based on surrounding frames, the factor explaining
natural variability between frames. For frame interpolation, the task of creating a new
frame based on two given frames, a frame interpolation would be able to accurately predict
56
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:63==
Video parameters
MPEG-4 (Base Media / Version 2)
480p (854 × 480)
30 FPS (Frames-Per-Second)
AVC (NTSC)
Table 5.1: The parameters used to create each video in the constructed dataset.
p, however it would be unable to predict u based on information given. During the design
and training of frame interpolation methods, if there are no specific mechanisms made
to consider u, then the method would be forced to generate an average u to minimize
the loss from expected results, this is a u that would never occur in pristine data and
this characteristic of frame interpolation methods often results in what is considered to be
’over-smooth’ footage.
Based on this hypothesis on frame interpolation and the characteristics of the morph-cut,
we can assume that a predicted intermediate frame would have more similarity to an in-
terpolated frame than an authentic frame. The reasoning behind this is that all frames
would show the predictable information p, but only authentic/pristine frames would show
the unpredictable variation u to any significant degree, while a interpolated or morphed
frame would create an over-smoothed average u. It then follows that a u factor coming
from an authentic/pristine frame would be greater compared to a u factor from an inter-
polated frame. To make use of this behaviour for morph-cut or interpolation detection, we
can predict the interpolated frame based on the frame before and after, then use the pre-
diction error, the difference between the prediction and the observed frame, to distinguish
an interpolated frame from a pristine frame.
5.4
Experiment Setup
To perform the experiment of our proposed method, we first construct a large dataset
of unit-selection-based facial video manipulations using the process described in section
5.2. This dataset would allow us to empirically verify the hypothesis made in section 5.3
as well as judge the performance of this hypothesis compared to four applicable methods
from our literature. The specifications, further details and description of the experiment
setup are explored in the following section.
5.4.1
Dataset Details
As a basis for the new morph-cut dataset, the VoxCeleb2[Nagraniy, Chungy, and Zis-
serman 2017] dataset was used, this dataset contains a large collection of celebrity in-
terview videos hosted on the video-sharing platform YouTube. For video selection, the
videos were ranked by movement, suitable videos were collected and examined for po-
tential points suitable for morph-cuts. The most suitable points found are joined together
with a morph-cut transition. This process is automatic and the final dataset contains 1000
videos with an average duration of 2.75 seconds, adding up to a total approximately 83, 000
frames of which approximately 27, 500 are morphed, given a distribution of 33% morphed
frames to pristine frames. The dataset is split into 3 sets corresponding to a training set,
a validation set and a testing set according to the numbers provided in table 5.2. The
exact specifications for the videos contained in our new morph-cut dataset are described
in table 5.1. All videos are accompanied with frame-level labels describing whether each
frame is a morphed or pristine frame, thereby ground-truth is provided at the most basic
level for the dataset.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
57
==PAGE:64==
Set
Count
Train
700
Dev
150
Test
150
Table 5.2: The number of videos in each set of our constructed dataset.
Figure 5.2: Given three consecutive frames, I0, I1, and I2, the proposed CNN-based
model aims to produce high-quality interpolated frames, I′
0.5 and I′
1.5. To this end, the
model maps the given frames to the interpolated frames and then map them back by con-
structing I′′
1 through interpolating between I′
0.5 and I′
1.5. The proposed cycle consistency
loss facilitates model learning by enforcing the similarity between I1 and I′′
1 . Illustration
from [Y.-L. Liu et al. 2019]
58
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:65==
Figure 5.3: Example of prediction error images of cropped faces in a sequence of pristine
frames (top) and morph-cut frames (bottom). The images visualize the absolute difference
between the interpolation output and the actual frame.
5.4.2
Proposed Detector
To create the prediction of the interpolated frames, the pre-trained CyclicGen[Y.-L. Liu
et al. 2019] convolutional neural network was used. Using a repeated convolutional pro-
cess, the network is able to generate high-quality interpolated frames from the information
contained in two separate frames.
To summarize, the training process for the CyclicGen CNN works like this:
• Given three consecutive frames I0, I1 and I3.
• The network is tasked with interpolating frame I0 and I1 together and frame I1 and
I2 together, thereby creating two new interpolated frames I′
0.5 and I′
1.5.
• The network is then tasked with interpolation the frames I′
0.5 and I′
1.5 together into
I′′
1 in an attempt to recreate I1 from the information contained in the interpolated
frames I′
0.5 and I′
1.5.
• The similarity between the interpolated I′′
1 and the actual I1 defines the loss for the
network.
The process defined for the CyclicGen CNN is further illustrated in figure 5.2. For pre-
dictions the network is simply provided two frames to interpolate using currently trained
weights.
With the CyclicGen CNN, for each frame in a video, a corresponding interpolated frame is
constructed based on the frame before and after, the prediction error is then calculated by
the difference between the predicted interpolated frame and the actual frame, resulting
in a prediction error image. The visualization of these prediction error images can be
seen in figure 5.3 with examples of prediction error images created from both pristine and
morphed frames. These prediction error images are then feed into a simple convolutional
neural network for frame-level classification. The input to the network is augmented with
the prediction error images of two frames before and two frames after the frame to be
classified, resulting in an input shape of size 64×64×5. The description of the archicture
used for this simple convolutional neural network can be seen in figure 5.3.
5.4.3
Baseline Methods
For baseline methods, we used a number of recent reproducible detection methods for
face-morph detection[Asaad and Jassim 2017], time-aware Deepfake detection [Güera
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
59
==PAGE:66==
Layer
Output Shape
Parameters
Conv2D
(62, 62, 128)
Kernel=(3,3)
MaxPooling2D
(31, 31, 128)
Pool=(2,2)
Conv2D
(29, 29, 128)
Kernel=(3,3)
MaxPooling2D
(14, 14, 128)
Pool=(2,2)
Conv2D
(12, 12, 256)
Kernel=(3,3)
MaxPooling2D
(6, 6, 256)
Pool=(2,2)
Conv2D
(4, 4, 512)
Kernel=(3,3)
MaxPooling2D
(2, 2, 512)
Pool=(2,2)
Flatten
(2048)
Dense
(512)
DropOut
(512)
Dense
(2)
Table 5.3: The network architecture of the classifier. The network contains 1.6M trainable
parameters.
and Delp 2018], inter-frame forgery detection [Bakas and Naskar 2018] and general pur-
pose image classification [Chollet 2017]. Among the four methods, [Güera and Delp 2018]
and [Bakas and Naskar 2018] utilize temporal information while [Asaad and Jassim 2017]
and [Chollet 2017] rely only on static face images.
The first method used for our baseline is based on topological data analysis for image
tampering detection described in a paper of the same name[Asaad and Jassim 2017].
The method was originally proposed for detecting morphing attacks on face images such
as passports and similar scenarios. Made to extract features from the texture of the image
and classifying images as morphed or pristine based on this information, this also means
that the method is very reliant on the quality of the observed image and highly susceptible
to degradation of that quality intentional or otherwise. The method works by constructing
a 1-skeleton of the full rips simplicial complex for each face image given, which is then
fed into an SVM classifier which should then be able to classify the image as being either
morphed or pristine.
The second method used for our baseline is one based on the use of a recurrent neural
network for deepfake detection [Güera and Delp 2018]. Originally used for the detection
of deepfakes by using a recurrent neural network to detect intra-frame inconsistencies
and temporal inconsistencies between subsequent frames and detecting deepfakes from
authentic videos. The network is intended to look for the presence of small pixel-wide
seams, flickering, inconsistencies in illumination and other such abnormalities and by the
presence or lack of these characteristics, it can judge if a frame was produced as part
of a deepfake process or not. Should the methods involved in creating a morph-cut fall
into similar pitfalls, it would be possible for this neural network to accurately distinguish
morphed frames from pristine ones.
The third method used for our baseline is a 3D convolutional neural network for gen-
eral inter-frame forgery detection [Bakas and Naskar 2018]. Intended to detect various
inter-frame type forgeries by extraction spatial and temporal features from a sequence of
frames, the 3D CNN is tasked with providing a video-level classification if a given video
contains a case of inter-frame forgery or not. For our purposes, we are going to train and
fed this 3D CNN with a sequence of frames that either do or do not contain a morph-cut
transition and task the neural network with distinguishing the sequence that do contain
60
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:67==
morph-cut transitions from those that don’t. Should the features related to general inter-
frame forgeries such as frame duplications, insertions or deletions appear in the morph-
cut transitions, this 3D CNN should reliably be able to detect these and classify these
sequences as being tampered with.
The last method for our baseline is the pre-trained image classification network, the Xcep-
tionNet [Chollet 2017]. With an outstanding performance on both general image classifi-
cation, action classification and deepfake detection, the XceptionNet is a proven powerful
convolutional neural network used in many fields and with the ability to solve a wide variety
of problems and tasks. For the reason of it being one of the most powerful classifiers at
the current time, we will use it to attempt the task of performing frame-level classification
of frames, by fine-tuning the pre-trained network to the task of morph-cut detection and
have it classify if given frames are morphed or pristine.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
61
==PAGE:68==
Method
Test Acc.
Topological Data Analysis Asaad and Jassim 2017
50.2%
Deepfake Video Detection Güera and Delp 2018
59.0%
Inter-Frame Forgery C3D Bakas and Naskar 2018
67.4%
Fine-tuned XceptionNet Chollet 2017
77.0%
Proposed Method
95.1%
Table 5.4: The detection accuracy of the proposed method in comparison to the baseline
methods. The results show the frame-level performance.
5.5
Results
Table 5.4 summarizes the detection accuracy of the proposed method compared to our
baseline methods. All methods are trained and validated using the training and validation
set respectively from our new constructed morph-cut dataset, the values found in table
5.4 are the values given when the methods are finally evaluated in the test set from our
dataset. Our proposed method achieves the highest detection accuracy of 95.1% on the
test set, followed surprisingly by the fine-tuned XceptionNet at 77.0%. The other three
baseline methods show rather limited success in detecting the morph-cut frames with
an acceptable level of precision. The detection-error-tradeoff (DET) curve for the top 3
best-performing methods is shown in Figure 5.4 and our proposed method achieves an
acceptable detection equal-error-rate (EER) of 4.95%.
Once again the prediction error images visualized in figure 5.3 are given as input to the
classifier in our proposed method, where the natural variations described in section 5.3
are clearly visible as the colored pixel artifacts that show up in the pristine frames, these
natural variations are not present or only present in very limited degree in the morphed
frames. To further support the hypothesis that the natural variation found in a pristine
would be greater compared the variation present in a morphed frame, figure 5.5 shows
the probability density distribution of the average interpolation prediction error per frame
with pristine frame and morphed frames being represented with different colors. It can be
seen that the average interpolation prediction error, and the natural variations contained
within, is shifting towards zero for the morphed frames with the pristine frames showing
a generally greater difference from the interpolation prediction. However there remains
a great amount of overlap in the distribution, showing that the average prediction error
is insufficient to fully capture the distinguishing factors between pristine and morphed
frames. Still our proposed method is shown to be very effective in further isolating useful
features from these prediction error images to distinguish a pristine frame from a frame
created as part of a morph-cut.
62
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:69==
Figure 5.4: The DET curve for the proposed method, the fine-tuned Xception-Net[Chollet
2017], and the inter-frame forgery detection method[Bakas and Naskar 2018]. The equal-
error-rate (EER) value for the aforementioned methods is shown in the figure legend.
Figure 5.5: The probability density distribution of average prediction error per frame for
pristine and morphed frames across the dataset.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
63
==PAGE:70==
6
Discussion
The original intention for this thesis was to look into the field of video forensics by repro-
ducing a set of old and new state-of-the-art methods and finishing by collecting these into
a full network with the hope of achieving robust and reliable detection of video manipula-
tions. However the project never got to a state where this would be reasonable and after
all this time of researching and implementing state-of-the-art methods dedicated to de-
tecting various video manipulations, the original intended concluding stage for this project
was found to be mostly unfeasible.
Centered around the MFC datasets from essentially day-one, due to these datasets being
both the most recent, the largest and most relevant datasets in the field of video foren-
sics at the current time, a lot of time was spent exploring these datasets and gradually
evaluating them as a whole. The MFC datasets are incredibly varied in the types of ma-
nipulations that are applied to their data, however this also comes with a downside in
that each manipulation gets very limited representation. As may have been observed in
section 4.1, the numbers supplied by the creators of the datasets are hugely exaggerated
based on the amount of data that is actually available, the data that is there is generally of
good quality, but the quantity is lacking and the highly skewed distribution of ∼30% tam-
pered videos and the very low number of videos per specific manipulation type, means
that it is challenging to develop reliable methods using this dataset. The Media Forensics
Challenge are trying to do a lot with very little.
The MFC datasets remain the most relevant datasets in the field of video forensics mainly
because the options are very limited, section 3.1 described the far majority of currently
available datasets for video forensics and the majority of these have too low a quantity of
video forgeries/tamperings to offer reliable solutions to the problems posed.
These problems bleed into the methods described in section 4.2 when evaluated using
this dataset, with the exception being the Stream Descriptor[Güera et al. 2019] method
as this method discards the majority of data given in favor of performing video-level de-
tection and ignoring the actual content, thereby ignoring the degree of variety contained
in the dataset and instead bringing the problem into a far simpler domain where it can
be solved for this dataset. The Noise and Quantization Residue[Chetty, Biswas, and R.
Singh 2010] method gets decent results by investigating the correlations between frames
and simplifying the problem in this way, where the Deep Convolutional Neural Network for
General Graphics Forgery[Kaur and Jindal 2020b] method attempts to attack the problem
head on and seemingly fails.
What should be taken away from this, is that the field of video forensics is still in an early
stage. The foundation for doing research in the field is still not fully formed, with low
amounts of high quality data suitable for research creating unstable ground for the study
of video manipulation detection. With a lot of research in the field currently being done
behind closed doors, with datasets that are self-made and not released, without a code
base or released source code, resulting in only a paper describing results that might or
might not be reproducible. Effectively performing the act of going behind a curtain, setting
the bar, jumping and then saying you made it while claiming state-of-the-art.
64
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:71==
Figure 6.1: The DET curve for the reproduced methods, the Stream Descriptors[Güera
et al. 2019], the Noise and Quantization Residue[Chetty, Biswas, and R. Singh 2010] and
the Deep Convolutional Neural Network for Graphics Forgery Detection[Kaur and Jindal
2020b]. The equal-error-rate (EER) value for the aforementioned methods are shown in
the figure legend.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
65
==PAGE:72==
6.1
Future Work
As things are at the time of writing, this project has rather little potential for continuation.
This is partially because of an overestimation on part of project’s expected difficulty and
goal, but also because of arguably the current state of the subject of video manipulation
detection research. Before this project could hope of continuing, the field of video foren-
sics would have to evolve further. To gain more robust detection methods and better data
to build these methods upon.
A great boon for the field would be more focused datasets with a higher quantity of data
of good quality, having such a foundation for study available publicly would undoubtedly
stimulate the growth of the field. Creating the methods for the creation of these large-scale
data quantities should be of a higher priority, allowing the creation of an environment for
better study and shared research rather than this currently rather dis-functional research
environment that has plenty of ideas, but very little of a way to build and test them.
To evolve further, the field of video forensics needs better data and more focused public
datasets to define a common bar, made with a sufficient quantity to satisfy the needs
of modern deep learning based learning algorithms, to further stimulate the research into
the field of video forensics and the development of more generalized and robust detection
methods.
66
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:73==
7
Conclusion
This thesis was aimed at producing a video manipulation detection model that comprised
several state-of-the-art methods for the detecting the tampering of modern digital video
content. It evolved into an exploration of the field of video forensics, reproducing 3 video
manipulation methods of varying complexity, methodology and evaluating these meth-
ods against the current state-of-the-art dataset that is the Media Forensics Challenge
datasets. As part of this evaluation all methods were examined using the same metrics
recommended by the National Institute of Standards and Technology for use with the Me-
dia Forensics Challenge datasets and all methods can be compared.
Furthermore the thesis delved further into the subject of unit-selection-based video ma-
nipulations, creating a new large-scale, publicly available dataset focused on the unit-
selection-based video transition the morph-cut. Together with this a method for detection
of the morph-cut was proposed, achieving a very acceptable EER of 4.95% for the frame-
level detection of a morphed frame.
All in all, the final goal of this work was not achieved, but the work done remained hugely
informative and gave a great amount of insight into this field of research, while adding a
small bit to this hopefully still maturing field of video forensics.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
67
==PAGE:74==
Bibliography
Mercier, Grégoire et al. (2019). Video Verification in the Fake News Era. Springer Inter-
national Publishing. Chap. 6. ISBN: 9783030267520. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-26752-0.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-26752-0%7B%5C_%7D6.
Kaur, Harpreet and Neeru Jindal (2020a). “Image and Video Forensics: A Critical Survey”.
In: Wireless Personal Communications 112.2, pp. 1281–1302. ISSN: 1572834X. DOI:
10.1007/s11277-020-07102-x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11277-020-07102-x.
Sabir, Ekraam et al. (2019a). “Recurrent Convolutional Strategies for Face Manipulation
Detection in Videos”. In: arXiv: 1905.00582. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.00582.
Kaur, Harpreet and Neeru Jindal (Jan. 2020b). “Deep Convolutional Neural Network for
Graphics Forgery Detection in Video”. In: Wireless Personal Communications 0123456789.
ISSN: 1572834X. DOI: 10.1007/s11277-020-07126-3. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11277-020-07126-3%20http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s11277-020-07126-3.
Bestagini, Paolo et al. (2013a). “Local tampering detection in video sequences”. In: 2013
IEEE International Workshop on Multimedia Signal Processing, MMSP 2013, pp. 488–
493. DOI: 10.1109/MMSP.2013.6659337.
– (2013b). “Local tampering detection in video sequences”. In: 2013 IEEE International
Workshop on Multimedia Signal Processing, MMSP 2013, pp. 488–493. DOI: 10.1109/
MMSP.2013.6659337.
D’Avino, Dario et al. (2017). “Autoencoder with recurrent neural networks for video forgery
detection”. In: IS and T International Symposium on Electronic Imaging Science and
Technology, pp. 92–99. ISSN: 24701173. DOI: 10.2352/ISSN.2470-1173.2017.7.MWSF-
330. arXiv: 1708.08754.
Rössler, Andreas et al. (2018). “FaceForensics: A Large-scale Video Dataset for Forgery
Detection in Human Faces”. In: arXiv: 1803.09179. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1803.
09179.
Guan, Haiying et al. (2019a). “MFC datasets: Large-scale benchmark datasets for media
forensic challenge evaluation”. In: Proceedings - 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Ap-
plications of Computer Vision Workshops, WACVW 2019 4, pp. 63–72. DOI: 10.1109/
WACVW.2019.00018.
Wang, Weihong and Hany Farid (2007). “Exposing digital forgeries in video by detecting
duplication”. In: MM and Sec’07 - Proceedings of the Multimedia and Security Workshop
2007 2.3, pp. 35–42. DOI: 10.1145/1288869.1288876.
“Exposing digital forgeries in interlaced and deinterlaced video” (2007). In: IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Forensics and Security 2.3, pp. 438–449. ISSN: 15566013. DOI:
10.1109/TIFS.2007.902661.
Tan, Shunquan, Shengda Chen, and Bin Li (2016). “GOP based automatic detection of
object-based forgery in advanced video”. In: 2015 Asia-Pacific Signal and Information
Processing Association Annual Summit and Conference, APSIPA ASC 2015 Decem-
ber, pp. 719–722. DOI: 10.1109/APSIPA.2015.7415366.
Su, Lichao, Tianqiang Huang, and Jianmei Yang (2015). “A video forgery detection al-
gorithm based on compressive sensing”. In: Multimedia Tools and Applications 74.17,
pp. 6641–6656. ISSN: 15737721. DOI: 10.1007/s11042-014-1915-4.
Li, Leida et al. (2013). “Detecting removed object from video with stationary background”.
In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artifi-
cial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 7809 LNCS, pp. 242–252. ISSN:
03029743. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-40099-5_20.
68
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:75==
Sitara, K. and B. M. Mehtre (2016). “Digital video tampering detection: An overview of
passive techniques”. In: Digital Investigation 18, pp. 8–22. ISSN: 17422876. DOI: 10.
1016/j.diin.2016.06.003. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.diin.2016.06.003.
Verdoliva, Luisa (2020). “Media forensics and deepfakes: an overview”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2001.06564.
Dale, Kevin et al. (2011). “Video Face Replacement”. In: SIGGRAPH Asia. SA ’11. Hong
Kong, China: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN: 9781450308076. DOI: 10.
1145/2024156.2024164. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2024156.2024164.
Güera, D. and E. J. Delp (2018). “Deepfake Video Detection Using Recurrent Neural Net-
works”. In: 2018 15th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal
Based Surveillance (AVSS), pp. 1–6.
Goodwin, Julian and Girija Chetty (2011). “Blind video tamper detection based on fusion
of source features”. In: Proceedings - 2011 International Conference on Digital Image
Computing: Techniques and Applications, DICTA 2011, pp. 608–613. DOI: 10.1109/
DICTA.2011.108.
Lukáˇ, Jan, Jessica Fridrich, and Miroslav Goljan (2006). “Digital Camera Identification
From Sensor Pattern Noise”. In: IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Se-
curityInformation Forensics and Security, 1.2, pp. 205–214.
Güera, David et al. (2019). “We Need No Pixels: Video Manipulation Detection Using
Stream Descriptors”. In: arXiv: 1906.08743. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08743.
Mattheyses, Wesley and Werner Verhelst (2015). “Audiovisual speech synthesis: An overview
of the state-of-the-art”. In: Speech Communication 66, pp. 182–217. ISSN: 0167-6393.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.specom.2014.11.001. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0167639314000818.
Bregler, Christoph, Michele Covell, and Malcolm Slaney (1997). “Video Rewrite: Driving
Visual Speech with Audio”. In: SIGGRAPH. SIGGRAPH ’97. USA: ACM Press/Addison-
Wesley Publishing Co., pp. 353–360. ISBN: 0897918967. DOI: 10.1145/258734.258880.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/258734.258880.
Berthouzoz, Floraine, Wilmot Li, and Maneesh Agrawala (July 2012). “Tools for Placing
Cuts and Transitions in Interview Video”. In: ACM Trans. Graph. 31.4. ISSN: 0730-0301.
DOI: 10.1145/2185520.2185563. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2185520.2185563.
Amerini, Irene et al. (Oct. 2019). “Deepfake Video Detection through Optical Flow Based
CNN”. In: The IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops.
Sabir, Ekraam et al. (June 2019b). “Recurrent Convolutional Strategies for Face Manipu-
lation Detection in Videos”. In: CVPR Workshops.
Chetty, Girija, Monica Biswas, and Rashmi Singh (2010). “Digital video tamper detection
based on multimodal fusion of residue features”. In: Proceedings - 2010 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Network and System Security, NSS 2010, pp. 606–613. DOI:
10.1109/NSS.2010.8.
Guan, Haiying et al. (2019b). “MFC datasets: Large-scale benchmark datasets for media
forensic challenge evaluation”. In: Proceedings - 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Ap-
plications of Computer Vision Workshops, WACVW 2019 4, pp. 63–72. DOI: 10.1109/
WACVW.2019.00018.
Liu, Qingzhong et al. (2013). “Detection of JPEG double compression and identification
of smartphone image source and post-capture manipulation”. In: Applied Intelligence
39.4, pp. 705–726. ISSN: 0924669X. DOI: 10.1007/s10489-013-0430-z.
Mihcak, M. Kivanc, Igor Kozintsev, and Kannan Ramchandran (1999). “Spatially adaptive
statistical modeling of wavelet image coefficients and its application to denoising”. In:
ICASSP, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
- Proceedings 6, pp. 3253–3256. ISSN: 07367791. DOI: 10.1109/icassp.1999.757535.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
69
==PAGE:76==
Wen, Lilong and Dan Xu (2019). “Face Image Manipulation Detection”. In: IOP Conference
Series: Materials Science and Engineering 533.1. ISSN: 1757899X. DOI: 10.1088/1757-
899X/533/1/012054.
Su, Lichao and Cuihua Li (2018). “A novel passive forgery detection algorithm for video re-
gion duplication”. In: Multidimensional Systems and Signal Processing 29.3, pp. 1173–
1190. ISSN: 15730824. DOI: 10.1007/s11045-017-0496-6.
Khodabakhsh, A., R. Ramachandra, and C. Busch (2019). “Subjective Evaluation of Me-
dia Consumer Vulnerability to Fake Audiovisual Content”. In: 2019 Eleventh Interna-
tional Conference on Quality of Multimedia Experience (QoMEX), pp. 1–6.
Scherhag, U., C. Rathgeb, J. Merkle, et al. (2019). “Face Recognition Systems Under
Morphing Attacks: A Survey”. In: IEEE Access 7, pp. 23012–23026.
Wang, Zhou and Alan C. Bovik (2009a). “Mean squared error: Lot it or leave it? A new
look at signal fidelity measures”. In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 26.1, pp. 98–
117. ISSN: 10535888. DOI: 10.1109/MSP.2008.930649. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=4775883.
Nagraniy, Arsha, Joon Son Chungy, and Andrew Zisserman (2017). “VoxCeleb: A large-
scale speaker identification dataset”. In: INTERSPEECH 2017-August, pp. 2616–2620.
ISSN: 19909772. DOI: 10.21437/Interspeech.2017-950. arXiv: 1706.08612.
Liu, Yu-Lun et al. (2019). “Deep Video Frame Interpolation using Cyclic Frame Genera-
tion”. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI).
Asaad, Aras and Sabah Jassim (2017). “Topological data analysis for image tampering
detection”. In: International Workshop on Digital Watermarking. Springer, pp. 136–146.
Bakas, Jamimamul and Ruchira Naskar (2018). “A Digital Forensic Technique for Inter–
Frame Video Forgery Detection Based on 3D CNN”. In: International Conference on
Information Systems Security. Springer, pp. 304–317.
Chollet, F. (2017). “Xception: Deep Learning with Depthwise Separable Convolutions”. In:
2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 1800–
1807.
Thakur, Rahul and Rajesh Rohilla (2020). “Copy-Move Forgery Detection using Residuals
and Convolutional Neural Network Framework: A Novel Approach”. In: pp. 561–564.
ISBN: 9781728117935. DOI: 10.1109/peeic47157.2019.8976868.
Kuznetsov, Andrey (2020). “Digital video forgery detection based on statistical features
calculation”. In: January, p. 111. DOI: 10.1117/12.2559499.
Howard, Matthew J, Alexander S Williamson, and Narges Norouzi (2020). “Video Manip-
ulation Detection via Recurrent Residual Feature Learning Networks”. In: GlobalSIP
2019 - 7th IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing, Proceed-
ings, pp. 1–5. ISBN: 9781728127231. DOI: 10.1109/globalsip45357.2019.8969458.
Kharat, Jayashree and Sangeeta Chougule (2020). “A passive blind forgery detection
technique to identify frame duplication attack”. In: Multimedia Tools and Applications.
ISSN: 15737721. DOI: 10.1007/s11042-019-08272-y.
Zhu, Tingge et al. (2020). Blind Detection Based on Color SIFT. Vol. 1. Springer Interna-
tional Publishing, pp. 331–341. ISBN: 9783030394318. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-39431-
8_32. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39431-8%7B%5C_%7D32.
Mahfoudi, Gael et al. (2019). “Copy and move forgery detection using SIFT and local
color dissimilarity maps”. In: GlobalSIP 2019 - 7th IEEE Global Conference on Signal
and Information Processing, Proceedings, pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/GlobalSIP45357.2019.
8969355.
Yang, Jianmei, Tianqiang Huang, and Lichao Su (2016). “Using similarity analysis to de-
tect frame duplication forgery in videos”. In: Multimedia Tools and Applications 75.4,
pp. 1793–1811. ISSN: 15737721. DOI: 10.1007/s11042-014-2374-7.
70
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:77==
Lehman, Philipp et al. (2018). Biblatex – Sophisticated Bibliographies in LaTeX. URL:
https://www.ctan.org/pkg/biblatex.
Wang, Zhou and Alan C. Bovik (2009b). “Mean squared error: Lot it or leave it? A new
look at signal fidelity measures”. In: IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 26.1, pp. 98–
117. ISSN: 10535888. DOI: 10.1109/MSP.2008.930649. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=4775883.
Chen, Shengda et al. (2016). “Automatic Detection of Object-Based Forgery in Advanced
Video”. In: IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 26.11,
pp. 2138–2151. ISSN: 10518215. DOI: 10.1109/TCSVT.2015.2473436.
O’Brien, James F. and Hany Farid (2012). “Exposing photo manipulation with inconsistent
reflections”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics 31.1, pp. 1–11. ISSN: 07300301. DOI:
10.1145/2077341.2077345.
Shabanifard, Mahmood, Mahrokh G. Shayesteh, and Mohammad Ali Akhaee (2013).
“Forensic detection of image manipulation using the zernike moments and pixel-pair
histogram”. In: IET Image Processing 7.9, pp. 817–828. ISSN: 17519659. DOI: 10 .
1049/iet-ipr.2012.0717.
Kee, Eric, James O’brien, and Hany Farid (2013). “Exposing photo manipulation with in-
consistent shadows”. In: ACM Transactions on Graphics 32.3. ISSN: 07300301. DOI:
10.1145/2487228.2487236.
Abbood, Alaa Ahmed and Ghazali Sulong (2018). “Segmentation and Enhancement of
Fingerprint”. In: Springer International Publishing 5. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-59427-9.
URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-59427-9.
Wei, Wei et al. (2019). “Video tamper detection based on multi-scale mutual information”.
In: Multimedia Tools and Applications 78.19, pp. 27109–27126. ISSN: 15737721. DOI:
10.1007/s11042-017-5083-1.
Shen, Junge, Tao Mei, and Xinbo Gao (2013). “Video archaeology: Understanding video
manipulation history”. In: Multimedia Tools and Applications 63.2, pp. 461–483. ISSN:
13807501. DOI: 10.1007/s11042-011-0922-y.
Howard, Matthew J., Alexander S. Williamson, and Narges Norouzi (2019). “Video manip-
ulation detection via recurrent residual feature learning networks”. In: GlobalSIP 2019 -
7th IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing, Proceedings. DOI:
10.1109/GlobalSIP45357.2019.8969458.
Bayram, Sevinç (2006). “Image manipulation detection”. In: Journal of Electronic Imaging
15.4, p. 041102. ISSN: 1017-9909. DOI: 10.1117/1.2401138.
Gul, Gokhan, Ismail Avcibas, and Fatih Kurugollu (2010). “SVD based image manipula-
tion detection”. In: Proceedings - International Conference on Image Processing, ICIP,
pp. 1765–1768. ISSN: 15224880. DOI: 10.1109/ICIP.2010.5652854.
Zampogiannis, Konstantinos et al. (2018). “Extracting Contact and Motion from Manipu-
lation Videos”. In: pp. 1–22. arXiv: 1807.04870. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1807.04870.
Margolin, Ran, Lihi Zelnik-Manor, and Ayellet Tal (2013). “Saliency for image manipula-
tion”. In: Visual Computer 29.5, pp. 381–392. ISSN: 01782789. DOI: 10.1007/s00371-
012-0740-x.
Hsieh, Chen Kuang, Ching Chun Chiu, and Po Chyi Su (2018). “Video Forensics for De-
tecting Shot Manipulation Using the Information of Deblocking Filtering”. In: Proceed-
ings - International Computer Software and Applications Conference 2, pp. 353–358.
ISSN: 07303157. DOI: 10.1109/COMPSAC.2018.10257.
Wary, Alongbar and Arambam Neelima (2019). “A review on robust video copy detec-
tion”. In: International Journal of Multimedia Information Retrieval 8.2, pp. 61–78. ISSN:
2192662X. DOI: 10.1007/s13735-018-0159-x. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13735-018-
0159-x.
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
71
==PAGE:78==
Boonkrong, Sirapat, Herwig Unger, and Phayung Meesad (2014). “Recent Advances in In-
formation and Communication Technology: Proceedings of the 10th International Con-
ference on Computing and Information Technology (IC2IT2014)”. In: Advances in Intel-
ligent Systems and Computing 265 AISC. ISSN: 21945357. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-
06538-0.
Manickam, Nithya, Aman Parnami, and Sharat Chandran (2006). “Reducing False Pos-
itives in Video Shot Detection Using Learning Techniques”. In: pp. 421–432. DOI: 10.
1007/11949619_38.
Jia, Shan et al. (2018). “Coarse-to-Fine Copy-Move Forgery Detection for Video Foren-
sics”. In: IEEE Access 6, pp. 25323–25335. ISSN: 21693536. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.
2018.2819624.
Tao, Junjie, Lili Jia, and Ying You (2017). “Review of passive-blind detection in digital
video forgery based on sensing and imaging techniques”. In: International Conference
on Optoelectronics and Microelectronics Technology and Application 10244.January
2017, p. 102441C. ISSN: 1996756X. DOI: 10.1117/12.2267503.
Korshunov, Pavel and Sébastien Marcel (2018). “Speaker inconsistency detection in tam-
pered video”. In: European Signal Processing Conference 2018-Septe, pp. 2375–2379.
ISSN: 22195491. DOI: 10.23919/EUSIPCO.2018.8553270.
Bolles, Robert et al. (2017). “Spotting Audio-Visual Inconsistencies (SAVI) in Manipulated
Video”. In: IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition Workshops 2017-July, pp. 1907–1914. ISSN: 21607516. DOI: 10.1109/CVPRW.
2017.238.
Stamm, Matthew C, Student Member, and K J Ray Liu (2010). “Statistical Intrinsic Fin-
gerprints”. In: 5.3, pp. 492–506.
Guttmann, Moshe, Lior Wolf, and Danny Cohen-Or (2011). “Content aware video manip-
ulation”. In: Computer Vision and Image Understanding 115.12, pp. 1662–1678. ISSN:
10773142. DOI: 10.1016/j.cviu.2011.05.010. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cviu.2011.
05.010.
Tondi, B. (2018). “Pixel-domain adversarial examples against CNN-based manipulation
detectors”. In: Electronics Letters 54.21, pp. 1220–1222. ISSN: 00135194. DOI: 10.
1049/el.2018.6469. arXiv: arXiv:1312.6199.
Hussain, Muhammad Nihal et al. (2018). “Analyzing disinformation and crowd manipula-
tion tactics on youtube”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE/ACM International Confer-
ence on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, ASONAM 2018, pp. 1092–
1095. DOI: 10.1109/ASONAM.2018.8508766.
Hyun, Dai Kyung et al. (2013). “Detection of upscale-crop and partial manipulation in
surveillance video based on sensor pattern noise”. In: Sensors (Switzerland) 13.9,
pp. 12605–12631. ISSN: 14248220. DOI: 10.3390/s130912605.
Frakes, Jerold C. (2018). “Automatic and Dynamic Video Manipulation”. In: Brides and
Doom, pp. 1–16. DOI: 10.9783/9781512816051-001.
Abel, K. and U. Bibel (2000). Formatierungsrichtlinien für Tagungsbände. Bonn: Format-
Verlag.
Abraham, N., U. Bibel, and P. Corleone (2001). “Formatting Contributions for Proceed-
ings”. In: Proc. 7th Int. Conf. on Formatting of Workshop-Proceedings, New York 1999.
Ed. by H.I. Glück. San Francisco: Noah & Sons, pp. 46–53.
Glück, H.I., ed. (2001). Proc. 7th Int. Conf. on Formatting of Workshop-Proceedings, New
York 1999. San Francisco: Noah & Sons.
Azubi, L. et al. (2009). “Die Fußnote in LNI-Bänden”. In: Formatierung 2009. Ed. by H.I.
Glück. LNI 999. Bonn: Format-Verlag, pp. 135–162.
Glück, H.I., ed. (2009a). Formatierung 2009. LNI 999. Bonn: Format-Verlag.
72
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:79==
Ezgarani, O. (2010). The Magic Format - Your Way to Pretty Books. Noah & Sons.
Glück, H.I. (2009b). “Formatierung leicht gemacht”. In: Formatierungsjournal 11/09, pp. 23–
27.
GI, Gesellschaft für Informatik e.V. (2014). www.gi-ev.at, Stand: 24.12.2014.
Wasser, K. et al. (2014a). Essenzen der Informatik. Verlag Formvoll.
Anteil an Frauen in der Informatik (2014). Statistics Worldwide.
Wasser, K. et al. (2014b). Ganz neue Essenzen der Informatik im selben Jahr. Format-
Verlag.
Ezzat, Tony, Gadi Geiger, and Tomaso Poggio (July 2002). “Trainable Videorealistic Speech
Animation”. In: ACM Trans. Graph. 21.3, pp. 388–398. ISSN: 0730-0301. DOI: 10.1145/
566654.566594. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/566654.566594.
Ezzat, T. and T. Poggio (1998). “MikeTalk: a talking facial display based on morphing
visemes”. In: Proceedings Computer Animation ’98 (Cat. No.98EX169), pp. 96–102.
Johnston, Pamela and Eyad Elyan (2019). “A review of digital video tampering: From
simple editing to full synthesis”. In: Digital Investigation 29, pp. 67–81. ISSN: 1742-
2876. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diin.2019.03.006. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1742287618304146.
Al-Sanjary, Omar Ismael, Ahmed Abdullah Ahmed, and Ghazali Sulong (2016). “Develop-
ment of a video tampering dataset for forensic investigation”. In: Forensic Science Inter-
national 266, pp. 565–572. ISSN: 0379-0738. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.
2016.07.013. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0379073816303176.
Wu, Y. et al. (2014). “Exposing video inter-frame forgery based on velocity field consis-
tency”. In: 2014 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Pro-
cessing (ICASSP), pp. 2674–2678.
Kumar, Akash and Arnav Bhavsar (2020a). “Detecting Deepfakes with Metric Learning”.
In: 8th International Workshop on Biometrics and Forensics. arXiv: 2003.08645. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.08645.
Tran, Du et al. (2015). “Learning spatiotemporal features with 3d convolutional networks”.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 4489–
4497.
Singh, Raahat Devender and Naveen Aggarwal (Mar. 2018). “Video Content Authenti-
cation Techniques: A Comprehensive Survey”. In: Multimedia Syst. 24.2, pp. 211–240.
ISSN: 0942-4962. DOI: 10.1007/s00530-017-0538-9. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00530-017-0538-9.
Kumar, Akash and Arnav Bhavsar (2020b). Detecting Deepfakes with Metric Learning.
arXiv: 2003.08645 [cs.CV].
Zhang, L., F. Peng, and M. Long (2018). “Face Morphing Detection Using Fourier Spec-
trum of Sensor Pattern Noise”. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia
and Expo (ICME), pp. 1–6.
Raghavendra, R., K. B. Raja, and C. Busch (2016). “Detecting morphed face images”.
In: 2016 IEEE 8th International Conference on Biometrics Theory, Applications and
Systems (BTAS), pp. 1–7.
Scherhag, U., C. Rathgeb, and C. Busch (2018). “Towards Detection of Morphed Face
Images in Electronic Travel Documents”. In: 2018 13th IAPR International Workshop
on Document Analysis Systems (DAS), pp. 187–192.
Wandzik, L., G. Kaeding, and R. V. Garcia (2018). “Morphing Detection Using a General-
Purpose Face Recognition System”. In: 2018 26th European Signal Processing Con-
ference (EUSIPCO), pp. 1012–1016.
Sitara, K. and B.M. Mehtre (2016). “Digital video tampering detection: An overview of
passive techniques”. In: Digital Investigation 18, pp. 8–22. ISSN: 1742-2876. DOI: https:
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
73
==PAGE:80==
//doi.org/10.1016/j.diin.2016.06.003. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1742287616300718.
Dong, Qiong, Gaobo Yang, and Ningbo Zhu (2012). “A MCEA based passive forensics
scheme for detecting frame-based video tampering”. In: Digital Investigation 9.2, pp. 151–
159. ISSN: 1742-2876. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diin.2012.07.002. URL: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1742287612000606.
Wang, Qi et al. (2014). “Video inter-frame forgery identification based on consistency of
correlation coefficients of gray values”. In: Journal of Computer and Communications
2.04, p. 51.
Chao, Juan, Xinghao Jiang, and Tanfeng Sun (2012). “A Novel Video Inter-Frame Forgery
Model Detection Scheme Based on Optical Flow Consistency”. In: IWDW. IWDW’12.
Shanghai, China: Springer-Verlag, pp. 267–281. ISBN: 9783642400988. DOI: 10.1007/
978-3-642-40099-5_22. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-40099-5_22.
74
Digital Passive Video Tampering Detection using Deep Learning
==PAGE:81==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
