==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master thesis
DTU Management Engineering & DTU Compute
Analysis of danish infrastructure for
charging of electrical vehicles
Author: s130546 Christian Anker Vandet
Supervisor: Professor MSO, Jeppe Rich
July 3rd. 2020
==PAGE:2==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
This MSc thesis was prepared at the department of DTU Management and DTU
Compute as the ﬁnal fulﬁlment for acquiring a MSc in Mathematical Modelling and
Computation.
I would to acknowledge the help of my supervisor Jeppe Rich for valuable advice
on what is now several papers - my bachelor, this thesis and published articles. Even
during these crazy corona times he has made himself available to me through the
digital wonder of Zoom.
I would also like to thank Thomas Kjær Rasmussen of the DTU Network Modelling
Group for providing location and pathﬁnding data.
Page 1 of 62
==PAGE:3==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Contents
List of Figures
4
1
Abstract
5
1.1
Abstract danish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Introduction
7
2.1
Problem introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Overview of paper
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Literature review
8
4
Methodology
9
4.1
Demand simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.1.1
Simulating demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.1.2
Sampling of TU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1.3
Trip data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1.4
Range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.1.5
Why urban areas are more interesting than rural ones . . . . . .
12
4.1.6
Upscaling demand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.1.7
Calculating the demand
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
When to charge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2.1
Adding information ﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2.2
A simple time approximation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.3
Diﬀerence between optimality and acceptability . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.4
A uniﬁed decision function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Queuing models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.1
Combining demand simulation and queue simulation
. . . . . .
28
4.3.2
Simulation illustration and parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.3
Achieving good system performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Optimisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.1
Derivative free and black-box optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.4.2
Why the location problem is hard at scale
. . . . . . . . . . . .
32
Page 2 of 62
==PAGE:4==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
4.4.3
Developing a suitable criterion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4.4
Constraints, relaxations and sparsity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4.5
Developing a constrained search space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.6
Constructing a naive heuristic solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Results
42
5.1
The power of information
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Regularised optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.1
Capacity optimisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3
A heuristic solution to the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.4
On the spatial properties of minima . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.5
Optimising for the 99% quantile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.6
Decisions revisited
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Conclusion
60
Bibliography
61
Page 3 of 62
==PAGE:5==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
List of Figures
1
Flow chart of the modelling approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Outlines of the area for optimisation and the Greater Copenhagen Area 13
3
Long and medium distance trips . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Percentage of weekly traﬃc per day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Weighed traﬃc density . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
Sketch of the queuing simulation process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7
Possible location on every link . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
8
Locations sampled with 200m radius
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
9
Locations sampled with 500m radius
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
10
Mean utilisation with all possible stations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
11
Heuristic solution based only on distances to travelled routes . . . . . .
41
12
Performance with 20 randomly sampled stations with simple decision
function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
13
Performance with 20 randomly sampled stations with enhanced deci-
sion function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
14
Information eﬃciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
15
Performance for λ = 0.25 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
16
Performance for λ = 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
17
Performance for λ = 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
18
Performance with s=15, F = x2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
19
Eﬃciency of stations for P
xi = s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
20
Solution for problem with two station sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
21
Solution for problem with three station sizes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
22
Solution for the problem with three station sizes and modiﬁed penalty .
53
23
Heuristic solution to s = 23 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
24
Waiting time distribution when minimizing E[WaitTime] . . . . . . . .
56
25
Wait time distribution when minimizing 99% quantile . . . . . . . . . .
57
26
Eﬃciency function of stations for the 99% quantile
. . . . . . . . . . .
58
Page 4 of 62
==PAGE:6==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
1
Abstract
This paper is mainly aimed at contributing to a simulated approach for system anal-
ysis of the optimal EV charging location problem for a constrained geographical area
in a future scenario. Utility theory, queue simulation, demand simulation and black
box optimisation are developed as methods and uniﬁed into a single framework which
seeks to ﬁnd optimal supply formations for a given geographical area. This uniﬁed
framework is then deployed to a highly urbanised area in Copenhagen with demand
upsampled to a 2030 scenario.
Diﬀerent to most other papers in the ﬁeld demand ﬂow is supposed as non parametric
and described by data from an extensive survey of individual danish transport choices.
A semi-complex decision function is developed to describe the behaviour of agents in
the system which is based on geometric distances and information ﬂow between agents
and system, simulating a future smart system. This leads to a constrained black box
optimisation problem for the location problem which is not easily solvable.
It is shown that the information ﬂow helps with system load balancing and the ef-
ﬁciency properties of the information ﬂow are derived by considering scenarios with
increasing variance. It is shown that the system has the same eﬃciency as an idealised
system for any reasonable variance increase if the expectation of the charging time is
precise, but suﬀers when the mean is over or underestimated compared to the true
mean.
Furthermore the improvement function of adding extra stations is explored and some
general properties are experimentally derived which show that the function is almost
submodular with a small linearly eﬃcient region. Generally there are many acceptable
solutions for the optimisation problem, which even simple heuristics can ﬁnd, since
most reasonable perturbations are smoothed out by the information ﬂow, however
ﬁnding a global optimum is therefore increasingly diﬃcult.
The problem is then extended to consider diﬀerent station sizes under linear and de-
creasing cost structures.
Keywords : Optimal EV charging, location problem, queuing simulation, black
box optimisation, smart systems
Page 5 of 62
==PAGE:7==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
1.1
Abstract danish
Det primære mål med dette projekt er at bidrage til en simulations metode til syste-
manalyse af optimale ladestation placeringer til opladning af elbiler i et afgrænset
geograﬁsk område placeret i fremtids scenarie.
Nytte teori, kø-simulering, efter-
spørgselssimulering og black box optimeringsmetoder bliver udviklet og forenet i en
samlet model til analyse af problemet. Denne model bliver så brugt på et højt ur-
baniseret område af Købehavn i et 2030 scenarie.
Ulig tidligere forskning i feltet
så bliver efterspørgslen beskrevet af data fra virkelige danske ture baseret på Trans-
portvaneundersøgelsen, i stedet for at have en parametrisk form. En semi-kompleks
valgmodel er udviklet for at beskrive agenters adfærd i systemet. Denne model er
baseret på geometriske distancer og informationsudveksling mellem agent og system,
hvor informationsudvekslingen simulerer interaktionen mellem agent og system i et
smart fremtidssystem. Dette leder til et begrænset black box optimerings problem for
lokationen af ladestationer som ikke tillader nemme løsningsmetoder.
Det bliver bevist at informationsudvekslingen hjælper med belastnings afbalancering
af systemet og eﬀektivitets egenskaberne for informationsudvekslingen bliver empirisk
aﬂedt. Der ﬁndes at systemet har optimal eﬀektivitet under varians stigning, hvis den
estimerede ladetid er præcis, men at over- eller underestimation af ladetiden leder til
dårligere end optimal eﬀektivitet.
Herefter er forberedningsfunktionen for antallet af stationer udforsket og nogle gener-
alle egenskaber er experimentelt fundet, som viser at funktionen er næsten submodular
med et smalt lineær eﬀektivt underrum. Generelt foreﬁndes mange acceptable løs-
ninger for optimerings problemet som selv simple heuristikker kan ﬁnde grundet den
balancerende eﬀekt af informationsudvekslingen. Af samme grund er det vanskeligt
at ﬁnde det unikke globale optimum.
Problemet er til slut udvidet til at omfatte forskellige ladestation størrelser under
lineære og faldende omkostningsstruktur.
Nøgleord : Optimal ladning af elbiler, lokations problemet, køsimulering, black
box optimering, smarte systemer
Page 6 of 62
==PAGE:8==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
2
Introduction
2.1
Problem introduction
In a world pushing towards a more sustainable approach to minimise eﬀects of pol-
lution and climate change electrical vehicles (EVs) have come to the forefront as an
alternative to traditionally heavy polluting vehicles based on internal combustion en-
gines. EVs as a whole have had an technological revolution in the last decade with
especially Tesla’s innovations in battery and charging technology pushing the ﬁeld
forward as whole. However to this moment the market penetration of EVs in most
major developed countries is minimal at best. A prominent argument against the
use of EVs has been the uncertainty associated with limited range and sporadically
placed charging supply. The private sector has in the past not been successful at
developing a fully connected charging network which stands in stark contrast to the
oversupplied network in place for traditional ICE vehicles. Recently positive strides
have been made by companies such as E.ON and Clever, but it is clear that if the
network wants to keep up with demand in the future, further progress is needed. One
idea is that such a network should be handled with a more uniﬁed approach, either
as an organisation or by the state itself.
Compared to ICE vehicles there are two major distinctions when it comes to charging
EVs, namely that stations are reliant on a large power supply, where gas stations can
move gasoline almost anywhere, and the fact that charging times for EVs at current
time are at least an order of magnitude slower than traditional ICE vehicles.
This leads to a more principled approach for analysis and expansion of such networks
being preferable. In this paper such a method will be developed which aims to analyse
what is known as the optimal EV charging problem and propose a solution approach
for solving the problem over a constrained geographical area.
The optimal EV charging location problem is a specialised version of the general lo-
cation or placement problem widely considered in operations research. A simpliﬁed
version can be stated as such:
Given a set of spatial locations and a set of demand for EV charging ﬁnd the conﬁg-
Page 7 of 62
==PAGE:9==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
uration of locations which minimises some criterion:
argmin
l
F(x|D)
(1)
In contrast to most other related papers a non-parametric form for D is assumed and
therefore a pure simulation approach is used. Such an approach is computationally
heavy but provides a very ﬂexible framework where analytical forms are not required.
2.2
Overview of paper
In chapter 3 a short literature review will be given of mainly contemporary related
work. Then in chapter 4 the necessary methodological tools needed will be introduced
and discussed, while also providing intuition about the dataset used. In chapter 5 the
developed framework will be used on a regularised sized problem.
3
Literature review
The location problem has a long history in operations research with many specialised
sub problems being developed over the years. Most related to this work is perhaps
what is known as the P-median problem, ﬁrst introduced inHakimi [1964]. It considers
the problem of placing a constrained amount of facilities at N locations as to minimize
transportation costs for a set of customers. The problem leads to a natural MIP
formulation which is NP hard and has prompted much later research into solution
methods.
Wang et al. [2010] gives one of the ﬁrst comprehensive treatments of the EV charging
problem. A multi-objective non linear optimisation algorithm is proposed which takes
into account factors such as electricity availability, priority conversion of existing
gas stations and EV adoption. This algorithm is then used on a pseudo version of
Chengdu, China.
Chen et al. [2013] proposes a data driven approach based on trips observed in the
Seattle area. These data are used to estimate a regression based model for parking
demand in Seattle as a proxy to actual charging demand.
An MIP optimisation
Page 8 of 62
==PAGE:10==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
approach is then used to solve the location problem.
Xiangyu and Qui [2020] introduces a model based on a reservation station, oﬀ-peak
idle rates and average peak waiting time.
Tran et al. [2020] uses a cross-entropy based method on a two tier optimisation scheme
which seeks to minimise overall cost while solving a lower level assignment equilibrium
problem.
4
Methodology
Generally the methods leveraged in this paper are derived from four distinct ﬁelds
which are then combined to produce a modelling approach of the EV charging prob-
lem. These ﬁelds are:
• Traﬃc simulation (Data driven)
• Utility theory / Decision functions
• Queuing models (Discrete-event simulation)
• Derivative-free / Black box optimisation
Taking an economic view of the problem we can identify these methods as providing
the following quantities to the uniﬁed model:
• Demand (Data driven simulation and utility theory)
• Supply (Optimisation)
• Performance (Queuing Models)
In the ﬂow chart below the general approach is depicted.
Page 9 of 62
==PAGE:11==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 1: Flow chart of the modelling approach
4.1
Demand simulation
4.1.1
Simulating demand
In many economical models and especially those concerning transport modelling, ob-
taining precise forms of the demand function is often a hurdle leading to either func-
tional approximations being used when the exact demand is not observed or functional
extrapolation when the demand is observed in some partition of the domain. In Den-
mark sensors provide exact counts of cars passing through highways or major bridges,
but such approaches are not as easily applied in urban areas. Since 2006 the current
Page 10 of 62
==PAGE:12==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
iteration of Transportvaneundersøgelsen(TU) has been used to provide high quality
data of danish travel patterns throughout all geographical and socioeconomic sets of
the population and has served as the data input for many papers and models of danish
traﬃc - see Christiansen and Skougaard [2015] for general information.
A main strength of TU is that it provides detailed geographical trip information which
can be used as input for detailed simulation of danish traﬃc ﬂow.
4.1.2
Sampling of TU
To simulate the individual trips through the system we start by sampling a set of trips
V from the TU dataset. As EVs are entered as a separate mode of transportation
one could start by only considering trips done by EVs, however this leads to a low
amount of overall trips, when taking into account the fact that EV market penetration
is still low and has been zero up until recent years. Instead consider the union set of
EV and regular cars V = EV ∪C, which seems reasonable when taking into account
danish plans of expanding EV penetration at the behest of combustion vehicles. As
an example Frederiksberg municipality has a goal of 90% communal EVs in 2030, see
Kommune [2019], and fresh predictions from Energistyrelsen land at 380.000 EVs on
danish roads in 2030.
For each trip an agent is associated for which there is wide array of temporal, so-
cioeconomic and geographical data available, allowing further partition of the sample
based on these parameters as necessary.
4.1.3
Trip data
Deﬁne a trip as transportation from zone A to zone B where zone A and B are LTM2
zones deﬁned by Landstraﬁkmodellen(LTM), see Rich and Hansen [2016]. A path
is then calculated from A to B and returned as an ordered set of links which the
agent passes through. Each link(l) has an associated distance and travel speed which
provides a time estimate of the passage time for each link. Taking the cumulative
Page 11 of 62
==PAGE:13==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
sum ﬁnds the total distance travelled and time spent after K links:
DK =
K
X
l
dl, TK =
K
X
l
tl, l ∈K, K ⊆L
(2)
4.1.4
Range
For a given agent a trip is then obtained which provides precise ﬁgures for the distance
driven and time spent. Let r denote the range of an EV. Since the state of the battery
is not known at trip start a sampling function F must be constructed which speciﬁes
the range r of the EV at tstart. This leads to the question of considering which agents
needs to use on route or destination charging which will be considered below.
4.1.5
Why urban areas are more interesting than rural ones
In recent studies it has been found that in non urban areas an overwhelming part of
the population has access to at home charging. This makes them uninteresting for the
overall scope if we consider that top of line modern EVs have a range of over 400 km
on full battery charge, thus even if assuming that the agent has a long daily trip and
a high charging threshold, he would need to not be able to charge the car at home
for multiple days in a row before needing on route or destination charging. See DST
[2018] for some recent numbers from a danish perspective. Furthermore rural areas
usually have less complex road systems with few major highways or regional roads
connecting the larger cities. These major roads become the main driver of demand,
as seen with gas stations where one is placed each x kilometres on every major road.
There is not much to indicate that the approach to EV charging in such areas should
be any diﬀerent since the ﬂow of the demand is very linear. As earlier noted service
times for EVs are in the current state much higher and therefore a higher quantity
of chargers become a necessity. An interesting idea for further work is looking at the
dynamics of very large charging stations with relatively high spacing against smaller
stations with corresponding smaller spacing.
Under these assumptions the used trips are limited based on the following parameters:
• Trips starting in the Greater Copenhagen Area and ending in the interest area
• Long distance trips ending in the interest area
Page 12 of 62
==PAGE:14==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
• A small sample of medium based trips from rural areas ending in the interest
area, representing non access at home, charger problems, forgetfulness etc.
Let the set sampled from V in this manner be EV C.
Below a ﬁgure is given which outlines the interest area (red) which is the basis for
the optimisation problem and the Greater Copenhagen area (blue). All maps in the
paper are made with Kahle and Wickham [2013].
Figure 2: Outlines of the area for optimisation and the Greater Copenhagen Area
Long distance trips are deﬁned by having a line distance of more than 70 km. In
the ﬁgure below the purple semi-circle encircles the 70 km radius from the interest
area. Trips originating further out than this radius are assumed to be long distance
and therefore required to charge in the interest area. Trips originating between the
Page 13 of 62
==PAGE:15==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
blue zone and the purple border are down sampled to 20 % of original size, which
represents the conditions described above.
Figure 3: Long and medium distance trips
4.1.6
Upscaling demand
While TU is rich in socioeconomic and geographical data it is generally sparse in
repeated measures, meaning that a single agent is generally only observed for a few
trips, which in many cases happen on the same day. This creates a somewhat canonical
problem when considering the approximation of demand in any current or future
scenario.
Consider that the eﬀective range of a modern EV in most cases is in excess of 400
Page 14 of 62
==PAGE:16==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
km on full battery charge and then contrast it with the fact that the average car trip
distance going to the deﬁned area is around 15 km/trip. Under the assumption of
uniform observation chance we run into the problem that the probability of observing
the agent needing to charge his EV is proportional to
Distance
Range·Scaling
(3)
with the scaling factor controlled by the decision function of the single agent.
This leaves us with two choices:
• Partition the data set further by having less than 10% of observed cars ever
needing to charge
• Force every car to charge on the observed trip.
In this paper the second approach is used in light of the following argument: Con-
sider the demand Sd for EV charging in a future scenario S. This demand is clearly
proportional to the total amount of EVs being used in scenario S. Fix this number
at some constant Sc.
Let the distribution of demand in S with vehicles Sc be F(Sd). Under the assumption
that the temporal aspect of TU data is an unbiased representation of danish trans-
port patterns then EV C is a lower dimensional approximation to F(Sd) and can be
up-scaled in the following way:
Calculate the weighed amount of trips per day, let this be STD. Let the average
days between charging, SAC, be the range divided by the average trip length twice =
r
E[Trip]·2.
Sample from the set EV C with replacement for a given weekday such that the amount
of trips sampled for that weekday is proportional to the normalized STD, under the
constraint that the sum of trips for all weekdays is equal to
SC
SAC . A sample from a
given weekday is only drawn from trips generated on that weekday and with sample
weight equal to TU sample weight. This procedure creates an up-scaled dataset with
demand equal to demand in future S without considering improvements in range ca-
pacity.
By necessity trips are drawn from TU and a trip with high weight will most likely
Page 15 of 62
==PAGE:17==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
occur multiple times. To counteract the problem of the exact trip creating an abnor-
mal demand at some point at exactly the same time t, some variation is added to the
start time of the agents trip to ensure a more stable system.
A procedure such as the Gibbs sampler could be used to draw new trips, however this
runs into the same problem, namely that the conditional probability for non observed
trips is zero and thus does not create new variation. In state of the art population
synthesis, see Rich [2018], machine learning methods are used to create fake but sta-
tistical coherent populations, however such methods have not yet been successful on
trip chain generation.
4.1.7
Calculating the demand
Assume that car ownership dynamics are static, an average car takes ﬁve back and
forth trips a week and the following parameters:
MaxRange = rM = 400km
(4)
UpperChargeThreshold = cU = 0.8
(5)
UpperRangeThreshold = rU = cU ·rM = 0.8·400 km
(6)
LowerChargeThreshold = cL = 0.2
(7)
LowerRangeThreshold = rL = cL ·rM = 0.2·400 km
(8)
AverageTripLength = E[Trip] = 15 km
(9)
AmountOfCars = Sc = 380.000·0.15
(10)
The total demand for charging during a week is then calculated as:
Sdweek = SC ·Trips·
15·2
rU −rL
(11)
Sdweek = 35625
(12)
Page 16 of 62
==PAGE:18==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
And daily demand given as :
Sdweek ·
STD
P(STD)
(13)
Below a ﬁgure is shown of the normalized STD.
Figure 4: Percentage of weekly traﬃc per day
When the trips have occurred is also a good sanity check on the sampled trips.
Below the weighed traﬃc density distribution is shown from start to end of week.
Page 17 of 62
==PAGE:19==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 5: Weighed traﬃc density
Note how morning and late afternoon peaks are clearly observed in the beginning
of the week while the shape becomes almost uniform during the weekend. Furthermore
there are clear peaks around midnight on Friday and Saturday, which corresponds to
people going out, visiting friends and other nighttime activities. We conclude that the
sample procured in this manner is a reasonable approximation to the real temporal
pattern of danish traﬃc.
4.2
When to charge
The seminal decision for the agent in the system is when to charge. This decision
creates demand for a single charger in the system and thus the sum of all the charging
decisions gives the total demand. The decision to charge is governed by the decision
Page 18 of 62
==PAGE:20==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
function of the individual agent A:
Charge|Ax = F(x)
(14)
Hence we consider an agent A with some deﬁning attributes x and the decision to
charge or not is then a functional of x. Under some broad assumptions in microeco-
nomics this leads to a human theory of rationality where the human agent solves the
optimal decision problem by maximising his own utility. Let U be the utility function
and the decision problem can be written as:
Charge|Ax = argmax[(U(x))]
(15)
To decrease complexity utility functions are usually considered consistent amongst
agents .
The task then becomes to identify the form of U and parametrization of x. Let us
consider some simple utility functions and then move toward a more complex view.
A simple start is to assume that utility is only derived from additional distance trav-
elled when needing to charge and that this distance is an inconvenience to the user,
therefore the derived utility is negative.
Let l be the location of the agent, j the location of a charging station and J the set
of all charging stations.
U(j) = −Dist(l,j) ,l,j ∈{X,Y } ,{X,Y } ∈J
(16)
Where for any practical application J is a bounded set
Allowing the distance to simply be the euclidean distance:
U(j) = −
q
(l1 −j1)2 +(l2 −j2)2
(17)
Consider a decision function which is then based on the position of the agent at
precise threshold T of the battery state. The maximisation problem is turned in a
minimisation one since all derived utilities are negative.
Charge|{Ar = T} = argmin
j
[(
q
(l1 −j1)2 +(l2 −j2)2]
(18)
Page 19 of 62
==PAGE:21==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Such a function severely limits the agents decision space and therefore produces a very
simple approximation of the actual decision process. An intuitive observation is that
human agents would not choose to charge exactly at T if along their forward trip a
station was located closer relatively to their position at that time. However the agent
should also not go below some lower threshold of battery state which would put them
in danger of running dry. This leads to the idea of a rolling decision window between
an upper threshold T and a lower threshold M
Charge|{M ≤Ar ≤T} = argmin
j
[(
q
(l1 −j1)2 +(l2 −j2)2]
(19)
This seems like a natural decision function for charging an ICE vehicle if money isn’t
a consideration. In modern times most people have access to exact locations of gas
stations through GPS or prior knowledge and can therefore approximately predict
when they will come conveniently close to one on their trip. At the same time human
agents are generally risk averse and will ﬁll their vehicles before the situation becomes
critical.
4.2.1
Adding information ﬂow
A signiﬁcant extension upon the ideas above is to allow the system and agent to
share information with each other, allowing both to make more informed decisions.
Such systems are already informally in place via third parties, for example Facebook
reporting demand at various stores by counting check-ins done at that location in
their app. This serves as a natural balancing feedback loop for the system, where the
agent can observe high demand at one location and choose another based upon this
information, leading to a higher expected utility for the agent and load balancing for
the system.
Consider an extension of the above utility function (16).
U(j) = −Dist(l,j)−I(j)
(20)
Where I is some information about known or predicted states of j.
As an example of an almost known state consider a computer vision system which
can reasonably accurately classify the number of cars in a given camera shot. This
Page 20 of 62
==PAGE:22==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
classiﬁcation procedure then becomes a reasonable approximation to the total amount
of cars in the queue system at a given time and can be fed back to the agent through
an app or in car system. This example will be used going foreward to model a use of
in system information sharing.
The problem now arises that some scaling is required to make the two terms con-
tribute to the utility function with a similar metric, essentially making them unitless
quantities. This is basically the problem of a discrete choice model: ﬁnd β1,β2 which
is most consistent with :
U(j) = β1 ·−Dist(l,j)+β2 ·−AmountOfCars(j)
(21)
In this case since no charging decisions are actually observed a diﬀerent route must
be taken. As an approximation to utility consider the following equality.
U(j) = −TimeBeforeUse(j)−TimeInUse(j)
(22)
Which is deﬁning the time used getting to and waiting at the station as well as the
time spent charging . Assuming charging time equal at all stations j the equation is
reduced to one term:
U(j) = −TimeBeforeUse(j)
(23)
A transformation must therefore be constructed which puts (21) into the form of (23).
An idea is to observe that when agents model the amount of cars observed at a charg-
ing station, they are really approximating the waiting time induced by those cars
already being in the system. This approximation might be qualitatively discrete, i.e
21 cars and 20 cars imply qualitatively the same waiting time and it will surely display
decreasing negative marginal utility - the decrease in utility by having to wait for 100
cars and 104 cars is much less than the diﬀerence between 0 and 4. However within
reasonable bounds this process is a consistent mapping between the amount of cars
observed and time spent waiting.
In the same manner a distance measure is intuitively converted to time before arrival
in what is second nature to most human agents.
Page 21 of 62
==PAGE:23==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
4.2.2
A simple time approximation
In modern systems a personal GPS can approximate the distance to time mapping for
almost any practical positions of both agent and station. From a system perspective
with a need for iterative evaluation this quickly becomes insurmountable when there
are many thousand agents and more than a trivial amount of stations in the system.
Therefore a more simple mapping from distance to time is needed without the use
of complex pathﬁnding. One way is to simply convert distance to time by assuming
a straight line resulting in the euclidean distance being traversed with some speed.
Assuming a constant speed along this line results in a consistent measure among all
agents, even if it is overestimated in some cases and underestimated in others. Since
the actual distance to the nearest stations is relatively small in most cases complex
routing seems unlikely to make a big diﬀerence. Taking the free speed to be 50 km/h,
all distances as meters and time as minutes then the function is given as:
E[TravelTime] =
q
(l1 −j1)2 +(l2 −j2)2
50·16.666
(24)
As discussed above observing the amount of cars in the system can be helpful for the
agent, however this measure must be converted to time. Observe that if there is a
queue formed then current capacity must be fulﬁlled and with no knowledge of the
current state of the agents charging there is a non-negative expectation for wait time
which is approximated by:
E[ChargeTime]·Y
(25)
Assuming that no other information is available to the agent it holds that:
TimeCharged
ChargeTime = y ∼U(0,1)
(26)
For n agents currently charging:
Y = E[min(y1,y2,y3..yn)] =
1
1+n
(27)
Which is a known fact from probability theory.
This assumes that the queue is exactly zero but capacity is currently ﬁlled. When the
Page 22 of 62
==PAGE:24==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
queue equals the capacity the expected waiting time will be:
E[ChargeTime]·Y +E[ChargeTime]
(28)
However what if a diﬀerent number of agents were queued? In general the distribution
of order statistics over i.i.d uniform variables has a beta distribution. Let Yk be the
k′th order statistic.
Yk ∼Beta(k,n+1−k)
(29)
Which has expectation:
E[Beta(k,n+1−k)] =
a
a+b =
k
n+1
(30)
When the queue equals the capacity the expected waiting time would be:
E[ChargeTime]·Y +E[ChargeTime]
(31)
Combining these two expression a uniﬁed formula is obtained:
Deﬁne Q as the current queue size, T as total waiting time and c as capacity. Then
it holds that
E[T] ≈E[ChargeTime]· Q (mod c)+1
c+1
+⌊Q
c ⌋·E[ChargeTime]
(32)
Where ⌊⌋is the ﬂoor function.
To make it computable for non ﬁlled stations a simple controlling factor is added. Let
s be cars currently being serviced:
E[T] ≈(E[ChargeTime]· Q (mod c)+1
c+1
+⌊Q
c ⌋·E[ChargeTime])·⌊s
c⌋
(33)
Note how for s < c, which is a underﬁlled system, the last term computes to zero.
When all chargers are in use, which is a necessary condition for a queue to form, the
last term computes to 1.
Since the charge time is narrowly distributed as a consequence of only considering
Page 23 of 62
==PAGE:25==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
one vehicle/battery type and fast charging the mean E[ChargeTime] is simple to
calculate. This fact makes the approximation very powerful at balancing the network
since it can accurately predict wait times.
It seems reasonable to have a powerful waiting time approximation built into to con-
sider the eﬀects of smart systems in the future which are based on machine learning
and computer vision models, ﬁelds which will surely see large improvements in the
coming decade.
If the current range and maximum charging range varied widely between vehicle types
the approximation would lose signiﬁcant power as the distribution of E[ChargeTime]
widens over diﬀerent stations. This will lead to either over or underestimated wait
times and load balancing will deteriorate. Later an example will be shown of such a
problem, however for the main work a tight estimate of E[ChargeTime] is assumed
to be available. Once again the above argument is applied to why such a thing might
be reasonable - it seems likely that the system knows precisely the charging time of
current agents, or at the very least a tight expectation.
All throughout this derivation static time has been assumed. In reality there is lag
between an agent obtaining this information, acting on it and arriving at the sta-
tion. During this delay it might be possible that the queue has lengthened, shortened
or disappeared. The agent could be allowed to obtain this information periodically
which would allow for a constantly changing approximation leading to an ever growing
amount of the decision points. This leads to two fundamental problems.
• N decisions points leads to N evaluations of the same agent at diﬀerent locations
leading to linear growth of complexity.
• When does an agent decide that something is good enough compared to looking
longer for a better proposal? This is a problem of expected improvement which
is not simple.
Furthermore at the scale of distances that is being considered in this paper a huge
change is not expected to happen between decision and arrival, however a change
might occur between the start of the trip, when a agent enters the system, and the
end of his trip. This leads to a contradicting view on how to handle decision points
in the system.
Page 24 of 62
==PAGE:26==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
4.2.3
Diﬀerence between optimality and acceptability
Taking a minimisation approach to establish a decision function for the agent naturally
leads to a one shot decision, unless an expected improvement function can accurately
predict that the minimal value will be lower than the current one at a later time step.
This could be done by building a model which can accurately predict wait times not
just at the current moment t but also at t+n. Such an approach could signiﬁcantly
improve the approach described since it will be possible to estimate how much wait
time can gained be over some interval. However such a model is inherently complex
and must be evaluated on real data in some form since it depends on weather, current
events, time of year on top of the already established traﬃc patterns. This is deemed
outside the scope of this paper but is an interesting approach to improve a strictly
minimizing approach.
Consider instead an acceptability criteria where an agent chooses a station if his total
time loss is under some threshold. This makes it simple to evaluate a rolling window
since the agent simply declines making a decision at time t and will wait for his next
decision point, however the cost of the evaluation itself grows with the amount of
decision points as noted above. Furthermore it is not clear that such an approach is
minimising for the system as whole. We will therefore use the minimising approach
as a one shot decision but evaluate it projected forward in time.
4.2.4
A uniﬁed decision function
To unify the approaches above the following scenario is proposed: The agent makes a
charging decision exactly once when he enters the system. To ﬁnd the optimal station
the decision function is applied on ﬁve almost evenly spaced points along the projected
path of his trip, with the ﬁrst point always being the entry point and the last always
being the destination. The distance to time approximation can be calculated ahead
of time, however the estimated queue waiting time is snapshotted at the entry point
which is equivalent to a naive prediction model of a stochastic process with zero trend.
Page 25 of 62
==PAGE:27==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
The decision problem for the agent is therefore given as:
argmin
j
(E[ChargeTime]·Q (mod c)+1
c+1
+⌊Q
c ⌋·E[ChargeTime])·⌊s
c⌋+
q
(l1 −j1)2 +(l2 −j2)2
50·16.666
(34)
l ∈{X1,l,Y1,l..X5,l,Y5,l}, j ∈{X1,j,Y1,j..Xs,j,Ys,j}
(35)
With {X,Y } points for the agent being the ﬁve evaluation points along the trip and
{X,Y } points for the stations being the locations of the s stations in the proposed
solution.
Combining the last two chapters we have obtained a way to simulate the quantity
of total demand and how this demand is applied on a general level. Next the mod-
elling of the actual system where this demand is to be applied will be explored.
4.3
Queuing models
Queuing models are models that describe and predict the behaviour of systems where
people wait to use some sort of resource or service, also known as a birth-and-death
stochastic process. This corresponds perfectly to a model of agents waiting in a queue
to charge their EV, with chargers in the systems being the resources and the associated
service being actual charging process for the vehicle.
The type of queuing system being considered is usually given in Kendall notation
which can be written as:
A/S/c/K/N/D
(36)
With A describing the arrival process, S the service time distribution, c the number
of servers, K the capacity of the queue, N the size of the source population and D the
queue discipline. Most simple queuing systems are in the form M/M/C with signiﬁes
a Poisson arrival process, exponentially distributed service time, and c servers in the
systems, an inﬁnite population and a basic First Come First Serve (FCFS) queuing
system.
Page 26 of 62
==PAGE:28==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
For such simple systems results can be calculated analytically, see for example [Pinsky
and Karlin, 2011, c.9]. Overall stability of the system can usually be determined by
considering the traﬃc intensity. With λ being the arrival rate per time unit and µ
being the service system rate per time unit, we have that the traﬃc intensity ρ is
given by:
ρ = λ
µ
(37)
If ρ ≥1 clearly the system is unstable and the expected queue length L →∞,t →∞
If ρ ⪅1 the system is generally unstable and L might blow up in ﬁnite time depending
on variance in arrivals.
Lastly if ρ << 1 the system is stable and will have a limiting distribution for which
moments are ﬁnite. For such calculations to work it is required that the service and
arrival processes are governed by some constant parameterization and consequently
the intensity is constant in time. This is not the case with the considered system
which can be described as a system of the type:
G/G/c
(38)
Where G stands for a general type distribution and c is the amount of chargers at
the given station. For this problem the arrival time distribution is given by the agent
based simulation and hence is discrete and determined in conjunction of the agent
data and the decision function applied at his entry. Furthermore it will display clear
seasonality on both hourly and daily timescales, based on the general structure of
working culture and the natural human circadian rhythm. Consequently the traﬃc
intensity will be highly variable over the course of the day, with arrival intensity being
very high around the semi-daily peaks and signiﬁcantly lower at night.
For such systems generally no exact results exist and at most one can hope to bound
the moments and variance by some approximations. Therefore a simulation based
approach is required to obtain meaningful results for expected waiting time, waiting
time distributions, utilisation of resources and so forth.
Such techniques are usually referred to as discrete event simulation (DES) or agent
based simulation (ABS) and are widely used in OR to simulate systems with variable
arrival processes and complicated branching service processes such as hospitals and
Page 27 of 62
==PAGE:29==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
airports, see Greasley and Owen [2018] for a current review, Jacob [2013] for a small
code based example. In this paper the primary work will be done with the R package
Simmer Ucar et al. [2019].
For the system being investigated there will be n of such queuing models simultane-
ously simulated with n being the numbers of charging stations. Clearly this puts a
novel computational bound on the size of the system and as will be seen later puts
a sharp constraint on optimising the system. This is not deemed detrimental due to
earlier considerations of highly urbanised areas being the main area of interest and
therefore allowing geographical partition.
Even so with modern computing power
scalability is possible to medium sized systems and beyond but most likely requires
later optimisation to be highly parallelized as the search space grows. An object of
further interest is therefore clearly whether an parametric approximation of demand
is suﬃciently rich and can provide the same quality results as simulation as to easily
compute large system conﬁgurations. A clear advantage of the simulated system is
that complicated agent utility functions can be applied as we shall later see and esti-
mated utility models from future data can directly be applied in the framework.
4.3.1
Combining demand simulation and queue simulation
A premise for the performance of these systems is generally that the arrival process
can be speciﬁed prior to execution of the model, either by a parameterized distribution
or an arrival schedule. This allows for a separation between the larger environment
and a model speciﬁc environment where the internal structure can be leveraged.
As shown earlier the demand for a speciﬁc station at time t is the outcome of the
decision function for agents at some time tn < t with the diﬀerence being the travel
time. Therefore when then decision function is not dependent on the internal state of
the queuing system or quickly computable entirely inside the system, the preferable
separation is obtained. Examples of this are the decision functions in (19) and (18).
For the general function described in (20) it is necessary to approximate the infor-
mation inside the system as done in the example (33), however even these relatively
quick computations have an eﬀect when scaled to 35.000 agents.
Page 28 of 62
==PAGE:30==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
4.3.2
Simulation illustration and parameters
Below a sketch of the queue simulation process for a single agent is illustrated:
Figure 6: Sketch of the queuing simulation process
With input parameters as:
Page 29 of 62
==PAGE:31==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Parameter list
Parameter
Value
Input to
Proposed supply
{X,Y }·{0,1,1..}
Station data
Capacity
4 in base scenario
Station data
Range
{20%..5%}·320 at t = {x1....xn}
Agent data
Agent trips
{X,Y } at t={x1...xn}
Agent data
Charge speed
25 km/m
Charge time
Free speed
50 km/h = 50·16.667 m/min
Drive to station
Decision function
U(x)
Optimal station
After the simulation is run for all agents performance moments can be calculated
for any agent or station in the system. A few of the most important ones are resource
utilisation and agent waiting time which will be used later to illustrate performance
and optimise the system.
4.3.3
Achieving good system performance
For any system with a irregular and sharply peaked arrival process it is clear that a
necessary condition for good system performance is that of load balancing or supply
scheduling. Contemplate the process that happens every single day at the local su-
permarket. When the demand is low service counters are closed and when demand
is high additional are opened to accommodate the peak. If this was not the case
the system would either be consequently under or oversupplied. The same idea does
not work for the system at hand as chargers can not simply be added or removed as
necessary - the supply is ﬁxed for a given system conﬁguration. Instead the load has
to be distributed away from high demand stations and onto lower demand stations,
essentially smoothing the demand curve for any given station. This leads to a beneﬁt
for the individual agent, lower wait time and consequently lower average wait time
for the system as a whole.
Next we will consider how to optimise the location of the charging stations as to
minimize some statistics which are simulated through the queuing model.
Page 30 of 62
==PAGE:32==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
4.4
Optimisation
Mathematical optimisation is the operation of ﬁnding the best (optimal) element from
the allowable set of solutions when evaluated with regard to some criterion. In most
cases this criterion is calculated as a function F, usually called the objective function,
which takes the allowable set as an argument F(x).
The goal of evaluating this criterion is usually that of ﬁnding the minimum value of
the function (minimisation) or the maximum value of the function (maximisation).
Note that any maximisation problem has an equal minimisation problem by simple
sign change of the function.
In most real world cases the function F is evaluated over some data set with some
parameters x which leads to the formulation F(x|D).
Optimisation problems can be classiﬁed further by considering the nature of the al-
lowable set of solutions x. The form of x leads to diﬀerent problems of the types
continuous, discrete and mixed based on how x is deﬁned. This distinction is usually
critical for the diﬃculty of the problem and solution approach.
4.4.1
Derivative free and black-box optimisation
A further division happens when considering the nature of the objective function F
itself. If the function is diﬀerentiable a lot of information is gained about which direc-
tion to search for an optimal solution. This motivates the idea of ﬁrst-order methods,
using the gradient, and second-order methods, using the hessian to guide the search
direction. If the derivative of F cannot be calculated diﬀerent solution methods are
needed, leading to the idea of derivative free optimisation.
For this speciﬁc problem the function F(x) can only be evaluated through the simu-
lation process described in the previous chapter. This promotes the idea of black box
optimisation as a subcategory inside derivative free optimisation.
Some input is put into the simulation and an output is created which can be evalu-
ated, however since the simulation is only described by it’s mechanical processes the
inputs can not be analytically connected to the outputs. This guides two general
paths: Population based methods and model approximation.
Model approximation, also known as surrogate models or surrogate optimisation, seeks
to create an analytical approximation to the black box model. A review is given in
Page 31 of 62
==PAGE:33==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Ky et al. [2016]. The basic idea is to evaluate F(x) for some points P which are
uniformly spread around the search space as such to cover it’s whole range. These
points are then ﬁt to some analytical function that approximates the black box, with
an acquisition function being used to sample news points to try. For continuous inputs
Gaussian Processes are a common choice due to their modelling ﬂexibility. If inputs
are discrete or mixed, random forests are a popular choice
Population based methods, also known as evolutionary algorithms have a long history
of use in many ﬁelds with black box problems. See Sloss and Gustafson [2019] for a
recent review. They all share the trait that a population of solutions are generated
and then evolved through the evolutionary process.
Perhaps the most famous example is that of genetic algorithms which are inspired by
the process of natural selection.
A third idea, which is loosely population based, is cross-entropy (CE) optimisation,
ﬁrst proposed in Rubinstein [1999] and with an R package by Benham et al. [2015].
CE optimisation uses KL-divergence minimisation to iteratively update a probabilistic
parameterization of the solution vector based on samples drawn from the distribution.
It handles both discrete and continuous problems and has seen use in allocation and
queuing problems. In this paper CE optimisation has been used for almost all prob-
lems with sanity checks done on some problems with a binary genetic algorithm.
Various forms of surrogate models have been attempted, but seem to not work well
for what are basically large combinatorial problems. A further exposition is given in
subsequent chapters.
4.4.2
Why the location problem is hard at scale
Consider the problem of placing k stations over n possible locations. For exhaustive
search this is equivalent to the famous n choose k problem also known as the binomial
coeﬃcient, describing the combinations in which k elements can be chosen from a
population of n. Any non trivial problem size will lead to exhaustive search being
unfeasible. Regard a relatively small problem of placing 20 stations over 200 locations.
Exhaustive search leads to 1.61358778797·1027 combinations being evaluated.
Combine this with the nature of the function F(x) described above and it leads to six
Page 32 of 62
==PAGE:34==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
general problems for optimising the function:
• Inputs are discrete
• The problem must be constrained or similar to give non degenerate solutions
• The search space must be constrained
• Calls to F(x) must be low
• The space must be explored in a way which is more eﬃcient than exhaustive or
random search
• The solution is assumed to be sparse when the amount of possible locations is
large
Consequently a diﬃcult optimisation problem is obtained which is likely to require
specialised methods in the future. It is now also clear why related work in the ﬁeld
parameterizes the demand distribution which does away with the computationally
heavy black box.
These six problems will be explored in the subsequent sections.
4.4.3
Developing a suitable criterion
So far the function F(x) has been formless. A key aspect of any optimisation problem
is to decide on what criterion the performance of the system is measured by. In statis-
tics and machine learning this is known as the loss function - for business problems
it is often money or a KPI which can be converted to monetary value.
For the stated problem the situation is less clear and not does readily present a sin-
gular choice. A intuitive observation is that the criterion is directly linked to the
decision function of the individual agents. If the agents only care to minimize wait-
ing time then the system should seek to minimise the expected waiting time of the
entire agent population. This leads to a quite simple formulation of the optimisation
problem when considering a ﬁxed number of stations.
Let x be the solution given as a binary vector corresponding to existence of a station
or not at xi, D the data describing the agents and stations and ﬁnally U(D) the utility
Page 33 of 62
==PAGE:35==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
function evaluated over the data.
argmin
x
(E[WaitTime]|D, U(D))
(39)
X
x
xi = s
(40)
While minimisation of the expected value is theoretically the best strategy for the
system when only considering a single KPI such as money, it might not be the case
for practical systems involving human agents which are sometimes irrational.
As earlier discussed utility functions are in real world situations rarely linear or con-
tinuous in time. Waiting 5 or 10 minutes might be qualitatively the same but 20
minutes is absolutely unacceptable, which establishes the utility function as a step-
function with increasing negative marginal utility. This is often seen for example in
call centres where the main object is not to minimize waiting time but to make sure
that X percent of the calls have to wait less than a certain number of minutes so they
don’t complain or leave bad reviews.
A similar view can be taken on this problem where long waiting times for a speciﬁc
part of the population can lead to news articles, complaining to local politicians and
so forth. In fact any problem which has these characteristics leads to the optimal
solution for the population being the minimisation of the 95% or 99% quantile. Such
a formulation leads to a well posed problem but one which is harder to evaluate on a
common baseline which is that of money. Without a precise formulation of this utility
step-function it is diﬃcult to evaluate how much of a gain a one minute decrease in
the 99% quantile is, while the expectation leads to an easily convertible performance
metric.
Converting time saved to money is a long standing problem in transport modelling
and essential to cost beneﬁt analysis of any major infrastructure project. The stan-
dard conversion metric is that of value of time (VoT) which estimates how much each
agent is willing to pay for a reduction in travel time and then generalises this measure
to the whole population through discrete choice models, see Rich and V [2019] for
recent danish calculations based on TU.
With this measure in hand any increase or decrease in E[WaitTime] can be converted
to a monetary value and therefore readily evaluated with regards to a budget or cost
Page 34 of 62
==PAGE:36==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
beneﬁt analysis.
It is common practice for these sort of problems to essentially be a dual objective
problem - minimize cost while maximising beneﬁt or having a total cost constraint
based on some budget, which is basically equivalent to the problem of placing a ﬁxed
number of stations under assumption of equal cost. While costs are not spatially
invariant for any practical problem it is deemed beyond the scope of this paper to
calculate them and are thus assumed equal.
4.4.4
Constraints, relaxations and sparsity
Constraints are used to enforce bounds on the solution space when the solution must
adhere to some imposed structure. This is common in OR and business problems
where quantities or money is limited. Consider the earlier problem of placing exactly
s stations:
argmin
x
(E[WaitTime]|D, U(D))
(41)
X
x
xi = s
(42)
Here the constraint is an equality constraint which says that the number of stations
placed must exactly match s. For many algorithms, and especially the ones consid-
ered here, there is no simple way to enforce such a constraint on the search space.
Instead the problem is usually relaxed which turns the constraint into a penalty on
the objective function when it is violated. One very famous method is that of La-
grangian multipliers for more regular optimisation problems. Such a method is not
applicable here but the general idea of penalties is. In machine learning penalties are
used to enforce sparsity of the solution, with the strength of the penalty inducing a
loose constraint, also known as regularisation.
Consider the problem above but without the equality constraint. Clearly the solution
is:
x = {1,1,1......1}
(43)
Page 35 of 62
==PAGE:37==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Putting a penalty term on the size of x:
argmin
x
(E[WaitTime]+λ
X
x
xi|D, U(D))
(44)
Note how this is essentially a L1 norm penalty as known from the LASSO, however
for binary strings this is equivalent to the L0 norm. Now P
x xi has a loose bound
such that for an improvement in objective value by adding stations it must hold that:
∆|E[WaitTime]| > λ·∆
X
x
xi
(45)
Where ∆E[WaitTime] is expected to be negative. Such a procedure is known as
regularising the solution. This has a clear cost beneﬁt interpretation when interpreting
E[WaitTime] as a monetary gain for society equal to:
∆E[WaitTime]·V oT(min)
(46)
Enforcing a payback period of t years on investment:
∆E[WaitTime]·Trips·V oT(min)·52·t > Cost·∆
X
x
xi
(47)
E[∆E[WaitTime]] is clearly highly non linear for the problem based on the amount of
stations in the current proposed solution and can once again only be simulated. How-
ever it is proposed that an area of the solution space exists where E[∆E[WaitTime]]
is roughly linear, which is when the total capacity in the systems hits an amount
capable of handling peak periods of demand when reinforced by the load balancing of
the decision function..
As shown above the penalty term enforces a certain sparsity in the solution with the
strength of regularisation controlled by λ. When increasing λ a more and more sparse
solution is obtained centred around the amount of stations which turns the inequality
above into an equality. Later it shall be investigated how the strength of λ aﬀects the
solution.
Above a loose bound was placed on the amount stations based on the expected im-
provement per station. Let’s instead consider the case where an exact equality is
Page 36 of 62
==PAGE:38==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
wanted, turning into a strict bound around a single point. This can be considered as
wanting to place exactly s stations no matter the eﬃciency.
Such a bound can be enforced by a penalty of the following kind:
E[∆E[WaitTime]] < 0
(48)
argmin
x
(E[WaitTime]+λ·max(0,
X
x
xi −s)| D, U(D))
(49)
With λ >> 1. Similarly a functional form can be used:
argmin
x
(E[WaitTime]+F(max(0,
X
x
xi −s))| D, U(D))
(50)
Where F is a non linear function.
4.4.5
Developing a constrained search space
As discussed the search space needs to be restricted to reach an acceptable solution
in feasible time. For this problem generally two approaches can be considered - fur-
ther geographical reduction or a coarser partition of solution points in the current
geographical resolution.
The ﬁrst method is straight forward, simply collapse the area towards a centre point,
in this case by removing feasible destination zones, until the area encompasses an
acceptable amount of links and therefore leading to a problem with desirable scale.
This method is declined for two reasons, mainly that links are not equally distributed
amongst zones and therefore the solution space does not scale linearly with amount
of zones.
Furthermore the whole point of simulating the demand is to achieve greater variation,
not less. When the geospatial topology becomes too small the same trips will merely
be sampled over and over, and while TU data might be rich it can not be expected
to be temporally representative over a very small area.
Method two involves downscaling the amount of feasible charger locations in a given
area. This makes sense intuitively - building two stations too close is ineﬃcient, there-
fore each charger location can be considered as a cell in a grid, with each cell only
being able to contain one station.
Page 37 of 62
==PAGE:39==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
A simple naive solution to this problem is given below:
Algorithm 1: Construction of a random non-square grid
Result: Distribution of points with radius r distance
Provide points P with (X,Y) and radius r;
while sum(Sampled!=0) do
Sample random point p from P where sampled = 0;
Set sampled (p) = 1 ;
Calculate euclidean distance between p and x ∈P \ p;
if Dist(p,x)<r then
Remove point x from P;
else
Keep point x in P;
end
end
Below three ﬁgures are shown for a possible location at all links, sampled with 200
m radius and sampled with 500 m radius.
Figure 7: Possible location on every link
Page 38 of 62
==PAGE:40==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 8: Locations sampled with 200m radius
Figure 9: Locations sampled with 500m radius
For further work the last ﬁgure will be used, resulting in 179 possible location of
stations.
Page 39 of 62
==PAGE:41==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
4.4.6
Constructing a naive heuristic solution
When faced with an optimisation problem as described it can often be complicated
or impossible to formulate an analytical model of the problem which can be suitably
optimised, and even if the problem is analytical in nature it is not a certainty that an
suitable algorithm exists for the required problem scale. If the system is of suﬃcient
complexity and speciﬁcity it is often required to develop a custom algorithm for even
being able to ﬁnd a non trivial solution. One way to construct such a solution is by use
of a heuristic which speciﬁes some simple rules to follow which leads to a feasible but
rarely optimal solution. The rules used are usually guided by rationality principles,
expert and domain knowledge or some novel insight into the problem at hand. For
the problem described mathematical information can only be gained by evaluating the
objective function F(x) for a given feasible solution x, however one can reason about
how x might contribute to the function F, basically heuristically approximating the
gradient.
Consider that for the decision function in (34) agents will always choose to charge
at the station closest to their partitioned trip. If stations are placed at all possible
locations then the stations with highest demand will be those which are closest to the
most amount of trips. This gives a ﬁrst principle idea of the inﬂow of demand into
the system.
Below a ﬁgure is shown of the mean utilisation throughout the simulation of each
station.
Page 40 of 62
==PAGE:42==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 10: Mean utilisation with all possible stations
To start with pick the 20 highest of these and observe the locations.
Figure 11: Heuristic solution based only on distances to travelled routes
Page 41 of 62
==PAGE:43==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Observe that there is one station with around 95% mean utilisation. As earlier
shown traﬃc intensity is heavily peaked around certain hours and the fact that such
a high utility is observed clearly indicates long queues which do not dissipate during
non-peak hours. No conﬁguration of the solution will alleviate this problem because
of the used decision function. We shall later see how the information ﬂow between
system and agent alleviates this problem.
The heuristic approach described above is one way to optimise the system by. Consider
a ﬁxed amount of stations s. Simulate the system starting with all stations operating,
remove the least used one. Repeat until the desired amount of stations s is obtained.
This is known as a greedy heuristic which inherently has some problems. Algorithms
used to solve these types of problems can generally be analysed in terms of exploration
and exploitation. Exploration is describing how much of the search space is covered
while exploitation refers to the inertia of good solutions. An algorithm as described
above heavily exploits but does not explore more than one conﬁguration of the solution
space for each sub-problem {sn,sn−1,sn−2..s} ∈S.
Such a approach is known as backward selection, however there is no guarantee that
a station eliminated in sub problem sn would not be included in sn−1.
A better
approach is usually to explore early in the search and then exploit later.
It shall later be seen that even for its issues such a simple heuristic produces an
acceptable solution to the problem. This is due to the strong internal load balancing
which ﬁxes almost any solution with decent spatial properties.
The heuristic will
almost always ﬁnd such a solution since when the numbers of stations is high it
inherently removes stations in areas which are oversupplied.
5
Results
5.1
The power of information
To showcase the power of adding information to the decision function consider a sim-
ple example of a prelaid charging grid with 20 total stations which are located at 20
randomly sampled positions. The simulation is then run without any form of optimi-
sation to get an idea of the performance diﬀerence between (19) and (34) for a non
optimal supply layout. Below ﬁgures are shown of the result with the top simulation
Page 42 of 62
==PAGE:44==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
only considering distances while the bottom one incorporates the system wait time
estimation.
Figure 12: Performance with 20 randomly sampled stations with simple decision
function
Page 43 of 62
==PAGE:45==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 13: Performance with 20 randomly sampled stations with enhanced decision
function
As was theorised earlier the modiﬁed decision function does much to balance the
loading of the system leading to lower expected wait time. In the top ﬁgure it can be
seen how stations which are closest to demand during peak hours get overwhelmed and
form ever increasing queues leading to very high average wait times. In the bottom
ﬁgure the utilisation range gets shrunk and is much better standardised throughout
the system.
A necessary condition for the waiting time estimation to provide good load balancing
is that E[ChargeTime] is close to its real value. To test this hypothesis consider two
systems with the same stations placed. One is an ideal system that achieves optimal
performance and the other is the simulated system above. Variance is then added to
the actual charge time based on two uniform distributions:
Charge time = Real charge time+k,k ∼U(−b,b) or U(0,b)
(51)
For U(−b,b) the mean is constant but has increasing variance =
1
12 ·(b−(−b))2.
Page 44 of 62
==PAGE:46==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
For U(0,b) the mean grows linearly in b and variance increases as
1
12 ·b2
Consider then the idealised system:
• Case 1) E[WaitTime] is constant under assumption of ρ = λ
µ << 1
• Case 2) E[WaitTime] grows linearly as E[ChargeTime]+b
Below a ﬁgure is showing what happens in the case of the proposed system.
Figure 14: Information eﬃciency
Note that for only variance increase, within some limit, perfect eﬃciency is ob-
tained. However for the increasing mean, which leads to an underestimation of the
actual wait time, wait time grows faster than linearly. This is a consequence of poor
load balancing due to predictor error of the wait time at each station.
5.2
Regularised optimisation
Attention is now turned to ﬁnding an optimal supply formation for a given regularised
problem:
argmin
x
(E[WaitTime]+λ
X
x
xi|D, U(D))
(52)
Page 45 of 62
==PAGE:47==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
CE optimisation is applied for the binary problem with the starting distribution pro-
posal already supposed sparse to speed up estimation time. To start with a very light
penalty is applied and then consequently increased to enforce more sparsity.
Consider λ = 0.25. Optimising with CE leads to a solution by variance convergence
which is simulated and illustrated below:
Figure 15: Performance for λ = 0.25
An estimated wait time of 2 minutes seems unreasonably low for any real world
problem. Consider also the utilisation scale which shows some of the stations only
have 20% average utilisation. From an eﬃciency perspective this penalty is too low
and leads to redundant stations, therefore the penalty is increased to λ = 1.
Page 46 of 62
==PAGE:48==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 16: Performance for λ = 1
Note how the coeﬃcient of λ was quadrupled but the amount of stations only
dropped by 5. As noted earlier the improvement function of stations is clearly non-
linear. 4.5 minutes wait time still seems reasonable and the average utilisation has
been pushed up about 5%. Next the penalty is increased to λ = 2.
Page 47 of 62
==PAGE:49==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 17: Performance for λ = 2
Even though the amount of stations is only reduced by two the performance of
the system plummets with expected waiting time almost doubling. To conclude the
experiment a very sparse solution is forced by using a penalty of the form in (50). s
is taken to be 15 and F = x2 to allow a little bit of ﬂexibility. Below the solution is
illustrated.
Page 48 of 62
==PAGE:50==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 18: Performance with s=15, F = x2
Note how the number of stations turned out to be 18. This incurs a penalty on
the objective function of 32 = 9. This leads credence to the idea that the improvement
function around s = 15 is very steep. Furthermore the performance of the system has
worsened tremendously again with three less stations leading to a 10 minute increase
in expected wait time. Naturally the utilisation of many stations is pushed up again
and clear signs of the system being undersupplied is present.
This leads to the following idea.
There exists a part of the solution space with:
l ≤
X
x
xi ≤u
(53)
Where stations have linear eﬃciency and thus provide linear utility to the system
as a whole. Below this point the eﬃciency is superlinear and above the eﬃciency is
sublinear. Consider the ﬁgure below:
Page 49 of 62
==PAGE:51==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 19: Eﬃciency of stations for P
xi = s
Therefore an eﬃcient "sweet spot" exists where the system achieves enough capac-
ity to properly distribute the load and create reasonable waiting times. This method
is sometimes known as the elbow method in machine learning and is used to determine
the value of a parameter only by considering it’s eﬃciency at optimising the objective
function for functions which are submodular.
Furthermore the function almost has the form of general exponential decay. Fitting
such a function allows quick estimation of how many stations are needed to match an
acceptability criterion of the expected wait time needing to be t minutes or less.
5.2.1
Capacity optimisation
Let us now instead move on to a mixed problem of capacity and location. Instead of
all stations having the same capacity they are now allowed to have discrete capacity
deﬁned for some set. To start with only two sizes are considered, 4 chargers and 8
charges. The solution is now represented as a discrete vector with possibles values
{0,1,2}. This augments the solution space to 3179 instead of 2179. It is assumed that
Page 50 of 62
==PAGE:52==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
cost is linear, therefore when calculating the penalty term with λ = 1 a station of size
8 has exactly twice the weight of a station with size 4. Later this assumption will be
changed.
Below the optimised solution found is shown:
Figure 20: Solution for problem with two station sizes
Almost identical performance is found to the same problem with only one size.
Perhaps doubling the size is too big of a jump to ﬁnd a reasonable balance. Instead
we consider stations of size {0,4,5,6} with solution vector of {0,1,2,3} Linear cost is
still assumed.
The penalty term is therefore given as:
(
X
x
xi >= 1)+(0.25·
X
x
xi = 2)+(0.50·
X
x
xi = 3)
(54)
Page 51 of 62
==PAGE:53==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 21: Solution for problem with three station sizes
Compared to the system above with two ﬁxed sizes this one achieves the same per-
formance with one and a half less stations, which is a quite remarkable improvement.
It also improves upon the one size system, having an expected wait time of around
0.1 minutes more but using half a station less, which should be worth around half a
minute based on the eﬃciency graph.
Lastly the problem above is modiﬁed such that cost of subsequent capacity above four
is less than linear. It seems realistic that establishing a base station size has higher
cost than simply adding more chargers. The penalty is thus modiﬁed as such:
(
X
x
xi >= 1)+(0.15·
X
x
xi = 2)+(0.30·
X
x
xi = 3)
(55)
The performance of this conﬁguration is given below. In the ﬁgure text the amount
of stations is converted back to linear cost, however under the new penalty structure
the solution would have a cost of 24, with 8 normal stations and 13 of larger sizes.
Intuitively under such a structure it is preferable to build larger stations after some
base amount is built to capture the immediate distance eﬀects. For practical problems
Page 52 of 62
==PAGE:54==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
this is surely the case, however such an exercise does not have much meaning without
a somewhat exact cost structure.
Figure 22: Solution for the problem with three station sizes and modiﬁed penalty
5.3
A heuristic solution to the problem
Recall the backwards selection heuristic described earlier.
Applying this heuristic
with s = 23 the following solution is obtained:
Page 53 of 62
==PAGE:55==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 23: Heuristic solution to s = 23
Note how the performance obtained is almost the same as the optimised solutions
above. It leads credence to the idea that under a smart system with these properties
ﬁnding an acceptable solution is simple but ﬁnding a global optimum is almost im-
possible. Applying the solution to other problems like capacity optimisation or with
unequal costs becomes more tricky and this is where the more structural algorithms
starts to shine.
It can however be argued that in real planning problems decisions are more guided
by practicality than optimality. It is therefore reassuring that under the system con-
ditions described so far that an acceptable but non optimal solution can be produced
even by consecutive greedy choices because of the inherent load balancing.
There is also a more theoretical explanation to why the heuristic solution does well.
Consider the eﬃciency function for the amount of stations above. This function is
almost submodular, for which greedy algorithms generally do well. In a very general
way the problem can also be regarded as a maximum set covering problem.
The stations which have low utilisation are those which cover the least amount of
trips, evaluated as the euclidean distance between the station and all agents trips
Page 54 of 62
==PAGE:56==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
along with a measure of cooperation. If the station does not create a lot of demand
on its own, meaning that it minimizes the distance measure, or has overlap with
stations which do, which measures cooperation, then it will have low utilisation and
therefore be removed.
5.4
On the spatial properties of minima
The optimised solutions above show several properties that are recurrent but also some
noteable distinctions. Generally the majority of stations are located in the upper part
of the space. This makes perfect sense with some knowledge of Copenhagen geogra-
phy, these areas are densely populated and have several major employers. However
two distinct patterns occur when considering the formation of these points. Either
they are closely spaced in the centre of the map or they are spread along the edge in
almost net like formation. This translates to either catching the agents when they are
entering at the border of the system or towards their end destination. Both formations
lead to almost similar performance, and even some perturbation of these structures
does not vary performance widely. This leads to the conclusion that under a smart
system such as this perfect spatial structures are not needed for good performance,
however as earlier seen the number of stations is much more sensitive. Hence the ob-
jective function has many local minima with similar properties. As mentioned above
this makes ﬁnding a single optimal solution very diﬃcult but an acceptable solution
more manageable.
Clearly once larger geographical areas are considered location becomes a bigger con-
tributing factor. When the examined area is small a perturbation which is small in
relative terms will have a small eﬀect on the overall performance.
5.5
Optimising for the 99% quantile
As discussed earlier another idea is to optimise the quantile function of the waiting
time. Even if the mean waiting time is low there might still be high unreasonably
high values which are not acceptable in daily life. Consider the ﬁgure below which
depicts the waiting time distribution for s = 23.
Page 55 of 62
==PAGE:57==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 24: Waiting time distribution when minimizing E[WaitTime]
The blue area in the ﬁgure shades the 99% quantile meaning that 99% of agents
had a waiting time less than roughly 35 minutes. However what immediately pops
out is the maximum value which is almost 100 minutes. Under the assumption of
linear utility this would be reasonable, but for any real life system such a situation
clearly means the system is undersupplied. One observation is that during the peak
period the movement in the system is so rapid that the naive prediction with zero
trend causes problems for the system, which a better forward prediction model would
alleviate.
The question then becomes if its possible to optimise for the 99% quantile instead of
the mean for a ﬁxed number of stations, therefore only allowing changes by permuta-
tion of locations. The ﬁgure below shows the waiting time distribution for minimisa-
tion of the 99% quantile for s = 23.
Page 56 of 62
==PAGE:58==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 25: Wait time distribution when minimizing 99% quantile
In general it is not the case, the 99% quantile is pretty stationary around 40
minutes. The main diﬀerence is that the max has been reduced by 20 minutes. Since
the mean has an unbounded inﬂuence function minimising the mean will also minimize
the 99% quantile for well posed problems. Furthermore the eﬃciency regions starts
at same point as the earlier derived one for the mean, however it is further extended
since the drops in the 99% quantile are less rapid than in the mean. Naturally a
much larger number of stations are needed to push below any reasonable threshold.
Choosing the last point in the elbow leads to 99% of the population having to wait
17 minutes or less to charge. Therefore the optimal amount of stations based on the
elbow method is 28, while it was 24 for the mean based derivation. This leads to
several decision criteria which can be evaluated to establish an optimal amount of
stations.
Page 57 of 62
==PAGE:59==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Figure 26: Eﬃciency function of stations for the 99% quantile
5.6
Decisions revisited
In the chapter above four decision concepts were presented:
• A regularised method based on smooth cost bounding to place stations for a
semi ﬁxed amount
• A regularised method based on strong cost bounding to place stations for a ﬁxed
amount
• The eﬃciency function for the mean to evaluate the amount of stations - based
on an elbow principle or a set service level
• The eﬃciency function for the 99% quantile to evaluate the amount of stations
- based on an elbow principle or a set service level
Page 58 of 62
==PAGE:60==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
For investigations into how many stations are needed to achieve a ﬁxed service level
the two last methods can be used. For solving the placement problem for a semi ﬁxed
or ﬁxed set of stations the two ﬁrst methods are used. For these evaluations equal
and linear costs were assumed, however penalties can be scaled on a station basis as
to reﬂect the underlying cost structure.
Page 59 of 62
==PAGE:61==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
6
Conclusion
In this paper a simulation and optimisation framework was developed for analysis of
the optimal EV charging problem. A constrained area of Copenhagen was chosen as a
test-bed and demand for EV charging in this area was calculated for a 2030 scenario
over a week long period based on a large real data set of danish travel preferences.
To transform the overall demand to location based demand a decision function incor-
porating real time information sharing between agent and system was derived. This
decision function serves as an approximation to a future smart system where the agent
and system can communicate via an app or in car system.
It was concluded that the addition of information ﬂow had a strong load balancing
eﬀect on the system as a whole under some regularity conditions on how eﬃciently
the system can estimate the queue size and mean charging time at a speciﬁc station.
To solve the location placement problem a regularised optimisation process based on
cross-entropy optimisation was proposed and used on the test problem for diﬀerent
strengths of regularisation.
Comparing the eﬀects of diﬀerent penalties on the objective function led to the con-
clusion that there exists a bounded region for which stations show linear eﬃciency
in wait time reduction, which exists where system reaches enough overall capacity to
successfully load balance during periods of peak demand.
The load balancing eﬀect ensures that many local minima exists with good perfor-
mance, which can even be derived from simple heuristics since the eﬃciency function is
approximately submodular. This makes the problem of ﬁnding an acceptable solution
to the problem for some level of performance simpler but ﬁnding a global optimum
more diﬃcult. For many real world problems of this sort this might be preferable
since implementing an optimal solution might not be possible but having many good
solutions available leads to ﬂexibility in the decision making. It was also shown how
capacity optimisation can be incorporated to develop a simultaneous problem of place-
ment and capacity under both linear and unequal cost structures.
A simulation based approach seems like a promising venue to pursue to consider the
eﬀects such smart systems will have on overall system performance in the future.
A next step could be to incorporate a strong foreward looking wait time prediction
model to further the ability of the system to self regulate.
Page 60 of 62
==PAGE:62==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
Bibliography
Tim Benham, Qibin Duan, Dirk P. Kroese, and Benoit Liquet.
Ceoptim: Cross-
entropy r package for optimization. 2015.
T. Donna Chen, Kara M Kockelman, and Moby Khan.
Locating electric vehicle
charging stations parking-based assignment method for seattle, washington. The
Alternative Transportation Fuels and Technologies, 2013.
Hjalmar Christiansen and Britt Zoëga Skougaard. Transportvaneundersøgelsen - vari-
bel deklaration. Technical report, DTU, 2015. URL http://www.modelcenter.
transport.dtu.dk/Transportvaneundersoegelsen.
Danmarks Statistik DST. Ni ud af ti kan klare pendlingen i elbil. dst.dk, 2018. URL
https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/nyt/NytHtml?cid=31453.
A. Greasley and C. Owen. Modelling people’s behaviour using discrete-event simu-
lation: a review. International Journal of Operations & Production Management,
38, No.5:1228–1244, 2018.
S.L Hakimi. Optimum locations of switching centers and the absolute centers and
medians of a graph. Operations Research, vol. 12(3):450–459, 1964.
Matthew Jacob. Discrete event simulation. Resonance, 2013.
David Kahle and Hadley Wickham. ggmap: Spatial visualization with ggplot2. The
R Journal, 5(1):144–161, 2013. URL https://journal.r-project.org/archive/
2013-1/kahle-wickham.pdf.
Frederiksberg Kommune. Elbilstrategi. frederiksberg.dk, 2019. URL https://www.
frederiksberg.dk/sites/default/files/2019-04/Elbilstrategi.pdf.
Vu Khac Ky, Claudia D’Ambrosio, Youssef Hamadi, and Leo Liberti. Surrogate-based
methods for black-box optimization.
International Transactions in Operational
Research, 2016.
Mark A. Pinsky and Samuel Karlin. An introduction to Stochastic Modelling. Elsevier,
2011.
Page 61 of 62
==PAGE:63==
Master thesis
Christian A. V. s130546
Analysis of danish infrastructure for charging of electrical vehicles
July 3rd. 2020
J. Rich. Large-scale spatial population synthesis for denmark. Eur. Transp. Res. Rev.
10, 63, 2018.
J. Rich and C.O Hansen. The danish national passenger model – model speciﬁcation
and results. European Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research, 16:573–
599, 2016.
J. Rich and CA. V. Is the value of travel time savings increasing? analysis throughout
a ﬁnancial crisis. Transportation Research. Part A: Policy & Practice, 142:145–168,
2019. doi: 10.1016/j.tra.2019.03.012.
R. Rubinstein. The cross-entropy method for combinatorial and continuous optimiza-
tion. Methodology and Computing in Applied Probability, 1:127–190, 1999. doi:
10.1023/A:1010091220143.
Andrew N. Sloss and Steven Gustafson. 2019 evolutionary algorithms review. 2019.
Cong Quoc Tran, Dong Ngoduy, Keyvan-Ekbatani, and David Watling.
A user
equilibrium-based fast-charging location model considering heterogeneous vehi-
cles in urban networks.
Transportmetrica A: Transport Science, 2020.
doi:
10.1080/23249935.2020.1785579.
Iñaki Ucar, Bart Smeets, and Arturo Azcorra. simmer: Discrete-event simulation for
R. Journal of Statistical Software, 90(2):1–30, 2019. doi: 10.18637/jss.v090.i02.
Hengsong Wang, Qi Huang, Changhua Zhang, and Aihua Xia. A novel approach for
the layout of electric vehicle charging station. In The 2010 International Conference
on Apperceiving Computing and Intelligence Analysis Proceeding, 2010.
Xiangyu and Rui Qui. Electric vehicle charging station location towards sustainable
cities. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 2020.
Page 62 of 62
