==PAGE:1==
Sammenbike: Entrepreneurial development of 
a prototype and production of a unique human 
powered vehicle 

Yaacob Amichai Szankowski   
Master’s Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Abstract 
This project seeks to enhance the acceptance of active mobility. The objective is approached through an 
integrated focus of entrepreneurial pursuit and technical development of a new vehicle.  
The project blends the analysis of the current mobility paradigm, with effectual creation of a new product for 
a new market. This market is termed the “active mobility” market. This market combines the market of private 
cargo bikes and the service market of bike sharing program. 
The vehicle which was created for this market combines attractive functional elements from cargo bikes and 
cars. This vehicle is dubbed “Sammenbike”. A model of the new vehicle is used to conduct a small market 
survey. 
“Sammenbike” is designed to be manufactured using common technologies, and the model is developed using 
design for manufacture principles. In doing so, the case for scalable production of the vehicle is made. 
The cost to produce a functional prototype of “Sammenbike” is used to create a road map for a business which 
will approach the new market with an ownership or leasing offer. 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
Acknowledgements 
The thesis has been written under the global Corona epidemic. Due to this, most of it was written at 
home. This would not have been possible if not for my better half, Lea Bennedsen, who bore the 
bulk of parenting of our daughter Klara in this time and still had the capacity to contribute and 
encourage after bedtime. 
I would like to thank Chris Valentin Nielsen and Robin van Oorschot in guiding me through an 
unusual project, set under unusual times. 
Carl Georg Rasmussen, for his endless inspiration and for once again sharing his workshop with me. 
Nicholas Christophersen, Jonas Gotfred, Lissi Marie Henriksen and Kim Petersen for getting in my 
mindset in developing a vital part of this design. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
Contents  
 
Preface 
1 
1.1 
Scope of project 
1 
 
Methodology 
2 
2.1 
Effectuation as a framework for 
entrepreneurship 
2 
2.2 
Technical methods 
4 
2.3 
Abbreviations used and explanation 
4 
 
Opportunity: Discovery versus Creation 
5 
3.1 
Problem statement 
5 
3.2 
Framing the active mobility market 
5 
3.2.1 
The European bicycle markets as a macro 
market 6 
3.2.2 
The CB market as a micro market 
9 
3.2.2.1 
The electrical CB sub-segment 
10 
3.2.2.2 
CB’s for commercial uses 
11 
3.2.2.3 
Current design trends in the micro 
market 
11 
3.2.3 
The urban mobility service market 
12 
3.2.3.1 
Cycling within the MaaS market 
13 
3.2.4 
Trends in the markets 
14 
3.2.5 
Industry analysis 
16 
3.2.5.1 
Threats of entry 
16 
3.2.5.2 
Power of suppliers 
17 
3.2.5.3 
Buyer power 
17 
3.2.5.4 
Threat of substitutes 
18 
3.2.5.5 
Competitive rivalry 
18 
3.2.6 
Evaluation of opportunity 
19 
 
Development: Design and Business 
20 
4.1 
Design exploration 
20 
4.1.1 
Decomposition of the family car 
20 
4.1.2 
Preliminary investigation: sketching and 
patent search 
22 
4.2 
Design generation 
24 
4.2.1 
Product design specification 
24 
4.3 
Design justification 
26 
4.3.1 
Side by side seating 
26 
4.3.2 
Two convertible positions: upright to 
recumbent 
27 
4.3.3 
Diagonal seating 
28 
4.3.4 
Four wheels 
28 
4.3.5 
Backbone vehicle architecture with front 
bifurcation 
28 
4.4 
Mechanisms to facilitate the invention 30 
4.4.1 
A novel steering system 
30 
4.4.2 
Adjustable recumbent seats 
30 
4.4.3 
Suspension system 
32 
4.5 
Fundamental mechanical considerations
 
32 
4.5.1 
Vehicle structural requirements 
32 
4.5.2 
Normal straight-line driving forces 
33 
4.5.3 
Minimal turning radius 
34 
4.6 
Introducing Sammenbike 
35 
4.7 
Business conceptualization 
37 
4.7.1 
New vs. Existing market and the active 
mobility hypotheses 
38 
4.7.1.1 
Prelude to testing: limitations to 
qualitative market research 
38 
4.7.1.2 
Survey design 
40 
4.7.1.3 
Survey results 
40 
4.7.1.4 
Results discussion 
45 
4.7.2 
Opportunity adaptation 
46 
4.7.3 
Financial analysis 
47 
4.7.3.1 
Funding requirements 
48 
4.7.3.2 
Financial revenue model 
49 
4.7.4 
Putting it all together 
51 
4.7.4.1 
Actors in the active mobility market and 
possible partnerships 
51 
4.7.4.2 
Business road map 
52 
 
Detailing: Production development 
53 
5.1 
Principles for material and processing 
choices 53 
5.2 
Chassis construction 
53 
5.2.1 
Joining processes 
54 
5.2.2 
Adaptation of chassis production method 
55 
5.2.2.1 
Testing 
56 
5.2.2.2 
Simple bending simulation 
57 
Assembly procedure 
58 
5.2.2.3 
Test piece expenditures 
59 
5.3 
Development of tooling for Seat 
construction 
60 
5.3.1 
Description of the joining method 
60 
5.3.2 
Development of process parameters using i-
form 
61 
5.4 
Shaping of side-by-side seat frame 
members 
63 
5.5 
Development of steering system 
64 
 
Conclusion 
68 
 
Reflections 
68 
7.1 
Entrepreneurial aspects 
68 
7.2 
Technical aspects 
69 
7.3 
Discussion and future work 
69 
 
Bibliography 
70 
 
Appendix 
74 
9.1 
Revenue models and prototype financial 
requirements 
74 
9.2 
Chassis assembly manual 
74 
9.3 
Test piece technical drawings (resized) 74 
9.4 
Feedback gathered from practitioners in 
the field 
74 
9.5 
Project Gantt chart 
74 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
List of figures 
Figure 1.The “double diamond” framework of innovation and 
its interpretation in this project. 
3 
Figure 2. The boundaries of the artificial market. 
6 
Figure 3. 2016 EU 28 Bicycle and e-bike sales country share 
(%). 
7 
Figure 4. Number of bicycles sold in the EU. 
7 
Figure 5. Average consumer price per country. 
8 
Figure 6. Types of cargo-cycles. (Cyclelogistics, 2020) 
9 
Figure 7. The current E-CB market. 
10 
Figure 8. The first (L) and second (R) "Taga" CB. (Taga 
USA Inc.) 
17 
Figure 9. The “Omnium” “short John” CB. (Omnium Cargo, 
2020) 
18 
Figure 10. Stick figure investigation of seat angle variations 
in bicycles. 
23 
Figure 11. Small sketch, investigating the combination of a 
space frame and a side by side tandem. 
23 
Figure 12. Top view, investigation on layout of steering, 
wheelbase and transmission alternatives, and their 
mechanical interactions. 
23 
Figure 13. Top view, investigation of range of adjustability 
on a four wheeled, rear steered upright tandem. 
23 
Figure 14. PDS of the invention. 
24 
Figure 15. The conceptual design, “cyclist” use case. 
25 
Figure 16. The conceptual design, “driver and passenger” use 
case. 
25 
Figure 17. The Dutch “Van Raam” side by side tandem. 
26 
Figure 18. Peter Lis and his family on the “Lissy” side by 
side tandem. (Lis, 2019) 
27 
Figure 19. The Lotus Elan backbone chassis. 
29 
Figure 20. Concept design top view, overall dimensions of 
chassis. 
29 
Figure 21. Concept design top view, placement of wheels, 
seats and components. 
29 
Figure 22. The embodied design of the steering system. 
30 
Figure 23. Unfolded (L) and folded (R) seat structure. 
31 
Figure 24. Artistic representation of seats with webbings. 31 
Figure 25. A suspension system composed of a damper, 
composite leaf spring and top arm. 
32 
Figure 26. Principal dynamic forces. 
33 
Figure 27. Ackermann steering diagram. 
34 
Figure 28. Intersect of steer rotation axis and track. 
35 
Figure 29. Embodied design, "driver and passenger" use case.
 
36 
Figure 30. Embodied design, "Cyclist" use case. 
36 
Figure 31. TAM (Total Addressable Market), SAM (Served 
Available Market). (Blank & Dorf, 2012) 
38 
Figure 32. Structure of survey. 
40 
Figure 33. Demographic distribution. N=88 
41 
Figure 34. Type of bike currently owned. N=88 
41 
Figure 35. Q6: “If it doesn't have a motor, why? (you can 
choose more than one answer)”. 
42 
Figure 36. CB user's cycling habits. N=76 
42 
Figure 37. Social cycling habits of CB users. N=76 
43 
Figure 38. Initial reaction of respondents to the function of 
side-by-side cycling. N=87 
43 
Figure 39. Follow up formulation, inquiring target group’s 
need. N=87 
44 
Figure 40. Q12: Negative attitudes towards the new concept: 
N=44 A:"It seems too complex." 48%, B: "I don't see 
the appeal of riding with another person.” 34% C: "I 
don't like the look of it." 14%, D: "I don't think it 
would work."” 23%, E: "It seems cumbersome.” 70%.
 
44 
Figure 41. Private ownership vs. service offer. N=43 
44 
Figure 42. Cost estimates of a fully functional prototype in 
Euros, total cost of production: €6980. 
48 
Figure 43. Private sales model. 
49 
Figure 44. Leasing model. 
50 
Figure 45. Potential partners in the active mobility market. 52 
Figure 46. Chassis with colors indicating the forming 
process. 
53 
Figure 47. The Lotus Elise chassis. 
54 
Figure 48. Wheel subassembly of a later Lotus model. The 
adhesive is visible in red. (Car Body Design, 2008) 55 
Figure 49. Front detail view of backbone profile and main 
chassis sidewall. 
55 
Figure 50. Trimetric detail view of backbone profile and 
main chassis members. 
55 
Figure 51.Detailed view of arm lug. 
56 
Figure 52. Detailed view: front bifurcation. 
56 
Figure 53. The structural blind rivets used in the test piece. 56 
Figure 54. Trimetric plot, first principal stress. 
57 
Figure 55. Front view, displacement plot. 
57 
Figure 56. The full simulation sequence as compared to the 
load. 
62 
Figure 57. Concept design side view. 
63 
Figure 58. Side view of frame members. Design optimization 
plot. 
63 
Figure 59.Side view of conceptual model. The dimensions of 
the frame members following optimization. 
64 
 List of tables 
Table 1. Summary of current CaaS programs in Copenhagen
 
14 
Table 2. Functional decomposition of the car. 
21 
Table 3. Features and production processes for a typical car
 
22 
Table 4. Patent categories relevant to the field of invention.23 
Table 5. The initial BMC. 
37 
Table 6. Online CB interest groups surveyed. 
40 
Table 7. Survey response and completion rates. 
41 
Table 8. Financial characterization of two service and private 
ownership businesses. 
47 
Table 9. A reduced BM, Private sales 
49 
Table 10. A reduced BM, service model. 
51 
Table 11. Business road map. 
52 
Table 12. Test piece assembly 
58 
Table 13. Test piece expenditures. 
59 
Table 14. The two-stage joining process. 
60 
Table 15. The simulated process. 
61 
Table 16. Critical operation parameters, comparison of 
project and originating article. 
63 
Table 17. Collaboration timeline 
65 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
… “there is nothing more pleasant than having a companion on the same machine. If you drive in the company 
of one or more comrades, each of whom has his or her own special vehicle, this is definitely more enjoyable 
than if you just drift on the street alone, but there is not much talk of mutual entertainment because of that 
Vehicles according to police regulations do not have to drive next to each other, but behind each other at a 
certain distance. Talking back and forth is usually limited to short shouts, short questions thrown out loud, and 
equally short answers, and it makes a strange impression when you see several cyclists cycling past each other 
in succession. 
Quite different if two people use a double-seat machine at the same time; There is no distance to prevent the 
exchange of thoughts, and the more the landscape changes, the more active the conversation between the trav-
elers is. Of course, the attraction of such a trip on a two-seater machine is greatly increased if there are delicate 
relationships between two travelers of different sexes.” 
Wilhelm Wolf, "Fahrrad und Radfahrer", Leipzig 1890 
 
 
 
 
“De fiets de fiets en verder niets” 
Common Dutch expression
==PAGE:8==
1 
 
 Preface 
The concept of mobility is rapidly changing around the world. Urban transport is being debated as a 
contributing factor to the global climate crisis. This, along with the repercussions of a car-dominated world is 
finally spurring a public debate on the influence this complex matter has on public health, economics, and city 
planning. 
This change in mobility has two factors at its origin. 
First, the private sector has taken over the duties of urban transport services that public administration once 
held. Second, the perceived boundaries of public and individual transport have been blurred by sharing and 
haling services. 
Transport of goods in cities is likewise being altered due to the rise of E-commerce. More packages are being 
delivered more frequently over arbitrary routes. This creates a need for more efficient distribution chains. 
Private sector actors have also overtaken this domain for the most part.  
Bicycles have seen a resurgence of interest as a transport vehicle for both goods and individuals. Along with 
electrical cars, electrical bicycles have gained mass acceptance. This in large part due to the reducing price of 
Lithium batteries.  
Bicycles, along with other electrical vehicles has begun a “micromobility” revolution. 
The fundamental argument presented in this paper is that human powered mobility is technologically 
underdeveloped. Bicycles are produced in much the same way as a century ago. Due to this, cars dominate 
consumer mindset. In politics, ambitious “climate plans” consist of electrical car subsidies, and a passing 
mention of bicycles. 
This paper examines opportunity creation in this field. For the new market of active urban mobility, an urban 
family car alternative is made. The market approach for this vehicle draws on current trends of decoupling of 
ownership and service models from usage. 
The paper represents the written portion of the final project examination in fulfillment of the master program 
in materials and manufacturing. This paper will be presented on the 29th of July 2020. 
 
1.1 Scope of project 
The prime objective of this project is to enhance the acceptance of active mobility. This objective is approached 
through an integrated focus of new business models and innovative technological development. The thesis 
encompasses entrepreneurial development, design and manufacturing of a new product and transport policy. 
The thesis is thus interdisciplinary in its approach to the following sub-objectives: 
I. 
Obtaining an overview of the current market and industry conditions in an artificial market: the “active 
mobility” market. 
II. 
Familiarizing with existing entrepreneurial practices and theory related to urban mobility and new 
markets. 
III. 
Designing an invention to serve the artificial market. 
IV. 
Conducting research and analysis of the appeal of the invention with an envisioned target group 
V. 
Developing a business model to commercialize the invention, and a road map for the creation of a 
venture with the means at hand. 
==PAGE:9==
2 
 
VI. 
Exploring innovative manufacturing processes to reduce the production costs and increase the finan-
cial viability of the venture with a design for scalable production. 
It is with this broad scope of exploration that a business case for small company with a new product in a new 
market is created. The business road map describes a plan to produce an MVP (minimum viable product) 
which will serve to generate interest and feedback and testing. Following that, the artificial market is created 
through two revenue streams of sale and leasing of the vehicle. 
 Methodology 
The opportunity was evaluated using Mullins’ model of seven domains (Mullins J. , 2010). The primary goals 
of the model are to answer the following questions: 
I. 
Are the market and the industry attractive? 
II. 
Does the opportunity offer compelling customer benefits and sustainable advantage over others to the 
customer’s needs? 
III. 
Can the team deliver the results they seek and promise to others? 
These questions relate to the well-known “double diamond” model of innovation and design theory (fig. 1). In 
the model, divergent exploration of a general problem serves to ground and refine the specific problem. This 
is followed by convergent processes: ideation and delivery of a specific solution. 
In relating to Mulins’ model, the first question is answered in the sections relating to the discovery and 
definition of the problem. (sections 3). The second question is answered in the sections relating to the 
research and development and technical detailing of the design and the conceptualization of the business 
(sections 4 and 5 As this project remains hitherto a solitary effort, the third question is addressed in sections 
4.7.3 and 4.7.4. 
2.1 Effectuation as a framework for entrepreneurship 
In broad terms, entrepreneurship is the analysis and planning of a new business opportunity. In her 
influential work on Effectuation Saras D. Sarasvathy (2008) calls entrepreneurship “the science of the 
artificial”. As a field of applied science, it seeks to design and control dependencies of artifacts (man-made 
creations). This is contrasted with research of human enterprise as governed solely by natural law. 
Traditional economics and sociology are two such fields (Sarasvathy, 2008). 
In Effectual reasoning, entrepreneurial opportunities can either be found or created. In neoclassical economics, 
market opportunities are created by assessing current demands. In contrast, evolutionary economics regards 
opportunities as adaptations to survive in a market (Sarasvathy, 2008). 
Effectuation’s central tenet is the “even-if” reasoning: to create opportunity in the face of uncertainty. In this 
project, this reasoning is combined with technical methods of research in fulfilling the prime objective. This 
is reflected in aspects relating to design for behavioral change, business modeling and design for manufacture. 
==PAGE:10==
3 
 
 
 
Figure 1.The “double diamond” framework of innovation and its interpretation in this project. 
==PAGE:11==
4 
 
2.2 Technical methods 
The technical development of the project was supported by a study of available literature in the following 
fields: 
• 
Design and manufacturing of automotive parts. 
• 
Policy and trend research in urban mobility.  
The sources varied from academic literature to reports from governmental and non-governmental agencies. 
The "Solidworks" CAD suite was used as a primary tool of design. Theoretical knowledge of machine design, 
principally of multi-track vehicles based the development of the vehicle. 
The development was further grounded in development of a product design specification (PDS) guide. This 
(PDS) described the design aim and formed the guidelines of all derived mechanical design problems. 
The production method of the chassis was developed as a low-cost analogue of existing technology. A Finite 
element model tested the strength of this analogue, in anticipation of validating the model’s strength with a 
simple bending test of a constructed test piece. Unfortunately, this test could not be performed, due to lack of 
access to testing facilities. However, the production method verified the feasibility of this construction method. 
The production method for the recumbent seats was developed using the "i-form" FE software for metal 
forming. This method was adapted from research by applying this method for aluminum. 
Additionally, an element of the vehicle was optimized using the design optimization module of the “Fusion 
360” CAD software suite. 
The design of the steering system was “outsourced” to a group of production Technology students from KEA 
(Københavns Erhverv Akademi). The group used a concept screening approach to the design objective. In this 
method, the alternative which they generated were benchmarked according to a scaling matrix. I assisted them 
in their project and provided my own feedback as a collaborator. 
2.3 Abbreviations used and explanation 
PT 
Public transport 
 
MaaS Mobility-as-a-Service 
Can refer to traditional P.T and taxis but is more commonly used to describe smartphone 
application-based ride sharing and haling services. 
CaaS 
Cycling-as-a-Service 
Refers to all kinds of city-wide bicycle sharing programs, where the service provider is not 
physically present for the transaction to take place. 
HPV 
Human Powered Vehicle 
Refers to all craft powered by humans- water, air or land based. Most typically used to refer to 
covered, recumbent cycles. 
MVP 
Minimum Viable product 
Describes the fundamental elements that make up the value proposition to potential users and 
consumers. 
DFM 
Design for Manufacture 
CB 
Cargo Bike 
Also referred to as a freight cycle. A pedal driven vehicle designed to carry goods and people.  
==PAGE:12==
5 
 
 Opportunity: Discovery versus Creation 
In considering urban mobility, the strategies of customer or user driven opportunity creation seem to lack 
account for externalities. The potential user of urban mobility is influenced by the infrastructure that drove 
him to choose one modal use over another. This infrastructure in turn was shaped by political and cultural 
attitudes to urban development. Further, those attitudes are based on notions of how public goods best benefit 
society. 
Focusing further on active urban mobility- reduced bicycle infrastructure development ensures that less people 
will perceive bicycles as a means of transport. This creates a positive feedback loop in reducing bicycle 
demand. 
Therefore, in the context of for promotion for active mobility, both causal reasoning (“how we got here”) as 
well as effectual (“how might we change it”) should be made to base the case for a need for innovation. 
 
3.1 Problem statement 
In countries where transport cycling is most prevalent, users do not need any meaningful change to the device. 
In fact, the acceptance of innovations in the field, most notably of electrical bicycles, has been slower there 
than in countries with much less infrastructure and traditions for cycling. (COLIBI - COLIPED, 2012) 
In countries where cycling isn’t the norm, bicycles are not seen as a viable mode of transport, and demand 
does not increase. There and elsewhere, electrical scooters and ride hailing apps have transformed urban 
mobility without significant infrastructure investment. 
Shared scooters have overtaken bicycles in popularity, being easily deployed and widely accessible as soon as 
a company decides to deploy a fleet. 
The sum result: the bicycle is not perceived to rival the car, and no significant opportunities are found in this 
market. 
Therefore, in taking on the role of opportunity creator, the decomposition of the problem cannot address the 
above-mentioned externalities, as they also serve as its source. The opportunity needs to include both the 
reasons for attraction, as well as repulsion from the use of the bicycle, and be phrased as: 
“How can a pedal-driven vehicle be designed, produced and marketed to appeal to both current urban 
cyclists and potential car consumers?" 
 
3.2 Framing the active mobility market 
In (Mullins J. , 2010) the author describes two viewpoints through which one can begin to assess opportunity 
in a market: the whole product market describes a macro market, and the segment within the market as a micro 
market. In the context of this project, the macro level market could be described as either: 
• 
The private ownership bicycle market: including all cycle types, as well as their accessories and related 
goods. 
• 
The urban mobility market: including all transport modes in an urban environment. These are: public 
transport forms, private cars and the relatively new MaaS segment, which is competing with them 
both. 
==PAGE:13==
6 
 
As the opportunity can fit both the private ownership as well as the service market, both sides needed to be 
investigated. Together, they form a new market of “active urban mobility”, where the ownership/service 
distinction doesn’t apply. These were assessed separately. 
In the private ownership market, regular commuter bikes as well as CB could form the micro market. Regular 
commuter bikes were excluded from analysis, as they form a distinct segment. 
The macro/micro distinction still applies in the private market, as sales figures in the CB market are portioned 
from the bicycle as a whole market. For the same reason, this distinction is less relevant for the urban mobility 
market, as well as the MaaS segment. 
 
Figure 2. The boundaries of the artificial market. 
 “Micromobility” is a different term currently in vogue. This term describes smartphone enabled services 
which include both electrical scooters and bicycles. Contrary to this term, the focus in this project was to base 
and justify the choice to use muscle power for transport. Moreover, “Micromobility” usually pertains to short 
distances (“last mile solutions”) with a focus on spatial proximity of fleet deployment in dense urban areas.  
On the other hand, transport cycling describes longer distances- up to 10 km per trip. Therefore, transport 
cycling includes whole journey travel as well as “last mile”. 
 
3.2.1 The European bicycle markets as a macro market 
The most reliable source of data on the bicycle market, which is also publicly accessible (meaning here: the 
data is derived from country-wide industrial associations reports and experts, rather than a privately-owned 
market analysis firm) is CONEBI (Confederation of the European Bicycle Industry). The data gathered here 
was therefore regionally limited to the 28 EU member states, and its latest publicly available data is from 2017, 
with statistics gathered until 2016. This limits the conclusions that can be drawn regarding more recent 
developments, as well as more global patterns. (CONEBI, 2017). 
As can be seen in fig. 3, the countries dominating the overall market share are also the biggest in terms of GDP 
and size. The four biggest countries in terms of market share all inherit rich histories as cycling nations, for 
transport and sport. One exception is the sizable Polish market, which is twice as big as the Belgian market, 
despite similar GDP’s as of 2016. The Polish bicycle market has grown by 20% since 2012 (European Cyclists’ 
Federation, 2016). 
==PAGE:14==
7 
 
 
Figure 3. 2016 EU 28 Bicycle and e-bike sales country share (%). 
 
Figure 4. Number of bicycles sold in the EU. 
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,0
0,5
0,8
1,4
2,2
2,9
3,6
4,3
4,6
5,6
6,6
8,1
0,0
-6,3
0,5
13,3
0,6
2,9
0,6
1,5
-5,3
-3,1
4,5
-2,1
-1,6
0,3
2,8
1,4
-0,4
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
[%] total market evolution
Year
[%] Electrical bikes market share
European market evolution 2000 - 2016
Electrical bikes market share
Total market evolution
==PAGE:15==
8 
 
The bicycle market is still recovering from the 2008 recession, as can be seen from the total market’s evolution 
(fig. 4). Its annual growth rate is estimated at 5.5% until 2022. For comparison, the European car market's 
annual growth rate is 1.7% until 2024 (European Cyclists’ Federation, 2018). The share of electrical bikes is 
steadily increasing, and as of 2016 is 8% of the total bicycle market. The average sales price of a bike in Europe 
can be seen to increase as a result. 
For a more detailed tally of the market conditions, the average spending on individual units is presented (fig. 
5). The clear tendency is for consumers in countries with well-developed bicycle infrastructure is to view their 
bicycles as a mode of transport and spend more on them as a result. 
 
 
Figure 5. Average consumer price per country. 
 
It can be inferred here that transport cycling fulfills a sizable segment of the bicycle market in Europe. 
Countries with strong transport cycling traditions (Denmark, The Netherlands and Germany) dominate.  
With these countries finally adapting to electrical bikes within the last part of the decade, the average price of 
a bicycle in Europe has risen. This is despite the technology becoming prevalent for at least a decade prior to 
that. Countries with strong sports cycling traditions (such as Spain and Italy) trail behind, emphasizing again 
the impact that electrical bikes have had on the European bicycle market in recent years. 
 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
(€) 
Average price (€) 
EU 28
==PAGE:16==
9 
 
3.2.2 The CB market as a micro market 
The “micro market” is the cycle type segment under consideration.  
Cargo cycle are HPV's designed for transporting payloads, which can be both goods and people. Different 
variants have been developed (see fig. 6). Traditional models include the two wheeled "long John" (or 
"bakefiets") and the three-wheeled, central steered "Christiania" bike. Maximal payload and maneuverability 
are a usual trade-off in CBs. 
In considering this market, the impact of electrification can also not be overstated. Electrical cargo bicycles 
can carry heavier payloads over longer distances. They would therefore more closely relate to the product 
under development. It was therefore that electrical cargo bike variants were documented. 
 
 
Figure 6. Types of cargo-cycles. (Cyclelogistics, 2020) 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
10 
 
3.2.2.1 
The electrical CB sub-segment 
In fig. 7, a selection of CBs is charted. The chart illustrates only the electrical variants. 
 
Legend 
Country of origin 
NL 
DK 
DE 
 
 
 
Number of wheels 
2 
3 
 
 
Figure 7. The current E-CB market. 
The average price of a CB with a 250W motor is €4200. This stands in sharp contrast to the average European 
bicycle price of €389 (fig 5).  This demonstrates the widely different micro market condition. 
The European Cyclists’ Federation’s market analysis report (European Cyclists’ Federation, 2016) which 
focuses on the establishing recommendations to policy makers, notes: 
Urban arrow familiy
Babboe Big E-Power
Johnny Loco E-Cargo 
Cruiser
Riese & Müller Load 
Hybrid Touring
Bulitt
Winther Cargoo
triobike
Christiania E-Light
Omnium  E-Cargo
Nihola E-Cargo
Butchers and bicycles 
MK1-E
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
5500
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Price [€]
Capacity (rider+load) [Kg]
Current E-Cargo bike market
==PAGE:18==
11 
 
“In a market where the average unit price of a bike is below €200 it is hard to imagine a jump to a viable 
market of machines costing in excess of €2000 without --- [external price support: (discounts, subsidies, tax 
relief etc.)” 
While that is true in the European wide scale, the Danish and Dutch markets have familiarity to CBs and their 
electrical variants- evident also in fig. 5. Most three wheeled bikes that were charted, as well as others currently 
on the market dominate the mid to low price range. 
3.2.2.2 
CB’s for commercial uses 
CB’s have long been used by the service sector for delivery of goods and individual transport. In framing this 
segment, the commercial service provider is a buyer of the CB (though that is not always the case), and thus 
forms this market segment. (Rudolpha & Grubera, 2017) has categorized commercial CB segments. 
I. 
Postal services 
These are the traditional “postman” cycles- either two or three wheeled. Common in Transport cycling 
countries. Typically form the last leg of the delivery of non-expedited post. 
II. 
Courier services 
Often these are regular bicycles or “short john” CB’s. Courier services are short-distance, expedited 
delivery of small to medium sized packages. 
III. 
Parcel services 
Typically, these are non-expedited larger items. Along with the rise in E-commerce, this service has 
largely been taken over by private actors.   
IV. 
Home delivery services 
Typically, home food delivery but also other goods from brick and mortar business. Home delivery 
services are being commodified, with smartphone platforms such as “Wolt”, private individuals now 
act as home delivery “freelancers”.  
V. 
Internal and on-site transport on large company ground.  
Used for time saving transport. 
VI. 
Service trips  
Municipalities in Germany have integrated CB fleets for maintenance of public gardens, street 
cleaning, waste collection and facility management. 
The newest CB’s are being developed separately from the consumer market. These dedicated vehicles are 
designed for parcel delivery of goods purchased online. Freight companies are exploring “last mile freight” 
solutions which will offer more flexibly and faster delivery in cities. 
Two brands (“GLEAM” and “Velove”) can be highlighted for their design and business approach. Both are 
designed as quad cycles (see fig. 7) with dedicated electrical systems (GLEAM technologies GmbH, 2020) 
(Erlandsson, 2018). Both companies were started as private initiatives and sought commercial partners after 
the prototype has been demonstrated.  
Large multinational courier companies, such as DHL (Erlandsson, 2018) and UPS (Nickelsburg, 2018) often 
deliver larger parcels than traditional postal services. Therefore, new delivery platforms, rather than the 
traditional “postman” CB are seeing a resurgence. The EU has subsidized development in this segment through 
the CIVITAS SUMP (Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans) initiative. 
3.2.2.3 
Current design trends in the micro market 
A growing market tends to innovate fast, while a mature market will display less product variety, and 
companies will compete on price. As a micro market serving private consumers, the amount of variations in 
the design and construction can help understand the stage this micro-market is in. 
==PAGE:19==
12 
 
Established brands (those created more than 15 years ago, such as “Nihola” and “Christiania”) feature simpler 
frame designs. With their well-established production chains, they tend to be less expensive. With designs 
which predate mainstream acceptance of electrification, they feature standardized electrical components. This 
includes OEM hub motors (Typically internal geared hub motors) and a rack mounted battery pack. In addition, 
these brands do not feature more modern amenities such as disk brakes or belt drive transmission. Newer 
companies tend to feature hydroformed frames and a molded plastic cargo hold construction. Electrical systems 
in newer models feature an integrated pedal motor and a battery pack developed exclusively for their designs. 
In terms of capacity, the average claim in the CB market is around 140 Kg. Confusingly, some manufacturers 
report the capacity including the rider, and some without- let the buyer beware. Two wheeled CBs can claim 
to have high capacity yet based on volume cannot carry as big or bulky items as three wheeled cycles. Two 
wheelers are also at the higher end of the price scale. This might be explained by the need to develop a stronger 
frame, since less frame members carry the load. 
Of the CBs under considerations, the Danish and Dutch offerings dominate. In a more global perspective, the 
“Longtail” (see fig. 7) design has seen several new variations. This design is popular as a family bike, with the 
parent being able to carry up to two kids behind him. This type variant is less widespread in traditional CB 
markets, as it offers limited bulk capacity. Thus, this design is not charted. 
 
3.2.3 The urban mobility service market 
As economies grow, fewer people are employed in the primary production and manufacturing sectors. This 
societal shift, termed tertiarization, is one of the hallmarks of industrialized nations. The tertiary sector is the 
largest, fastest growing sector in the Western world. 
In cities, passenger transport services have been historically operated and regulated centrally by city and 
government authorities. 
Public transit systems have evolved to one of the main responsibilities of local authorities, who run and own 
them. Taxicabs have likewise been regulated by local authorities in most (but not all) countries. 
In self-operated transport services, car rental, leasing and sharing clubs have each provided unique values of 
availability, affordability, efficiency, convenience, and sustainability to consumers.  
The market for urban transportation services is continuously changing, but this change has been hastened in 
more recent times. 
Starting in the 1980's, privatization of transit systems around the world has shifted the responsibility of 
operation unto private hands. Privatization is based on the belief that the public sector is ineffective and 
counterproductive in responding to the needs of passengers. In most cases, this notion has proven to be false, 
as fares have increased, and service quality has not generally seen improvement. On the other hand, 
privatization has encouraged innovation of PT systems. (OECD, 2008). 
With the global privatization movement, came deregulation. In the taxicab branch, a large market of 
opportunity was forming. Along with the adaptation of smartphones with embedded GPS, app-based ride 
sharing, or haling services have surpassed both taxicabs and self-operated services in all metrics of availability, 
affordability, efficiency, convenience. Opponents see these services as unregulated taxis, resulting in outright 
ban in some countries. Moreover, app-based car sharing services have not been found to reduce levels of car 
ownership nor replace trips taken by private cars. (Clewlow & Mishra, 2017). 
A different subset of the new self-operated market are free floating car fleets. They too, have so far not shown 
to reduce private car ownership. (Haustein & Jensen, 2020). The free-floating car can be paralleled with 
another recent entrant to the urban mobility scene: dock-less electrical scooters fleets. Used mostly for short 
distances, scooters have likewise seen widespread adaptation while also receiving negative attention due to 
users' alarming injury rates. (Mack, 2020).  
==PAGE:20==
13 
 
Paralleling free floating car sharing services are app-based bicycle sharing. They too, have their predecessors, 
in publicly procured bike sharing programs.  
The following section describes the local CaaS scene, recognizing the current actors in the field and their 
offers. 
3.2.3.1 
Cycling within the MaaS market 
In (Utriainen & Pöllänen, 2018) the lack in scientific literature on MaaS as a whole and CaaS is considered. 
As MaaS is a new paradigm in the transport system, the research in this field is sparse. 
Public bike sharing programs have their origins with initiatives such as the “Wittefietsenplan” in 1965, where 
50 bikes were painted in white and placed around Amsterdam for people to use for free. That plan was 
unsuccessful, as most bikes were stolen. Nevertheless, the plan inspired subsequent programs, starting in the 
90’s and early 2000’s. These programs were administered by public stakeholder (“OV-fiets” by the Dutch rail, 
“Bycykler København” by Copenhagen municipality, among others) and served to form a “last mile” solution 
for commuters to get to and from rail stations. 
(Waes, Farla, Frenken, Jong, & Raven, 2018) have evaluated the “typology” of bike sharing business models. 
Traditional bike lending programs have the disadvantage of the users having to return the bikes to the same 
location. This limitation spurred the innovation of dock-less bike share programs. 
“Bycyklen” are the latest iteration of the municipal bike sharing program. The program’s controversial 
development and execution has demonstrated some of the unfortunate trends in publicly funded infrastructure. 
The white city bikes, with a front electrical motor are heavy, bloated with unwanted features and feature a 
20000 DKK price tag. The program deployed with production defects that required a total recall from the first 
week of operation. They are reportedly operated at a loss and require 8 daily users to break even. (Bencke, 
2018) (Viskinde, 2014) (Behrendt, 2013) (Bredsdorff, 2015). 
“Donkey republic” represents the forerunner in the private bike-share market. Luckily for them, the city bike 
program’s miss-launch coincided with their establishment. 
Originally, the company sought to be “the Uber of bike share”, using a Bluetooth enabled lock for private 
bikes, which can then be lent out. This idea had the advantage of relying on existing bicycle network. This 
approach was quickly dropped. Instead, “donkey republic” has launched their fleet of basic, robust bicycles. 
“Donkey Republic” has expanded to many European cities, but financially are still (as of time of writing) 
maintained by external investment. (Zacho, 2018) Their use of public land for rental and parking has been 
challenged by municipalities. In response, the company has focused on providing their service on privately 
owned, but publicly accessible land. Recently, the company has also deployed an electrical bike program. 
(Sylvestersen, 2017). 
“Swapfiets” are the most recent entrant to the local bike-share scene. Their entry can be seen as a response to 
the criticism which plagued “Donkey Republic”. Since “Swapfiets” business model in essence binds an 
individual to a particular bike, they are not seen as “invasive” to public spaces. “Swapfiets” represents a 
differentiation strategy in this market- responding to potential stakeholders’ objection, while listening to the 
users’ demands. As of the time of writing, they do not offer an electrical bike in Denmark. (Petzer, Wieczorek, 
& Verbong, 2019) (Krogh, 2020). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
14 
 
Table 1. Summary of current CaaS programs in Copenhagen 
 
3.2.4 Trends in the markets 
Summarized in the following page are key findings arising from the evaluation of the markets along with other 
broader trends that are important to regard for a new venture in the active mobility market
 
Value 
Proposition 
Parking 
location 
Pricing 
scheme in 
DK/ CPH 
[DKK] 
Bycyklen 
Dock-based 
electrical 
bikeshare for 
users of local 
public transport 
via app. 
Next to 
major 
public 
transport 
hubs 
Pay as You Go 
12 per 20 minutes 
Pre-paid 
packages 
300/500 per 600/1200 minutes valid for one 
year from the date of purchase. 
Regular 
Subscription 
70 DKK per month incl. 140 minutes of 
free usage and parking rate of 0.15/ min. 
Student/youth 
subscription 
70 DKK per month incl. 280 minutes of 
free usage and parking rate of 0.075 DKK. 
Donkey 
republic 
Dock-less bike 
share via an app 
private 
and 
public 
land 
 
Regular bikes 
Electrical bikes 
Minute rates 
17/22 per 5/30 
18/28 per 15/30 
 
Hour rates 
33/55/66/95 per 
1/2/4/6/12 
50/75/135  
per 1/2/12 
 
Day rates 
110/195/255 per 1/2/3. 
Additional days: 60 
DKK 
170/300/420 per 
1/2/3 
 
Swapfiets 
A ‘Netﬂix model’ 
for cycling: 
Maintenance and 
replacement of 
one bicycle on 
monthly rolling 
lease for ﬂat fee. 
User’s 
private 
land 
Monthly 
subscription 
190 DKK/ student 170 DKK+ 99 DKK 
startup fee 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
 
 
Trends in the Private bicycles/ CB markets. (Eurostat, 2019). 
* S-pedelec is a designation for electrical bikes with motor assistance up to 45 km/h (and up to20 km/h without the rider pedaling). 
 
 
Trends in the CaaS market. 
==PAGE:23==
16 
 
3.2.5 Industry analysis 
In a similar vain to the market analysis, differing conclusions can be drawn, depending on definition of industry 
boundaries. The choice was made to comment where applicable from one of the three viewpoint, as an entrant 
to the following industries: 
• 
The bicycle industry- classified as a manufacturing industry, commented here from its broadest scope, to 
include all cycle types. 
• 
The CB industry- with the viewpoint of the companies producing only the models considered in fig. 7. 
• 
MaaS- Commented here with the view of the emerging industry as part of the service sector, in its broadest 
scope (to include MaaS firms not currently with a fleet of bicycles). 
This was made in order to assess current and potential industry actors in the active urban mobility market. 
To assess the conditions of these industries, Porter’s well known five forces analysis (Porter, 2008) is 
employed. Porter's analysis is used to examine three “horizontal” forces, exerted by rival companies and two 
“vertical” forces: suppliers and customers. 
3.2.5.1 
Threats of entry 
This force relates to how easily a new firm can disrupt an industry. The primary factors influencing the three 
industries are scale economics and product differentiation. 
In the global bicycle industry, production lines of cheap bicycles can rival automotive lines in their size. 
However, CBs generally require more hand assembly, and are produced in series. Cheap CB brands benefit 
from the distribution and production chains of their parent brands- the supermarkets and large multinational 
companies such as the Salling group (owner of the “SCO” brand) and Accell (owner of the “Babboe” brand). 
Being service based, the MaaS industry is less effected by factors relating to manufacturing and thus, to capital 
costs. This generally enables low entry barriers and is the reason for it being a steadily evolving industry. 
However, CaaS companies own the bikes that they offer, and geographical coverage plays a key role in pay-
as-you-go based programs. This is another key advantage to the leasing model of “swapfiets” 
To counter the effects of scale, product differentiation in the CB segment is high, where potential customers 
can be enticed by new offerings if they offer a novel upgrade to the experience. 
A company that has made headlines and shown successful entry of a new player to the CB market is “Taga 
bikes”. "Taga" offered a cheap tricycle which converts to a baby stroller. This design appealed to young 
families with a product they need anyway (i.e. the stroller) and had additional functionality. The brand 
succeeded in raising capital in a crowdfunding campaign and established itself in countries where CB’s are 
less prevalent. The second bike offered a fully functional electrical CB, with seating for two children, at a 
market breaking low-price of 1200 USD. The low cost of this product proved to be too low, and while the 
second crowdfunding campaign was a success, the company filed for bankruptcy, leaving many backers 
without recourse. The production rights for the “Taga” brand have been bought by a new company, who 
diligently scrubbed mentions of this sorry tale from most sources. Only the crowdfunding page is left showing 
the number of backers the company has let down (Taga USA Inc.) 
The complexity of capital requirements for all three industries is hard to assess. The amount of outsourcing 
can influence both manufacturing and service sectors- both can have significant nonrefundable activities, in 
the form of development and advertising. A small self-owned CB brand, on the other hand, has the potential 
to at least break even, if overhead expenditures are kept minimal. 
Overall, the entry barrier for a novel CB brand is low. The initial capital requirements, and the related 
economics of scale can be gauged by the interest achieved with a prototype. A design which is significantly 
different than those currently on the market can gain a foothold, but it is hard to gauge the long-term success 
in this segment. 
==PAGE:24==
17 
 
3.2.5.2 
Power of suppliers 
Overall, supplier power is relatively limited in this context. The bicycle market is minuscule in comparison to 
the metal and electrical component manufacturers. For a standard mass-produced bicycle, the price of raw 
materials is relatively low in comparison to development expenses. Switching suppliers is possible due to the 
size disparity between the market and industries. 
In the context of “micromobility” industry, success is based on supplier integration, as dedicated fleets are 
developed and manufactured for different brands. 
One development demonstrating forward integration due to the rise of “last mile freight” is Schaeffler GmbH. 
As a major sub supplier of transmission parts in the automotive industry, “Schaeffler” also produces parts for 
the e-bike market. Their “Bio-hybrid” is a four wheeled vehicle with a top shell and windscreen. Two versions 
were launched, aimed at the consumer and delivery markets. 
When asked in 2016 about a launch date Peter Gutzmer, Schaeffler’s CTO responded: 
“At this point, we have to act with caution in the relatively wide and, to some extent, completely new 
“micromobility” search box. From the more recent past we know that consumers are very slow in adopting 
products such as unicycles, skateboards and micro vehicles like the Twizy. In the approach selected by 
Schaeffler, the focus was initially put on a new mobility idea that we’d like to put on the road with innovative 
technologies and solutions. With respect to mass production, anything is conceivable, from proprietary 
developments through to new partnerships and cooperation agreements. We’re going to closely watch the 
market and view a production launch as a realistic proposition." (Schaeffler GmbH, 2016) 
Here, the mindset of large companies is laid bare: before the potential of B2B was exposed, Schaeffler was 
satisfied with their role as a sub supplier to the automotive industry. Products such as the “Bio-hybrid” can be 
developed and shelved until the market has matured enough to ensure their successful entry. 
3.2.5.3 
Buyer power 
Consumers tend to be more price sensitive if they are purchasing products that are undifferentiated, expensive 
relative to their incomes, and where product performance has limited consequences (Porter, 2008). 
In the CaaS market, this is most evident. As the CaaS market is built around low cost offerings, targeted at 
price conscious tourists, PT users, and commuters, there is currently no “luxury” segment to the market. 
Therefore, service bicycles with enhanced performance (such as CBs for goods and children transport, or 
racing bikes for speed) do not exist.  
As has been discussed in section 3.2.2, in traditional CB countries, the low end of the market is well developed. 
Shoddily built CBs can be bought at any big supermarket, and they satisfy the need of a large segment of the 
market. However, buyers who seek good craftsmanship sustain many of the brands charted in fig. 7.  
Another venue where buyer power is less effective is in non-cycling countries for CBs, as potential buyers are 
not exposed to the variety seen in well-established countries. 
Figure 8. The first (L) and second (R) "Taga" CB. (Taga USA Inc.) 
==PAGE:25==
18 
 
3.2.5.4 
Threat of substitutes 
This force is particularly exemplified in the CaaS industry versus the bicycle industry. The CaaS industry has 
simplified the purchasing experience, lowered the price and rid the casual cyclist of the burden of ownership. 
Other substitutes, such as electrical scooters have also gained a market, by further offering the user all the 
benefits of the bicycle, without the need to exude energy. 
The CB micro market offers distinct value to the consumer- to use one’s own power to transport goods and 
family. As such, there is little substitute to consumers looking for this. 
This force can further be seen through the scope of the transport sector- of both private cars, but also public 
transport systems as especially topical. With the global ravage of the Corona virus, and the social distancing it 
imposed, the demand for urban transport has plummeted. Municipalities around the world have established 
new bike lanes, as people began riding bicycles instead of public transport (Laker, 2020). The long term effects 
of this remain to be seen, but bicycle advocacy groups have taken the opportunity to try and build up the 
momentum to dethrone the car as an urban mobility solution (Haubold, 2020). 
3.2.5.5 
Competitive rivalry 
The European bicycle industry is starting to combat cheaper imports. Recently, the industry has consolidated 
its political power with the newly established “Cycling Industries Europe” organization. The organization has 
successfully lobbied the implementation of new EU tariffs on electrical bike import. (Toll, 2018) 
Additionally, with the aid of automation and implementation of lean practices, bicycle manufacturing is 
returning to Europe. New Factories are being established in European countries where labor is cheap and 
competent, such as Portugal, Poland and Romania. (Muelaner, 2020) 
As there are many CBs brands, with equal size and power, competitive rivalry can be intense in the CB 
industry. However, this highly differentiated industry provides a positive sum effect of this force. The wide 
variety of designs and features, which appeal to different segments and price points, has provided many smaller 
brands with a loyal following. 
One example which can be noted in this regard, is the Omnium brand. Based in Copenhagen, the company has 
two activities- the sale of the “Omnium” bike, a “short john” bike, built with high quality Chromoly tubing, 
and a courier business “By-Expressen”, which uses the Omnium bikes as a flagship vehicle. The brand is 
highly respected by bicycle couriers around the world, as it is built and used by them. Thus, “Omnium” is an 
example of employing co-creation principals in the CB market. 
 
Figure 9. The “Omnium” “short John” CB. (Omnium Cargo, 2020) 
==PAGE:26==
19 
 
 
3.2.6 Evaluation of opportunity 
Three industries and markets that broadly serve the active urban mobility market were assessed. This 
assessment helped form an understanding of the structures, trends and factors in an artificially constructed 
market. The growth rate of the active mobility market is high and as such, reliable evaluation is difficult. 
Scale economics results in high entry barriers for all markets. In the high-end CB market, there is more leeway, 
and many small companies prosper within their niche. Additionally, new B2B segments are created within the 
CB market. Larger actors, as well as public funding are beginning to shape this new segment. 
Accell Group's CEO Ton Anbeek has stated in a recent launch of the company’s electrical CB: 
“The e-cargo bike market is a growth market with clear potential, with experts forecasting that around 20 
(Lambert, 2020) million units will be sold across Europe by 2030” (Lambert, 2020 
This statement rings true for countries with established bicycle infrastructure and awareness for active 
mobility. However, this forecast should be contrasted with the private passenger car market, which is at least 
one order of magnitude larger, despite the average distances commuted in private cars being below 25 km in 
Europe (Pasaoglu, et al., 2012). 
Assessing publicly accessible financial statements of small to medium sized independent Danish CB brands 
(“Omnium”, “Bullitt”, “Nihola”, “Trio bikes” and “Butchers and bicycles”) most approach profitability within 
five years of establishment. All brands under consideration continue to improve their product by introducing 
an electrical system and other features, such as a belt transmission. 
On the other hand, CaaS firms’ financials are less than satisfactory- both “Donkey republic” and “Bycyklen” 
have continuously reported losses throughout their existence. Their means of survival continue to be external 
investors. In the booming electrical scooter sharing market, firms, such as “Voi”, “Tier” and “Lime” continue 
to secure millions from investors- enabling them to grow and expand while reporting operational losses. This 
trend is similar to the broader MaaS market, which remains to be a financial bubble- time will tell whether it 
bursts or begin to turn a profit. 
It can further be claimed that while the ease of access to the various mobility services has been demonstrated, 
the acceptance of service over ownership has not. Sharing/ leasing of vehicles remains of limited interest to 
the market. The MaaS market is still in its speculative phase, and the CaaS market as well- both are currently 
supported by investors, and the profitability of this business model is not proven. 
It is therefore difficult to quantify the size of the MaaS market, and even more so of CaaS. In (Zijlstra, Durand, 
Hoogendoorn-Lanser, & Harms, 2019) the authors indicated a potential userbase of up to 30% of the total 
Dutch population, based on available literature. The report profiled the current user base as typical innovation 
adopters: young, tech savvy urbanites. 
The MaaS industry is ripe for innovation- the industry has become less profitable as many firms provide similar 
offerings. Except for “Bycyklen”, CaaS companies currently offer only basic bike models. 
One crucial aspect in assessing the attractiveness of the active mobility market is timing. Electrical bikes have 
helped renew the public’s interest in cycling for transport. Lowering battery prices and growing ecological 
awareness have seen this segment accelerated growth. As a reaction, city planners and bicycle designers are 
beginning to shape the "automobilization" of the humble bicycle. Traffic measures, parking and safety 
standards are being improved to facilitate the growing number of users. 
Deloitte has named transport cycling as a central trend for 2020. Electrical bikes, bike sharing programs and 
"smart mobility" innovations all serve to change the tide for the bicycle. (Deloitte, 2019). 
==PAGE:27==
20 
 
 Development: Design and Business 
This section documents the combined output of the technical and entrepreneurial effort. The specific solution 
to the problem stated in section 3.1 is generated, with the starting point of design development. The design 
was developed to a degree which would ground the discussion with a target group. Following that, a business 
strategy is formulated, based on the feedback received, and the economical requirements that were calculated. 
 
4.1 Design exploration 
The initial intent was to create a design for an HPV which encapsulates an answer to the stated problem. The 
primary design intent was to mimic as many sociotechnical aspects of the automobile and simultaneously 
maintain the human as the primary motor.  
In the context of design, a sociotechnical viewpoint describes how people interact with a technological object. 
Here the intent was to create a design which explores what a car represents, enables and addresses as a 
technological object. 
The secondary intent of the conceptual design was to explore new approaches in human powered vehicle 
designs- unique features, functions and styling. The goal was to create a design differentiated from both current 
and historical designs and drew on my experience in the field. 
Moreover, the concept draws further on conceptual frameworks of design for behavioral change- by addressing 
attraction and repulsion to the use of human power for transport in current times. 
At the same time, the goal needed to be attainable within the current paradigms of urban infrastructure. By 
bypassing the challenges faced by urban traffic planners and politicians, and instead focusing on offering a 
bike that feels like a bike to cyclists, and a car to motorists, the objectives and boundaries were laid out. 
 
4.1.1 Decomposition of the family car 
The sociotechnical aspects of the car are akin to the concepts of market and industry: 
• 
Functionality: the features and designs that enable functions from the perspectives of the users and 
other road users. 
• 
Producibility: the manufacturing processes and processing framework that create a car as a 
technologically advanced, mass produced object. 
This functional decomposition is drawn out in table 2. The decomposition is in no way exhaustive and is 
intrinsically connected to this project. Therefore, the immense functions that the motor provide (i.e.: “users are 
passively seated and travel great distances”) are omitted. 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
21 
 
Table 2. Functional decomposition of the car. 
Function 
Feature 
Vehicle users 
Transport on paved roads 
Wide rimmed wheels for inflatable tyres, suspension 
system 
Transports goods and passengers in separate com-
partments 
2 front “bucket seats”, a rear three-person bench, 
baggage room 
Maneuverable in high and low speeds, acceleration 
and turning 
Wide rimmed wheels for inflatable tyres, differen-
tial suspension, steering and braking systems 
Maneuverable in reverse 
Reversable gear transmission, rear view mirrors 
Protect from the elements 
body panels, windows 
Provide protection in an accident 
Unibody, body panels, crumple zones 
Accommodate driver and main passenger with wide 
adaptability to their height 
Adjustable height seats and steering column 
Driver and main passenger can communicate easily 
Side by side seating configuration 
Provide privacy 
body panels 
Microclimate control 
A/C system, heated seats 
Road visibility 
Large windows, rear view mirrors, windshield wip-
ers and washers 
Theft protection 
Alarm, locks, vehicle registration database 
Roadside repairable 
Spare wheel 
Other road users 
Visible- Day or nighttime 
Blinkers, headlights, reflectors and reflective paint 
Road presence- height of occupants 
Large diameter wheels, high center of gravity 
Communicative and predicable 
Blinkers, headlights and horn 
Accountable 
Registration plates 
 
Subsequently, the most essential elements of the automobile are selected to assess the common processes of 
production (table 3). This decomposition is likewise rudimentary, and assumes a modern family car, of average 
price. The processes employed in the production of the features are marked with a cross, with equivalent 
processes used in large- and small-scale operations being considered for substitution for the same feature. 
==PAGE:29==
22 
 
 
Table 3. Features and production processes for a typical car 
Feature 
Common processes in mass production 
Casting, 
forging 
Extrusion, 
rolling 
Sheet metal forming 
(hydro- 
and 
stretch 
forming, blanking and 
punching, 
deep 
drawing) 
Spot welding 
Riveting, 
bolting 
Unibody chassis 
 
 
 
 
 
Body panels 
 
 
 
 
 
Suspension 
system  
(arms, linkages, 
subframe) 
 
 
 
 
 
Wheels 
 
 
 
 
 
Seats 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CNC milling, 
3D metal 
printing 
None 
Plasma / laser cutting, 
CNC milling, bending 
Spot welding, other 
welding processes, 
other fastening and 
bonding processes 
None 
Common prototyping/ small series alternatives 
 
Forging and casting are grouped here, though they are different processing categories, as they are common 
alternatives in car construction. Extrusion and rolling are also grouped together, as they both result in flat or 
bar shaped profile stocks. Spot welding is emphasized as its various forms are used extensively in car 
construction. Additionally, spot welding is more versatile and easier to automate than other welding processes. 
Riveting and bolting are grouped, as they are also more common in mass production (Koganti & Weishaar, 
2008). In prototyping and small-scale production, dedicated tooling and capital-intensive processes (such as 
sand casting or lost wax molding) are avoided. The trade-off in most cases is labor and material cost. 
 
4.1.2 Preliminary investigation: sketching and patent search 
A design for a “car alternative” is a novel and complex goal which has been perused for many years in the 
HPV world. Velomobiles (faired, i.e.: covered cycles, often three wheeled and recumbent) are an uncommon, 
yet cite-able invention in this regard. Velomobiles exist within a niche market, despite many individuals’ 
attempt to broaden their appeal. For a more thorough review of velomobiles, the reader is referred to the 
author’s bachelor thesis (Szankowski, 2015). It is with this background, that this cycle type was not taken as a 
starting point. 
David Pressman, a patent attorney, writes: “more patents issue on bicycles than anything else” (Pressman, 
2012). A patent search, limited to the classifications in table ##, confirms this observation, with 483 results. 
==PAGE:30==
23 
 
Non were found that attempt to combine two active cyclists and a cargo compartment or reduce track width 
by having diagonal seating. 
Table 4. Patent categories relevant to the field of invention. 
B62K13/06 
Cycles convertible to, or transformable into, other type of cycle or land vehicle to a 
quadricycle, e.g. by coupling together two bicycles side by side. 
B62K13/04 
Cycles convertible to, or transformable into, other types of cycles or land vehicle to a 
tricycle. 
B62K2003/125 Tandems with side-by-side seating. 
In this part, early sketches are presented and commented on, to guide the reader in the design process 
 
Figure 10. Stick figure investigation of seat angle variations in 
bicycles. 
 
Figure 11. Small sketch, investigating the combination of a 
space frame and a side by side tandem. 
 
Figure 12. Top view, investigation on layout of steering, wheelbase and transmission 
alternatives, and their mechanical interactions. 
Left to right: 1. “Long wheelbase, back drive connected shaft” 2. “extra-long wheelbase, front 
drive, no differential, forklift back” 3. “long wheelbase, front drive with differential”. 
 
Figure 13. Top view, 
investigation of range of 
adjustability on a four 
wheeled, rear steered upright 
tandem. 
 
==PAGE:31==
24 
 
4.2 Design generation 
The design was developed in the Solidworks CAD suite. To give flexibility in the choice of manufacturing 
processes only simple forms were used.  To assist in the creation of a systematic approach to the design, a 
hierarchic model was developed (fig. 14). Both problem and solution domains are represented. The hierarchical 
relationship describes the perceived influence each requirement has on uptake of the design as a product for 
large scale production. All sub-problems realized in this project: the chassis and seats, as well as the steering 
and suspension systems were all developed using this model. 
 
4.2.1 Product design specification 
 
 
General functional requirements “What does the design do?”  
Carry a maximal load of 400 kg.  
Usable by either one or two persons. In both cases, weight distribution should be 
optimal.  
Two children seated in the front.  
Be as light as possible. 
Be as narrow as possible. 
Mechanical requirements “How does the design do it?”                 
Maneuverable as a regular CB. 
As small turning radius as possible. 
When cycled by two (“driver and passenger” mode):                 
Wide range of seating positions: upright seated to low recumbent.     
Riders can have varying heights. 
Riders are seated at eye level with motorists.           
When cycled by a single person (“cyclist” mode): 
Centrally located in an upright position. 
adjustable to a wide range of individuals and  
seating positions.                             
Transmit pedaling forces equally between all 
positions.                                    
Electrical system as an integral  
part of the design.  
Manufacturing  
“How is it made?”               
Use minimal  
dedicated tooling.               
Use only existing 
technologies. 
 
Figure 14. PDS of the invention. 
==PAGE:32==
25 
 
 
The most attractive functions of the car and the CB were thus combined: 
 
Car: 
│Stability│Comfort│Adjustable│ 
│Side by side seating│ Road presence│  
│Heavy payload capacity│ 
 
CB: 
│Front seating for children│ 
│Electrical system│ 
This combination of attributes calls for two use cases. As in a car, these two cases should be easily alternated 
between. The conceptual design that was arrived at calls for four medium sized wheels, three pedal axles and 
two steering columns. The two-use case were combined from the typical seating position of each inspirational 
vehicle (the car and CB). Therefore, the CB gives an “upright” cycling position, while the car gives two semi 
reclined positions. 
 
 
Figure 15. The conceptual design, “cyclist” use case. 
 
Figure 16. The conceptual design, “driver and passenger” use case. 
==PAGE:33==
26 
 
 
4.3 Design justification 
To decompose the functions that the design embodies, the choices that were taken are presented with contextual 
reasoning derived from existing inventions in the field. 
 
4.3.1 Side by side seating 
Cycles for side by side riding exist in many variations, with both 3 and 4 wheels, and in both upright seated 
and recumbent positions. These cycles, like recumbents, exist only in niche applications. The most widely used 
applications are: 
• 
Rehabilitation and riding with less abled people. As passengers, they can pedal, but do not need to 
steer and balance (as in a regular tandem) with the added benefit of ease of communication and clear 
view of the way. 
• 
Recreational riding- such as bicycles for rent in holiday resorts and other attractions. 
As such, these cycles are not seen as useful for either sports or transport. They are usually heavy and handle 
poorly at high speed. 
 
Figure 17. The Dutch “Van Raam” side by side tandem. 
A model of these cycles which has inspired this project and has not reached serial production is the “Lissy” 
(fig. 18) side by side tandem. This cycle was design by the German Peter Lis. Peter sought to create a cycle he 
and his wife can continue riding together as she began developing a neuro-degenerative disease.  
The “Lissy” features three wheels in a “delta” configuration with a single front steered wheel. The riders are 
seated close together, slightly diagonally, so their shoulders do not interfere. each rider drives a separate back 
wheel, and the driver compensates for the mismatch in the wheel speeds by steering. The wheels are directly 
behind the riders, with a track width of 1 meter, this cycle is legal in European bicycle lanes. 
==PAGE:34==
27 
 
 
Figure 18. Peter Lis and his family on the “Lissy” side by side tandem. (Lis, 2019) 
As mentioned, recumbent cycles in general exist within a stable niche market- the customer base is devoted to 
this style. Typical uses include both sport and transport. Recumbent cycles have at their advantage reduced 
aerodynamic drag and for some, reduced spinal load. One the other hand, the cyclist cannot apply body weight 
to push the pedals. Recumbent are also less visible in traffic. Thus, recumbents are most at home on flat terrain, 
in low traffic conditions. 
In a side-by side recumbent tandem, the users do not affect the dynamic weight distribution of the vehicle, and 
the vehicle’s handling to the same degree as if they were seated upright. A large wheeled, side by side 
recumbent can therefore address some of the recumbents’ disadvantages. 
 
4.3.2 Two convertible positions: upright to recumbent 
The convertible seating position is the most novel aspect of this design. This dual functionality mimics two 
aspects of both the car and the CB. 
The typical family car usage frequency by scenario can be construed as follows: 
Most journeys, the driver is the sole occupant. Secondary to that, the driver shares the car with a single adult 
passenger. Third, the driver chauffeurs’ children in the back bench. Lastly, the car is fully occupied. In all 
cases, cargo use increases with each scenario. 
Typically, a CB is used by one adult, alone or to transport children and goods. Rarely does one see a full family 
use a CB- such a case is usually reserved for recreation. 
It is these typical usage scenarios, and their comparison that prompted the initial investigation: 
 
The appeal of the bike: 
Can a tandem bicycle be improved for wider 
appeal? Can the CB be used by two adults? 
 
The appeal of the car: 
Why has virtually every car been designed with 
side by side seating? 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
28 
 
4.3.3 Diagonal seating 
As demonstrated in fig. 22, the diagonal seating configuration permits a narrower cycle. The Danish road 
standard on bicycles and their dimensions (Bekendtgørelse om cyklers indretning og udstyr m.v., 2016) 
describes the overall dimensions that a cycle may have. A bicycle with more than 3 wheels may have a total 
width of up to 1,25m (excluding handlebars and mirrors) and a total length of 3,5 m. (article 4). In general, 
this can be taken as a maximal dimension, as most bicycle lanes will not accommodate overtaking of or by a 
cycle with this width. 
 
4.3.4 Four wheels 
Designs for both side by side tandems and large cargo cycles with 3 wheels exist, and from a technical 
standpoint, this was also possible here. The choice of four wheels for this design is threefold: 
1. Perception: to appear as a car to potential users and others in traffic. 
2. Function: more stability in varying loads due to the configurable design. 
3. Manufacturing: as will be demonstrated, the use of 4 wheels reduces part  
count and reduces the number of sub-assemblies. 
 
4.3.5 Backbone vehicle architecture with front bifurcation 
In automotive design, the first serial automobiles were designed around tubular space frame architecture. In 
this construction method, the frame members enclose the occupants, and the body panels are attached to those 
members. Space frame architecture is still utilized in custom automotive applications of small serial production 
sports cars. The main disadvantage in this approach is the lack of scalability as space frame production is 
necessarily handmade. Typical Bicycle frames can also be claimed to be space frame. As such, their production 
is automated by flexible welding robotic arms- a considerable investment of capital with its own slough of 
mitigating factors (such as dedicated tooling and facilities, long lead times and proprietary ownership of code 
by robot manufacturer, to name a few). 
Another concurrent automotive architecture style is the "ladder". Here, the longitudinal frame members 
connect the four wheels in the periphery of the vehicle, and the body is set on top of this chassis. This 
architecture solved the scalability of frame production and is still widely used. 
With advancements of composites and in particularly fiberglass, the backbone architecture developed- with a 
single central member connecting the front and back parts of the vehicle. The fiberglass body is mounted on 
top of this chassis, as in ladder architecture. One automotive pioneer of this style was the British racing car 
manufacturer Lotus. 
The Lotus Elan used a steel sheet backbone chassis with a fiberglass body. The Elan was a commercial success, 
marrying cost saving production with low weight and superior handling. Variants of this style were produced 
by Lotus for the next three decades. 
The design of the Elan suited this application for several reasons: 
1. The sheet metal chassis compromised of simple shapes yet performed many functions. This resulted in an 
efficient design. 
2. The bifurcation (front fork junction) could be used for the convertible aspect of the design. In the Elan, the 
engine is placed between the two front members, lowering the vehicle’s center of gravity.  
 
==PAGE:36==
29 
 
 
Figure 19. The Lotus Elan backbone chassis. 
The inspiration of the Elan (and, to a larger extent, its successor, the “Europa”) is most evident in fig. 20. The 
bifurcation, coupled with a long wheelbase and larger wheels, will provide road visibility. Seating within the 
frame members (and not on top) will seat the riders closer to the vehicle’s own center of gravity. With no 
surrounding frame members, the track width, being a crucial to overall stability, can be varied in the design 
process, while the wheelbase remains constant. 
 
Figure 20. Concept design top view, overall dimensions of 
chassis. 
 
Figure 21. Concept design top view, placement of wheels, seats 
and components. 
 
==PAGE:37==
30 
 
4.4 Mechanisms to facilitate the invention 
The features that will enable the invention needed to be further developed as “sub-problems” to the overall 
design goal. As a vehicle, the mechanisms which enable the functional goal needed to be developed first. The 
development of these mechanisms for manufacturing formed the final aspect of the entrepreneurial pursuit and 
are documented in section 5. 
 
4.4.1 A novel steering system 
The vehicle can interchangeably be steered in two positions. This is facilitated by two steering columns, with 
the controls being detachable. The system was developed in collaboration with a group of production 
technology students and was the main aspect of this project to be outsourced. Our cooperation and their work 
output are document in section 5.5 
 
Figure 22. The embodied design of the steering system. 
 
4.4.2 Adjustable recumbent seats 
The two seats are fixated to the chassis at the bottom and top, with the bottom member being fixed in position 
at the side members, and the top being detachable from the arch (see fig. 24). This allows the seats to be folded 
away when the single cyclist position is assumed. 
==PAGE:38==
31 
 
 
Figure 23. Unfolded (L) and folded (R) seat structure. 
The seats are constructed of two horizontal pipes, and two plates per side (fig. 24). All hinged connections are 
facilitated by bronze bushings. The angle and folding of the seat are both enabled by a slotted lobe and 
catchment. The bottom pipe can rotate on its axis, while the top is rigidly connected. This allows the seat to fit 
form around the person’s body, as in a hammock and maintain its position. The seat would support the body 
of the riders with nylon webbing, which are lashed to the side plates rigidly and adjust along the length of the 
seat (fig. 25). 
 
Figure 24. Artistic representation of seats with webbings. 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
32 
 
 
4.4.3 Suspension system 
The concept features a unique suspension system on all four wheels. The suspension combines a gas damper 
with a composite leaf spring. This system has been adopted from the author's previous work and altered for 
this design. The design of the composite leaf springs has been developed as part of the of the advanced fiber 
composites manufacturing course using the vacuum bag infusion technique. The leaf spring was designed with 
the 400 kg payload in mind. With a simple bent steel plate serving as the mold, the two manufacturing 
requirements are fulfilled. 
 
Figure 25. A suspension system composed of a damper, composite leaf spring and top arm. 
 
4.5 Fundamental mechanical considerations  
A rudimentary introduction of the forces and geometrical conditions of dual track vehicles is required to fulfill 
the mechanical requirements described in fig. 14. 
This section describes a brief summary of basic static and dynamic forces and how they shaped the design 
process (Barton & Fieldhouse, 2018). 
 
4.5.1 Vehicle structural requirements 
The chassis, being the main structure of the vehicle is required to be stiff enough in reacting to the static forces 
of payload, the vehicle's own weight and dynamic loads generated by handling and road vibrations. Moreover, 
the chassis must be strong enough to withstand the cyclic loading it is subjected to. 
Three dynamic loading cases are considered in chassis design: 
I. Torsional loads due to deflection of one wheel. 
II. Bending loads due to a simultaneously deflection of a set of front or back wheels. 
III. Longitudinal or lateral loads due to inertia effects under traction, braking and/or cornering conditions.  
==PAGE:40==
33 
 
Torsional stiffness is perhaps the most important parameter in the initial stages of design. It is normally 
assessed by fixing the structure in 3 points and applying a load in the fourth. A simple bending simulation, 
representing the weight of the rider on the main chassis member is described in section 5.2.2.2. The bending 
simulation would initialize the strength analysis of the structure. In this application, the simulation would serve 
to examine the strength of the joining method developed for this invention. 
 
4.5.2 Normal straight-line driving forces 
In analyzing the vehicle under acceleration or deacceleration, the masses of the various structures and 
components that make up the vehicle are lumped together and treated as a single lumped body. Its center of 
mass is used in modelling the longitudinal, lateral or vertical motions of the vehicle. The governing equations 
of motion are derived by applying Newton’s second law of motion as a generalization termed rigid body laws. 
The approach is summarized as: 
I. 
Defining an axis system on a free body diagram (FBD). 
II. 
Application the rigid body laws. 
III. 
Expressing any kinematic constraints and forces which form the variables in the system. 
IV. 
Establishing the governing set of equations then come from combining II & III. 
D’Alembert’s principle of inertial force makes quick work of this representation. The system is treated as static 
with the body being in equilibrium. Thus, the sum of moments is equal to zero. Calculation are simplified, as 
the moment equation can be applied anywhere on the body, and not only about its center of mass. The normal 
forces acting on the front and rear axles of an accelerating car can directly be described by: 
𝑁1 = 𝑚𝑔𝑏−𝐷𝑐−𝑚𝑥ℎ̈
(𝑎+ 𝑏)
 
𝑁2 = 𝑚𝑔𝑎+ 𝐷𝑐+ 𝑚𝑥ℎ̈
(𝑎+ 𝑏)
 
𝑚𝑔 is the vehicle’s weight, 𝑚𝑥̈ is d’Alembert’s pseudo-force and 𝐷 is aerodynamic drag. The last two terms 
represent the load transfer effect, and therefore their signs are reversed for the front and rear axles. 
 
Figure 26. Principal dynamic forces. 
As the vehicle has two use cases (single cyclist and two persons side-by-side) its’ center of gravity changes. 
The long wheelbase, the diagonal seating position and the high placement of the recumbent seats all serve to 
alter the center of gravity as little as possible. 
==PAGE:41==
34 
 
 
4.5.3 Minimal turning radius 
Steering geometry of a dual track vehicle is normally developed using Ackerman’s steering geometry. To 
enable turning without slip, the inner wheel must turn slightly more than the outer wheel, using the steering 
linkages to achieve this variation.  
sin𝛿𝑖= [
𝐿
𝑅−𝑇
2
] 
sin𝛿𝑜= [
𝐿
𝑅−𝑇
2
] 
The expression for the outer turning angle can be described using the inner turning angle, as they are 
codependent variables: 
cot 𝛿𝑜= cot 𝛿𝑖+ 𝑅
𝐿 
And the theoretical track turning diameter D is given by: 
𝐷= 2(
𝐿
sin 𝛿𝑜
+ 𝑑) 
With d being the distance between the intercept of the suspension linkage axis and the ground (see fig. 28). 
The most obvious way to minimize the turning radius is to keep the wheelbase as short as possible. To facilitate 
the long wheelbase of this design, the steered wheels are not interfered by other components or the chassis 
(fig. 27). 
 
Figure 27. Ackermann steering diagram. 
==PAGE:42==
35 
 
Using 𝐿= 2200𝑚𝑚, 𝛿𝑜= 30°, 𝑑= 125𝑚𝑚 𝐷= 4525𝑚𝑚   In comparison to other multitrack HPV, this 
value is quite low, but would need to be further scrutinized with an MVP. 
 
Figure 28. Intersect of steer rotation axis and track. 
 
4.6 Introducing Sammenbike 
The name “Sammenbike” was chosen to communicate the Danish origins of the design, and the vision of 
shared active mobility. 
The embodied design was developed to demonstrate the main aspects of the invention. These were the 
convertible function, which allows two use cases and the large carrying capacity. 
The large carrying platform, electrical motor and suspension systems are visible in this representation. 
In order to convey further realism to the model, Other elements were added, such as wheel fenders, a bicycle 
saddle and pillar, front guard rail, a rear platform and suspension elements. 
This representation was used to ground the discussion of this opportunity with potential users and experts in 
the mobility field. Many commented on the width of the design, and the graphic was updated to display a 
maximal track width of one meter, and a wheelbase of 2,2 meters. 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
36 
 
 
Figure 29. Embodied design, "driver and passenger" use case. 
 
Figure 30. Embodied design, "Cyclist" use case. 
==PAGE:44==
37 
 
4.7 Business conceptualization 
The concept of the business model describes how organizations ‘do business’. It centers on the organization's 
focal activities and extends to explain how they both create, deliver and capture value (Zott & Amit, 2013). 
A business model canvas is used here to portray an evolving concept. As is typical of startups/ small enterprises 
it is highly affected by changing expectations, aspirations and feedback. The first BMC (Table 5) ambitiously 
described a manufacturing company. The company would approach the private consumer through direct sales 
channels and businesses through fleet leasing. 
The customer segmentation described the envisioned active mobility market. To narrow down the search for 
market fit, the “early adapters” of new technology needed to be recognized in the context of this project. 
The first category encompasses a broad group of current car, PT and bicycle users. Within each of those, “early 
adapters” might be found, as some might be reluctant users of their current mode of transport. 
The second group (“families who wish to cycle for transport together”) can be described as current CB owners, 
along with people looking to buy a CB. 
The third (“transporters of goods of up to 100 kg in urban environments”) describes a mixed group of business 
and individuals- Couriers, logistics and others. 
Table 5. The initial BMC. 
Key Partners 
Suppliers 
Outsourced 
labor 
Key Activities 
Vehicle design 
Vehicle 
manufacture 
Marketing 
Value 
Proposition 
A new 
individual 
and family 
urban cargo 
human 
powered 
mobility 
design 
Customer Relationships 
Sales and service through 
own website 
Lease and servicing to 
businesses 
Customer Segments 
Any combination of the 
following: 
1. Healthy, city dwelling 
people, who commute 
between 5- 15 km per 
day. 
2. Families who wish to 
cycle for transport 
together. 
3. Transporters of goods 
of up to 100 kg in 
urban environments. 
Key Resources 
Unique design  
Manufacturing 
Channels 
Social media channels, 
which will document the 
creation and development 
of a new bicycle factory 
in Denmark 
Cost Structure 
R&D 
Set up of manufacturing and assembly 
Marketing 
Revenue Stream 
Vehicle sales 
Fleet services and leasing to companies, municipalities and 
ride sharing services 
Advertising on vehicles 
==PAGE:45==
38 
 
 
Figure 31. TAM (Total Addressable Market), SAM (Served Available Market). (Blank & Dorf, 2012) 
4.7.1 New vs. Existing market and the active mobility hypotheses 
The active urban mobility market as defined here is both artificial and existing. It is artificial in the sense that 
some product categories have arbitrarily been excluded. In the private market, these were regular commuter 
bikes and in the CaaS market- staff operated bike rental. All categories which were included are currently in 
existence and were assessed individually in section 3.2. To formulate a business strategy, the market type 
would to be defined as either existing or new.  
Hypothesis 1 describes a re-segmentation strategy in the private CB market, while hypothesis 2 describes a 
new customer base. This new market would draw an interest from current bike owners, CaaS users, and those 
contemplating buying a CB. 
 
Hypothesis 1: 
New niche product into an existing market. Core 
users will be “CB enthusiasts”- those who own one 
already and are interested in new designs. They are 
mostly based in countries with well-developed bike 
infrastructure or awareness, making them wish to 
be more bike dependent. 
 
 
Hypothesis 2: 
New product into a new market. Core users will be 
young adults who often ride side by side on two 
regular bikes and would like to talk together as 
they ride. 
 
4.7.1.1 
Prelude to testing: limitations to qualitative market research 
The hypotheses are grounded in two disciplines: mobility studies and product development research. 
Mobility studies is a vast field. As such, the historical context of technological development should serve as a 
backdrop to all research conducted in it. 
Since the early 20th century, the car has been synonymous with economic and social progress. Motorized 
transport has shaped the urban environment to such an extent that all non-motorized traffic has been 
marginalized (Koglin & Rye, 2014). Today, studies of car usage typically take on one of two forms: applied 
or analytical. 
TAM: The 
envisioned 
active mobility 
market
SAM: Current 
transport 
cyclists
Target market: 
early adaptors
==PAGE:46==
39 
 
Applied methods use behavioral change approaches. These divide the decision-making process of potential car 
users into stages. The focus is to create an intervention, akin to drug dependency intervention. 
In analytical studies, attitude-based surveys serve to predict behavior. This contrasts with more traditional 
approaches of sociodemographic (“life stages”) or geographic segmentation (Haustein & Hunecke, 2013). This 
Attitude-based segmentation is useful in soft policy measures and branding (that is, how to improve 
communication with potential users). It is less useful in long term planning based on travel demands. 
The purposes of these two methods might be different, but the results that they seek are similar. The main 
problem in both is the inherent power imbalance between motorized and non-motorized transport that exists 
in urban environments. Equally as problematic is the weakening consumer perception of PT versus private 
cars. This imbalance is rooted not only in traffic flow optimization, being centered on motorized transport, but 
also in less tangible aspects of mobility- the experience and meaning of the freedom of movement. 
In considering the project purely as an invention seeking a market fit, more general uncertainties plaguing any 
new product arise: 
1. Potential customers have difficulty in articulating needs that new technology might potentially fulfill. 
2. How to turn new technologies into products that meet customer needs. 
3. How to optimize investments to new technologies into products. 
As the market for active urban mobility is rapidly changing and highly variable geographically and 
socioeconomically, the correct action to take in order to approach meaningful insight from this phase was not 
an easy choice. In designing the survey and approaching the intended focus group, the first uncertainty of new 
product development, coupled with the urban power imbalance was most apparent. 
(Mullins & Sutherland, 1998) summarize effective practices to combat these uncertainties. Of relevance to this 
project were two: 
1. To focus on user probing, and less on quantifying, in the development process. Users should be involved 
in idea generation: to use mock-ups or prototypes to drive early and extensive qualitative market research 
to better understand customer usage and benefits. 
2. Limit large scale, quantitative market research studies to answering questions of market size and best price 
points. 
To employ these practices in the context of this project, certain compromises needed to be made. The 
invention’s functionality needed to be represented with a virtual mock-up to ease the focus group’s 
understanding.  
Marketers and economists employ the SEC (Search, Experience and Credence) classification to differentiate 
how goods are evaluated by consumers: 
“Search goods” can easily be evaluated before purchase- these are most consumer goods.  
"Experience goods” can only be evaluated upon consumption. Many personal services fall into this category 
(such as restaurants, hairdressers and holidays). (Benz, 2007) 
Normally, it can be argued that a bicycle will fall under the first category. As such, a new bicycle product or 
feature could be described, rather that presented. However, as a vehicle powered by humans, seeing a 
representation could convey the concept, and perhaps even the sought aesthetic qualities (that is, if the model 
is well developed), but the handling and ergonomic and its perception in traffic can only be realized by a real 
life, full scale prototype. Thus, the causality dilemma is amplified here by the potential user needs for 
interaction with an object that is yet to be fully designed. This drove the development of the model to be more 
realistic, rather than conceptual. 
 
==PAGE:47==
40 
 
4.7.1.2 
Survey design 
The central purpose of the survey was to evaluate interest in the design among a small focus group. The survey 
was divided in four main sections (fig. 32) and designed to be as short and easy to understand as possible. The 
survey consisted of closed questions to allow participants to easily and quickly respond and reduce drop rates. 
1. Basic personal information and type of bicycle used established general demography. 
2. Attitude to general innovation in bicycles. If the interviewee already has an electrical bike, it was assumed 
that they have a positive attitude to innovations. 
3. If the interviewee has a CB, he is asked to elaborate on his habits. 
4. A rendered mock-up of the invention was presented and explained in layman’s terms. The explanation was 
made to focus on the function of the invention, rather than its form or features. The interviewee was then 
asked brief questions relating to it. If the interview displayed positive attitudes, he was further asked of his 
ideal way to purchase and use. 
 
Figure 32. Structure of survey. 
4.7.1.3 
Survey results 
The survey was conducted between the 24.4.20-25.5.20, with an invitation submitted in three online groups as 
shown in the table below.  
Table 6. Online CB interest groups surveyed. 
Name 
Website 
Locality 
Group size 
“Ladcykel entusiaster” (“CB enthusiasts”) 
Facebook Denmark 
4266 
“Transportsykkelforumet” (“The CB forum”) 
Norway 
3527 
/r/CargoBike 
Reddit 
International/ American based 
4436 
Total 
12229 
==PAGE:48==
41 
 
Table 7. Survey response and completion rates. 
 
Population size 
% 
Invitation response 
Started the survey/ received the invitation 
(94/12229) *100 = 0.7 
Completion rate 
finished the survey/ started the survey 
(88/94) *100 = 93 
 
It is difficult to ascertain the actual group size conducted by online surveys, but it can reasonably be concluded 
that this survey cannot be used to indicate the attitudes of the target group. The high competition rate can 
indicate good engagement among those that have completed it. Young families formed the majority of those 
who completed the survey. 
 
Figure 34. Type of bike currently owned. N=88 
Two wheeled, non-motorized cargo cyclists, and three wheeled motorized cargo cyclists answered in equal 
measures and formed the majority of those who answered. From this, it can be inferred that three wheeled CBs 
are often motorized, as they are heavier and have a larger capacity. 
27%
9%
7%
17%
27%
1%
11%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Two wheeled
cargo bike
Three wheeled
cargo bike
Regular bike with
a trailer
Don't own a cargo
bike or trailer
Non motorized
Motorized
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Age Interval
Age distribution
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
1
2
3
More
than
3
# of adults in houshold
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
0
1
2
3 or
more
# of children in houshold
Figure 33. Demographic distribution. N=88 
==PAGE:49==
42 
 
Next, an evoked question was raised to those who do not have a motorized bicycle or CB. 
 
Figure 35. Q6: “If it doesn't have a motor, why? (you can choose more than one answer)”.  
A:"Don't need it- I got my muscle power" 83%, B: “It’s too expensive” 50% C: “It's too complex” 20%, D: 
“It adds too much weight” 17%. N=30 
 
 
Figure 36. CB user's cycling habits. N=76 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Often (Weekly/Daily)
Sometimes (Monthly/Yearly)
Practically never
Q7: "How often do you use your CB for the following activities?"
Grocery shopping
Drop off and pick up kids
Commute to work, school etc.
 Sports and exercise
Leisure- for example camping
Transport big stuff- furniture, building materials etc.
Go out for a night in town
==PAGE:50==
43 
 
 
Figure 37. Social cycling habits of CB users. N=76 
The interviewees use their bikes mostly as a children transporter. Likewise, of those interviewed, the spouse 
is almost never along for the ride, either alongside them or in the CB. 
Most interviewees displayed lukewarm to negative attitudes to the invention and found the bicycle to be mostly 
useful for leisure. 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
Often (Weekly/Daily)
Sometimes (Monthly/Yearly)
Practically never
Q8: "Please choose the answer that most reflects your typical ride on a 
CB."
With my children in the bike
I Ride alone
Ride along others
With other adults in the bike
I don't see 
the point 
in it.
43%
I don't have any opinion of it.
10%
I like it, 
but it's 
not for 
me.
25%
I think it's 
a great 
idea!
22%
Q9: "What do you think about 
the option of pedaling side-by-
side with someone?"
Leisure.
55%
Riding with 
less-able 
people as 
passengers.
28%
Commuting 
together.
11%
Transportin
g cargo.
6%
Q10: "If you had such a bike, what 
do you think you would mostly use 
it for?"
Figure 38. Initial reaction of respondents to the function of side-by-side cycling. N=87 
==PAGE:51==
44 
 
 
Figure 39. Follow up formulation, inquiring target group’s need. N=87 
Those who displayed negative attitudes of the invention were further invoked to elaborate on their opinion: 
 
Figure 40. Q12: Negative attitudes towards the new concept: N=44 A:"It seems too complex." 48%, B: "I 
don't see the appeal of riding with another person.” 34% C: "I don't like the look of it." 14%, D: "I don't 
think it would work."” 23%, E: "It seems cumbersome.” 70%. 
Those with positive opinion of the invention were further presented with an evoked question testing their 
attitude to a CaaS scheme in relation to this invention. 
 
Figure 41. Private ownership vs. service offer. N=43 
Practically never.
50%
From time to 
time.
28%
Whenever I have a 
partner for it.
22%
Q11: "If your bike had an option of converting to a side-by-
side tandem, how often would you use this function?"
I would be 
interested in buying 
it.
37%
I would prefer to lease it on 
a monthly/yearly basis.
14%
I would prefer to 
rent it on a "pay as 
you go" basis.
49%
Q13: "What would be your ideal payment option for this kind of 
vehicle?"
==PAGE:52==
45 
 
4.7.1.4 
Results discussion 
The survey focused on answering the first hypothesis by targeting CB enthusiasts. The second hypothesis was 
partially tested with answers from non-CB owners. 
The first hypothesis can be said to have failed the survey. This can be attributed to the maturity of the private 
cargo market. In Q7 (CB riding habits), the utilitarian habits of the interviewees are evident.  Enthusiast rarely 
ride their CB with other adults, and do not feel they need it. 
With market growth, customers’ taste becomes more alike and price rivalry dominates. Enthusiasts in existing 
niche markets might still accept new niche products, but only if they either: solve existing customer pains or 
are low cost alternatives. 
Additionally, in Q6 (opinion of electrical motor) the phrasing of the answer (“got my muscle power”) displays 
interviewer bias, as many cyclists identified with the pride of using one’s own power. 
The results of the second hypothesis are not conclusive from this survey. As the survey was posted to online 
CB enthusiasts’ groups, they were the majority who answered. Additionally, As the cycling habits of non-CB 
owners were not inquired, it is hard to say if they ride side by side often enough with others. 
Fitzpatrick (2013) describes the last survey question as a classic mistake in market research- to try and gage 
interest by outright asking about it. This is instead of asking them about how they currently solve their 
perceived problem or if they have searched for a solution already (Fitzpatrick, 2013). 
An informal street interview was conducted to gain more knowledge from both groups. 10 young adults who 
ride side by side were interviewed on a weekend day in central Copenhagen, with about half of those being 
couples. As in the cargo enthusiasts’ group, most do not ride with others often. Additionally, they don’t always 
ride with the same people. To strengthen the understanding of the CB enthusiast group, 3 Families seen riding 
together with children and spouse in the cargo hold, were interviewed. The interviewees seemed to enjoy the 
slow pace and saw no need for both parents to pedal. All of those interviewed stated that they ride together 
exclusively on the weekend. Most interviewees liked the basic premise of the invention but could not see 
themselves commit to such a device- they too reiterated that the invention seems fun, but not practical. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
46 
 
4.7.2 Opportunity adaptation 
In the proceeding section, the efforts that went into finding a base of early adopters for the innovation were 
outlined. As the target group had a lukewarm response to the invention's base premise, it was important to 
outline a pivot strategy. A reassessment of the situation would re-examine: the perceived notions of market 
need, or its perceived boundaries. For a business focused on this invention, the offer will likely need to possess 
one or more of the following attributes: 
 
The perceived market need: 
- Be price competitive 
- Iterate and find additional customer  
  pains 
 
 
The market’s boundaries: 
- Base its efforts in non-cycling countries 
- Expand the definition of the target 
  segment 
 
As the second hypothesis related to the CaaS market, secondary research has helped gather additional insight. 
One main limitation of CaaS studies, and more generally in mobility studies, is the lack of sampling from non-
user groups. That is, it is often hard to point out the reason people choose not to do something, even if the 
conditions allow it. 
For this invention to make an impact in the service market, those who could use CaaS programs, but are 
unwilling to, would form the early adapters group, as it would satisfy a need which is not currently met. 
Two MaaS studies relating to the possibility of integration of other cycle types in the MaaS market were found: 
I. 
(Waes, Farla, Frenken, Jong, & Raven, 2018) describes two app platforms (“listnride” and 
“Spinlister”) for peer-to-peer bicycle sharing. These serve a niche market for unique cycle rental. This 
model is independent of infrastructure and based on existing bike capacity. Thus, the authors describe 
it as having scaling potential. 
This business idea ("the Uber of bicycles") has been tried before by one current CaaS company. As the concept 
in this project centers around a company that will produce a new cycle, it cannot be peer-to peer based. 
However, such platforms can be used to promote new, unusual cycles. 
II. 
(Fishman, 2014) describes extensive research on bike share programs in Australia. This work is one 
of the few that delves into attraction, as well as aversion of CaaS programs. 
The author highlights a statement made by one of his interviewees. A member of a subscription-based 
program, who also rides a recumbent bicycle describes how he feels more present in traffic on his 
unusual cycle, leading motorists to drive more carefully around him. 
This can have wide reaching consequences on the acceptance of new, unusual cycles in traffic. Many studies 
have shown that non-cyclists’ aversion of bicycles stems from their perceived levels of danger of riding a 
bicycle in traffic. Yet, cyclists themselves can attest that cycling more unusual bikes results in motorists 
slowing down around them. In the context of CaaS, a program offering unusual bikes can create a demand by 
non-cyclists, who will begin to feel safer on them than on regular bikes. 
(Fishman, 2014) also notes (among others) two variable he suspects reduce membership demand in bike 
sharing: 
• 
Travel demands by employment- job in multiple locations, often carrying tools. These can be handyman 
(plumbers and electricians) but can also expanded to real estate agents, police force and other logistical 
staff. 
• 
Travel demands before and after work: dropping off or picking up children and other errands. 
All these highlight new venues of exploration, to re-contextualize a business around this invention. 
==PAGE:54==
47 
 
4.7.3 Financial analysis 
Cost competitiveness was a significant driving force in developing this venture. As previously elaborated, with 
many small companies thriving, cost competitiveness is essential for survival in the current private CB 
industry. In the same vain, the MaaS industry was born due in large part to the high costs of ownership of 
private vehicles. In this section, the financial prospects of the venture are presented. 
To form a base comparison, the finances of two companies from the private and service markets were analyzed 
using publicly available financial statements. Both companies were established within the last decade. 
The CaaS company runs on smaller profit margins and has yet to report profits from its main activities. The 
company has recently received venture funding to sustain its growth and expansion. 
The private sale company manufactures a unique design and therefore has additional patent costs as a result. 
The company has expanded its operation within the last few years by renting a larger production facility. 
Table 8. Financial characterization of two service and private ownership businesses. 
 
Donkey Republic Bike ApS  
(Parent company: Donkey Republic 
Holding ApS) 
Butchers and bicycles  
ApS 
Revenue model 
Rental of own bikes through mobile 
application 
Private sale and of 
CBs 
Sales revenue  
(Fiscal year 2018) [DKK] 
6572700 
4377920 
Average unit price [DKK] 
100 
40000 
Gross margin percentage = 
(Gross sales- production costs)/ 
Gross sales 
55% 
75% 
Approximate units sold =  
Sales revenue/ Average unit price 
65727 
109 
Approximate break-even period 
Unknown 
3-4 years 
Operating expenses 
Administration 
Distribution 
Marketing 
Software R & D 
Patents 
Administration 
Distribution 
Marketing 
Hardware R & D 
Production expenses 
Procurement 
App server costs 
Online and telephone support 
Raw materials 
Storage 
Manufacturing 
Factory overhead 
 
==PAGE:55==
48 
 
4.7.3.1 
Funding requirements 
The cost estimates to build a prototype are detailed in appendix 1. The estimates considered here assume that 
all labor is performed by one individual, rather than outsourced. Material and labor costs are largely equal. In 
materials, the costs of the batteries weigh heaviest, with specialized bicycle components a close second. In 
labor, the chassis is estimated to take the longest time to produce, and therefore costs the most. By accounting 
for labor costs here, a projected scenario of a one-man company is envisioned. With the prototype build period 
being about a month, the calculated salary is not unrealistic. 
 
Figure 42. Cost estimates of a fully functional prototype in Euros, total cost of production: €6980. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
49 
 
4.7.3.2 
Financial revenue model 
Scenario 1: Private ownership 
The cost to produce a prototype was used to establish two financial models. The first describes a private sales 
model. The model describes a scenario of a one-man company. 
The assumptions that were made: 
• 
Fixed costs: rental of workshop facilities in an existing facility. The price of rent covers factory 
overheads, and the facility has all the necessary machinery. 
• 
COGS: both material and labor costs reduce by 25% after the first unit is produced and sold. This 
assumption is made as the cost of prototype production includes fabrication of dedicated tooling. 
• 
Unit price: the vehicle is sold at the highest price that the existing CB ownership market will permit. 
 
Figure 43. Private sales model. 
This simplistic model demonstrates a very small profit margin of 13%, and a break-even period of 8 years. 
The sales growth in this model can be approximated with either a new product in a new market or a niche 
product to re-segment an existing market. 
Following (Waes, Farla, Frenken, Jong, & Raven, 2018), a reduced business model is used to represent the 
core building blocks for this case. The model is much the same as the first BMC (table 5) but underlines the 
self-sustained nature of the operation. 
Table 9. A reduced BM, Private sales 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Demand (units)
1000*[DKK]
Years
Sales revenue
COGS
Fixed costs
Net income
Units sold
Value 
A unique HPV: convertible side by side electrical 
tandem/ Electrical cargo cycle 
 
Profit 
Sale of vehicles 
Processes 
R&D 
Manufacturing and assembly 
Resources 
Model of invention 
Manufacturing facility in Denmark 
==PAGE:57==
50 
 
Scenario 2: Leasing model 
A leasing model expands on the private sale scenario with the following assumptions: 
• 
The costs of production are constant, and assumed to be reduce by 25%, as in the second unit sold 
under the private ownership model. 
• 
The fixed costs are higher, as they now include a vehicle storage facility. 
• 
A surplus of two vehicles is maintained. This permits exchange while leased units are being serviced. 
• 
To maintain a growing inventory, 7 new units are built yearly. 
The model has two revenue streams: subscriptions and sale of previously leased vehicles. Subscription are 
about twice as expensive as current bicycle programs, but still much cheaper in comparison to car leasing 
programs. 
They break even period of this model is much longer, With the 21st year covering accumulated losses. 
 
Figure 44. Leasing model. 
For this model to work, the subscription growth rate needs to be much higher. The lower cost of subscription 
can improve financial accessibility to more expensive goods but relies on high growth rates and sale of 
previously leased goods. The value to the customer is a substitute for urban transport. 
In order to focus on the service model, manufacturing of new vehicles would need to be separated.  
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
-400
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
Demand (units)
1000*[DKK]
Years
fixed costs
Service costs (including refurbishments)
Net income
Subscription revenue
Refurbished vehicle revenue
Manufacturing costs of new vehicles
# unit currently leased
# of New Units built
# of new units leased
==PAGE:58==
51 
 
Table 10. A reduced BM, service model. 
 
4.7.4 Putting it all together 
In testing the active mobility hypotheses, it became clear that the best strategy for this invention would be 
to establish a new market.  Under these circumstances, recognizing current actors and scouting potential 
partnerships is crucial for this venture to become sustainable. 
4.7.4.1 
Actors in the active mobility market and possible partnerships 
The actors in the active urban mobility scene can be grouped as: the public sector, private businesses and 
private customers (fig. 45) (Janasz, 2017). 
The public sector describes public decision makers, city or region administration and PT operators. The public 
sector could be enticed to support a pilot program which could test the invention. Locally, the city of 
Copenhagen has shown support for innovations in the field, as described in section 3.2.3.1.  
Other regional administrations, such as Furesø municipality, have launched public-private partnership 
programs to encourage cycling to work. These pilot programs support electrical bike leasing for employees of 
large companies (Rantorp, 2018). 
Another public sector actor which already runs CB loan programs are local committees (Lokaludvalg). These 
drive local initiatives, such as CB loan programs from public libraries. 
As has been established, currently no CaaS program offers a “premium” value proposition. In the regional 
MaaS market, the complementation of cycling to other offers of subscription-based offers is under 
consideration (Emma Lund, 2016) 
As a complementary product, the design developed in this project can function as a medium range alternative 
for families, with motorized transport and regular bicycles for long- and short-range distances. Thus, families 
in suburban and satellite localities can commute to the inner city together. 
In applying the design for the commercial urban freight sector, the design developed in this project could serve 
to extend route flexibility, as the side-by-side function could enable staff transport. 
In the private sector, a broader spectrum of business could see a financial incentive in such a vehicle. Being 
cheaper than a car, faster over short distances and able to carry two employees and equipment. A regional 
example of application are the regional hospitals, which have begun to use CB for blood sample delivery. 
Unlike CB’s described under section 3.2.2.2, which were developed for the commercial market, the design 
developed in this project is rooted in the potential for social mobility. Therefore, the wider public will likely 
remain the primarily target and should be integrated in the development of the brand. This two-way process 
should focus on communicating the vision for a better paradigm in urban mobility, and let customers drive 
development beyond the MVP.  
Value 
A family car alternative 
Profit 
Subscriptions and deposits 
Sale of refurbished vehicles 
Processes 
Maintenance and redistribution of vehicles 
Service and customer support 
Resources 
Outsourced manufacture of new vehicles 
Warehouse and service center 
==PAGE:59==
52 
 
 
Figure 45. Potential partners in the active mobility market. 
4.7.4.2 
Business road map 
A road map is described in table 11. The road map sets an arbitrary timeline, with a company phase change 
every two years. The milestones describe the elementary factors of success that will need to be evaluated in 
order to continue the venture. 
The venture starts with the construction of a minimum viable product (MVP). A minimum viable product 
describes the fundamental elements that make up the value proposition. In contrast, a prototype would make a 
functional concept, which can serve to test production method.  
The functionality of the invention would be demonstrated with an MVP. An MVP would demonstrate the 
vehicle's functionality in two use cases, and its large carrying capacity. This invention would need to be 
constructed in a simplified form, rather than the prototype proposed. As the invention is detailed to possible 
production methods which could enable scalable production in the following section, the prototype goes 
beyond the functional aspects of the invention. 
Table 11. Business road map. 
Years 
Base strategy and  
target markets 
Milestones reached at end of year 
Employees 
and functions 
1 
Investments and  
small-scale operations 
MVP tested; market position established 
1- 2 
R & D, 
fundraising 
2 
Crowd/venture/ public funding received 
3 
Private ownership market: Focus 
on establishing a new market for 
a true urban car alternative 
Market/ fit adjusted 
Supply chain generated 
2-5 
Engineering, 
marketing, 
operations 
4 
Regulatory testing passed, 
Revenue forecast generated 
5 
Diversification: 
Service market 
Self- 
maintained 
fleet of leased 
vehicles 
Complement 
existing 
MaaS/ CaaS 
packages 
Partnerships established 
New vehicle manufacturing 
separated/ outsourced 
5-10 
Engineering, 
marketing, 
sales, 
operations, 
business  
intelligence 
6 
Turnkey program established 
7 
Expansion: 
B2B/ Public 
Courier fleets 
Logistics 
fleets: repair, 
maintenance, 
service, 
cleaning and 
transport 
Leisure and 
rehabilita-
tion fleets 
Operations 
optimized 
8 
==PAGE:60==
53 
 
 Detailing: Production development 
Sections 4.1-4.6 explained the core design aspects and justified them as a highly differentiated product. In this 
section, the exploration of novel manufacturing methods is described. The motivation here was to enable rapid 
prototyping, scalability and lower production costs. As a newly established venture with its central theme of 
production, it was important to strike a good balance between innovation and manufacturing accessibility. 
5.1 Principles for material and processing choices 
The prototype needs to demonstrate producibility by common processes while being indicative of its scaling 
potential. Fig. 46 demonstrates this by color coding the forming processes needed to construct the chassis. 
 
Figure 46. Chassis with colors indicating the forming process.  
In selecting the material for the chassis, the obvious choice here was aluminum. Its weight, price and flexibility 
in manufacture makes for an easy choice for a modern vehicle. Plates and standard profiles of 1.5-2 mm wall 
thickness were selected. The total weight of the chassis is approximately 25 kg. 
 
5.2 Chassis construction 
The construction of the chassis is presented in appendix 2 as an easy to follow step-by-step manual. The manual 
demonstrates the DFM principles guiding the design process. The application of these principles can be 
separated to machining and assembly of the prototype. 
Fig. 46 demonstrates that the embodied design can be produced with standard workshop equipment- all 
machined and bent surface are orthogonal to the primary axis of the component. This reduces the need for 
custom fixturing. 
In considering the assembly of the prototype, the chassis is divided into sub-assemblies. These are the 
“backbone”, 2 “shock towers” and 4 “arms”. (see appendix 2). 
To reduce part count, the “shock towers” and “arms” are both identical. The process of assembly can be carried 
out with minimal fixturing, as no reorientation of the vehicle is required under its construction. The bottom 
profile functions as the primary processing surface, around which the submodules are joined in succession 
from the bottom up. 
 
Legend 
1.5 mm plates, 
plasma/laser/ waterjet cut 
Standard profiles 
CNC machined stock 
==PAGE:61==
54 
 
5.2.1 Joining processes 
The joining method which was developed for the chassis was another reinterpretation of automotive production 
technology. Once more, the goal was to differentiate, explore alternatives to current processes, and find cost 
benefit advantages. 
In modern bicycle frame construction, TIG and MIG welding are the sole alternatives. Their strength and 
reliability are widely evident in this setting. Two drawbacks to arc welding of aluminum structures in general, 
and to a small-scale venture were the origin of this investigation: 
• 
Adequate welding quality of aluminum structures requires skills, tools and facilities. It is the main reason 
that most bicycle production is labor intensive and outsourced if the sales volume is low or automated and 
mass produced.  
• 
Welding aluminum structures in continuous weld sections often requires post welding heat treatment. 
Common joining methods for unibody chassis and car panels are self-piercing rivets (SPR), resistance spot 
welding (RSW) and spot friction joining (SFJ).  In terms of cost (of consumables, equipment and energy) RSW 
is the cheapest, followed by SFJ and SPR. (Briskham, Blundell, Han, Hewitt, & Young, 2006). None of these 
methods hold the drawbacks of arc welding processes. All three require access to both sides of the joint, which 
limits the flexibility in design. 
A relatively new joining method in the automotive industry is adhesive bonding. This method does not change 
the properties of the base material and offers wider design flexibility. One caveat to this is that it is important 
to design adhesives joints in such a way that the load experienced by the bond is not a peeling or cleavage type 
load. (Ghosh, Pancholi, & Sathaye, 2014) 
Combining blind riveting (“pop rivets”) and adhesive bonding could deliver on the manufacturing 
requirements as laid out in fig. 14 section 4.2.1. Both methods require minimal skill and tooling and could be 
suited for manual or non-dedicated robotic assembly. 
This process was inspired once again by another chapter from Lotus’s history. In the 90’s Lotus teamed with 
Hydro aluminum of Denmark. Together, they developed a dedicated production line for the “Elise” chassis 
(fig. 47). 35 extruded members, of 2 mm wall thickness are assembled in a Lego-like fashion. The adhesive is 
applied to ridges on the extrusions, which ensures that the bonding surface remain at a specific distance of 
0.5mm from each other, thereby the adhesive does not squeeze out. The members are joined using SPR before 
the adhesive fully cures. 
 
 
Figure 47. The Lotus Elise chassis. 
==PAGE:62==
55 
 
Lotus continues to expand on this concept, branding it “Versatile Vehicle Architecture”, with high-pressure 
die-castings and stamping. The technology reduces costs associated with dedicated tooling and faster 
development of new models for the niche sports car market. 
 
Figure 48. Wheel subassembly of a later Lotus model. The adhesive is visible in red. (Car Body Design, 2008) 
5.2.2 Adaptation of chassis production method 
Some concessions needed to be made to suit the Lotus chassis bonding method for low cost production. The 
“Elise” chassis is built of custom aluminum profiles with interlocking ridges. In this way, the mating surfaces 
are offset from one another, and the adhesive is not squeezed out (Kochan, 1996).  
This implementation of this feature was explored in various ways. 
In fig. 49, the bottom of the chassis sidewall is bent to meet the inner profile dimensions of the bottom profile, 
creating a constant gap above it. This solution would produce the desired effect but has the disadvantage of 
the adhesive being exposed to the environment in a location where water is likely to pool. 
In fig. 50, two ridges above and below the rivets would create two bonding surfaces. The lower ridge was not 
feasible, as it is too close to the sheet’s edge. 
Other components of the chassis would need to be tackled creatively, in order to use this joining method. 
 
 
Figure 49. Front detail view of backbone profile and main 
chassis sidewall. 
 
Figure 50. Trimetric detail view of backbone profile and main 
chassis members. 
==PAGE:63==
56 
 
In fig. 51, a positive draft angle in the cavities of the lug would create a mating surface and fixate the profile 
end.  
The front bifurcation junction was designed around this joining method and uses standard stock. The solution 
was to use hexagonal bar stock, which would be milled out to preserve weight. The hexagonal shape will 
facilitate the 30-degree angle in this junction, and a T extrusion profile would locate the arm’s end (fig. 52). 
Figure 51.Detailed view of arm lug. 
Figure 52. Detailed view: front bifurcation. 
5.2.2.1 
Testing 
To test the bonding method, a test piece was designed and manufactured. The test piece was to be subjected to 
a three-point bending test, to determine the maximal bending moment the joint can withstand. Unfortunately, 
testing was not possible, due to the Corona epidemic. 
The method was modified in the following ways: 
1. Blind rivets were used, instead of SPR. The “multi grip” structural rivets which were selected facilitate 
assembly of varying plies (fig. 54). 
2. The selected adhesive did not require heat curing. An adhesive that is specially formulated for metal 
joining was chosen. Additionally, a slow setting formulation was chosen, to allow time for rivet 
application. 
3. Flat panels and standard extrusion profiles were selected. Developing dedicated profile extrusions was out 
of reach for this project and would void the manufacturing requirements. 
The test piece was made as a rectangular box, with overall dimensions of 1000 x 500 x 73 mm (B x H x W). 2 
side panels, two columns and a top panel were designed of 1.5 mm bent aluminum sheets, and a standard U-
profile was used for the bottom piece. The test piece was constructed with 52 rivets and epoxy was applied 
along the offset surfaces. The dimensions of test piece are documented in appendix 3. 
Figure 53. The structural blind rivets used in the test piece. 
==PAGE:64==
57 
 
The columns fixate the construction latterly and vertically, as rivets are applied to both sides, top and bottom. 
The panel’s raised surface was achieved by countersinking the rivet holes and a single “jog” (two-way bend). 
This modification was made as the distance of the bend to the edge was too close. (compare appendix 3.4 and 
fig. 51). 
5.2.2.2 
Simple bending simulation 
The test piece model was simulated using the Solidworks finite element module. 
All parts were modelled as shell elements. Shell elements are normally used in FEM of sheet metal parts. Shell 
elements have no thickness- i.e. all nodes are surface nodes.  
The rivets were modelled as pinned connections, which constrain the cylindrical mating surfaces from rotation 
and translation. The adhesive was modelled as bonded, non-contacting surfaces.  
The model was supported at the bottom on two surfaces, and a remote load of 4000 N is applied centrally to 
the top surface of the box. (fig. 55).  
The simulation results in minimal deflection and stresses, as all reaction forces were well within the strength 
ranges of the aluminum panels, rivets and epoxy. 
The panels were riveted at the top and bottom, but not in the middle. The panel bulges out, indicating that the 
adhesive might not suffice at that location (fig. 54). 
 
Figure 54. Trimetric plot, first principal stress.  
 
Figure 55. Front view, displacement plot.
==PAGE:65==
58 
 
Assembly procedure 
The test piece was constructed in order to validate the simulation’s results. As mentioned, this comparison 
could not be made. Nevertheless, the construction of the test piece served to demonstrate the method of 
manufacture and draw conclusions regarding its economic and technical feasibility. 
The bending of the aluminum components was outsourced, while the test piece was assembled in-house. The 
total processing time was about 4 hours- less than half a workday for one person. To complete the test piece, 
the standard aluminum profile which formed the bottom piece of the box was drilled to match the bent 
components. The tooling and materials needed for the assembly were rudimentary: 
• 
Acetone and coarse sandpaper 
• 
A riveting tool 
• 
Two-part epoxy, brushes, chemical respirator and latex gloves. 
Table 12. Test piece assembly 
Assembly of test piece, step 1-2 
1.  
Dry fitting  
 
The components were 
put together with the 
rivets used to hold them 
in place. 
 
Two advantages of this 
joining method are: 
 
• 
Ability to test fitting 
of the components. 
 
• 
Work out the joining 
order “on the fly”. 
 
2.  
Surface preparation  
 
The 
bonding 
surface 
were 
cleaned 
with 
acetone, scoured with 
coarse sandpaper, and 
cleaned again. 
 
The 
surfaces 
were 
cleaned prior to roughing 
to 
avoid 
embedding 
contaminants. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:66==
59 
 
Assembly of test piece, step 3-4 
3.  
Mixing of adhesive 
 
Application to bonding surface and 
placement of rivets: As in step 1.  
All the rivets that are visible can be 
located, before they are applied. This can 
help in tolerancing issues. 
4.  
Application of rivets 
 
This was the only part of the process that 
required strenuous activity, as the 
riveting tool was manual. Once the epoxy 
components are mixed, there is 90 
minutes to complete the assembly, before 
the epoxy begins to harden. 
 
 
5.2.2.3 
Test piece expenditures 
Besides the potential to test the construction method, the test piece can serve as an indicator for the economic 
viability of the technology- discounting tooling, facilities and salary expenses.  
Unsurprisingly, outsourcing the production of custom components formed much of the price. In fig. 42 section 
4.7.3.1 the costs of labor and material are calculated as in-house fabrication, as outsourcing non-serial 
production would not suit the financial purpose of the prototype. 
Table 13. Test piece expenditures. 
Item 
Supplier 
Price excl. 
VAT [DKK] 
Approx. cost to 
construct test piece 
[DKK] 
Bent and cut aluminum plates 
Gladsaxe klip & buk A/S 
2500 
Aluminum profile 
MetalCentret A/S 
90 
Rivets 
HVACgrossisten A/S 
522 
522/ 52 rivets = 10 
Two-part epoxy, brushes 
R&G GmbH 
511 
511*10% = 51 
Total 
 
2651 
 
 
==PAGE:67==
60 
 
5.3 Development of tooling for Seat construction  
The two side by side seats had to fulfil the functional requirements as laid out in section 4.2.1. For their 
production, a novel manufacturing method was explored. In a similar vain to section 5.2.2, the objective here 
was to find a cheap method which had good scaling potential. 
In the article: “Joining sheet panels to thin-walled tubular profiles by tube end forming” (Alves, Dias, & 
Martins, 2011) the authors describe an innovative joining method of tubes and sheet metal. The method has 
significant potential in construction of light weight structures. With virtually no consumable materials and 
minimal dedicated tooling, this method can produce joints as strong as welds. In addition to this, the method 
seemed worthy of exploration as the article describes using this method for the construction of car seats. 
5.3.1 Description of the joining method 
The joining method mentioned above is composed of a two-stage process. The simplicity of the method relies 
on careful considerations of tool geometry and material properties. The method is presented below as applied 
to the simultaneous joining of two plates to one tube using a vertical press. 
Table 14. The two-stage joining process. 
1.  
Beading 
 
The tube is compressed axially using two 
punches (#2), which move inwards due to 
vertical pressure applied to an inclined 
surface.  
A container (#3) ensures a certain length 
of overhang. This results in localized 
buckling of the tube near its ends. 
 
2.  
External inversion  
 
The two side sheets (#1) are placed on top 
of the bead, and a second punch (#2) is 
driven into the tube, causing the tube 
ends to roll inside out (invert). 
 
 
==PAGE:68==
61 
 
5.3.2 Development of process parameters using i-form 
The process was simulated using “i-form”- a FE software dedicated to metal forming processes. “i-form” was 
developed in collaboration by Chris Valentin Nielsen and Paulo Martins of DTU (DK) and IST (PT). In “i-
form”, the model is simulated as 2D axisymmetric. The process parameters are presented and related to the 
article. 
Table 15. The simulated process. 
The starting condition  
The two stages were simulated as two concurrent 
events in one simulation. This meant that the tube (in 
yellow) and plate (in teal) are both present initally. 
The simulation was preformed in 0.1 second step 
increments, and took 82 seconds. 
Parameter 
Sign 
Value 
[mm] 
Tube radius 
r0 
12.5 
Tube wall thickness 
t0 
1.5 
Tube Initial free length 
l0 
36 
Sheet thickness 
ts 
1 
Initial punch distance 
lgap 
9.5 
Die radius 
rf 
1.25 
Extenal inversion punch radius 
rcd 
3.5 
Extenal inversion punch length 
l1 
7 
After the tube is compressed and a bead has formed, 
the compression punch (#2) is moved sideways. 
 
The plate is lowered on top of the bead, and the 
inversion punch is lowered, and the tube end encases 
the plate. 
==PAGE:69==
62 
 
The materials of the tube and plate are 6060 and 7075 aluminum, respectively. In the article, a critical load is 
established experimentally. This helps determine the start of local buckling in the tube. As this was not possible 
here, the critical load was computed using column buckling theory. 
The Euler column formula is used to analyze for buckling of a long column: 
𝜎𝑐𝑟(𝑒𝑢𝑙𝑒𝑟) = 𝑃𝑐𝑟
𝐴= 𝜋2𝐸
(𝑙
𝑘)2
 
Where: 𝜎𝑐𝑟: Critical stress, 𝑃𝑐𝑟: Critical force 𝐴: Cross section area 𝐸: Young’s modulus 
𝑙
𝑘: Slenderness ratio 
The slenderness ratio is an indicator of a member under compressive load to resist bending and buckling, due 
to its length and cross section. The critical slenderness ratio is defined only by material properties, if the 
slenderness ratio is less than the critical, the column is considered short and the Johnson parabola is more 
applicable than the Euler formula: 
(
𝑙
𝑘)𝑐𝑟= √
2𝜋2𝐸
𝜎𝑦 
𝜎𝑐𝑟(𝐽𝑜ℎ𝑛𝑠𝑜𝑛) = 𝜎𝑦−1
𝐸(𝜎𝑦
2𝜋)2(𝑙
𝑘)2 
Here, Johnson’s formulation was found to be valid, as the tube is short in regard to its cross section. 
 
Figure 56. The full simulation sequence as compared to the load. 
==PAGE:70==
63 
 
Overall, the loads are predictably much lower than the referenced article, due to the chosen material. The article 
finds experimentally two processing parameters that can be isolated: 
Table 16. Critical operation parameters, comparison of project and originating article. 
 
(Alves, Dias, & Martins, 2011) 
The values developed here 
𝒍𝒈𝒂𝒑
𝒓𝟎
 
10
16 
9.5
12.5 
𝒍𝟏
𝒓𝟎
 
11
16 
7
16 
As with other sub-problems in this invention, aluminum was chosen for its weight and strength. 
Cold forming of aluminum can induce work hardening of the workpiece. With annealing and flexible dies, 
loads and tool friction might reduce, but the cost trade-off for choosing this method might diminish. 
The plate which was simulated is likely too thin. This should primarily influence the geometry described in 
table 15, and not the forces generated. 
Rotary swaging is a similar tube end forming process, commonly used in the production of aluminum ladders. 
As in the process described here, the tube is deformed to clamp over a perpendicular member. The two 
processes can be compared for their financial viability in this application. 
 
5.4 Shaping of side-by-side seat frame members 
The design optimization module of the Fusion 360 CAD software was used to reduce the weight of the frame 
members to which the seats connect. The shape of these member as developed to the conceptual phase was 
used as a starting point (fig. 58). The preserved geometry were the fixation points and the pedal axle. The 
applied forces were pedaling forces, the occupant’s weight and the self-weight of the members. 
 
Figure 57. Concept design side view. 
 
Figure 58. Side view of frame members. Design optimization plot. 
==PAGE:71==
64 
 
The algorithm iterates between different scenarios, depending on the starting shape and forces. This algorithm 
is not as rigorous as a full FE simulation, with the “heat map” describing the travel path of forces, using the 
set conditions. This was used to arrive at a second iterative design (fig. 59). 
This method is most useful in pre-existing designs. This method was simple to apply to these self-standing 
frame structures, as prior knowledge is key to assessing the alternatives generated by the algorithm. The 
vehicle’s weight can be further optimized using this method or by similar means. 
 
Figure 59.Side view of conceptual model. The dimensions of the frame members following optimization. 
5.5 Development of steering system 
To shorten the list of technical challenges faced in the development of this invention, as well as expand the 
interest and increase feedback on the design, some outsourcing was in order. I contacted a lecturer, Ahmed 
Adil Albayati at KEA (Københans Ehverakademi) and requested to come and showcase the invention to his 
2nd semester production technology students. Ahmed agreed, and luckily a group of students (These are: 
Nicholas Christophersen, Jonas Gotfred, Lissi Marie Henriksen and Kim Petersen) took up the challenge. 
The requirements for the 2nd semester project at production technology at KEA were: 
The students must create a project around the manufacturing of a mechanism (that is a device with movable 
part) and envision the development of it. The project puts the students in a position of an outsourced company 
and must justify their choices using PDS (Product Design Specification) methodology. 
==PAGE:72==
65 
 
The result of our collaboration is the steering system design shown in fig. 22. The students approached the 
sub-problem in a systematic manner, produced several alternatives and weighed their merits. 
In this section, their work and our partnership are summarized. 
Table 17. Collaboration timeline 
Date 
Topics covered 
3.2.20 
“Pitch” meeting at KEA 
The class is presented with an opportunity to join “Kuba bikes’” design engineering department. 
The suggested topics of research were: 
• 
Conceptualize and realize chassis, suspension, transmission, electrical, ergonomics, and 
mechanisms. 
• 
DFM- sheet metal design 
• 
FE modeling 
• 
Produce technical drawings 
 
6.2.20 
Meetings with interested groups 
Several groups have expressed interest in the project. I scheduled a meeting with all of them and 
described in further detail my needs. In return, the groups filled me in on their competences. 
One group decided to go forward with the project and have chosen to design the vehicle’s steering 
system. 
I supply the group with further information about the design, as well as a short literature list 
regarding steering geometry.  
The group is made to sign an NDA contract, and our partnership is established. 
 
12.2.20 
Problem statement and approval 
The group has sent a synopsis for approval. The problem statement as the group has formulated 
is: 
” How can we build a light, compact and cheap steering system? 
The steering system must have two steering columns, which do not interfere, and follow the 
regulations regarding bicycles with more than 2 wheels.” 
 
28.2.20 
Research initiation 
The group has requested another meeting. This will be our final physical meeting before the 
Corona epidemic. Subsequent meetings were conducted via Microsoft teams. 
The group has begun their research by conducting interviews with CB shop owners and 
constructors. I further clarified some technical matters and delivered an updated assembly file of 
the model to the group. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:73==
66 
 
30.3.20 
Benchmark Matrix 
The group has decomposed their problem in two parts and have sent a benchmark matrix which 
they used to quantify the alternatives. The concepts are: 
 
Steering mechanism 
Bar linkage 
 
  
Chainwheel linkage 
Hydraulic pistons 
==PAGE:74==
67 
 
Steering bar fasteners 
“click” system 
Lock Pin 
Screwed “bayonet” 
 
31.3.20 
Midway meeting 
In this meeting, the concept and benchmarking method are explained. I deliver the group my 
evaluation of the concepts using their benchmarking matrix and add two criteria which I perceive 
to be important to the project: scaling prototyping and potential. 
I advise the group to consider in combining two fastener types, to create a fail-safe system. 
 
16.4.20 
Finalized model 
I send a finalized model of the vehicle. This model is made for ease of collaboration and 
rendering. 
 
13.5.20 
Last meeting 
In this meeting, the group discussed the concepts that they have chosen (bar linkage and “click”) 
We discussed material choices and how to get quotes from suppliers- to give an estimated price 
to produce their concept. 
 
26.5.20 
Results 
The group has sent a material selection and strength calculations document. The team has found 
that aluminum can be used in both parts of the mechanism. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
68 
 
 Conclusion 
Urban transport cycling has the potential to transform cities to be more livable, improve the public’s health 
and reduce the share of GHG emissions from the transport sector. Urban transport as a whole is being rapidly 
transformed due to urbanization, privatization of PT and the sharing or service economy. Along with other 
small vehicles, bicycles are forming a “Micromobility” revolution. 
However, private car ownership is increasing globally. Development of motorized transport infrastructure can 
hardly be reckoned with. Political foresight can at most discuss subsidies for electrical car consumption for the 
wealthy. 
This project tackles the topic of transport cycling by applying entrepreneurial methods. Normally, transport 
cycling advocates focus on either infrastructure development, or on motorized vehicles penalization. 
In this paper, a different approach is taken. By focusing on a design for a new HPV, promotion of transport 
cycling is made independent of infrastructure. The design seeks to attract both skeptics and enthusiasts. In 
doing so, the case is made for a new market. By building the business case for both MaaS and private ownership 
models, the boundaries of the new market are made fluid. 
The development of this venture delved into causal mechanisms, by analyzing current transport trends, and 
effectual, by envisioning an artificial market. Two hypotheses were formulated to test a business strategy. A 
market survey was conducted using an embodied model of the HPV which could convey the functional inten-
tion of the new product. 
The survey indicated a need to create a new market, as enthusiasts of the CB market did not find the new 
design attractive. However, the market need has not been fully tested. An MVP would need to be produced to 
gain more meaningful insight. 
Further, the manufacturing methods that enable mass production of car were selected to make the case for 
scaling potential. The venture seeks to start with the means at hand, to develop a one-man factory to produce 
a working model of the vehicle. Financially, this set up can be realized with minimal resources. 
 Reflections 
Combining the challenge of entrepreneurial opportunity development, with the technical challenge of new 
product design draws on many fields of research. In most regards, it is best to hone one’s skills in one aspect 
and find partners that can complement the skillset which one possess. 
In this project, many “hats” needed to be donned. As such, the reflections on entrepreneurial and technical 
field are separately summarized. 
7.1 Entrepreneurial aspects 
Efforts were taken to base entrepreneurial action on theoretical framework to the extent where such theory can 
be found. However, for the “novice” entrepreneur, pursuing a radical alternative, pitfalls abound the road to 
opportunity. 
The concept of opportunity forms the framework for entrepreneurial pursuit. In this project, “opportunity 
creation” was used to describe the new product in a new market approach. Realistically, the product needed to 
be weighed against current offerings. Likewise, a target market with a fundamental understanding of the 
product was sought to provide feedback on this new product. 
In (Kitching & Rouse, 2017) the authors critiques entrepreneurial opportunity as lacking in boundary definition 
between belief and practice. In this project, the belief in a need for a new design formed the basis for the 
creation of a new market. 
==PAGE:76==
69 
 
However, the context of existing transport infrastructure and cheap goods binds this opportunity as a niche, 
luxury product. Therefore, it is hard to employ effectual reasoning and disregard current paradigms. 
A realistic approach which examines all external conditions should be taken in commercialization of this 
design and any new endeavors in active mobility. 
 
7.2 Technical aspects 
The execution of the design and the research in enabling technologies all formed (for the most part) the realm 
of “prior knowledge” for this endeavor. As such, the technical goals were bounded by what could be achieved 
by a single person with the time given. Many details remain to be realized. 
The metal forming processes which were examined are cost and weight effective in the automotive industry. 
It remains to be seen if this “translation” can successfully be executed in this design. However, the financial 
reasoning for research in application of automotive technology to non-motorized vehicles will improve their 
market acceptance. 
The frame bonding technology researched here can be implemented for cost reduction of structures produced 
for niche markets. Both this the frame bonding process, as well as the tube forming method remains to be 
tested for their strength in this application. 
The collaboration with the production technology students from KEA has been fruitful and constructive. In 
most part, this can be attributed to the similarities between our lines of education and backgrounds.  
Delegation of technical tasks grows naturally with the size of a venture. In “outsourcing” this sub-problem, 
another inspiration from car manufacturing was attempted. Realizing that no one technically proficient 
individual can tackle all design work meaningfully, I sought to create an “engineering department”.   
The similarities between our background has also served to approach the design problem in much the same 
way. Among other fields of study, the design developed for this thesis will need to be refined visually.  
7.3  Discussion and future work 
This project lays the groundwork for establishment of a small enterprise with activities which revolve around 
the promotion of human powered mobility. Timing plays a central role in success of new business pursuits. 
Luckily, the global climate crisis and the current pandemic have created an acute need for individual transport 
solutions. Thus, timing has never been more favorable for such a venture. 
 
==PAGE:77==
70 
 
 Bibliography 
Alves, L. M., Dias, E. J., & Martins, P. A. (2011). Joining sheet panels to thin-walled tubular profiles by tube 
end forming. Journal of Cleaner Production(19), pp. 712-719. 
Barton, D. C., & Fieldhouse, J. D. (2018). Vehicle Accelerating/Decelerating on Level Ground, Steering 
Geometry and Kinematics, Structural Requirements. In Automotive chassis engineering (pp. 22-25, 
49-52, 222). Springer International Publishing AG. 
Behrendt, M. (2013, August 20). Oversigt: Københavns nye bycykler i kroner og øre. Retrieved from 
https://ing.dk/artikel/oversigt-koebenhavns-nye-bycykler-i-kroner-og-oere-161081 
Bekendtgørelse om cyklers indretning og udstyr m.v. (2016, June 30). Retrieved from 
https://www.retsinformation.dk/Forms/R0710.aspx?id=182136#id26e11b65-ad82-46af-b151-
91ece06f2f04 
Bencke, A. (2018, March 5). Færre i brug og færre i drift: Bycyklen har problemer. Retrieved from 
https://www.tv2lorry.dk/kobenhavn/faerre-i-brug-og-faerre-i-drift-bycyklen-har-problemer 
Benz, M.-A. (2007). Experience and Credence Goods - An Introduction. In Strategies in Markets for 
Experience and Credence Goods. DUV. 
Blank, S., & Dorf, B. (2012). Customer Discovery, Phase One: State Your Business Model Hypotheses. In 
The Startup Owner’s Manual Strategy Guide (p. 229). Pescadero. 
Bredsdorff, M. (2015, April 17). Teknikborgmester om bycykler: Vi kunne ikke finde en hyldevare. Retrieved 
from https://ing.dk/artikel/teknikborgmester-om-bycykler-vi-kunne-ikke-finde-en-hyldevare-175496 
Briskham, P., Blundell, N., Han, L., Hewitt, R., & Young, K. (2006). Comparison of Self-Pierce Riveting, 
Resistance Spot Welding and Spot Friction Joining for Aluminium Automotive Sheet. Detroit: SAE 
International. 
Car Body Design. (2008, July 23). Lotus Evora- Car body design. Retrieved from 
https://www.carbodydesign.com/archive/2008/07/23-lotus-evora/ 
Clewlow, R. R., & Mishra, G. S. (2017). Disruptive Transportation: The Adoption, Utilization, and Impacts 
of Ride-Hailing in the United States. Davis: Institute of Transportation Studies, University of 
California. 
COLIBI - COLIPED. (2012). European bicycle market.  
CONEBI. (2017). European bicycle market.  
Cyclelogistics. (2020). Cyclelogistics. Retrieved from 
https://repository.cyclelogistics.eu/index.php/s/GnsaCKYFCzo3Ykz 
Deloitte. (2019). Deloitte insights- Technolgy, Media and Telecommuincations predictions 2020. Deloitte 
Development LLC. 
Emma Lund, e. a. (2016). Feasibility study MaaS - A business case for EC2B. Lund: Trivector. 
Erlandsson, J. (2018, August 30). DHL Express taking the next step in city logistics containerisation. 
Retrieved from https://www.velove.se/news/dhl-express-taking-the-next-step-in-city-logistics-
containerisation 
European Cyclists’ Federation. (2016). European bicycle market analysis 2015. Brussels: European Cyclists’ 
Federation. Retrieved from 
https://ecf.com/sites/ecf.com/files/CONEBI%20market%20report%20analysis%202016.pdf 
==PAGE:78==
71 
 
European Cyclists’ Federation. (2018). The benefits of cycling: Unlocking their potential for Europe. 
Brussels: European Cyclists’ Federation. 
EuroStat. (2019, July). Population structure and ageing. Retrieved from 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/Population_structure_and_ageing#Slightly_more_than_three_persons_of_worki
ng_age_for_every_person_aged_65_or_over 
Fishman, E. (2014). Bikeshare: barriers, facilitators and impacts on car use. PhD thesis. 
Fitzpatrick, R. (2013). The Mom Test: how to talk to customers and learn if your business is a good idea 
when everybody is lying to you.  
Ghosh, D., Pancholi, L., & Sathaye, A. (2014). Comparative Studies of Adhesive Joints in Automotive. SAE 
International. 
GLEAM technologies GmbH. (2020). Gleam-bikes. Retrieved from https://gleam-bikes.com/about-us/ 
Haubold, H. (2020, April 20). European Cyclists' Federation. Retrieved from https://ecf.com/news-and-
events/news/cycling-economy-and-coronavirus-weathering-crisis-preparing-sustainable 
Haustein, S., & Hunecke, M. (2013). Identifying target groups for environmentally sustainable transport: 
assessment of different segmentation approaches. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 
pp. 197-204. 
Haustein, S., & Jensen, A. F. (2020). Effekt- og brugerundersøgelse af E-bybiler i Region Hovedstaden. 
DTU. 
Janasz, T. (2017). Digital Technologies and Business Model Innovations for Urban Mobility. In Paradigm 
Shift in Urban Mobility (pp. 67-194). Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden. 
Kitching, J., & Rouse, J. (2017). Opportunity or dead end? Rethinking the study of entrepreneurial action 
without a concept of opportunity. International Small Business Journal: Researching 
Entrepreneurship, 35(5), pp. 558–577. 
Kochan, A. (1996). Lotus: aluminium extrusions and adhesives. Assembly Automation, 16(4), pp. 19–21. 
Koganti, R., & Weishaar, J. (2008). Aluminum vehicle body construction and enabling manufacturing 
technologies. SAE International journal of materials and manufacturing, 1(1), pp. 491-502. 
Koglin, T., & Rye, T. (2014). The marginalisation of bicycling in Modernist urban transport planning. 
Journal of Transport & Health, pp. 214-222. 
Krogh, F. (2020, January 26). Cykler fra Swapfiets indtager byen. Retrieved from 
https://stiften.dk/artikel/cykler-fra-swapfiets-indtager-byen 
Laker, L. (2020, March 25). Retrieved from https://www.citylab.com/perspective/2020/03/coronavirus-bike-
lane-emergency-transportation-covid-19/608725/ 
Lambert, T. (2020, May 2). (translated) Accell introduces new Carqon transport bike brand. Retrieved from 
https://www.sazbike.de/hersteller/accell-stellt-neue-transportradmarke-carqon-2540555.html 
Lis, P. (2019). Lissy - a multi-seated tricycle. Retrieved from http://www.dielissy.de/start_d/start_d.html 
Mack, E. (2020, January 8). Electric Scooter Accidents Are Spiking Nationwide. Retrieved from 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/ericmack/2020/01/08/electric-scooter-injuries-are-spiking-nationwide/ 
Muelaner, J. (2020, March 16). Lean Manufacturing in Practice. Retrieved from 
https://www.engineering.com/AdvancedManufacturing/ArticleID/20000/Lean-Manufacturing-in-
Practice.aspx 
==PAGE:79==
72 
 
Mullins, J. (2010). The new business road map (3 ed.). Pearson education LTD. 
Mullins, J., & Sutherland, D. J. (1998). New Product Development in Rapidly Changing Markets: An 
Exploratory Study. Journal of product innovation mangement(15), pp. 224–236. 
Nickelsburg, M. (2018, October 25). UPS launches cargo e-bike delivery in Seattle, returning to bicycle 
courier origins a century later. Retrieved from https://www.geekwire.com/2018/ups-launches-cargo-
e-bike-delivery-seattle-returning-bicycle-courier-origins-century-later/ 
OECD. (2008). Privatisation and regulation of urban transport systems. OECD/ ITF. 
Omnium Cargo. (2020). Official Shop. Retrieved from https://omniumcargo.dk/ 
Pasaoglu, G., Fiorello, D., Martino, A., Scarcella, G., Alemanno, A., Zubaryeva, A., & Thiel., C. (2012). 
Driving and parking patterns of European car drivers- a mobility survey. Joint Research Centre of 
the European Commission. 
Petzer, J. M., Wieczorek, A., & Verbong, G. (2019, September 2). Cycling as a service assessed from a 
combined business-model and transitions perspective. Environmental Innovation and Societal 
Transitions. 
Porter, M. E. (2008, Jan). The five competitive forces that shape strategy. Harvard Business Review, pp. 78-
93. 
Pressman, D. (2012). Patent It Yourself. NOLO. 
Rantorp, C. G. (2018, 10 29). Kommuner vil have medarbejdere ud af bilen og op på elcyklen. Retrieved 
from https://pro.ing.dk/mobilitytech/artikel/kommuner-vil-have-medarbejdere-ud-af-bilen-og-op-pa-
elcyklen-1134 
Rudolpha, C., & Grubera, J. (2017, July 14). Cargo cycles in commercial transport: Potentials, constraints, 
and recommendations. Research in Transportation Business & Management(24), pp. 26-36. 
Sarasvathy, S. D. (2008). Effectuation - Elements of Entrepreneurial Expertise. Edward Elgar Publishing. 
Schaeffler GmbH. (2016, March). Fact sheet XXL. Retrieved from 
https://www.schaeffler.com/remotemedien/media/_shared_media/08_media_library/01_publications/
schaeffler_2/brochure/downloads_1/micromobility_bio_hybrid_fact_sheet_xxl_de_en.pdf 
Sylvestersen, S. (2017, November 6). Bycykelkrig i København: Private bycykler skal ud. Retrieved from 
https://www.tv2lorry.dk/kobenhavn/bycykelkrig-i-kobenhavn-private-bycykler-skal-ud 
Szankowski, Y. (. (2015). Leitra velomobile analysis and redesign. Copenhagen: DTU. 
Taga USA Inc. (n.d.). Taga 2.0 - The Ultimate, Most Affordable Family Bike. Retrieved 2020, from 
https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/taga2/taga-20-the-ultimate-most-affordable-family-
bike/comments 
Toll, M. (2018, July 20). EU joins the e-bike trade war with new tariffs to prevent Chinese electric bicycle 
dumping. Retrieved from https://electrek.co/2018/07/20/europe-e-bike-china-dumping-tariffs/ 
Utriainen, R., & Pöllänen, M. (2018, 12 15). Review on mobility as a service in scientifc publications. 
Research in Transportation Business & Management, pp. 15-23. 
Viskinde, M. (2014, April 15). Opgraderet bycykel: Slut med småfejl ... men den er dæleme tung. Retrieved 
from https://ing.dk/artikel/opgraderet-bycykel-slut-med-smaafejl-men-den-er-daeleme-tung-167761 
Waes, A. v., Farla, J., Frenken, K., Jong, J. P., & Raven, R. (2018, May 28). Business model innovation and 
socio-technical transitions. A new prospective framework with an application to bike sharing. 
Journal of Cleaner Production(195), pp. 1300-1312. 
==PAGE:80==
73 
 
Zacho, O. (2018). Cykelfirma bløder millioner i jagten på vækst. Retrieved from 
https://finans.dk/erhverv/ECE10382537/cykelfirma-bloeder-millioner-i-jagten-paa-
vaekst/?ctxref=ext 
Zijlstra, T., Durand, A., Hoogendoorn-Lanser, S., & Harms, L. (2019). Promising Groups for Mobility-as-a-
Service in the Netherlands. The Hague: Netherlands Ministry of Infrastructure and Water 
Management. 
Zott, C., & Amit, R. (2013). The business model: A theoretically anchored robust construct for strategic 
analysis. Strategic Organization, 11(4), pp. 403–411. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
74 
 
 Appendix 
9.1 Revenue models and prototype financial requirements 
9.2 Chassis assembly manual 
9.3 Test piece technical drawings (resized) 
9.4 Feedback gathered from practitioners in the field 
9.5 Project Gantt chart 
 
==PAGE:82==
Private sales model 
 
 
 
Years 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Revenues: 
Unit price 
45000 
45000 
45000 
45000 
45000 
45000 
45000 
45000 
45000 
45000 
Units sold 
1 
2 
5 
5 
5 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Sales revenue 
45000 
90000 225000 225000 225000 675000 900000 1125000 1350000 1575000 
Expenses: 
Unit variable costs 
52035 
39026 
39026 
39026 
39026 
39026 
39026 
39026 
39026 
39026 
COGS 
52035 
78052 195129 195129 195129 585388 780518 
975647 1170776 1365906 
Direct material (unit) 
26835 
20126 
20126 
20126 
20126 
20126 
20126 
20126 
20126 
20126 
Direct labor (unit) 
25200 
18900 
18900 
18900 
18900 
18900 
18900 
18900 
18900 
18900 
Fixed costs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rental of manufacturing facility 
48000 
48000 
48000 
48000 
48000 
48000 
48000 
48000 
48000 
48000 
Net income 
-55035 -36052 
-18129 
-18129 
-18129 
41612 
71483 
101353 
131224 
161094 
==PAGE:83==
Leasing model 
Years 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
# of new units 
leased 
1 
4 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
# unit  
currently leased 
1 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
70 
75 
80 
85 
90 
95 
100 
# of New  
Units built 
3 
6 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
Total fixed  
costs 
72000 
72000 
72000 
72000 
72000 
72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 72000 
rent of 
manufacturing 
space 
48000 
48000 
48000 
48000 
48000 
48000 48000 48000 48000 48000 48000 48000 48000 48000 48000 48000 48000 48000 48000 48000 48000 
Rent of  
storage facility 
24000 
24000 
24000 
24000 
24000 
24000 24000 24000 24000 24000 24000 24000 24000 24000 24000 24000 24000 24000 24000 24000 24000 
Unit variable 
cost 
39026 
39026 
39026 
39026 
39026 
39026 39026 39026 39026 39026 39026 39026 39026 39026 39026 39026 39026 39026 39026 39026 39026 
Manufacturing 
costs of new 
vehicles  
117078 234155 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 273181 
Fixed+ variable 
costs 
189078 306155 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 345181 
Service costs 
(including 
refurbishments) 
390 
2151 
4503 
7054 
9205 
11156 13108 15059 17010 18962 20913 22864 24816 26767 28718 30669 32621 34572 36523 38475 40426 
Subscription 
price per year 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
4800 
Subscription 
revenue 
4800 
24000 
48000 
72000 
96000 120000 144000 168000 192000 216000 240000 264000 288000 312000 336000 360000 384000 408000 432000 456000 480000 
Refurbished 
vehicle revenue 
0 
20000 
60000 
120000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 140000 
Net income 
-184668 -264307 -241684 -160235 -118386 -96338 -74289 -52240 -30191 -8143 
13906 35955 58003 80052 102101 124149 146198 168247 190296 212344 234393 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
Material costs- in DKK, excludes VAT and import taxes. All prices acquired between Feb- June 2020. 
 
 
Sale price 
Amount 
Sum 
% of materials 
% of unit variable cost 
Chassis 
Profiles, plates and billets 
75 
25 
1875 
7,0 
3,6 
Rivets 
520 
0,2 
104,0 
0,4 
0,2 
epoxy 
511 
0,5 
255,5 
1,0 
0,5 
Seats 
Dies 
1000 
1 
1000 
3,7 
1,9 
Tubes and plates 
75 
5 
375 
1,4 
0,7 
Fabric webbing etc. 
150 
1 
150 
0,6 
0,3 
Steering 
Rods and plates 
75 
2 
150 
0,6 
0,3 
Ball joints 
200 
4 
800 
3,0 
1,5 
Universal linkage 
100 
1 
100 
0,4 
0,2 
headset bearings 
60 
2 
120 
0,4 
0,2 
Suspension 
Billets 
75 
4 
300 
1,1 
0,6 
Shock absorbers 
700 
2 
1400 
5,2 
2,7 
Electrical 
Battery cells (type 21700) 
32 
180 
5760 
21,5 
11,1 
Motor and charge controllers, assorted electrical components 
2545 
1 
2545 
9,5 
4,9 
Brushless out runner motor 
1900 
1 
1900 
7,1 
3,7 
Transmission 
Internally geared bottom bracket 
3000 
2 
6000 
22,4 
11,5 
Wheels 
300 
4 
1200 
4,5 
2,3 
Belt drive 
400 
3 
1200 
4,5 
2,3 
Cranks 
500 
1 
500 
1,9 
1,0 
Differential 
500 
1 
500 
1,9 
1,0 
Tyres 
150 
4 
600 
2,2 
1,2 
Labor costs- assumes 8-hour workday, at 150 DKK/hr wage. 
 
Process 
# of workdays 
sum 
% of unit variable cost 
Chassis 
Cutting and bending of plates and profiles 
5 
6000 
12 
Bonding and riveting 
2 
2400 
5 
CNC milling of lugs etc. 
5 
6000 
12 
Seats 
Cutting and bending of plates and profiles 
2 
2400 
5 
Machining and heat treatment of dies 
2 
2400 
5 
assembly of seats 
2 
2400 
5 
Steering 
Machining of linkages 
1 
1200 
2 
machining of king pins 
2 
2400 
5 
 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
 
 
1x Backbone U profile 80x20x2mm 
1 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
 
1x U profile 
front 
upright 
75x25x2mm 
 
2x L profile 
30x30x1.5mm 
front 
bulkhead 
(fore, L+R) 
 
2x L profile 
30x30x1.5
mm rear 
bulkhead 
(fore, L+R) 
 
1x T  
Front 
upright 
profile 
50x4x2mm 
2x L profile 
30x30x1.5mm 
front 
bulkhead 
(aft, L+R) 
 
2x L profile 
30x30x1.5
mm rear 
bulkhead 
(aft, L+R) 
 
1x 32mm 
hex stock 
forward 
junction 
upper 
support 
 
1x 32mm hex 
stock forward 
junction 
lower support 
 
4x outer 
arm 
wedge 
 
2x 1.5mm 
plate 
Bulkhead/ 
seat mount 
wall 
 
1x 1.5mm 
plate rear 
flange 
2 
==PAGE:87==
 
1x 4kt 
profile 
60x60
x2mm 
main 
head 
tube 
 
2x 4kt profile 
30x30x1.5m
m arm 
upright 
2x U profile 55x55x2mm bottom arm (L+R) 
2x U profile 55x55x2mm top arm (L+R) 
 
2x arm 
lug (right 
top, left 
bottom) 
 
2x arm 
lug (left 
top, right 
bottom) 
 
4x arm 
upright 
lug 
3 
==PAGE:88==
 
 
 
 
 
2x 4kt profile 18x100x2mm wheel member 
4x 1.5mm plate shock tower upright profile 
4x 
1.5mm 
plate 
shock 
tower 
side 
profile 
 
4x 1.5mm 
plate shock 
tower 
hanger 
4 
==PAGE:89==
 
1x 1.5mm plate top flange 
1x 1.5mm plate left panel 
1x 1.5mm plate right panel 
1x 1.5mm plate rear carrier 
5 
==PAGE:90==
 
 
1x 1.5mm plate left 
back arch profile 
1x 1.5mm plate right 
back arch profile 
 
 
1x 1.5mm plate left 
back arch side panel 
1x 1.5mm plate right 
back arch side panel 
 
1x25Øx1.5mm tube back arch 
 
6 
==PAGE:91==
 
1x 1.5mm plate left driver panel 
1x 1.5mm plate right driver panel 
1x 4kt profile 
60x60x2mm driver 
head tube 
1x 1.5mm plate left passenger panel 
1x 1.5mm plate right passenger panel 
 
7 
==PAGE:92==
 1000,00 
 501,50 
 79,00 
ITEM NO.
PART NUMBER
QTY.
1
Back bone
1
2
Side panel
2
3
Bulkhead
2
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:10
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
Aluminum
WEIGHT: 
Yaacob Szankowski
10.3.20
Assembly for 
refrencing
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:93==
 1,50 
 498,00 
 31,50 
 46,50 
 48,00 
 53,08 
 35,16 
 60,57 
 62,01 
 19,82 
 462,00 
1
17
18
2
3
4
19
20
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
21
22
13
14
15
23
24
16
Fixed Face
A
B
C
G
H
L
M
K
J
F
E
D
N
CL
O
X
Y
0
0
Tag
Direction
Angle
Inner Radius
A
UP
90°
2
B
UP
90°
2
C
UP
90°
2
D
UP
90°
2
E
UP
90°
2
F
UP
90°
2
G
DOWN
30°
2
H
UP
30°
2
J
DOWN
30°
2
K
UP
30°
2
L
UP
90°
2
M
UP
90°
2
TAG
X LOC
Y LOC
SIZE
1
10,50
61
 4,90 
 THRU ALL
2
10,50
141,16
3
32,50
11
4
32,50
61
5
32,50
141,16
6
32,50
191,16
7
105,82
49,76
8
105,82
152,40
9
488,82
49,76
10
488,82
152,40
11
562,14
11
12
562,14
61
13
562,14
141,16
14
562,14
191,16
15
584,14
61
16
584,14
141,16
17
10,50
78,58
 4,90 THRU ALL
18
10,50
123,58
19
32,50
78,58
20
32,50
123,58
21
562,14
78,58
22
562,14
123,58
23
584,14
78,58
24
584,14
123,58
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
Aluminium
WEIGHT: 
Yaacob Szankowski
10.3.20
Bulk head
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:94==
 1,50 
 1000,00 
 70,00 
 35,00 
 70,00 
 47,00 
 23,00 
-1
15
2
3
8
9
12
13
14
19
20
26
25
22
21
23
24
5
4
7
10
11
17
16
6
18
Fixed Face
A
B
D
C
CL
X
Y
0
0
TAG X LOC Y LOC
SIZE
-1
11,50
17,50
 4,90 THRU ALL
2
61,50
17,50
3
61,50
39,50
4
155,14
39,50
5
155,14
17,50
6
205,14
17,50
7
155,14 258,75
8
61,50
258,75
9
61,50
500
10
155,14
500
11
155,14 741,25
12
61,50
741,25
13
61,50
960,50
14
61,50
982,50
15
11,50
982,50
16
155,14 982,50
17
155,14 960,50
18
205,14 982,50
19
85,82
17,50
 4,90 THRU ALL
20
85,82
39,50
21
130,82
39,50
22
130,82
17,50
23
130,82 960,50
24
130,82 982,50
25
85,82
982,50
26
85,82
960,50
Tag Direction Angle  Inner Radius
A
UP
90°
2
B
UP
90°
2
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:10
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
Aluminum
WEIGHT: 
Yaacob Szankowski
10.3.20
Back bone
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:95==
 1000,00 
 500,00 
 A 12 
 B 14,5 
 C 12 
 D 14,5 
E
1
15
16
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
17
18
14
F
X
Y
0
0
E
 0,80 
 0,80 
 1,50 
DETAIL E
SCALE 1 : 1
DETAIL E
SCALE 1 : 1
TAG
X LOC Y LOC
SIZE
1
17,50
8,50
4,90 THRU ALL
2
17,50 491,50
3
39,50
8,50
4
39,50 491,50
5
258,75
8,50
6
258,75 491,50
7
500
8,50
8
500
491,50
9
741,25
8,50
10
741,25 491,50
11
960,50
8,50
12
960,50 491,50
13
982,50
8,50
14
982,50 491,50
15
17,50
58,50
 4,90 THRU ALL
16
17,50 441,50
17
982,50 58,50
18
982,50 441,50
Tag 
Direction
Angle
Inner Radius
A
DOWN
30°
1
B
UP
C
DOWN
D
UP
A
A
B
B
C
C
D
D
E
E
F
F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:10
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
Aluminium
WEIGHT: 
Yaacob Szankowski
7.4.20
Side panel_V3
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
==PAGE:96==
 
James Thomas, industrial designer, previously curated the 
bicycledesign.net blog: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jimm Pratt, 
Recumbent and 
velomobile 
enthusiast: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“I really like the way that this one can accommodate a single 
rider in the center as well as two riders side by side. I have 
never ridden a side by side tandem, but I would imagine that 
is not ideal to ride alone if the weight is on one side. I know 
this is just the frame concept, but do you have plans to add 
compartments for storage? Maybe modular solutions for 
different types of needs (cargo, family, etc).” 
“I like it! My immediate thought:  is it wide enough?  With the frame 
75cm across, wheels will be in the 80-85cm width, so my question is 
that will it be stable in tight turns at speed?  And although C.G. has 
gotten away with having 92-96cm width for the Leitra, I think the law 
says something about 76cm for max width for cycles?  Ah, I just 
checked.  Looks like you can go up to 1 meter in width if necessary- so 
no problems there.    
The other possible problem that comes to mind (so far) is the steering 
position for the center 'pilot'.  As you have it designed now, the steering 
column looks like it is going to annoy one or both of the 'engine' 
riders.  I can envision one or both getting banged up with the steering 
column if it passes near the legs or arms when going over rough 
roads.   One solution might be to give the pilot a more recumbent-
styled steering option, like what you see on a Velocino (see attached 
photos of mine below, being ridden by a colleague).  This keeps the 
steering out of the way, and might permit the pilot to lean back, 
lowering the overall height and therefore center of gravity.” 
==PAGE:97==
Daniel Meyerowitz, hand bike enthusiast and copywriter for bicycle brands: 
 
 
 
 
 
Johan Erlandsson, Co-founder of 
“Velove”- a company producing a four 
wheeled cargo cycle used for urban 
freight 
 
 
 
 
“I think you may also want to help your 
audience make the mental leap to what 
advantages this invention could provide - social, 
environmental, health, cost. You want your 
audience to see how this fulfils your challenge 
from the opening: In what ways is this an 
evolutionary leap in the development of bikes 
and transport? Why have we been waiting for 
four wheels, after getting used to two or three? 
What does this make possible, which was not 
possible before?  
 
[]….I’m curious about two particular details: 
- How much luggage can the bike carry when it 
is a tandem? Could your family of three ride in 
it? 
 
- How easy is the switch from tandem to solo 
cargo configuration? Immediate and no tools, or 
only for the tech savvy or… 
 
One angle you might explore on the opportunity 
page: 
Bicycles and cars are seen as opposed to each 
other – both competing for loyalty, space on the 
road, parking and pocketbooks. They are 
portrayed as adversaries, one good for cities 
and one evil. But the stubborn endurance of 
these two forms of transport shows the obvious 
– there are unique advantages to each. 
 
For the first time, the Threesome (whatever, it 
needs a name) combines the best of both worlds 
for a solution that’s great for cities, families, and 
the planet. Here is a practical and pleasurable 
leap in the development of the automobile and 
the bicycle. Getting around cities for work and 
weekends has never been this fun, easy and 
affordable. No pollution? Naturally!” 
“I can give you one piece 
of feedback: don’t make 
it too wide so it will cause 
a problem on the bike 
path. Try to keep close to 
the width of a regular 
bike if you want to use 
the bikelane.”…. 
….”I would say that the 
limit where it still works 
fine on any bikelane is 90 
cm. If you can go 
narrower than that -all 
good. 1 meter wide bikes 
will only fit on high 
standard bike lanes or on 
h
i
==PAGE:98==
Hans Lak, Clean Energy and Clean Mobility Influencer Sustainable Development Accelerator 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Matt Pinder, M.Eng., Senior Designer & EIT at Alta Planning + Design 
“Your idea is like nothing else. It is like when Didi the 
Red Bull guy told banks about his Energy drink. 
I do ride a Nihola cargobike with my grandchildren 
problem cycle paths are too narrow in many countries... 
Denmark and Holland are exceptions!”…. 
….“Did you talk to people who offer #MaaS? I did the 
outdoorstepper the streetstepper and nobody did get 
it! Free the gym streetstepper.com i did a round of the 
Zurichsee 107 KM crazy exhausting normal bikeshops 
can only think bikes..nothing else.. How about campus 
grounds? Or large companies? Find partners” 
Wow very interesting! I agree with the 
pay as you go model because this is 
likely to be very expensive to buy. Who 
is your target customer? Urban 
households that don’t have vehicle 
access? Or is it more for tourists? Or the 
business market? When I think of side 
by side tandem I think of a “cute” bike 
that tourists would rent. Don’t be 
hindered by that, because your idea 
could be quite practical - you will just 
have the challenge of convincing people 
that it’s a practical device 
Another benefit to pay as you go is 
storage. Urban households wouldn’t 
have anywhere to keep this so you 
could keep these in shared car parking 
spaces just like car share works today 
 
If you’re looking for an interesting 
business model I would check out 
Swapfiets, a super successful Dutch pay 
as you go bike leasing company that’s 
now spreading across Europe. You could 
copy parts of their business model 
==PAGE:99==
 
  
Jan. 
Feb. 
Mar. 
Apr. 
Maj 
Jun. 
Jul. 
Week # 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
Entrepreneurial activities 
  
Market analysis 
Secondary research: current markets 
(Cargo bike segment, MaaS 
segment) analysis 
  
  
  
  
  
Primary research:  Correspondence 
with experts in the field 
  
  
  
  
  
Primary research:  Model 
showcasing to potential customers 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Industry analysis 
  
secondary research: current 
industries (bicycles and urban 
mobility) analysis 
  
  
  
  
  
Primary research: Cost breakdown as 
related to design and features of 
product 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Financial results/ projections 
  
Business modeling - Financial 
breakdown of enterprise 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Manufacturing activities 
  
Formulating design requirements/ 
limiting factors/ production methods 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Embodied design for primary market 
analysis 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Theoretical research 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
FEM of bonded sheet metal and 
profiles and construction of test 
piece 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Design of seat tooling and FEM 
modeling of seat- joining method 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
DFM guidelines formulating 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Development of steering system 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Write up of report 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
==PAGE:100==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Manufacturing Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet, Bld. 425
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4763
Fax +45 4525 1961
www.mek.dtu.dk
July 2020
