==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark & Aalto University
Department of Environmental Engineering
MSc Thesis
Informing A Stream Temperature Model
With Airborne Thermal Images –
The Usserød Case, Denmark
Author
Elena Merola
Supervisors
Peter Bauer-Gottwein
Filippo Bandini
Teemu Kokkonen
July 2020
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
River temperature is a key parameter for water quality. The monitoring of
thermal regimes in streams at diﬀerent scales is an increasingly researched topic
due to its ecological and economimic value. However, typical data collection
systems often present a resolution and continuity gap which does not allow a
comprehensive description of smaller streams. Unmanned Airborne Vehicles
(UAV) were observed to resolve the gap allowing for high spatial resolution
acquisitions, which allows them to provide meaningful information for stream
temperature models. This thesis evaluates the possibility of reﬁning a stream
temperature model with data collected from UAV ﬂights. Focus is also given
to target detection techniques, in order to address common georeferentiation
issues in the thermal imagery. Machine learning classiﬁcation based on tem-
perature only data is therefore explored as a target isolation method when no
precise referencing is available. Findings conﬁrm the informative value of UAV
for water temperature models, while pointing out some challenges in dealing
with areas sheltered by vegetation. UAV derived proﬁles are, in fact, aﬀected
by vegetation coverage. This aﬀects results in two ways: ﬁrst, water masking
results based on temperature only parameters are hindered by a lower con-
trast between water and land; second, obtained temperature values are mixed
with vegetation material, lowering the average temperature and resulting in
unexplained oscillations in the thermal regime. Moreover, it was observed that
UAV thermal acquisitions may suﬀer from underestimation biases.
Overall,
the technology provides informative value in itself for a qualitative understand-
ing of longitudinal temperature trends; in the modelling framework and with
due considerations, quantiﬁcation and critical analysis of these trends was also
possible.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Abstract
i
Table of Contents
iii
List of Tables
iv
List of Figures
vi
Nomenclature
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Materials and Methods
5
2.1
Study Area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Thermal Imagery Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
GIS Analysis and Data Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
Machine Learning methods for Data Processing . . . . .
15
2.3
Heat Balance Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3.2
Hydrodynamic model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.3.3
Advection-Dispersion Term
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.3.4
Heat Balance module . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3
Results and Discussion
35
3.1
Machine Learning results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.1.1
Parametrization and Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.1.2
Water masking results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
ii
==PAGE:4==
3.2
Longitudinal Temperature Proﬁles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2.1
UAV Accuracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2.2
Water temperature modelling Accuracy
. . . . . . . . .
47
3.2.3
Longitudinal proﬁles comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4
Conclusions
55
Bibliography
57
Appendix A: Python Program
63
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of Tables
2.1
Extracted cross proﬁles from thermal imagery pre-processing. .
14
2.2
Generalized classiﬁer input and output . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Object features for the classiﬁcation problem
. . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Measured boundary conditions for the hydrodynamic model. *a:
(Rudersdal, Hørsholm og Fredensborg Kommuner, 2018), *b:
(Hydroinform, 2019). Note: Qx indicates the discharge at sta-
tion x. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.5
Advection-dispersion boundary conditions related to measured
discharges. *c: (Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet, n.d.) . . . . . . .
32
2.6
UAV-inferred boundaries.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.7
Boundaries of the integrated model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.8
Main heat balance module forcings. Source: (Danmarks Meteo-
rologiske Institut, n.d.) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.1
Confusion matrices outcomes for regularizations of the logistic
regression classiﬁer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.2
Optimal test error [%] for the three models over 5 tuning iterations. 38
3.3
Confusion matrices for the three optimized models. . . . . . . .
38
3.4
Classiﬁcation results of the KNN classiﬁer with and without the
inclusion of RGB features. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.5
Sensitivity Analysis of the mixing discharge calculation, calcu-
lated with diﬀerent stream discharges, Q1, and diﬀerent changes
in temperature after mixing, T3 - T1. Based on equation (2.4).
47
iv
==PAGE:6==
List of Figures
2.1
Flow chart of the methodology. The workﬂow is shown divided
based on the working environment, therefore showing a distinct
data extraction and data processing phases. . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Overview of Usserød Å.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Overview of the catchment and the surveyed areas
. . . . . . .
9
2.4
Raw thermal and RGB data, overview over surveyed stretch 3.
A: Usserød Wastewater Treatment Plant. B: Donse å tributary.
C: Vegetated area.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Raw thermal and RGB data, overview of stretches 1 and 2.
. .
11
2.6
Flow chart for data processing. Pink ﬁelds: Input and Output
of program. Light green ﬁelds: Intermediary data input/output.
Dark green ﬁelds: Processes. Yellow ﬁeld: Manual processes.
Blue ﬁelds: Parametrization process. Dotted ﬁelds: Parallel im-
plementations.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.7
Hyperplane in SVM. Figure adapted from Farrar and Worden
(2012), pp. 377. To the left: possible hyperplanes for the linear
split. To the right: optimal hyperplane.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.8
Example of classiﬁed cross-sections showing opposite tempera-
ture trends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.9
Display of the measurements stations along the Usserød å. Un-
published ﬁgure by Grégory Lemaire. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.10 Time series of Air temperature and Relative humidity for the
period 1st of February 2019 – 1010 of February 2019 (Danmarks
Meteorologiske Institut, n.d.). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
v
==PAGE:7==
3.1
Train and test error results over ranges of parametrization values
for the three models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.2
Percentages of True Positive, True Negative, False Positives and
False negatives for diﬀerent regularizations of the logistic regres-
sion classiﬁer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3
Classiﬁcation results of Stretch 3 as a function of the three in-
put features: temperature, moving variance of temperature, and
cross-sectional distance. In grey: points classiﬁed as non-water;
in cyan: points classiﬁed as water.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4
Classiﬁcation results of Stretches 1 and 2, as a function of the
three input features: temperature, moving variance of tempera-
ture, and cross-sectional distance. In grey: points classiﬁed as
non-water; in cyan: points classiﬁed as water. . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.5
Accuracy of the UAV-extrapolated longitudinal temperature pro-
ﬁle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.6
Accuracy of the UAV-extrapolated longitudinal temperature pro-
ﬁle with the application of a linear correction factor. . . . . . .
45
3.7
GIS estimation of the location of measurement station 2, corre-
sponding to a local increase in water temperature.
. . . . . . .
46
3.8
Model sensitivity to diﬀerent input discharges at 4 ◦C
. . . . .
48
3.9
Accuracy of the modelled longitudinal temperature proﬁle. . . .
49
3.10 Modelled curve at diﬀerent times of the day on the 5th and 6th
of February 2019. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.11 Comparison of the longitudinal temperature proﬁles obtained
with UAV surveying only, and with heat balance modelling inte-
grated with UAV inputs. The modelled curve represents water
temperature on the 6th of February 2019, at 03.00 h. The UAV
proﬁle is shown with and without the application of a linear cor-
rection factor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.12 Instance of camera instability eﬀects at chainage: 6,262 km to
6,287 km. The error is observed to produce a higher temperature
in the overlapping pixels. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
3.13 Modelled temperature in diﬀerent days with and without the
input of UAV-inferred boundaries.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
vi
==PAGE:8==
Nomenclature
Notations
(a, b)
Open interval.
[a, b]
Closed interval.
{a, b}
Discrete set.
σ(x)
Sigmoid function
1
1+e−x .
w
Weight coeﬃcient.
∥w∥2
Euclidean norm
p
w2
1 + ... + w2n.
λ
Regularization rate.
M
Manning coeﬃcient.
Q
Discharge.
D
Dispersion factor.
u(z)
Vertical streamwise ﬂow velocity.
u∗
Shear bed velocity.
ρ
Density of water 997 kg m−3.
cp
Speciﬁc heat capacity of water 4186 J kg−1 ◦C−1.
vii
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms and Abbreviations
CRS
=
Coordinate Reference Systems
DEM
=
Digital Elevation Model
FN
=
False Negative
FP
=
False Positive
GCP
=
Ground Control Points
GCS
=
Geographic Coordinate Systems
GIS
=
Geographic Information Systems
ML
=
Machine Learning
KNN
=
K-Nearest Neighbors
PCS
=
Projected Coordinate Systems
RGB
=
Red-Green-Blue
SVC
=
Support Vector Classiﬁcation
SVM
=
Support Vector Machines
TN
=
True Negative
TP
=
True Positive
TPS
=
Thin Plate Spline
UAV
=
Unmanned Airborne Vehicle
WWTP
=
Wastewater Treatment Plant
viii
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Thermal understanding of water bodies can aid towards improved manage-
ment of streams in order to prevent detriments to the ecology of the system.
Water temperature is a direct measurement of water quality, inﬂuencing param-
eters such as dissolved oxygen and suspended solids concentrations, and hence
playing a signiﬁcant role on the biophysical and biochemical processes of the
river (Caissie, 2006; Dugdale et al., 2017; Loinaz et al., 2013; Fullerton et al.,
2017). Water temperature within a watercourse is naturally subject to varia-
tions resulting from hydrological processes, topographic conditions, seasonality
of riparian and aquatic vegetation, climatic conditions and groundwater inputs
- to cite some (Dugdale et al., 2017). In this context, artiﬁcial discharge inputs
may cause alterations to natural thermal variations, which could in turn lead
to harmful eﬀects on the ecological status of the system. Hence, monitoring
of the temporal and spatial variations along a water body may provide great
informative value to management practices.
The interest for stream water temperature has been on the rise over the past
decades (Webb et al., 2008). Despite this, to date the understanding of spatial
ﬂuvial temperature dynamics is often restricted by availability of data (Dugdale
et al., 2017; Handcock et al., 2012). River thermal regimes have therefore re-
mained poorly explored, many times relying on point measurement techniques
1
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1. Introduction
at low spatial resolution.
Nevertheless, the correct quantiﬁcation of stream
temperature heterogeneity is key to assessing its ecological impact (Fullerton
et al., 2017). Stream networks are aﬀected by numerous drivers, often interact-
ing and resulting in complex regimes (Wawrzyniak et al., 2013). To describe
such complexity, in situ measurements are not suﬃcient; limitations come from
site accessibility and failure in representing the system in an extensive and com-
prehensive manner. Other techniques such as satellite remote sensing generally
suﬀer from either high costs or poor resolutions, hindering the application to
smaller streams (Beaufort et al., 2016).
To solve the temporal continuity gap, several modelling approaches have been
investigated. These are typically divided into statistical and process-based ap-
proaches (Dugdale et al., 2017; Beaufort et al., 2016; Vatland et al., 2015), with
the latter relying on physical understanding of the modelled system. However,
ﬂuvial thermal heterogeneity is hardly replicated at process-level, and high
spatial resolution remains an issue. Diﬀerent integrated modelling approaches
relying on several data collection methods are thus being investigated (e.g.
Vatland et al. (2015)). Among these, the use of Unmanned Airborne Vehi-
cles (UAV) for integrated temperature modelling sparks interest following the
recent technological advances (Caldwell et al., 2019; Vatland et al., 2015). De-
spite UAVs being on the spotlight of environmental research, such approach has
been less extensively explored with respect to other environmental monitoring
applications (Manfreda et al., 2018).
Interest in UAVs sparks from their potential in being employed as valid al-
ternatives to more traditional monitoring operations such as remote sensing
observations, manned airborne surveying and in situ point measurements. The
advantage of UAV surveying is the possibility of acquiring data over a relatively
extended area with a ﬁne spatial resolution. In addition, this new monitoring
platform provides ﬂexibility of temporal resolution and the possibility for a
wide range of applications, while allowing for repeated deployment in a more
cost-eﬀective as well as timely manner (Manfreda et al., 2018; Dugdale et al.,
2019; Köppl, 2016). UAVs therefore represent a promising research area, espe-
cially in the monitoring and management of smaller water bodies which may
require more accuracy in order to be comprehensively described. Typical ap-
plications in the ﬁeld of water management are represented by ﬂow monitoring,
ﬂood observation, and groundwater exchanges identiﬁcation (Manfreda et al.,
2018). Fewer investigations have addressed the use of high resolution thermal
2
==PAGE:12==
1.1 Background
imagery for stream temperature assessment (Wawrzyniak et al., 2013).
Some of the main challenges in the use of UAVs for stream thermal mapping are
related to biases and data processing methods (Dugdale et al., 2019; Caldwell
et al., 2019; Handcock et al., 2012). During ﬂight acquisition, errors could arise
due to external radiation absorption as well as internal heating of the payload
(Dugdale et al., 2019). These errors may be automatically compensated by
algorithms accounting for the sensor’s temperature variations. Furthermore,
while one of the advantages of UAVs is to allow data collection even in un-
favourable cloud-shade conditions (as opposed to satellite imagery acquisition),
captured thermal data is aﬀected by atmospheric factors including cloud cov-
erage (Handcock et al., 2006; Kay et al., 2005).
As clouds conditions may
change even within a single acquisition, this poses pre-processing challenges
in the retrieval of representative in-stream temperature values. Nevertheless,
in their review of the use of UAVs for environmental monitoring, (Manfreda
et al., 2018) report a probability of obtaining functional data between 45%
and 70% under unfavourable climatic conditions. Some countermeasures may
be taken so as to minimize drifts. For instance, acquisition of data at night-
time may provide an aid in order to reduce radiative warming and reﬂection
(Dugdale, 2016). In terms of data processing for target identiﬁcation, complex
techniques may be required (Handcock et al., 2012). For the retrieval of pure
water pixels, common approaches are based on spatial masking relying on Red-
Green-Blue (RGB) imagery acquired at the same time of thermal acquisition,
or on other available datasets which can be spatially overlapped to thermal
imagery. Nonetheless, georeferencing of thermal images may at times prove
problematic. Several studies address georeferencing techniques for thermal im-
ages (Habib et al., 2017; Aicardi et al., 2017) suggesting ongoing research on
the topic. For wide enough rivers, a buﬀer from the river centerline may be
applied to exclude bank material, such as applied by Dugdale et al. (2019) and
Cristea and Burges (2009). In other application ﬁelds, such as when dealing
with hyperspectral images, target detection may performed based on classiﬁ-
cation algorithms (Adão et al., 2017). In general, no standardized approach is
observed in this regard (Manfreda et al., 2018).
One of the main objectives of this thesis is therefore the exploration of new tar-
get detection methods for poorly georeferenced UAV-acquired thermal images
using classiﬁcation algorithms – in order to extract pure water information
acquired over a small stream in Denmark. More vastly, the primary aim of
3
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1. Introduction
the project is to investigate the drone technology for the monitoring of spatial
thermal variations within rivers, and its informative value in order to produce
data inputs and calibration for integrated ﬂow and water quality models. The
focus is on smaller streams, which are thought to be the most cost-eﬀective
application of the UAV technology with respect to remote sensing observations
(Manfreda et al., 2018).
4
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Materials and Methods
The methodology used to conduct the research relied on a combination of data
analysis and manipulation, and water quality modelling. Therefore, the work
was divided into two main phases:
1. Thermal imagery extraction and processing: Geographic Information Sys-
tems (GIS) manipulation of third-party acquired thermal imagery; data
extraction and manipulation in a coding environment; application of Ma-
chine Learning methods for water masking.
2. Heat balance modelling: Hydrodynamic and heat exchange modelling of
the river through the use of the DHI Mike Software (DHI Group, n.d.);
use of thermal imagery inputs in an integrated modelling framework of
stream water temperature.
Both phases aimed at the creation of a longitudinal temperature proﬁle along
the stream in order to allow comparison and evaluation of methods. In addition,
the resulting outcomes from the two phases were used for cross validation and
ﬁne-tuning of methods. In particular, data acquired from the thermal imagery
was used as input information in the temperature exchange model, while simu-
lated conditions were used as validation and understanding of the UAV-based
temperature trend. The methodology ﬂow chart can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1.
5
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
Averaging
Removing 
outliers
equidistant 
cross 
sections
Digitization 
of river 
centerline
Static 
filtering
No
Machine 
learning
Correction
Model 
Data extraction
Data processing
Model building
Georeferencing 
of RGB 
Cross 
section 
export
Manual 
filtering
Correctly 
filtered
Training 
set
yes
Masked 
data
Longitudinal 
profile
Longitudinal 
profile
Measurements
Building:
Geomtery, 
Flow
Validation:
Temperature
Thermal Data
Validation
QGIS
Python
Mike 
Hydro 
river
Figure 2.1: Flow chart of the methodology. The workﬂow is shown divided
based on the working environment, therefore showing a distinct data extraction
and data processing phases.
2.1
Study Area
The Usserød Å is used as a case-study for this research project. The stream
is located ca. 30 km North of Copenhagen, Denmark (Figures 2.2 and 2.3). It
originates from the Sjaelsø lake and ﬂows as a tributary to the Niva Å ca. 9 km
downstream, passing through the danish municipalities of Rudersdal, Hørsholm
and Fredensborg.
The Usserød catchment comprises 126 km2 of peri-urban areas. Urban areas
account for 22% of the catchment extension, while 55% of the land is used for
6
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Thermal Imagery Analysis
DENMARK
Usserød å
Usserød å
Nivå å
Sjaelsø
Cathcment
Figure 2.2: Overview of Usserød Å.
agricultural purposes, and the remaining 17% is natural areas. Several forms
of pollution reach the stream through drainage of contaminated sites located
within the catchment (Riverscapes, 2020; Ribaucourt, 2019).
The study of
Usserød å’s water quality is therefore of interest for the need to improve its
ecological status. The major sources of thermal pollution along the stream are
represented by the three wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) of Usserød,
Sjælsmark and Sjælsø, as well as the three dams: Stampedam, Fabriksdam and
Mølledam. Moreover, several agricultural sites drain into the river at several
locations, contributing to the thermal load of the Usserød å.
Overall, the
Usserød å is a rather small stream, suggesting the need of high resolution data
in order to evaluate the site with the needed accuracy.
2.2
Thermal Imagery Analysis
As described, the primary goal of the thermal imagery analysis was to extract
reliable information related to the temperature trend along the stream.
To
7
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
do this, the main objective was to create an eﬀective water mask in order to
exclude the river surroundings and avoid biasing of the results. Two diﬀerent
possibilities were considered to achieve the water mask: 1. Spatial processing
in QGIS, and masking of data by RGB imagery cell classiﬁcation; 2. Extraction
of ﬁxed length cross-sectional temperature proﬁles at spaced intervals along the
river, with subsequent analytical diﬀerentiation of river banks and water data
through post-processing procedures, based on temperature diﬀerences between
the river and the surroundings.
After the isolation of pure water data, averaging and outlier removal processes
were carried out in order to obtain the longitudinal temperature proﬁle of the
stream, as described in detail in the following sections.
2.2.1
Data
The data was acquired by the Danish company Drone Systems (Drone Systems,
n.d.) through the use of a Flir Tau-2 thermal camera mounted on a hexacopter
frame. Thermal data was provided for three diﬀerent times of the year - namely
February, March and August - and at diﬀerent hours of the day. The data is
discontinuous along the watercourse: it covers three stretches of the Usserød
river, including its source at the Sjaelsø lake, its mouth at the Nivå åa Å,
and an intermediary stretch including the Usserød WWTP (Figure 2.3). The
spatial resolution of the data is of 0.09 m. In addition, Red-Green-Blue (RGB)
Imagery with a spatial resolution of 0.01 m was acquired and provided by the
company. RGB images were acquired during the August survey and they cover
approximately the same stretches described earlier. Both thermal and RGB
data was provided as georeferenced bitmap images.
Raw georeferenced data was visualized by means of the QGIS Software (QGIS
Development Team, 2009). The software allows the management and manip-
ulation of spatial data, primarily by enabling the visualization of layers of in-
formation into maps. Such layers can then be spatially analyzed and used to
extract relevant information stored as pixel values or vectorial geometries. An
initial inspection highlighted a faulty georeferentiation of the thermal imagery
with respect to the standard Coordinate Reference Systems (CRS), generating
a referencing mismatch between thermal data and other layers of information.
The error is most likely to be attributed to the lack of suﬃcient Ground Con-
8
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Thermal Imagery Analysis
Figure 2.3: Overview of the catchment and the surveyed areas
trol Points (GCP) due to the nature of the area. In fact, a better overlapping
of thermal images with layers in standard coordinates was seen around built
areas, while poorer precision was observed in more vegetated areas, where fewer
reference points are found.
Choice of data
Due to the inconsistency between thermal and RGB imagery referencing, the
latter was initially excluded from the analysis. In addition, the thermal dataset
corresponding to the campaign conducted in February was chosen. The deci-
sion was mainly dictated by the nighttime data acquisition of the February
9
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
(3)
A
B
A
B
C
C
Figure 2.4: Raw thermal and RGB data, overview over surveyed stretch 3. A:
Usserød Wastewater Treatment Plant.
B: Donse å tributary.
C: Vegetated
area.
campaign, as opposed to the other data provided, which were collected during
daytime. Nighttime drone ﬂights can be expected to decrease biases related
10
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Thermal Imagery Analysis
(2)
(a) Stretch 2
(1)
(b) Stretch 1
Figure 2.5: Raw thermal and RGB data, overview of stretches 1 and 2.
11
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
to radiative warming of sensors, as well as minimizing skin-layer evaporative
cooling eﬀects of the stream, reducing sources of uncertainty within the tem-
perature acquisition.
Moreover, solar radiation scarcity may aid decreasing
vertical stratiﬁcations within the stream (Handcock et al., 2006). Stratiﬁcation
eﬀects, resulting in higher surface temperature with respect to the bulk, may
be especially pronounced during summer time when solar radiation is more
frequent and intense (Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut, n.d.). Therefore, the
wintertime acquisition also played a role in the choice of dataset. In addition,
a mean stream temperature reduction is observed in winter, resulting in en-
hanced thermal diﬀerences with respect to warmer artiﬁcial input discharges
and better identiﬁcation of their eﬀect on the overall trend.
2.2.2
GIS Analysis and Data Extraction
The QGIS Software was used for the ﬁrst phase of information processing, so as
to carry out the extraction and export of data to a post-processing environment,
as shown in Figure 2.1. In order to do so, data was manipulated to address the
georeferencing issues.
The ﬁrst step consisted in the choice of a suitable Projected Coordinate Sys-
tem (PCS). As opposed to Geographic Coordinate Systems (GCS), which are
based on angular units of latitude and longitude, PCSs allow to visualize two-
dimensional map projections based on linear units (DTU Space, 2019). For
this project, the Cartesian coordinate system EPSG:25832: ETRS89/UTM
zone 32N (IOGP Geomatics Committee, n.d.) was used, as recommended for
the Denmark area (Klokan Technologies GmbH, n.d.). Consequently, all lay-
ers of information were converted to the chosen reference system, allowing the
analysis of data in metric units.
Thermal Data Extraction
An analytical approach to obtaining pure water data was chosen on account of
the unavailability of matching RGB data for the spatial masking of non-water
area. Therefore, the extraction of data from the thermal raster layer was aimed
at retrieving cross-sectional temperature proﬁles at equally spaced intervals
along the river centerline. To do this, the centerline along the Usserød å was
manually digitized in order to match the thermal dataset georeferentiation. A
12
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Thermal Imagery Analysis
total of 1254 cross sections was then generated, with spacing of 5 meters along
the stream length, covering the three stretches of thermal data. The cross-
sectional length was chosen to be 20 meters, so as to include the wider sections
of the stream. Each generated cross section is composed of a series of discrete
points at pixel size resolution; the associated temperature value was extracted
from the thermal raster for each of the discrete points along the sections. The
resulting temperature proﬁles were coupled with chainage information and ex-
ported to the post-processing environment in order to proceed with the masking
of non-water data.
Chainage calculation
The reference chainage 0 point of the watercourse was chosen at the mouth of
the Sjaelsø Lake (Figure 2.3), with the streamwise direction determining posi-
tive increase. For each of the three stretches, chainages of the starting location
of data acquisition were also identiﬁed. Distances along the manually digitized
centerline were estimated by perperdicular projection of the cross-sectional cen-
ter points onto the oﬃcial Usserød centerline (Styrelsen for Dataforsyning og
Eﬀektivisering, n.d.). The corresponding locations for each of the cross sections
were calculated based on the starting chainages of the three stretches and the
spacing between cross sections.
RGB Matrix Extraction
Despite its initial discard, RGB imagery was adopted at a later stage for the
purpose of improving post-processing algorithms accuracy.
The three RGB
layers were subjected to a Thin Plate Spline (TPS) transformation so as to
retrieve a feasible coordinate match. The TPS transformation induces a forcing
constraint through a chosen set of datapoints while yielding an interpolation
between them, allowing curvature and bending to the original layer (Mitas
and Mitasova, 1999). The aspect ratio of layers was therefore not maintained
in the process.
The curvature and bending of layers proved necessary with
respect to simple translation and rotation, due to distortions identiﬁed in the
images. These may be attributed to acquiring camera orientation, as well as
orthorectiﬁcation procedures of the data provided. Distortion eﬀects are most
likely experienced in both thermal and RGB imagery; nevertheless, thermal
imagery was chosen as a reference, while the RGB was adapted accordingly.
The datapoint set was chosen according to the identiﬁcation of matching Ground
13
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
Control Points within the RGB and the thermal imageries. Where this was not
possible, estimates were used based on river meandering and permanent vege-
tation elements. In total, 28, 143 and 66 GCP were identiﬁed in stretch 3, 2
and 1, respectively (as labelled in Figure 2.3). Despite stretch 1 being the most
extended (approximately 4 km reaching the merging with the Nivå å), sluggish
computational times imposed reduced accuracy on GCP identiﬁcation. Fewer
referencing points were picked in stretch 3 due to both its reduced extension
and the lack of visible permanent elements in the area.
Once a satisfactory coordinate ﬁt was achieved, values from the three RGB
bands were extracted at each discrete point location of the river cross sections.
Cross-sectional Proﬁles
The ﬁnal data extracted consists of 1254 cross sections. Every cross section
stores information of chainage, a temperature proﬁle and a Red-Green-Blue
matrix for each of the points deﬁning the section (Table 2.1). A manual ﬁl-
tration based on visual inspection of the layers was applied to the generated
proﬁles. Consequently, invalid pieces of information - such as cross sections
lying on bridges or deﬁned over densely vegetated areas - were disregarded.
Table 2.1: Extracted cross proﬁles from thermal imagery pre-processing.
Cross Proﬁles
Proﬁle
Point
Temperature
Chainage
Red
Green
Blue
1
1
T1
0
R1
G1
B1
1
2
T2
0
R2
G2
B2
1
3
T3
0
R3
G3
B3
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
1,254
165,826
T165826
8,342
R165826
G165826
B165826
14
==PAGE:24==
2.2 Thermal Imagery Analysis
2.2.3
Machine Learning methods for Data Processing
Extracted data was processed by means of a program written in Python1. The
program serves the main scopes of retrieving pure water data, averaging pure
water cross sectional values along the centerline, and delivering the tempera-
ture trend along the watercourse. To do this, three supervised machine learning
(ML) models were optimized, tested and evaluated for performance; the pro-
gram ﬂow chart can be seen in Figure 2.6.
Problem deﬁnition and model selection
In order to elect feasible models, a ﬁrst narrowing down of possibilities was made
according to the nature of the problem - i.e. a binary classiﬁcation of water
and non-water data - and available input features. Suitable algorithms were
therefore chosen within classifying ML techniques. Classiﬁers are examples of
supervised learning models that aim at the categorization of objects into classes
or labels on the basis of a set of object properties, or features (Lee, 2019, Ch.
1). They behave as mapping functions from a series of n-dimensional feature
vectors xi ∈Rn (where n is the number of features), to a class label, yi (Loog,
2018).
Table 2.2: Generalized classiﬁer input and output
Object
Features
Output
o1
x1
x2
.
.
xn
y1
o2
x1
x2
.
.
xn
y2
.
⇒
.
.
.
.
.
oN
x1
x2
.
.
xn
yN
Among classiﬁers, some of the most common are represented by the Support
Vector Machines (SVM), Logistic Regression and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN)
algorithms - as introduced, for instance, by Lee (2019). As opposed to other
classiﬁcation models such as decision trees, the aforementioned classiﬁers do
1https://www.python.org
15
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
Preprocessing 
of Data
Analysis of Data
Input Temperature 
Data
Temperature 
variance 
cross-profiles
Variance peak 
cut-off filter
Binary 
classification
Machine Learning 
Training Set
Identification of 
correctly classified 
cross sections
Linear 
regression
Model comparison 
and choice
Definitive Model
Longitudinal profile 
without RGB
Longitudinal profile 
with RGB
RGB 
Matrix
Outlier sections 
removal
Curve fit
Longitudinal 
temperature trend
Nearest 
neighbors
Support vector 
machine
Model 
Tuning 
Loop
Model tuning Loop
Initial 
training set
SVM
Logistic 
regression
KNN 
Testing set
training set
Optimal 
parameters
Correction function
Figure 2.6: Flow chart for data processing. Pink ﬁelds: Input and Output
of program. Light green ﬁelds: Intermediary data input/output. Dark green
ﬁelds: Processes. Yellow ﬁeld: Manual processes. Blue ﬁelds: Parametrization
process. Dotted ﬁelds: Parallel implementations.
not necessarily require a large number of independent features to function. Al-
though in some cases prediction accuracy may still beneﬁt from a higher amount
of features, such as for Support Vector Machines (Kotsiantis, 2007), this made
them suitable candidates for the deﬁned problem. Only temperature values
and related constructed subfeatures were, in fact, available as input variables.
Other useful input parameters could have been provided by the Digital Eleva-
tion Model (DEM) and the RGB or satellite imagery of the area. These could
16
==PAGE:26==
2.2 Thermal Imagery Analysis
oﬀer relavant information to the algorithm, related to the depression of the
river bed and the pixel color data, respectively. However, the inconsistency of
the thermal layer with standards CRSs determined the impossibility of further
feature addition. Table 2.3 shows the selected model inputs. The objects to be
classiﬁed, p1...N, correspond to each discrete point of the river cross-sections.
Their associated temperature value, together with a value of moving variance of
temperature, and the position of the point along the cross section were selected
as object features.
Table 2.3: Object features for the classiﬁcation problem
Object
Features
p1...N
T value
T moving variance
Distance along XS
The outcome of the algorithms is a discrete value indicating whether the point
falls within a water or a non-water area, such that: yi = {0, 1}.
Training Dataset
Supervised ML algorithms require a set of labeled instances for learning. This
means that every object represented in the training dataset needs to be coupled
with its correct class in the form of model output (Loog, 2018). In order to
obtain this, a simple ﬁltering based on cross-sectional temperature variance
proﬁles was used, as shown in Figure 2.6.
The variance proﬁles were calculated based on a moving window of tempera-
ture intervals taken along the cross-sectional distance. The window was oppor-
tunely tuned so as to represent the temperature trend as closely as possible,
highlighting diﬀerences between in-stream temperature values and water sur-
roundings. In most cases, this resulted in peaks of variance in correspondence
of the transition from water to river banks. In other cases, especially where
riparian vegetation is dense, or ﬂooded areas are present, a more gradual tem-
perature transition could be observed, resulting in diminished, or not present
at all, variance peaks.
The ﬁlter was designed as a static cutoﬀﬁlter based on a maximum variance
threshold. It was applied starting from the centerline of the watercourse, result-
17
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
ing in cuts to the left and to the right corresponding to temperature values that
showed a higher variance than the set threshold. The cutoﬀvalue was adjusted
for the three stretches of data based on the observed diﬀerences. In fact, the
areas of the stream towards its merging with the Nivå å are characterized by
sharper changes in temperature. On the other hand, areas in proximity of the
Sjaelsø Lake are less densely built and riparian vegetation is more dominant.
Therefore, lower cutoﬀvalues were set for this area, leading to greater ﬁltered
results uncertainty. Newly ﬁltered cross-sections were manually analyzed in
order to select correct instances for the training set.
It is noteworthy to mention that the described ﬁlter was originally designed as
a solution for the water masking problem. Yet, the aforementioned sources of
uncertainty lead the research towards the implementation of ML algorithms,
restraining the use of correct results for the automatized classiﬁcation of more
complex river cross sections.
First model: Logistic Regression
The Logistic Regression analysis is one of the most straightforward binary clas-
siﬁcations.
The model was chosen for its ease of understanding and widely
reported popularity (Dreiseitl and Ohno-Machado, 2002; Giancristofaro and
Salmaso, 2007).
The classiﬁcation with the Logistic Regression model is performed by sigmoid
activation of the input variables (Ayyadevara, 2018), (Lee, 2019, Ch 7): input
data in the interval (−∞, +∞) is mapped to the output interval [0, 1], repre-
senting the probability of the object of belonging to class 1. The output is
discretized into the single values 0 or 1 by rounding oﬀthe continuous interval
probabilities with a threshold of 0.5 (Eq. 2.2). The mapping function is called
sigmoid function, and for one feature is written as:
σ(x) =
1
1 + e−(w0+wx)
(2.1)
where x represents the input datum, and the two coeﬃcients w0 and w are
calculated during the training of the model. For n features, the exponent at
the denominator is written as: w0 + w1x1 + ... + wnxn. In this form, it can
easily be noted that the coeﬃcients w1...n act as weights for the features x1...n.
18
==PAGE:28==
2.2 Thermal Imagery Analysis
ydiscrete =
(
1,
if y > 0.5
0,
if y ⩽0.5
(2.2)
The Scikit-learn implementation of a logistic regression classiﬁer2 was used in
the thermal data analysis program. A liblinear solver was used to solve the
classiﬁcation problem based on empirical observations, while the regularization
parameter λ was tuned as explained in Section 2.2.3.
Second model: K-Nearest Neighbors
The principle of the KNN algorithm is based on probability estimation of an
object belonging to a certain class, based on the labels assigned to neighboring
objects. This type of learning is deﬁned as instance-based learning (Kotsiantis,
2007). Hence, no predictive model is built in this type of classiﬁcation (Dreiseitl
and Ohno-Machado, 2002).
The ﬁne resolution of the data at hand ensured the water region, the river banks,
and the aquatic vegetation patches being continuous areas – thus suggesting the
KNN classiﬁer as a suitable tool for the analysis. In addition, the tuning of the
algorithm relies solely on the selection of the number of neighboring objects to
analyze (k), decreasing sources of uncertainty in the parametrization process.
The algorithm was implemented with the Scikit-learn library3 and tuned with
a cross-validation process (Section 2.2.3).
Third model: Support Vector Machines
As opposed to the two earlier described classiﬁers, Support Vector Machines is
a dichotomous classiﬁer, predicting a discrete output rather than a probability
of class membership (Dreiseitl and Ohno-Machado, 2002). In a Support Vector
Classiﬁcation (SVC), point data is separated into two classes by the identiﬁ-
cation of a hyperplane (a line, in a bidimensional case) splitting the regions
of class membership (Lee, 2019, Ch. 9). In the case of a binary classiﬁcation
with linearly separable variables, the best split is represented by the line that
maximises the margin between the closest datapoints and the line itself (Figure
2https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.linear_model.LogisticRegression.html
3https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsClassiﬁer.html
19
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
2.7). When variables are not linearly separable, a kernel trick is performed:
this consists in adding a ﬁctitious dimension to the variables, in order to be
able to ﬁnd a separating plane in a higher dimensional space (Lee, 2019, Ch.
9).
Figure 2.7: Hyperplane in SVM. Figure adapted from Farrar and Worden
(2012), pp.
377.
To the left: possible hyperplanes for the linear split.
To
the right: optimal hyperplane.
Once more, the model was implemented by means of the scikit-learn SVM clas-
siﬁer4. More information about the SVM algorithm can be found in the library
documentation5. The SVM classiﬁer was chosen for its substantial diﬀerence
from the other two classiﬁers. While KNN is considered quite sensitive to noise,
SVMs are more adaptable to data variations (Kotsiantis, 2007). As mentioned
earlier (2.2.3), the three stretches of the Usserød å present diﬀerent character-
istics, resulting in quite variable data from one stretch to another. Therefore,
a ﬂexible model was considered suitable to adapt to the temperature proﬁles
variations observed. As for the Logistic Regression, the tuning of the model
concerned mainly the choice of the regularization rate. On the other hand, the
kernel parameter was chosen based on empirical observations due to the high
computational requirements of a looping parametrization.
Model tuning
The regularization rate, λ, determines the dampening of the model complexity.
It is applied as a multiplier to ∥w∥2, thus incrementing the inﬂuence of higher
4https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.svm.SVC.html
5https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/svm.html
20
==PAGE:30==
2.2 Thermal Imagery Analysis
weights, while reducing inﬂuence from close-to-zero-weighted features.
The
result is a simpliﬁcation of the model so as to avoid overﬁtting of training
data. This aids, for instance, in the recognition of noise as well as decreasing
the probability of modelling based on the training set peculiarities.
In the
scikit-learn implementation of the logistic regression and SVM, the adjusted
parameter, C, is the inverse of the regularization rate: C = 1
λ. For the KNN
the adjusted parameter for ﬁtting accuracy was the number of neighbors, k.
The same cross-validation parametrization was applied to the three machine
learning models, carried out as written below in pseudocode.
Algorithm 1 Determination of Optimal Parameter
Inputs: Training Set, Array of parameters to test
for j in range (Predeﬁned Number of Loops) do
Split data into Training (Xtrain, ytrain) and Testing (Xtest, ytest) Sub-Sets
for i in Model Parameters to test do
Train Model with ith parameter
Predict ˆy from Xtest
Compute error as P ˆy ̸= ytest
Compute error percentage
Store Parameter-Error couple
end
Pick Optimal Parameter from the i iterations
Store as Optimal Parameter of jth iteration
end
Pick most frequent parameter in the j iterations
Output: Most frequent Optimal Parameter
Model Evaluation
The three models were evaluated for performance and compared in order to
choose the most accurate one. This was done by the analysis of their overall
error rate and output Confusion Matrices.
As shown in Algorithm 1, the error rate is calculated as the ratio between
correct predictions and total predictions made. A more detailed view of where
the errors occur can be seen in the Confusion Matrix, deﬁned as shown below
for the classes Water (1) and non-water (0):
21
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
Predicted
0
1
0
TN
FP
True
1
FN
TP
• True Positives (TP): Water was predicted correctly
• False Positives (FP): Water was predicted incorrectly
• True Negative (TN): Non-Water was predicted correctly
• False Negative (FN): Non-Water was predicted incorrectly
Based on these methods, the model was chosen keeping in mind the charac-
teristics of the dataset. In fact, a single temperature proﬁle generally contains
two external areas which are non-water regions, and a central water region of
minor extent. This generates an imbalance in the overall dataset, which will
contain a far higher amount of points classiﬁed as non-water (0). Therefore, a
model predicting a 100% of cases belonging to class 0 will commit a lower error
with respect to a model predicting 100% of class 1 cases. Despite this, for the
scope of this application more importance was given to a better prediction of
the water areas, and a post-processing method was implemented to reduce the
amount of False Positives.
The ﬁnal model was chosen based on a thoughtful assessment of the overall
error and the Confusion Matrix outcomes for the tuned models.
Post-processing
Due to the training set characteristics, the model was mainly trained to identify
cross-sectional temperature proﬁles showing a higher in-stream temperature
with respect to the surroundings. Therefore, faulty predictions were made for
cross-sectional proﬁles that showed an opposite trend, as shown in the examples
in Figure 2.8. The expansion of the training set proved hard due to the lack
of correctly classiﬁed cross-sections that showed a u-shaped trend. However,
the precision of the classiﬁcation error on these proﬁles suggested the use of
reversed classes for the identiﬁcation of water and non-water areas. Each proﬁle
was therefore discerned based on its central temperature value with respect to
its extremes. U-shaped proﬁles were then ﬁltered according to the rule: 0 =
water, 1 = non-water, as opposed to the remaining majority.
22
==PAGE:32==
2.2 Thermal Imagery Analysis
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Cross-sectional distance
1
0
1
2
3
Temperature (°C)/ Class (-)
Classification of cross-section at chainage: 6.072 km
Temperature
Class prediction
(a) n-shaped proﬁle
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Cross-sectional distance
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Temperature (°C)/ Class (-)
Classification of cross-section at chainage: 0.39 km
Temperature
Class prediction
(b) u-shaped proﬁle
Figure 2.8: Example of classiﬁed cross-sections showing opposite temperature
trends.
Each masked cross-section was then averaged in order to retrieve the repre-
sentative temperature value at the respective chainage. The obtained scatter
points were processed to remove outliers based on density clouds – i.e. lower-
density point aggregations were removed. The ﬁnal scatter showed three dis-
tinct trends, corresponding to the three surveyed stretches of the Usserød å.
Non-linear least squares optimization was used to estimate the best ﬁt for the
data. Due to the highly complex behaviour of temperature variations along
the stream, the three stretches were treated individually. The resulting curve
is determined by the sum of the three functions that best represent each sec-
tion of the river. The interpolation of the functions provides an estimate for
the unsurveyed areas. Finally, in situ measurements were used to calibrate the
longitudinal temperature curve. The residuals of the ﬁtted curve with respect
to the in situ measurements were calculated. The magnitude of the bias along
the river was estimated by linear regression of these residuals. The obtained
correction function could ultimately be used for the input of UAV-estimated
values in the heat balance model.
23
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
2.3
Heat Balance Modelling
The modelling of the Usserød å and its merge into the Nivå å was carried
out by means of the MIKE Hydro River software from DHI67. The tool en-
ables dyanmic river network modelling, and can be coupled with other MIKE
softwares for integrated river modelling. The task was performed in the follow-
ing steps: ﬁrst, a simple hydrodynamic steady-state model was built based on
discharge and cross-sectional geometry measured at various points along the
stream; secondly, the model was completed by the advection-dispersion terms
for heat transport; ﬁnally, a heat-balance module built on MIKE ECO Lab8 –
a MIKE tool for the simulation of ecological processes – was implemented. The
heat exchange template was conﬁdentially provided by DHI and it is based on
the work by Loinaz et al. (2013). The obtained model was ﬁne-tuned based on
thermal imagery observations, so as to include agricultural drainages and other
identiﬁed tributary discharges.
2.3.1
Data
The majority of the data used in the hydrodynamic modelling task were mea-
sured during the ﬁeld campaigns conducted by the Riverscapes project9. Mea-
surements correspond to 11 stations located in various points of the Usserød
å and connected branches, as shown in Figure 2.9. In particular, two of the
stations are located on the Nivå å (Stations 10 and 11), while one of the mea-
surement locations (Station 6) is found on a tributary of the Usserød å, i.e. the
Donse å.
Relevant data used for the task was:
• The measured discharges;
• The global Manning’s number estimate for the whole river stretch;
• The depth of the water column along the cross-sectional length at the 11
measurement locations;
6https://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike-hydro-river
7https://www.dhigroup.com/
8https://www.mikepoweredbydhi.com/products/mike-eco-lab
9https://www.riverscapes.env.dtu.dk/
24
==PAGE:34==
2.3 Heat Balance Modelling
• The tributaries’ water temperature.
In order to harmonize the model with the results of the UAV-borne data, all
measurements used were related to a ﬁeld campaign conducted in the month
of February.
Additional data on discharge temperatures for the advection-dispersion term
was estimated from the thermal imagery analysis. Moreover, the thermal im-
agery was inspected to identify further discharge sources into the Usserød å,
and to infer groundwater exchange patterns in between measurement stations.
Online weather records were used in order to recreate conditions for the heat-
exchange template. Finally, information on riverbed elevation was retrieved
from the documentation of the Usserød å regulation (Rudersdal, Hørsholm og
Fredensborg Kommuner, 2018, pp. 7–9). Further details on the input data will
be discussed in the appropriate sections.
Figure 2.9: Display of the measurements stations along the Usserød å. Unpub-
lished ﬁgure by Grégory Lemaire.
25
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
2.3.2
Hydrodynamic model
Geometry of riverbed
The ﬁrst step to build the hydrodynamic model was to create the main branch
and the riverbed geometry. The main river branch was added by importing the
Usserød å centerline shapeﬁle in the software.
The geometry of the riverbed was built based on data related to the 8 stations
lying on the Usserød stream. Cross-sectional water depth measurements were
coupled with elevation above Geoid information (vertical reference DVR90), in
order to calculate the cross-sectional elevation at each location. The datum
was retrieved from the Usserød å 2018 Regulativ (Rudersdal, Hørsholm og
Fredensborg Kommuner, 2018, pp. 7–9) and it is referred to the river bottom
elevation. Thus, the value was assumed to be related to the point of maximum
depth for each cross-section. Based on this assumption, the diﬀerence between
the maximum water depth and the water depth at each measured point was
used to retrieve the elevation along the cross-section, according to the simple
equation: Point elevation = datum + (max depth - point depth).
The obtained cross-sectional geometries were then interpolated in the MIKE
Hydro software setting a spacing interval of 100 m. In addition, the nearest
cross-section was copied at the end chainage of the river branch, where no
interpolation was possible.
Bed Resistance
Manning’s number, M =
1
n [m1/3 s−1], was set as a uniform bed resistance
value. Manning’s number is an expression of the roughness of the riverbed and,
therefore, a function of the aquatic vegetation. For more abundant river vege-
tation, the roughness coeﬃcient n increases, while its reciprocal M decreases.
Ranges of the Manning number in natural riverine environments are highly
variable depending on the speciﬁc river conditions (Chow, 1959), with typical
values suggested by the software handbook (DHI group, 2017) being between
10 and 100 m1/3s−1. For the winter months from December to February, the
measured (i.e. calculated from ﬁeld measurements) Manning’s number was 20
m1/3s−1.
26
==PAGE:36==
2.3 Heat Balance Modelling
Boundary Conditions
Measured Boundaries
The starting input boundaries for the hydrodynamic
model were related to the measured discharge values. An input point source dis-
charge was included at chainage 0, where the Usserød river originates. Diﬀuse
discharge inputs were added in order to model discharge diﬀerences measured
between one station and the other. Tributary discharges were added as point
sources. These include the WWTP eﬄuent, the Donse å tributary, and the
Nivå å, modelled as a tributary branch to the Usserød å at the point of merg-
ing of the two rivers. Finally, the discharge-water level (Q −h) relationship
was expressed in a table at the end chainage of the branch. The Q/h table was
automatically calculated by the software using the Manning Formula:
Q(h) = M(h)A(h)R
2
3 S
1
2
(2.3)
where Q(h) is the water level-dependent discharge. M is the Manning coeﬃ-
cient, A(h) is the wetted cross-sectional area, R is the hydraulic radius, and S
is the bed slope. MIKE Hydro River is able to retrieve automatically the values
of A and R based on cross-sectional geometry, while the slope is user-deﬁned.
The slope at the end chainage was calculated with a basic mathematical for-
mula using geodetic datum values of the two nearest cross-sections and their
distance.
Table 2.4 shows the input values for the measured boundary conditions.
UAV-inferred boundaries
Once a basic hydrodynamic model was deter-
mined from measured data, modiﬁcations were implemented based on thermal
imagery observations. Additional discharge points visible in the drone acqui-
sitions were pointed out. The magnitude of input discharges was estimated
according to the formula:
Tmix = Q1T1 + Q2T2
Q1 + Q2
(2.4)
with: T1, Q1 = River temperature and river discharge before mixing; T2, Q2
= Temperature and discharge of tributary source; and Tmix = River temper-
ature after mixing. T1, T2 and Tmix were estimated from the thermal data,
while Q1 was calculated by interpolation of discharge data from the two closest
measurement locations. The equation was solved for Q2 and the calculated
27
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
discharge was input as a new point source boundary condition. Diﬀuse inputs
were adjusted accordingly to the new boundaries. Signiﬁcant identiﬁed tribu-
tary inﬂows and their magnitude can be read in Table 2.6. Other minor inﬂows
were disregarded due to their negligible discharges.
Groundwater interactions were also estimated based on captured temperature
changes. In fact, groundwater temperature is reported to be approximately 8.5
◦C in Denmark, with no signiﬁcant seasonal changes (Miljø- og Fødevareminis-
teriet, n.d.). Groundwater inﬂow can therefore be expected to increase stream
temperatures during winter. Based on this, no groundwater inﬂow was assumed
over river sections showing constant water temperature. On the other hand,
in sections subject to positive diﬀuse inputs and in the absence of tributaries,
the starting location of groundwater interactions could be observed due to a
gradual stream temperature increase.
2.3.3
Advection-Dispersion Term
The transport of substances and energy in water is aﬀected by advective and
dispersive processes, where the advection describes the pure transport due to
water ﬂow, while dispersive transport is mainly aﬀected by diﬀusive motion due
to concentration gradients. The streamwise temperature distribution due to
water ﬂow was therefore modelled according to the one-dimensional Advection-
Dispersion equation:
∂AT
∂t
= D∂2AT
∂x2
−∂QT
∂x
± R
(2.5)
where A is the cross-sectional area, T is the temperature, t is the time coor-
dinate, x is the streamwise coordinate, D is the dispersion coeﬃcient, Q is the
discharge, and R representes sources or sinks of heat. An additional decay term
completing equation (2.5) was ignored.
The Software is able to retrieve cross-sectional areas along the x coordinate,
as well as discharge data in space and time based on the hydrodynamic simu-
lation. The user-deﬁned input is represented by the Dispersion coeﬃcient, D.
Assuming dispersive transport to be governed by Fick’s law of Diﬀusion, D is
also representative of the thermal diﬀusivity of water. The model calculates
28
==PAGE:38==
2.3 Heat Balance Modelling
the parameter in the form:
D = aub
(2.6)
Where u is the mean ﬂow velocity in the streamwise direction.
Literature
presents a variety of approaches for determining the equation of longitudinal
dispersion in rivers (e.g. Zeng and Huai (2013), Sahin (2014)). In general, the
coeﬃcient is written in the form D ∝u∗, with u∗being the shear bed velocity.
The vertical velocity proﬁle in an open channel is logarithmic, varying with
depth (z) in the form:
u(z)
u∗
= c1log( z
c2
)
(2.7)
where with c1 and c2 we hereby denote other coeﬃcients whose deﬁnition goes
beyond the scope of this application. From (2.7) we can infer: usurf ∝u∗for
constant depths. Under the assumption of constant water level – true at steady-
state – we can therefore rewrite the dispersion coeﬃcient form as: D ∝u.
Based on these conclusions, the b coeﬃcient in (2.6) was set equal to 1. The
proportionality coeﬃcient, a, can vary largely in open channels (Fischer and
Wood, 1979). For small streams, smaller values of a are expected; in this case,
a was tuned over a range of 0-5 [m], as recommended in the MIKE Hydro River
user guide (DHI group, 2017).
The source/sink term R in equation (2.5), is implemented in the ECOLab heat
balance template.
A/D Boundaries
To complement the Advection-Dispersion term, a temperature value was associ-
ated to each of the previously deﬁned discharge boundaries. The temperatures
were either measured, in the case of measuring stations located on the tribu-
taries, or retrieved based on UAV-borne data and online sources. A correction
factor was applied to thermal imagery values based on the estimated bias. This
was assumed constant and decided based on the comparison of measured and
imagery-estimated values. The advection-dispersion boundaries were deﬁned
as shown in Table 2.5 and 2.6.
29
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
2.3.4
Heat Balance module
The Heat Balance module complements the advection-dispersion equation (2.5)
by adding sinks and sources of heat based on atmospheric components and heat
exchange with other sources such as groundwater and overland water ﬂows. The
ﬁnal equation resolved by the model is:
T = Hgain −Hloss
depth ∗cp ∗ρ ∗60 ∗60 ∗24
(2.8)
with:
• T = daily temperature variation [◦C d−1]
• depth = depth of water column [m]
• cp = speciﬁc heat capacity of water [J kg−1 ◦C−1]
• ρ = density of water [kg m−3]
• Hgain = Total heat gain [W m−2]
• Hloss = Total heat loss [W m−2]
The components of heat gain and heat loss are represented by equations (2.9)
and (2.10), respectively:
Hgain = Hsr + Har + Hol + Hdr
(2.9)
Hloss = Hevap + Hconv + Hbr + Hgw
(2.10)
with:
• Hsr = Solar radiation [W m−2]
• Har = Atmospheric radiation [W m−2]
• Hol = Overland heat ﬂux [W m−2]
• Hdr = Drainage heat ﬂux [W m−2]
30
==PAGE:40==
2.3 Heat Balance Modelling
• Hevap = Evaporation component [W m−2]
• Hconv = Convection component [W m−2]
• Hbr = Backward radiation [W m−2]
• Hgw = Groundwater heat ﬂux [W m−2]
For this application, and considering data at hand, the module was mainly used
to account for atmospheric heat balance components, while heat ﬂuxes from
drainage, groundwater, and overland ﬂow were neglected. In addition, solar
radiation was assumed to be 0, as justiﬁed by the simulation period (nighttime
in winter) and veriﬁed by weather records (Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut,
n.d.).
Relevant inputs are summarized in Table 2.8.
Inputs interacting with null
values were disregarded. Time series inputs can be observed in Figure 2.10.
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
00:00
09:00
18:00
03:00
12:00
21:00
06:00
15:00
00:00
09:00
18:00
03:00
12:00
21:00
06:00
15:00
00:00
09:00
18:00
03:00
12:00
21:00
06:00
15:00
00:00
09:00
18:00
01-Feb 02-Feb 03-Feb 04-Feb 05-Feb 06-Feb 07-Feb 08-Feb 09-Feb 10-Feb
T (°C)
Rh (%)
Relative humidity
Air Temperature
Figure 2.10: Time series of Air temperature and Relative humidity for the
period 1st of February 2019 – 1010 of February 2019 (Danmarks Meteorologiske
Institut, n.d.).
31
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
Table 2.4: Measured boundary conditions for the hydrodynamic model. *a:
(Rudersdal, Hørsholm og Fredensborg Kommuner, 2018), *b: (Hydroinform,
2019). Note: Qx indicates the discharge at station x.
Boundary
Chainage (m)
Value (m3 s−1)
Source
Calculation
Point source Q
0
+0.215
Measured
None
Diﬀuse Q
0 – 617.5
+0.091
Measured
Q2 −Q1
Diﬀuse Q
617.5 – 2834.2
-0.001
Measured
Q3 −Q2
Diﬀuse Q
2834.2 – 4332.3
-0.094
Measured
Q4 −Q3
Diﬀuse Q
4332.3 – 4494.7
-0.296
Measured
Q5 −Q4
Diﬀuse Q
4494.7 – 4647.5
-0.034
Measured
Q7 −Q5
Diﬀuse Q
4647.5 – 6287.2
-0.037
Measured
Q8 −Q7
Diﬀuse Q
6287.2 – 8042.4
-0.037
Measured
Q9 −Q8
Q/h Table
8304.6
N.A.
Table, a*
Slope;
Automatic
Point souce Q:
WWTP
4390.0
+0.380
Online measure, b*
None
Point source Q:
Donse å
4607.7
+0.121
Measured
None
Point source Q:
Nivå å
8281.3
+0.439
Measured
None
Table 2.5: Advection-dispersion boundary conditions related to measured dis-
charges. *c: (Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet, n.d.)
HQ Boundary type
T (◦C)
Source
Diﬀuse inputs
8
c*
Input discharge
1.3
Measured
WWTP eﬄuent
6.5
Estimated from UAV
Donse å
3.9
Measured
Nivå å
3.6
Measured
32
==PAGE:42==
2.3 Heat Balance Modelling
Table 2.6: UAV-inferred boundaries.
UAV-inferred Boundaries
Chainage (m)
Q (m3/s)
T (°)
Agricultural drainage/seepage
445
0.022
5.2
Tributary
2730
0.100
3.6
Agricultural drainages (summed)
4920
0.060
5.1
Tributary
6440
0.136
5.3
Table 2.7: Boundaries of the integrated model
Boundary
Chainage (m)
Q m3/s
T ◦C
Point source Q
0
0.215
1.3
Point souce Q:
from UAV
445
0.022
5.2
Diﬀuse Q
440-617.5
0.069
8
Point souce Q:
from UAV
2730
0.1
3.6
Diﬀuse Q
617.5-2834.2
-0.101
8
Diﬀuse Q
2834.2-4332.3
-0.094
8
Point souce Q:
WWTP
4390
0.38
6.5
Diﬀuse Q
4332.3-4494.7
-0.17
8
Point source Q:
Donse å
4607.7
0.121
3.9
Diﬀuse Q
4494.7-4647.5
-0.034
8
Point souce Q:
from UAV
5000
0.06
5.1
Diﬀuse Q
4647.5-6287.2
-0.077
8
Point souce Q:
from UAV
6440
0.136
5.3
Diﬀuse Q
6287.2-8042.4
-0.05
8
Point source Q:
Nivå å
8281.31
0.439
3.6
Q/h relation
8304.6
0.2
N.A.
33
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 2. Materials and Methods
Table 2.8: Main heat balance module forcings. Source: (Danmarks Meteorolo-
giske Institut, n.d.)
Forcing
Symbol
Value
Unit
Air temperature
Tair
Hourly time series
◦C
Relative humidity
Rh
Hourly time series
%
Wind Speed
U
4.7
m s−1
Global Solar Radiation
Srad
0
W m−2
Drainage Flow
Qdr
0
m3 s−1
Groundwater Flow
Qgw
0
m3 s−1
Overland Flow
Qol
0
m3 s−1
Depth of water column
depth
Built-in (from HD)
m
Groundwater Temperature
Qgw
8
◦C
34
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Machine Learning results
3.1.1
Parametrization and Performance
The parametrization results for the three models are shown in Figure 3.1. The
test and train error for the chosen range of parameters are displayed. The test
error displays the accuracy of predictions, while comparison with the train error
allows to check for overﬁtting. In the case of model complexity increasing to
an overﬁtting level, it would result in the crossing of the test and train error
curves. In fact, model complexity is controlled by the regularization parameter
as explained in Section 2.2.3. As complexity increases, better predictions of the
training data can be observed, resulting in the training error to approach lower
values. Nevertheless, an overﬁtting model is not able to generalize predictions
to unseen data, leading to an increase in test error. In this case, no overﬁtting
behavior was observed for any of the models, due to the restricted amount of
training samples that were provided to the classiﬁers. The minimum error cor-
responding to the chosen optimal parameter is highlighted in the graphs. This
corresponds to λ = 0.1 and λ = 21.5 for the Logistic Regression and for the
SVM algorithm, respectively (3.1c), (3.1a). The KNN showed better perfor-
mance when parametrized to use k = 1 neighboring value for class estimation
(3.1b). Since the number of neighbors is a positive integer, this was consid-
35
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
0.1
0.2
0.5
1.0
2.2
4.6
10.0 21.5 46.4 100.0
4
5
Error Rate (%)
Test Error
Train Error
Minimum Test Error: 3.93%
(a) Logistic Regression: Error rate for range
of λ
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Error Rate (%)
Test Error
Train Error
Minimum Test Error: 0.37%
(b) KNN: Error rate for range of k
0.1
0.2
0.5
1.0
2.2
4.6
10.0 21.5 46.4 100.0
15
16
17
18
19
Error Rate (%)
Test Error
Train Error
Minimum Test Error: 15.72%
(c) SVM, Sigmoid kernel: Error rate for range
of λ
Figure 3.1: Train and test error results over ranges of parametrization values
for the three models.
ered to be the optimal parameter. In the case of the logistic regression, below
λ = 0.1, the error appears stable, therefore only meaningful changes are rep-
resented in Figure 3.1a. Nevertheless, the Logistic Regression classiﬁer sheds
uncertainty on its optimization results. In fact, a strongly superior classiﬁca-
tion performance was observed for higher values of λ. This could be explained
by the imbalance of the dataset yielding rather low errors in the case of 100%
class 0 predictions – as mentioned in Section 2.2.3. To check for performance,
therefore, the confusion matrices for diﬀerent Logistic Regression parametriza-
tions were analyzed, as shown in Table 3.1 and Figure 3.2. What emerges from
this analysis is the increasing trend of FP predictions as λ increases, coupled
with a decrease in TN. In particular, with smaller values of λ, the algorithm
increases accuracy on False Positive predictions minimizing the error to almost
0%. The specular trends of the TP-FN and TN-FP couplings are visible in
Figure 3.2. In general it can be extrapolated that less water predictions are
being attempted as λ decreases. Although no overﬁtting trend was identiﬁed,
it can be assessed that the minimization of the False Positives to extremely low
levels, and the general reduction of water class prediction attempts, may result
36
==PAGE:46==
3.1 Machine Learning results
in patterns similar to overﬁtting. The so-tuned algorithm is therefore not able
to predict water in diﬀerent datasets, and minimizes its error by predicting
more Negatives, which represent the vast majority of the total points.
Table 3.1: Confusion matrices outcomes for regularizations of the logistic re-
gression classiﬁer.
Prediction
λ
0.001
0.01
0.1
100
1000
2000
3000
5000
FP
4
4
12
30
351
421
449
432
TP
488
488
462
431
378
393
415
437
FN
100
100
126
157
210
195
173
151
TN
3423
3423
3415
3397
3076
3006
2978
2995
65%
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
0.001
0.01
0.1
100
1000
2000
3000
5000
λ
FP
FN
TP
TN
Figure 3.2: Percentages of True Positive, True Negative, False Positives and
False negatives for diﬀerent regularizations of the logistic regression classiﬁer
Despite the diﬃculty in parametrization, the Logistic Regression classiﬁer dis-
played a low generalization error (equal to the test error in cross-validation).
Table 3.2 displays the models’ generalization errors associated to the optimal
parameter over 5 tuning iterations, while confusion matrices for the optimized
models can be observed in Table 3.3. The generalization error varies slightly
during each iteration, due to the randomness of the initial split in train and
test percentages. Nevertheless, rather constant results are observed, indicating
KNN as having the best overall performance. The KNN outperformed the other
classiﬁers due to its point proximity-based nature, which indicates it as more
suitable for spatial analyses. As opposed to the other algorithms, this made
the KNN more prone to identifying the discrete points as part of a temperature
proﬁle. The choice of neighbors generally lacks a reasoned methodology, relying
37
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
almost entirely on parametrization processes (Kotsiantis, 2007). In general, it
can be said that the number of neighbors is related to noise sensitivity, with
smaller ks being more prone to deviations. The extrapolation of the training
set relied on noise-free data, therefore yielding the reported optimal k.
Table 3.2: Optimal test error [%] for the three models over 5 tuning iterations.
KNN-ER
LOGREG-ER
SVM-ER
0.345
3.237
16.481
0.395
3.336
16.679
0.420
3.212
15.567
0.297
3.459
16.604
0.370
3.212
16.086
Table 3.3: Confusion matrices for the three optimized models.
(a) Optimized Logistic Regression classi-
ﬁer
Predicted 0
Predicted 1
True 0
84.5%
0.2%
True 1
3.0%
12.3%
(b) Optimized KNN classiﬁer
Predicted 0
Predicted 1
True 0
84.0%
0.3%
True 1
0.5%
15.2%
(c) Optimized SVM classiﬁer
Predicted 0
Predicted 1
True 0
74.0%
10.7%
True 1
5.0%
10.3%
Regardless of its dependency on k, KNN is – intuitively – noise-sensitive (Kot-
siantis, 2007).
Consequently, it showed biased classiﬁcations over vegetated
stretches of the river. Logistic regression relying on a result-based parametriza-
tion was therefore used for the water masking of stretch 2.
38
==PAGE:48==
3.1 Machine Learning results
3.1.2
Water masking results
The classiﬁcation results can be seen in Figures 3.3 and 3.4, represented as
functions of the three features used as data input for classiﬁcation. Results are
presented divided for the three stretches of data and from two perspectives –
namely, almost normal to the cross-sectional distance axis, and parallel to the
variance axis.
The best classiﬁcation results are observed for stretch 3 (Figure 3.3). Here, it
is clearly visible how the points within a buﬀer from the river centerline (cross-
sectional distance = 10 meters) are classiﬁed as water. Moreover, these points
appear to be warmer – approximately 2 to 3 ◦C – and have lower variance
with respect to the surroundings. The two peaks of temperature variance are
highlighted in Figure 3.3a.
These correspond to the change of temperature
from the water areas to the river banks.
The sharp temperature diﬀerence
between banks and river aided the classiﬁer both directly and indirectly: in
primis, by aiding the recognition of distinct areas; secondly, by enlargening the
training dataset thanks to the correctly classiﬁed proﬁles obtained with the
static variance threshold ﬁlter. Two possible misclassiﬁcation regions may be
identiﬁed in Figure 3.3a. These are represented by the central grey area at cross-
sectional distance = 10 m, temperature = 1.5 - 2 ◦C (False Negatives), and by
the blue area falling far from the mid cross-sectional distance (False Positives).
Due to the a priori manual ﬁltration, we would expect the river centerline to
have no 0-class points. Therefore we may infer FN predictions over the pointed
out grey region. On the other hand, naturally wider riverbed sections of the
Usserød å, as well as dams and reservoirs, indicate that water points could be
found over a larger cross-section portion. A symmetrical behavior would be
expected, casting doubts on the assigned class label. However, we should not
exclude the possibility of a correct water prediction, coupled with false negative
predictions mirroring from the river centerline.
Classiﬁcation results for stretches 1 and 2 (Figure 3.4) show a higher degree
of uncertainty, and the pattern of classiﬁcation appears less clear. In stretch
1, we can observe temperature-related stratiﬁcations of water points (Figure
3.4b). These correspond to temperatures of 0-1 ◦C and 1.5-2.5 ◦C. The lat-
ter is most likely consistent with the transition phase from colder-than-land to
warmer-than-land water, where similar water and land temperatures are de-
tected. The former might coincide with the source of the river at Lake Sjaelsø,
39
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
(a) -83 degrees azimut, stretch 3
(b) from below, stretch 3
Figure 3.3: Classiﬁcation results of Stretch 3 as a function of the three input
features: temperature, moving variance of temperature, and cross-sectional
distance. In grey: points classiﬁed as non-water; in cyan: points classiﬁed
as water.
40
==PAGE:50==
3.1 Machine Learning results
(a) -83 degrees azimut, stretch 1
(b) from below, stretch 1
(c) -83 degrees azimut, stretch 2
(d) from below, stretch 2
Figure 3.4: Classiﬁcation results of Stretches 1 and 2, as a function of the
three input features: temperature, moving variance of temperature, and cross-
sectional distance.
In grey: points classiﬁed as non-water; in cyan: points
classiﬁed as water.
which presents a wider cross section with temperatures around 0 ◦C. Overall,
the stretch might yield a vast percentage of outliers. Neverthless, the point
cloud density at the center may suggest enough data being provided for a re-
aliable extrapolation.
Stretch 2 was classiﬁed using logistic regression due to unsatisfactory results of
the KNN. An asymmetrical classiﬁcation behavior is appreciated in Figure 3.4d,
41
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
leading to sure outliers. The misclassiﬁcation is uneven along cross-sectional
distance, with the left river bank seemingly representing the cause of distur-
bance. The presence of a street following the right bank for a good portion of
the surveyed area may have induced a clearer distinction. On other hand, the
dense vegetation on the left bank explains the reason of misclassiﬁcation, with
water being approximately at the same temperature as the vegetated land.
Both stretches in Figure 3.4 appear chaotic with respect to the variance feature.
This is not surprising, as the thermal imagery displayed unclear water deﬁni-
tions, sometimes hardly recognizable by human eye.
The RGB matrix was
implemented as feature data in order to aid the classiﬁcation task over veg-
etated areas showing gradual water-land temperature slopes and noisy traits.
The results of the inclusion of the RGB features in the KNN classiﬁer are shown
in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Classiﬁcation results of the KNN classiﬁer with and without the
inclusion of RGB features.
(a) RGB features excluded
Predicted 0
Predicted 1
Mean Error
Opt. Neighbors
True 0
84.5%
0.2%
True 1
0.3%
15.0%
0.4%
1
(b) RGB features included
Predicted 0
Predicted 1
Mean Error
Opt. Neighbors
True 0
82.2%
2.4%
True 1
6.2%
9.2%
8.4%
5
The table highlights worse results when the extra features were included. The
reason of the performance drop was attributed to the impossibility to obtain
a completely matching RGB georeferentiation. In fact, the stream is in some
points rather narrow, with meandering behavior. These attributes call for high
referencing accuracy, which could not be achieved due to the complete lack of
GCP. In addition, simple rotation and translation mechanisms could not be
performed due to distortions of the images. Thus, no suﬃcient overlapping
could be achieved, resulting in biased learning data. Further analytical pro-
42
==PAGE:52==
3.2 Longitudinal Temperature Proﬁles
cessing was therefore needed to cover the data gap, both in external datasets
and in a meaningful amount of traning samples.
These ﬁndings essentially highlight the need for valid georeferencing of the
thermal imagery in order to aid data processing and, in particular, target de-
tection. In fact, spatial masking algorithms may be considered in the case of
accurately referenced data. These could be elaborated by means of RGB im-
agery, preferably acquired within the same ﬂight. As both the environment
and the river network are dynamically changing, acquisition of RGB within
diﬀerent days may not catch any ﬂoating material and could account for river
banks variation. Even more so, when acquired with a monthly diﬀerence. Sea-
sonal vegetation changes may, in fact, aﬀect results, especially when the RGB
time of acquisition determines less abundancy of vegetation with respect to
thermal imagery. When data at hand is poor or insuﬃcient, such as in the
present case, ML methods can aid in the determination of pure water areas.
Greater accuracy could be achieved by the expansion of the dataset; yet, as
reported by Sun and Scanlon (2019), limited training sets are often the case
in environmental applications of machine learning. Despite the uncertainties,
the classiﬁers have been observed to perform well in order to obtain reliable
information. In particular, it is noteworthy to mention that in high contrast
areas, no external dataset is needed for target detection. Greater uncertainties
arise from vegetation-abundant areas, where water is not clearly visible from
the air.
3.2
Longitudinal Temperature Proﬁles
3.2.1
UAV Accuracy
The longitudinal trend obtained from the thermal imagery is shown in Figure
3.5. The masked and averaged water data is shown together with the extrapo-
lated ﬁt, represented with a 2 σ interval error. In situ measurements are also
shown. The comparison highlights a clear underestimation of drone-derived
thermal data.
It can be observed that point measurements follow approxi-
mately the same trend, with the exception of station 2 (i.e. 0.617 km). At
chainage 0.617 km, the sudden increase in temperature revealed by the ﬁeld
43
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
campaigns cannot be appreciated from the drone view. In general, a noncon-
stant bias can be pointed out in the UAV surveys. The magnitude of this bias
at each measured location is displayed in Figure 3.5b.
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5
Chainage (km)
0
1
2
3
4
5
T (°C)
drone-borne T
measured T
fit
2 
(a) Comparison of the UAV-derived longitudinal temperature proﬁle and in-stream point
measurements acquired in the ﬁeld by Riverscapes.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Chainage (km)
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
T (°C)
residuals of measured T
fit: y= 0.136x + 1.236 
 R2 = 0.41
(b) Diﬀerence between measured values and curve predictions, and linear ﬁt of
residuals.
Figure 3.5: Accuracy of the UAV-extrapolated longitudinal temperature
proﬁle.
The diﬀerence in measured and UAV-surveyed temperatures shows an increas-
44
==PAGE:54==
3.2 Longitudinal Temperature Proﬁles
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5
Chainage (km)
0
1
2
3
4
5
T (°C)
drone-borne T
measured T
original fit
corrected fit
(a) Extrapolated drone-temperature trend and trend corrected by a linearly increasing
bias.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Chainage (km)
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
T (°C)
New measured T residuals
(b) Diﬀerence between measured values and corrected curve predictions.
Figure 3.6: Accuracy of the UAV-extrapolated longitudinal temperature
proﬁle with the application of a linear correction factor.
ing trend with increasing distances. Thus, a growing underestimation of the
drone acquisitions can be deduced. However, the behavior at station 2 is pe-
culiar. An analysis of the imagery indicates that this point is located nearby a
possible point source discharge or seepage 3.7. Therefore, it may be assumed
45
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
that the observed value is referred to the temperature of the discharge itself,
rather than the temperature within the stream. This point could be thus consid-
ered an outlier with respect to the river’s trend. Another plausible explanation
is the presence of vegetation sheltering the water and impeding the retrieval
of truthful values. However, the heat balance model questions this hypothesis,
as will be shown the next section (3.2.3). Taking this into account, a linearly
increasing underestimation behavior can be hypothesized, as not enough mea-
surement points were available to infer a more detailed trend. The result of the
modelled bias applied as a correction function to the longitudinal proﬁle can
be seen in Figure 3.6a. The corrected trend resembles quite accurately point
measurements in second half of the river, while overestimations are seen for
lower chainages (Figure 3.6b). This is induced by the approximated linearity of
the bias, as it can be observed in Figure 3.5b. The point at station two (0.617
km) inﬂuences this linearity by raising the correction factor applied to points
before chainage 4.5km. Despite the hypothesis of being an outlying value, its
inﬂuence was kept due to the uncertainty in such assumption.
G I S -e s t i m a t e d
position of measuring
station 2
Chainage: 450 m
Figure 3.7: GIS estimation of the location of measurement station 2, corre-
sponding to a local increase in water temperature.
46
==PAGE:56==
3.2 Longitudinal Temperature Proﬁles
3.2.2
Water temperature modelling Accuracy
Sensitivity to point source discharges
The calculation of input discharges identiﬁed by thermal imagery analysis was
carried out according to (2.4). This relied on an estimation of water tempera-
tures for the river before mixing (T1), the input discharge (T2), and the river
after mixing (T3). In addition, the discharge of the stream right before mixing
was estimated. Table 3.5 shows formula sensitivity to diﬀerent temperature
increase values (∆T = T3 −T1 ◦C) and for diﬀerent river discharges before
mixing. The calculations are performed assuming base values of T1 = 2.9 ◦C
and T2 = 4 ◦C.
Table 3.5: Sensitivity Analysis of the mixing discharge calculation, calculated
with diﬀerent stream discharges, Q1, and diﬀerent changes in temperature after
mixing, T3 - T1. Based on equation (2.4).
Calculation of input discharge, Q2 [L/s]
Q1 [L/s]
∆T [◦C]
0.10
0.20
0.50
1.00
100.00
22.22
37.50
83.33
1000.00
150.00
33.33
56.25
125.00
1500.00
200.00
44.44
75.00
166.67
2000.00
For small variations in ∆T, rather high variations in Q2 can be observed; the
equation is therefore very sensitive to temperatures estimation.
The model
sensitivity to diﬀerent tributary discharges at a baseline temperature of 4 ◦C
was tested. The results are shown in Figure 3.8. For the tributary input given,
a 1 ◦C variation corresponds to an 8-fold increase in discharge.
Simulations results
The accuracy of the model with respect to the measured dataset is shown in
Figure 3.9. The modelled curve is representative of the night hours between the
5th and the 6th of February, 2019. In particular, it shows the simulated water
temperature at 3 A.M., time at which the drone ﬂight was hypothesized. In
Figure 3.9b we can observe the magnitude of the deviation between the curve
and the measurements. The model follows the point measurements pattern,
47
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
0.025
0.025
0.025
0.025
0
0
0
0
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0
0
0
0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0
0
0
0
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0
0
0
T degree  C
Q m3/s
Temperature
Figure 3.8: Model sensitivity to diﬀerent input discharges at 4 ◦C
while showing a deviation from them. The error is highest for the measure-
ment at chainage 0.615 km, as already observed from the UAV-borne data.
The observation of this error brings forward the aforementioned hypothesis,
which indicates this point as not representative of the river temperature, but
rather of a particular mixing location. In fact, an agricultural discharge was
introduced in the model nearby the measurement station, as identiﬁed from
the thermal images. Despite this addition, it could not be possible to calibrate
the model to reach the measured temperature. The raise in temperature ob-
served in the ﬁrst section is aﬀected by a combination of agricultural discharge
and groundwater exﬁltration into the stream - with the latter having a higher
inﬂuence on the thermal load. Chainage 0 lies on the model boundaries and
therefore no deviations are possible. On the other hand, a divergence is seen
around chainage 3000 m. Here, a higher temperature is predicted, with respect
to the in situ datum. A tributary was identiﬁed in the vicinity of the sampling
location, raising the water temperature as visible. It is probable that a wrong
estimation of the discharge location has aﬀected the model by deviating from
the measurements. Considering the discussed factors, the model appears faith-
ful to measured data for its initial stretch, while an underestimation is again
observed towards the river mouth.
Albeit minor, the underestimation of these points sparks reﬂection on the UAV-
derived proﬁle. Previous investigations on UAV-thermal mapping usually re-
port a time-dependent overestimation bias, related to sensor heating during the
ﬂight (Dugdale et al., 2019). Even when internal heating is compensated, it
seems far more common to experience higher drone-acquired values than log
48
==PAGE:58==
3.2 Longitudinal Temperature Proﬁles
0
750
1500
2250
3000
3750
4500
5250
6000
6750
7500
8250
Chainage (m)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
T (°C)
measured T
Modelled
(a) Comparison of the modelled longitudinal temperature proﬁle and in-stream
point measurements acquired in the ﬁeld by Riverscapes. The model refers to
the the 6th of February 2019 at 03.00 h.
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
Chainage (m)
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
T (°C)
Measured T residuals
(b) Diﬀerence between measured values and model predictions.
Figure 3.9: Accuracy of the modelled longitudinal temperature proﬁle.
values (e.g. Wawrzyniak et al. (2013)). In this case, the error source between
UAV data and logged values could therefore lie within the times of acquisition.
Both the drone ﬂight and the modelled conditions were, in fact, nocturnal. On
the other hand, it is reasonable to think that ﬁeld campaigns were conducted
at daytime. In addition, downstream locations as well as tributaries were mea-
sured on the 5th of February; upstream locations were measured the 6th of
February, while the drone was ﬂown during the night between the two days.
Figure 3.10 shows the model predictions at diﬀerent times of the day and on
diﬀerent days.
The comparison of the model outcomes for several time steps reinforces the idea:
49
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
0
750
1500 2250 3000 3750 4500 5250 6000 6750 7500 8250
Chainage (m)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
T (°C)
5.02, 10.00 h
5.02, 12.00 h
5.02, 14.00 h
6.02, 03.00 h
6.02, 10.00 h
6.02, 12.00 h
6.02, 14.00 h
measured T 5.02
measured T 6.02
Figure 3.10: Modelled curve at diﬀerent times of the day on the 5th and 6th of
February 2019.
in fact, the measurements taken on the 5th of February are better matched by
simulations of the same day, and the opposite is also true. In particular, the
curves representing the 12.00 hour seem to best represent the sampled data.
No curve could approximate the temperature at station 2. In general, these
results validate the model, which can therefore be conﬁdently compared with
night-time drone acquisitions.
3.2.3
Longitudinal proﬁles comparison
The comparison of the ﬁnal longitudinal proﬁles obtained with the two methods
can be analyzed in Figure 3.11, with a more detailed insight on the combination
of methods – i.e. the use of drone inputs for stream temperature modelling –
presented in Figure 3.13.
The main temperature variations are visible in all proﬁles, with the Usserød
50
==PAGE:60==
3.2 Longitudinal Temperature Proﬁles
0
750
1500 2250 3000 3750 4500 5250 6000 6750 7500 8250
Chainage (m)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
T (°C)
gw + Agr.Q
tributary
WWTP
Donse å
Agr.Q
Tributary
Nivå å
St1
St2
St3
St4
St5
St7
St8
St9
St11
Stretch1
Stretch2
Stretch3
Modelled
UAV
UAV corrected
measured T
Figure 3.11: Comparison of the longitudinal temperature proﬁles obtained with
UAV surveying only, and with heat balance modelling integrated with UAV
inputs. The modelled curve represents water temperature on the 6th of February
2019, at 03.00 h. The UAV proﬁle is shown with and without the application
of a linear correction factor.
WWTP discharge being the most promiment disturbance to natural oscilla-
tions. This is identiﬁed by a peak in temperature at chainage 4,390 km. The
discharge from the wastewater treatment plant accounts for high percentages
of the total Usserød ﬂow, with values ranging yearly from 30% to 97% (2018)
(Ribaucourt, 2019; Hydroinform, 2019). The upstream part of the river un-
til the WWTP input appears more stable, with an initial steep growth and a
more gradual heat loss. The initial increase corresponds to the only river sec-
tion that presents a diﬀuse input to the Usserød å – i.e. the only section where
no point sources were identiﬁed to explain the increase in discharge between
two measuring stations. Thus, the temperature and discharge increase can be
attributable to a diﬀuse groundwater ﬂux, as mentioned earlier. The possibility
of the agricultural seepage/drainage accounting for the diﬀerence in discharge
51
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
was also tested and discarded by comparison with UAV data. Additionally,
thermal imagery was used to identify the location of groundwater exchanges in
between station 1 and station 2, as appears visible in Figures 3.11 and 3.13.
The heat loss from the initial rise to the WWTP outlet appears more gradual in
the imagery derived proﬁle, with the respect to the modelled curve. The grad-
ual decrease may be dictated by the data gap, as well as by dense vegetation
present in the area, which hindered drone acquisitions. Despite the absence of
sensible changes in drone-acquired stream temperature, the tributary identiﬁed
in the images was calculated to have a rather signiﬁcant input and this is visible
in the modelled proﬁle. Care should be taken when observing such trend, due
to the high uncertainty deriving from discharge estimation from the thermal
imagery, as shown by the sensitivity analysis presented (Section 3.2.2).
Stretch 3 shows higher temperature oscillations. In fact, the downstream sec-
tion of the Usserød å crosses an alternation of urbanized and vegetated areas.
Hence, more disruptions can be assumed. A few meters downstream of the
wastewater outlet, the Donse å mixes with the stream with cooler water. Fur-
ther downstream, warm discharges were singled out from the thermal imagery.
It is interesting to notice that the oscillations are more pronounced in the drone
acquisitions than they could be simulated. The UAV proﬁle displays a higher
sensitivity and more delayed temperature variations. The adjustment of the
model’s dispersion coeﬃcient did not replicate the trend. On the other hand,
the measured temperature of the Donse tributary aﬀects the magnitude of the
temperature drop observed at chainage 4,607 km.
Therefore, the diﬀerence
observed in the two proﬁles can partly be explained by the daily temperature
variations, with the simulation being inﬂuenced by the diurnal temperature of
the Donse å. Even so, the variations visible between station 7 and station 8
could not be completely described by external inputs.
Since the river section in analysis presented high water-land temperature con-
trast, inaccuracy of classiﬁcations is not considered. Changing atmospheric fac-
tors as well as camera instability may have inﬂuenced the acquisition, explaining
the observed behavior. Figure 3.12 shows an example of camera instability or
erroneous pre-processing of thermal imagery within the stretch in analysis. In
addition, oscillations may result from vegetation sheltering of the water surface.
Even in the absence of canopies due to the winter conditions, trees covered great
sections of the reach. Due to the wide extension of the tree covered area, not
all data was pre-ﬁltered. In particular, sections showing only partly river width
52
==PAGE:62==
3.2 Longitudinal Temperature Proﬁles
coverage were still analyzed. Therefore, inﬂuence of the colder tree canopies or
branches is considered to have reduced average temperature over intermitting
sections of the river. Finally, natural temperature heterogeneity uncaught by
simpliﬁed process-based modelling may be accounted.
5+
-2.5
Temperature (°C)
Figure 3.12: Instance of camera instability eﬀects at chainage: 6,262 km to
6,287 km. The error is observed to produce a higher temperature in the over-
lapping pixels.
Apart from sheltering, riparian vegetation may aﬀect temperature detections
with interfering radiation scattering from the stream surface (Handcock et al.,
2012). The reﬂection of bank material from the water surface therefore sums
with the water radiation emission, causing a widely reported overestimation
error (Dugdale et al., 2019). In this case, the UAV-detected surface tempera-
ture was observed to be lower than measured and modelled temperatures. The
comparison of the model with the uncorrected UAV proﬁle highlights a higher
bias than can be explained by the aforesaid considerations on daily variations.
The model simulates describes drops of up to 1 ◦C between day and night
(Figure 3.10). Yet, diﬀerences up to 2 ◦C can be observed between the uncor-
rected trend and the measurements (Figure 3.11). While taking into account
the model limitations due to simpliﬁcations made, it may still be concluded
53
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 3. Results and Discussion
that the drone has suﬀered an underestimation bias of approximately 1 ◦C.
Lower detected temperatures may be accounted for by atmospheric absorption
(Kay et al., 2005), despite UAVs suﬀering less from atmospheric deviation with
respect to other remote sensing techniques due to lower surveying altitudes.
0
750
1500
2250
3000
3750
4500
5250
6000
6750
7500
8250
Chainage (m)
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
T (°C)
no UAV 6.02 12.00 h
no UAV 5.02 12.00 h
UAV 5.02 12.00 h
UAV 6.02 12.00 h
measured T 5.02
measured T 6.02
Figure 3.13: Modelled temperature in diﬀerent days with and without the input
of UAV-inferred boundaries.
Finally, the simulated longitudinal proﬁles accuracy with and without the UAV-
inferred inputs can be compared. Figure 3.13 displays the simulations on the
5th and on the 6th of February at 12.00, time at which the measurements are
believed to be taken based on ﬁgure 3.10. It can be noticed that the simulations
including the UAV inputs show results closer to measured values.
Greater simulation accuracy can therefore be concluded when using an inte-
grated modelling approach. Despite the uncertainties, thermal mapping pro-
vides a continuous source of information at ﬁne spatial scale, allowing estima-
tions for modelling reﬁnement. Thus, UAV thermal mapping proved both as an
added data source for traditional water quality tasks, and a valid thermal mon-
itoring method itself, provided proper calibration and meticulous elaboration
of data.
54
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 4
Conclusions
This thesis aimed at the investigation of the UAV technology for river tem-
perature mapping, to integrate it in a novel modelling approach for the under-
standing of small streams longitudinal thermal proﬁles. The main challenge in
the analysis of the UAV data lay within the poor georeferencing of the images,
which prevented the possibility of using external datasets for target detection.
It was shown that simple machine learning classiﬁers may prove successful in
the water masking task, even in the case of scarce data availability. Neverthe-
less, if a greater precision is required, algorithms should beneﬁt from a greater
amount of uncorrelated input features and from extended labeled datasets.
More complex algorithms may be investigated in order to address this issue
and reduce the need of post-processing experienced in this investigation. The
amount of tailored analytical processes should be kept to the minimum, as they
hinder the generalization of methods and inhibit the delivery of a methodologi-
cal approach to the scientiﬁc community. In this thesis, a complete automation
of the classiﬁcation was attempted, in order to avoid pre-ﬁltration of data. The
impossibility to rely on correctly georeferenced datasets hindered this goal. It
is believed, but could not be proven, that the extension of the dataset may suc-
ceed in automating the process, reducing user input by eliminating untargeted
pixels without the need for manual ﬁltration. As data collection technologies
advance, the need to speed up data processing increases, and more and more
hydrologists and environmental managers are pushed to embrace new data sci-
ence tools. It is therefore left as a hint for future practicioners to investigate
55
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 4. Conclusions
the area further based on the promising results obtained in this project. In
addition, the need to harmonize the procedures in the ﬁeld of UAV thermal
mapping for surface waters is brought forward.
The UAV technology proved as a valuable tool for the understanding of longi-
tudinal temperature trends in small rivers. One of the main limitations comes
from its use in heavily vegetated areas.
The use of eﬃcient water masking
methods may aid in retrieving valuable information in visible patches of vege-
tated areas. Calibration of datasets with ground measurements is advisable to
apply the needed corrections to the resulting data. Based on stream tempera-
ture point measurements, in fact, the UAV results could be adjusted and used
to inform the process-based model. This integrated modelling approach based
itself on cross-referencing of the two methods together with the use of mea-
sured values. The built model may be used to understand longitudinal thermal
dynamics and the reaction of the stream to varying inputs. Combined with
the thermal imagery, the framework provides both a spatial and a temporal
scale to the Usserød å thermal understanding, and may be used an input to
ecological restoration applications, as well as to include water temperature in
water management practices.
Finally, based on the variety of UAV applications, it is possible to think of a
water temperature modelling framework which builds on UAV detections only
– providing, together with temperature inputs, information on bathymetry and
surface ﬂow velocity for the simulation of the hydrodynamic conditions.
56
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
Adão, T., Hruška, J., Pádua, L., Bessa, J., Peres, E., Morais, R., Sousa, J.J.,
2017. Hyperspectral imaging: A review on uav-based sensors, data processing
and applications for agriculture and forestry. Remote Sensing 9, 1110.
Aicardi, I., Chiabrando, F., Lingua, A.M., Noardo, F., Piras, M., Vigna, B.,
2017. A methodology for acquisition and processing of thermal data acquired
by uavs: a test about subﬂuvial springs’ investigations. Geomatics, Natural
Hazards and Risk 8, 5–17. doi:10.1080/19475705.2016.1225229.
Ayyadevara, V.K., 2018.
Logistic regression, in:
Pro Machine Learn-
ing Algorithms:
A Hands-On Approach to Implementing Algorithms in
Python and R. Apress, Berkeley, CA. chapter 3, pp. 49–69. doi:10.1007/
978-1-4842-3564-5_3.
Beaufort, A., Moatar, F., Curie, F., Ducharne, A., Bustillo, V., Thiéry, D.,
2016. River temperature modelling by strahler order at the regional scale in
the loire river basin, france. River Research and Applications 32, 597–609.
Caissie, D., 2006. The thermal regime of rivers: a review. Freshwater biology
51, 1389–1406.
Caldwell, S., Kelleher, C., Baker, E., Lautz, L.K., 2019. Relative information
from thermal infrared imagery via unoccupied aerial vehicle informs simula-
tions and spatially-distributed assessments of stream temperature. Science
of the Total Environment 661, 364–374.
Chow, V.T., 1959.
Open-channel Hydraulics.
Civil Engineering Series,
McGraw-Hill, New York.
57
==PAGE:67==
Cristea, N.C., Burges, S.J., 2009. Use of thermal infrared imagery to comple-
ment monitoring and modeling of spatial stream temperatures. Journal of
Hydrologic Engineering 14, 1080–1090.
Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut, n.d. Vejrarkiv. URL: https://www.dmi.
dk/vejrarkiv/.
DHI group,
2017.
MIKE Hydro River User Guide.
URL: https:
//manuals.mikepoweredbydhi.help/2017/Water_Resources/MIKEHydro_
River_UserGuide.pdf.
DHI Group, n.d. MIKE Hydro River. URL: https://www.mikepoweredbydhi.
com/products/mike-hydro-river.
Dreiseitl, S., Ohno-Machado, L., 2002. Logistic regression and artiﬁcial neural
network classiﬁcation models: A methodology review. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics 35, 352–359.
Drone Systems, n.d. Drone Systems. Thermal Inspection Specialists. URL:
https://dronesystems.dk/en/.
DTU Space, 2019. Coordinates and Map Projections. 30532 Introduction to
Digital Mapping and GIS. Lecture at Techical University of Denmark [Pow-
erpoint slides].
Dugdale, S.J., 2016. A practitioner’s guide to thermal infrared remote sensing
of rivers and streams: recent advances, precautions and considerations. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Water 3, 251–268.
Dugdale, S.J., Hannah, D.M., Malcom, I.A., 2017.
River temperature
modelling:
A review of process-based approaches and future directions.
Earth-Science Reviews 175, 97–113.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
earscirev.2017.10.009.
Dugdale,
S.J.,
Kelleher,
C.A.,
Malcolm,
I.A.,
Caldwell,
S.,
Hannah,
D.M., 2019.
Assessing the potential of drone-based thermal infrared
imagery
for
quantifying
river
temperature
heterogeneity.
Hydro-
logical
Processes
33,
1152–1163.
URL:
https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/hyp.13395,
doi:10.1002/hyp.13395,
arXiv:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/hyp.13395.
58
==PAGE:68==
Farrar, C.R., Worden, K., 2012. Supervised learning – classiﬁcation and regres-
sion, in: Structural Health Monitoring. John Wiley Sons, Ltd. chapter 11,
pp. 361–401. doi:10.1002/9781118443118.ch11.
Fischer, R., Wood, J., 1979. Drought resistance in spring wheat cultivars. iii.*
yield associations with morpho-physiological traits. Australian Journal of
Agricultural Research 30, 1001–1020.
Fullerton, A.H., Torgersen, C.E., Lawler, J.J., Steel, E.A., Ebersole, J.L., Lee,
S.Y., 2017. Longitudinal thermal heterogeneity in rivers and refugia for cold-
water species: eﬀects of scale and climate change. Aquatic Sciences , 80:3.
Giancristofaro, R.A., Salmaso, L., 2007. Model performance analysis and model
validation in logistic regression. Statistica 63, 375–396.
Habib, A., Xiong, W., He, F., Yang, H., Crawford, M., 2017. Improving or-
thorectiﬁcation of uav-based push-broom scanner imagery using derived or-
thophotos from frame cameras. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied
Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 10, 262–276.
Handcock, R., Gillespie, A., Cherkauer, K., Kay, J., Burges, S., Kampf, S.,
2006. Accuracy and uncertainty of thermal-infrared remote sensing of stream
temperatures at multiple spatial scales. Remote Sensing of Environment 100,
427–440. doi:10.1016/j.rse.2005.07.007.
Handcock, R.N., Torgersen, C.E., Cherkauer, K.A., Gillespie, A.R., Tockner,
K., Faux, R.N., Tan, J., Carbonneau, P., 2012. Thermal infrared remote
sensing of water temperature in riverine landscapes. Fluvial remote sensing
for science and management 1, 85–113.
Hydroinform, 2019. Usserød Å, målersystem. URL: http://hydroinform.dk/
UsseroedIntern.html.
IOGP Geomatics Committee, n.d. Epsg geodetic parameter dataset. URL:
https://epsg.org.
Kay, J.E., Kampf, S.K., Handcock, R.N., Cherkauer, K.A., Gillespie, A.R.,
Burges, S.J., 2005.
Accuracy of lake and stream temperatures estimated
from thermal infrared images 1. JAWRA Journal of the American Water
Resources Association 41, 1161–1175.
59
==PAGE:69==
Klokan Technologies GmbH, n.d. Epsg:25832. etrs89 / utm zone 32n. URL:
https://epsg.io/25832.
Kotsiantis, S., 2007. Supervised machine learning: A review of classiﬁcation
techniques. Informatica (Ljubljana) 31, 249–268.
Köppl, C.J., 2016. Thermal imaging from unmanned airborne vehicles [Unpub-
lished Master Thesis]. Technical University of Denmark.
Lee, W.M., 2019. Python Machine Learning. John Wiley & Sons.
Loinaz, M.C., Davidsen, H.K., Butts, M., Bauer-Gottwein, P., 2013. Integrated
ﬂow and temperature modeling at the catchment scale. Journal of Hydrology
495, 238–251.
Loog, M., 2018.
Supervised classiﬁcation:
Quite a brief overview.
Ma-
chine Learning Techniques for Space Weather ,
113–145doi:10.1016/
b978-0-12-811788-0.00005-6.
Manfreda, S., Mccabe, M., Miller, P., Lucas, R., Madrigal, V.P., Mallinis, G.,
Ben Dor, E., Helman, D., Estes, L., Ciraolo, G., Müllerová, J., Tauro, F.,
Isabel De Lima, M., Pedroso de Lima, J., Francés, F., Caylor, K., Kohv,
M., Maltese, A., Tóth, B., 2018. On the use of unmanned aerial systems for
environmental monitoring doi:10.20944/preprints201803.0097.v1.
Miljø-
og
Fødevareministeriet,
n.d.
Grundvand
skal
bruges
til
køling
og
opvarmning.
URL:
https://mst.dk/natur-vand/
vand-i-hverdagen/drikkevand/drikkevandsinitiativ/
grundvand-skal-bruges-til-koeling-og-opvarmning/.
Mitas, L., Mitasova, H., 1999. Spatial interpolation. Geographical information
systems: principles, techniques, management and applications 1.
QGIS Development Team, 2009. QGIS Geographic Information System. Open
Source Geospatial Foundation. URL: http://qgis.osgeo.org.
Ribaucourt, E., 2019. Integrated monitoring of impacts from wet weather dis-
charges to Usserød Å [Master Thesis]. Technical University of Denmark.
Riverscapes, 2020. Usserød Å Catchment. URL: https://www.riverscapes.
env.dtu.dk/field-sites/usseroed.
60
==PAGE:70==
Rudersdal,
Hørsholm
og
Fredensborg
Kommuner,
2018.
Regula-
tiv
for
Usserød
Å.
URL:
https://www.horsholm.dk/media/3309/
usseroed-aa-regulativ-2018-samlet-med-bilag.pdf.
Sahin, S., 2014. An empirical approach for determining longitudinal dispersion
coeﬃcients in rivers. Environmental Processes 1, 277–285.
Styrelsen
for
Dataforsyning
og
Eﬀektivisering,
n.d.
INSPIRE
Hy-
droNetwork.
URL: https://download.kortforsyningen.dk/content/
inspire-hydronetwork. From Geodanmark Database.
Sun, A.Y., Scanlon, B.R., 2019. How can big data and machine learning beneﬁt
environment and water management: A survey of methods, applications, and
future directions. Environmental Research Letters 14. URL: www.scopus.
com. cited By :5.
Vatland, S.J., Gresswell, R.E., Poole, G.C., 2015. Quantifying stream ther-
mal regimes at multiple scales: Combining thermal infrared imagery and
stationary stream temperature data in a novel modeling framework. Water
Resources Research 51, 31–46.
Wawrzyniak, V., Piégay, H., Allemand, P., Vaudor, L., Grandjean, P., 2013.
Prediction of water temperature heterogeneity of braided rivers using very
high resolution thermal infrared (tir) images. International Journal of Remote
Sensing 34, 4812–4831.
Webb, B.W., Hannah, D.M., Moore, R.D., Brown, L.E., Nobilis, F., 2008.
Recent advances in stream and river temperature research.
Hydrological
Processes: An International Journal 22, 902–918.
Zeng, Y.h., Huai, W.x., 2013. Estimation of longitudinal dispersion coeﬃcient
in rivers. Journal of Hydro-environment Research 8. doi:10.1016/j.jher.
2013.02.005.
61
==PAGE:71==
62
==PAGE:72==
Appendix A
Python Program
Main.py
1 from
generalFunctions
import
getCrossProfiles
2
3 cross_profiles , longitudinalDist = getCrossProfiles ()
4 #%% plotting
single
profiles to proceed
with
visual
inspection of
filtration
and
changing of wrongly
filtered
profiles - creation of
dictionary
profiles_to_filter
5 from
generalFunctions
import
visualInspection
6 iD = 464
7 visualInspection (cross_profiles , iD)
8
9 #%% Manual
Identification of water non water and
creation of ML training
set
10 from
generalFunctions
import
MLDataSetCreation
11
12 dictManuallyFiltered = {}
13 X_train , y_train , ml_profiles = MLDataSetCreation (dictManuallyFiltered ,
cross_profiles )
14
15 #%% Finding
optimal
parameters
for SVM , Logistic
Regression
and KNN
16 from
generalFunctions
import
optimalParametersModels
17
18 percentageTest = 0.2
19 optimalLambdaLR , optimalNeighboursKNN , optimalLambdaSVM ,
opt_error_LR ,
opt_error_knn , opt_error_svm = optimalParametersModels (X_train , y_train ,
percentageTest )
20
63
==PAGE:73==
21 #%% Compute
Confusion
Matrices of all Models
22 from
confusionMatrix
import
confusionMatrix
23 conf_matrix_log_reg , conf_matrix_knn , conf_matrix_svm = confusionMatrix (
X_train , y_train , percentageTest ,optimalLambdaLR , optimalNeighboursKNN ,
optimalLambdaSVM )
24
25 #%%
26 from
generalFunctions
import
filterAndLongProf , createLRModel ,
createKNNModel
27
28 mdl_LR = createLRModel (1000 , X_train , y_train)
29 mdl_KNN = createKNNModel(int( optimalNeighboursKNN ), X_train , y_train)
30 longProfnoNan , longDistnoNan , cross_profiles = filterAndLongProf (
cross_profiles , mdl_LR , mdl_KNN , longitudinalDist )
31
32 #%%
33 from
generalFunctions
import
curveFit
34
35 result = curveFit(longProfnoNan , longDistnoNan )
36
37 #%% Calculate
residuals
from meas with
linear fit , returns:measured
residuals , score , m and q of the line
38 from
generalFunctions
import
correctionFactor
39 from
fitFunctions
import
fitfunc
40
41 meas = [1.3 , 3.8, 2.5, 2.7, 5, 4.8, 4.7, 4.6
,3.8]
42 measdist = [0, 0.6175 , 2.8342 , 4.3332 , 4.5500 , 4.7020 , 6.2872 ,
8.0424
,8.35]
43
44 measuredResiduals , score , m, q = correctionFactor (result , fitfunc , meas ,
measdist)
64
==PAGE:74==
generalFunctions.py
1 import
pandas as pd
2 from
crossProfileClass
import
crossProfile
3 import
numpy as np
4 from
profilesDataframe
import
idx_from_id
5 import
matplotlib.pyplot as plt
6 from
MLCodeProfiles
import
find_profiles_interval
7 from
MLCodeProfiles
import
create_ML_set
8 import
copy
9 from
MLParametrization
import
logRegParametrization
10 from
MLParametrization
import
svmParametrization
11 from
MLParametrization
import
knnParametrization
12 from
smoothingFilter
import
removeOutliers
13 from
MLCodeProfiles
import
gatheringInformation
14 from
sklearn.linear_model
import
LogisticRegression
15 from
sklearn.neighbors
import
KNeighborsClassifier
16 from
sklearn
import svm
17 from
savePlot
import
createXPlot , updateXPlot , plotPlot , updateXPlot_u
18 from
MLCodeProfiles
import
MLfilter
19 from
sklearn.linear_model
import
LinearRegression
20 from
scipy.optimize
import
curve_fit
21 from
smoothingFilter
import
density_filter
22 from
fitFunctions
import
polynomial , step1 , step2 , step3 , sigmoid , line
23 from
numpy
import exp , loadtxt , pi , sqrt
24 from
lmfit
import
Model
25
26
27 def
getCrossProfiles ():
28
temp_path_1 = r" Filtered_C1_RGB .csv"
29
temp_path_2 = r" Filtered_C2_RGB .csv"
30
temp_path_3 = r" Filtered_C3_RGB .csv"
31
32
x = int (input("Choose
stretch to analyze (1, 2 or 3), choose 4 for the
merged
file: "))
33
34
# Insert
spacing
between
profiles to calculate
chainage
35
spacing = 5
36
37
#read in data from csv file
38
if x == 1:
39
file = pd.read_csv(temp_path_1)
40
startChainage = 4312
# store
position of first
profile
with
respect to river
origin
41
startID = 448
# store ID of first
profile
42
65
==PAGE:75==
43
elif x == 2:
44
file = pd.read_csv(temp_path_2)
45
startChainage = 1552
46
startID = 165
47
48
elif x == 3:
49
file = pd.read_csv(temp_path_3)
50
startChainage = 0
51
startID = 0
52
53
elif x == 4:
54
file1 = pd.read_csv(temp_path_1)
55
startChainage1 = 4312
56
startID1 = 448
57
file1['Chainage '] = startChainage1 + (file1['LINE_ID '] - startID1)*
spacing
58
59
file2 = pd.read_csv(temp_path_2)
60
startChainage2 = 1552
61
startID2 = 165
62
file2['Chainage '] = startChainage2 + (file2['LINE_ID '] - startID2)*
spacing
63
64
file3 = pd.read_csv(temp_path_3)
65
startChainage3 = 0
66
startID3 = 0
67
file3['Chainage '] = startChainage3 + (file3['LINE_ID '] - startID3)*
spacing
68
69
file = pd.concat ([file3 , file2 , file1 ])
70
71
# fix
chainage
values
72
if x != 4:
73
file['Chainage '] = startChainage + (file['LINE_ID '] - startID)*
spacing
74
75
76
# CREATION OF PROFILES
===============================================================================
77
78
profiles_id = file.loc[:,"LINE_ID"]. unique ()
#create an array
containing
unique the values of line id (i.e. cross
profiles
IDs)
79
cross_profiles = [None ]*(np.size(profiles_id))
#initiate
array for
storing
values
80
# xs_averages = [None ]*(np.size(profiles_id))
66
==PAGE:76==
81
longitudinalProf_statvar = []
#initiate
empty
array to store
each
filtered
cross
profile 's average temp , will
produce
longitudinal
temperature
profile
82
longitudinalDist = []
#initiate
array to
store
longitudinal
distances (array of chainages of profiles)
83
longitudinalAvg = []
84
i = 0
85
for
profile in profiles_id:
86
87
profile_dataframe = file.loc[file['LINE_ID ']== profile]
# loc -> slicing
array. # slice the
dataframe
where the line ID
is the same (get values
related to one cross
profile)
88
89
p = crossProfile ()
#create
object
from
class
crossProfile
90
p.ID = profile
91
p.chainage = int( profile_dataframe .loc[:, 'Chainage ']. unique ())
92
#p.chainage = startChainage + (p.ID - startID)*spacing
93
p.xdist = profile_dataframe .loc[:, 'DIST ']. values
94
p.temp = profile_dataframe .loc[:, 'Temp ']. values
95
p.RGB = profile_dataframe .loc[:, 'Red'].values , profile_dataframe .
loc[:, 'Green '].values , profile_dataframe .loc[:, 'Blue ']. values
96
p. nanInvalidRGB ()
97
98
p.var = p.movingVar (6) [0]
# function
argument: window
size of moving
window
variance
99
100
p.window_size = p.movingVar (6) [1]
# store
window
size to use in staticFilter
function
101
102
if x == 4:
# due to difference in stretches
better
filtering is achieved
with
different
thresholds
for each
stretch
103
if p.chainage < startChainage2 :
104
p.filtered = p.staticFilter (0.08)
# function
argument: static
threshold
for
variance
cutting
105
elif
startChainage2
<= p.chainage < startChainage3 :
106
p.filtered = p.staticFilter (0.02)
107
elif p.chainage
>= startChainage3 :
108
p.filtered = p.staticFilter (0.2)
109
110
else:
111
p.filtered = p.staticFilter (0.02)
# modify
code to choose
wanted
variance
threshold
when
working
with
single
stretches
112
67
==PAGE:77==
113
114
cross_profiles [i]= p
115
116
# xsavg = longitudinalProfilePoint ()
117
# xsavg.xsID = p.ID
118
# xsavg.chainage = p.chainage /1000
119
# xsavg.statvarAvg = np.nanmean(p.filtered)
120
121
# xs_averages[i]= xsavg
122
123
filteredAvg = np.nanmean(p.filtered)
# retrieve
one single
temp
value
representative of the cross
profile
124
longitudinalProf_statvar = np.append(longitudinalProf_statvar ,
filteredAvg)
# fill
array
with
average
values
from each
cross
profile
125
126
longitudinalDist = np.append(longitudinalDist , p.chainage /1000)
# store
distances in km - reference
point 0 is the origin of
the river
127
128
129
#
plt.figure ()
130
#
plt.plot(p.xdist , p.temp)
131
#
plt.plot(p.xdist , p.filtered)
132
#
plt.plot(p.xdist [0:np.size(p.xdist)-p.window_size], p.var)
133
#
plt.legend (['Raw Temp ','Filtered ', 'Variance '])
134
#
plt.xlabel('Cross -sectional
Distance (m) ')
135
#
plt.ylabel('Temperature (
[U+FFFD]C
) ')
136
#
plt.title (" Profile " + str(p.ID) + " - Chainage: km " + str(p.
chainage /1000))
137
#
plt.savefig(folder + '\Profile ' + str(profile))
138
#
plt.show ()
139
140
i = i + 1
141
142
# plot
average
values of temperature
along the
stretch
143
# plt.figure ()
144
# plt.plot(longitudinalDist , longitudinalProf_statvar , '.')
145
# plt.xlabel('Chainage (km) ')
146
# plt.ylabel('Temperature (
[U+FFFD]C
) ')
147
# plt.title('Longitudinal
Trend ')
148
# plt.title('Longitudinal
Average , Variance
Filter , stretch ' + str(x))
149
#plt.savefig( filtered_folder + '\Longitudinal
average ')
150
151
return
cross_profiles , longitudinalDist
68
==PAGE:78==
152
153 def
visualInspection (cross_profiles , iD):
154
idx = idx_from_id(cross_profiles , iD)
155
profile_eg = cross_profiles [idx]
156
157
plt.figure ()
158
plt.plot(profile_eg.xdist , profile_eg.temp)
159
plt.plot(profile_eg.xdist , profile_eg.filtered)
160
plt.title("Profile " + str(profile_eg.ID) + " - Chainage: km " + str(
profile_eg.chainage /1000))
161
plt.legend (['Temp
Profile ', 'Filtered
temp '])
162
plt.xlabel('Cross -sectional
Distance (m)')
163
plt.ylabel('Temperature (
[U+FFFD]C
)')
164
plt.xticks(np.arange(min(profile_eg.xdist), max(profile_eg.xdist)+1, 1)
)
165
166 def
MLDataSetCreation (profiles_to_filter , cross_profiles ):
167
168
# Takes a dictionary as input , where the key is the
profile iD and the
value is a tuple (waterBegin , waterEnd)
169
# This
gives the
opportunity of adding
profiles
which are
manually
identified (other
info
below)
170
# In this case it automatically
uses a predefined
dictionary
for
comodity
171
172
profiles_to_filter = {
# key =
profile ID , values = (x where
water begins , x where
water
ends)
173
# #1 : (6 ,13),
# to add
profile
that is already
correctly
filtered: write an x_beg > x_end , eg:
(1 ,0)
174
# #2 : (7.5, 12.8) ,
#
profile
where no water is found: (0,0)
175
# #3 : (8 ,13),
176
# 5 : (6, 15),
177
# 6 : (7, 14),
178
# 7 : (7.5, 13),
179
# 8 : (8.5, 12.5) ,
180
# 9 : (8.1, 13.5) ,
181
# 10 : (1, 0),
182
# #11: (1, 0),
183
# 13 : (6.8, 12.5) ,
184
# #14 : (4.5, 12.5) ,
185
# 15 : (1, 0),
186
# 16 : (9, 12.6) ,
187
# 19 : (1, 0),
188
# 20 : (8, 13),
69
==PAGE:79==
189
# 21 : (5, 12.1) ,
190
# 22 : (8
,15.9),
191
# #24 : (0,0),
192
# 25 : (8.2, 14.1) ,
193
# 26 : (1, 0),
194
# 27 : (1, 0),
195
# #28 : (0, 17),
196
# #29 : (0, 19),
197
# #30 : (1, 18),
198
# 31 : (3, 16.6) ,
199
# #63 : (0, 0),
200
# 67 : (10.2 , 11.4) ,
201
# #85 : (0, 0),
202
# #86 : (0, 0),
203
# 94 : (9.5, 11.3) ,
204
# 104 : (9, 10.8) ,
205
# 117 : (7.6, 11.2) ,
206
# 118 : (7.5, 11.5) ,
207
# #122 : (0, 0),
208
# #123 : (0, 0),
209
# #160 : (0, 0),
210
# #167 : (0, 0),
211
# 175 : (7.5, 12)
212
}
213
214
# ml_profiles = copy.deepcopy( cross_profiles )
215
ml_profiles
=[]
216
217
# Manual
identification of valid
interval - correctly
filtered
profiles
(using
static
variance
filter) to train
algorithm
218
valid_intervals = {3:(360 , 415) , 2:(2072 ,
2082) , 1:(7317 ,
7787)}
# define
valid
intervals of profiles
for each
stretch {
stretch: (chainage_beg , chainage_end )}
219
220
for
stretch in valid_intervals :
221
222
chainage_beginning , chainage_end = valid_intervals [stretch]
223
ml_profiles = np.append(ml_profiles , find_profiles_interval (
chainage_beginning , chainage_end , cross_profiles ))
224
225
226
# Creating
new
profiles
with
manual
filtration
227
for key in profiles_to_filter :
#Looping
through
the
profiles
and
changing
the
profile.
filtered
228
70
==PAGE:80==
229
x_beginning , x_end = profiles_to_filter [key]
#Finding
out where to start and end the water
230
idx = idx_from_id(cross_profiles , key)
# Retrieve
index
inside
cross_profiles
variable
from
profile ID
key in dictionary
231
232
if (x_beginning <= x_end):
#Add
already
well
filtered
profiles
233
cross_profiles [idx]. change_profile_filtered (x_beginning , x_end)
#Using the
function
that
returns
the new
profile.filtered
for the
filter
234
#Assigning
the new
profile.filtered to the
specific
profile
235
236
ml_profiles = np.append(ml_profiles , cross_profiles [idx])
237
238
ml_profiles_list = list(ml_profiles)
239
240
X_train , y_train = create_ML_set(ml_profiles)
241
242
return
X_train , y_train , ml_profiles_list
243
244 def
optimalParametersModels (X_train , y_train , percentageTest ):
245
246
lambda_interval = np.logspace (-1, 2, 10)
247
neighbors_interval = range (1 ,20 ,1)
248
kernels = ['linear ', 'sigmoid ']
249
250
indexing = range (3)
251
opt_error_LR = np.zeros(len(indexing))
252
opt_lambda_LR = np.zeros(len(indexing))
253
254
opt_error_svm = np.zeros(len(indexing))
255
opt_lambda_svm = np.zeros(len(indexing))
256
257
opt_error_knn = np.zeros(len(indexing))
258
opt_neighbours_knn = np.zeros(len(indexing))
259
260
261
for i in indexing:
262
opt_error_LR[i], opt_lambda_LR[i] = logRegParametrization (
lambda_interval , X_train , y_train , percentageTest )
263
opt_error_knn[i], opt_neighbours_knn [i] = knnParametrization (
neighbors_interval , X_train , y_train , percentageTest )
264
opt_error_svm[i], opt_lambda_svm [i] = svmParametrization (X_train ,
y_train , percentageTest , kernels , lambda_interval )
265
71
==PAGE:81==
266
optimalLambdaLR = most_frequent(list( opt_lambda_LR ))
267
optimalNeighboursKNN = most_frequent (list( opt_neighbours_knn ))
268
optimalLambdaSVM = most_frequent(list( opt_lambda_svm ))
269
270
return
optimalLambdaLR , optimalNeighboursKNN , optimalLambdaSVM ,
opt_error_LR , opt_error_knn , opt_error_svm
271
272 def
plotProfileWithModel (model , idx , cross_profiles ):##########
273
profile_eg = cross_profiles [idx]
274
plt.figure ()
275
X_eg = gatheringInformation (profile_eg)
276
y_eg = model.predict(X_eg)
277
plt.plot(profile_eg.xdist , profile_eg.temp)
278
plt.plot(profile_eg.xdist , y_eg)
279
plt.plot(profile_eg.xdist , removeOutliers (y_eg), color = 'black ')
280
plt.title('AI identification of water
over
Cross
Section
Profile ' +
str(profile_eg.ID))
281
plt.legend (['Temp
Profile ', 'Filter '])
282
plt.xlabel('Cross -sectional
Distance (m)')
283
plt.ylabel('Temperature (
[U+FFFD]C
)')
284
285 def
createLRModel(lambdaValue , X_train , y_train):######
286
287
mdl_LR = LogisticRegression ( C=1/ lambdaValue , solver='liblinear ',
multi_class='ovr',
# create
model
with
optimal
parameters
defined
288
tol=1e-4, random_state =1,
289
penalty='l2', max_iter =1000)
290
291
mdl_LR.fit(X_train , y_train)
292
293
return
mdl_LR
294
295 def
createKNNModel (neighbors , X_train , y_train):######
296
297
mdl_KNN = KNeighborsClassifier (n_neighbors=neighbors)
298
mdl_KNN.fit(X_train ,y_train)
299
300
return
mdl_KNN
301
302 def
createSVMModel (lambdaValue , X_train , y_train): ##########
303
304
mdlsvm = svm.SVC(C=1/ lambdaValue , kernel='sigmoid ')
305
mdlsvm.fit(X_train , y_train)
306
307
return
mdlsvm
308
72
==PAGE:82==
309 def
filterAndLongProf (cross_profiles , mdl_LR , mdl_KNN , longDist):
310
# Split
profiles
into 3 streches
311
stretches = [[] ,[] ,[]]
312
margin = [(0, 1552, 3), (1552 , 4312, 2), (4312 , 9000 , 1)]
313
for j in range (3):
314
for
profile in cross_profiles:
315
if margin[j][0] <= profile.chainage <= margin[j][1]:
316
profile.stretch = margin[j][2]
317
stretches[j]. append(profile)
318
319
longitudinalProf
=[]
320
321
for j in range (3):
322
for
profile in stretches[j]:
323
X = gatheringInformation (profile)
324
if j==1:
325
y = mdl_LR.predict(X)
326
y_1 = removeOutliers (y)
327
idx = idx_from_id(cross_profiles , profile.ID)
328
if 0<= profile.ID <166:
329
cross_profiles [idx]. nConcavity = False
330
cross_profiles [idx]. logRegFiltered = MLfilter(
cross_profiles [idx],y_1 , n= False)
331
else:
332
cross_profiles [idx]. nConcavity = True
333
cross_profiles [idx]. logRegFiltered =
MLfilter(
cross_profiles [idx],y_1)
334
filteredavg = np.nanmean( cross_profiles [idx]. logRegFiltered
)
335
else:
336
y = mdl_KNN.predict(X)
337
y_1 = removeOutliers (y)
338
idx = idx_from_id(cross_profiles , profile.ID)
339
if 0<= profile.ID <166:
340
cross_profiles [idx]. nConcavity = False
341
cross_profiles [idx]. knnFiltered = MLfilter(
cross_profiles [idx],y_1 , n= False)
342
else:
343
cross_profiles [idx]. nConcavity = True
344
cross_profiles [idx]. knnFiltered = MLfilter(
cross_profiles [idx],y_1)
345
filteredavg = np.nanmean( cross_profiles [idx]. knnFiltered)
346
longitudinalProf = np.append(longitudinalProf , filteredavg)
347
348
nanIdx = []
349
for i in range(len( longitudinalProf )):
73
==PAGE:83==
350
if np.isnan( longitudinalProf [i]):
351
nanIdx.append(i)
352
353
longProfnoNan = np.delete(longitudinalProf , nanIdx)
354
longDistnoNan = np.delete(longDist , nanIdx)
355
356
return
longProfnoNan , longDistnoNan , cross_profiles
357
358 def
curveFit(longProfnoNan , longDistnoNan ):
359
# We call the
density
filter in order to remove
blatant
outliers
360
longDist , longProf = density_filter ( longDistnoNan ,longProfnoNan , 9,
0.05)
361
longProfSaved = copy.deepcopy(longProf)
362
longDistSaved = copy.deepcopy(longDist)
363
364
# We fit out curve
with a sigmoid in the first strech , line on the
second and
polynomial in the third
365
# Initial
values of the
polynomial
366
init_vals = [1, 0, 1, 0, 3, 5, 2, 1 ,1 ,1 ]
367
best_vals , covar = curve_fit(polynomial , longDistSaved [168:] ,
longProfSaved [168:] , p0=init_vals)
368
369
# We see where
temperature is bigger
than 3, add more
weight in order
to fit the
polynomial
correctly
370
pos = []
371
for i in range(len(longProf)):
372
if ( longProfSaved[i] > 2.9) & (longDistSaved [i] > 4.310):
373
pos.append(i)
374
sigma = np.ones(len(longDistSaved))
375
sigma[pos] = 10
376
377
# Actually
fitting
the model
378
mod = Model(sigmoid)*Model(step1) + Model(line)*Model(step2) + Model(
polynomial)*Model(step3)
379
pars = mod.make_params( c1= 20, c2 =0.4 , c3 =1.3 , c4=0.45 , slope =0,
intercept =1, a = best_vals [0]
, b= best_vals [1], c= best_vals [2], d=
best_vals [3] , e = best_vals [4], f = best_vals [5], g = best_vals [6], h =
best_vals [7], i = best_vals [8], l = best_vals [9])
380
381
result = mod.fit(longProfSaved , pars , x=longDistSaved , weights = sigma)
382
print(result.fit_report ())
383
384
# Plotting
the result
385
meas = [1.3 , 3.8, 2.5, 2.7, 5, 4.8, 4.7, 4.6, 3.8]
386
measdist = [0, 0.6175 , 2.8342 , 4.3332 , 4.5500 , 4.7020 , 6.2872 ,
8.0424 ,8.35]
74
==PAGE:84==
387
388
plt.figure(figsize = (6.76 ,4.55))
389
plt.plot(longDistSaved , longProfSaved , '.', markersize =2, c='tab:cyan ',
label='drone -borne T')
390
plt.plot(measdist , meas , '.', markersize =8 , c='black ', label='measured
T')
391
plt.plot(longDistSaved , result.best_fit , 'tab:gray ', label='fit')
392
plt.ylabel('T (
[U+FFFD]C
)')
393
plt.xlabel('Chainage (km)')
394
plt.xticks(np.arange (0,9, 0.5))
395
plt.legend(loc='lower
right ', ncol =2)
396
plt.savefig("dronefit.pdf")
397
plt.show ()
398
399
return
result
400
401 def
correctionFactor (result , fitfunc , meas , measdist):
402
measuredResiduals = [meas[i] - fitfunc(result.best_values ,measdist)[i]
for i in range(len(meas))]
403
404
#Linear
residuals
fit
405
res_linearfit = LinearRegression ().fit(np.array(measdist).reshape (-1,1)
, np.array( measuredResiduals ).reshape (-1,1))
406
m= res_linearfit.coef_
407
q= res_linearfit.intercept_
408
score= res_linearfit.score(np.array(measdist).reshape (-1,1), np.array(
measuredResiduals ).reshape (-1,1))
409
410
y_res = [m[0]*x + q[0] for x in measdist]
411
plt.figure(figsize = (6.63 ,2.6))
412
plt.plot(measdist , measuredResiduals , 'x', c='darkred ', label='
residuals of measured T')
413
plt.plot(measdist , y_res , label='fit: y= 0.136x + 1.236 \n $R ^{2}$ =
0.41 ')
414
plt.yticks(np.arange(-1, 2.5, 0.5))
415
plt.ylabel('T (
[U+FFFD]C
)')
416
plt.xlabel('Chainage (km)')
417
plt.xticks(np.arange (0,9, 1))
418
plt.legend(loc='lower
right ')
419
plt.savefig(" residualsmeasured .pdf", bbox_inches = "tight")
420
421
return
measuredResiduals , score , m[0], q[0]
422
423 def
most_frequent(List):
424
return max(set(List), key = List.count)
75
==PAGE:85==
crossProﬁleClass.py
1 import
numpy as np
2 import
statistics as stat
3 import
copy
4 from math
import
ceil
5 from math
import
floor
6 #from
varianceClass
import
variance
7
8
9 class
crossProfile(object):
10
11
ID = 0
12
chainage = 0
13
temp = []
14
xdist = []
15
var = []
16
window_size = -1
17
filtered = []
18
knnFiltered = []
19
logRegFiltered = []
20
svmFiltered = []
21
RGB = [ [] ,[] ,[] ]
22
nConcavity = None
23
24
25 #%% function to calculate
moving
window
variance
profile
26
27
def
movingVar(self , window_size):
28
29
var2ap = []
30
31
for i in range(0, np.size(self.temp)-window_size):
32
var2ap = np.append(var2ap , stat.variance(self.temp[i:i+
window_size ]))
33
34
return var2ap , window_size
#
information on window
size is stored for use in static
filtering
35
36
37
38 #%% filtering
function
according to static
variance
threshold
39
40
def
staticFilter (self , var_threshold ):
41
42
if self.window_size !=
-1 :
#
76
==PAGE:86==
check
that
variance
has been
calculated
before , else
return
error
43
44
var_center = int ((np.size(self.var)+self.window_size)/2)
#
define
centerline of variance
profile , remember
variance
has
window_size
elements
less than the
temperature
profile
45
filteredCrossP = copy.deepcopy(self.temp)
#
create
duplicate of temperature
profile to filter
46
47
# right
filtering
48
for i in range(var_center , np.size(self.var), +1):
#
loop
through
variance
profile
elements , increment
from
centerline
49
i = int(i)
50
if self.var[i] >= var_threshold :
51
filteredCrossP [i+int(self.window_size /2) :]= None
#
variance
profile is shifted (to the left), filtering
shifts by half
window_size
points to refer to correct
temp
position
52
break
53
54
# left
filtering
55
for i in range(var_center , 0 , -1):
#
loop
through
variance
profile
elements , decrement
from
centerline
56
i = int(i)
57
if self.var[i] >= var_threshold :
58
filteredCrossP [: i+int(self.window_size /2)]= None
59
break
60
61
62
else:
#
return
error if window_size
has not been defined , call
movingVar
function
and then
static
filtering
function
63
print('Variance
was not calculated , calling
function
movingVar ,
input
window
size for moving
variance ')
64
WS = int(input ('Moving
window
size (enter
number): '))
65
self.var = self.movingVar(WS)
66
print ('Thank you , now static
filter can be applied ')
67
self.staticFilter(var_threshold )
68
69
70
return
filteredCrossP
71
72
73
#%% filtering
function
according to percentage of increase in variance
with
respect to previous
variance
element
74
75
def
percentageFilter (self , percentage_threshold ):
76
77
==PAGE:87==
77
if self.window_size !=
-1 :
#
check
that
variance
has been
calculated
before , else
return
error
78
79
var_center = int ((np.size(self.var)+self.window_size)/2)
#
define
centerline of variance
profile , remember
variance
has
window_size
elements
less than the
temperature
profile
80
filteredCrossP = copy.deepcopy(self.temp)
#
create
duplicate of temperature
profile to filter
81
82
# right
filtering
83
for i in range(var_center , np.size(self.var), +1):
#
loop
through
variance
profile
elements , increment
from
centerline
84
i = int(i)
85
if self.var[i+1]
>= (1+ percentage_threshold )*self.var[i]:
86
filteredCrossP [i+1 :]= None
87
break
88
89
# left
filtering
90
for i in range(var_center , 0 , -1):
#
loop
through
variance
profile
elements , decrement
from
centerline
91
i = int(i)
92
if self.var[i-1]
>= (1+ percentage_threshold )*self.var[i]:
93
filteredCrossP [: i -1]= None
94
break
95
96
97
else:
#
return
error if window_size
has not been defined , call
movingVar
function
and then
static
filtering
function
98
print('Variance
was not calculated , calling
function
movingVar
, input
window
size for moving
variance ')
99
WS = int(input ('Moving
window
size (enter
number): '))
100
self.var = self.movingVar(WS)
101
print ('Thank you , now static
filter can be applied ')
102
self. percentageFilter ( percentage_threshold )
103
104
105
return
filteredCrossP
106
107
108 #%% Manual
changing of wrong
filtration
109
110
def
change_profile_filtered (self , xdist_beginning , xdist_end):
111
112
# Find the x position
where
water
starts and ends
within a cross
profile
78
==PAGE:88==
113
water_start = 0
114
water_end = 0
115
116
for i in range(0, np.size(self.xdist)):
117
118
if ( xdist_beginning == ceil(self.xdist[i] * 10) /10) or (
xdist_beginning == floor(self.xdist[i]*10) /10) :
#take
index of distance of water
start and water end
119
water_start = i
120
if (xdist_end == ceil(self.xdist[i] * 10) /10) or (xdist_end ==
floor(self.xdist[i]*10) /10) :
121
water_end = i
122
123
# Changing
the
filtration
124
125
for i in range (0, np.size(self.xdist)):
126
if (i<water_start):
127
self.filtered[i] = None
128
elif(water_start < i <= water_end):
129
self.filtered[i] = self.temp[i]
130
else:
131
self.filtered[i] = None
132
133
134 #%% Invalid RGB Points = NaN
135
def
nanInvalidRGB(self):
136
137
red = self.RGB [0]
138
green = self.RGB [1]
139
blue = self.RGB [2]
140
141
for i in range(np.size(red)):
142
143
if red[i] == 255 and green[i] == 255 and blue[i] == 255:
144
red[i] = None
145
green [i] = None
146
blue [i] = None
147
148
elif red[i] == 0 and green[i] == 0 and blue[i] == 0:
149
red[i] = None
150
green [i] = None
151
blue [i] = None
152
153
154 #%% Concavity of profile
155
def n_Or_U (self):
79
==PAGE:89==
156
157
if self.temp[int(np.size(self.xdist)/2)] < np.mean(self.temp):
158
self.nConcavity = False
159
160
else:
161
self.nConcavity = True
80
==PAGE:90==
proﬁlesDataframe.py
1 # Profiles
functions
2 import
numpy as np
3
4 # retrieve
index
inside
dataframe
from
profile ID
5 def
idx_from_id (crossProfiles , id_to_find):
6
7
for i in range(0, np.size(crossProfiles)):
8
9
if crossProfiles[i].ID == id_to_find:
10
break
11
12
return i
13
14 #%% Discern u-shaped
profiles
and n-shaped
profiles
15
16 def
profileConcavity (cross_profiles ):
17
18
u_profiles = []
19
n_profiles = []
20
21
for i in range(0, np.size( cross_profiles )):
22
23
prof = cross_profiles[i]
24
# center
temp
value < average
25
if prof.temp[int(np.size(prof.xdist)/2)] < np.mean(prof.temp):
26
u_profiles.append(prof)
27
# center
temp
value
>= average
28
else:
29
n_profiles.append(prof)
30
31
# # center
temp
value
lies
below
extremes
32
# if prof.temp [0] > prof.temp[int(np.size(prof.xdist)/2)] < prof.
temp[np.size(prof.xdist) -1] :
33
#
u_profiles.append(prof)
34
35
# # one or both
extremes
are not above
central
value
36
# else :
37
#
n_profiles.append(prof)
38
39
return
u_profiles , n_profiles
81
==PAGE:91==
MLCodeProﬁles.py
1 from
crossProfileClass
import
crossProfile
2 import
numpy as np
3 import
copy
4
5 #%% FUNCTION TO DETERMINE
TRAINING
SETS - X (Input), Y (Output)
6
7 # X is a matrix
containing
info on temperature , position
along
cross
section (x dist), variance
for each
point of the
selected
profiles
8 # Y is an array of values
where 1 = water , 0 = non water , associated to
each
input
point
9
10 def
create_ML_set(profile_array):
11
12
x_temp = []
13
x_dist = []
14
x_variance = []
15
y_ML = []
16
x_temp_center = []
17
18 #
profile_array = find_profiles_interval (chainage_beginning ,
chainage_end , profile_array)
19
20
for
profile in profile_array:
# Define X matrix
columns
21
22
x_dist = np.append(x_dist , profile.xdist)
# Merge
distance
info from all
profiles
into one single
array
23
x_temp = np.append(x_temp , profile.temp)
# Merge
temp info from all
profiles
into one single
array
24
25
x_variance = append_N_zeros (np.round(profile.window_size /2),
x_variance)
# Match
variance
profile
dimension by adding a total
of window_size
zeros
(1/2 at the
beginning
and 1/2 at the end)
26
x_variance = np.append(x_variance , profile.var)
27
x_variance = append_N_zeros (int(profile.window_size /2), x_variance)
28
29
for point in range(0, np.size(profile.filtered)):
# Define Y array
30
31
if (np.isnan(profile.filtered[point ])):
# where
filtered
profiles
have null values , y = 0, i.e. non
water
32
y_ML = np.append(y_ML , 0)
82
==PAGE:92==
33
else:
34
y_ML = np.append(y_ML , 1)
35
for point in range(0, np.size(profile.temp))
:
36
37
x_temp_center = np.append(x_temp_center , profile.temp[point] -
profile.temp[int(np.size(profile.temp)/2)])
38
39
40
41
# if filtered
profiles
have values , y = 1, i.e. water
42
43 #
print(np.size(x_temp), np.size(x_dist), np.size(x_variance))
44
X_ML = np.column_stack ((np.asarray(x_temp),np.asarray(x_dist),np.
asarray(x_variance),np.asarray(x_temp_center)))
#Merge
arrays
into
matrix
45
46
#Standardize
Matrix
47
mu = np.mean(X_ML , 0)
48
sigma = np.std(X_ML , 0)
49
X_ML = (X_ML - mu) / sigma
50
51
return X_ML , y_ML
52
53 #%% function to define
valid
profiles
stretch
54 def
find_profiles_interval (chainage_beginning , chainage_end , cross_profiles
):
55
56
ml_profiles = []
57
for i in range(0, np.size( cross_profiles )):
58
59
if ( chainage_end
>= cross_profiles [i]. chainage
>=
chainage_beginning ):
60
ml_profiles.append( cross_profiles [i])
61
62
return
ml_profiles
63
64 #%% function to append
wanted
number of zeros (to be used to correct
for
variance
profile
shift)
65 def
append_N_zeros (number_zeros , list_to_append ):
66
67
for i in range (0, int(number_zeros)):
68
list_to_append = np.append(list_to_append , 0)
69
70
return
list_to_append
71
72
83
==PAGE:93==
73 #%% function to gather
information
from
profile
for ML
74 def
gatheringInformation (profile_eg):
75
76
x_variance_eg = []
77
x_variance_eg = append_N_zeros(np.round(profile_eg.window_size /2),
x_variance_eg)
78
x_variance_eg = np.append(x_variance_eg , profile_eg.var)
79
x_variance_eg = append_N_zeros(int(profile_eg.window_size /2),
x_variance_eg)
80
x_temp_center = []
81
for point in range(0, np.size(profile_eg.temp))
:
82
83
x_temp_center = np.append(x_temp_center , profile_eg.temp[point]
- profile_eg.temp[int(np.size(profile_eg.temp)/2)])
84
85
X_eg = np.column_stack ((np.asarray(profile_eg.temp),np.asarray(
profile_eg.xdist),np.asarray(x_variance_eg ),np.asarray( x_temp_center )))
86
87
return
X_eg
88
89
90
91 #%% function to return
filtered
temperatures
based on Machine
Learning
point
validity
92 def
MLfilter (profile , modelOutput , n=True):
93
94
filteredTemperatures = copy.deepcopy(profile.temp)
95
96
for i in range (0, np.size(modelOutput)):
97
98
if modelOutput[i] == int(not(n)):
99
filteredTemperatures [i] = None
100
101
return
filteredTemperatures
102
103
104 #%% Normalization
function of model
input
data
105
106 def
normalize (X):
107
108
mu = np.mean(X, 0)
109
sigma = np.std(X, 0)
110
X_norm = (X - mu) / sigma
111
112
return
X_norm
84
==PAGE:94==
MLCodeProﬁles_wRGB.py
1 from
crossProfileClass
import
crossProfile
2 import
numpy as np
3 import
copy
4
5 #%% FUNCTION TO DETERMINE
TRAINING
SETS - X (Input), Y (Output)
6
7 # X is a matrix
containing
info on temperature , position
along
cross
section (x dist), variance
for each
point of the
selected
profiles
8 # Y is an array of values
where 1 = water , 0 = non water , associated to
each
input
point
9
10 def
create_ML_set(profile_array):
11
12
x_temp = []
13
x_dist = []
14
x_variance = []
15
x_R = []
16
x_G = []
17
x_B = []
18
y_ML = []
19
20 #
profile_array = find_profiles_interval (chainage_beginning ,
chainage_end , profile_array)
21
22
for
profile in profile_array:
# Define X matrix
columns
23
24
x_dist = np.append(x_dist , profile.xdist)
# Merge
distance
info from all
profiles
into one single
array
25
x_temp = np.append(x_temp , profile.temp)
# Merge
temp info from all
profiles
into one single
array
26
r, g, b = profile.RGB
27
x_R = np.append(x_R , r)
28
x_G = np.append(x_G , g)
29
x_B = np.append(x_B , b)
30
31
x_variance = append_N_zeros (np.round(profile.window_size /2),
x_variance)
# Match
variance
profile
dimension by adding a total
of window_size
zeros
(1/2 at the
beginning
and 1/2 at the end)
32
x_variance = np.append(x_variance , profile.var)
33
x_variance = append_N_zeros (int(profile.window_size /2), x_variance)
34
35
for point in range(0, np.size(profile.filtered)):
85
==PAGE:95==
# Define Y array
36
37
if np.isnan(profile.filtered[point ]):
# where
filtered
profiles
have null values , y = 0, i.e. non
water
38
y_ML = np.append(y_ML , 0)
39
else:
40
y_ML = np.append(y_ML , 1)
# if filtered
profiles
have values , y = 1, i.e. water
41
42 #
print(np.size(x_temp), np.size(x_dist), np.size(x_variance))
43
X_ML = np.column_stack ((np.asarray(x_temp),np.asarray(x_dist),np.
asarray(x_variance), np.asarray(x_R), np.asarray(x_G), np.asarray(x_B)))
#Merge
arrays
into
matrix
44
45
#Standardize
Matrix
46
#mu = np.mean(X_ML , 0)
47
#sigma = np.std(X_ML , 0)
48
#X_ML = (X_ML - mu) / sigma
49
50
X_ML , y_ML , removedRows = eliminateNanRGB (X_ML , y_ML)
# eliminate
from
training
set all points
that do
not have
associated
RGB values
51
52
return X_ML , y_ML , removedRows
53
54 #%% function to define
valid
profiles
stretch
55 def
find_profiles_interval (chainage_beginning , chainage_end , cross_profiles
):
56
57
ml_profiles = []
58
for i in range(0, np.size( cross_profiles )):
59
60
if ( chainage_end
>= cross_profiles [i]. chainage
>=
chainage_beginning ):
61
ml_profiles.append( cross_profiles [i])
62
63
return
ml_profiles
64
65 #%% function to append
wanted
number of zeros (to be used to correct
for
variance
profile
shift)
66 def
append_N_zeros (number_zeros , list_to_append ):
67
68
for i in range (0, int(number_zeros)):
69
list_to_append = np.append(list_to_append , 0)
70
86
==PAGE:96==
71
return
list_to_append
72
73
74 #%% function to gather
information
from
profile
for ML
75 def
gatheringInformation (profile_eg):
76
77
x_variance_eg = []
78
79
x_variance_eg = append_N_zeros(np.round(profile_eg.window_size /2),
x_variance_eg)
80
x_variance_eg = np.append(x_variance_eg , profile_eg.var)
81
x_variance_eg = append_N_zeros(int(profile_eg.window_size /2),
x_variance_eg)
82
83
X_eg = np.column_stack ((np.asarray(profile_eg.temp),np.asarray(
profile_eg.xdist),np.asarray(x_variance_eg ),np.asarray(profile_eg.RGB
[0]) ,np.asarray(profile_eg.RGB [1]) ,np.asarray(profile_eg.RGB [2])))
84
85
return
X_eg
86
87
88
89 #%% function to return
filtered
temperatures
based on Machine
Learning
point
validity
90 def
MLfilter (profile , modelOutput):
91
92
filteredTemperatures = copy.deepcopy(profile.temp)
93
94
for i in range (0, np.size(modelOutput)):
95
96
if modelOutput[i] == 0:
97
filteredTemperatures [i] = None
98
99
return
filteredTemperatures
100
101
102 #%% Normalization
function of model
input
data
103
104 def
normalize (X):
105
106
mu = np.mean(X, 0)
107
sigma = np.std(X, 0)
108
X_norm = (X - mu) / sigma
109
110
return
X_norm
111
87
==PAGE:97==
112
113 #%% Eliminate
points
with NaN RGB
114
115 def
eliminateNanRGB (X, y):
116
117
numbersToRemove = []
118
for i in range(np.size(y)):
119
120
if np.isnan(X[i, 3]):
121
numbersToRemove.append(i)
122
123
X = np.delete(X, numbersToRemove , axis = 0)
124
y = np.delete(y, numbersToRemove , axis = 0)
125
126
return X, y, numbersToRemove
88
==PAGE:98==
MLParametrization.py
1 from
sklearn.linear_model
import
LogisticRegression
2 from
sklearn.neighbors
import
KNeighborsClassifier , DistanceMetric
3 from
sklearn
import svm
4 from
sklearn. model_selection
import
train_test_split
5 import
numpy as np
6
7 #%%%
Logistic
Regression
8 import
matplotlib.pyplot as plt
9 from
savePlot
import
plotLRLambdaAndError
10 def
logRegParametrization (lambda_interval , X_train , y_train , test_ratio):
11
12
X_train_LR , X_test_LR , y_train_LR , y_test_LR = train_test_split (X_train
, y_train , test_size=test_ratio , stratify=y_train)
13
14
train_error_rate = np.zeros(len( lambda_interval ))
# Initialize
arrays to store
error
rates - train
error
needed
to avoid
overfitting
15
test_error_rate = np.zeros(len( lambda_interval ))
16
17
18
for k in range(0, len( lambda_interval )):
# loop to test
model
over
range of parameters (
changing
lambdas)
19
mdl = LogisticRegression ( C=1/ lambda_interval [k], solver='liblinear
', multi_class='ovr',
# parameters
left as default , 'ovr' = binary
problem (water , non water)
20
tol=1e-4, random_state =1,
21
penalty='l2', max_iter =1000)
22
23
mdl.fit(X_train_LR , y_train_LR)
# model fit , use
training
datasets
24
25
26
y_train_est = mdl.predict(X_train_LR).T
# predict
output
arrays
from
training
and
testing
sets
27
y_test_est = mdl.predict(X_test_LR).T
28
29
30
train_error_rate [k] = np.sum(y_train_est != y_train_LR) / len(
y_train_LR)*100
# compare
predictions (y_train_est) with
training
outputs
given
31
test_error_rate[k] = np.sum(y_test_est != y_test_LR) / len(
y_test_LR)*100
# give
results as percentage of error
over
total
89
==PAGE:99==
32
33
# PLOT
CREATION
34
plotLRLambdaAndError (lambda_interval , test_error_rate , train_error_rate
)
35
print( train_error_rate )
36
print( test_error_rate )
37
38
min_error = np.min( test_error_rate )
# check
value of minimum
error
39
opt_lambda_idx = np.argmin( test_error_rate )
# give
index of lambda
producing
minimum
error
40
opt_lambda = lambda_interval[ opt_lambda_idx ]
# define
optimal
model
parameters
41
42
return
min_error , opt_lambda
43
44 #%% LogReg
Kfold
45
46
47
48
49 #%% Nearest
Neighbors
50 from
savePlot
import
plotKNNeighboursAndError
51 def
knnParametrization (neighbors_interval , X_train , y_train , test_ratio):
52
53
X_train_KNN , X_test_KNN , y_train_KNN , y_test_KNN = train_test_split (
X_train , y_train , test_size=test_ratio , stratify=y_train)
54
55
error_rate_test_KNN =[]
56
error_rate_train_KNN =[]
57
58
for d in neighbors_interval :
59
60
knclassifier = KNeighborsClassifier (n_neighbors=d);
61
knclassifier.fit(X_train_KNN , y_train_KNN);
62
63
y_est_test_KNN = knclassifier.predict(X_test_KNN);
64
y_est_train_KNN = knclassifier.predict(X_train_KNN);
65
66
error_rate_test_KNN .append (100* np.sum( y_est_test_KNN != y_test_KNN)
/ len( y_est_test_KNN))
67
error_rate_train_KNN .append (100* np.sum( y_est_train_KNN !=
y_train_KNN) / len( y_est_train_KNN))
68
print('inside KNN!')
69
print(d)
70
90
==PAGE:100==
71
min_error = np.min( error_rate_test_KNN )
72
opt_neighbors_position = np.argmin( error_rate_test_KNN )
73
opt_neighbors = neighbors_interval [ opt_neighbors_position ]
74
75
plotKNNeighboursAndError (neighbors_interval , error_rate_test_KNN ,
error_rate_train_KNN )
76
77
return
min_error , opt_neighbors
78
79
80 #%% Support
Vector
Machine
81 from
savePlot
import
plotSVMLambdaAndError
82 def
svmParametrization (X_train , y_train , test_ratio , kernels ,
lambda_interval ):
83
84
X_train_svm , X_test_svm , y_train_svm , y_test_svm = train_test_split (
X_train , y_train , test_size=test_ratio , stratify=y_train)
85
86
svm_test_error = []
87
svm_train_error = []
88
svm_min_error = []
89
results_svm = {}
90
91
for
command in kernels:
92
print("In Kernel:" + str(command))
93
i = 0
94
for k in lambda_interval :
95
96
mdlsvm = svm.SVC(C=1/k, kernel=command)
97
mdlsvm.fit(X_train_svm , y_train_svm)
98
99
y_pred_test = mdlsvm.predict(X_test_svm).T
# predict
output
arrays
from
training
and
testing
sets
100
y_pred_train = mdlsvm.predict(X_train_svm).T
101
102
svm_test_error = np.append(svm_test_error , np.sum(y_pred_test
!= y_test_svm) / len(y_test_svm)*100)
# compare
predictions (
y_train_est) with
training
outputs
given
103
svm_train_error = np.append(svm_train_error , np.sum(
y_pred_train != y_train_svm)/len(y_train_svm)*100)
104
print("lambda: " + str(i))
105
i = i+1
106
svm_min_error = np.min(svm_test_error )
# check
value of minimum
error
107
svm_opt_lambda_idx = np.argmin( svm_test_error )
# give
index of lambda
producing
minimum
error
91
==PAGE:101==
108
results_svm[str(command)] = (svm_min_error , lambda_interval [
svm_opt_lambda_idx ])
109
plotSVMLambdaAndError (lambda_interval , svm_test_error ,
svm_train_error )
110
print( svm_train_error )
111
112
minimum = 100
113
name_kernel = ''
114
opt_lambda = 0
115
print(results_svm)
116
for ker in results_svm:
117
best_err_kernel = results_svm[ker ][0]
118
best_lambda_kernel = results_svm[ker ][1]
119
120
if best_err_kernel < minimum:
121
minimum_error = best_err_kernel
122
name_kernel = ker
123
opt_lambda = best_lambda_kernel
124
print(minimum_error)
125
print(name_kernel)
126
print(opt_lambda)
127
128
#opt_kernel= min(results_svm , key=results_svm.get)
#
iteration
through
the keys of the dictionary , returns
smallest
value
according to the
function
specified in key , i.e. the
smallest
value -
dictionary.get
returns
values of dict
129
# svm_opt_lambda = results_svm[opt_kernel ][1]
#
in the min
function we assume the error is smaller
than the lambda
130
131
#return
opt_kernel , svm_opt_lambda
132
return
minimum_error , opt_lambda
92
==PAGE:102==
smoothingFilter.py
1 import
numpy as np
2 import
matplotlib.pyplot as plt
3
4 #%%
5 def
removeOutliers (array):
6
7
arr_length = np.size(array)
8
slider_size = int(arr_length /10)
9
10
for i in range (arr_length - slider_size):
11
check_intervals = int(slider_size /4)
12
zerosExtremes = countZeros(array[i:i+ check_intervals ])[0] +
countZeros(array[i+3* check_intervals :i+4* check_intervals ])[0]
13
onesExtremes = countZeros(array[i:i+ check_intervals ])[1] +
countZeros(array[i+3* check_intervals :i+4* check_intervals ])[1]
14
zerosCenter = countZeros(array[i+ check_intervals :i+3*
check_intervals ])[0]
15
onesCenter = countZeros(array[i+ check_intervals :i+3* check_intervals
])[1]
16
17
if (( zerosCenter /( check_intervals *2)) < 0.3 ) and (( onesExtremes /(
check_intervals *2)) > 0.5):
18
zerosPosition = countZeros(array[i+ check_intervals :i+3*
check_intervals ])[2]
19
array = setToOne(array , zerosPosition , i + check_intervals )
20
21
if (( onesCenter /( check_intervals *2)) < 0.8 ) and (( zerosExtremes /(
check_intervals *2)) > 0.5):
22
onesPosition = countZeros(array[i+ check_intervals :i+2*
check_intervals ])[3]
23
array = setToZero(array , onesPosition ,
i + check_intervals )
24
25
zerosBeginning = countZeros(array [0: int(slider_size /4)])[0]
26
onesBeginning = countZeros(array [0: int(slider_size /4)])[1]
27
zeroEnd = countZeros(array[len(array)-int(slider_size /4):len(array)])
[0]
28
onesEnd = countZeros(array[len(array)-int(slider_size /4):len(array)])
[1]
29
30
if zeroEnd /( slider_size /4) <0.4:
31
zeroPosition = countZeros(array[len(array)-int(slider_size /4):len(
array)])[2]
32
array = setToOne(array , zeroPosition ,len(array)-int(slider_size /4)
)
93
==PAGE:103==
33
if onesEnd /( slider_size /4) <0.4:
34
onesPosition = countZeros(array[len(array)-int(slider_size /4):len(
array)])[3]
35
array = setToZero(array , onesPosition ,len(array)-int(slider_size /4)
)
36
37
if zerosBeginning /( slider_size /4) <0.4:
38
zeroPosition = countZeros(array [0: int(slider_size /4)])[2]
39
array = setToOne(array , zeroPosition ,0)
40
if onesBeginning /( slider_size /4) <0.4:
41
onesPosition = countZeros(array [0: int(slider_size /4)])[3]
42
array = setToZero(array , onesPosition ,0)
43
44
array = removeExtremes (array)
45
return
array
46
47
48 def
countZeros(array):
49
50
counter0 = 0
51
counter1 = 0
52
positions0 = []
53
positions1 = []
54
for i in range(len(array)):
55
if array[i] == 0:
56
positions0.append(i)
57
counter0 += 1
58
if array[i] == 1:
59
positions1.append(i)
60
counter1 += 1
61
return
counter0 , counter1 , positions0 , positions1
62
63
64 def
setToZero (array , where , constant):
65
for
position in where:
66
array[position + constant] = 0
67
68
return
array
69
70
71 def
setToOne (array , where , constant):
72
for
position in where:
73
array[position + constant] = 1
74
return
array
75
76
94
==PAGE:104==
77 def
removeExtremes (array):
78
array_center = int(np.size(array)/2)
79
80
for j in range(array_center , int(np.size(array)) -1, +1):
81
if array[j]+ array[j+1] == 1:
82
array[j+1 :]= array[j+1]
83
break
84
for j in range(array_center , 1,
-1):
85
if array[j]+ array[j-1] == 1:
86
array [: j -1]=
array[j-1]
87
break
88
89
return
array
90
91 def
density_filter (x_values , y_values , mesh_grade , accep_per):
92
# Meshing
and
disregard of low -density
zones (outliers)
93
den_mat = np.zeros (( mesh_grade , mesh_grade))
94
ind_mat = np.zeros ((len(x_values), 2))
95
max_x = x_values [-1]
96
min_x = x_values [0]
97
max_y = max(y_values)
98
min_y = min(y_values)
99
100
mesh_dx = (max_x - min_x) / mesh_grade
101
mesh_dy = (max_y - min_y) / mesh_grade
102
103
for i in range(len(x_values)):
# Assigning
density
values
104
n = 0
105
m = 0
106
while
x_values[i] > min_x + (n + 1) * mesh_dx:
107
n = n + 1
108
while
y_values[i] > min_y + (m + 1) * mesh_dy:
109
m = m + 1
110
111
den_mat[n, m] = den_mat[n, m] + 1
112
ind_mat[i] = [n, m]
113
114
# Pairs to delete (low -density
ones)
115
indDel = []
116
for n in range(mesh_grade):
117
for m in range(mesh_grade):
118
if den_mat[n, m] / np.max(den_mat) < accep_per
and
den_mat[n, m
] != 0:
119
indices = [n, m]
120
indDel.append(indices)
121
95
==PAGE:105==
122
listDel = []
123
for i in range(len(ind_mat)):
124
flag = 0
125
for j in range(len(indDel)):
126
lowDenseIdx = indDel[j]
127
if lowDenseIdx [0] == ind_mat[i, 0] and
lowDenseIdx [1] ==
ind_mat[i, 1]:
128
flag = 1
129
if flag:
130
listDel.append(i)
131
132
# Delete
unwanted
values
133
y_fin = np.delete(y_values , listDel)
134
x_fin = np.delete(x_values , listDel)
135
return x_fin , y_fin
96
==PAGE:106==
confusionMatrix.py
1 from
crossProfileClass
import
crossProfile
2
3 # FUNCTION TO CREATE
CONFUSION
MATRICES
4 from
sklearn. model_selection
import
train_test_split
5 from
sklearn.linear_model
import
LogisticRegression
6 from
sklearn.neighbors
import
KNeighborsClassifier , DistanceMetric
7 from
sklearn
import svm
8 from
sklearn.metrics
import
confusion_matrix
9
10 def
confusionMatrix (X_train , y_train , test_ratio ,optimal_lambda_logreg ,
optimal_neighbours_knn , optimal_lambda_svm ):
11
12
#THESE
PARAMETERS
CAN BE PUT AS INPUT , FINDING
THE MOST
FREQUENT AT
LINE 297 OF MainUpdated_2ML .py
13
optimal_lambda_logreg = 0.1
14
optimal_neighbours_knn = 1
15
optimal_lambda_svm = 46.41588834
16
17
#WE SPLIT THE TRAIN AND TEST INTO
PARTS TO COMPARE
18
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split (X_train , y_train ,
test_size=test_ratio , stratify=y_train)
19
20
#WE TRAIN ALL MODELS AND CREATE A CONFUSION
MATRIX FOR THEM
21
22
#WE TRAIN
LOGISTIC
REGRESSION
AND
COMPUTE
ypred AND GET
CONFUSION
MATRIX
23
mdl = LogisticRegression ( C=1/ optimal_lambda_logreg , solver='liblinear '
, multi_class='ovr',
# parameters
left as default , 'ovr' = binary
problem (water , non water)
24
tol=1e-4, random_state =1,
25
penalty='l2', max_iter =1000)
26
27
mdl.fit(X_train , y_train)
#
model fit , use
training
datasets
28
y_pred_LR = mdl.predict(X_test).T
29
conf_matrix_log_reg = confusion_matrix (y_test , y_pred_LR)
30
31
#WE TRAIN KNN AND
COMPUTE
ypred AND GET
CONFUSION
MATRIX
32
knclassifier = KNeighborsClassifier (n_neighbors= optimal_neighbours_knn )
;
33
knclassifier.fit(X_train , y_train);
34
y_pred_KNN = knclassifier.predict(X_test);
35
conf_matrix_knn = confusion_matrix (y_test , y_pred_KNN)
36
97
==PAGE:107==
37
#WE TRAIN SVM AND
COMPUTE
ypred and GET
CONFUSION
MATRIX
38
mdlsvm = svm.SVC(C=1/ optimal_lambda_svm , kernel='sigmoid ')
39
mdlsvm.fit(X_train , y_train)
40
y_pred_svm = mdlsvm.predict(X_test).T
41
conf_matrix_svm = confusion_matrix (y_test , y_pred_svm)
42
43
return
conf_matrix_log_reg , conf_matrix_knn , conf_matrix_svm
44
45 def
confusionMatrixCompareLogReg (X_train , y_train , test_ratio , lambda1 ,
lambda2):
46
47
# AGAIN WE SPLIT
INTO TEST AND TRAIN
48
X_train , X_test , y_train , y_test = train_test_split (X_train , y_train ,
test_size=test_ratio , stratify=y_train)
49
50
print(len(y_train))
51
print(len(y_test))
52
mdl1 = LogisticRegression ( C=1/ lambda1 , solver='liblinear ', multi_class
='ovr',
# parameters
left as default , 'ovr' = binary
problem (water ,
non water)
53
tol=1e-4, random_state =1,
54
penalty='l2', max_iter =1000)
55
56
mdl2 = LogisticRegression ( C=1/ lambda2 , solver='liblinear ', multi_class
='ovr',
# parameters
left as default , 'ovr' = binary
problem (water ,
non water)
57
tol=1e-4, random_state =1,
58
penalty='l2', max_iter =1000)
59
60
mdl1.fit(X_train , y_train)
# model fit , use
training
datasets
61
y_pred_1 = mdl1.predict(X_test).T
62
63
mdl2.fit(X_train , y_train)
# model fit , use
training
datasets
64
y_pred_2 = mdl2.predict(X_test).T
65
66
conf_matrix_1 = confusion_matrix (y_test , y_pred_1)
67
conf_matrix_2 = confusion_matrix (y_test , y_pred_2)
68
69
return
conf_matrix_1 , conf_matrix_2
70
71 def
confusionMatrixCompareRemoveOutliers (Profiles , percentage_train ,
test_lambda , test_lambda2 ):
72
73
import
random
98
==PAGE:108==
74
from
MLCodeProfiles
import
create_ML_set
75
random.shuffle(Profiles)
76
77
# WE WILL
TRAIN
WITH
PROFILES
FROM 0 TO percentage_train *len(Profiles)
78
train_end = int( percentage_train *len(Profiles))
79
train_profiles = Profiles [0: train_end]
80
test_profiles = Profiles[train_end :]
81
82
83
# WE TRAIN THE MODEL AND CREATE
XTRAIN
YTRAIN
84
X_train , y_train = create_ML_set(train_profiles )
85
mdl = LogisticRegression ( C=1/ test_lambda , solver='liblinear ',
multi_class='ovr',
# parameters
left as default , 'ovr' = binary
problem (water , non water)
86
tol=1e-4, random_state =1,
87
penalty='l2', max_iter =1000)
88
mdl.fit(X_train , y_train)
89
90
mdl2 = LogisticRegression ( C=1/ test_lambda2 , solver='liblinear ',
multi_class='ovr',
# parameters
left as default , 'ovr' = binary
problem (water , non water)
91
tol=1e-4, random_state =1,
92
penalty='l2', max_iter =1000)
93
94
mdl2.fit(X_train , y_train)
95
96
# NOW WE HAVE TO RUN EACH
PROFILE
INSIDE AND RUN
removeOutliers on the
outputted y
97
from
smoothingFilter
import
removeOutliers
98
99
y_pred_smoothed = []
100
y_pred= []
101
y_true= []
102
y_pred_lambda2 = []
103
104
for
profile in test_profiles:
105
X_test_profile , y_test_profile = create_ML_set ([ profile ])
106
# We store the true y
107
y_true.extend(y_test_profile)
108
# We run the X through
the model and get the y_pred
109
y_pred_profile = mdl.predict(X_test_profile )
110
# We store the y_pred
111
y_pred.extend(y_pred_profile)
112
# We filter the y_pred
113
y_pred_smoothed_profile = removeOutliers ( y_pred_profile )
114
# We store the the
y_pred_smoothed
99
==PAGE:109==
115
y_pred_smoothed.extend( y_pred_smoothed_profile )
116
# We predict
for lambda = 100
117
y_pred_profile_lambda2 = mdl2.predict( X_test_profile )
118
# We store it
119
y_pred_lambda2 .extend( y_pred_profile_lambda2 )
120
121
122
conf_matrix_pred = confusion_matrix (y_true , y_pred)
123
conf_matrix_pred_smoothed = confusion_matrix (y_true , y_pred_smoothed )
124
conf_matrix_lambda2 =
confusion_matrix (y_true , y_pred_lambda2 )
125
126
return
conf_matrix_pred , conf_matrix_pred_smoothed , conf_matrix_lambda2
100
==PAGE:110==
savePlot.py
1 import
matplotlib.pyplot as plt
2 from
mpl_toolkits.mplot3d
import
Axes3D
3 import
matplotlib
4 import
math
5 from
numpy
import exp , power
6 import
numpy as np
7
8 def
createXPlot ():
9
10
XPlot = []
11
for target in range (2):
12
XPlot.append ([[] ,[] ,[]])
13
return
XPlot
14
15 def
updateXPlot(y, X, XPlot):
16
17
for i in range(len(y)):
18
if y[i] == 0:
19
XPlot [0][0]. append(X[i][0])
20
XPlot [0][1]. append(X[i][1])
21
XPlot [0][2]. append(X[i][2])
22
if y[i] == 1:
23
XPlot [1][0]. append(X[i][0])
24
XPlot [1][1]. append(X[i][1])
25
XPlot [1][2]. append(X[i][2])
26
return
XPlot
27
28 def
updateXPlot_u(profile , y, X, XPlot):
29
30
if profile.nConcavity:
31
for i in range(len(y)):
32
if y[i] == 0:
33
XPlot [0][0]. append(X[i][0])
34
XPlot [0][1]. append(X[i][1])
35
XPlot [0][2]. append(X[i][2])
36
if y[i] == 1:
37
XPlot [1][0]. append(X[i][0])
38
XPlot [1][1]. append(X[i][1])
39
XPlot [1][2]. append(X[i][2])
40
41
else:
42
for i in range(len(y)):
43
if y[i] == 0:
44
XPlot [1][0]. append(X[i][0])
101
==PAGE:111==
45
XPlot [1][1]. append(X[i][1])
46
XPlot [1][2]. append(X[i][2])
47
if y[i] == 1:
48
XPlot [0][0]. append(X[i][0])
49
XPlot [0][1]. append(X[i][1])
50
XPlot [0][2]. append(X[i][2])
51
return
XPlot
52
53
return
XPlot
54
55
56 def
plotPlot(X, lowerz , upperz , j):
57
58
colours = ("darkgrey", "tab:cyan")
# r: malignant , b: benign
59
fig = plt.figure(figsize =(18 ,15))
60
ax = fig.add_subplot (111,
projection= '3d')
61
for target in range (2):
62
ax.scatter(X[target ][1],
63
X[target ][0],
64
X[target ][2],
65
c=colours[target], alpha =0.2)
66
ax.set_zlim3d(lowerz , upperz)
67
ax.view_init(elev=-90, azim =-90)
68
ax.set_xlabel("Cross
Sectional
Distance (m)")
69
ax.set_ylabel("Temperature (
[U+FFFD]C
)")
70
ax.set_zlabel("Variance (
[U+FFFD]C
^2)")
71
ax.legend (['non -water ', 'water '])
72
73
# plt.savefig( str(j) + "3d.pdf", dpi =600)
74
plt.show ()
75
76 def
plotKNNeighboursAndError (Neighbours , error_test , error_train):
77
import
numpy as np
78
import
random
79
plt.figure(figsize = (5.1 ,2))
80
plt.plot(Neighbours ,error_test , marker='o', linewidth = 1 , label = '
Test
Error ')
81
plt.plot(Neighbours ,error_train , color ='tab:purple ', marker='o',
linewidth = 1 , label = 'Train
Error ')
82
plt.xlabel("Number of Neighbours (-)")
83
plt.xticks(Neighbours)
84
plt.ylabel("Error
Rate (%)")
85
# plt.title ("KNN: Error
Rate for range of Nearest
Neighbors ")
86
plt.plot(Neighbours[np.argmin(error_test)], np.min(error_test), marker
= 'o', color = 'red', label ="Minimum
Test
Error: " + str(round(
error_test[np.argmin(error_test)],2)) +"%")
102
==PAGE:112==
87
plt.legend(loc = 'lower
right ')
88
plt.savefig('KNN' + str(random.random ()) +'.pdf')
89
plt.show ();
90
91
92 def
plotLRLambdaAndError (lambda_interval , error_test , error_train):
93
94
import
random
95
lambda_interval_string = [str(round(i,1)) for i in lambda_interval ]
96
97
plt.figure(figsize = (5.1 ,2))
98
plt.plot(lambda_interval_string , error_test , marker='o', linewidth = 1
,label = 'Test
Error ')
99
plt.plot(lambda_interval_string , error_train , color ='tab:purple ',
marker='o',linewidth = 1 , label = 'Train
Error ')
100
plt.xlabel("Lambda (-)")
101
plt.ylabel("Error
Rate (%)")
102
# plt.title (" Logistic
Regression: Error
Rate for range of Lambdas ")
103
plt.plot( lambda_interval_string [0], error_test [0], marker = 'o', color
= 'red', label ="Minimum
Test
Error: " + str(round(error_test [0] ,2)) + "
%")
104
plt.legend(loc = 'upper
left ')
105
plt.savefig('LR' + str(random.random ()) +'.pdf')
106
107
plt.show ();
108
109
110 def
plotSVMLambdaAndError (lambda_interval , error_test , error_train):
111
import
numpy as np
112
import
random
113
lambda_interval_string = [str(round(i,1)) for i in lambda_interval ]
114
115
plt.figure(figsize = (5.1 ,2))
116
plt.plot(lambda_interval_string , error_test , marker='o', linewidth = 1
,label = 'Test
Error ')
117
plt.plot(lambda_interval_string , error_train , color ='tab:purple ',
marker='o',linewidth = 1 , label = 'Train
Error ')
118
plt.xlabel("Lambda (-)")
119
plt.ylabel("Error
Rate (%)")
120
# plt.title ("SVM
Sigmoid: Error
Rate for range of Lambdas ")
121
plt.plot( lambda_interval_string [np.argmin(error_test)], np.min(
error_test), marker = 'o', color = 'red', label ="Minimum
Test
Error: "
+ str(round(error_test[np.argmin(error_test)],2)) + "%")
122
plt.legend(loc = 'bottom
left ')
123
plt.savefig('SVM' + str(random.random ()) +'.pdf')
124
103
==PAGE:113==
125
plt.show ();
126
127 def
sigmoid (x, c1 , c2 , c3 , c4):
128
return
(1 / (1 + exp(-c1*(x-c2))))*c3 + c4
129
130 def line (x, slope , intercept):
131
return
slope*x + intercept
132
133 def
sineDamped(x, a, b, c ,d):
134
return (a/(b+x))*np.sin ((2* np.pi/c)*x) + d
135
136 def step1 (x):
137
result = []
138
for ao in x:
139
if ao < 1.551:
140
result.append (1)
141
else:
142
result.append (0)
143
144
return
result
145
146 def step2(x):
147
result = []
148
for ao in x:
149
if 1.551 < ao
<= 4.2:
150
result.append (1)
151
else:
152
result.append (0)
153
154
return
result
155
156 def step3(x):
157
result = []
158
for ao in x:
159
if 4.1
<= ao:
160
result.append (1)
161
else:
162
result.append (0)
163
return
result
164
165 def
polynomial(x, a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, l):
166
167
return a + b*np.power(x,1) + c*np.power(x,2) + d*np.power(x,3) + e*np.
power(x,4) +
f*np.power(x,5) + g*np.power(x,6) + h*np.power(x,7) +
i*
np.power(x,8) +
l*np.power(x,9)
168
104
==PAGE:114==
169 def
residualsFit(m, q, x):
170
y_res = []
171
for i in x:
172
y=q[0]+m[0]*i
173
y_res.append(y[0])
174
175
return
y_res
176
177 def
corrected_fit(x, original_fit , residuals_fit ):
178
179
corrected_fit = []
180
for i in range(len(x)):
181
corrected_fit.append(original_fit[i] + residuals_fit [i])
182
183
return
corrected_fit
105
==PAGE:115==
ﬁtFunctions.py
1 import
numpy as np
2 from
numpy
import exp
3
4 def
polynomial(x, a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, l):
5
6
return a + b*np.power(x,1) + c*np.power(x,2) + d*np.power(x,3) + e*np.
power(x,4) +
f*np.power(x,5) + g*np.power(x,6) + h*np.power(x,7) +
i*
np.power(x,8) +
l*np.power(x,9)
7
8 def
sigmoid (x, c1 , c2 , c3 , c4):
9
return
(1 / (1 + exp(-c1*(x-c2))))*c3 + c4
10
11 def line (x, slope , intercept):
12
return
slope*x + intercept
13
14 def
sineDamped(x, a, b, c ,d):
15
return (a/(b+x))*np.sin ((2* np.pi/c)*x) + d
16
17 def step1 (x):
18
result = []
19
for ao in x:
20
if ao < 1.551:
21
result.append (1)
22
else:
23
result.append (0)
24
25
return
result
26
27 def step2(x):
28
result = []
29
for ao in x:
30
if 1.551 < ao
<= 4.1:
31
result.append (1)
32
else:
33
result.append (0)
34
35
return
result
36
37 def step3(x):
38
result = []
39
for ao in x:
40
if 4.2
<= ao:
41
result.append (1)
42
else:
106
==PAGE:116==
43
result.append (0)
44
return
result
45
46 def
fitfunc (par , x):
47
48
print(par)
49
a=par['a']
50
b=par['b']
51
c=par['c']
52
c1=par['c1']
53
c2=par['c2']
54
c3=par['c3']
55
c4=par['c4']
56
d=par['d']
57
e=par['e']
58
f=par['f']
59
g=par['g']
60
h=par['h']
61
i=par['i']
62
intercept=par['intercept ']
63
l=par['l']
64
slope=par['slope ']
65
66
fitfunc = []
67
for value in x:
68
if 4.1< value
<4.370:
69
y = line(value ,slope ,intercept)
70
fitfunc.append(y)
71
else:
72
y = sigmoid(value , c1 , c2 , c3 , c4)*step1 ([ value ])[0] + line(
value , slope , intercept)*step2 ([ value ])[0] + step3 ([ value ]) [0]*
polynomial(value , a, b,c, d, e,f,g,h,i,l)
73
fitfunc.append(y)
74
return
fitfunc
107
