==PAGE:1==
Msc. Thesis
Economic Feasibility Analysis of the
North Sea Wind Power Hub using
the Energy System Model Balmorel
Mario Garzón González
DTU Lyngby Campus, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Management
Department Technology, Management, and Economics
Supervisors:
Lena Kitzing - DTU Management
Juan Gea-Bermudez - DTU Management
DTU Lyngby Campus
Nils Koppels Allé Building 424
2800 Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +34 659436293
mggo@dtu.dk
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Executive Summary
This Master’s Thesis presents an economic feasibility study for the North Sea Wind
Power Hub (NSWPH). The energy island connects 12 GW of oﬀshore wind farms and
interconnection capacity between Denmark, The Netherlands, and Germany. From the
12 GW, 2 GW are assumed to belong to Denmark, 4 GW to The Netherlands, and 6
GW to Germany.
The energy system model Balmorel is used to optimise both electricity and heating
sector. The main results from the optimisation consists of hourly energy prices, electricity
ﬂows, consumer demand, and producer generation. Using these results, the deltas in
consumer surplus, producer surplus, and congestion rents, are calculated between diﬀerent
scenarios and a radial reference case.
Moreover, yearly cash ﬂows are calculated for each NSWPH wind farm, which are
assumed to operate under a CfD support scheme. By comparing the level of support
required by the wind farms, with the revenues obtained from the market, it is possible to
calculate the total support required from each country. Aggregating the total support
and the delta of consumer surplus, the total economic balance is calculated for each
country.
According to the results of the study, the North European energy system would save
an average of 2, 500 M€ per year, when considering the NSWPH. From the countries
connected to the hub, Germany would be the only one getting beneﬁts from the NSWPH,
earning more than 30, 000 M€ (Present Value 2029) over the lifetime of the project. On
the other hand, Denmark would lose around 3, 000 M€ and The Netherlands 1, 000 M€.
It is recommended that the NSWPH operates under its own bidding zone. Moreover, a
set of recommendations is presented regarding the design of auctions for the support of
renewable energy.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis was prepared in fulﬁllment of the requirements for acquiring a MSc.
degree in Sustainable Energy with a specialisation in Energy Systems Analysis from
the Technical University of Denmark. This project started in February 2020, under the
supervision of Lena Kitzing (DTU), and Juan Gea-Bermudez (DTU).
DTU Lyngby Campus, July 24, 2020
Mario Garzón González
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors, who have been a continuous source
of support during the realisation of this Master’s Thesis. Thank you Lena for sharing
your knowledge and give me the opportunity to start my career in energy economics
and policies. I will always appreciate all the trust you have deposited in me from the
beginning. Thank you Juan for sharing your impressive work developing Balmorel, and
for your inﬁnite patience when guiding me through it during our uncountable calls.
I would particularly like to thank Philipp, Diana, and Mason for introducing me to the
model. Thanks to Victor and Martijn too, for developing really useful codes to deal with
the output data and draw amazing transmission lines maps.
I would like to oﬀer my special thanks to all my friends that have accompanied me
during the entire Msc. Thesis. Thanks you Casper, Charles, Kamran, Kevin, Tamas, and
Rafaella for being my little family in Linde Alle. Special thanks to Marlu, for teaching
me how important is to make someone tea. I will always be grateful for your support
and encouragement.
Finally, I am eternally thankful to my family and friends from Madrid. Thank you for
the weekly calls and for staying always positive despite the situation there. I am looking
forward to ﬁnally see you all.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Executive Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
International Collaboration Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
The Hub-and-Spoke concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Motivation & Scope of the Project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Methodology
11
2.1
Energy System Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Balmorel: description of the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Economic Study Procedure & Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Results
25
3.1
Future Energy System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2
Comparison Between Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
NSWPH Wind Farms Economic Feasibility Study . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4
Discussion
43
4.1
Limitations of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2
Analysis of the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.3
Auction Design and Level of Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Conclusions
49
A Interconnectors Capacities
51
B Price Duration Curves
55
C Surplus Scenario N4
59
Bibliography
61
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
By the end of 2019, the European Commission presented the European Green Deal
[1] as a response to the climate change emergency. The two main objectives of the
agreement are to transform Europe into the ﬁrst climate-neutral continent by 2050, and
decouple the economic growth from resource use by moving into a clean, circular economy.
In order to achieve them, actions from all sectors are required including: investing in
environmentally-friendly technologies, support innovation in industry, increase the energy
eﬃciency in buildings, promote sustainable mobility and decarbonise the energy sector.
These actions are completely in line with the objectives from the Paris Agreement, which
intend to limit the global temperature raise to 2 Celsius degrees above pre-industrial
levels for this century.
The European Commission proposals related to the decarbonisation of the energy sector
are summarised in [2]. The most relevant objectives for this Msc. Thesis include the
interconnection of energy systems, improving the integration of renewable energy sources
in the grid, increasing cross-border and regional cooperation to better share clean energy
sources, and developing the full potential of Europe’s oﬀshore wind energy. Oﬀshore wind
energy is expected to be one of the main sources of electricity in the future European
energy system. At the end of 2019, there was more than 22 GW of oﬀshore wind power
installed capacity in Europe [3]. In Figure 1.1, it is possible to observe an increase in the
annual installed new capacity during the past years.
Nonetheless, this annual ratio is not enough to cover the 230 – 380 GW of oﬀshore
wind installed capacity estimated by the European Commission for 2050 [4], or the 450
GW estimated by WindEurope [5]. Maintaining the annual level of 3.5 GW installed
in 2019 until 2050, would result in a total oﬀshore wind installed capacity of less than
130 GW. This installed capacity would be insuﬃcient to meet the estimations previously
mentioned. New strategies and international collaboration are required to accelerate the
integration of oﬀshore wind in the European energy system. As a consequence, multiple
organisations around the North Sea Region are already taking action in order to move to
a low-carbon society in time.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Annual oﬀshore wind installations by country (left axis) and cumulative
capacity (right axis) (GW) [3].
One of the measures taken by diﬀerent governments to help the development of
oﬀshore wind industry, is the realisation of auctions for the support of renewable energy.
Countries like Denmark or The Netherlands, have already successfully implemented this
type of auctions for oﬀshore wind projects. The type of support schemes have diﬀered
between countries in the past. For example, a two-sided sliding premium or contract
for diﬀerence (CfD) has been implemented in Denmark [6], while a sliding premium is
considered in The Netherlands [7].
Oﬀshore wind farms operating under a sliding premium support scheme, receive money
from the government if their revenues are below the electricity price agreed in the auction
(€/MWh). The main diﬀerence between this two support schemes, occurs when the
market revenues received by the wind farm are higher than the level of support agreed.
In the Dutch sliding premium scheme, the wind farm can keep those extra revenues
obtained from the market. However, in the Danish CfD scheme, the wind farm should
pay those extra revenues back to the government.
1.1
International Collaboration Framework
During the last decade, there has been a strong willingness among North Sea Region
(NSR) countries to cooperate in order to overcome the challenges of the future energy
system. Following the Political Declaration in 2009 [8], the North Seas Countries’ Oﬀshore
==PAGE:13==
1.2 The Hub-and-Spoke concept
3
Grid Initiative (NSCOGI) was formalised in 2010. The objectives of NSCOGI were to
achieve an eﬃcient and economic use of renewable energy resources, as well as optimise
infrastructure investments. NSCOGI was supported by regulators, transmission system
operators (TSOs) and energy ministries from the 10 countries members.
In 2016, this cooperation was strengthen by the formation of The North Seas Energy
Cooperation (NSEC) [9]. The NSEC is formed by Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany,
Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden since United Kingdom
departure from EU in 2020. The organisation is divided in four groups: Hybrid and joint
projects, Maritime Spatial Planning, Support framework and ﬁnance, and Delivering
2050 [10]. The Delivering 2050 group is focused on onshore grid planning, sector coupling,
sector integration and the Hub-and-Spoke concept explained in Section 1.2. Some of
the areas in which the NSEC is working, are at the same time the objectives from other
transnational organisations like the CPMR North Sea Commission [11], which remarks
the relevance of these goals for the North Sea Region countries.
However, not only governmental organisations are required to support the oﬀshore
wind deployment. Wind Europe is an association within the industry that gathers more
than 400 members from 35 diﬀerent countries including: wind turbine manufacturers,
suppliers, research institutes, national wind and renewable associations, developers,
contractors, electricity providers, ﬁnance and insurance companies, and consultants.
The organisation advocates wind energy policies for European region, publishes annual
statistics [3], and promotes the use of wind power [5].
Another example of international organisation is the European Network of Transmission
System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E). ENTSO-E is formed by 42 TSOs from 35
countries across Europe form with the objective of setting up the internal energy market,
and of supporting the ambitious European energy and climate agenda. ENTSO-E is
willing to collaborate with the diﬀerent stakeholders to develop the full potential of
oﬀshore wind power, as presented in [12].
Currently, one of the projects that is receiving a lot of attention by the listed organisations
is The North Sea Wind Power Hub (NSWPH). This ‘energy island’ has already been
included in the climate plan of the Danish Government, which aims to achieve climate
neutrality by 2050 [13]. The NSWPH consortium is formed by the TSOs Energinet
and Tennet, the Port of Rotterdam, and Gasunie, an European energy infrastructure
company. This consortium is, among other institutions, adding the techno-economic
perspective to facilitate discussions between policy makers and North Sea stakeholders.
1.2
The Hub-and-Spoke concept
The NSWPH is a hybrid oﬀshore hub concept project, fully in line with the previously
mentioned objectives from the European Commission. The NSWPH consortium has
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
published six concept papers informing the main stakeholders about the major ﬁndings
obtained during two years of research [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], which are summarised
in [20]. Each of the six reports addresses a diﬀerent stage of the project: an outlook of the
future European energy system is presented in Section 1.2.1; the Hub-and-Spoke concept
is deﬁned in Section 1.2.2; the beneﬁts of using oﬀshore hybrid assets are presented in
Section 1.2.4; and Section 1.2.5 introduces the requirements for the development of a
North Sea oﬀshore grid in the future.
Apart from the studies released by the NSWPH consortium, multiple organisations
have published independent studies about the development of an oﬀshore grid in the
North Sea. PROMOTioN (Progress on Meshed HVDC Oﬀshore Transmission Networks)
is one of the most ambitious research projects aiming to develop meshed HVDC oﬀshore
grids. Two of the ﬁnal deliverables of the project present an optimal scenario for the
development of a future European oﬀshore grid [21] and a deployment plan draft with
detailed deadlines proposed from 2020 till 2050 [22]. Among other conclusions, the study
recommends the standardisation of a 2 GW. 525 kV. platform and converter design to be
implemented in the North Sea. Moreover, the research project has really detailed studies
covering DC grid protection, regulation and ﬁnancing, and grid topology converters.
Furthermore, a study realised by Roland Berger for the European Commission found
that 5 hybrid projects, including the NSWPH, are expected to be more beneﬁcial than
the business as usual case [23]. According to the study, the NSWPH would save around
2,500 M.€ during the entire lifetime of the project (25 years) considering only CAPEX
and OPEX. The report highlights multiple barriers regarding the market arrangement,
the lack of a transnational support scheme for renewable energy sources (RES), and the
need for a fair distribution of welfare between the stakeholders involved in the project.
Market modelling was not carried out for this study.
On the other hand, there are multiple studies approaching the analysis of the North Sea
oﬀshore grid using energy system modelling. The consulting company Navigant published
a detailed study using their own model PowerFys, which concluded that oﬀshore hybrid
assets provide cost advantages when compared with the traditional radial connection
between wind farms and countries [24]. This result is supported by [25], which uses the
energy system model Balmorel. The paper remarks the importance of a long planning
horizon for developing the oﬀshore North Sea grid, since it leads to a signiﬁcant cost
reduction for the entire energy system.
1.2.1
The Challenge
Following the structure of the six papers, the main challenges that the NSWPH will help
to address are presented in [14]. The energy system will be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in the
North Sea Region countries in the future, in order to achieve the goal of net zero green-
house emissions by 2050. Both energy supply and demand patterns will change, driven
by the required increase in deployment of renewable energy, and the decarbonisation of
==PAGE:15==
1.2 The Hub-and-Spoke concept
5
the energy end use. Furthermore, the ﬂexibility of the system will have to increase to
maintain the security of supply while the peak generation of renewable energy generation
will exceed demand at certain times.
Electric and thermal storage, together with the production of electro- and bio-fuels,
could play an important role to absorb the ﬂuctuations of variable renewable energy, if
the technology achieves the maturity levels required by the system. This fact is supported
by the new hydrogen strategy for a climate-neutral Europe recently presented by the
European Commission [26]. This strategy aims to install 40 GW of electrolyzers in
Europe for 2030, and another 40 GW of electrolyzers in Europe’s neighbouring countries
with the intention of importing the hydrogen produced to Europe. In addition, high
interconnection capacity between countries is expected in order to evacuate the excess of
renewable energy produced, and avoid bottlenecks in the grid. Moreover, the European
energy system could use electric vehicles as a electric grid balance mechanism, if the ﬂeet
increases signiﬁcantly.
1.2.2
Deﬁnition & Technical Feasibility
The NSWPH follows the Hub-and-Spoke concept deﬁned in [15]. The concept consists of
modular hubs that connects oﬀshore wind farms and interconnection capacity between
multiple countries. The same interconnector is used to transmit both the power gener-
ated by the wind farm and electricity traded between countries. This solution allows to
increase the utilisation rate of the asset while reducing overall costs, according to the
paper.
The modularity of this concept enables a step-by-step approach that could adjust the
functionality of individual projects according to the needs of the system. For example,
it could result in a ﬁrst hub built in 2030 focused on oﬀshore wind production and
interconnection capacity between countries, connected later on to other hubs focused on
power-to-hydrogen conversion, storage and transportation [15]. As a consequence, the
Hub-and-Spoke concept is expected to facilitate sector coupling through ‘power-to-X’.
Further details about the technical feasibility of this concept are presented in [16].
The report explores diﬀerent conﬁgurations for the hub regarding the location, total oﬀ-
shore wind capacity connected to the hub and connection capacities to diﬀerent countries,
as presented in Figure 1.2. According to the study, the optimal capacity installed in the
hub is between 10-15 GW, from a techno-economic point of view. If the hub capacity is in-
creased, the beneﬁts from scaling reduce the total costs of the project. However, wake and
blockage eﬀects are expected to increase for larger oﬀshore wind farm clusters. In addition,
technical limitations could be induced for hubs larger than the optimal capacity range [16].
In order to explore the possible conﬁguration of the energy island, the NSWPH
consortium has explored 4 diﬀerent foundation types to build the hub substructure. In
Figure 1.3, island-based foundations are compared to platform-based hubs regarding size
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
Figure 1.2: Key conﬁgurations investigated by the NSWPH consortium to assess feasi-
bility of the Hub-and-Spoke concept [16].
and water depth limitations, construction time, and environmental impact. According to
[16], island-based foundations result in lower costs and allow for larger scale interconnec-
tion hubs compared to platform-based hubs. However, smaller platforms are expected to
have lower environmental impact, planning risk and construction timelines. The NSWPH
consortium has declared the 20th of May, 2020 [27] that it will be built of concrete, which
could indicate that the option chosen is the caisson island.
When considering the location in which the NSWPH could be built, four diﬀerent
areas have been explored in Figure 1.4. The deeper the water depth of the location, the
higher the costs and technical limitations for the construction of the hub. The study
states that Location 2 and 4 are the deepest areas with an average of 44 and 53 m.
respectively. In addition, the total cost of the transmission lines increases signiﬁcantly
with the distance from the hub to shore. It is expected that the majority of the energy
will ﬂow to Germany and The Netherlands, since bigger interconnection capacity to those
countries is foreseen by the NSWPH consortium.
When comparing the capacity factor, there are no major diﬀerences between the wind
yield of the diﬀerent locations as presented in Figure 1.5. Taking into account the facts
previously mentioned, and noticing that the distance between the hub, Germany, and
The Netherlands is similar for Location 1 and 3; Location 3 seems to be the most feasible
economically in a ﬁrst screening analysis, since it is closer to Denmark.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 The Hub-and-Spoke concept
7
Figure 1.3: Comparison between diﬀerent foundation types for the NSWPH [16].
Figure 1.4: Diﬀerent locations explored to build the North Sea Oﬀshore Wind Power
Hub [16].
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
Figure 1.5: Comparison of the capacity factor estimated for the diﬀerent locations
presented in Figure 1.4 [16]. The capacity factor includes wake and blockage
eﬀects but excludes other technical losses.
1.2.3
Market Set Ups
This Master’s Thesis is focused on the ref. case presented in Figure 1.2, in which a
hub with an oﬀshore wind capacity of 12 GW is connected to Denmark, Germany, and
The Netherlands. Three diﬀerent market set ups are considered during this study: the
NSWPH representing its own bidding zone, a market arrangement in which each NSWPH
wind farm transmit the electricity produced to its country, and a business as usual radial
reference case.
No electricity demand is considered in the energy island. Therefore, when the NSWPH
represents is own bidding zone, the electricity price in the hub is directly related to
the electricity prices of the neighbouring countries. In this market set up, the NSWPH
normally would take the hourly lowest electricity price of the three neighbouring countries.
On the other hand, another option considered in this study is a market set up in
which each wind farm is forced to transfer the electricity produced to its own country.
For example, a 2 GW Danish wind farm operating under this market setup in the
hub, would be forced to send its electricity produced to Denmark, independently from
electricity prices. This market set up tries to imitate a market operating under Financial
Transmission Rights (FTR). However, in reality the actual ﬂow is not forced to be sent
to a determined country, but the transaction is forced ﬁnancially. As a consequence, the
actual electricity ﬂows presented for this market set up in this study do not necessarily
have to match the ﬂows that would occur in reality.
1.2.4
The Beneﬁts
The beneﬁts of moving from a national oriented approach to the modular Hub-and-spoke
concept are presented in [17]. As mentioned previously, multiple studies conclude that
the Hub-and-spoke concept is expected to reduce signiﬁcantly the total overall costs of
the energy system [23],[25],[24]. For example, a reduction of 30% [28] in transmission
asset life-cycle costs is estimated when considering 180 GW [29] of oﬀshore wind installed
in the North Sea by 2050.
==PAGE:19==
1.2 The Hub-and-Spoke concept
9
Another cost beneﬁt analysis (CBA) conducted by the NSWPH consortium estimates
an increase in social welfare by approximately € 1.0-1.7 billion per year for the whole
Europe in 2040 [17], when moving into a Hub-and-Spoke concept design. The study
compared the installation of a 12-24 GW Hub-and-spoke project to business as usual
radially connected wind farms of the total same capacity. Furthermore, the increase in
oﬀshore wind deployment and interconnectors caused by the Hub-and-spoke concept is
expected to reduce the electricity prices and emissions of the power system.
As previously mentioned, the integration and technical development of ‘Power-to-X’
in the power system will result in additional beneﬁts for the Hub-and-spoke concept. The
high deployment of wind oﬀshore in the North Sea will imply to transport approximately
25% of the electricity generated by these wind farms further than coastal regions [17].
‘Power-to-gas’ can be installed inland to absorb the excess of VRE generation in order
to produce mainly hydrogen or methane that can be used when required. This would
relieve the congestion in the electricity transmission grid, reduce curtailment caused by
bottlenecks, increase the integration of large-scale oﬀshore wind and increase the overall
ﬂexibility of the system.
1.2.5
Requirements to Develop
The steps to incentivise all the stakeholders involved in the Hub-and-Spoke concept
are presented in [18]. At the moment, the regulatory framework and market design is
prepared to enable national projects with limited scope to be realised quickly, minimising
direct costs and cost of capital. However, the time horizon of the grid planning processes
is normally not larger than 10 years; the cost beneﬁt analysis are not ready to handle
hybrid assets or strongly sector coupled projects yet; and the analysis is normally fo-
cused on the value of an isolated project on a deﬁned system. Although the NSWPH
consortium foresees that a ﬁrst project is conceivable under current regulation, the pre-
viously mentioned facts limit the full development of the modular Hub-and-Spoke concept.
During 2019, the NSWPH consortium discussed with the wind energy industry in
order to agree in the principal points required for the success of this new business model.
The agreed principles included that “Developers from diﬀerent jurisdictions should join
the hub under harmonised regulatory and / or subsidy parameters”, “Hydrogen solutions
should be further considered as a mean to enhance the business case for developers and
TSOs”, “Alignment of the timing is key in ensuring that the sizing of the cables is com-
mensurate to the capacity which is connecting”, and “Roles and responsibilities have to
be deﬁned early and clearly” [18].
In addition, the NSWPH consortium and oﬀshore wind farm developers agreed that
further research is needed to establish an optimal governance structure regarding the
operation and ownership of the hub and the grid. An optimal model for the reallocation
of social welfare between stakeholders should be developed. Furthermore, maritime
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Introduction
spatial planning after 2030 will be crucial to unlock the cost reduction potential of the
Hub-and-Spoke concept [19].
1.3
Motivation & Scope of the Project
As mentioned in Section 1.2, there are multiple studies that indicate that the NSWPH
would be beneﬁcial for the European energy system. However, the uncertainty about the
market design and the allocation of costs and beneﬁts between the involved stakeholders
presents multiple barriers for this project [18], [23]. This Master’s thesis addresses these
barriers by calculating the impact of diﬀerent market designs on the proﬁtability of the
project for the wind farm owners, the consumers, and the Transmission System Operators
(TSOs), based on optimal energy ﬂows and electricity prices obtained with the energy
system model Balmorel described in Section 2.2.
This project studies the NSWPH with an installed oﬀshore wind capacity of 12 GW, from
both a private and a socio-economic point of view. From this 12 GW, 2 GW are assumed
to belong to Denmark, 4 GW to The Netherlands, and 6 GW to Germany. The NSWPH
wind farms are assumed to operate under a CfD support scheme. Therefore, yearly cash
ﬂows are calculated during the entire lifetime of the projects to estimate the level of
support required by the wind farms. In addition, an economic balance is performed
between this level of support and the market revenues obtained by the wind farms. By
doing so, it is possible to understand the cost of this support for the diﬀerent governments.
One of the main objectives from this Master’s Thesis is to propose a combination
of market design and auctions for support of renewable energy that creates a beneﬁcial
and fair situation for all the stakeholders involved in the project. To do so, diﬀerent
market set up scenarios are optimised in Balmorel. These scenarios enable the comparison
between the level of support required by each countries’ wind farms, under the diﬀerent
market conditions. Three main scenarios are optimised: the energy island representing its
own bidding zone, a business as usual radial reference case, and a scenario in which the
wind farms have a ﬁnancial transmission agreement with their own country. In addition,
one extra scenario is deﬁned to allow the comparison between Location 1 & 3 (Figure 1.4).
In order to further understand how the NSWPH project would aﬀect its neighbour-
ing countries, the variation in electricity prices and energy production mix of Denmark,
Germany and The Netherlands is analysed. This allows to calculate the diﬀerence in
consumers, producers, and TSOs surplus, between each considered scenario and the
reference radial case. Combining the delta in consumer surplus and the level of support
required by each country in each scenario, a total economic balance is calculated.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Methodology
The methodology followed by this study is focused on two aspects: the energy system
modelling procedure and the economic feasibility study. Section 2.1 introduces three dif-
ferent energy system models used for similar studies: Balmorel, PRIMES, and PowerFys.
The energy system model Balmorel has been selected for this study, since it is an open
source model and it has been developed mainly in the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU).
Section 2.2 describes the main characteristics of the model, together with the speciﬁc
add-ons activated for this study and the methodology followed to simulate the day-ahead
spot market. On the other hand, the steps used to calculate the economic impact of the
energy island on consumers, producers, and TSOs’ is presented in Section 2.3. Moreover,
the assumptions and procedure followed to calculate the level of support required by the
NSWPH wind farms are detailed at the end of this chapter.
2.1
Energy System Modelling
Currently, the utilisation of energy system models is widely extended among the stake-
holders of the energy industry. They are applied mainly to address the multiple challenges
required by the sustainable transition, including the eﬀect of various energy policies on
the system, or forecasting the evolution of future electricity prices.
Energy companies, research institutions, and policy makers have developed multiple
models with diverse characteristics, depending on the speciﬁc focus of the study they
were designed for. At the moment, the European Commission is using the PRIMES
model, developed at the National Technical University of Athens [30]. The management
consulting company Navigant, applies their own model called PowerFys, and universities
like the Technical University of Wien (TU Wien) or the Technical University of Denmark
(DTU), use the energy system model Balmorel. Apart from the models previously men-
tioned, there are many others being considered within the energy industry. Nonetheless,
this section is focused on these three since they have been used for similar studies.
All these three models are applied not only for optimal path-ﬁnding but also to evaluate
future scenarios of the energy system. However, each model follows a speciﬁc methodology
and has its own limitations. For example, PowerFys does not model the heating sector
when studying the NSWPH in [24], while it is included by Balmorel during this Master’s
Thesis. Including the heating sector inﬂuences signiﬁcantly the results of the power system,
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Methodology
specially due to the ﬂexibility provided by power-to-heat and the eﬀect of combined heat
and power plants (CHP). On the other hand, PRIMES combines behavioural modelling
with micro-economic and technical system aspects, involving all sectors and markets [31].
Some of the micro-economic aspects included in PRIMES are taxes, subsidies, congestion
fees, grid tariﬀs, or diﬀerent discount rates for each technology type, which reﬂects its
maturity-related risk. However, due to the larger amount of sectors and features consid-
ered by the model, the time aggregation needs to be higher than in PowerFys or Balmorel.
The three models previously mentioned could be used to study the inﬂuence of the
NSWPH in the European energy system. However, among other reasons, Balmorel
is chosen for this Master’s thesis since it is an open source model that can take into
account the heating sector, while keeping an hourly time resolution. In addition, there is
signiﬁcant expertise among researchers from DTU Management department using and
developing Balmorel, which allows the possibility of collaboration during the realisation
of this study.
2.2
Balmorel: description of the model
Balmorel is an open source, deterministic, with a bottom-up approach, partial equilib-
rium model that is written in GAMS (General Algebraic Modelling System) modelling
language, as described in [32]. It is designed to optimise simultaneously the generation,
transmission, and consumption of heat and electricity from an energy system. The
model was released in 2001 and it has been under continuous development by multiple
researchers since then. The core code is linear, although it also allows to solve mixed
integer problems (MIP) when modelling economy of scale or unit commitment. In
addition, it is written in a modular and extensible way that permit expansions of the
model as required, in the form of add-ons.
The objective function of the model minimises the total costs of the system, constrained
by technical, physical or regulatory aspects. The ﬁnal energy demand is deﬁned exoge-
nously and it has to be satisﬁed at each time step. Balmorel assumes perfect competition
between energy producers. It is normally used to optimise the energy system from a
socioeconomic point of view, although it can be used to optimise it from the private
investors perspective too. Furthermore, fuel prices and the availability of diﬀerent re-
sources are set as an input. The level of foresight of the model is ﬂexible and it depends
on the settings decided by the user.
Electricity and heat generation and storage units are described by types of technol-
ogy. Each technology has speciﬁc initial investment and operation maintenance costs
(O&M), eﬃciency, technical lifetime and used fuel type. Additional characteristics can be
speciﬁed like the Power-to-Heat ratio for co-generation units, or environmental aspects
like the level of emissions associated to each technology. The existing planned and
installed capacity of each generation technology is deﬁned exogenously, together with its
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Balmorel: description of the model
13
commissioning and decommissioning date. However, it is possible to allow the model
to install or decommission extra generation capacity endogenously, as a result of the
optimisation.
The ﬂexibility regarding temporal and spatial resolution allows for a wide range of
modelling options in Balmorel. Time steps are organised by three hierarchic layers from
higher to lower: Years (Y ), Seasons (S), and Terms (T). The optimisation can include
one or more years, which are divided into an equal number of seasons, and each season is
divided at the same time into an equal number of terms. The number of years, seasons
and terms can be deﬁned by the user, which gives the possibility to adjust the time
aggregation of the model set up. Moreover, it is possible to adjust the weight (duration)
of each time step, increasing this way the ﬂexibility of the temporal resolution.
Regarding the spatial resolution, Balmorel is also divided in three hierarchic layers
from higher to lower: Countries (C), Regions (R), and Areas (A). Each country can be
divided in one or multiple regions, and each region can be divided at the same time in
one or multiple areas. Regulatory targets and policy measures can be deﬁned by country,
such as the minimum renewable energy required or a CO2 emissions limit.
Electricity demand is deﬁned by regions, in which the electricity balance is maintained.
As a result, the marginal cost of the electricity supplied establishes the electricity price
of each region. In addition, it is possible to deﬁne power transmission limitations among
regions, enabling to model congestion both within a country and between diﬀerent
countries. Regions can be seen as bidding zones or nodes in which no power grid is
considered, assuming a copper plate system.
Areas are mainly used to deﬁne heat demand and climate conditions such as wind,
solar, and hydro potential for renewable energy generation. Furthermore, the type of
technologies that can be installed in each area are deﬁned as an input. For example, the
same region can have three diﬀerent areas deﬁning onshore, nearshore, and far oﬀshore
wind conditions respectively. Curtailment of variable renewable energy generation is
allowed if the model ﬁnds it optimal.
2.2.1
Speciﬁc Add-ons Considered
In order to increase the characteristics of the energy system considered by the model,
diﬀerent add-ons are activated for this study. For example, the heat demand from the
industry sector is included, aggregating diﬀerent industries regarding their temperature
level needs. As a consequence, diﬀerent areas are deﬁned in each region considering
high, medium, or low heat demand temperature, together with the possibility of being
connected to the district heating network. The connection to the district heating network
is also considered when taking into account the heat demand from individual users.
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Methodology
Regarding the renewable gas sector, the possibility of producing, storing, and con-
suming both hydrogen and synthetic natural gas (SNG) is included in the model. These
electrofuels can be used as a replacement for conventional natural gas. Hydrogen is
assumed to be produced by electrolyzers, and it can be used to produce electricity via
fuel cells, or to produce SNG by methanation.
The electricity sector is complemented by including some characteristics of the transport
sector. Private electric vehicles (EVs) are modelled as a virtual storage, as described in
[33]. The electricity consumed for charging this storage is considered, and the state of
charge (SOC) of this virtual storage is limited by EVs charging/discharging usage patterns.
On the other hand, a signiﬁcant additional electricity demand is considered related
to the decarbonisation of the rest of the transport sector. The massive production of
electrofuels and biofuels will increase signiﬁcantly the electricity demand, according to the
scenario presented in [34]. This electricity demand is modelled in a simplistic way by two
constrains, in order to avoid increasing substantially the complexity of the optimisation
problem. The ﬁrst constrain ensure that the annual energy required to decarbonise the
transport sector is produced. The second constrain restricts when and where this extra
demand can be covered, by limiting the ratio between the additional transport demand,
and the annual average demand of each region (excluding transport).
2.2.2
Modelling Procedure Applied
In order to estimate the economic feasibility of the NSWPH, it is important to capture as
much as possible the phenomenons related to variable renewable energy. This Master’s
thesis follows the methodology for operational planning of large scale energy system with
high share of renewable generation, detailed in [35]. Due to the lack of demand in the
artiﬁcial energy island, the electricity prices received by the hub are directly related to
the prices of Germany, Denmark, and the Netherlands. Therefore, it is crucial to get an
estimation of the hourly day ahead prices of the main countries inﬂuenced by the NSWPH.
The optimisation of the energy system is conducted in multiple steps as presented
in Figure 2.1. First of all, the variable renewable energy (VRE) time series are obtained
from the CorRES model [36]. These proﬁles are used as an input to deﬁne the renewable
energy potential of each area in Balmorel. Afterwards, the total installed capacities for
each simulated year are cost-optimised in the Investment Run.
Finding the optimal mix of total installed capacity for each area of the model, de-
mands signiﬁcant computational time. Hence, a high level of time aggregation is required
for this optimisation in order to reduce the complexity of the problem. During this step
of the optimisation, the electricity prices obtained include the long-term marginal costs
of the installed technologies, which are used in some of the calculations of Chapter 3.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Balmorel: description of the model
15
Figure 2.1: Flow chart of the methodology followed presented in [35]. During this study,
there is one extra step considered: the Investment Run. The total installed
capacities obtained by the Investment Run are used as an input for the
Storage and Planned Maintenance optimisation.
When a high level of time aggregation is used like in the Investment Run, Balmorel
transforms each full year time series into the time steps considered by the optimisation. It
is done in a way that the transformed time series’ average, equals the average value of the
original full-year time series. When optimising transmission lines and variable renewable
energy, it is crucial that the peaks of both demand and generation are preserved without
any transformation. To do so, the time series used for this step are escalated before
running the optimisation, following the procedure presented in [25].
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Methodology
The total installed capacities obtained by the Investment Run are used as an input
for the Storage and Planned Maintenance optimisation. This step emulates the long-term
decisions that the diﬀerent market participants take regarding the schedule of yearly
maintenance, or the usage of inter-seasonal storage.
These two decisions are normally based on future expected energy prices. Therefore, a
full year dispatch optimisation is performed to determine when each power plant will stop
operating, in order to perform its required maintenance. In addition, the initial storage
content at the beginning of each Season (S) is obtained and ﬁxed in the Day-Ahead
optimisation. Furthermore, the time and region in which the additional transport demand
is consumed is optimised and saved during this step.
Following the methodology previously mentioned, the last step before running the
Day-Ahead optimisation is the Stochastic Outage Simulation. In reality, units can ex-
perience unexpected operational problems that aﬀects their availability. This type of
events aﬀects directly the electricity prices since units that were originally scheduled can
no longer generate power. Hence, extra generators are required to start its operation,
resulting normally in a higher operational cost. Taking into account the total available
units of each technology type, and its probability of suﬀering an outage, Monte Carlo
simulations are carried out for each time step. As a result, random unit outages are
obtained, limiting this way the initial availability of the generation units.
Finally, using the VRE proﬁles obtained by the CorRES model, the installed capacities
optimised by the the Invesment Run, the seasonal storage levels and additional transport
electricity demand ﬁxed by the Storage and Planned Maintenance optimisation, and the
ﬁnal availability of generation units calculated in the Stochastic Outage Simulation, the
Day-Ahead optimisation is performed. This last step attempts to simulate the behaviour
of the spot electricity market. As a consequence, consecutive 24 hours dispatch optimi-
sations are executed. Constrains regarding unit commitment and ancillary services are
activated for this step. The operational decisions taken for one day are linked to the
next one. This means that these decisions may limit the operation on the following day,
according to the ﬂexibility of the units.
The output of the Day-Ahead optimisation consists of a detailed hourly energy dis-
patch across all the countries considered for each optimised year. This includes hourly
energy generation mix, energy ﬂow among regions, electricity and heat prices, and cur-
tailment of variable renewable energy. It is important to highlight that the energy prices
obtained by this step, correspond to pure short-term marginal costs of the generation
units. In a future with a massive share of renewable energy generation, it is possible
that other technologies apart from thermal peak units, need to start bidding considering
long-term costs to be proﬁtable. The results obtained by this optimisation are used to
perform the economic feasibility study.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Balmorel: description of the model
17
2.2.3
Model Set Up and Scenarios
In order to capture the eﬀects that the NSWPH will produce on the European energy
system, the 9 most relevant countries are considered, as presented in Figure 2.2. This
includes Denmark (DK), Germany (DE), The Netherlands (NL), Sweden (SE), Norway
(NO), Finland (FI), Belgium (BE), France (FR), and United Kingdom (UK).
Figure 2.2: Countries considered in Balmorel for this study.
The time resolution chosen for each optimisation step is presented in Table 2.1.
During the Investment Run, each optimised year is deﬁned by 16 representative Seasons
(S), each of them divided at the same time in 24 Terms (T). This can be understood
as representing an entire year by selecting 4 weeks every season (summer,winter, etc.),
in which only one hour every three is taken into account from Thursday, Friday, and
Saturday. The Stochastic Outage Simulation optimises the full year, represented by
364 days in which only 1 hour every 4 is considered. On the contrary, the Day-Ahead
optimisation optimises each day taking 24 hours into account.
Three years are optimised by the model: 2025, 2035, and 2045. Each year is intended
to represent a decade. For example, 2025 represents the time period from 2020 to 2030.
As a consequence, the NSWPH is not allowed to operate in the model until the 2035
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Methodology
Table 2.1: Time resolution for each step of the optimisation.
Step
Years
Seasons
Terms
Foresight
Invesment Run
3
16
24
Two years: 2025 & 2035 / 2045
Sto. and Plan. Maint.
3
364
6
One year: 2025 / 2035 / 2045
Day-Ahead
3
364
24
One day
optimisation. Furthermore, the level of foresight is limited diﬀerently for each step.
During the Invesment Run, the model optimises 2025 and 2035 at the same time, while
the Storage and Planned Maintenance optimisation solves each year individually. On
the other hand, the Day-Ahead optimisation only considers one day at a time. During
this study, the Day-Ahead optimisation is only performed for 2035 and 2045, since the
NSWPH is considered to start operation in 2030.
The uncertainty regarding market arrangement presents a barrier for the NSWPH.
In order to analyse the impact of diﬀerent market set ups on the proﬁtability of the
energy island, multiple scenarios are modelled. The main scenario (N1) represents the
NSWPH installed in Location 3 (Figure 1.4). A total oﬀshore wind power installed of
12 GW is assumed, as described in the ref. case in Figure 1.2. In addition, the power
transmission capacity is ﬁxed to 2, 4, and 6 GW from the NSWPH to Denmark, The
Netherlands and Germany respectively. In this scenario, the NSWPH is deﬁned as a
region (R) representing its own bidding zone.
In order to evaluate the transmission lines capacities assumed in N1, this scenario
is compared with the scenario N2 in which the transmission lines capacities are optimised.
Furthermore, scenario N3 is similar to N2 but the NSWPH is placed in Location 1 (Fig-
ure 1.4), allowing the comparison between locations. Regarding the market arrangement
set ups, scenario N4 tries to simulate a market operating under ﬁnancial transmission
rights (FTR) between the wind farms situated in the hub and their respective countries.
The business as usual case is represented in scenario N5, in which radial connection is as-
sumed between each NSWPH wind farm and its country. This scenario act as a reference
and no hub-countries interconnection is considered. This scenario conﬁguration allows
the comparison between the NSWPH having its own bidding zone (N1), a scenario in
which the wind farms operate under FTR (N4), and the business as usual radial case (N5).
As mentioned in Chapter 1, the FTR forces the electricity production of each wind
farm to be administratively transmitted to its country, directly aﬀecting each country’s
electricity price but not the real electricity ﬂow necessarily. The scenarios are summarised
in Table 2.2, Figure 2.3, and Figure 2.4.
In order to model the ﬁnancial transmission rights deﬁned in scenario N4, two sets
of constrains are implemented in the model. The ﬁrst set of constrains (Equation 2.1)
ensures that there is always transmission line capacity reserved to transmit the electricity
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Balmorel: description of the model
19
Table 2.2: Summary of the diﬀerent scenarios modeled in Balmorel.
Scenario
Location
Market Set-up
Interconnection Hub-Countries
N1
3
Own bidding zone
Fixed
N2
3
Own bidding zone
Optimised
N3
1
Own bidding zone
Optimised
N4
3
Financial Transmission Rights
Fixed
N5
3
Radial
-
Figure 2.3: Visual representation of the radial set up in scenario N5.
Figure 2.4: Visual comparison between scenario N1 (left) and N4 (right).
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Methodology
produced by each wind farm of the NSWPH to its country. The second set of constrains
(Equation 2.2), forces the electricity produced by each wind farm to be transmitted to
its country. The interconnector capacity is deﬁned as Xcapk−Hub, in which K is the
subset of countries connected to the hub. V gen represents the electricity generated in
the NSWPH corresponding to each country’s wind farm. Moreover, Xf a−b represents
the electricity ﬂow from a to b, for each country (k), at year (y), season (s), and term (t).
Again, the actual physical electricity ﬂows could diﬀer from Xf.
Xf k−Hub
k,y,s,t ≤Xcapk−Hub
y
−V genHub
k,y,s,t
∀k ∈K, y ∈Y, s ∈S, t ∈T.
(2.1)
Xf Hub−k
k,y,s,t ≥V genHub
k,y,s,t
∀k ∈K, y ∈Y, s ∈S, t ∈T.
(2.2)
2.3
Economic Study Procedure & Assumptions
This section explains the methodology followed during the economic feasibility study. As
mentioned before, one of the objectives of this Master’s Thesis is to study the impact
that the NSWPH would have on the diﬀerent stakeholders of the project: consumers,
producers, and TSOs. To do so, the beneﬁts received by the diﬀerent stakeholders in
each scenario, are compared with the radial reference case (scenario N5). In addition, a
detailed calculation is performed to estimate the level of support that the NSWPH wind
farms would need to be proﬁtable.
2.3.1
Impact on Consumers, Producers, and TSOs
In order to optimise the diﬀerent scenarios, multiple assumptions are needed regarding
the costs of the oﬀshore wind farms, the construction of the hub, and the transmission
lines between the hub and the countries. In Table 2.3 Location 1 & 3 are compared
regarding distance to diﬀerent countries and interconnectors cost. Moreover, Table 2.4
presents the cost assumed for the oﬀshore wind farms in the NSWPH.
Consequently, these assumptions are used together with the output obtained from
the Investment Run to calculate the consumer, producer, and TSOs surplus of each
Table 2.3: Transmission interconnectors cost assumptions. Locations 1 & 3 are compared
regarding costs and distance from the hub to the diﬀerent countries. Due to
conﬁdentiality issues, the data used for the transmission line cost is expressed
as a range between 1-1.5M€2015/km/GW.
DK - Hub
NL - Hub
DE - Hub
Location
km
M€/GW
km
M€/GW
km
M€/GW
L1
310
310-465
250
250-375
310
310-465
L3
100
100-150
300
300-450
275
275-412
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Economic Study Procedure & Assumptions
21
Table 2.4: Costs assumed for the oﬀshore wind farms in the NSWPH in €2015. Connec-
tion to grid costs are not considered since they are included in the transmission
lines side [37].
OWF Cost
Data
Invesment CAPEX [M€/MW]
1.57
Hub CAPEX [38] [M€/MW]
0.19
Fixed O&M [€/MW/year]
36,053
Variable O&M [€/MWh]
2.7
Lifetime [year]
30
scenario. The consumer surplus delta (∆Cs) determines how the consumers of each
country are impacted by the hub. It is deﬁned as the diﬀerence in money that consumers
pay to satisfy their energy demand, between the radial reference case N5 and each
scenario that considers the hub (M). It includes both the electric and heat demand, which
are included in the set U. The calculation of the consumer surplus delta is described in
Equation 2.3, where Cd is the consumer demand, and Ep the energy prices.
∆Csm,k,y =
X
t,s,u
Cdref
k,y,t,s,u · Epref
k,y,t,s.u −
X
t,s,u
Cdm,k,y,t,s,u · Epm,k,y,t,s,u
∀m ∈M, k ∈K, y ∈Y
(2.3)
The consumer demand includes the electricity and heat consumed by the traditional users
like households, the electricity required to produce bio- & electro-fuels, and the electricity
consumed by electric vehicles. The electricity demand required by electric storage or
power-to-heat units is not considered for this calculation, since they are included as a
cost in the producer surplus explained below.
In addition, the energy prices considered for this calculation are the ones obtained
from the Investment Run, since they include long-term marginal costs and provide a
fairer comparison between the scenarios for this particular analysis. If the prices obtained
by the Day-Ahead optimisation were considered for this calculation, one scenario which
requires huge investment in new generation installed capacity, could result cheaper than
another with signiﬁcant less new investment, since these costs would be ignored.
Producer surplus delta (∆Ps) is deﬁned in a similar way to ∆Cs. In this case, ∆Ps
determines how the energy producers of each country are inﬂuenced by the hub. It is
deﬁned as the diﬀerence in the proﬁt that producers obtain from selling their electricity,
between the radial reference case N5 and each scenario (M). It is described in Equation
2.4, where Pg represents the energy generated by the producers, and Cg all the generation
costs. Cg considers ﬁxed and variable operational generation costs together with fuel
costs, including the electricity costs for both heat pumps and electric storage units.
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Methodology
∆Psm,k,y =
X
t,s,u
(Pgref
k,y,t,s,u·Epref
k,y,t,s,u−Cgref
k,y,t,s,u)−
X
t,s,u
(Pgm,k,y,t,s,u·Epm,k,y,t,s,u−Cgk,y,t,s,u)
∀m ∈M, k ∈K, y ∈Y
(2.4)
Moreover, the TSOs surplus is directly calculated as congestion rents. The only congestion
rents considered in this analysis are the ones produced in the lines that connect the hub
with the diﬀerent countries. Therefore, it is not possible to compare it with the reference
case since there are no congestion rents when the wind farms are connected radially. A
summary of the methodology followed during this sub-section is presented in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Visual summary of the methodology followed to calculate the delta in Con-
sumer surplus, Producer surplus, and congestion rents.
2.3.2
CfD Support Level Required by the Wind Farms
Detailed economic calculations are performed in order to study the proﬁtability for the
wind farm owners during the entire lifetime of the project. The wind farms are assumed
to start operation in 2030, being 2029 the year in which the initial investment is consid-
ered. In addition, the yearly energy production, market revenues and costs for the wind
farms are calculated for 2035 and 2045 using the output from the Day-Ahead optimisation.
Moreover, linear interpolation is realised to obtain yearly data from 2030 to 2050.
Real revenues and costs are considered static from 2050 onwards, increasing only by the
eﬀect of inﬂation. The inﬂation rate assumed is 1%, the private discount rate 8% and the
socio-economic discount rate 4%. The level of taxes is 22% for the oﬀshore wind farms
located in Denmark, 25% in The Netherlands, and 30% in Germany [39]. A summary of
the economic parameters used for the economic feasibility study is presented in Table 2.5.
In order to reduce the risk perceived by the wind farm owners, auctions for the support of
renewable energy are expected to play a crucial role in the NSWPH. The support scheme
considered during this study consists of a 20 year two-sided contract for diﬀerence (CfD).
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Economic Study Procedure & Assumptions
23
Table 2.5: Assumptions used for the economic feasibility study. Inﬂation, private and
socio-economic discount rate are the same for the three countries.
Country
DK
NL
DE
Tax rate [39]
22%
25%
30%
Private disc. rate [29]
8%
8%
8%
Socio-economic disc. rate
4%
4%
4%
Inﬂation
1%
1%
1%
Therefore, the revenues obtained by the wind farms during the ﬁrst 20 years, will be equal
to the amount of electricity produced multiplied by the CfD price. The remaining 10 years,
the wind farm will receive the spot market price. Taking this into account, the yearly cash
ﬂows are calculated and aggregated as the Net Present Value (NPV) in 2029, using the
private discount rate. The CfD price is estimated by assuming an NPV in 2029 equal to 0.
A wind farm operating under a CfD support scheme, participates in the market re-
ceiving the beneﬁts of selling the electricity produced. If this revenue is lower than
the CfD level agreed in €/MWh, the diﬀerent governments (DK, NL, DE) have to pay
this diﬀerence to their respective NSWPH wind farms. On the contrary, if the market
revenues obtained by the wind farm are higher, the NSWPH wind farms are the ones
paying this diﬀerence to the governments. Taking this fact into account, it is possible
to estimate the level of yearly support required by each country for the NSWPH wind
farms. These support payments are then aggregated and brought to NPV 2029 using the
socio-economic discount rate.
In this study, it is assumed that the support received by the wind farms is paid by
the ﬁnal electricity consumers. Therefore, it is possible to calculate a balance between
the support that the consumers of each country need to pay, and the beneﬁts that they
would obtain from the NSWPH: the consumer surplus (Cs). As mentioned before, the
Cs is calculated for the years 2025, 2035, and 2045. However, since it is assumed that
the NSWPH starts to operate in 2030, only 2035 and 2045 are taken into account for this
calculation. Again, linear interpolation is used to obtain the Cs values between 2030 and
2050. From 2050 onwards, the real consumer surplus is considered static, only increasing
by the eﬀect of inﬂation.
By doing so, it is possible to aggregate both the amount of support paid to each
wind farm, and the consumer surplus from each country, in 2029 € Present Value. There-
fore, a cost-beneﬁt analysis can be calculated for each country, considering the support
as a cost and the consumer surplus as a beneﬁt. By comparing these two numbers, it
is possible to estimate which country would receive more beneﬁts from participating in
the NSWPH. A summary of the methodology followed in this sub-section is presented in
Figure 2.6.
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Methodology
Furthermore, multiple sub-scenarios are considered when deciding which stakeholder
should pay the transmission line, and therefore obtain the congestion rents from the
interconnector. The ﬁrsts sub-scenarios (e.g. N1, N4) assume that both the transmission
line and congestion rents belong to each country government.
On the other hand, the second sub-scenarios (e.g. N1+ TL I) assume that each NSWPH
wind farm assumes the costs of its transmission line individually, obtaining the congestion
rents of its line. Finally, the third sub-scenario (N1+ TL S) assumes that the total
costs of the three transmission lines are aggregated, and then divided in relation to the
oﬀshore wind farm capacity of each country: 50% DE, 33% NL, and 17% DK. The same
distribution is assumed for the congestion rents.
Figure 2.6: Visual summary of the methodology followed to calculate the total economic
balance of each country when moving from the business as usual radial case
to the NSWPH.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3
Results
This chapter presents the results obtained by following the methodology detailed in
Chapter 2. Section 3.1 provides an overview of the future energy system optimised by the
model. In this section, the total energy generation and transmission installed capacities
are analysed for each country in the diﬀerent years optimised. It is assumed that the
overall conﬁguration of the North European system is similar between the scenarios that
consider the NSWPH. Therefore, all the results presented in Section 3.1 refers to scenario
N1, as it is the main scenario of the study.
Section 3.2 compares the main results obtained for each scenario. The capacity of
the transmission lines related to the NSWPH of scenarios N1, N2, and N3, are compared
in order to assess the assumption taken when ﬁxing the interconnector capacities in
scenario N1. Furthermore, the total system costs that the energy system would save
when moving from the reference radial case to the diﬀerent scenarios are presented.
Once the assumption regarding the transmission lines capacity is accepted, the sce-
narios that represent diﬀerent market arrangements (N1, N4, and N5) are analysed. This
comparison allows to understand the impact of the market conﬁguration on each country.
Diﬀerences in power generation installed capacities are presented for these scenarios.
In addition, price duration curves are analysed in order to understand the evolution of
electricity prices, both between the two main steps of the optimisation (Investment Run
& Day-Ahead Optimisation), and between the previously mentioned scenarios.
The beneﬁts obtained by the diﬀerent stakeholders are compared for each country,
including consumers, producers, and congestion rents. Most of the results presented in
this section, take the radial reference case N5 as the baseline and compares the impact of
moving from a business as usual radial case to a unique NSWPH bidding zone in scenario
N1, or a FTR market arrangement like scenario N4.
At the end of the chapter, Section 3.3 presents detailed results obtained from the
economic feasibility study, for each NSWPH wind farm, in the diﬀerent market ar-
rangement set ups. These results include the level of CfD support required by each
country’s wind farm, the cost of the interconnectors, the congestion rents generated
in each transmission line, and the total support that each government should pay to
the wind farm owners. In addition, an economic balance is presented following the
methodology introduced in Figure 2.6, which indicate the total beneﬁts or costs that
each country is expected to receive when installing the NSWPH.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Results
3.1
Future Energy System
The future energy system optimised by Balmorel in this study, is characterised by a
massive amount of renewable energy generation installed capacity, together with a high
decarbonisation of both the heating and transport sector. The heating sector is decar-
bonised by a combination of heat storage and heat pumps. On the other hand, the
transport sector is electriﬁed by the use of EVs, and the rest of transport is decarbonised
by producing bio- and electro-fuels. In Figure 3.1, the distribution of the total electricity
demand is presented for each country.
The production of bio- and electro-fuels represents a huge part of the electricity
demand for countries like Denmark, France, or United Kingdom. This fact will have
a signiﬁcant impact on the total electricity generation installed capacities, which are
presented in Figure 3.2. Furthermore, the sum of the electricity demand required from
power-to-heat and EVs, is equal or higher than the traditional consumers electricity
demand, for most of the countries considered. This result supports the idea previously
mentioned that a high electriﬁcation of the heating and transport sector is presented in
this optimised energy system.
In Figure 3.2, it is possible to observe the diﬀerence in size between the multiple
countries. For example, the total installed capacities from France, Germany or U.K,
are signiﬁcantly higher than the ones installed in the Nordic countries. Moreover, it is
possible to see how the amount of solar energy installed in France is massive. This is
Figure 3.1: Comparison of the elements that form the total electricity demand between
countries in scenario N1, for 2035 and 2045.
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Future Energy System
27
Figure 3.2: Comparison of the total electricity generation installed capacity between
countries in scenario N1, for 2025, 2035, and 2045.
caused by the huge amount of electricity required in this country to produce bio- and
electro-fuels mentioned before.
Onshore wind installed capacity remains almost constant through the years, since the
potential limit is achieved. However,the total oﬀshore wind installed capacity increases
signiﬁcantly from the 45 GW installed in 2025, to 365 GW in 2035, and 600 GW in
2045. This number contrasts with the 450 GW forecasted by WindEurope for the whole
Europe [5].
Moreover, there are almost no fossil fuel electricity generation units installed. This
fact leads to a high share of renewable electricity in the mix, as presented in Figure 3.3.
In a highly electriﬁed system as the one presented in this study, it is crucial for the
sustainability of the energy system that the electricity comes from clean sources. If the
electricity used in heat pumps and in the production of bio- & electro-fuels is renewable,
both the heating and transport sector become more sustainable too. The renewable
energy share (RES) exceed the 90% of the total electricity production in 2045 in almost
every country considered by the model. From the total electricity produced in 2045, 57%
comes from wind and 31% from solar energy. These energy sources are followed by 5% of
hydro and 5 % of nuclear energy. The remaining 2% is represented by a mix of fossil
fuels, biomass and waste power plants.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Results
Figure 3.3: Comparison of the total electricity produced between countries in scenario
N1, for 2035, and 2045.
On the other hand, the total heat generation installed capacities are represented in
Figure 3.5. The heating sector optimised by Balmorel in this study, is characterised by a
signiﬁcant amount of natural gas boilers and heat pumps, which work together with a
huge amount of heat storage, both long and short term.
The combination of power-to-heat provided by heat pumps and heat storage, increases
signiﬁcantly the ﬂexibility of the power system. This synergy allows the system to
absorb the excess of variable renewable electricity generated, storing it as heat. This
heat generation mix is complemented by biomass, waste, and other fossil fuels. It is
possible to see how the amount of storage installed capacity is almost the same as the
heat generation capacity in 2045 for most of the countries.
Furthermore, the North European energy system optimised for this study presents
a high level of interconnection between countries, as presented in Figure 3.4. As expected,
the biggest transmission lines in the system are between Germany and France, since these
are the biggest countries in Europe. In addition, France has a huge variable renewable
energy generation capacity caused by the production of clean fuels to decarbonise the
transport sector (Figure 3.1, Figure 3.2).
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Future Energy System
29
To accommodate the excess of renewable energy produced in the system, the model could
invest in electric storage, power-to-X, or interconnection capacity. Due to the expensive
costs of storage and power-to-X, the model ﬁnds optimal to build huge transmission lines
between countries. It is important to take into account that all these options that add
ﬂexibility to the system, compete among themselves. Therefore, the costs assumed in
the model as an input, have a signiﬁcant impact on which option is the optimal one.
In Figure 3.4, it is possible to observe the evolution of the transmission lines between
the years. Almost every line capacity is increased when moving from one decade to
another, since the electricity demand increases together with the amount of renewable
energy installed capacity. Moreover, in the optimisation of 2035 the 12 GW NSWPH is
installed, interconnecting Denmark, Germany, and The Netherlands. The transmission
lines obtained by the diﬀerent scenarios are presented in Appendix A.
Figure 3.4: Comparison of the total transmission line capacities installed in 2025, 2035,
and 2045, for scenario N1. The NSWPH is represented with a 12 (GW) in a
blue circle.
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Results
Figure 3.5: Comparison of the total heat generation installed capacity between countries
in scenario N1, for 2025, 2035, and 2045.
3.2
Comparison Between Scenarios
This section analyse the impact that moving from a business as usual reference case to
the diﬀerent NSWPH market arrangement set ups have on the energy system. During
the Investment Run, it is possible to obtain the total costs of the entire energy system as
an output of the model optimisation. Therefore, it is possible to calculate the diﬀerence
on the total energy system costs for the years 2025, 2035 and 2045. It is calculated as
the total system costs of the scenario N5 minus the scenario considered. The results are
presented in Table 3.1, in which a positive result imply that the scenario considered has
lower total system costs than the radial case N5.
According to the optimisation results, the North European energy system would save
between 1700-3150 M€ 2015 per year, when considering the NSWPH. The total system
costs are already lower in 2025, when the hub is not even built. The foresight of the model
Table 3.1: Diﬀerence of the total energy system costs between the reference radial case
N5, and the scenarios N1,N2,N3,N4. The results are presented in Real M€
2015.
Year
N1 [M€/y]
N2 [M€/y]
N3 [M€/y]
N4 [M€/y]
2025
1700
1939
1899
1700
2035
3077
3149
2993
3064
2045
2727
2962
2678
2710
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Comparison Between Scenarios
31
allows to optimise 2025 knowing what will happen in 2035. Therefore, the possibility of
building the hub in 2035 makes the model to choose paths with less total system costs
for 2025. In addition, the largest costs savings are presented for 2035, when the NSWPH
is already installed.
Scenario N2 has the least total energy system costs. This result is expected, since
N2 is the only scenario that has no restrictions regarding the transmission lines between
the NSWPH and the neighbouring countries, when considering Location 3. Therefore,
these transmission lines are going to be optimal, in contrast with the transmission line
capacities ﬁxed in N1 and N4.
The diﬀerences between installing the NSWPH in Location 1 (N3) and Location 3
(N2), are noticeable when comparing the transmission lines capacities between the hub
and the neighbouring countries. The results are presented in Table 3.2. The conﬁguration
that the model ﬁnds optimal for scenario N2, would represent a large interconnector line
between DK and DE of 17 GW through the hub in 2025. This result is related to the
input costs data, since the model considers cheaper to connect DK and DE through the
hub than directly.
This conﬁguration might not be realistic, since the NSWPH consortium is currently not
considering transmission lines as big as this one. The result is caused by a relative low
cost of interconnection between DK and the hub when considering Location 3. However,
when comparing the transmission lines capacities between N1 and N3 in 2035, they follow
a similar structure. As a result, the assumption of connecting 2, 4, and 6 GW to DK,
NL, and DE respectively is considered acceptable.
From now on, scenarios N1 and N4, will be compared with N5 as a reference, since these
scenarios assume the same interconnection capacities. Coming back to Table 3.1, N1
and N4 are similar in terms of total system costs savings. However, N1 is cheaper for
the energy system, since including the FTR market set up in scenario N4 restricts the
freedom of the model to ﬁnd an optimal path.
Table 3.2: Transmission line capacity between the hub and the neighbouring countries
for scenarios N1, N2, and N3.
Transmission lines 2035
Transmission lines 2045
Scenario
Hub-DK
Hub-NL
Hub-DE
Hub-DK
Hub-NL
Hub-DE
N1
2
4
6
2
4
6
N2
17
5
17
24
7.5
18
N3
3.5
3
7.5
8
3
7.5
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Results
3.2.1
Electricity Generation Installed Capacities
To understand the diﬀerences between the optimal paths found by the optimisation, the
total electricity generation capacities are compared in Figure 3.6 and Figure 3.7. If the
results presented in Figure 3.6 are positive, the energy system installs more capacity
in the scenario that considers the NSWPH than in the reference radial case, being the
opposite for negative numbers. Overall, the total 12 GW reduction in the wind installed
capacity of 2045 is explained because the 12 GW of the NSWPH are not included in
any of the countries for N1, while it is included in N5. However, in 2035 there is an
extra reduction of 13 GW in the total wind installed capacity between the three countries.
Moreover, a major strategy change is seen in the electricity generation mix in Germany.
When considering the energy island, a lot of extra solar capacity is installed in 2025, al-
though less solar capacity is required for 2035 and 2045. Regarding the dispatchable units,
coal and electric storage is substituted by natural gas units, when the NSWPH is installed.
The electricity demand related to the production of bio- & electro-fuels diﬀers from one
scenario to another, as a result of the optimisation. In Figure 3.8 the diﬀerences in the
electricity demand related to the decarbonisation of the transport sector are presented,
both when moving from N5 to N1, and when moving from N1 to N4. When changing
from the radial reference case to the NSWPH, the electricity demand destined to produce
bio- & electro-fuels increase signiﬁcantly in all the countries considered, specially in
Germany. On the other hand, when moving from N1 to N4, the diﬀerences are small and
compensated between 2035 and 2045.
In Figure 3.7, the diﬀerences in electricity generation installed capacities between the
scenarios N1 and N4 are presented. It is important to notice that Figure 3.6 results were
in the order of GW, while these ones are presented in MW. Hence, the diﬀerences between
Figure 3.6: Comparison of the total electricity generation installed capacities (GW)
between N1 and N5. The diﬀerence is calculated as the value from N1
minus the value from N5. All the diﬀerences lower than 300 MW has been
eliminated.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Comparison Between Scenarios
33
Figure 3.7: Comparison of the total electricity generation installed capacities (MW)
between N1 and N4. The diﬀerence is calculated as the value from N4
minus the value from N1. All the diﬀerences lower than 100 MW has been
eliminated.
Figure 3.8: Comparison of the electricity demand related to the decarbonisation of the
transport sector, between scenarios N1&N5, and N4&N1. The results are
calculated as Dec. Trans. Demand of N1 minus N5, or N4 minus N1.
scenarios N1&N5 are signiﬁcantly bigger than the ones presented between N1&N4. In
this case, if the result is positive, scenario N4 requires more installed capacity than N1,
being the opposite when the number is negative.
As a result, in N4 less total installed capacity is required in Denmark while it in-
creases in The Netherlands and Germany. This result is expected, since Denmark is
supposed to act as a electricity export country. Therefore, without the N4 restrictions in
the model, the NSWPH would send more energy to The Netherlands and Germany.
The electricity ﬂows between the hub and its neighbouring countries are presented
in Figure 3.9. To put the results into perspective, it is important to take into account
that the total annual energy produced by the NSWHP is around 52 TWh. Germany
is the country that receives the biggest amount of electricity from the Hub, between
30-35 TWh. In addition, the electricity ﬂow from NL & DE to the hub, is lower than the
one from DK to the hub. This support the idea that Denmark is normally acting as an
electricity export country, while The Netherlands and Germany import it.
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Results
Figure 3.9: Comparison of the energy ﬂow between the hub and its neighbouring countries
in 2035 and 2045 for scenario N1.
3.2.2
Price Duration Curves
The structure of electricity prices has a direct impact on the economic results presented
during this chapter. In Figure 3.10, the price duration curves (PDC) from scenarios
N1 and N5 in 2035 are compared. As expected, prices in N1 are more stable than in
N5, both for high and low electricity prices. The electricity prices of the three countries
follow the same structure since they are highly interconnected. In addition, Denmark
is always the lowest electricity price, followed by the NSWPH, The Netherlands and
Germany, which has the highest electricity price among these countries in the optimisation.
In Figure 3.11, the price duration curves from scenarios N1 and N4 in 2035 are presented.
The electricity prices from both scenarios are really similar, despite a small diﬀerence in
Denmark. The electricity price in DK is slightly lower in N4, since the model forces a
higher amount of electricity from the NSWPH to this country.
Moreover, to understand the evolution of electricity prices with time, a comparison
between 2035 and 2045 is presented for scenarios N1 & N5 in Figure 3.12 and Figure 3.13,
respectively. Both price duration curves present similar diﬀerences between 2035 and
2045. In 2045, the electricity price is higher for the average values, while there are less
hours with high electricity prices. In addition, there is a higher number of hours with
lower prices in 2045 than in 2035 for both scenarios. This diﬀerence is more signiﬁcant
in N1 than in N5. Ampliﬁed versions of the PDC are presented in Appendix B.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Comparison Between Scenarios
35
Figure 3.10: Price duration curve com-
parison between the sce-
narios N1 & N5 for 2035.
Figure 3.11: Price duration curve com-
parison between the sce-
narios N1 & N4 for 2035.
Figure 3.12: Price duration curve com-
parison between 2035 and
2045, for scenario N1.
Figure 3.13: Price duration curve com-
parison between 2035 and
2045, for scenario N5.
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Results
3.2.3
Consumer Surplus, Producer Surplus, and
Congestion Rents
Analysing the expected impact on the welfare of the diﬀerent stakeholders is crucial
to understand the incentive that each country has to participate in the NSWPH. In
Figure 3.14, the deltas on consumer surplus, producer surplus, and congestion rents
between scenario N1 and N5 are presented. The producer surplus of the NSWPH wind
farms in scenario N5 is not considered in each country, but aggregated and compared with
the NSWPH wind farms proﬁt of scenario N1. The methodology presented in Figure 2.5
is followed.
During this analysis, it is important to consider that there are diﬀerences in the electricity
generation installed capacities between scenarios, as presented in Figure 3.6. When
focusing on the producer surplus, the total producers’ proﬁt of all the neighbouring coun-
tries is lower when moving from the radial reference case to the NSWPH conﬁguration.
Moreover, the producer surplus is already negative in 2025, which indicates that part of
the losses perceived by the producers come from the optimal path found by the model,
and not directly from the NSWPH.
The consumers of Germany will beneﬁt from the NSWPH, since they will import
lower electricity prices mainly from Denmark. At the same time, this will increase the
Danish electricity prices in 2035, which result in these consumers paying 390 M€ (Real
2015) more per year to satisfy their demand. However, this electricity demand is higher
in scenario N1 than in N5, due to the demand related to the decarbonisation of the
transport sector presented in Figure 3.8. Moreover, the consumers from The Netherlands
will beneﬁt from the NSWPH in 2035, slightly losing in 2045. On the contrary, Danish
consumers will recover some of their loses in 2045.
According to the results of the optimisation, the NSWPH wind farms will beneﬁt
from the connection to the energy island. It is expected that they earn an extra proﬁt of
91 M€ (Real 2015) when connected to the hub in 2035, and 174 M€ in 2045. Moreover,
the congestion rents generated by the interconnection lines between the hub and the
neighbouring countries range from 58 M€2015 to 257 M€2015 per year.
The results obtained following the same procedure between scenarios N4 and N5,
are presented in Figure C.1 in Appendix B. In order to compare the results obtained for
N4 and N1, the diﬀerences are presented in Table 3.3. According to the optimisation
results, moving from N1 to N4 increases the overall producers surplus while the congestion
rents are reduced. In addition, the consumer surplus is reduced in 2035 for Denmark,
and increased for The Netherlands and Germany, while the opposite happens in 2045.
The results presented in this sub-section are used in Section 3.3 to calculate the total
balance for each country participating in the NSWPH.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Comparison Between Scenarios
37
Figure 3.14: Comparison of the congestion rents, consumers, and producers surplus, for
the scenario N1. It is represented in Real M€ 2015.
Table 3.3: Comparison of the congestion rents, consumers, and producers surplus, be-
tween scenario N1 and N4. It is calculated as the value corresponding to the
scenario N4 minus the value corresponding to N1, represented in Real M€
2015 per year.
N4 VS N1
Denmark
The Netherlands
Germany
Parameter [M€/y]
2035
2045
2035
2045
2035
2045
Cons. Surp
-5
9
3
-6
6
-23
Prod. Surp
201
356
199
378
198
402
Con. Rents
-29
-42
-51
-46
-162
-38
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Results
3.3
NSWPH Wind Farms Economic Feasibility Study
In this last section of Chapter 3, an economic feasibility study is performed for each
country’s wind farm. As mentioned before, from the 12 GW of oﬀshore wind generation
installed in the NSWPH, 2 GW are assumed to belong to Denmark, 4 GW to The
Netherlands, and 6 GW to Germany. Applying the methodology described at the end
of Section 2.3, yearly cash ﬂows are calculated and aggregated into 2029 Present Value.
The results obtained for the sub-scenarios included in N1 are presented in Figure 3.15,
the results obtained for N4 in Figure 3.16, and the ones calculated for N5 in Figure 3.17.
When comparing the CfD support level in the sub-scenario N1, Denmark has
the lowest one, followed by The Netherlands and Germany. In this case, the transmission
lines are not owned nor paid by the wind farm. In addition, since the energy island has
its own bidding zone the electricity price seen by all the NSWPH wind farms is the same.
Therefore, the only diﬀerences in the support level required to achieve an NPV equal to
zero, is the taxes level. For example, since Germany has the higher tax level, it also has
the highest level of CfD support required.
In the sub-scenario N1, the CfD levels are similar between the diﬀerent countries,
ranging from 64.5 to 68.9 €/MWh. However, when the transmission lines are paid and
owned by the wind farms, the situation depends on how these transmission line costs
and congestion rents are distributed. If each country assumes the costs and beneﬁts of
its own transmission line (N1+TL I), Danish NSWPH wind farm would have a really
low CfD level of 57.45 €/MWh, in comparison with the 68.3 €/MWh in Germany or
69.4 €/MWh in The Netherlands. This is caused by the fact that Denmark has the
cheapest cost of transmission line capacity per km, in combination with signiﬁcantly high
congestion rents in relation with its production.
Figure 3.15: Summary of the economic results obtained for scenario N1.
==PAGE:49==
3.3 NSWPH Wind Farms Economic Feasibility Study
39
Figure 3.16: Summary of the economic results obtained for scenario N4.
Figure 3.17: Summary of the economic results obtained for scenario N5.
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Results
On the other hand, if the costs of transmission lines and congestion rents are shared
(N1+TL S), the CfD support level is closer between the countries. The CfD level ranges
from 63.7 €/MWh in Denmark to 68.8 €/MWh in Germany. The costs of transmission
line, the congestion rents, and the yearly diﬀerence between the market revenues and the
the CfD level is aggregated in 2029 Present Value. This way, it is possible to calculate
the total support that each government should pay to the NSWPH wind farms to be
proﬁtable. The cost of capital of each stakeholder assumed for this study has a signiﬁcant
impact, when comparing the results between scenarios in which the government owns
the transmission line, versus the ones that the wind farms owns it,
The cost of capital assumed for the government is 4%, signiﬁcantly lower than the
8% considered for the private wind farm owners. Therefore, the scenarios in which the
government owns the transmission line, the total level of support required is lower than
when the transmission line belongs to the wind farm owners. As a result, sub-scenario
N1 requires a total support over the 30 years lifetime of the project of 8618 M€ (Present
Value 2029), while N1+TL I and N1+TL S require almost the same level of support
around 11, 500 M€. The small diﬀerence between these last two sub-scenarios, comes
from the tax level diﬀerences presented between the countries.
However, when focusing on the way this total support is distributed among the dif-
ferent countries, N1+TL I & N1+TL S present signiﬁcant diﬀerences. The fact of sharing
both costs and beneﬁts from the transmission lines (in relation with the total installed
capacity of each country), has an impact on the amount of support required by each wind
farm. When each country’s wind farm assumes the beneﬁts and costs of its transmission
line, the Danish wind farm requires 825 M€, in contrast of the 1, 549 M€ required in the
sub-scenario N1+TL S. Netherlands decreases from the 4, 434 M€ required in N1+TL I
to 3, 515 M€ in N1+TL S, and Germany stays almost constant moving from 6, 266 M€
to 6, 432 M€ in N1 + TL S.
When comparing the deltas in consumer surplus, it is possible to observe that Ger-
many consumers are the ones obtaining the biggest beneﬁts. Germany consumer surplus
aggregated in 2029 Present Value achieves 38, 081 M€, followed by the 2, 497 M€ earned
by the Dutch consumers. On the other hand, Danish consumers would lose 2, 057 M€,
due to the increase of electricity prices. As previously mentioned, this is caused by an
increase in the exported electricity to Germany and The Netherlands when connected to
the hub.
Comparing the transmission line costs with the congestion rents received in each sce-
nario, it is possible to estimate if the TSOs would make any beneﬁt from owning the
interconnector. In all the sub-scenarios that include N1, the sum of the total congestion
rents compensate the costs of the transmission line. However, this is not the case when
considering the sub-scenarios that include N4.
==PAGE:51==
3.3 NSWPH Wind Farms Economic Feasibility Study
41
Finally, aggregating the total support required by each country’s wind farm with the
consumer surplus, it is possible to calculate the ﬁnal balance of each country. According to
the results of this study, the only country with a ﬁnal positive balance would be Germany
with more than 30, 000 M€ in all the sub-scenarios considered. However, Denmark would
lose between 2507 and 3606 M€, and The Netherlands would lose between 775 and 2436
M€, depending on the scenario considered.
Moving the focus to the results obtained in the sub-scenarios considering N4, the
main diﬀerences come from a signiﬁcant reduction in the beneﬁts obtained by congestion
rents. Although the CfD required in this sub-scenarios (N4) is slightly lower than in
the sub-scenarios that consider N1, the lower income received from the congestion rents
make the total support required to be higher for N4 sub-scenarios. This lower level of
CfD in N4 is caused by a higher electricity production, which is at the same time caused
by a lower curtailment required from the NSWPH wind farms in scenario N4.
Finally, the total support required by the sub-scenarios that consider the reference
radial case N5 is considerably higher than in the rest of scenarios. This is caused by a
lack of congestion rents income, together with lower electricity prices seen by the NSWPH
wind farms when the production of the hub is high (Figure 3.10).
==PAGE:52==
42
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion
This chapter presents a discussion about the main ﬁndings and procedure applied during
this Master’s Thesis. In Section 4.1, some of the modelling limitations and assumptions
used during study are described. In addition, Section 4.2 discusses some of the main
results obtained in Chapter 3. Finally, Section 4.3 presents an overlook of some of the
main points to consider when designing auctions for the support of renewable energy in
the NSWPH.
4.1
Limitations of the Study
Balmorel is a useful model to explore and analyse future scenarios for both power and
heat sector. However, as any model, it has limitations that are important to take into
account when analysing the results obtained during this study:
• Limited geographical scope: The 10 countries considered more relevant for the
study of the NSWPH are included. However, the North European power system
is embedded in the ENTSO-E network. Therefore, electricity demand and supply
from both Eastern and Southern Europe have an impact on balancing the supply
and demand of the NSEC countries. Including more countries on the optimisation
in Balmorel could have signiﬁcant impact on the results.
• Limited temporal resolution: During the Invesment Run, 384 hours are used
to represent the 8760 hours of the year due to computational time restrictions.
However, the methodology used reduce the impact of this limitation, since the
Day-Ahead optimisation takes the full year into account.
• Limited modelling detail for electricity transmission grid: All the lines are as-
sumed to be DC (direct current). Since no distinction is made between AC and
DC transmission lines, Kirchhoﬀ’s law is neglected allowing to fully control the
electricity ﬂows in the optimisation. In addition, copper plates are assumed inside
a region, which neglects the grid expansion required inside regions. Congestion
and ﬂows in certain interconnectors might be diﬀerent in reality due to these
simpliﬁcations.
• Limited behaviour modelling: Market participants are optimised assuming perfect
competition and collaboration between countries to achieve the least cost energy
system. In reality, each country could look for its own beneﬁt, reducing the beneﬁts
of collaboration. Moreover, some market actors could have market power which is
not reﬂected in this optimisation.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Discussion
• Limited generation of bio- & electro-fuels modelling: Electricity demand required
to decarbonise the transport sector (excluding EVs) is modelled in a simplistic way.
This electricity demand can be consumed in any country, without modelling the
installation of bio- & electro-fuels production plants. In reality, the countries in
which these fuels are produced can be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent due to this assumption.
• Cost assumptions for transmission lines: The power system optimised in this
study, is characterised by a large total interconnection capacity between countries.
The uncertainty regarding the costs assumed for this transmission lines together
with other social, technical, or regulatory limitations from reality, can have a
signiﬁcant impact on the total interconnection installed capacity.
• Financial Transmission Rights modelling: When modelling the market operating
under FTRs, the actual ﬂows have been restricted trying to simulate the impact on
electricity prices that this set up would have. However, in reality actual electricity
ﬂows might be completely diﬀerent. Further research on the eﬀects of FTRs is
required to assess the eﬀect of this simpliﬁcation.
4.2
Analysis of the Results
As presented in Section 3.1, the future energy system optimised with Balmorel is char-
acterised by a high share of renewable energy, a signiﬁcant electriﬁcation of heat and
transport sector, and large interconnection capacity between countries. The electricity
produced optimised in 2045, consists of 57% wind energy, 31% solar energy, 5% of hydro,
5 % of nuclear energy, and the remaining 2% is covered by a mix of fossil fuels, biomass
and waste power plants.
These results diﬀer slightly from the scenarios presented by the European Commission
in [2], which forecast between 81% and 85% of electricity being produced by renewable
energy (65% to 72% from wind and solar), 12% to 15% from nuclear energy, and fossil
fuel energy sources representing from 2% to 6%. However, the European Commission
forecast takes into account the entire Europe, while this study only considers 10 North
European countries.
One of the main diﬀerences between the results obtained in this study and the Eu-
ropean Commission forecast, is the total oﬀshore installed capacity. As mentioned in
Chapter 1, the European Commission assumes 230 – 380 GW of oﬀshore wind installed
capacity for 2050 [4], and WindEurope estimates 450 GW [5]. The model optimisation
exceeds this number, resulting in 600 GW of oﬀshore wind installed capacity. For example,
in the model Denmark installs 50 GW from the 600 GW previously mentioned, which
contrasts with the 18 GW oﬀshore wind potential areas that COWI mapped out in a
recent study [40].
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Analysis of the Results
45
This large diﬀerence is mainly driven by the assumption taken related to the decar-
bonisation of the transport sector. As presented in Figure 3.1, including the electricity
demand required to produce enough bio- & electro-fuels to make the transport sector
sustainable presents a signiﬁcant impact on the total electricity demand of the system.
The production of these fuels is not an energy eﬃcient process yet. Therefore, a signiﬁcant
amount of energy is lost when covering the energy required by this sector using bio- &
electro-fuels. Increasing the eﬃciency of these fuel generation processes would reduce
considerably the amount of electricity required.
In addition, in Figure 3.8 an increase in the electricity demand destined to produce
these fuels is presented when the NSWPH is considered for Germany, Denmark, and The
Netherlands. As a consequence, the proﬁt from the NSWPH wind farms increases in
comparison with the radial reference case (Figure 3.14). This means that in this optimal
scenario, installing the NSWPH would be accompanied by an increase in the bio- &
electro-fuels installed generation in the multiple countries. Therefore, it is important to
consider the development of power-to-X when analysing the beneﬁts from installing the
NSWPH.
The interconnection capacities optimised between the NSWPH and the neighbouring
countries increase from 2035 to 2045. The assumption taken by the NSWPH about ﬁxing
them to 2, 4, and 6 GW is supported by the results obtained in scenario N3 (Table 3.2).
However, it might be interesting to design the NSWPH considering a future increase in
the total interconnection capacity. This would also be useful in case that re-powering
the NSWPH wind farms occurs at the end of the lifetime of the project.
The diﬀerences between the electricity prices obtained in the Investment Run and
Day-Ahead optimisation are presented in Figure 4.1 for 2035. As expected, electricity
prices from the Investment Run are signiﬁcantly higher, since they consider the long-term
marginal costs of all the technologies installed in the model optimisation. As mentioned
in Section 2.3.1, it is crucial to choose these electricity prices to obtain the real impact
of the NSWPH in the consumer and producer surplus.
In Table 4.1, the diﬀerences on the revenues received by the NSWPH wind farms
between using Investment Run or Day-Ahead optimisation electricity prices are presented
for scenario N1. As expected, when using the Investment Run electricity prices, the total
amount of support required by each government decreases signiﬁcantly. According to the
results of the study, the NSWPH wind farms will still need support to be proﬁtable, even
when technologies consider the long-term marginal costs in their bidding strategy. This
might be caused by the diﬀerences in capital costs between the socio-economic perspective
of the model (4%) and the private owners (8%). Optimising the system from the pri-
vate investor owners perspective might lead to a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent power mix scenario.
NSWPH wind farms economic results obtained through yearly cash ﬂows, only con-
sider data from 2035 and 2045. Linear interpolation is performed between these two
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Discussion
years to deﬁne the yearly revenues and costs between 2030 and 2050. Real revenues and
costs are assumed to be constant from 2050 to 2060. Although these assumptions aﬀects
considerably the ﬁnal results, it is not expected to impact signiﬁcantly the conclusions of
this study, since major sources of uncertainty are included in the model.
Figure 4.1: Price duration curve comparison between the prices obtained from the
Investment Run and the Day-Ahead optimisation.
Table 4.1: Comparison between the economic results obtained when considering electricity
prices coming from the Investment Run and Day-Ahead optimisation.
N1
Invest. Run Rev.
Day-Ahead Rev.
Country
DK
NL
DE
DK
NL
DE
CfD [€/MWh]
62.4
64.0
66.9
64.5
66.0
68.9
Sup. OWF [M€2029]
-617
-1594
-3393
-450
-3273
-4895
Total Sup [M€2029]
-5605
-8618
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Auction Design and Level of Support
47
4.3
Auction Design and Level of Support
Auctions for the support of renewable energy are expected to play a crucial role in
the development of oﬀshore wind power. This type of projects require a large initial
investment, in which the cost of capital play a crucial role in the overall proﬁtability.
Therefore, support schemes like the CfD considered in this study help to reduce the
risk for the private investor, which can reduce the cost of capital as a consequence. In
addition, the competition generated by an auction is expected to minimise the total
support required by this oﬀshore wind projects.
Deciding which stakeholder will own the transmission lines has a signiﬁcant impact
on its results. In this study, it is assumed that the cost of capital from the government is
signiﬁcantly lower than the cost of capital from the private investors. However, private
investors could argue that they are able to built the transmission lines cheaper, due to a
combination of expertise and know-how with closer relationship with the transmission
industry. In this study, this last fact is not considered. As a result, the overall support
required by the governments is lower when they are the ones owning the transmission
lines, but it might be diﬀerent in reality.
The diﬀerent level of tax rates between countries can present a barrier for the com-
petition of the auction if multiple countries are allowed to participate. In Figure 3.15, the
diﬀerences in CfD support between DK, NL, and DE of scenario N1, come exclusively
from the corporate tax rate level. The diﬀerence of more than 4€/MWh presented
between DK and DE, would give a signiﬁcant advantage in the auction to Danish wind
farms over the German ones. Therefore, it is crucial to consider the national level of
taxes if a multi-country auction is designed.
In case that the transmission lines are owned by the wind farm private investor, it
is recommended by this study that one site is auctioned at each time. In this mono-site
auctions, the location and interconnector/s capacity would be ﬁxed. If multiple sites and
transmission lines are auctioned at the same time, there could be competition problems
related to which country’s wind farm should own which transmission line.
For example, in N1+TL I (Figure 3.15) the diﬀerences in CfD support level range
from 57.45 €/MWh in Denmarc to 69.4 €/MWh in The Netherlands. This diﬀerence is
mainly caused by a diﬀerent distribution of transmission lines costs and congestion rents,
along with the national taxes level previously mentioned. On the other hand, scenario
N1+TL S reduces this diﬀerences by sharing these costs and congestion rents according
to the total energy produced. However, implementing this type of distribution might
lead to extra collaboration issues in reality.
According to the results of this study, moving from the NSWPH having its own bidding
zone (N1) to a FTR market arrangement (N4), restricts the optimal path found by the
model. As a consequence, scenario N4 is less optimal than N1, resulting in higher support
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Discussion
required from the governments. For example, the level of support required increases from
8, 618 M€ (2029 PV) to 10, 696 M€ between scenarios N1 and N4 respectively. This
diﬀerence is mainly driven by a reduction in congestion rents.
On the other hand, the methodology followed to optimise the diﬀerent scenarios, presents
diﬃculties to compare them directly. These scenarios ﬁnd diﬀerent optimal paths regard-
ing the total generation installed capacities, electricity ﬂows, and distribution of electricity
demand destined to produce bio- & electro-fuels. Therefore, it is diﬃcult to isolate the
impact of one single parameter when all these diﬀerences play a signiﬁcant role on the
results. To facilitate the comparison, it would be possible to ﬁx the installed capacities
and distribution of transport fuels electricity demand. However, this methodology would
beneﬁt signiﬁcantly the scenario used to optimise these parameters for the rest of scenarios.
Finally, the total economic balance that each country perceives from the installation of
the NSWPH is only positive for Germany. When interconnecting multiple countries, it is
important to analyse not only the proﬁtability of the project, but also the impact that
this interconnection will create on the consumers of each country. For example, in this
study Danish consumers are expected to pay more to satisfy their electricity demand
when the NSWPH is considered. On the other hand, Germany would earn more than 10
times the losses perceived by Denmark.
This fact could present a barrier for the collaboration between countries in any en-
ergy island. To avoid it, politicians should design a mechanism to compensate this type
of losses. For example, in this case Germany could transfer some of the welfare received
to both Denmark and The Netherlands to compensate their losses, while still being
proﬁtable.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusions
Multiple studies have shown that the implementation of energy islands could save signiﬁ-
cant costs to the energy system. However, the lack of cost beneﬁt analysis presents a
barrier for these type of projects. This Master’s Thesis presents an economic feasibility
study for the North Sea Wind Power Hub (NSWPH), in which the North European
energy system is optimised Balmorel. The main results from the optimisation consists of
hourly energy prices, electricity ﬂows, consumer demand, and producers generation.
A methodology is developed to estimate the total economic balance of each country
participating in an energy island. Using the results from the optimisation, the delta in
consumer surplus, producer surplus, and congestion rents, is calculated between diﬀerent
scenarios and a radial reference case. The total support required by the wind farms is ag-
gregated with the consumer surplus of each country, obtaining the total economic balance.
According to the results of the study, the North European energy system would save
an average of 2, 500 M€ per year, when considering the NSWPH. This result is slightly
higher than the €1.0-1.7 billion per year concluded by [17] for 2040. From the countries
connected to the hub, Germany would be the only one getting beneﬁts from the NSWPH,
earning more than 30, 000 M€ (Present Value 2029) over the lifetime of the project.
On the other hand, Denmark would lose around 3, 000 M€ and The Netherlands 1, 000 M€.
Cost of capital have a crucial impact on the proﬁtability of projects with such a large
initial investment. Therefore, CfD support schemes are recommended to reduce the risk
of the NSWPH, which is expected to reduce the cost of capital at the same time. In
addition, the evolution of bio- & electro-fuels is expected to have a signiﬁcant impact on
the proﬁtability of the NSWPH wind farms.
The ownership of the transmission line inﬂuence directly the results of NSWPH auctions
for support of renewable energy. To minimise the level of support required by each
government, the stakeholder that could build the transmission line at the least cost should
own it, including the government. In addition, it is recommended that the NSWPH
operates under its own bidding zone.
Overall, this study indicates that the NSWPH would be beneﬁcial for the European
energy system. However, there are multiple assumptions and limitations that should be
taken into account when analysing these results. This conclusions can be used as an
starting point for policy makers to create an optimal framework for the development of
the NSWPH.
==PAGE:60==
50
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX A
Interconnectors Capacities
Figure A.1: Comparison of the total transmission line capacities installed between coun-
tries in scenario N1, for 2025, 2035, and 2045.
==PAGE:62==
52
A Interconnectors Capacities
Figure A.2: Comparison of the total transmission line capacities installed in 2025, 2035,
and 2045, for the scenario N2.
Figure A.3: Comparison of the total transmission line capacities installed in 2025, 2035,
and 2045, for the scenario N5.
==PAGE:63==
A Interconnectors Capacities
53
Figure A.4: Comparison of the total transmission line capacities installed in 2025, for
the diﬀerent scenarios presented in Table 2.2.
Figure A.5: Comparison of the total transmission line capacities installed in 2035, for
the diﬀerent scenarios presented in Table 2.2.
==PAGE:64==
54
A Interconnectors Capacities
Figure A.6: Comparison of the total transmission line capacities installed in 2045, for
the diﬀerent scenarios presented in Table 2.2.
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX B
Price Duration Curves
==PAGE:66==
56
B Price Duration Curves
Figure B.1: Price duration curve comparison between the sce-
narios N1 & N5 for 2035.
Figure B.2: Price duration curve comparison between the sce-
narios N1 & N4 for 2035.
==PAGE:67==
B Price Duration Curves
57
Figure B.3: Price duration curve comparison between 2035
and 2045, for scenario N1.
Figure B.4: Price duration curve comparison between 2035
and 2045, for scenario N5.
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX C
Surplus Scenario N4
Figure C.1: Comparison of the congestion rents, consumers, and producers surplus, for
the scenario N4. It is represented in Real M€ 2015.
==PAGE:70==
60
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
European Commission. The European Green Deal. Technical report. December 2019.
url: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/resource.html?uri=cellar:b828d165-
1c22-11ea-8c1f-01aa75ed71a1.0002.02/DOC%7B%5C_%7D1%7B%5C&%7Dformat=
PDF.
[2]
European Commission. Clean Energy - The European Green Deal. 2019.
[3]
Wind Europe. Oﬀshore Wind in Europe - Key trends and statistics 2019. Technical
report. 2019, pages 10–12.
[4]
European Commission - In-Depth Analysis in support of the Commission Commu-
nication COM (2018) 773. A European long-term strategic vision for a prosperous,
modern, competitive and climate neutral economy. Technical report. 2018, page 77.
[5]
Wind Europe. Our energy, our future - How oﬀshore wind will help Europe go
carbon-neutral. Technical report. November 2019.
[6]
Mario Garzón González and Lena Kitzing. Auctions for the support of renewable
energy in Denmark A Case Study on Results and Lessons Learnt. Technical report.
2019.
[7]
László Szabó et al. Auctions for the support of renewable energy in the Netherlands
- Results and Lessons Learnt. Technical report. 2019.
[8]
Council of the European Union. Political declaration on the North Seas Countries
Oﬀshore Grid Initiative. 2009.
[9]
North Seas countries and the European Commission. Political Declaration on energy
cooperation between the North Seas Countries. 2016.
[10]
North Seas Energy Cooperation. Annex 1: Work programme. Technical report.
2020.
[11]
CPMR North Sea Commission. North Sea Commission Action Plan - 2019-2020.
Technical report. 2019.
[12]
ENTSO-E. Position on Oﬀshore Development. Technical report. 2020.
[13]
Danish Ministry of Climate Energy and Utilities. Denmark unveils plan to build
the world’s ﬁrst oﬀshore wind “energy islands”, ushering in a new era for oﬀshore
wind energy in Europe. May 2020. url: https://en.kefm.dk/news/news-
archive/2020/may/denmark-unveils-plan-to-build-the-world-s-first-
offshore-wind-energy-islands-ushering-in-a-new-era-for-offshore-
wind-energy-in-europe/ (visited on June 8, 2020).
==PAGE:72==
62
Bibliography
[14]
North Sea Wind Power Hub consortium. The Challenge (1) - Urgent action is
needed to reach a low-carbon society in time. Technical report. June 2019.
[15]
North Sea Wind Power Hub consortium. The vision (2) - The Hub-and-Spoke
concept as modular infrastructure block to scale up fast. Technical report. June
2019.
[16]
North Sea Wind Power Hub consortium. Modular Hub-and-Spoke: Speciﬁc solution
options (3) - Case studies have demonstrated technical feasibility. Technical report.
June 2019.
[17]
North Sea Wind Power Hub consortium. The beneﬁts (4) - The modular Hub-and-
Spoke concept has substantial societal beneﬁts and thus the potential to incentivise
all involved stakeholders. Technical report. June 2019.
[18]
North Sea Wind Power Hub consortium. Requirements to develop (5) - Ensure
industry can progress. Technical report. June 2019.
[19]
North Sea Wind Power Hub consortium. Requirements to Build (6) - Post-2030
planning is needed now. Technical report. June 2019.
[20]
North Sea Wind Power Hub consortium. Modular Hub-and-Spoke Concept to
Facilitate Large Scale Oﬀshore Wind. Technical report. 2019.
[21]
Moore, John et al. PROMOTioN - Deliverable 12.2: Optimal Scenario for the
Development of a Future European Oﬀshore Grid. Technical report. 2020.
[22]
Moore, John et al. PROMOTioN - WP12 Deployment plan for future European
oﬀshore grid. Technical report. 2020.
[23]
Uwe Weichenhain et al. Hybrid projects : How to reduce costs and space of oﬀ-
shore developments North Seas Oﬀshore Energy Clusters study. May. 2019. isbn:
9789276040934. doi: 10.2833/416539.
[24]
Navigant. “Integration routes North Sea oﬀshore wind 2050”. In: North Sea Wind
Power Hub (2020). url: https://northseawindpowerhub.eu/wp- content/
uploads/2020/04/NSWPH-Integration-routes-offshore-wind-2050.pdf.
[25]
Juan Gea-Bermúdez et al. “Optimal generation and transmission development of
the North Sea region: Impact of grid architecture and planning horizon”. In: Energy
191 (January 2020). url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.116512.
[26]
European Commission. A hydrogen strategy for a climate-neutral Europe. Technical
report. 2020.
[27]
Mathias Julius Falkengaard. EnergiWatch - Konsortium har plan for energiø på 10
GW. May 2020. url: https://m.energiwatch.dk/article/12157077 (visited
on June 8, 2020).
[28]
North Sea Wind Power Hub. Modular Hub and Spoke. Technical report. November
2017. url: https://northseawindpowerhub.eu/wp-content/uploads/2017/
11/Concept-Paper-2-Modular-Hub-Spoke.pdf.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
63
[29]
Roland Berger and European Commission. NSWPH in the context of the North
Seas Oﬀshore Energy Clusters study. Technical report. 2018, pages 5–6.
[30]
European Commission. Accompanying the document - Proposal for a Directive of
the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2012/27/EU on
Energy Eﬃciency. Technical report. 2016.
[31]
E3MLab and ICCS at National Technical University of Athens. PRIMES MODEL
- Detailed model description. Technical report. 2014. url: http://www.e3mlab.
euCentral@e3mlab.eu.
[32]
Frauke Wiese et al. “Balmorel open source energy system model”. In: Energy
Strategy Reviews 20 (2018), pages 26–34. issn: 2211467X. doi: 10.1016/j.esr.
2018.01.003. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2018.01.003.
[33]
Philipp Andreas Gunkel et al. “From passive charging to vehicle-to-grid : assessing
the ﬂexibility from electric vehicles in a context of transmission system development”.
In: Under review: Applied Energy (2020).
[34]
Transport & Environment. “How to decarbonise European transport by 2050”.
In: (2018). issn: 1098-6596. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004. arXiv: arXiv:
1011.1669v3.
[35]
Juan Gea-Bermúdez et al. “Operational planning of large-scale energy systems with
high share of renewable generation - Under Review”. In: (2020). doi: 10.36227/
TECHRXIV.12465230.V1. url: https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.12465230.
v1.
[36]
Matti Koivisto et al. “Using time series simulation tools for assessing the eﬀects
of variable renewable energy generation on power and energy systems”. In: (May
2019). issn: 2041840X. doi: 10.1002/wene.329. url: https://orbit.dtu.dk/
en/publications/using- time- series- simulation- tool- for- assessing-
the-effects-of-va.
[37]
Danish Energy Agency. Technology Data - Generation of Electricity and District
heating. Technical report. 2020.
[38]
M J Koivisto and J Gea-Bermudez. NSON-DK energy system scenarios-Edition 2.
Technical report. 2018.
[39]
KMPG. Corporate tax rates table. Technical report. 2020.
[40]
COWI. Finscreening af Havarealer til Etablering af Nye Havmølleparker Med
Forbindelse til Energiø/Hub. Technical report. May 2020.
==PAGE:74==
