==PAGE:1==
Annotation in Virtual Reality
Michael Atchapero
s143049
July 12, 2020
Abstract
This thesis explores virtual reality annotation on 3D-scanned objects to compare geo-
metric properties. A virtual reality annotation prototype was developed and compared
to keyboard-and-mouse annotation, with low geometric variance as the ideal property.
A hypothesis test on diﬀerences of variances between the platforms showed no ev-
idence to reject the null hypothesis of no diﬀerences in variances. With no evidence to
suggest a diﬀerence in variances, the virtual reality prototype serves as an alternative in
regards to precision.
Thethesisconcludeswithadiscussiononhowtoimprovekeyboard-and-mousean-
notation, following from experience with developing an annotation program in virtual
reality.
1
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
2
Related Work
7
3
Design
8
3.1
Initial Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Control Scheme
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.2
Annotation Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.3
Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Final Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.1
Transformation Centre . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.2
Thumb-Stick Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.3
Annotation Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2.4
Designing for Test Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.5
Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Implementation
18
4.1
Unity Game Objects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Virtual Reality Scene Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
The Annotation Object . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.1
Disabling Physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.2
Inserting the Skull Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3.3
Collision Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.4
Ray-cast Annotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3.5
Annotation Object Movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.6
Modifying Existing Annotation Landmarks . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Exporting Data Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Results
30
5.1
Testing Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Statistical Hypothesis Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Test Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4
Data Handling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.5
Assumptions of the Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5.1
The Independence Assumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5.2
The Normality Assumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2
==PAGE:3==
5.6
The Hypothesis Test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Discussion
43
6.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Beating the Hypothesis Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
Evaluating the Testing Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.4
Precision and Clipping Planes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.5
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
References
50
8
Appendix
53
8.1
Initial Time Plan
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.2
Time Plan Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.3
R sheet: Normality Assumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8.4
R sheet: Hypothesis Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.5
C# Scripts in Unity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
DTU Compute are collaborating with biologists and PhD students, whom are inter-
ested in comparing Finnish seal skulls to Baltic seal skulls: In particular, comparing the
physical properties such as size, width, height. An example could be that the distance
between teeth could vary between the seal species. Their physical properties are com-
pared by the location of several landmarks.
Figure 1: A seal skull from three diﬀerent angles, with landmarks at points of interest
shown. Credits belong to the PhD students.
4
==PAGE:5==
For each skull, the coordinates of all 31 landmarks are registered, yielding a (X, Y, Z)
position foreach landmark. The valuesof the (X, Y, Z) positions arecompared between
equivalent landmarks between annotated skulls.
CurrentlytheselandmarksareannotatedwithaMicroScribepen. TheMicroScribe
is a 3D digitizer [12]; A user pricks a physical object with the digitizing pen, saving the
(X, Y, Z) coordinates digitally on a computer. In our case, the data contains its annota-
tion number, name, position and surface angle. However, one drawback is the need for
a physical object, as these seal skulls belong to museums.
An idea is then to 3D scan the physical objects, but it is not only diﬃcult to com-
pare the geometric characteristics of 3D models directly using mathematical models, it
also does not ﬁt the current data set formats derived from pen annotations of physical
objects. Therefore, we wish to continue with the annotation data format.
Avarietyofannotationsoftwarealreadyexists,bothinresearchandacademia[7][5],
and some publicly available at various price points [2][13][17]. PhD students at DTU
Compute have experimented with annotating 3D models with keyboard and mouse
using Stratovan Checkpoint [17], but even for experienced users, an annotation ses-
sion on one skull takes 20 minutes with keyboard and mouse in Stratovan Checkpoint
compared to only 5 minutes with MicroScribe. The time diﬀerence is signiﬁcant, as the
PhD students work with 22 diﬀerent skulls to annotate. Furthermore, the biologists
and PhD students emphasize a need for both precision and consistency with regards to
placing the annotation points.
Therefore, this thesis explores prototyping a virtual reality tool for annotating dig-
ital 3D models that is compatible with the currently used data format.
The argument for using virtual reality for the annotation procedure is that virtual
reality mixes both the physical presence of annotating the skull while still using the dig-
ital 3D-scanned models. Here, a virtual reality setup consists of a head-mounted display
and two touch controllers, one for each hand. For example, one touch controller may
be used for holding and rotating the 3D model and another touch controller is used to
annotate. Secondly, virtual reality has more intuitive camera control than standard 2D
screens, as the camera is controlled by the head-mounted display’s position and orienta-
tion. The annotation object is then controlled and annotated by the touch controllers’
buttons and orientation.
The primary question is the viability of annotation in virtual reality; Can users an-
notate as reliably in virtual reality as they can with keyboard and mouse annotation
in Stratovan Checkpoint? With the emphasis on precision and consistency, the proto-
type’s viability is measured by comparing the statistical variance in the placement of the
annotation landmarks. Multiple test subjects annotate the same skull multiple times in
both the virtual reality prototype and in Stratovan Checkpoint. A statistical hypothesis
5
==PAGE:6==
test is conducted on the diﬀerences of variances from their repeatedly placed annota-
tions, from which we conclude a verdict on consistency between the systems.
A tangential challenge is the intuitiveness and accessibility of the prototype, since
time spent annotating is also a secondary factor we can measure.
The prototype will be developed with the game engine Unity [18] and the virtual
reality device Oculus Rift [11], as this combination makes the initial setup and installa-
tion quick. A single seal skull will be selected and used as the annotation object during
development and testing. It is outside the scope of this thesis to explore the biological
research or how this prototype can be used in that context. This thesis focuses on the
comparison of virtual reality annotation and keyboard-and-mouse annotation.
6
==PAGE:7==
2
Related Work
There are numerous papers on annotation systems, mostly in regards to 3D models
and augmented reality, and less so with virtual reality. The more general purpose of
digital annotation refers to environments in which notes, comments and media can be
attached to existing 3D models.
Clergeaud et al. propose an annotation system for taking notes in virtual reality [7].
They recognized the use of virtual reality for testing engineering solutions, but they also
saw a lack of compatibility between data generated inside and outside of virtual reality.
In their annotation system, users can annotate the environment, meant to help the next
person entering the same area. Users also carry a notepad in the virtual environment,
the contents of which can also be accessed outside of virtual reality.
Continuing with annotation in environments, Kadobayashi et al. present a 3D
model annotation system in a collaborative environment [15]. They use technology
which allows users to place portals, from which the user can peek into the environ-
ment of the annotation object. Users can place multiple portals, and depending on the
portal’s placement and orientation, gain multiple viewpoints on the same 3D object.
In contrast to traditional 3D annotation systems, users do not control a camera, but a
character in ﬁrst-person view who can place portals. Similarly to virtual reality, users
can also move their character in the environment, and their angle of view into the por-
tal can give them new perspectives. In their system, annotations contain messages that
can be placed not only on the model’s surface, but also on portals, or on top of other
annotations.
In regards to annotation of complex 3D models, Bourguignon et al. discuss how
their 3D sketching system can be used to annotate existing 3D models [6]. They pro-
vide an example of an annotated 3D model of a heart in a classroom context, where the
sketching is used like chalk on a blackboard. Furthermore, they suggest pushing the
near clip plane to view the insides of the heart’s 3D model, which allows annotating
inaccessible sections and inner surfaces.
The second example of a virtual reality annotation system is described by Riberio
et al., which is a system speciﬁcally designed for annotating dancers in a virtual envi-
ronment [5]. They discuss how annotation with head-mounted displays often target
augmented reality scenarios, to annotate real world environments rather than virtual
environments. Previously, choreography would be studied using video footage, which
only provides one point of view by default. The advantage of using a head-mounted
display is to allow better camera control. With recorded dance data that can be replayed
in a virtual environment, the user can watch the dance from multiple viewpoints and
annotate either the skeleton bones of the dancer, or freely in space using point clouds.
7
==PAGE:8==
3
Design
The purpose of this section is to analyze the problem and theorize ideas, to discuss the
potential options, to decide on a solution and justify the reasons behind our choices.
However, an important preface is understanding that users of digital technology come
from diﬀerent backgrounds and experiences, so users’ varying familiarity with digital
media must be accounted for. On the one hand, be mindful that PhD students and
biologists from the problem statement may have no prior experience with virtual real-
ity. On the other hand, this thesis is not about the biological research, but about the
comparison of annotation systems on two diﬀerent platforms, so the reader is likely in-
terested in virtual reality or computer graphics. Hence, the design should be accessible
enough for users not related to computer graphics research, yet their data should be
useful enough to contribute to scientiﬁc research within computer graphics.
The prototype will be compared to the keyboard-and-mouse annotation in Strato-
van Checkpoint in section 5, a program that does not allow users to customize controls,
as discussed in section 6. Similarly, the prototype will also be one single design with no
possibility of customization, because the prototype’s design should be identical for all
test subjects.
Commercial products, such as Unity and Autodesk Maya, include a staggering
number of user preferences and customization options for their editors, allowing users
to set up a workﬂow to improve production speed. This is standard for large commer-
cial software catering to diﬀerent users, who have varying purposes behind their use
of said products. For example, Unity is a game engine originally meant to make video
games, yet here in this thesis Unity is used for research purposes.
Even though we discuss multiple design possibilities in the following sections, re-
member that large commercial software products do not settle for one single design;
They implement multiple designs and let the user decide which to use. Understand
that the prototype’s ﬁnal design is not ultimately superior nor necessarily the most
preferable to every user or reader. The ﬁnal design should be thought of as the nec-
essary pieces to construct a prototype that can conduct a reasonably valid comparison
between keyboard-and-mouse annotation and virtual reality annotation - a minimum
viable product. There are features and possibilities discussed that would be useful, but
scrapped for not being necessary.
The design process was a combination of hypothetical designs from a discussion
standpoint, and implementing ideas to then receive feedback. The drawback of purely
hypothetical designs is unforeseen issues in practice; The drawback with design by feed-
back is that users rarely understand what features they want or what tools they need to
succeed in using the software better.
8
==PAGE:9==
3.1
Initial Design
When Oculus Rift is ﬁrst installed with controllers, the user can sit through demos that
demonstrate the use of the touch controllers [9].
In this setup, the head-mounted display and the two touch controllers are tracked
by two stationary sensors, placed roughly one meter apart and facing in parallel the di-
rection the playing ﬁeld. With the head-mounted display on, the controllers appear as
digital hands. The controllers themselves have sensors tracking the thumb, index, mid-
dle and ring ﬁngers; The digital hands change pose according to how the controller is
held physically. For example, lifting the index ﬁnger on the controller makes the digital
hands in virtual reality adjust their index ﬁnger as well.
Figure 2: Four examples of hand poses. The hand poses change the ﬁngers are lifted
from the sensors on the touch controller. Various combinations yield various poses.
The diﬀerent hand poses in the Oculus Rift demos can be used in various ways [9].
Pointing the index ﬁnger spawns a ray from the ﬁngertip, used to select distant objects.
9
==PAGE:10==
A hand close by a object can grab it by clenching the middle and ring ﬁnger. These fea-
tures introduced in the demos imprint a standard control-scheme on how users should
expect to use controllers in virtual reality applications.
The integration of Oculus Rift into Unity includes several sample scenes with hand
functionality as seen in the demos [10]. The index-ﬁnger ray-casting and grabbing ob-
jects was reused for the initial design: Not only was it standard for Oculus Rift appli-
cations, reusing the design would speed up development for the ﬁrst proof-of-concept.
In our prototype, index-ﬁnger ray-casting was not used to select objects, but to place an
annotation point.
3.1.1
Control Scheme
Theinitialdesignmappedtheleftthumb-sticktomovingtheannotationobjectaround
in the X and Z axes, such that the annotation object could be moved horizontally and
forward/backwards, but not vertically. The right thumb-stick rotates the object verti-
cally and horizontally, but not clockwise or counter-clockwise. This control-scheme is
adopted from console games, where the left thumb-stick usually controls movement
and the right thumb-stick controls view.
Figure 3: Graphic of left and right touch controllers and their buttons, as seen during
the Oculus Rift setup. Credits goes to Oculus Rift [11].
The buttons on the back of the controllers by the middle and ring ﬁngers are the
hand-triggers, used to grab the skull. When the index ﬁnger of the dominant hand
(by default right-hand) is lifted from the controller, the pointing ﬁnger displays a ray.
10
==PAGE:11==
Pressing the upper button (default B-button) places an annotation point. The lower
button on the dominant hand (default A-button) resets the skull’s position, rotation
and scale. The two buttons on the non-dominant hand (default X- and Y-buttons)
scale the object either upwards or downwards. The start button toggles which hand is
dominant.
To summarize, the control scheme allows the user to grab, move, rotate and scale
the object, reset its transformation, and annotate the object with ray-casting.
3.1.2
Annotation Procedure
The ﬁrst central question was how to design the annotation itself. The Oculus Rift
demos would suggest using ray-casting from the user’s digital hand, while a more con-
servative approach reuses the MicroScribe gestures, with the user’s digital hand holding
a pen and pricking the skull to annotate. There are multiple reasons why we continued
with ray-cast annotation over pen annotation. First, there were issues in implement-
ing collision detection for the skull (discussed in section 4.3.3), as the mesh was very
detailed at 14 million triangle polygons, and collision detection with ray-casting is sim-
pler to implement in Unity and less error prone than collision detection between two
objects. Secondly, Stratovan Checkpoint uses ray-casting and Oculus Rift demos sug-
gests their use, so we are taking advantage of the opportunities in the digital medium
by using it. Finally, gauging the distance to the annotation object in virtual reality can
be diﬃcult, especially when the object is suﬃciently enlarged and taking up most of the
visible space around the user. The distance is easier gauged with a laser-pointer, which
is what ray-casting already uses. Although to be fair, an annotation pen’s tip could also
beneﬁt from a laser-pointer to gauge distance.
The index-ﬁnger ray is only displayed when the dominant hand’s ﬁnger is pointing
out. If the ray intersects the annotation object, the ray stops at the surface hit. Upon
pressing the annotate button, an annotation point is only placed if the ray hits a surface.
If instead the ray hits an existing annotation point, that point is selected and can be
moved.
Finally, theprototypecanimportandexportannotationdata, whichforeachanno-
tation point contains annotation name, number, position and orientation. There is no
interface for controlling this from within the virtual environment; Access to importing
in particular is limited to the Unity editor, as it was used for development purposes.
The prototype would export all annotations data automatically upon shutdown.
11
==PAGE:12==
3.1.3
Evaluation
Early questions included how to annotate inaccessible parts of the annotation object.
As Bourguignon et al. pointed out, the annotation object can be ”sliced” by placing the
near clip plane into it [6]. This worked well in an early keyboard-and-mouse prototype,
in particular with buildings, organs or bottles. However, in this project it was decided
to use a seal skull as the annotation object, and after a few tests, it became evident there
was no need to slice the annotation object with the near clip plane. Furthermore, if
the near clip plane is pushed far away, we risk clipping away the user’s digital hands
and controllers in the virtual environment. The near clip plane is good a tool for slicing
annotationobjectsinakeyboard-and-mousecontext,butnotforvirtualrealitycontexts
due to relying on the visibility of the user’s digital hands.
Another idea was multiple camera views to help orient the user, as explored by
Kadobayashi et al [15]. Autodesk products, such as Autodesk Maya, features multi-
ple windows where users see 3D models from multiple perspectives, usually three axial
orthographic views and one perspective view [3]. Splitting screens in the head-mounted
display is obviously no solution, but screens can be placed in the virtual environment.
As an example, one Oculus demo places the user in a virtual cinema with a giant screen
with access to their desktop PC. Unity allows placing cameras in the virtual environ-
ment, the results stored as textures that can be displayed in real-time on screens [23].
This is comparable to surgeons using extra camera and screen equipment to help ori-
ent themselves during an operation. Unlike the clipping technique, this is fairly easy
to implement with Unity’s Render Textures [24]. However, this feature was not nec-
essary to carry out a comparison of keyboard-and-mouse annotation versus annotation
in virtual reality. The user already has means to orient themselves, such as moving their
head-mounted display to get a diﬀerent view, or simply moving and rotating the anno-
tation object by grabbing it. The digital annotation object has no weight and should
not have [16], so unintuitively, grabbing an enlarged object is rather eﬀortless.
To summarize what the ﬁrst prototype contained: The user could move, rotate,
scale and grab the annotation object, and those transformations could be reset to de-
fault. The user would annotate with ray-casting with their dominant hand by pointing
their index ﬁnger and pressing a button with their thumb.
This ﬁrst design was shown to a small group of researchers, their experience ranging
from directly working with virtual reality to never having tried it before.
The main ﬂaw of the initial design was borrowing the control scheme too much
from the Oculus Rift demos. For users unfamiliar with the demos, reusing the con-
trol scheme loses its inherent familiarity and therefore also immediate accessibility. In
particular, the Oculus Rift demos properly introduce ray-casting by pointing with the
12
==PAGE:13==
index ﬁnger, but this prototype does not. By reusing their control scheme, the proto-
type relies on the assumption already are familiar with Oculus Rift. Given the original
problem statement, the prototype is meant as a scientiﬁc tool rather than as entertain-
ment, hence we cannot assume that users have prior experience with a variety of virtual
reality applications. While the base functionality was there, it was necessary to simplify
and re-design the control scheme.
3.2
Final Design
The design goals going forwards was to simplify the annotation procedure for accessi-
bility, such that it was immediately obvious how get started. Secondly, to adjust some
functionality and parameters, such as changing the annotation object to rotate around
the user rather than its own centre, which is more intuitive when the object is enlarged.
Finally, to design with annotation sessions and testing in mind.
3.2.1
Transformation Centre
A critique with the initial design was how scaling centered on the annotation object:
Up-scaling frequently caused the annotation object to clip through the user. Down-
scaling also reduced the size of the collision for grabbing, which meant that after down-
scaling, the annotation object would often be out of reach for hand-grabbing. The
solution was centering the scaling to a point near the user instead of the annotation
object’s centre. This stops the annotation object from clipping into the user, but now
the problem is that user feels that scaling now changes both size and position simulta-
neously. This can cause dizziness, as the user loses sense of how large and how close the
object is. What informs our eyes about an object’s size and distance is environment and
lighting, so the solution was to add a non-intrusive static environment. To help orient
the user, the virtual environment received a checkered ground plane onto which the
annotation object’s shadow is cast, and a transparent plane closer to the user’s height
to help gauge the object’s vertical position by how the annotation object clips into the
plane.
13
==PAGE:14==
Figure 4: The environment consists of a transparent plane to gauge height and a check-
ered plane with shadows cast onto it. The user sees the skull at a similar angle in the
prototype.
Figure 5: The top illustration shows rotation of the skull around itself. The bottom
illustration shows rotation the skull around a pivot point near the user.
14
==PAGE:15==
The drawback of these changes is less intuitive rotation and scaling, as it is simpler
to grasp that rotating and scaling occurs from the centre of the annotation object. With
the new changes, the user may have trouble understanding where the pivot point is and
how it works. The trade-oﬀfor intuitiveness is a potentially better workﬂow in practice
when annotating, especially when the object is enlarged.
3.2.2
Thumb-Stick Sensitivity
Previously, the intent of rotating with the thumb-stick was to give an overview, as grab-
bing the object makes for more precise orientation. However, some feedback suggested
using the grabbing for quick orientation, and the thumb-stick for precision. Thus the
base rotation sensitivity was lowered. Secondly, the rotation and movement speed was
the same regardless of the object’s scale, so when the object was enlarged, the thumb-
sticks felt too sensitive. Now, the movement and rotation sensitivities are lowered fur-
ther when the object is enlarged.
The idea is that when the annotation object is enlarged, it is easier to aim and place
the desired annotation point. So when the annotation object is larger, the rotation
thumb-stick should be less sensitive. When the annotation object is smaller and the
user wants an overview, the rotation is faster relatively.
3.2.3
Annotation Procedure
Anothercritiquepointwasthatuserswereconfusedwithhowtoannotate. TheOculus
demos has the user pointing their index-ﬁnger to enable ray-casting features, but this is
not intuitive without either a tutorial or prior experience with the demos. Therefore,
the dominant hand now holds a visible touch-controller with a ray-gun attached onto
it, with rays always visible. The immediate visual feedback of a ray-gun for annotation
shouldconveytoaﬁrst-timeuserthecontrol-schemeandhowtoannotate. Themotion
of annotating is the same as a hand-gun: The user points the ray-gun and uses their
index ﬁnger on the index-trigger to place an annotation point.
15
==PAGE:16==
Figure 6: Attached to the dominant hand is a touch-controller with a ray-gun tip, its
laser intersecting the annotation object. The laser is visible in the virtual reality proto-
type.
With a touch-controller taking up space in on hand, the drawback was that users
did not realize that both hand-triggers can grab the annotation object. Another issue
was that users would discover by accident that the oﬀ-hand index-trigger places the gun
in that hand, i.e. swapping the dominant hand. This was added to accommodate left-
handed users.
3.2.4
Designing for Test Sessions
The annotation procedure of the virtual reality prototype is compared to the keyboard-
and-mouse annotation program Stratovan Checkpoint [17]. To ease comparing data
betweenprograms,theprototypewouldexportthesametypeofdataasStratovanCheck-
point.
The annotation points in the exported data is ordered by the sequence in which the
annotation points are placed in the session. To export consistent data, we use the same
order and placements during test. Hence, an idea was to add spheres guiding users on
where to place annotations. We decided against this, however, as there is a diﬀerence
between hitting a target and annotating freely oﬀa written deﬁnition. Furthermore,
Stratovan Checkpoint does not include such a feature, so the idea was scrapped.
Finally, we considered placing menus in the virtual environment allowing import-
ing and exporting annotation points. This seems reasonable for an all-purpose anno-
tation program, but instead we streamlined the prototype for the test sessions. Since
the start button was now available, we mapped exporting user’s data to that button.
Importing data was not used for testing, only for development purposes.
16
==PAGE:17==
3.2.5
Evaluation
We considered placing instructional interfaces and menus inside the virtual environ-
ment to guide users. As the test sessions with test subjects would be under supervision
to ensure that the annotation procedure was done correctly, the need for instructional
windows and menus inside the virtual environment was not necessary. Here, the super-
vision would ensure that test subjects were familiar with the controls and annotation
points before beginning the actual test and recording their data. However, there was
still merit in simplifying the ray-casting control scheme, as with the ray-gun attached to
their hand, less explanation was needed to get users started on annotating.
An important point is that users had diﬀerent ideas on what the ideal design for the
prototype should be. As there will be disagreements, remember that the design used
in the testing process is not by any means ﬁnal or superior. Users with prior Oculus
Rift experience may prefer ray-casting from the index-ﬁnger, while users with no vir-
tual reality experience may prefer a ray-gun attached to their hand, since its use is more
immediately obvious. The biologists familiar with MicroScribe may prefer pen annota-
tion, mimicking the motions of pricking the skull. Where users disagreed on the design,
these could be left to user preference in a complete product. Certain features that were
omitted from the prototype could also be available in a potential fully-ﬂedged product
as optional tools, such as virtual screens in the virtual environment or targets for guided
annotation sessions. But because we are building a prototype with a single set design
meant for comparing across platforms, it was out of scope to implement more.
Referring to ﬁgure 3 with the button layout, to summarize the ﬁnal control scheme:
The left thumb-stick moves the annotation object, the right thumb-stick pivots the
annotation object around the user. On the left controller, the Y and X buttons scales
the annotation object up and down respectively. On the right controller, the B button
deletes annotation points, and the A button resets the annotation object’s position,
rotation and scale. The hand-triggers grab the annotation object.
The (by default right) hand with the ray-gun’s index-trigger places an annotation
point. The oﬀ-hand index-trigger switches which hand holds the ray-gun. The start
button exports the annotation point data to a .csv spreadsheet ﬁle.
17
==PAGE:18==
4
Implementation
Thepurposeoftheimplementationsectionistodescribethestrategyandstepsrequired
to implement the ﬁnal design of the prototype. Despite the simplicity of the end result
of the prototype, there were technical challenges in ﬁnding the right conﬁguration.
The prototype uses the game engine Unity3D [18] and the virtual reality device
Oculus Rift [11], which consists of a head-mounted display and two hand-held con-
trollers. TheintegrationofOculusRiftintoUnityaddssampleassets, scenesandscripts
to quickly develop a virtual reality application in Unity. In this chapter, the integration
is assumed and its setup is covered elsewhere online [8]. Because we start with sample
assets, scenes and scripts, the implementation section here will primarily focus on the
annotation object, the object which to annotate. Its behaviour and properties diﬀer to
the sample objects found in Oculus Rift’s sample scenes, and it is tied to logic behind
the annotation procedure as well.
4.1
Unity Game Objects
Unity is a powerful game engine with the advantage of many built-in libraries and func-
tions. However, due to Unity’s complexity and default settings, sometimes users strug-
gle to get their own custom intended behaviour in their application, and the prototype
described in this paper is no diﬀerent. To understand the technical solutions ahead, the
reader needs familiarity with a few fundamental concepts of Unity.
A Unity Scene is akin to a level in a video game; An area or a space in the application
that is currently loaded. Scenes can contain Game Objects, which can be the environ-
ment, the player, obstacles, interactible objects, cameras, lighting and much more. All
game objects contain Components: Each component is a building block that make up
the properties of the game objects. All game objects must contain a Transform compo-
nent, which indicates a game object’s position, rotation and scale in the scene. Game
objects can contain multiple components, each regulating diﬀerent properties, such as
Rigidbody (physics), Colliders (collision detection), Meshes (polygon meshes), Scripts
(C# code, examples at section 8.5) and much more.
In the Unity editor, every game object in a scene is nested in the scene’s Hierarchy.
Unity’s concept of Parenting refers to nesting game objects (child objects) under some
other game object (parent object) [21]. Unity’s hierarchy is more akin to a tree data
structure of game objects rather than simply a list of game objects. A game object can
only have one parent object, and they can have multiple child objects. In regards to the
hierarchy in the Unity editor, the obvious beneﬁt is organization during development,
but the parent-child relations between objects also aﬀect their Transform component
18
==PAGE:19==
(position, rotation, scale), which happens to be important for the implementation of
the annotation object.
A child object will move, rotate and scale exactly as its parent object does [21]. As
an example, imagine a racing car as a game object, and we want the camera (also a game
object) to chase the car. The common solution is to create and attach a script compo-
nent to the main camera. Any script’s Update function is called every frame 1 : In that
function we can set the camera’s position and rotation at some oﬀset behind the car.
This makes the camera appear to chase the car in real-time. However, the alternative
solution is to make the camera a child object of the car object.
Any game object without a parent object will have its Transform component’s val-
ues (position, rotation, scale) be set in world-space. But a game object with a parent
object has the origin of its coordinate system centered on its parent object, and there-
fore the Transform component’s values are an oﬀset to its parent object. As the parent
object moves, rotates and scales, so will its child object. Therefore, with the camera as a
child object of the car object, as the car moves around the camera will follow. Here, the
camera’s Transform values is the oﬀset to the car, so the camera’s distance and angle to
the car is tweaked by modifying the camera’s Transform component. Meanwhile, the
car’s Transform component is the car’s world-space coordinates.
These concepts in the Unity engine, especially parenting and transforms, are vital
in understanding the implementation structure of the annotation object.
4.2
Virtual Reality Scene Setup
To make a scene use the Oculus head-mounted display, the main camera should be
deleted and replaced with the game object OVRCameraRig, which is found as a prefab
2 in the Oculus Rift sample framework. The OVRCameraRig has a component with
a property that displays either digital hands or digital controllers in the virtual environ-
ment, but enabling this property does not show the digital hands or controllers as inde-
pendent game objects in the editor’s hierarchy. Instead, there are two sample scenes of
interest: CustomHands and CustomControllers [10]. The former scene has digital hands
as independent game objects in the hierarchy and the latter scene has two digital con-
trollers as independent game objects in the hierarchy. In the prototype, both the digital
hands and controllers are inserted into the prototype’s scene, since we need access to
both hands and controllers as game objects. Without the hands and controllers explic-
1The Frame Rate of an application is the frequency with which the application program is updated
(usually 60 times per second), both in behaviour and visually. When a script uses the Update function,
its code contents appears to be functional in real-time.
2A prefab is a reusable template of a game object. [20]
19
==PAGE:20==
itly available as game objects, they cannot easily be referenced in our script components.
Speciﬁcally, we want to control the visibility of the controllers and the transform com-
ponents of the ray-gun’s tip, namely to track the position and rotation of the user’s
digital hands when annotating.
4.3
The Annotation Object
Describing the implementation details of the end result leaves out discussions on de-
cisions and details of the development process. Hence, this section is written with the
stages and steps of implementing an annotation object, as there are many pitfalls and
issues to cover. Previous sections discussed various designs and decisions, but in short:
The user should be able to grab the annotation object by the hands, to annotate the
object with ray-casting, and to export the annotation points as data compatible with
previous data sets.
To start with, the DistanceGrab sample scene contains many game objects that can
be grabbed with the hands. Simply copy one of the grabbable game objects into a new
scene, alongside an OVRCameraRig, custom hands and controllers, then object-grab
interaction should work right oﬀthe bat. This single game object will be the basis from
which we build the annotation object’s other properties.
4.3.1
Disabling Physics
The ﬁrst issue is that the Oculus Rift sample framework assumes that grabbable game
objects should be aﬀected by gravity and physics. Disabling gravity is easily done in
the annotation object’s Rigidbody component, but the annotation object is still af-
fected by forces and velocities, which it will be given by poking, punching or by being
thrown. The annotation object should stay still in the air when not grabbed by the
hands. Physics can be removed entirely by removing the Rigidbody component, but
the grabbing in the Oculus Rift framework relies on the object having a Rigidbody
component: Removing the Rigidbody component stops grabbing from working at all,
so this is not an option.
The grabbable object has a script component OVRGrabbable, which should not be
editedtoavoidbreakingthesampleframework. SinceUnityusesC#, anobject-oriented
programming language, the solution is to instead use inheritance to replace the OVR-
Grabbable component with a new script component which inherits the OVRGrab-
bable class. The function GrabEnd is triggered when the user lets go of the object, so we
override the function and set its Rigidbody velocities to zero to prevent the object from
being thrown. Poking the object still causes movement, so the velocities should also be
20
==PAGE:21==
set to zero in the FixedUpdate function 3 , but only when the object is not grabbed.
In short: Remove the gravity in Rigidbody, and via scripts set the object’s velocity
to zero if not held in the user’s hands. Now, the object can be repositioned and rotated
by grabbing, but otherwise it stays still when not held by the user.
The hierarchy is as follows:
• GrabbableObject: Transform,MeshFilter,MeshRenderer,BoxCollider,Rigid-
body, OVRCustomGrabbable (script)
4.3.2
Inserting the Skull Mesh
The next step is to replace the sample 3D model with the seal skull. Under normal
circumstances, this should be fairly straightforward: Remove the old 3D model and
colliders and replace with our own. Unfortunately, there are issues with both colliders
and the 3D model.
The seal skulls are 3D scanned and as a result are very detailed at around 14 million
triangle polygons. Additionally, the skulls’ 3D models are not centered around the ori-
gin at (0, 0, 0): They are placed roughly 180 meters away from the origin. The standard
practice is centering 3D models at the origin, and therefore it is tempting to simply ﬁx
this oﬀset in a 3D model editor such as Blender to avoid future possible issues. The
problem is that re-centering a skull around the origin makes annotating this new 3D
model incompatible with previous annotation data sets: The annotation data sets ex-
ported from Stratovan Checkpoint are annotations done directly on the 3D scanned
skulls, and therefore all of Stratovan Checkpoint’s data sets have the same oﬀsets as
the 3D scanned skulls. Instead of re-centering all skulls and all previous data sets, it
seems simpler to accept that the 3D models themselves are at some oﬀset from the ori-
gin. Hence, the skulls need not be re-centered in Blender. However, both the oﬀset and
the level of detail of the polygon mesh cause issues in Unity.
Removing the old mesh and colliders of the grabbable object and replacing both
with the 3D skull causes a displacement, in which the game object’s Transform com-
ponent can be at the origin (0, 0, 0), but the 3D model and the mesh collider are still
some 180 meters away. Even worse, rotating the Transform component does not make
the skull rotate around itself - the skull rotates around the Transform component’s po-
sition as a pivot point while the mesh keeps its distance of 180 meters.
Recall the relation between parenting and Transform components and the example
with the camera chasing the car. Keeping the annotation object at the origin, a child
object should be added with the mesh component and placed such that the skull mesh
3FixedUpdate is an update function primarily meant for physics [22].
21
==PAGE:22==
visually centers around the origin. The 3D scan’s inherent displacement is cancelled out
by the child object’s Transform. Instead of rotating the child object with the inherent
pivot point, simply rotate the parent object. This way, the skull can be rotated with
itself as the centre, cancelling out the pivot issue.
How does this solution not break compatibility with the data sets with oﬀsets? Be-
cause both the child and parent objects’ Transform components can be reset to iden-
tity values to cause the displacement again. The displacement should be enforced when
either importing or exporting any data sets. The Transform values for cancelling the
displacement can be stored before importing/exporting, and used again after ﬁnishing
importing/exporting.
Tosummarize: KeepanobjectwhoseTransformcomponenttrackstheskull’s(sup-
posed) world position and rotation, with no displacement or pivot issues. Then insert
the mesh component into a child object and re-calibrate its Transform component to
re-centre the skull at the parent object’s Transform position.
The hierarchy is as follows:
• Grabbable Object: Transform, Rigidbody, OVRCustomGrabbable (script)
• Skull Model: Transform, Mesh Filter, Mesh Renderer, Mesh Collider
4.3.3
Collision Detection
Unity has built-in colliders for simple shapes, such as boxes, spheres and capsules. For
collision detection matching the 3D model, the Mesh Collider component is instead
used. Ideally, this mesh collider can simply be used for collision detection for both grab-
bing and the annotation procedure, hence why the previous hierarchy description had
the box collider removed.
The issue is that grabbing the object relies on collider being aﬀected by physics,
which requires enabling the mesh collider’s Convex property. For convex mesh collid-
ers, Unity recommends using either simple or simpliﬁed 3D models [19]. The combi-
nation of physics and collision detection on complex 3D meshes are computationally
expensive. Then consider that the skull mesh has 14 million triangle polygons, and it
seems impossible.
The simple built-in colliders are such basic shapes that they always function with
physics, like convex meshes would. The solution is to use a simple box collider for the
physics behind grabbing and the mesh collider for annotation only. At this point, we
have a parent object keeping track of the skull’s world-space coordinates, with a child
object containing the skull’s 3D model and mesh collider. Since Unity disallows any
game object to have multiple collider components, we can place a box collider on the
22
==PAGE:23==
parent object for collision detection of grabbing, and the child object retains the mesh
collider in the shape of the skull. Additionally, the mesh collider has the same oﬀset
issue as the render of the 3D model discussed previously, so the mesh collider must be
placed as the child object to cancel the oﬀset.
The hierarchy is as follows:
• GrabbableObject: Transform,BoxCollider,Rigidbody,OVRCustomGrabbable
(script)
• Skull Model: Transform, Mesh Filter, Mesh Renderer, Mesh Collider
4.3.4
Ray-cast Annotation
Theray-castannotationmustignoretheboxcolliderforgrabbingandonlyhitthemesh
collider representing the skull’s surface. The parent game object (Grabbable Object)
needs to have its Layer property set to Ignore Raycast, and the child game object needs
to not have that property.
Implementing annotation is done via programming by adding a script component.
In practice, it does not matter which object the script component is attached to, be-
cause the script itself needs references to both the parent and child object. But in this
prototype, the script AnnotationController was attached to the parent object (the code
can be found in the appendix at 8.5). A Line Renderer component was also attached to
the parent object, which visualizes the ray-casting in the virtual environment, such that
the user can aim.
The script itself needs references to both the Grabbable Object (itself), the Skull
Model(itschild), thetipofthegunfromwhichtheuserray-castsfrom, thelinerenderer
component, and a prefab game object as the template for the annotation marks.
Anoutlineoftheannotationcodegoesassuch: Setthelinerenderer’sstartingpoint
at the gun tip. Then use Unity’s physics library to raycast out. If nothing is hit, set the
laser line’s end point at the maximum ray-cast range. If the ray-cast hit something, set
the line’s end point at the hit point. If the ray-cast hit the annotation object, and the
user triggered the input to annotate, then instantiate a new annotation landmark game
object (from the prefab) located at the hit point, with the orientation of the hit point
surface’s normal, and its parent object set to the Skull Model. In pseudo-code, it goes
like so:
23
==PAGE:24==
Set LaserLine's start position at GunTip
Raycast forward from GunTip
if (hit) {
Set LaserLine EndPosition at hit point
if (hit is SkullMesh and AnnotationButton pressed)
Create landmark as child of SkullMesh
}
else
Set LaserLine's end position at RaycastRange
Figure 7: The outline as described in pseudo-code. Note that this is a very bare-
minimum to just get ray-cast annotation working: The ﬁnal script has more elaborate
features with logic not present here. The full C# code can be found in the appendix at
section 8.5.
Instantiated annotation landmark game objects use the Skull Model game object
as their parent, to again use the parenting and transforms: As the skull is moved, ro-
tated and scaled, the landmarks stay attached to the surface correctly. When the skull’s
inherent displacement is reinserted before importing/exporting, each annotation land-
mark will now also have the correct displacement, making their positions and rotations
compatible with previous data sets from Stratovan Checkpoint.
The hierarchy is as follows:
• GrabbableObject: Transform,BoxCollider,Rigidbody,OVRCustomGrabbable
(script), AnnotationController (script), Line Renderer
• Skull Model: Transform, Mesh Filter, Mesh Renderer, Mesh Collider
• Any number of instantiated annotation landmarks...
4.3.5
Annotation Object Movement
At this stage of implementation, there are still unassigned input buttons on the con-
troller, so we can assign them for positioning, rotation and resizing of the annotation
object.
The two thumb-sticks on the touch controllers can be moved vertically and hori-
zontally, i.e. there are two axes of movement. A thumb-stick’s position returns a two-
dimensional vector with each input-axis spanning in the range of -1 to 1. In this proto-
type, theleftthumb-stickcontrolspositionandtherightthumb-stickcontrolsrotation.
24
==PAGE:25==
Use Unity’s built-in translate and rotation functions from in the annotation object’s
transform object (in the C# script), as they are more robust than modifying the values
directly - calculating rotation is especially tricky.
Assume that positive Z is forward, Y is the vertical axis and X the horizontal axis.
For movement, use transform.Translate with the left thumb-stick input, where
input-axis X is bound to world-space axis X, and input-axis Y is bound to world-space
axis Z. This means that the user cannot adjust the annotation object’s height from
the left thumb-stick, but they can control the distance to the object. The annotation
object’s height can be manipulated with either hand-grabbing or by rotation using the
right thumb-stick.
For rotation, use transform.Rotate twice, one function call using right thumb-
stick axis X for horizontal rotation (yaw axis) and another function call using right
thumb-stickaxisY forverticalrotation(pitchaxis). Onceagain, theusercanonlyrotate
around the roll axis by grabbing the object.
Both function calls should use the optional parameter for translating and rotating
in world-space. The sensitivity should be adjusted by multiplying by a constant value
k. Optionally, to adjust the sensitivity according to scale S of the annotation object, we
recommend multiplying the object’s scale S to the power of some low exponent n. In
mathematical terms, we can write this as
a · k · Sn
where a is the input-axis ranging from -1 to 1, k is a constant base sensitivity multiplier,
S is the scale of the object, and n is some exponent that controls the relative sensitivity
as the annotation object scaling is adjusted. In this prototype, translation values were
k = 0.006 and n = 0.2; Rotation values were k = 0.7 and n = 0.1.
Technically, the annotation object translates and rotates faster when enlarged. But
because the up-scaling rate is so much higher than the translation and rotation speed
increase, inpracticetheuserwillfeelthatthelarge-sizedannotationobjectmovesslower
relatively. This is the desired result, as we want controls to be feel slower and precise
when the object is scaled up.
Scaling is simple to implement. The left controller’s Y and X buttons are so far
unused, so we assign them for scaling up/down. If the ’scale up’ button is held, simply
multiply the current scale by a value slightly higher than 1, such as 1.03. For down-
scaling, use division instead of multiplication, and remember to set a lower scale limit
to prevent errors such as negative scaling.
So far, scaling centers on the Grabbable Object. Up-scaling often causes the object
to clipinto theuser’s cameraview. Therefore, onecan inserta pivotpoint inthe vicinity
25
==PAGE:26==
of the user, such that as the skull enlarges, it also keeps its distance and does not clip into
the camera. To do so, simply insert an empty game object Pivot Point as the parent of
the Grabbable Object, and scale the Pivot Point object instead of the Grabbable Object.
Figure8: Topillustration: Scalingcenteredaroundtheannotationobject. Bottomillus-
tration: Scaling centered at the user’s position. Scaling centered around the annotation
object will often caused it to clip into the user, unless the user simultaneously moves the
annotation away while up-scaling. Without a static environment as visual aid to gauge
the annotation object’s place and size, scaling centered around the user’s position can
cause nausea.
26
==PAGE:27==
This makes for a hierarchy like so:
• Pivot Point: Transform
• Grabbable Object: Transform, Box Collider, Rigidbody, OVRCustom-
Grabbable (script), AnnotationController (script), Line Renderer
• Skull Model: Transform, Mesh Filter, Mesh Renderer, Mesh Collider
• Any number of instantiated annotation landmarks...
The grabbing gesture moves the Grabbable Object, which means the Pivot Point
alwaysstaysinplace. Anymovementortranslationoftheannotationobjectshouldalso
not move the Pivot Point either: For movement use the Grabbable Object’s Transform
component, and for scaling use the Pivot Point’s Transform component. Rotation can
be left to preference: If rotation centered on the object is desired, use the Grabbable
Object’sTransformcomponent; Ifrotationcenteredontheuserisdesired,usethePivot
Point’s Transform instead. In our case, we centred rotation on the Pivot Point.
4.3.6
Modifying Existing Annotation Landmarks
The inability to move or delete annotation landmarks makes using the prototype un-
forgiving, so naturally this must be included. The only tool the user practically has to
select anything is the ray-gun, so if the ray-gun points at an annotation landmark in-
stead of the skull surface, that landmark can be selected by the index-trigger. A selected
landmark is in real-time placed on the skull’s surface where the ray-gun’s laser pointer
hits. Pressing the index-trigger again places the selected landmark. Since a button is
available for deletions, the user can either point at an annotation landmark and press
delete, or they can select it ﬁrst and then press delete; Either option removes the anno-
tation landmark.
To implement selecting a landmark requires revising the logic behind ﬁgure 7. In
words, the logic goes like this: If the ray-cast hits a surface and an annotation landmark
is currently selected, then that landmark should be placed on the skull mesh’s surface in
real-time. Otherwise, we can assume that no landmark is currently selected. Now, if the
ray-cast hit the annotation object and the index-trigger was pressed, a new annotation
landmark is created and placed (same as before). Else if the ray-cast hit an annotation
landmark instead and the index-trigger was pressed, select that annotation landmark.
Andﬁnally, iftheray-casthitnothing, thenanycurrentlyselectedannotationlandmark
should not be rendered.
27
==PAGE:28==
Set LaserLine's start position at GunTip
Raycast forward from GunTip
if (hit) {
Set LaserLine EndPosition at hit point
if (SelectedLandmark exists) {
if (hit is AnnotationLandmark)
Place landmark at hit position
else
Disable landmark render
}
else if (hit is SkullMesh and AnnotationButton pressed)
Create landmark as child of SkullMesh
else if (hit is AnnotationLandmark) {
if (AnnotationButton pressed)
Select landmark
else if (DeleteButton pressed)
Delete landmark
}
}
else {
Set LaserLine's end position at RaycastRange
if (SelectedLandmark exists)
Disable landmark render
}
Figure 9: An outline of the logic behind ray-cast annotation, with creation, selection
and deletion of annotation landmarks. The full C# code is in the appendix at section
8.5.
Withallthisdone, theprototypeshouldnowallowtheusertosuccessfullyannotate
in a virtual reality environment. The ﬁnal matter is that of exporting data sets.
28
==PAGE:29==
4.4
Exporting Data Sets
In the ﬁnal design, pressing the start button on the left touch-controller exports anno-
tation data.
Recall that the 3D-scanned skull models are displaced some 180 meters away and
that Stratovan Checkpoint’s data sets assume this displacement in their exported data
sets. For compatibility and convenience, the same displacement should be enforced.
The process requires some experimentation and double-checking the data, but the gen-
eral idea goes like so: Set the Pivot Point’s rotation and scale to their identity values and
also the Grabbable Object’s position and rotation4 to their identity values5. Now, the
game object Skull Mesh should also have its displacement position and rotation reset
to identity values, and the correct scale for the mesh (in this speciﬁc case, a scale of 10).
Once the annotation object appears to be displaced correctly as according to the 3D
scan, the user’s annotations will remain attached to the Skull Mesh game object, and
will therefore have an equivalent displacement just like in Stratovan Checkpoint.
Tocheckthateverythingaddsup, anequivalentannotationsessionineachprogram
should yield similar data sets to show that everything works as intended. Alternatively,
one can also implement importing an existing Stratovan Checkpoint data set into the
prototype, and check that all annotation landmarks are attached to the skull correctly
after importing. Exporting can then be veriﬁed by checking that the exported ﬁle’s data
matches that of the imported one. In this particular project, two oddities include that
the X-position values needed to be negated and the scale multiplied by 10 to match the
data sets from Stratovan Checkpoint. Developers are encouraged to double-check that
their own implementation exports equivalent data.
The exported data is in a .csv spreadsheet ﬁle. One simple strategy is to insert the
position data into a table (two-dimensional array) of the contents to write. A .csv ﬁle
can also be opened in a text editor, so simply writing out strings in a similar format and
saving as .csv works. Each line in the ﬁle represents a row in the spreadsheet, with each
cell separated by a comma. Since writing table data into text ﬁles is more of a general
programming problem, we see no need to go into further detail.
4The Grabbable Object’s rotation can be manipulated by grabbing, therefore it must also be reset.
5Identity position is (0, 0, 0), identity rotation is the identity quaternion, and identity scale is (1, 1, 1).
29
==PAGE:30==
5
Results
Recall that the biologists here are interested in comparing seal skulls to each other. In
practice, the annotation procedure requires a set of clearly deﬁned spots on the skulls
that must be marked, which are called landmarks. Assume that a set of people each
annotate all skulls. Even with clear deﬁnitions of landmarks, two persons may annotate
in slightly diﬀerent ways. However, this is no issue so long each person is consistent
with their own annotation procedure, because then the only diﬀerences measured are
betweentheskulls, atleastintheory. Inreverse, itisfaultytocomparedatasetsfromtwo
diﬀerent persons, because then the slight diﬀerences in how they annotate may aﬀect
the comparisons of the skulls. The comparisons of skulls are only useful when the data
is consistent down to being from the same person, and therefore no comparisons of
data between diﬀerent users should be done.
The primary question of the thesis was if users can annotate as reliably in virtual
reality compared to keyboard and mouse annotation. Since the PhD students collab-
orating with the biologists used Stratovan Checkpoint [17] for comparing 3D scanned
skulls, this thesis will use the same program as a baseline. We are interested how con-
sistently each person can annotate with keyboard-and-mouse annotation and with the
virtual reality prototype respectively. When a person can consistently reproduce the
same result, the variance in reproduced results should be low.
This thesis will not cover if the choice of application is signiﬁcant when comparing
skulls, thatis, whetherornotthediﬀerenceinvariationbychoiceofapplicationmatters
in regards to the biological variation between the diﬀerent seal skulls. That question is
left to possible future work.
5.1
Testing Procedure
In collaboration with the PhD students, a 3D scan of a skull and a total of 10 landmarks
were selected. The landmarks selected are # 2, 3, 4, 11, 25, 20, 14, 28, 18, 19, as seen on ﬁg-
ure 1 from the introduction, as these landmarks had clear deﬁnitions and were relatively
easier to place than those excluded.
One annotation session consists of annotating all 10 landmarks on the same skull,
in the order written out previously. In each program, a test subject annotates either 5 or
10 sessions depending on their endurance and fatigue, yielding a total of either 10 or 20
annotation sessions per test subject. The test subject alternates between programs for
each session, the ﬁrst program being selected randomly. No test subject had any prior
experience with either program.
The skull selected was one of the better 3D scans out of 22 available, and the land-
30
==PAGE:31==
marks selected are the easier ones to place, because none of the test subjects were fa-
miliar with the annotation procedure. Picking a worse scan and harder landmarks to
annotate will increase variability, so by picking the best testing conditions possible, we
can support the claim that the variance in the data is due to human input rather than
uncontrolled test variables and factors. Picking an ideal skull and the easy landmarks
leading to lower general variance will not beneﬁt the virtual reality prototype, since the
lower variance will also apply to annotation sessions with keyboard-and-mouse.
5.2
Statistical Hypothesis Testing
A statistical hypothesis test is a comparison between two data sets, where we determine
whether or not there is a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two data sets.
In this thesis, we conduct a hypothesis test on the diﬀerences between two sample
data sets; The mean of diﬀerences will center around 0 if there is no diﬀerence between
the sample data sets. The hypothesis test is conducted by calculating the p-value: As-
suming the truth of the null hypothesis that there is no diﬀerence between the sample
data sets, the p-value is the probability of obtaining a result with the actually observed
mean diﬀerence between the sample data sets or a result even more extreme. The p-
value is calculated in regards to a normal distribution with mean equal to 0 and with
the standard deviation of the diﬀerences in the sample data, and that the observed result
of mean diﬀerences from the sample data are yielded from that probability distribution
[14]. We will go into further details in section 5.6.
Asampleofdataisonlyasubsetofthepopulationfromwhichthedataisfrom. The
sample data is used to estimate (but not ascertain) the probability distribution of the
population[14]. Inthisproject, whenauserannotatesaskullandadatasetisgenerated,
that is a sample of the user’s true probability distribution of data output. So even when
the same user annotates the same skull multiple times, the output will naturally vary,
and this variance is of interest when comparing the annotation programs.
It is also important to discuss what a statistical hypothesis test is not. If a statistically
signiﬁcant delta variance was found, that diﬀerence is only signiﬁcant in the domain of
statistics - it says nothing about the practical signiﬁcance. The conclusion will be that
the output variances are not the same, but it may also turn out that the delta variance is
statistically insigniﬁcant when comparing biological skulls to each other, meaning the
choice of program may perhaps not matter when annotating the skulls for biological
studies (again, this is possible future work). Finally, the hypothesis test says nothing
about which program is designed better than the other in terms of accessibility.
The hypothesis test should be used as the starting point of a discussion, rather than
a means to end discussion. Regardless of whether users are more, less or equally consis-
31
==PAGE:32==
tent with one program over the other, the test is used to explain diﬀerences or similari-
ties, to give insight into the evaluating the design and other technicalities.
5.3
Test Format
A number of test subjects do either 5 or 10 annotation sessions in each program, each
session containing 10 landmarks. Since there are three dimensions to this data, this sec-
tion discusses the question of how to best use the data statistically.
A simple test could look like this: For each person, calculate the average variance
from exported data of Stratovan Checkpoint and the virtual reality prototype respec-
tively, then do a t-test. While such a test could work, there are some drawbacks. First,
the number of samples n is set to the number of test subjects, so the reliability of the t-
test is on number of test subjects. Secondly, averaging out the data also means not fully
putting it to use. With our interest in variance, this simple test could still be performed
if test subjects only placed a single landmark 10 times. Therefore, we should make best
use of the fact that there are multiple landmarks.
The absolute locations of each landmark is not our interest, but rather the distri-
butions of their placements, because those distributions inform us about the variance.
The distributions for each landmark cannot be estimated without multiple samples,
hence the need for multiple annotation sessions.
The test will look like this: For each person, do a hypothesis test on the delta vari-
ance; For each landmark the variance of their placements are calculated, then the diﬀer-
ences of variances between data from both platforms are calculated, which is the input
for the hypothesis test.
The test is conducted under the assumption that the null hypothesis is true, mean-
ing we assume the delta variance approximates zero and then that assumption is put to
the test.
32
==PAGE:33==
5.4
Data Handling
This section covers how to format data for hypothesis testing for one user. Each land-
mark −→
Ln is a three-dimensional vector containing positions of X, Y and Z, so
−→
Ln =


Xn
Yn
Zn

, n = 1..10
After one annotation session, either platform exports a .csv spreadsheet ﬁle listing
10 landmarks with X, Y and Z positions. Since each test subject does upwards to 10
annotation sessions on each platform, we end up with usually 20 .csv ﬁles in total.
A C# console program DataFormatter.cs is found in the appendix at section
8.5. The program takes a folder as an input, loads all .csv ﬁles, and combines them
into one .csv ﬁle containing all the data: Each rows represent a landmark’s axis, so
X1, Y1, Z1, ..., X10, Y10, Z10
and each column represents an annotation session’s data. The program is run twice,
once for Stratovan Checkpoint’s data, once for the prototype’s data.
While not necessary, it may be convenient to transpose the data using a spreadsheet
program. In that case, what the rows and columns represent is swapped. This is as-
sumed in the R code found in the appendix at ﬁgure 21.
Both .csv ﬁles are loaded into R. We calculate the sample variance for each land-
mark’s axis data across all ten annotation sessions, meaning
Var(X1), Var(Y1), Var(Z1), ..., Var(X10), Var(Y10), Var(Z10)
This is done for both platforms. We then subtract the prototype’s sample variance from
that of Stratovan Checkpoint, so
Var(X1,PC) −Var(X1,VR) = ∆Var(X1)
and do so for all 10 landmarks’ three axes
∆Var(X1), ∆Var(Y1), ∆Var(Z1), ..., ∆Var(X10), ∆Var(Y10), ∆Var(Z10)
These 30 delta variances are the input for the hypothesis test. The test itself requires
calculating the sample mean x and sample standard deviation s. Also note that the sam-
ple size n will always be n = 30, as the number of annotation sessions conducted only
aﬀects the sample size of the sample variance for each landmark. Finally, because each
user’s consistency should be measured individually, a hypothesis test is conducted for
each test subject.
33
==PAGE:34==
5.5
Assumptions of the Tests
The hypothesis tests rely on two assumptions about the sampling and the population.
Each of the random variables X1, ..., Xn from which we generate a sample must be inde-
pendent and normally distributed, so Xi ∼N(µ, σ2), where µ is the mean and σ is the
standard deviation [14].
5.5.1
The Independence Assumption
The assumption about independent observations is violated when measurements share
somefeature. Asimpleexamplewouldbesamplingheightsofapopulation, wheremost
of the participants are related by family. In that case, the heights of the subjects are not
all independent observations [14].
Wecanclearlyestablishthateachofthe10landmarksareindependentlyplacedfrom
one another. Again, each landmark −→
Ln is a three-dimensional vector containing posi-
tions of X, Y and Z, so
−→
Ln =


Xn
Yn
Zn

, n = 1..10
Since we have 10 annotation sessions in total, we have sample of the population,
from which we can estimate the probability distributions of Xn, Yn and Zn.
TheissuehereisthattheindependenceofvariablesXn, Yn, Zn isarguable. Theargu-
ment against their independence is that the variables Xn, Yn, Zn share the property of
belonging to the same landmark’s position −→
Ln. The argument for their independence
is that the values of all three geometrical axes X, Y, Z can be modiﬁed independently,
hence their values must be independent. A second argument for their independence,
is that each and every variable provides new and unique information - we cannot infer
the result of one random variable from any of the two others.
If you do not accept the argument for the independence of variables Xn, Yn, Zn,
there are ways to determine the variance of a vector containing random variables. The
varianceofavectorcontainingrandomvariablescanbegeneralizedintoamatrix,known
as the variance-covariance matrix. This can be generalized further by computing the
determinant of the variance-covariance matrix, a scalar which then can be used as the
general variance of a vector of random variables [1].
While there is a way to compute (generalized) variance for a vector −→
Ln contain-
ing random variables, in this thesis we accept the argument for the independence of
Xn, Yn, Zn and continue using their respective individual variances. The beneﬁt here is
34
==PAGE:35==
avoiding matrix computations for each landmark, a larger sample size for the hypothe-
sis test, and it greatly simpliﬁes arguing for the normality of the distribution of the data
used in the hypothesis test - which is the next assumption we must discuss.
5.5.2
The Normality Assumption
Thenormalityassumptionusuallyischeckedgraphicallybyplottingthedataandseeing
if it maps to a normal distribution [14]. So, we compute the delta variances, then check
if that maps to a normal distribution. For this section, the programming language R is
used for computations. The entire R code can be found in the appendix, ﬁgure 20.
Itturnsoutthatdiﬀerencesinsampledvariancesalwaysleadtonormaldistributions
because of the Central Limit Theorem; It is more clarifying to show the general case of
this before showing the data. We show this by simulating simple normal distributions.
Itisimportanttodistinguishbetweenthetruemeanµandvarianceσ2, andasample
mean x and sample variance s2. The samples are taken from a population, and sample
statistics are used to estimate the statistics of the population.
Using R, create a normal distribution N(µ, σ2) with population mean µ = 0 and
variance σ2 = 12. From that distribution, take a sample of size n = 50 and calculate
the sample variance s2. Then repeat this simulation process to calculate 10.000 sample
variances and plot them.
35
==PAGE:36==
Figure 10: Histogram of 10.000 sample variances from a normal distribution with mean
µ = 0 and variance σ2 = 12. The histogram’s X-axis shows the range of results the
samplevariancesgave, theY-axisshowsthefrequenciesofeachresultofsamplevariance.
The 10.000 sample variances have a sample mean of x ≈1, and visually looks to
follow a normal distribution. However, a property of variance is that variance cannot
be negative. But even with sample mean x ≈1, the variance can still exceed 2 in rare
cases, so one of the tails are cut oﬀ. But recall that we are not interested in the sample
variances in isolation, but the delta sample variances from two data sets. Using the same
normal distribution N(µ, σ2) with mean µ = 0 and variance σ2 = 12, generate another
10.000 sample variances, pair each sampled variance from each of the two generated
sets, and subtract each pair of sampled variance. This results in 10.000 delta sampled
variances, seen below.
36
==PAGE:37==
Figure 11: Histogram of 10.000 delta sample variances from a normal distribution with
mean µ = 0 and variance σ2 = 12. The histogram’s X-axis shows the range of results the
samplevariancesgave, theY-axisshowsthefrequenciesofeachresultofsamplevariance.
This plot is clearly a normal distribution with sample mean x ≈0 and no tails
cut oﬀ. The true mean µ will be 0 if there is no diﬀerence in variance - and the sam-
ple mean x ≈0 suggests so, as both sets of sampled variances were indeed from the
same probability distribution. This is a variant of the Central Limit Theorem, where
instead of showing that the distribution of sample means approach a normal distribu-
tion, this shows that the distribution of delta sample variances also approach a normal
distribution.
If you accept that the sample variances themselves map to normal distributions,
then an alternative shorter argument can be made: With two normal distributions X ∼
N(µX, σ2
X) and Y ∼N(µY, σ2
Y), the distribution of their diﬀerences is also normal with
mean µX−Y = µX −µY and variance σ2
X−Y = σ2
X + σ2
Y [25]. Thus, if we accept that the
sample variances map to normal distributions, then the distribution of delta sampled
variances must also be normal.
Showingthegeneralcasemakesinterpretingtheactualdataeasier,andalsostrength-
37
==PAGE:38==
ens the idea that they too are normally distributed. The main point is that since all data
in our hypothesis tests are delta sampled variances which always map to normal distri-
butions, the normality assumption holds for all data sets used in the hypothesis tests.
Since data should not be compared across test subjects, a hypothesis test is con-
ducted for each test subject. Going forwards, the ﬁrst test subject’s data is picked to
illustrate the procedure behind the mathematics and plots.
Figure 12: A histogram of the sample variances in X, Y and Z positions in Stratovan
Checkpoint. The histogram’s X axis shows the range of results, and the Y axis shows
the frequency at which each result occurred.
38
==PAGE:39==
Figure 13: A histogram of the sample variances in X, Y and Z positions in the virtual
reality prototype. The histogram’s X axis shows the range of results, and the Y axis
shows the frequency at which each result occurred.
Figure 14: A histogram of the sample variances in X, Y and Z positions from Stratovan
Checkpoint subtracted with their equivalent sample variances from the virtual reality
prototype. The histogram’s X axis shows the range of results, and the Y axis shows the
frequency at which each result occurred.
39
==PAGE:40==
The third ﬁgure shows the delta sampled variances, with each data entry corre-
sponding to some landmark’s X, Y or Z position. If there was no diﬀerence in variance
between programs, then the sample mean x should approximate towards zero. It is very
clear that the sample mean x does approximate towards zero even with two outliers,
implying no diﬀerence in variance between programs. From this distribution we ﬁnd
the sample mean x = 1.26 · 10−3 and sample standard deviation s = 5.68 · 10−3. Now,
when is a sample mean x statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from 0? That depends on
the distribution, which is what the sample standard deviation s is used for. The sample
mean x and sample standard deviation s are used for calculations in the hypothesis test,
although the reader can probably already guess the result of the hypothesis test for the
ﬁrst test subject from the plot above.
5.6
The Hypothesis Test
The data from the previous section is used for the calculations ahead. We have sample
mean x = 1.26 · 10−3 and sample standard deviation s = 5.68 · 10−3 and sample size
n = 30.
To investigate whether or not the diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant, let µ represent
themeanofdeltavariance. Thenullhypothesisstatesthatthereisnodiﬀerencebetween
the two data sets, hence:
H0 : µ = 0
The next step is calculating the p-value, which is probability of observing a sample
mean x that is at least 1.26 · 10−3 or more extreme. The null hypothesis is rejected if the
p-value is low, the threshold of which is known as the signiﬁcance level α. Often chosen
signiﬁcance levels of α are either 0.05 or 0.01 - in this paper, we choose α = 0.05. In
short: There is strong evidence against the null hypothesis if p-value < α holds [14].
The observed value of the t-test statistics is calculated:
tobs = x −µ0
s/√n ,
where µ0 is the value of µ under the null hypothesis: H0 : µ = µ0. This gives us
tobs = 1.26 · 10−3 −0
5.68 · 10−3/
√
30 = 1.218
The p-value is given by
p = 2 · P(T > |tobs|)
40
==PAGE:41==
Wecomputethep-valueasatail-probabilityinthet-distribution 6 , whichisbetterdone
in the programming language R 7. We ﬁnd that p = 0.233.
The probability of observing a mean x = 1.26 · 10−3 or more extreme from zero is
p = 0.233, or 23.3% Since this p-value is not below our threshold α, we have no evidence
against the null hypothesis and cannot conclude a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
variance between the two data sets for this test subject.
SincethevirtualrealityvariancesweresubtractedfromthevariancesfromStratovan
Checkpoint, if the mean delta variance is a positive number, the variance was lower
for the virtual reality prototype. If the mean delta variance is a negative number, the
variance was lower for keyboard-and-mouse annotation.
Repeating the hypothesis test for each test subject, we present the table below:
Test
Subject
x
s
p-value
Hypothesis Test Result
1
1.26 · 10−3
5.68 · 10−3
0.233
No evidence against H0
2
1.10 · 10−3
4.73 · 10−3
0.213
No evidence against H0
3
−8.88 · 10−4
4.03 · 10−3
0.237
No evidence against H0
4
4.06 · 10−4
5.93 · 10−3
0.710
No evidence against H0
5
6.89 · 10−4
3.79 · 10−3
0.323
No evidence against H0
Figure 15: Table with hypothesis test results on delta variances for each test subject, with
theirsamplemeanx, samplestandarddeviations, p-value, andthehypothesistestresult.
The ﬁrst three test subjects did 10 annotation sessions in each program, while the
last two test subjects only did 5 annotation sessions in each program due to technical
issues and fatigue. More annotation sessions lead to the delta sample variance better
estimating the true delta variance. From the all test subjects, there was no evidence to
reject the null hypothesis of no diﬀerence between the data sets.
After the results from the ﬁrst three test subjects, we expected no evidence against
the null hypothesis of no diﬀerence between the data sets. Therefore, we decided to
time each annotation session for the last two test subjects as well. Our primary interest
is in annotation consistency, but a tangential issue is that the PhD can annotate 31 land-
marks on a physical skull with MicroScribe in 5 minutes, while annotating the same 31
6The t-distribution is deﬁned as the sampling distribution of the sample mean standardized with
the sample variation. The t-distribution is used to calculate probability of obtaining the sample mean
in a given range, especially when the sample size is small. As sample size increases, the t-distribution
approximates the normal distribution, where if n > 30 there is little diﬀerence [14].
7See appendix ﬁgure 21 for the R code.
41
==PAGE:42==
landmarks on a 3D-scanned skull in Stratovan Checkpoint takes roughly 20 minutes.
Test Subject
tPC
tVR
∆t
4
212 s
163 s
49 s
4
189 s
142 s
47 s
4
149 s
162 s
-13 s
4
Missing data.
139 s
Missing data.
4
98 s
141 s
-43 s
5
270 s
175 s
95 s
5
216 s
142 s
74 s
5
230 s
113 s
117 s
5
138 s
104 s
34 s
5
143 s
104 s
39 s
Figure 16: Table listing the time of annotation sessions in seconds. One session was not
timed by mistake.
A hypothesis test can be conducted on the diﬀerences in time ∆t: The procedure
and calculations are similar. This time, the sample sizes are n = 4 and n = 5 instead of
n = 30. One again, the null hypothesis states there is no diﬀerence in time between the
programs, H0 : µ = 0, with signiﬁcance level also at α = 0.05.
Test Subject
x
s
p-value
Hypothesis Test Result
4
10
45.56
0.690
No evidence against H0
5
71.8
35.67
0.011
Reject H0
Figure17: Tablewithhypothesistestresultsondeltatimeforeachtestsubject,withtheir
sample mean x, sample standard deviation s, p-value, and the hypothesis test result.
Note the rejection of the null hypothesis in test subject 5’s case of diﬀerences in
time. Assuming the null hypothesis of no diﬀerence in means, the probability to get
a result with sample mean x ≥71.8 is only 1.1%. Since the result is so extreme and
unlikely, there is evidence to suggest a diﬀerence in annotation time for this test subject.
However, keep in mind the small sample size at n = 5.
42
==PAGE:43==
6
Discussion
Thethesisexploredusingavirtualrealityannotationprototypeasanalternativetoboth
MicroScribeandStratovanCheckpoint, withtheprimarymotivationtoannotatea3D-
scannedmodelwhereahead-mounteddisplayallowsmoreintuitivecameracontroland
touch controllers can mimic motions of physical annotation. The primary question
was if users could annotate as reliably in virtual reality as they could with keyboard-
and-mouse. Since the biologists and PhD students involved with the problem state-
ment high emphasize precision and consistency, the diﬀerences in variance between
keyboard-and-mouse annotation and virtual reality annotation was compared.
6.1
Conclusion
The test results suggest there is no evidence for statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences in
variances between using keyboard-and-mouse annotation and the virtual reality proto-
type. This assumes test subjects have no prior experience with either program. None
of the test subjects were involved with the development of the prototype to avoid bias.
In regards to variance, it seems virtual reality is neither better nor worse than keyboard-
and-mouse for annotation, but simply an alternative.
Two hypothesis tests on annotation time lead to one test subject’s result showing
no diﬀerence between the programs, and another test subject’s result showed evidence
that virtual reality was faster to use. However, the sample size for the hypothesis test
was low, as were the number of hypothesis tests conducted with regards to annotation
time. Further testing is possible future work.
4 out of 5 test subjects were more precise in virtual reality, but none of them reached
the threshold required to pass the hypothesis test of delta variance. One test subject was
signiﬁcantly faster in virtual reality, and this test subject was also more precise in virtual
reality as well.
6.2
Beating the Hypothesis Test
A goal of the project was measuring consistency between two annotation platforms.
During the test sessions, we believed that virtual reality annotation was more precise
than keyboard-and-mouse annotation.
The reason is discussed in more detail later in section 6.4, but in short: There is a
limit to how close the camera can get to the model in Stratovan Checkpoint before the
clipping plane interferes with the visibility of the annotation object. In the virtual real-
ity prototype, rather than placing the camera closer, the annotation object can instead
43
==PAGE:44==
be enlarged with no upper limit.
We can conﬁrm that the virtual reality prototype can indeed reach the low variance
required to be a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence. But doing so requires ignoring the
purpose of the test by not annotating according to the deﬁnition of the landmarks, but
by annotating the same triangle polygons repeatedly that happens to ﬁt the landmark
deﬁnitions across sessions. In that case, the p-value turned out to be 0.0087, which is
strong evidence against the null hypothesis. However, this data is not from any of the
test subjects, but by a developer.
This result was not presented earlier, because there must be a clear distinction be-
tween data from a developer that cheats the test, and test subjects with no prior ex-
perience. Remember that when the biologist and PhD students annotate the skulls to
compare them, they do not annotate the same skull repeatedly in one setting, so the low
variance reached by memorizing triangle polygons cannot be reproduced in a practical
setting.
Note the diﬃculty in producing a test result where we can reject the null hypoth-
esis because of the type of data we are testing on. The outcome of the hypothesis test
depends on a sequence of annotation sessions conducted over an hour or two. From
the data exported to the hypothesis test, there are two layers of abstraction: The test
does not use the geometric data of Xn, Yn, Zn directly, but the statistical metadata of
variance, which is further modiﬁed by using the delta variance. By contrast, it is much
easier to produce extreme results in a hypothesis test on annotation time.
Continuing with the belief that virtual reality potentially was more precise, we con-
sidered devising another type of test in which test subjects were speciﬁcally asked to
enlarge the object to the degree, that even they could reach the low variance required
to produce a statistically signiﬁcantly low variance. The skull had to be the same, but
we wanted to avoid memorization of triangle polygons across annotation sessions. The
idea was creating 10 skull mesh variants, all with diﬀerent triangle polygon patterns,
whilst still being visually similar at a glance. The 10 variations of the same skull were
exported from Blender using decimation [4], with values ranging from 0.2 to 0.1. With
a 3D scan of 14 million triangle polygons, the levels of detail ranged from roughly 3 mil-
lion to 1.4 million triangle polygons. The low range of decimation was selected due to
performancereasons, asloadingmultipleskullsrangingfrom(forexample)14millionto
7 million triangle polygons might encumber the computer. After importing the skulls
into the prototype, it became clear that the decimation algorithm was too clever: Most
triangle patterns remained between the most and least detailed skulls. With the project
running out of time, the test was never conducted.
44
==PAGE:45==
Figure 18: A close-up of the spot of the ﬁrst landmark with two skull meshes at diﬀerent
decimations: The top mesh has 1.4 million triangle polygons, and the bottom mesh has
3 million triangle polygons.
6.3
Evaluating the Testing Process
It became evident that even after emphasizing precision to the test participants, they
would not enlarge the skull enough to reach the low variance required to beat the hy-
pothesis test. With no upper limit to the enlargement, there was no technological con-
straint stopping the test subjects from achieving a much lower variance in the virtual
reality prototype.
During the test, the subjects were asked to place annotation points oﬀa verbal def-
inition for each landmark. They were also asked to pick a spot for each landmark and
prioritize placing the points at the same spot, and that this was easier to do the larger
the annotation object was. They were not speciﬁcally asked to enlarge the object to the
45
==PAGE:46==
degree required to beat the hypothesis test, as that would break the integrity of the test
- they must annotate according to the landmark deﬁnitions. For the test subjects, a ver-
bal deﬁnition of the landmarks was not suﬃcient to make them reach the low variance
required to beat the test.
For the last two test subjects, whose annotation sessions were also timed, the exper-
iment became rather odd: We asked them to annotate precisely and consistently whilst
almost knowing the result in advance, meanwhile we were actually measuring some-
thing else entirely.
Why do test subjects not enlarge the annotation object as much as possible? In
Stratovan Checkpoint, it is easy to supervise users to get as close as possible, since there
is an actual cap they can reach. By contrast, it can be bewildering that there is no limit
to the annotation object’s scale in the virtual reality prototype. Perhaps the biologists
and PhD students related to the problem statement, who understand the emphasis on
consistency, would perform better than the test subjects.
Another point regarding precision is that failing to reject a hypothesis test implies
the absence of that evidence. If the result repeatedly is there is no evidence to reject the
nullhypothesisofnodiﬀerence, itisnotunreasonabletoevaluatethereisnostatistically
signiﬁcant diﬀerence.
Anecdotally, every test subject preferred the virtual reality prototype over Strato-
van Checkpoint. The discussion was brought up as test subjects alternated between
programs for each session. As the sessions became repetitive, some subjects got increas-
ingly frustrated about the faults of Stratovan Checkpoint. They found the default con-
trol scheme unintuitive, and there was no option to change the default control scheme.
Furthermore, the camera’s clipping plane prevented users from getting a close view,
placing a cap to how close they could get to the surface they wanted annotated.
6.4
Precision and Clipping Planes
In Stratovan Checkpoint, the user controls a camera that cannot zoom, but it can be
placed closer to the annotation object, which eventually causes the camera’s near plane
to clip into the object. As mentioned earlier, this places a limit on how closely any sur-
face can be observed, because the surface must at least be farther away than the camera’s
nearclipplane. Invirtualrealityhowever,thecameraiscontrolledbythehead-mounted
display, so instead the solution was to enlarge the annotation object. Without a limit
to the object’s scale, the user can even see the individual polygon triangles, as seen on
ﬁgure 18.
This leads to a broader discussion about digitalized annotation programs. We sug-
gest that enlarging annotation objects is preferable over placing the camera up close to
46
==PAGE:47==
prevent issues with clipping near planes in general. In fact, a well-placed near plane
can clip into objects to peek inside hidden surfaces, making the clipping plane a useful
tool rather than a hindrance. This is not viable in virtual reality, as pushing the near
clip plane forward causes the user’s digital hands to be clipped away as well. Hence, in
regards to partial visibility with near clip planes, there is a real advantage to not using
virtual reality.
In Unity, using the clipping plane as a tool is simple. Changing the near clip plane
value can be assigned to keyboard keys. The annotation ray-casting should start from
the near clip plane and forward, such that clipped surfaces cannot be annotated. The
meansthereispotentialforimprovingkeyboard-and-mouseannotation,sofuturework
could incorporate these concepts.
Enlarging an object does not aﬀect the resulting image if the camera keeps its dis-
tance at the exact same rate. This is easy to showcase in Unity: Consider a scene with 3D
models and a camera, all child objects to a game object with only its Transform compo-
nent. When the parent object’s uniform scale is modiﬁed, the 3D models will scale too,
but so will the camera’s oﬀset at the exact same rate. Since the near clip plane distance is
a property of the camera object, it is a constant value unaﬀected by scale, and therefore
the near plane eventually clips into the 3D models when lowering the scale. Modifying
the scale upwards in real-time shows no change in the displayed image - at least until the
far clip plane is reached. Then again, in an annotation context, the far clip plane is less
of an issue than the near clip plane.
47
==PAGE:48==
Figure 19: The left column shows the Unity scene with three objects, a camera, all put
under a parent object with varying world-space scale. The right column shows the cam-
era’s renders. There is no visible output diﬀerence between scale 1.00 and 2.00, because
even though the objects are twice the size in the bottom row, the camera oﬀset to the
origin is also twice as distant. With a constant near plane distance, at lower scale the
near plane eventually clips into the 3D models, as soon on the top row.
Even in many widely used 3D model editors, users cannot adjust the near clip plane.
Ideally, the clipping plane should never be a hindrance for camera proximity of any ac-
tivity, but it is so when annotating in Stratovan Checkpoint. While proximity is capped
when the clipping plane causes issues, using the scaling solution instead means little if
users do not take advantage of access to newfound levels of detail. Users must put in
the eﬀort to get an even closer view of the model if annotation is to be more precise and
consistent.
48
==PAGE:49==
6.5
Future Work
Part of why we researched annotation was because annotating with MicroScribe re-
quiredaphysicalobject, whileannotatingthe3DscansoftheskullsinStratovanCheck-
point took roughly four times as long as with MicroScribe. We already discussed means
to increase precision, but the second activity users spend time on is camera control. The
annotation sessions can be sped up by using templates for camera views, for example.
So instead of manually adjusting the camera every time, the click of a button rotates the
annotation object at a good angle.
There are also questionable design decisions in Stratovan Checkpoint beyond the
camera issues discussed earlier, such as not being able to reconﬁgure the controls, both
mouse inputs and keyboard shortcuts. The restricts all users into the same control
scheme. Remedying this beneﬁts all users, not only those with disabilities and hand-
icaps, but also to speed up workﬂows for experienced users. Secondly, consider allow-
ing multiple windows with diﬀerent camera angles, such as how Autodesk Maya and
Unity does it. Third, allow the user to adjust the clipping planes, as discussed earlier. Fi-
nally, allowing importing previous data sets and using them for template camera views,
because sometimes we know in advance where to annotate, especially when there are
similar landmarks located on similarly sized annotation objects.
In regards to developing another keyboard-and-mouse annotation program, it may
actually be more convenient to create annotation tools in an already existing editor,
rather than developing an entirely new annotation prototype. For example, the Unity
editor already has built-in camera controls, multiple screen views and customizable lay-
outs, so we skip needing to reinvent those controls by simply extending the editor to
also encompass annotation. Then consider the beneﬁts of Unity’s other features, such
as object hierarchies, custom scripts, debugging, lighting control and more. Of course,
the same argument applies to any other software product that allows extending their
editors, such as Autodesk Maya.
In regards to the biological context, if there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in variance
between the platforms, the next obvious question is if the signiﬁcant diﬀerence matters
when comparing skulls to each other. This thesis only looked at how viable virtual
reality annotation was in a statistical context, but the biological context is where the
annotation is used practically, although given the results of this thesis it may be diﬃcult
justifying looking into.
49
==PAGE:50==
7
References
References
[1] Sengupta A. Generalized Variance. Accessed July 2020. https://faculty.
ucr.edu/~ashis/publication/publications/ESS6053.PDF.
[2] Autodesk. Inventor — Mechanical Design And 3D CAD Software — Autodesk.
Accessed March 2020. https://autodesk.com/inventor.
[3] Autodesk.
Maya Help:
Interface overview.
Accessed March 2020.
https://help.autodesk.com/view/MAYAUL/2020/ENU/?guid=
GUID-F4FCE554-1FA5-447A-8835-63EB43D2690B.
[4] Blender Documentation Team. Decimate Modiﬁer - Blender Manual. Accessed
July 2020. https://docs.blender.org/manual/en/latest/modeling/
modifiers/generate/decimate.html.
[5] Riberio C., Kuﬀner R., and Fernandes C. Virtual Reality Annotator: A Tool to
Annotate Dancers in a Virtual Environment, volume 10605 of Digital Cultural
Heritage. SPRINGER INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHING AG, 2018.
[6] Bourguignon D., Cani M., and Drettakis G. Drawing for illustration and anno-
tation in 3d. In Computer Graphics Forum, 2001.
[7] Clergeaud D. and Guitton P. Design of an Annotation System for taking notes in
Virtual Reality. 2017 3dtv Conference: the True Vision - Capture, Transmission and
Display of 3d Video (3dtv-con), 2017.
[8] Facebook Technologies, LLC. Unity Integration — Developer Center — Ocu-
lus - Facebook.
Accessed April 2020.
https://developer.oculus.com/
downloads/package/unity-integration/.
[9] FacebookTechnologies, LLC. OculusFirst Contact. Accessed July2020. https:
//www.oculus.com/experiences/rift/1217155751659625/.
[10] Facebook Technologies, LLC. Unity Sample Framework - Facebook. Accessed
June 2020.
https://developer.oculus.com/documentation/unity/
unity-sample-framework.
50
==PAGE:51==
[11] Facebook Technologies, LLC. Oculus — VR Headsets & Equipment. Accessed
March 2020. https://www.oculus.com/.
[12] GoMeasure3D. MicroScribe Aﬀordable Portable CMM. Accessed March 2020.
https://gomeasure3d.com/microscribe/.
[13] Autodesk
Help.
About
3D
Annotation
and
Model-Based
Def-
inition.
Accessed
March
2020.
https://knowledge.
autodesk.com/guidref/INVLT/2019/learn-explore/
GUID-B8779786-A71C-4A5C-B9A9-7EB1A9918946.
[14] BrockhoﬀP.B., Møller J.K, Andersen E.W., Bacher P., and Christiansen L.E. In-
troduction to Statistics at DTU. Accessed July 2020. http://www2.compute.
dtu.dk/courses/introstat/book-IntroStatistics.pdf.
[15] Kadobayashi R., Mccahill M.P., and Tanaka K. 3D Model Annotation from Mul-
tiple Viewpoints for Croquet.
Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on Creat-
ing, Connecting, and Collaborating through Computing (C5 ’06), IEEE Computer,
2006.
[16] Lykke J. R., Olsen A. B., Berman P., Bærentzen J. A., and Frisvad J. R. Account-
ing for object weight in interaction design for virtual reality. Journal of WSCG,
27(2):131–140, 2019.
[17] Stratovan Corporation. Checkpoint — Stratovan. Accessed April 2020. https:
//www.stratovan.com/products/checkpoint.
[18] Unity Technologies. Unity Real-Time Development Platform — 3D, 2D VR &
AR Visualizations. Accessed March 2020. https://unity.com/.
[19] Unity Technologies.
Unity - Manual: Mesh Colliders.
Accessed July 2020.
https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/class-MeshCollider.html.
[20] Unity Technologies. Unity - Manual: Prefabs. Accessed July 2020. https:
//docs.unity3d.com/Manual/Prefabs.html.
[21] Unity Technologies. Unity - Manual: Transforms. Accessed July 2020. https:
//docs.unity3d.com/Manual/Transforms.html.
[22] Unity Technologies.
Unity - Scripting API: MonoBehavior.FixedUpdate().
Accessed July 2020.
https://docs.unity3d.com/ScriptReference/
MonoBehaviour.FixedUpdate.html.
51
==PAGE:52==
[23] Unity Technologies. Unity - Manual: Camera. Accessed March 2020. https:
//docs.unity3d.com/Manual/class-Camera.html.
[24] Unity Technologies. Unity - Manual: Render Texture. Accessed March 2020.
https://docs.unity3d.com/Manual/class-RenderTexture.html.
[25] Weisstein E.W.
Normal Diﬀerence Distribution - from Wolfram Math-
World.
Accessed May 2020.
https://mathworld.wolfram.com/
NormalDifferenceDistribution.html.
52
==PAGE:53==
8
Appendix
8.1
Initial Time Plan
The project spans 24 weeks in total.
Project setup, research and early thesis draft
• 1st-2nd weeks: Project setup, practicalities, early keyboard-mouse prototyping.
• 3rd week: Time plan. Collect research. Draft primary thesis introduction with
project goals and motivation. Lay plans for test procedures.
• 4th week: Research - Where is the project located in the road-map of available
research?
Minimum viable products
• 5th-6th weeks: Initial design and related work. What should the project include
(and not include), what are the primary components, which parts are minimally
required for the project to succeed? The design of the minimum viable product
(abbr. MVP) should relate to already existing work in research.
• 6th-9th weeks: MVP ready by the end of the 9th week.
• 10th week: Do an early user test to get feedback - but do not include it as the ﬁnal
test result. Revise design draft of the MVP, and write a draft implementation of
the MVP components. This is a good time to re-evaluate the initial design - were
changes made? Were there unforeseen design or technical issues? These should
be included.
Prototype improvements and testing
• 11thweek: Researchanddesignforfurtherimprovementsandcomponents. What
can be done to enable better virtual reality annotation than what we currently
have? How do we go about accomplishing these parts, and how do they relate to
current research?
• 12th-16th weeks: Implement remaining improvements.
• 17th week: Write implementation section and relate to others’ work.
53
==PAGE:54==
• 18th week: Test the prototype with a focus group, preferably some who are al-
ready familiar with the annotation procedure. The goal is to recreate the data
set.
• 19th-20th weeks: Write the remainder of the thesis: Results and discussion.
Rounding out the project The ﬁnal four weeks should be spent on revisiting all
phases of the project for quality assurance and to improve the overall work. Having the
extra month is also useful in case the plan itself falls apart or the project is delayed.
8.2
Time Plan Changes
This section documents changes to the plan from the initial draft.
• Weeks 4-7: Met a PhD student involved, who introduces the problem ﬁrst-hand.
Developed a prototype those three weeks, and ended with a prototype shown to
a circle of researchers.
• Weeks8-9: Implementingdesignsfromthegivenfeedbackfromshowingthepro-
totype to supervisors and PhD students.
• Weeks 10: Planned the annotation procedure in collaboration with PhD student.
Revised the design to support annotation sessions more practically.
• Week 11-20: Collecting test subjects for annotation sessions, develop results and
discussion topics continuously. Write thesis.
• Week 20-24: Stop researching and conducting new types of experiments. Round
oﬀthe project and ﬁnalize thesis.
54
==PAGE:55==
8.3
R sheet: Normality Assumption
n <- 50 # Sample size from which to calculate variance.
mu <- 0 # True mean
sd <- 1 # True standard deviation
x <- 1 # Generate 10.000 sample variances.
v <- c(var(rnorm(n,mu,sd)))
repeat {
v <- append(v, var(rnorm(n,mu,sd)))
x = x+1
if (x == 10000) { break }
}
# Plots a histogram of 10.000 sample variances.
hist(v, prob=TRUE, nclass=100,
main = "Histogram of 10.000 sample variances")
x <- 1 # Generates another 10.000 sample variances.
v2 <- c(var(rnorm(n,mu,sd)))
repeat {
v2 <- append(v2, var(rnorm(n,mu,sd)))
x = x+1
if (x == 10000) { break }
}
# Histogram of 10.000 paired differences of sample variances.
hist(v-v2, prob=TRUE, nclass=100,
main = "Histogram of 10.000 paired
differences of sample variances.")
}
Figure 20: The R code used to check the normality assumption. The ﬁnal histogram
displays what clearly is a normal distribution, where the mean x approximates towards
0 if there is no diﬀerence in variance. Compare to the Central Limit Theorem: Instead
of taking sample means x, we take delta sample variances ∆s2 and show that the theorem
still holds: Diﬀerences in sample variances maps to a normal distribution.
55
==PAGE:56==
8.4
R sheet: Hypothesis Testing
getwd() # Gets working directory. Place .csv in this folder
df1 <- read.csv('reformat.csv')
df2 <- read.csv('reformat2.csv')
# Calculates all column variances.
varList1 <- unname(apply(df1,2,var))
varList2 <- unname(apply(df2,2,var))
# Calculates paired delta variance.
dif <- varList2 - varList1
t.test(dif) # Quick and simple t-test.
tobs <- mean(dif)/(sd(dif)/sqrt(30)) # T-obs
pvalue <- 2 * (1-pt(abs(tobs), df=30-1)) # Computes p-value.
pvalue # Prints the calculated p-value.
Figure 21: The R code used do hypothesis testing. The t-test function is R’s built-in hy-
pothesis test, and also the fastest way to conduct a hypothesis test in R. The remaining
commands show the explicit commands to compute the p-value manually.
56
==PAGE:57==
8.5
C# Scripts in Unity
The C# code used in the Unity project is available below:
https://github.com/MichaeliusDenModige/VR-Annotation-Scripts
The GitHub page does not include the remainder of the Unity project, as certain 3D
models had to remain conﬁdential.
• AnnotationController.cs: A Unity component with all code related to the
annotation object.
• DataFormatter.cs: An independent console program. Takes any number of
exported .csv data from a folder and formats them into one .csv to ready for
hypothesis testing in R.
• DataHandler.cs: Importing and exporting data sets to and from Unity. Con-
verts annotation dots in Unity into .csv spreadsheet ﬁles and vice versa.
• InputMapping.cs: Simpliﬁes using the touch controller’s buttons and maps
them to functionality related to the prototype.
• OVRCustomGrabbable.cs: A Unity component overriding functionality re-
garding grabbing objects. Use instead of the OVRGrabbable component.
The thesis along with the code should allow readers to reproduce the project.
57
