==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Anomaly-Based IDS for IoT Gateways
Technical University of Denmark
Henning Tau Frederiksen, s153612
July 18, 2020
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Anomaly-Based IDS for IoT Gateways
Report written by:
Henning Tau Frederiksen, s153612
Supervisor:
Xenofon Fafoutis, Ph.D.
DTU Compute
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
compute@compute.dtu.dk
Project period:
27. January– 18. July, 2020
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc Eng
Field:
Computer Science and Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the require-
ments for graduation in the above education at the Technical
University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This report was written at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in order to fulﬁll the requirements
for acquiring a Master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
The project was carried out from January 27th 2020 to July 18th 2020, and repre-
sents a workload of 30 ECTS points.
i
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank PhD Xenofon Fafoutis of the Technical University of Denmark
for his guidance and feedback throughout the project.
I would also like to thank the people from my dorm for being patient and listening
to my project struggles, even though the subject matter may have seemed equal
parts boring and confusing to them.
Lastly I would like to thank the people at my local pizza place, for ensuring that I
never go hungry to bed.
iii
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
Across the globe there are several billion IoT devices, with many of these being
part of 6LoWPAN networks. The devices in these networks are generally resource-
constrained, and may therefore be extra vulnerable to attacks which can cause sig-
niﬁcant monetary losses, or corruption of valuable research. For that reason, it is
extremely beneﬁcial if these attacks can be detected quickly and eﬀectively, such
that their scope can be minimized.
To solve that task, this report has designed and implemented an anomaly-based IDS.
Since 6LoWPAN networks are very vulnerable to both internal and external attacks,
the IDS has been developed to detect a variety of attacks from both origins. This
has been done by training a DNN on several external attacks from the NSL-KDD
dataset and three internal attacks: A UDP DoS attack, a SF attack, and a MitM
attack.
The results achieved by the ﬁnal model are more than satisfactory, with the neural
network achieving 88 % recall and 94.2 % accuracy across all the datasets combined.
The recall appears even better when explored in more detail, as it is 96.3 %, 99.7
% and 100 % for the MitM, UDP DoS and SF attacks, respectively. Across the
diﬀerent DoS and Probe attacks the recall is lower at 85 % and 86 %, however, these
categories include several novel attack observations, and as such, the results are
still very respectable. Furthermore, the model has been tested in real time, where
it managed to detect whether the generated traﬃc was normal or anomalous within
10-16 seconds.
However, the ﬁnal IDS has some limitations in regards to which RPL attacks it can
possibly detect and how many packets per second it can handle. This is caused by
the centralized design making it infeasible to detect all types of RPL attacks, such
as a blackhole attack, and the current ﬂow-based preprocessing likely becoming a
bottleneck at higher packet rates. Both areas may merit future research.
v
==PAGE:10==
vi
==PAGE:11==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
State of the Art
4
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
RPL and 6LoWPAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Intrusion Detection Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.4
Machine Learning Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.5
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Current literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Datasets and Data Generation
28
3.1
NSL-KDD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
MQTT dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
DoS in RPL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
Selective Forwarding Attack Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.5
Combining the Datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
The Deep Neural Network
35
4.1
Final Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Training the network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Oﬄine evaluation
42
5.1
Dataset Complexities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2
Results on the Combined Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Scaling of the classiﬁer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Online implementation and evaluation
52
vii
==PAGE:12==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
6.1
Exporting the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.2
Setup and the Online Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3
The Generated Attack and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Discussion and Future Work
61
7.1
The ﬂow-based approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.2
The Centralized IDS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.3
Limitations of the available data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.4
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.4.1
The IDS Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.4.2
More Relevant External Attack Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
8
Conclusion
68
viii
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The world is rapidly becoming more and more connected, as new devices across sev-
eral diﬀerent ﬁelds and applications are increasingly being built with internet access
as a core part of their functionality. This global system of interrelated computing
devices is referred to as the Internet of Things (IoT), and it is quickly growing in
size, with some publications predicting upwards of 75.4 billion IoT devices in 2025
[19].
A signiﬁcant amount of those devices are sensors that are resource-constrained in
terms of radio range and battery life, and for that reason new networking protocols
have been designed to eﬃciently manage those constraints. Two such widespread
protocols are the IPv6 over Low-Power Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoW-
PAN) and the Routing Protocol for Low-Power and Lossy Networks (RPL), which
are often used in collaboration to ensure internet connectivity and routing capabil-
ities for Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) [24].
While the protocols manage to solve the tasks for which they were designed, they
open up several new attack avenues, which can be exploited by malicious entities.
6LoWPAN enables internet connectivity for the network, and in that way creates
the possibility of attacks from the internet side. In contrast, the design of RPL
allows for new and destructive attacks that can be carried out from within the
network. Such attacks can potentially cause signiﬁcant economic damage or loss of
valuable research knowledge, and for that reason, it is extremely valuable to be able
to eﬀectively detect these attacks, in order to minimize their scope. A system which
can perform that task is called an Intrusion Detection System (IDS).
The goal of this report is to minimize monetary and research losses, by designing
and implementing an IDS that is capable of eﬀectively detecting both the internal
1
==PAGE:14==
1.1. Problem Statement
Introduction
and external attacks that WSNs can be vulnerable to.
1.1
Problem Statement
To provide high-quality protection against a variety of cyber attacks, a signiﬁcant
amount of current research focuses on developing anomaly-based IDSs. However,
when related to the context of WSNs, the current state of the art research generally
falls into two categories. In the one category are those systems, which focus on
detecting attacks that originate internally, i.e. that are carried out from within the
targeted network. Generally, these IDSs detect a narrow range of attack types, and
include a distributed component which introduces computational overhead on the
nodes in the network. In the other category are those systems that focus on external
attacks, i.e. attacks that originate from the internet side. These IDSs are designed
to detect a wide variety of attacks, however, they are seldomly implemented in real
time, and their practical feasibility is less certain.
As WSNs can be vulnerable to both internal and external attacks, this project seeks
to design an IDS that is capable of detecting various attacks from both origins.
Furthermore, it attempts to avoid common pitfalls of current systems, by keeping
the IDS purely centralized to avoid computational overhead on nodes, and by testing
the system in real time to demonstrate its practical feasibility. A more detailed
description of this project’s contributions can be seen in section 2.3.
1.2
Project objectives
The goal of this project is to develop a fully functional anomaly-based IDS. To
ensure a more general-purpose IDS, the system should be able to identify a wide
variety of cyber attacks that target diﬀerent protocols. Furthermore, as the IDS will
be developed with focus on WSNs, it should be able to detect both internal and
external attacks, and the attack types selected for detection must therefore come
from both origins. In addition to this, at least one of the attack types should be
RPL-speciﬁc, as this is one of the primary protocols targeted in internal attacks.
Lastly, to avoid common weaknesses of current systems, the developed IDS should
avoid introducing computational overhead for constrained nodes, and it should be
tested in real-time for at least one attack type. To improve clarity, the objectives
can be seen in bullet form below:
• The system should be able to detect at least 3-4 diﬀerent attack types, of both
internal and external origin.
2
==PAGE:15==
1.2. Project objectives
Introduction
• At minimum one of the detected attack types should be RPL speciﬁc
• The IDS should avoid introducing computational overhead on constrained
nodes.
• The system should be tested in real-time for one attack type or more.
3
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2
State of the Art
2.1
Background
This section seeks to provide an overview of essential concepts and technologies
necessary to understand and evaluate the current research within the area. This
overview will include some of the diﬀerent network types and protocols, as well as
some of the machine learning algorithms used.
2.1.1
RPL and 6LoWPAN
WSNs are (as the name implies) networks of sensors which are spatially distributed
to measure various physical data, and send them to some central location, called
a sink. As these sensors generally have no need for high-speed communication and
seek to keep power consumption low, WSNs often adopt the IEEE 802.15.4 standard.
This standard deﬁnes the operations at the physical and link1 layers and is designed
for low-rate networks with low power consumption in mind [22]. However, while
this allows the sensor nodes to communicate internally in the network, they must
be able to support the IP protocol to communicate with the rest of the world, and
therefore, it was decided that 802.15.4 should be IPv6 compatible. This decision
brought several challenges with it, especially since the frame size of 802.15.4 is 127
bytes, whereas IPv6 usually requires a maximum transmission unit (MTU) of 1280
bytes [1]. To solve these challenges the 6LoWPAN adaptation layer was designed.
The two major functionalities of 6LoWPAN is that it allows for compression of the
IPv6 header, and that it is able to fragmentize packets and reassemble them at the
destination [1]. The 6LoWPAN adaptation layer is then placed between the link and
1More speciﬁcally, it deﬁnes the operation of the Medium Access Control (MAC) sub-layer
4
==PAGE:17==
2.1. Background
State of the Art
networking layer, and with the added functionality that it provides, nodes in the
network are capable of accessing the internet. WSNs that are capable of accessing
the internet through the use of the 6LoWPAN adaptation layer, are often referred
to as 6LoWPAN networks, and the terms will be used interchangeably throughout
the rest of this report.
The last problem to solve, was to decide on a routing protocol for 6LoWPAN net-
works. Such a protocol should be able to handle many sensor devices communicat-
ing over low-power and lossy links, and for that purpose the ”Routing protocol for
low-power and lossy networks” (RPL) was speciﬁed, which is now considered the
standard routing protocol for 6LoWPAN networks [24]. RPL works by constructing
a Destination Oriented Directed Acyclic Graph (DODAG), where the DODAG root
is usually the 6LoWPAN Border Router (6BR)2. The DODAG is constructed with
respect to some Objective Function (OF), which speciﬁes how the routing metric is
calculated. An often used objective function is the Expected Number of Transmis-
sions (ETX), which approximately reﬂects the link quality [41]. During construction
of the graph a joining node will choose a parent from the set of those nodes that are
within transmission range. The parent chosen will be the one with the best value
according to the OF; for the ETX function that would be the node which can pro-
vide a path with the lowest expected number of transmissions to the 6BR. After
joining the DODAG, nodes are assigned a rank, which corresponds to some measure
of distance from the 6BR and is usually calculated based on the OF [34]. The rank
increases ”the further away” from the 6BR a node is placed, and for that reason,
nodes joining a network seek to choose a parent with as low of a rank as possible.
An example of a DODAG can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1.
To create and maintain the network topology, RPL relies on four diﬀerent control
messages, where DODAG Information Object (DIO) and Destination Advertisement
Object (DAO) are the two most important ones [41].
The DIO control message is used for both construction and maintenance of the
DODAG, and contains information like rank of sender, IP address of root etc [41].
These are sent at periodic intervals, such that nodes receiving the DIO message can
inspect the included rank, and use this information to decide if the sender of the
message would be an appropriate parent. This process allows for upwards routing,
i.e. for traﬃc to be routed from nodes towards the root (6BR).
To support downwards routing, the DAO message is used. This routing can be done
one of two ways depending on whether the DODAG runs in storing or non-storing
mode: In non-storing mode, the root node speciﬁes the entire route which the packet
2The 6BR is the ”bridge” between the 6LoWPAN network and the internet. All external traﬃc
destined for a node in the network, or the other way around, passes through this.
5
==PAGE:18==
2.1. Background
State of the Art
Figure 2.1: An example of a DODAG with valid ranks, where the lines denote parent-
child relationships. Notice how the node with rank 768 chose the node with rank
512 as its parent instead of the one with rank 640.
should take through the network, by using IPv6 source routing. Whereas in storing
mode, all intermediate nodes have their own routing table, and decide themselves
how to forward a received packet [41]. To enable the ﬁrst routing type, all nodes
send DAO messages to the root, where they include the address of their parent.
Using this information, the root can piece the DODAG together, and will know
how to route a packet, such that it reaches the desired node. To achieve the second
routing type, nodes instead include the address preﬁx reachable through them in the
DAO message, and send this to their parents. This way, the parents can maintain a
routing table of their children.
By constructing the DODAG, RPL allows for multi-hop routing in a network with
a large amount of resource-constrained nodes. However, the protocol also enables
new attack avenues, such as sinkhole and selective forwarding attacks. These will be
explored in the next section.
2.1.2
Attacks
The most common attacks detected by the IDSs in the literature review, as well
as the IDS developed in this report, are DoS, DDoS, MitM, probe, sinkhole, black
hole, and selective forwarding attacks. The ﬁrst four attacks are widespread and
6
==PAGE:19==
2.1. Background
State of the Art
have been observed across many diﬀerent network types, whereas the last three are
more speciﬁc to RPL networks. Here is a quick explanation of those attacks:
DoS: Probably the most well-known attack, the Denial of Service attack aims to (in
any way) prevent legitimate users from accessing the resources of a speciﬁc service
[23]. There are many variants of this attack, and it is often very destructive.
DDoS: The Distributed Denial of Service attack is a variant of the standard DoS
attack. In this version, the attacker has managed to infect several hosts (such as PC’s
or IoT devices) with ”attack” software, before the launch of the attack. At launch,
all infected devices will then attack the desired victim (usually by generating large
amounts of network traﬃc)[23].
MitM: In a Man-in-the-middle attack, the attacker places himself between two
communicating entities, such that all messages between the two victims go through
the attacker. In this way, the attacker has control over the communication between
the victims, and can eavesdrop on the information being passed, or potentially even
alter it. [2]
Probe: In a probe attack, the attacker collects information about a system and
attempts to ﬁnd known vulnerabilities that can be exploited. This is often achieved
through a scan of the system [32]. This attack is not that dangerous on its own, but
may precede more destructive attacks.
Sinkhole: The goal of a sinkhole attack is to get nearly all traﬃc from the sur-
rounding area routed through the malicious node. This is usually done by making
the malicious node appear attractive to other nodes with respect to the underlying
routing protocol, such that those nodes decide to route their traﬃc through it [18].
In RPL networks this is often achieved by advertising a low rank. The attack is
not necessarily dangerous by itself, but when combined with other attacks, it can
increase the damage caused by those attacks.
Black Hole: In a black hole attack, the attacker decides to drop all packets being
routed through it, instead of forwarding them as a node would normally do. This
attack is most destructive when used in combination with the sinkhole attack, how-
ever, victim nodes may sometimes conclude that the link is broken and simply ﬁnd
a new route [18].
Selective Forwarding: A more subtle version of the black hole attack is the se-
lective forwarding attack. In this attack, only a portion of the packets sent through
the malicious node are dropped [18]. This makes the attack more diﬃcult to detect
7
==PAGE:20==
2.1. Background
State of the Art
and avoid.
Attack origins
Attacks on a network do not vary only by attack type, they may also have wildly
diﬀerent origins. In this paper, we will distinguish between two diﬀerent origins,
attacks of external origin i.e. external attacks and attacks of internal origin i.e.
internal attacks. Here, external attacks are those that are performed by attackers
outside the 6LoWPAN network, whereas internal attacks will be those carried out
by nodes inside the network. This means, that an external attack can be launched
from anywhere on the internet, and as 6LoWPAN networks are internet-connected
they are naturally vulnerable to such attacks. Thus, in order to completely protect
a 6LoWPAN network, both attack avenues must be considered, which is why this
paper will focus on some internal attacks (Selective Forwarding, internal DoS, MitM)
and some external attacks (Probe, DoS). A ﬁgure illustrating what an internal and
external attacker could be, is seen in ﬁgure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: An overview of a 6LoWPAN network. As can be seen, an external attacker
is a malicious device that attacks the network from the internet side, whereas an
internal attacker is a participant of the network it attacks.
2.1.3
Intrusion Detection Systems
Traditionally, ﬁrewalls and encryption techniques have been used to keep networks
and hosts safe from those attacks, which seek to disrupt their normal modes of
operation. While both technologies are still widely utilized, they no longer provide
suﬃcient means of protection due to the high complexity of networks and the wide
8
==PAGE:21==
2.1. Background
State of the Art
variety of attacks[33]. Instead, they now form the ﬁrst line of defense against intrud-
ers, with IDSs forming the second line.
The purpose of an IDS is to monitor a network or a single host and identify any
malicious activity happening on the system[13]. If it identiﬁes such activity, it should
raise an alarm for an administrator to see, or automatically begin to take preven-
tative measures. An IDS which monitors hosts is called a Host-based IDS (HIDS)
whereas one that monitors networks is called a Network-based IDS (NIDS)[12]. How-
ever, it is common to simply refer to both types as ”IDS”, and as the focus of this
paper is network-based IDSs, IDS will from this point on refer to a NIDS.
Instead of being categorized by the type of system that they monitor, IDSs are
more commonly categorized simply by their applied detection methodology. In this
aspect the two most common types of IDSs are signature-based (also called misuse
IDS) and anomaly-based IDSs. The signature-based approach keeps a list of sig-
natures of known attacks, and then checks if incoming traﬃc matches any of the
known patterns, often using simple regex and string matching [17]. The advantage
of this approach, is that it performs extremely well at identifying known attacks,
and usually requires little computational overhead [35]. However, the downside is
that it is necessary to store all the attack signatures, and this detection method is
unable to detect novel attacks. Often, even a small modiﬁcation to a known attack
is enough to subvert detection. For this reason, a lot of current research is focused
on anomaly-based IDSs. The anomaly-based IDS seeks to establish a model for the
normal behavior of a system, and then it raises an alarm if it observes traﬃc that
deviates signiﬁcantly from this model [24]. The model can be established through
diﬀerent means, but in newer times machine learning is often used. The downside
of the anomaly-based approach is that it produces a higher amount of false alarms,
however, it also has the potential to discover novel attacks. Due to that signiﬁcant
strength, I have designed and implemented an anomaly-based IDS throughout this
project.
2.1.4
Machine Learning Algorithms
One of the major decisions to make when developing an anomaly-based IDS, is
deciding which detection algorithm to use. There is no ”universally best” approach
in this regard, and a lot of current research in the area is based on developing or
modifying detection algorithms to achieve better detection results. For this reason,
the following ”State of the Art” section presents a wide variety of machine learning
algorithms. Luckily for us, many of these are based on one of two base classiﬁers:
The Decision Tree or the Neural Network.
9
==PAGE:22==
2.1. Background
State of the Art
The Decision Tree The decision tree classiﬁer is quite simple, but has laid the
groundwork for powerful algorithms. The algorithm adopts a very human-like ap-
proach to classiﬁcation, since it ”asks a series of questions” in an attempt to cate-
gorize the data [42]. This is done by recursively splitting the data into groups, with
each split being based on the value of just one feature. For example, given a dataset
containing animals where the goal is to classify which animals are mammal and
which are not, a split could be performed by looking at whether the animal has fur
or not. This will split the data into two groups (also called branches), whereafter
each branch will be split again according to the value of some other feature3. The
process will continue until all the created groups are mostly pure, i.e. contain mostly
one class. Which feature to split on, and which value to make the split at, is decided
by looking at the purity gain [42].
Simply put, the purity gain (∆) is a measure of the predictive power of the branches
after the split, compared to before the split, and its formula is given in equation
2.1 [42]. Here, I(r) is the impurity before the split and I(bk) is the impurity of each
branch after the split. Furthermore, N(bk) is the size of each group after the split,
which means the sum expression corresponds to a weighted average of the branches’
impurities. The impurity of a branch can be measured in diﬀerent ways, but a simple
way is to use the Class Error measure which is given by 1 −max
c
p(c|b) where b is
the branch and c is the dominant class on that branch. From these equations, we
can see that the purity gain is a measure of how well a given split separates the
classes, and when a decision tree is considering which split to make, it will therefore
choose the one with the largest purity gain.
∆= I(r) −
K
X
k=1
N(bk)
N(r) I(bk)
(2.1)
On its own, the decision tree has a tendency to overﬁt and in modern times it is
seldomly used for classiﬁcation tasks [4]. However, when several trees are combined
into 1 classiﬁer they can achieve great results [10], which is the case with the Random
Forest (RF) classiﬁer and the XGBoost classiﬁer, both of which are represented in
the ”State of the Art” section. The random forest is the simpler of the two as it
uses a bagging approach to combine the decision trees. This means, that each tree is
trained on a random subset of the full dataset, and during classiﬁcation, the output
of the RF is chosen to be the majority vote of the participating trees [42]. This
classiﬁer is still widely used, especially due to the fact that it performs very well
3The re-split will not necessarily be based on the same feature for the two branches
10
==PAGE:23==
2.1. Background
State of the Art
with default parameters [5]. In contrast, the XGBoost uses a boosting approach to
combine the trees. In this approach, the decision trees are combined iteratively, such
that the ﬁrst tree is trained on a subset of the dataset, and the datapoints it could
not classify correctly are then assigned a higher chance to be included in the next
subset. The second tree is then trained on the next subset, and the datapoints which
both trees combined cannot classify correctly are then assigned a higher chance to
be included in the next subset and so forth [5]. Furthermore, during classiﬁcation,
the outputs of the diﬀerent trees are weighted according to how well they perform.
The Artiﬁcial Neural Network Neural networks have become quite prevalent
within anomaly-based IDSs. This can be seen from the literature reviewed in this
report where several diﬀerent variants have been implemented. In fact, the detection
component of this project uses a deep neural network to classify abnormalities, which
will be explained in more detail later.
Simply put, a neural network can be viewed as network of nodes (or neurons) that
are connected by a series of weights [20]. An example of a neural network can be
seen in ﬁgure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: An example of a neural network. Figure taken from [20]
As can be seen, the ﬁrst ”layer” is called the input layer, the last layer the output
layer, and the layers in between are called hidden layers. The input layer is more
of a pseudo-layer, as it does not actually consist of neurons like the other layers,
but instead represents the input values being fed to the network. Each layer is then
connected by a series of weights, such that the input to a neuron in any given
layer can be represented by the formula w · x + b where the vector w represents
the weights leading to the node (denoted by arrows in ﬁgure 2.3), x represents the
outputs from the previous layer [20] and b is a bias. Each node passes the input
through an activation function to produce its own output, and the output of any
11
==PAGE:24==
2.1. Background
State of the Art
node can therefore be represented by the formula y = f(x · w + b), where f(·) can
be many diﬀerent functions, but sigmoid is commonly used [29].
Data is then propagated through the network as seen in ﬁgure 2.3 by dotting the
input values with the weights, passing them through the activation functions, dotting
the neuron outputs with new weights and so forth. When the transformed data is
ﬁnally output from the ﬁnal layer as a prediction, the predicted values are compared
with the actual values through the use of a cost function, that helps quantify how
good/bad the prediction was, and this function could be something as simple as the
Mean Squared Error (MSE). The major strength of introducing the cost function,
is that we now have a performance measure that is sensitive to small changes in
the output of the neural network. More importantly, since the output changes based
on the weights and biases in the network, we thus have a measure of how small
changes to the weights and biases aﬀect the performance [29]. In short, training
the neural network can now be viewed as a classic minimization problem, where
we seek to determine the values for the weights and biases that will minimize the
cost function. However, since a neural network can have extremely many weights
and biases, solving the minimization problem analytically is not computationally
feasible, which is why other methods such as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
are used instead, but that will not be expanded upon in this report.
There are many variants of the neural network, that usually relates to the amount
of layers or how they are structured. Some of these variants are mentioned during
the literature review, and for that reason, they will quickly be introduced here. Arti-
ﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) is an umbrella term that includes all these variants,
however, when used in literature it mostly refers to Vanilla Neural Networks i.e.
networks with only one hidden layer [20]. In contrast, networks with 2 or more hid-
den layers are called Deep Neural Networks (DNNs).Lastly, networks such as Gated
Recurrent Unit (GRU) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) are both types of
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). RNNs are networks which have cycles, such
that a prediction may be aﬀected by previous inputs and not just the current input.
As such, the networks are good at handling temporal data [6].
Besides the many diﬀerent types of networks, there has also been designed a wide
array of techniques which can be combined with a network to help improve its
performance. One of these techniques, namely regularization, has been used in the
design of the DNN in this report, and will therefore be expanded upon later in
section 4.1.
12
==PAGE:25==
2.1. Background
State of the Art
2.1.5
Evaluation Metrics
In the ”State of the Art” section many diﬀerent systems and machine learning
algorithms will be reviewed and compared. For the purposes of a fair comparison,
it is necessary to establish evaluation metrics that will accurately reﬂect the quality
of an algorithm. The metrics used in this report are quite standard, and include
accuracy, recall, precision and the Fβ score. For the equations in this section, the
following nomenclature applies:
TP = True Positive
FP = False Positive
TN = True Negative
FN = False Negative
The accuracy reﬂects how many percent of the observations are classiﬁed correctly,
thus it is deﬁned as a ratio of the amount of correct predictions over the total amount
of predictions [31]. The equation is given in 2.2.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + FP + TN + FN
(2.2)
The recall measures how many percent of the anomalous classes are correctly iden-
tiﬁed. As such, it is the ratio of correctly identiﬁed anomalous observations over the
entire amount of anomalous observations. The equation is given in 2.3.
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(2.3)
The precision corresponds to the amount of anomalous predictions that are correct,
i.e. of the observations predicted as anomalous how many percent were actually
anomalous [12]. The equation can be seen in 2.4.
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(2.4)
The Fβ score is the weighted harmonic mean of recall and precision. This means,
it represents how well the classiﬁer performs in terms of both recall and precision,
with 1 being best and 0 being worst. The β parameter can be freely chosen, such
that importance can be placed on either of the two metrics, with β < 1 prioritizing
precision and β > 1 prioritizing recall [12]. The equation is given in 2.5.
13
==PAGE:26==
2.2. Current literature
State of the Art
Fβ = (1 + β2) ∗
precision ∗recall
β2 · precision + recall
(2.5)
Lastly, a Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve is often used to evaluate
the performance of a binary classiﬁer as its prediction threshold is varied (or simply
to select a threshold), and an example of an ROC curve can be seen in the Oﬄine
Evaluation section in ﬁgure 5.5. An ROC curve is based on the principle, that most
binary classiﬁers do not just output the values 0 or 1, but actually any continuous
value in between. This means, that one can manually decide on a threshold that de-
termines when a prediction should be counted as an anomalous or normal prediction.
For a threshold of 0.5 any output above this would then be counted as a predic-
tion of 1 (anomaly) and the other way around. A low threshold will result in many
anomalous prediction and therefore many true positives and false positives, whereas
a high threshold will result in many normal predictions and fewer true and false
positives. Before plotting the ROC curve, the threshold is then usually increased
from 0 to 1 in some desired step size, and the True Positive Rate (TPR or recall)
and False Positive Rate (FPR) are registered at each step. Finally, the ROC curve
is created by plotting the TPR and FPR against each other, and it visualises the
tradeoﬀthat is made when the threshold is varied (both rates growing or both rates
decreasing). For a classiﬁer that predicts randomly, the TPR and FPR will grow
equally fast when decreasing the threshold, and the ROC curve would approximate
a straight line from (0,0) to (1,1).
With these metrics in mind, a proper evaluation of existing literature can be pro-
vided. This can be found in the next section ”Current Literature”.
2.2
Current literature
SVELTE: Real-Time Intrusion Detection in the Internet of
Things
Shahid Raza, Linus Wallgren, Thiemo Voigt[34]
This paper describes one of the most successful and well-known examples of a RPL
speciﬁc IDS. In an eﬀort to provide some security from both internal and external
attacks, the authors developed a hybrid IDS in every sense of the word.The result
is a system that is both signature- and anomaly-based, with centralized and dis-
tributed components.
14
==PAGE:27==
2.2. Current literature
State of the Art
Detection Approach
The paper states that most attacks on low power wireless networks take place in
the network layer or target the routing protocol speciﬁcally. For this reason, the
IDS is designed to detect sinkhole attacks, selective forwarding (SF) attacks and
spoofed or altered routing information, with the authors claiming that it can easily
be extended to detect more attacks of this nature.
To achieve the desired detection, the IDS consists of 3 main modules: A 6LowPAN
mapper which maintains a mapping of the network in the 6BR and a whitelist of
innocent nodes, an analysis component which analyses the map to detect intrusions,
and a ﬁrewall to provide some protection against external attacks. All modules run
on the 6BR, but the mapper and the ﬁrewall also include some software that runs
on the nodes.
To maintain a mapping of the network, the server component of the mapper (on the
6BR) periodically sends messages to the client component (running on the nodes),
requesting information about the node and its neighbors, such as rank, parent rank,
ID etc. Based on the retrieved information from all nodes, the analysis module then
looks for inconsistencies in the DODAG to help detect sinkhole attacks or altered
routing information. To detect selective forwarding attacks, the analysis module
looks at unanswered mapper requests, and if enough requests are unanswered from
a given node, it is assumed that some intermediate node is ﬁltering the traﬃc. By
identifying all nodes being ﬁltered, the malicious node can eventually be found.
Evaluation
To test the performance of their IDS, the authors use the Cooja network simulator4
to simulate 3 diﬀerent lossy network conﬁgurations, which have 8, 16 and 32 nodes
including 1, 2, and 4 malicious nodes respectively. For both sinkhole and selective
forwarding attacks, they achieve 100 % detection rate (meaning they identify all
malicious nodes, also known as recall) after 5-30 minutes. However, as can be seen
from ﬁgure 2.4 the precision (deﬁned as
TP
FP+TP ) is only around 80 % when detecting
selective forwarding attacks, which means the system produces a signiﬁcant amount
of false positives. The results are similar for sinkhole attacks.
Comments Overall this IDS performs well, and the authors seem to have been
thorough and transparent when evaluating it. The fact that it’s been tested with
lossy (albeit simulated) networks, means that its performance will translate better
4This simulator will be explained in more detail later.
15
==PAGE:28==
2.2. Current literature
State of the Art
Figure 2.4: SVELTE’s precision when detecting selective forwarding attacks. Taken
from [34]
to the real world, than those systems that have only been tested on simulated, loss-
less networks, or those systems that have only been tested on datasets. However,
there is still room for improvement. The system produces too many false positives5,
and it has only been tested with a few attacks. Furthermore, the IDS introduces ap-
proximately 30 % energy overhead in a duty cycled network with 64 nodes. Lastly,
the authors mention that they implemented a ﬁrewall to protect against external
attacks, but they do not seem to have tested it. Due to this, it seems fair to assume
that while SVELTE provides state of the art identiﬁcation for internal attacks, its
protection against external attacks could use improvement.
Threat analysis of IoT networks Using Artiﬁcial Neural Net-
work Intrusion Detection System
Elike Hodo, Xavier Bellekens, Andrew Hamilton, Pierre-Louis Dubouilh, Ephraim
Iorkyase, Christos Tachtatzis and Robert Atkinson [14]
Detection Approach
In this paper, the authors propose using an Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) to
detect external DoS and DDoS attacks. This is achieved by implementing a classical
type of supervised ANN, namely the multi-layer perception (MLP) at a centralized
5It should be noted, that in a later article they have extended SVELTE to reduce the false
positive ratio [38]. However, it is diﬃcult to discern how much this has helped, as they use a
simpler network conﬁguration the second time around.
16
==PAGE:29==
2.2. Current literature
State of the Art
location, such as a 6BR. The network has one hidden layer with 3 units, and it uses
the sigmoid activation function in the hidden layer and output layer. Furthermore,
6 non-speciﬁed features are extracted from the network data and fed to the neural
network as inputs.
Evaluation
To test the prediction accuracy of the proposed classiﬁer, the authors create normal
data and attack data, using a simulation of a sensor network. The experiment’s
network topology can be seen in ﬁgure 2.5. As can be seen, the topology includes 5
nodes, where 4 act as clients and 1 acts as a server. A passive listener is then placed
in between the server and clients, which captures and stores the generated traﬃc,
in both normal and attack scenarios.
Figure 2.5: The simulated network topology that was used to generate training and
testing data. Figure taken from [14]
After the simulation has been completed, the captured data is fed to the ANN clas-
siﬁer, where most of it is used for training purposes and the rest is saved for testing.
Across 496 test samples, the ANN manages to achieve 99.4 % accuracy.
Comments
The accuracy achieved in this paper is very impressive and is the reason for its inclu-
sion, however, the paper also contains a couple of weaknesses. First oﬀ, it seems that
the IDS is only built to detect 1 type of DoS and 1 type of DDoS attack, which makes
its detection scope quite narrow. Likely due to this, the authors have not tested the
classiﬁcation algorithm on any of the widely used network traﬃc datasets, which
makes it diﬃcult to compare their results to other anomaly-based approaches. Fur-
thermore, they do not explain which features they use for their classiﬁcation, which
17
==PAGE:30==
2.2. Current literature
State of the Art
makes their results diﬃcult to replicate, and they do not implement or test their
IDS system in real-time scenarios. Lastly, they only focus on attacks from external
intruders [14], and thus, their system oﬀers no protection against internal attacks.
An Ensemble Intrusion Detection Technique Based on Pro-
posed Statistical Flow Features for Protecting Network Traf-
ﬁc of Internet of Things
Nour Moustafa, Benjamin Turnbull, and Kim-Kwang Raymond Choo [27]
In this paper, the authors develop an anomaly-based IDS which uses AdaBoost
ensemble learning in combination with 3 classiﬁers to detect a wide array of attacks
on the HTTP and DNS protocols.
Detection Approach
It should be mentioned, that the authors never implement the IDS in an actual
system, however, their detection mechanisms are logically centralized. To detect at-
tacks against the HTTP and DNS protocols, the network data is represented using
36 diﬀerent features (with many of them being speciﬁc to those protocols). Of these
36 features, the ones with lowest mutual covariance are then selected and passed on
to the classiﬁer. For the classiﬁcation task, the authors use 3 classiﬁers, namely an
ANN, a Naive Bayes (NB) and a Decision Tree (DT). These classiﬁers are combined
using AdaBoost, thereby allowing the classiﬁers to function as one entity through
weighted voting.
Evaluation
To evaluate their detection approach, the authors use data from the UNSW-NB156
and NIMS7 datasets, as well as some self-generated data that they gained by simu-
lating benign IoT sensor communication. The detection system performs admirably,
managing to achieve 99.54 % and 98.29 % accuracy for the DNS based attacks on
the UNSW-NB15 and NIMS datasets respectively. For the HTTP based attacks, it
achieves accuracies of 98.97 % and 98.36 %. It should be mentioned that several
diﬀerent attacks are included in the datasets.
Comments
This article achieves very impressive accuracies across several attack types. They
6Available here: https://www.unsw.adfa.edu.au/unsw-canberra-cyber/cybersecurity/
ADFA-NB15-Datasets/
7Available here: https://projects.cs.dal.ca/projectx/Download.html
18
==PAGE:31==
2.2. Current literature
State of the Art
classify 5 diﬀerent attack types for DNS data sources and 8 diﬀerent attack types
for HTTP sources. Furthermore, the detection algorithm does not seem to use un-
reasonable computational power. However, they do not use separate test sets to test
their algorithm, but instead split their datasets into train and test sections using
10-fold cross-validation. This means, that the test sets will be much more simi-
lar to the train sets, than when separate test sets are used (as in the NSL-KDD
dataset), which makes it signiﬁcantly easier to achieve high accuracies. Thus, while
their results are impressive, one should be careful of being too amazed, until they
demonstrate strong results on separate test sets.
An Anomaly-Based IDS for Detecting Attacks in RPL-Based
Internet of Things
Behnam Farzaneh, Mohammad Ali Montazeri, Shahram Jamali [11]
Detection Approach
In this article, the authors propose a fully distributed anomaly-based IDS to detect
two internal attacks, namely the DIS attack and Neighbor attack. This means, that
each node in the network runs a full version of the IDS. To achieve this, they ﬁrst
establish a proﬁle for normal behavior by simulating networks of diﬀerent sizes and
densities. To detect neighbor attacks, they investigate the amount of DIO messages
a node normally receives from its neighbors and uses this to determine a threshold
value, which decides how many messages from a single neighbor is suspicious. This
threshold value is dynamic, and depends on the messages received in total, as well
as the amount of neighbors, and can be diﬀerent for every node in the network. In
contrast, for the DIS attacks the authors realized that across all their network con-
ﬁgurations a node never received more than 3 DIS messages (within a certain time
limit) from a single neighbor. Therefore, this was set as a static threshold value,
where any activity above this is suspicious.
Evaluation
To test their IDS, the authors implement it in the Contiki operating system, and
evaluate it using the Cooja simulator. Each node has 10 KB of RAM, and 10 KB
of ROM. They then simulate 27 diﬀerent attack scenarios, where they vary the
distance between nodes, the amount of nodes, and the relative amount of attacker
nodes. Across all scenarios they get 100 % true positive rate (TPR) and 0 % false
positive rate (FPR) when detecting DIS attacks. For neighbor attacks they achieve
94.47 - 100 % TPR and 0.2 - 9.61 % FPR across all attack scenarios.
19
==PAGE:32==
2.2. Current literature
State of the Art
Comments The main strength of this paper, is that they design a simple IDS that
can run on computationally constrained nodes, and implement it in a real system,
such that it can detect internal attacks in real-time. However, while they achieve
impressive results, their approach has some short-comings. First oﬀ, the network
topologies they use to test their IDS’s ability to detect DIS attacks, are the exact
same topologies they use to establish a proﬁle for normal DIS message behavior.
They do not mention the topologies used to establish normal behavior for DIO mes-
sages, but it might be the same topologies there too. This means, it is unknown if
their great prediction results will apply to completely new network topologies. Fur-
thermore, while the IDS can detect 2 diﬀerent attacks, it basically uses 2 diﬀerent
models to do so. Therefore, to expand the IDS to detect new attacks, one might
have to create a completely new model and add it to the IDS. Thus, the IDS is
likely diﬃcult to scale to new attacks.
A Deep Learning Approach to Network Intrusion Detection
Nathan Shone , Tran Nguyen Ngoc, Vu Dinh Phai , and Qi Shi [37]
In this paper the authors present a DNN approach to dimensionality reduction,
which achieves good results on the KDD Cup ’99 and NSL-KDD datasets.
Detection approach
In this article, the authors’ primary focus is on developing the detection algorithm,
which means it has not been implemented in an actual IDS. However, to motivate
their design of the algorithm, the authors mention that internet traﬃc is steadily
increasing in complexity, which presents signiﬁcant detection tasks. To combat this
complexity they propose a new approach to feature reduction, namely stacked Non-
Symmetric Deep Auto-Encoders (NDAEs), which they claim provide more powerful
generalisation of features, than classical approaches such as Principal Component
Analysis (PCA). NDAES are unsupervised neural networks that encode data by
having less units in the output layer than input layer, while seeking to maintain the
same amount of information. After the stacked NDAEs have reduced the amount of
features, their output is fed to a random forest for classiﬁcation. The structure of
the algorithm can be seen in ﬁgure 2.6.
Evaluation
To test the accuracy of their detection algorithm, the authors train and test it on
the KDD Cup ’99 and NSL-KDD datasets. To train and test they ran the algorithm
20
==PAGE:33==
2.2. Current literature
State of the Art
Figure 2.6: The structure of the proposed detection algorithm. The numbers denote
the amount of units in a given layer. Taken from [37]
on a PC with Ubuntu, 3.6 GHz processor, 16 GB RAM and NVIDIA GTX 750
GPU. They managed to achieve 97.85 % accuracy on the KDD Cup ’99 set across
5 classes. On the NSL-KDD dataset they achieved 89.22 % accuracy across 12 dif-
ferent attack scenarios, which indicates that their algorithm is good at identifying
speciﬁc attack types. Lastly, their algorithm requires signiﬁcantly less training time
than other DNN-based algorithms, with up to 98.81 % time saved during training.
Comments
This article proposes an interesting approach to feature reduction using DNNs, and
manages to achieve impressive results using that method. However, their impressive
results should be taken with a grain of salt. While they claim that they are using
the whole NSL-KDD dataset for their results, it seems that they have ﬁltered out
all novel attacks in the test set, such that it only includes the same attack types as
the training set. Furthermore, they have even ﬁltered away some attack types that
exist in the training set, if they deem that the attack type had too few observations.
In this way, they end up testing their algorithm on a signiﬁcantly easier version of
the NSL-KDD test set, which contains 12 attack types out of the original 37, with
many of the most diﬃcult attack types having been removed. Thus, their results
would likely be signiﬁcantly worse on the full NSL-KDD test set. Furthermore, as
they have only used the NSL-KDD set to train their algorithm, their system can
only provide protection against external attacks.
21
==PAGE:34==
2.2. Current literature
State of the Art
Multiclass Classiﬁcation Procedure for Detecting Attacks on
MQTT-IoT Protocol
Hector Alaiz-Moreton, Jose Aveleira-Mata, Jorge Ondicol-Garcia, Angel LuisMu˜noz-
Casta˜neda, Isa-as Garc-a, and Carmen Benavides [2]
Due to lack of proper IoT datasets, this research group has generated their own
dataset containing MQTT (Message Queuing Telemetry Transport) traﬃc, which
they test their IDS on.
Detection approach MQTT is a publish-subscribe protocol widely used in IoT
networks. In MQTT networks a central node functions as a broker that manages
all messages in the network, which makes the broker an obvious attack target. For
that reason, this group focuses on detecting three diﬀerent attack types, all of which
wholly or partially target the broker, namely a DoS attack, a MitM attack and
an Intrusion attack. In order to successfully detect these, the authors consider and
evaluate three diﬀerent machine learning approaches: XGBoost, Long Short-Term
Memory network (LSTM) and a Gated Recurrent Unit network (GRU). Of these
three approaches the ﬁrst is tree-based and can be considered a better version of
Random Forest, whereas the latter two are both recurrent neural networks (RNNs).
The generated data does not get classiﬁed in real-time, but is instead collected in
datasets and represented by 34 features. Then, before the data is passed to the
algorithms it is ﬁrst re-sampled (to create an even amount of normal and anomalous
samples) and the more desirable features are extracted using both ﬁlter- and wrapper
based methods.
Evaluation The paper achieves great results on their classiﬁcation, achieving 93 %
and 96 % accuracy for the LSTM and GRU algorithms respectively for the four-class
classiﬁcation problem. The corresponding Fβ scores are very similar, with values of
0.93 and 0.96, for a β value of 2, meaning that recall is prioritized higher than preci-
sion. The authors do not explicitly mention the accuracy of the XGBoost algorithm
on the four-class problem, but when classiﬁcation was reduced to a binary one, the
algorithm achieved betweeen 95 % and 99 % recall on the diﬀerent attack classes.
Furthermore, the authors claim that even for the four-class problem, the XGBoost
achieved better results than the neural networks.
Comments The strength of this paper is that the authors receive great accuracies
across a four-class problem, and they do it for attacks on the MQTT protocol, which
are not as often explored. However, there are three downsides. First oﬀ, they never
test their algorithms on any of the network datasets typically used, which makes it
22
==PAGE:35==
2.2. Current literature
State of the Art
hard to compare their results with other research groups. Secondly, and in the same
vein, their results are based on a validation dataset, which was part of the same
dataset as the training data before this was split. This means that the validation
data is likely similar to the training data, thus making higher classiﬁcation accuracies
easier to achieve. Lastly, while the group focuses on three diﬀerent attacks they are
all on the same protocol, and all attacks originate from within the WLAN (Wireless
Local Area Network). This makes the scope of the attacks tested somewhat narrow,
and it seems unlikely that the model can provide suﬃcient security for a wider range
of attacks.
Compression Header Analyzer Intrusion Detection System
(CHA - IDS) for 6LoWPAN Communication Protocol
Mohamad Nazrin Napiah, Mohd Yamani Idna Bin Idris, Roziana Ramli, and Ismail
Ahmedy [28]
Inspired by the SVELTE paper [34], this group adopts a similar data collection
approach, but with a focus on diﬀerent features and with the use of Machine Learning
in the detection component.
Detection approach The authors of this paper focus on three diﬀerent internal
attacks targeting the RPL protocol, namely the hello ﬂood, sinkhole and wormhole
attacks. To identify these attacks, they ﬁrst simulate the attacks in the Cooja sim-
ulator for 30 minutes and export the data received by all nodes in the network to
a pcap ﬁle, using the Cooja 6LoWPAN analyzer. Thus, they assume a global view
of the network. To reduce the huge amount of possible features, the group focuses
only on information contained in the 6LoWPAN compression header, which still
leaves 77 potential features. Therefore, they further reduce the features by using
Correlation-based Feature Selection (CFS) to get a measure of the prediction infor-
mation contained in a subset of features, and search for the optimal feature subset
using a graph search algorithm. Using this approach they extract a subset of ﬁve
features from the 6LoWPAN compression header, which are then used to train the
machine learning algorithms.
Evaluation After the initial simulation of 30 minutes to select features and train six
diﬀerent machine learning algorithms, the authors run new 30 minute simulations
for each attack, where data is exported every 10 minutes. The algorithms are then
fed the datasets containing 10, 20, and 30 minutes of data, and their accuracies are
measured. Across all three datasets (Hello ﬂood, sinkhole and wormhole) and across
all three time intervals, the random forest manages to achieve 100 % accuracy with
23
==PAGE:36==
2.2. Current literature
State of the Art
the other algorithms mostly achieving accuracies in the mid- to high 90’s. However,
when combining the three datasets (such that all attacks are included) the J48
algorithm performs best, with 99.4 % accuracy.
Comments While the authors achieve extremely high accuracies, there are some
questionable aspects surrounding their approach. First oﬀ, they seem to use the
exact same simulation setup for their training and testing data, which means that the
generated data will be very similar. Secondly, while the paper insinuates that their
setup is equivalent to a real-life scenario, it seems that the classiﬁcation process is still
dependent on pcap ﬁles exported from Cooja every 10 minutes, which is not viable
in an actual network. Furthermore, when performing the classiﬁcation they make
use of data that can only be gathered with a global network view, without providing
suggestions as to how such a global view could be achieved in a real scenario (unlike
the SVELTE paper [34], where it is a central part of their discussion). Lastly, their
approach focuses only on internal attacks, thus providing no countermeasures against
attacks from the internet side.
With all that said, the general ideas proposed in this paper seem promising, which
is the reason for its inclusion in this section.
Other promising literature
Besides the articles reviewed in the previous sections, there is still much promising
research to be explored. However, for reasons such as similarity to the articles already
reviewed, or being less central to the scope, they may not need to be reviewed to the
same degree as the articles seen earlier. These articles are presented in this section.
In An Accurate Security Game for Low-Resource IoT Devices [35] the
authors propose a distributed hybrid IDS, which has both a signature-based and
an anomaly-based component running on each node in the IoT network. Since the
anomaly-based component can consume signiﬁcant energy resources, they use game
theory to determine when the component should be activated or not, to achieve the
optimal balance between energy conservation and detection accuracy. The group
tests the IDS in the TOSSIM simulator (a simulator for TinyOS sensor networks),
where they perform internal DoS attacks from up to 40 % of the participating nodes,
and they achieve fantastic results. With a network size of 300 nodes, where 40 %
are anomalous, the system manages to detect 92 % of the nodes performing attacks,
and the detection rate is naturally higher for smaller networks or less attackers.
They claim that their system consumes signiﬁcantly less energy than other hybrid
detection systems [35], however, it seems that their system consumes more energy
than SVELTE. Furthermore, the authors claim that the IDS is protected against
24
==PAGE:37==
2.3. Contribution
State of the Art
”hello ﬂood, sink hole, black hole, sybil, wormhole, spoofed and altered information
and resource exhaustion attacks” [35].
In Intrusion Detection and Prevention in CoAP Wireless Sensor Net-
works Using Anomaly Detection [12] the authors develop an IDS that focuses
on detecting four diﬀerent attacks on the CoAP protocol. To achieve this, they con-
duct four experiments (one for each attack type) of 30 minutes duration using the
IoT-Lab platform, and the collected data is exported to a pcap ﬁle. From the ﬁle
37 features are extracted and are then reduced in dimensionality using both PCA
and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) (to compare performance between the two)
after which they are passed on to a Support Vector Machine (SVM) classiﬁer. When
using the LDA dimensionality reduction method, the authors achieve nice results,
managing to achieve 93 % accuracy across the ﬁve class problem. It should be noted,
however, that the recall for three of the four anomalous classes is less impressive,
as it lies at 69 - 78 %. All in all, the authors still manage to build an IDS that can
detect attacks against the CoAP protocol, which is an attack avenue that is not
often explored.
2.3
Contribution
After having reviewed the current research, a pattern begins to emerge. While a lot
of impressive research has been conducted within the ﬁeld of anomaly-based IDSs,
it seems to fall into one of two categories when put in the context of WSNs. In the
ﬁrst category, the system is built to detect attacks of internal origin in the sensor
networks, in which case it usually has a narrow attack scope and has components
distributed across the resource constrained nodes. In the other category we have
those systems, that are built to detect attacks of external origin. These IDSs gener-
ally make use of more powerful algorithms, and can detect a wider range of attacks,
however, they are not able to detect attacks speciﬁc to 6LoWPAN networks, and
they have generally not been tested in real-time. Both types of systems are valuable
contributions to the ﬁeld of network security, but neither manages to provide a com-
plete security solution that can protect WSNs against both internal and external
attacks.
With the above in mind, the contribution of this project has been to design and
implement an all-encompassing security solution, which provides protection against
both internal and external attacks, across a variety of protocols and attack types.
Furthermore, the developed IDS has avoided a common weakness of the mentioned
systems, by keeping the entire system centralized such that the resource-constrained
25
==PAGE:38==
2.3. Contribution
State of the Art
nodes are spared. In addition, the IDS has been tested in real-time in order to demon-
strate that it has signiﬁcant practical use, and in this way, anomaly-based IDSs are
brought one step closer to being useful outside of research environments. An overview
of the developed system, compared to the other state of the art systems, is provided
in ﬁgure 2.1. As can be seen, the developed system is the only one oﬀering pro-
tection against both internal and external attacks. The shortcomings which caused
the system to score ”Moderate” in the ”RPL Attack Protection” category, will be
expanded upon in section 7.2.
26
==PAGE:39==
2.3. Contribution
State of the Art
Author
Internal/External
Centralized/Decentralized
No. Attacks
RPL Attack Protection
Real-time Tested
Shahid Raza et al. [34]
Internal
Decentralized
2
High
Yes
Elike Hodo et al. [14]
External
Centralized
2
None
No
Nour Moustafa et al. [27]
External
Centralized
8
None
No
Behnam Farzaneh et al. [11]
Internal
Decentralized
2
High
Yes
Nathan Shone et al. [37]
External
Centralized
12
None
No
Hector Moreton et al. [2]
Internal
Centralized
3
None
No
Mohamad Napiah et al. [28]
Internal
Centralized
3
Low
No
Hichem Sedjelmaci et al.[35]
Internal
Decentralized
1
Low
Yes
Jorge Granjal et al. [12]
Internal
Centralized
4
None
No
Henning Frederiksen
Both
Centralized
20
Moderate
Yes
Table 2.1: An overview of the IDSs reviewed in this report. To judge the IDSs’ ability to detect RPL attacks, three scores have been given.
High reﬂects that the IDS is capable of detecting malicious RPL nodes based on information available to the IDS. Moderate entails that
the IDS can detect anomalous behavior, but not the actual malicious node, based on information available to the system. Low means that
either the IDS detects malicious RPL nodes based on information it may not have in an actual system, or that the IDS may be able to
detect malicious RPL nodes, but experimental results have not been provided.
27
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3
Datasets and Data Generation
In order to develop the desired IDS, a signiﬁcant amount of heterogeneous data was
needed. For that reason, data has been gathered from four diﬀerent sources and
combined for the purpose of training and testing the developed system. The four
sources are the NSL-KDD dataset1, an MQTT dataset [2], and two diﬀerent attacks
simulated in Cooja. A description of the four sources will be given in this section.
3.1
NSL-KDD
The NSL-KDD dataset is one of the most well-known and widely used datasets
within the intrusion detection ﬁeld. It is built based on the KDD Cup ’99 dataset,
which in turn is based on data captured by the DARPA ’98 IDS evaluation program
[40] where several external attacks were launched against a network containing hun-
dreds of emulated PC’s [15]. NSL-KDD was made as an improved version of the
KDD Cup ’99 dataset, where redundant records were removed, as these would neg-
atively aﬀect classiﬁer performance [32]. The NSL-KDD is split into both a training
and a test set and both sets include normal data and attack data from 4 major at-
tack groups, namely DoS, Probe, U2R (User-to-Root) and R2L (Remote-to-Local).
The training set contains 21 diﬀerent attack types distributed across the groups,
whereas the test set includes 16 additional attacks and thus has 37 in all [32]. To
provide suﬃcient information for attack detection, each observation in the sets is
represented by 41 features, and the training set is composed of 125973 observations
whereas the test set has 22544 observations. Here, an observation corresponds to a
ﬂow.
In order to stay within a reasonable scope when combining this dataset with the
1Available here: https://www.unb.ca/cic/datasets/nsl.html
28
==PAGE:41==
3.2. MQTT dataset
Datasets and Data Generation
others, the U2R and R2L attack groups were ﬁltered from the dataset. This left
the normal, DoS and probe data, and the ﬁltered training set thus included 10
diﬀerent attacks whereas the ﬁltered test set included 17. The ﬁltered groups were
quite small, which meant that the train and test datasets still included 124926 and
19592 observations, respectively. Even when ﬁltered, the NSL-KDD test set is able
to provide a good measure of how well the detection algorithm can identify novel
attacks, as it includes many attack types not seen in the training dataset.
3.2
MQTT dataset
This dataset was developed by the group in [2] and was created because the group
felt that no proper IoT datasets existed. To generate the data, they created a test
environment with several sensors, actuators and a broker, where the sensors would
send and received data through the broker by using the MQTT protocol. With this
setup, they generated three diﬀerent attacks against the protocol: a DoS attack, a
MitM attack and an intrusion attack, and the frames for each attack where exported
to separate ﬁles [3]. For the purpose of this report, only the MitM dataset has been
used and for that reason, this dataset will occasionally be referred to as the MitM
dataset. The dataset contains 110668 frames with 3855 of these being attack frames
and 106.813 of these being normal traﬃc frames. Furthermore, the dataset originally
had 66 features, however, before I used it in this report I reduced the amount of
features to 34, such that preprocessing was simpler. As will be seen later on, this
had no signiﬁcant eﬀect on results.
During generation of the dataset, the attack was then carried out by intercepting
messages from a sensor to the broker and modifying its contents [2]. There was no
speciﬁc test set to supplement this data, so for the purposes of this report, 80 % of
the original data was split into a train set and 20 % was split into a test set.
3.3
DoS in RPL
The previous datasets already provided a wide variety of attacks across various
protocols and with that data it should be possible to build a capable IDS. However,
as the goal was to protect sensor networks, an important attack category was still
missing: Attacks in RPL networks. For that reason I implemented a User Datagram
Protocol (UDP) DoS attack in an RPL network using Contiki-ng and Cooja.
Cooja is a network simulator/emulator that uses the Contiki operating system [30].
Contiki-ng is the next generation of the operating system Contiki, which is widely
29
==PAGE:42==
3.3. DoS in RPL
Datasets and Data Generation
used in IoT contexts, and it is very lightweight as it was designed speciﬁcally for
sensor networks [9]. A major beneﬁt of Cooja is therefore that it executes an actual,
compiled Contiki system when simulating a sensor node, which means that any code
written for a simulated node is readily deployable unto real-life nodes. Furthermore,
Cooja is even capable of emulating sensor nodes at the hardware level, thus providing
more ﬁne-grained details about the execution [30]. For this simulation, I did not make
use of Cooja’s emulation capabilities, as I ran the sensor nodes as native processes.
This is because that allows for more eﬃcient execution of the simulation, while still
simulating deployable code [30].
For the simulations, an RPL network of 14 nodes was constructed, with one node
being the border router, one node being the attacker, and the rest being innocent
nodes that send UDP data to the border router periodically. The placement of the
nodes was randomly generated, but the attacker node was moved around between
simulations, to ensure that detection of an attack would not depend upon the loca-
tion of the attacker. An example of a topology can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The topology for one of the simulated runs. The green node is the border
router, the yellow nodes are UDP clients, and the purple node is the attacker.
With the nodes created and the topology in place, it needed to be decided how
the radio communication should be modelled. For my simulations I decided to use
30
==PAGE:43==
3.3. DoS in RPL
Datasets and Data Generation
the Unit Disk Graph Medium (UDGM) Distance Loss model, which represents the
transmission range as a circle, and only nodes within this circle receives packets.
Furthermore, it also considers radio interference [25]. The transmission range is
then set to 50m, while the interference range is set to 100m, and in order to make
the simulation as realistic as possible, the RX ratio is set to 65 %. The RX ratio
determines the chance of a node successfully receiving a packet, thus, setting this
value less than 100 % is equivalent to having lossy links in the simulation.
After all the settings had been decided, the simulation was then run 4 times, with
the sending rate of both attacker and normal nodes being varied between each run.
The ﬁrst three runs were then used for training purposes, and the last run was used
for testing purposes. An overview of the sending rates for each run, can be seen in
table 3.1.
Train/Test data
Attacker sending rate
Normal sending rate
Train
16 per second
1 per minute
Train
12 per second
3 per minute
Train
12 per second
12 per minute
Test
8 per second
12 per minute
Table 3.1: An overview of the sending rates in the four runs
After each run had completed, the data was exported to a pcap ﬁle. Each pcap ﬁle
was then transformed to a ﬂow-based representation similar to the other datasets.
This was primarily done using the add packet to ﬂows function and afterwards the
ﬂows were exported to an .arﬀﬁle. This functionality is part of the process pcaps.py
ﬁle which can be found in my github repository2. It is important to note, that
using a standard ﬂow-generation approach, the amount of ﬂows generated in this
simulation would be insigniﬁcant compared to the number of ﬂows in the NSL-KDD
and MQTT datasets, which may aﬀect an NN’s ability to classify data from this
simulation. Therefore, when generating ﬂows from the pcap ﬁles, a pseudo sliding-
window approach was adopted. In this case, each ﬂow looked at data within a 30
second interval, but a new ﬂow was generated each second. This meant, that the
ﬂows had temporal overlap, and that the information from each packet was included
in several ﬂows. This had the beneﬁt, that the produced amount of ﬂows increased
by a factor of 30, while maintaining variance between ﬂows.
2https://github.com/coolpotato1/IDS_project
31
==PAGE:44==
3.4. Selective Forwarding Attack Simulation
Datasets and Data Generation
3.4
Selective Forwarding Attack Simulation
The last attack used to train and test the IDS was a selective forwarding (SF) attack.
To simulate this attack, I cloned the public github repository3 of the group behind
SVELTE [34]. This repository contains the Cooja simulation code that they used
to test their own IDS, thus making it possible for me to generate similar data to
train and test my IDS with. The type of selective forwarding attack performed, is a
variant where RPL control traﬃc is sent and/or forwarded as usual by the attacker
node, but all data packets are dropped; the same variant that was used to evaluate
SVELTE [34]. However, an important diﬀerence with respect to SVELTE, was that
in this case the focus was not on detecting the node performing the SF attack, but
instead on identifying the nodes being blocked. The reason for this choice will be
expanded upon in the discussion section.
The simulation was run 3 times for a duration of approximately 8 minutes each,
and the attacker node was moved around between simulations. An example of the
simulated network topology can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Network topology for a run of the selective forwarding attack. The green
node is the border router, the purple node is the attacker, and the yellow nodes are
normal nodes sending UDP data.
In a similar approach to the previous section, after each run the data was exported
3https://github.com/ecksun/Contiki-IDS/tree/attacks
32
==PAGE:45==
3.5. Combining the Datasets
Datasets and Data Generation
to a pcap ﬁle. The pcap ﬁle was then converted into ﬂows, using the pseudo slid-
ing window approach. It should be mentioned, that for this simulation the ﬂow
conversion was based on a global network view, as this was the fastest approach.
However, with changes to the preprocessing the same ﬂows could be achieved with
a local view. After the pcap ﬁles had been converted to ﬂows, it was now possible
to combine them with the other datasets.
3.5
Combining the Datasets
When combining the datasets, it was necessary to take into account which features
overlapped between sets and which did not, such that the columns could be matched.
This was done in the method combine datasets in dataset manipulation.py which
can be found on my github4. This method ensures, that when a second dataset
is combined with a ﬁrst dataset, the features that match are put into the same
columns as they are placed in the ﬁrst dataset. The features that do not match
are then appended as new columns, and are assigned the values 0 or None for
the observations in the ﬁrst dataset, which did not originally have those features.
Sadly, the data collected from the four sources was diﬀerent to such an extent, that
there was minimal feature overlap between the datasets. This meant, that when
two datasets were combined, the amount of features in the combined dataset was
almost equal to the sum of features in the two original datasets. In this case, the
ﬁnal dataset had a manageable amount of features, namely 80, but if many more
datasets had to be combined, it could end up causing an explosion in the number
of features in the combined dataset.
During combination of datasets, some of them were sampled ﬁrst. This was the
case for the MitM dataset, the RPL DoS data and the ”Selective Forwarding” data,
as these datasets had far more normal data than attack data, which can aﬀect
classiﬁer performance. To combat this, the normal observations in these datasets
were undersampled, such that the amount of normal observations was reduced to be
the same as the amount of attack observations. This way, the classiﬁer would not
be biased towards classifying normal data. An overview of the amount of features
and observations in each dataset, can be seen in table 3.2.
As can be seen, the combined train dataset had 137024 observations with 80 features
each, and provided plenty of information to train a classiﬁer. The process for selecting
the classiﬁer for the IDS, as well as training and testing this, will be elaborated upon
in the next section.
4https://github.com/coolpotato1/IDS_project
33
==PAGE:46==
3.5. Combining the Datasets
Datasets and Data Generation
Dataset
No. features
normal observations
anomaly observations
NSL-KDD (Train)
43
67343
58630
NSL-KDD (Test)
43
9711
12833
NSL-KDD (Train-Filtered)
43
67343
57583
NSL-KDD (Test - Filtered)
43
9711
9881
MQTT (Sampled - Train)
34
3118
3052
MQTT (Sampled - Test)
34
739
805
UDP DoS (Sampled - Train)
8
1977
1977
UDP DoS (Test)
8
11979
770
SF (Sampled - Train)
8
990
990
SF (Test)
8
1833
887
Combined Dataset (Train)
80
73426
63600
Combined Dataset (Test)
80
24260
12341
Table 3.2: Number of features and observations for the various datasets. The com-
bined train and test datasets are the combinations of all the other train and test
datasets in the table, respectively. With the exception of the unﬁltered NSL-KDD.
34
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4
The Deep Neural Network
4.1
Final Design
In newer times, deep neural networks have been gaining a lot of traction in sev-
eral areas such as speech recognition, image classiﬁcation etc. as large volumes of
data and high computational power have become readily available. The DNNs have
achieved state-of-the-art results in these areas, due to their ability to solve complex
problems when enough data is available [7]. As intrusion detection is a complex task,
and since I have plenty of data available, I have chosen to design and implement a
DNN as the classiﬁer for the IDS.
The design of the network, such as number of layers, choice of activation functions
etc. has been decided by taking inspiration from other existing literature and by
conducting much trial-and-error on the training and test sets. The network presented
in this section is the ﬁnal design, and is the one used for evaluation purposes later
in the report.
The implemented network is also a Feed Forward network, which means that there
are no cycles and the data only ﬂows in one direction. Furthermore, the network
has an input layer with nodes corresponding to the amount of features (i.e. 80),
two hidden layers with 400 and 80 nodes respectively, and an output layer with one
node which outputs a number between 0 and 1. This output reﬂects the degree to
which the network ”believes” that the input data corresponds to an attack or not.
An illustration of the neural network design can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1.
As can be seen from the ﬁgure, two activation functions are used: The ReLU function
and the sigmoid function. ReLU stands for rectiﬁed linear unit, and it is one of the
35
==PAGE:48==
4.1. Final Design
The Deep Neural Network
Figure 4.1: The design of the DNN. The number hovering above each layer corre-
sponds to the amount of nodes in that layer. The word in each node describes the
activation function used by that node.
most common activation functions in neural networks. The function simply takes
the input and suppresses it if the input is negative or allows the input through
unchanged if positive. Described mathematically, it is simply: y = max(0, x).
The sigmoid activation function is commonly used in the output layer of neural
networks, and has the pleasant property that it outputs a value between 0 and 1.
The sigmoid function is given in equation 4.1 [20]:
σ(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(4.1)
After the layers, nodes and activation functions had been decided, the only major
design decisions left to make, were which cost function to use and whether any
regularization methods should be used. For the cost function I decided to use the
binary cross-entropy, which is given by the formula in 4.2 [36]. In the equation, y is
the actual class of some observation and p is the prediction made by the network for
the same observation. As this cost function is speciﬁc to binary classiﬁcation, y can
take on the values 0 or 1, in which case the cost function reduces to Cost = −log(1−
p) or Cost = −log(p) respectively. As can be seen from the reduced functions, if y
36
==PAGE:49==
4.2. Training the network
The Deep Neural Network
is 0 the cost reduces the closer p is to 0 as well, and if y is 1 the cost reduces the
closer p is to 1. Thus, the NN now had a proper measure of cost.
Cost = −y · log(p) −(1 −y) · log(1 −p)
(4.2)
Lastly, I decided to make use of a regularization technique in my network. Regular-
ization is widely used in conjunction with DNNs, and seeks to prevent a model from
overﬁtting, thus helping it generalize better [26]. It can be very beneﬁcial to include
a regularization technique, as deep neural networks often have a serious problem
with overﬁtting. The technique I decided to include in my DNN is dropout, as this
has achieved promising results in literature [39].
In dropout, nodes are randomly ”dropped” before each training sample1 with a
probability p, which means that the dropped nodes will not be used to classify
that sample. Before the next training sample these nodes are then added back, and
another round of randomly dropping occurs amongst all nodes. This way, a diﬀerent
combination of nodes may be used to classify each training sample, and instead of
training one NN, this can be thought of as training a large amount of ”thinner”
networks. During testing, all nodes are then added back and their outgoing weights
are multiplied with the probability 1-p, which is a way of approximately averaging
the output of all the ”thin” networks [39]. This is reminiscent of ensemble classiﬁers,
which are also great at preventing overﬁtting.
I added dropout to both hidden layers of the DNN, choosing a drop probability
of 0.5. Thus, the amount of nodes in the hidden layers were approximately halved
during each training sample.
With the ﬁnal design of the neural network having been explained in great detail,
the process of training it will be elaborated upon in the next section.
4.2
Training the network
From an implementation perspective, the actual training of the network is quite
easily done, however, there is plenty of work involved in extracting data properly,
getting it to the desired format and potentially reducing the amount of features.
While data extraction has mostly been covered (in the data collection section), this
section seeks to provide a complete overview of the tasks that have been solved, and
how, to ensure that the development of a powerful model was possible. An overview
1More speciﬁcally, they are usually dropped before a group of training samples.
37
==PAGE:50==
4.2. Training the network
The Deep Neural Network
of the pipeline can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: The pipeline used for generating data, processing data, and training the
model.
As can be seen from the ﬁgure, a signiﬁcant part of the pipeline was dedicated to
preparing and handling the various datasets, which is why it was described in detail
in section 3. It will not be further discussed here.
Preprocessing
After having combined the datasets, it was still necessary to process them further
before feeding them to the model. This was due to the fact that the datasets con-
tained string values, such as protocol names, and a neural network is only capable
of handling numeric values. Two approaches were used to convert string values to
numeric values: one-hot encoding and binary encoding. One-hot encoding is often
used when a feature has a small, unordered set of possible string values that it can
assume. For the combined dataset, it could be the feature “protocol type” which can
assume the values “tcp”, “udp”, “icmp”, “icmpv6” or “None”. Using one-hot encod-
ing, that feature is then split into ﬁve new “boolean” columns (or features) with one
column for each possible string value. Given an observation with the protocol “tcp”,
the value in the tcp-column is then set to 1, with the values in the other protocol
38
==PAGE:51==
4.2. Training the network
The Deep Neural Network
columns set to 0. This way, features with string values can eﬃciently be encoded to
numeric values. However, if a feature can take on many diﬀerent string values, the
one-hot approach would split this feature into as many new features, causing the
dimensionality of the dataset to explode. To avoid this, binary encoding has been
used in these cases.
In binary encoding the possible string values of a given feature are each assigned
a number, usually from 0 and up, and are then replaced by the binary version of
that number. Again, the feature is split into several new features, with each feature
corresponding to a digit of the binary number. Using the protocol type feature as an
example, it would be split into three features (as three bits are needed to represent
the ﬁve possible values). The string “icmp” could then be replaced by three new
features with the values 0, 1, 0. This approach has the beneﬁt that it adds signiﬁ-
cantly less features than one-hot encoding, thus preventing the dimensionality of the
dataset from exploding. However, it has the downside that it may make some values
seem more similar than others. For example, in the example above “tcp” and “udp”
would be replaced by the values 0,0,0 and 0,0,1, thus seeming more similar than
“udp” and “icmp” with the values 0,0,1 and 0,1,0. For that reason, binary encoding
was only used in favour of one-hot, when a feature had many possible string values
(more than six).
After all features had been converted to numeric values, it was necessary to normal-
ize the values2. To normalize the values, min-max normalization was used, which
distributes all values between 0 and 1. The equation for the normalization can be
seen in equation 4.3 [43]. Here, z is the vector of values for a given feature after
normalization and x is the vector of values before normalization; the normalization
is performed element-wise.
z =
x −min(x)
max(x) −min(x)
(4.3)
Feature Selection
After normalization, the data was ready to be passed either directly to the neural
network or to a feature selection method which would focus on removing irrelevant
features ﬁrst. As can be seen from ﬁgure 4.2 feature selection was not a part of the
ﬁnal process, however, two diﬀerent methods were experimented with: Recursive
Feature Elimination (RFE) and PCA. It was observed, that adding the feature
2A neural network can handle values not being normalized, but it may spend a lot of com-
putational power and time adjusting weights to accommodate this. Therefore, normalizing data
manually is considered good practice.
39
==PAGE:52==
4.2. Training the network
The Deep Neural Network
selection methods worsened the performance of the DNN on the combined dataset,
which is why they were not included in the ﬁnal process. The likely reason that
performance was worsened when reducing the features, is due to the unique nature
of the combined dataset. As mentioned earlier, the datasets that were combined
only had a small amount of overlapping features, which means that in the combined
dataset there are many features which only describe a small subset of the dataset,
and are simply 0 or None everywhere else. An example of this can be seen in ﬁgure
4.3, which shows an actual extract from the dataset.
Figure 4.3: Data from the combined dataset. The observations seen are from the SF
simulation.
The phenomenon is most extreme for the simulated data, where only 8 of the 80
features describe these observations, and the values for the rest are set to 0 or None.
Furthermore, most of these eight features are only relevant for that data and may
not be “used” in the rest of the dataset. This means, that when performing feature
reduction much of the information contained in these eight features may be lost,
making it impossible to classify any of the attacks from the simulated data. Due to
this, no feature selection was performed.
Training and Validation
Finally, the actual training of the neural network could be performed. As can be
seen from ﬁgure 4.2, this step was repeated often. At each step, the hyperparameters
of the model were modiﬁed in some way, by changing the amount of layers, the
amount of nodes, the dropout likelihood etc. Afterwards the model was ”validated”
by conducting an oﬄine evaluation of the model on the test set, and depending on
the results, the hyperparameters were adjusted again, until satisfactory results were
achieved. Sometimes, a separate dataset called a validation set is used for evaluation
purposes in this part of the process, such that the hyperparameters are not adjusted
based on the test set itself. This is to ensure that no part of the model conﬁguration
has been based upon the test set (such as number of layers), such that the ﬁnal
evaluation on the test set is more representative of real life. While that is good
practice, it has not been done here, as it is desirable to be able to compare the
achieved results to other groups, and most other groups have simply used the test
set for both validation and test purposes.
Furthermore, while training and validating the neural network, a random forest
classiﬁer was trained and validated in parallel as a baseline for comparison. The
40
==PAGE:53==
4.2. Training the network
The Deep Neural Network
reason for this was, that a portion of the data in the combined dataset had been
generated for the purposes of this project. This meant, that when the neural network
was not initially capable of identifying a certain attack class, there were two options:
The neural network had not been trained properly or there was an issue with the
generated attack data. To help identify the issue, it was then tested whether the
random forest classiﬁer could correctly classify the attack class or not. If it could,
the training of the neural network was assumed to be the problem, and if the RF
classiﬁer could not, the generated data was likely the issue. The reason that random
forest was chosen for this purpose, is that it performs extraordinarily well with no
hyperparameter tuning. In a survey, random forest with default parameters managed
to place 5th out of 179 classiﬁers [5]. This had the added beneﬁt that it allowed me
to compare the designed DNN to another strong classiﬁer, in order to test for myself
if a neural network was the correct approach to use for the anomaly-based IDS.
After several rounds of adjusting hyperparameters on the DNN, and having reached
the ﬁnal design presented in the previous section, it became clear that the DNN
was the best approach, as will be seen in the next section. The training was then
complete, and I could proceed to the oﬄine evaluation.
Before being able to proceed to online classiﬁcation, however, it was necessary to
convert and export the model. This process will be explained in detail in the ”Online
Implementation and Evaluation” section.
41
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 5
Oﬄine evaluation
This section will present the results achieved, when the DNN performs classiﬁcation
on static datasets. This provides an important measure of the designed IDS’s de-
tection capabilities, and the results will therefore be analyzed in depth. In order to
provide a complete picture of the classiﬁers performance, several diﬀerent evaluation
approaches will be explored. First oﬀ, an overview of the accuracies achieved on the
individual datasets will be presented, to gain an idea of their respective complexi-
ties and to see how the designed DNN compares against a RF classiﬁer. This will be
followed by an in depth presentation and discussion of the results achieved by the
DNN on the combined dataset. Lastly, it will be explored how well the classiﬁer has
scaled in terms of accuracy and prediction time when combining the datasets, and
this will be compared to the scaling of the RF.
5.1
Dataset Complexities
The four datasets that have been combined vary widely in both amount of features,
diﬀerent attacks, and amount of observations, and in order to provide an overview
of the complexity of each dataset, both the RF and DNN algorithms have been
used. As there can be some randomness associated with the training process in both
classiﬁers, they have been trained and tested ﬁve times on each dataset. The average
results for both classiﬁers are presented in ﬁgure 5.1 in the form of accuracy, recall,
precision and f1-score, and the equations for these can be found back in section 2.1.5.
As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the performance of the random forest and the DNN
are closely related when it comes to the individual datasets, and in this case it
varies which classiﬁer is the best performer. Close results were to be expected, as
the RF classiﬁer achieved 5th place with default parameters out of 179 surveyed
42
==PAGE:55==
5.1. Dataset Complexities
Oﬄine evaluation
Figure 5.1: The accuracy, recall, precision, and f1-score achieved by the DNN and RF classiﬁers on the individual datasets
43
==PAGE:56==
5.2. Results on the Combined Dataset
Oﬄine evaluation
classiﬁers, and generally does not improve much with tuning [5]. However, the deep
neural network slightly outperforms the random forest on the KDD dataset, where it
achieves better accuracy, recall and F1-score. Furthermore, it performs signiﬁcantly
better than the random forest on the self-generated UDP DoS data, where the RF
apparently had issues with false positives, and thus dropped to a precision of around
70 %. In exchange, random forest outperformed the neural network on the MitM
dataset, and both algorithms basically achieved 100 % on the generated selective
forwarding data.
As was expected, a pattern emerges when comparing the results on the datasets.
Both classiﬁers achieve the worst results on the ﬁltered NSL-KDD dataset, which
indicates that this dataset has the highest complexity. This was expected, as the test
set includes 17 diﬀerent attacks, 7 of which had not been seen in the training set.
For the MitM dataset and the generated UDP DoS data, the average performance
of the two classiﬁers seems to be around the same, which could indicate similar
complexities. Lastly, both classiﬁers basically achieved 100 % accuracy on the gen-
erated Selective Forwarding data, which is no surprise, as the focus in that set was
detecting blocked ﬂows, which is a simple task.
With these results in mind, the next section will explore in great detail how the
designed DNN performs on the combined dataset.
5.2
Results on the Combined Dataset
In order to gain a more detailed understanding of how well the ﬁnal classiﬁer can
detect attacks on a network, it was tested on the combined dataset, and its ability
to detect the diﬀerent attack types was noted. To provide complete security, it is
important that the system can detect all the diﬀerent attack types with suﬃcient
accuracy, such that no malicious behavior on the network will go undetected.
To start with, it is desirable to know if the classiﬁer in general detects abnormal
behavior and does not produce too many false positives or false negatives. For this
purpose, a normalized confusion matrix can be seen in ﬁgure 5.2. It is worth noting,
that the matrix is normalized with respect to the amount of actual normal observa-
tions and the amount of actual anomaly observations (i.e. the rows in the matrix).
This means, that when read in a standard reading direction, the squares correspond
to the True Negative Rate (TNR), the False Positive Rate (TPR), the False Negative
Rate (FNR), and the True Positive Rate (TPR or recall) respectively.
As can be seen from the confusion matrix, the amount of false positives is extremely
44
==PAGE:57==
5.2. Results on the Combined Dataset
Oﬄine evaluation
Figure 5.2: A confusion matrix that visualises the performance of the DNN on the
combined dataset
low (2.5 %), which contributes to the models high overall accuracy of 94.2 %. Nat-
urally, this is beneﬁcial as it means that every alarm raised by the system will be
taken seriously by a network administrator. Sadly, the false negative rate is worse
and lies at around 12 %, which means that 12 % of attacks manage to go undetected
by the algorithm. While it would be desirable to have a lower false negative rate,
it still means that the algorithm correctly detects 88 % of a wide variety of attacks
against several protocols, and therefore does oﬀer a lot of protection to a network.
To obtain a more detailed overview of which attack types the DNN has trouble de-
tecting, we can look at the attack-type speciﬁc recalls, which can be seen in ﬁgure
5.3.
When studying this ﬁgure, the recalls for the individual attack types seem better
than one would expect. The recalls for the KDD DoS and Probing attacks lie at 85
% and 86.2 % respectively, while the recalls for the MitM, UDP-DoS and SF are
96.3 %, 99.7 % and 100 %. The reason that the overall recall is only 88 % is due to
the fact that the KDD DoS and Probing attacks make up an extremely large part
of the attacks in the dataset. While it is undesirable that the DNN does not detect
45
==PAGE:58==
5.2. Results on the Combined Dataset
Oﬄine evaluation
Figure 5.3: Recalls for the speciﬁc attack types. It is important to note, that while
the recalls for several diﬀerent attack types are displayed, the classiﬁcation itself has
still been binary
14-15 % of the DoS and Probing attack observations in the ﬁltered KDD test set,
it still correctly identiﬁes 85-86 % of those observations, which means it is capable
of protecting against most attacks in those categories. Furthermore, when we study
the recalls for the speciﬁc attacks included in those categories, we can once again
see, that the results may be better than they initially appear. These results can be
seen in ﬁgure 5.4.
When looking at the speciﬁc recalls for the KDD DoS and Probe attacks, the ﬁrst
thing to notice is that the DNN is extremely good at identifying attack types that
were included in the training set. The recalls for 4 of the DoS attacks were above 99
%, with a 5th attack type having a recall of 95 %. The classiﬁer does struggle with
one previously seen DoS attack, namely the ”back” attack, where the recall is 76.5
%. However, the reason for the recall of the DoS attack group being 85 % is mostly
due to the novel attacks, which naturally can be diﬃcult to detect. All in all, the
classiﬁer oﬀers great protection against the DoS attacks it has been trained on, and
then some protection against novel attacks, which is still impressive.
When studying the recalls for the probing attacks, the results are even better. Of
46
==PAGE:59==
5.2. Results on the Combined Dataset
Oﬄine evaluation
Figure 5.4: Overview of the speciﬁc recalls for the KDD DoS and Probe attacks. It
is important to note, that while the DNN had encountered some of the attack types
in the training set, all observations in the test set were still new.
the 4 already seen probing attack types, 3 of them have recalls of 99 % or above,
with 2 of these being a straight 100 %! The last one still had a detection rate of
93.5 %, and thus it seems fair to conclude, that the neural network can enable
fantastic protection against all 4 of the previously seen probing attacks. However,
the most impressive part of the DNN’s performance is its detection rate of the novel
probing attacks. For these, it manages to achieve 72 % recall on the mscan attack
and 97 % recall on the saint attack. With the exception of the mscan attack, all
the probing attacks are thus detected in 93.5 % of cases or above, and one could
therefore wonder why the overall recall of the Probe attack category is only 86 %.
The reason is simply, that the mscan attack type is the most represented attack in
the category, and makes up 996 out of the 2421 Probe observations in the KDD test
set. Thus, it drags the overall recall for the probing attacks signiﬁcantly down.
All in all, when referring back to the recalls for the MitM, UDP-DoS and SF attacks
47
==PAGE:60==
5.2. Results on the Combined Dataset
Oﬄine evaluation
presented in ﬁgure 5.3, and combining these with the recalls achieved for the speciﬁc
attacks in the KDD DoS and KDD Probe categories, we see that the DNN detects
all attacks included in the combined dataset remarkably well, with the exception of
a few novel attacks. This is a very satisfying performance, but one may wonder, if we
could successfully increase the amount of anomaly predictions, such that we make
a tradeoﬀwhere we allow a higher false positive rate (which is currently at 2.5 %)
in order to achieve better recall on the novel attacks. Naturally, we can increase the
amount of anomaly predictions by lowering the prediction threshold for the neural
network, and to analyze whether this would be beneﬁcial, the ROC curve for the
network is presented in ﬁgure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: The ROC curve. The grey point on the graph corresponds to a threshold
value of 0.45, which was used for the other ﬁgures in this section.
There are a couple of things to take away from this ﬁgure. First oﬀ, we can see that
the threshold value which has been used when evaluating the neural network in this
section, is very close to the optimal value. Increasing the threshold would only cause
a sharp reduction in the TPR while giving almost no reduction in the FPR1. In
contrast, decreasing the threshold would sharply increase the FPR with almost no
1While it may initially seem counter-intuitive, increasing the threshold of the classiﬁer moves
the TPR and FPR back along the curve. The reason is, that a higher threshold value requires a
higher output value from the NN before it’s counted as an anomaly prediction, which reduces the
amount of predicted positives and thus the TPR and FPR.
48
==PAGE:61==
5.3. Scaling of the classiﬁer
Oﬄine evaluation
increase in recall. In fact, if we were to decrease the theshold all the way down to 0.05,
the recall would only increase from 88 % to 90 %, while the FPR would go from 2.5
% to 32 %. From this we can conclude, that it is not possible to signiﬁcantly increase
the detection rate of this DNN, simply by varying the prediction threshold. Luckily,
with the exception of a few novel DoS attacks, the neural network is capable of
properly identifying all attacks included in the combined dataset, and can therefore
enable strong protection against both internal and external attacks.
5.3
Scaling of the classiﬁer
With the presentation of the previous results, it has become clear that the DNN can
provide impressive protection against the attacks in the combined dataset. However,
the combined dataset still includes only a relatively small subsection of all attacks
that can be carried out against a network. Therefore, this section will explore how
the classiﬁer scales in terms of both detection accuracy and detection time when
combining the datasets, in order to determine the viability of the model being ex-
panded in the future to include even more attacks.
First oﬀ, we analyze whether the classiﬁers ability to properly detect the attacks
is signiﬁcantly aﬀected by combining the datasets. This helps us measure, whether
using one model to detect attacks from all the datasets can compete with using
a model speciﬁcally trained for each dataset. If performance is not signiﬁcantly
aﬀected by the combination of datasets, it seems reasonable to assume, that the
classiﬁcation component can be extended in the future, to detect even more attacks.
If the performance is signiﬁcantly aﬀected, it could indicate that using one model to
detect a variety of internal and external attacks is not a viable long term solution,
and several models should be used instead. A ﬁgure showing the recall and accuracy
in both scenarios, can be seen in 5.6.
As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the performance does not drop signiﬁcantly when one
model is used to identify all attacks; in fact, most of the diﬀerence in results seems
to be suﬃciently explained by the randomness associated with the training process2.
There is a small drop in the accuracy on the UDP DoS and SF datasets (around 4.5
and 3.5 percentage points respectively), but nothing worrisome. While the results
should be taken with some caution, since the design of the model has been based on
the combined dataset, they still look promising. Thus, it seems like the classiﬁer can
be trained to identify many diﬀerent internal and external attacks without signiﬁcant
drops in accuracy, which is promising for our IDS. With this in mind, we will look at
2This is likely why the recall has increased in some cases after the datasets have been combined
49
==PAGE:62==
5.3. Scaling of the classiﬁer
Oﬄine evaluation
Figure 5.6: The recall and accuracy before and after combining the datasets. The
before values are taken from ﬁgure 5.1, the after values were generated by training
and testing the DNN 5 times and averaging the results.
the scaling with respect to prediction time. Until now, the RF classiﬁer has mostly
been left out of the graphs as it did not add much, however, it generally performed
marginally worse than the DNN. When analyzing the prediction time, it has been
included again to showcase the DNNs impressive prediction time, which can be seen
in ﬁgure 5.7. The prediction times have been established by predicting on a complete
dataset at a time, and dividing by the amount of observations. The experiment was
run on a laptop with an i5-8300H 2.3 GHz CPU and 8 GB DDR3 RAM.
There are 2 main takeaways from this ﬁgure. First oﬀ, the DNN performs signiﬁ-
cantly faster on the large datasets with many observations, namely on the KDD ﬁltered
dataset and the combined dataset, with the average prediction times being approx-
imately 33 % lower on both compared to RF. Furthermore, while the prediction
time of the RF classiﬁer seems to slowly increase with the amount of features in
the dataset, no such correlation can be seen for the DNN (with the exception of the
MitM dataset which seems to be a bit of an outlier). Thus, in terms of prediction
time the DNN currently outperforms the RF and seems to scale better as well. As
such, it seems that in terms of timing the DNN can handle many more features,
which would be required if it were to be expanded to detect even more attacks in
the future.
Throughout the entirety of this chapter, we have seen that the DNN marginally
outperforms the RF in terms of accuracy, and signiﬁcantly outperforms in term
50
==PAGE:63==
5.3. Scaling of the classiﬁer
Oﬄine evaluation
Figure 5.7: Prediction times on the diﬀerent datasets. The datasets have been sorted
after the amount of features they contain, and predictions have been made 5 times
on each dataset and averaged.
of prediction times. Furthermore, we have discovered that the classiﬁer is fantastic
at detecting already-seen attacks and is capable of detecting some novel attacks
at impressive rates as well. Finally, it seems that the DNN scales well when given
more features and attack types, which is promising as we seek to design an IDS
that functions as an all-encompassing security solution. With these things in mind,
it is time to see if some of these promising results for the IDS can be transferred
to real life, which will be explored in the next section ”Online implementation and
evaluation”.
51
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 6
Online implementation and
evaluation
This section will summarize the process of adapting the model, and therefore the
IDS, to real time classiﬁcation. First, a short description will be given of the process
involved in exporting the model to a coral dev board. Secondly, an overview of the
entire pipeline from attack generation to attack detection will be provided. Lastly,
some early results will be presented and followed by a short discussion of these.
6.1
Exporting the model
Before setting up the classiﬁcation pipeline, the model was exported to a Coral Dev
Board, which can be seen in ﬁgure 6.1. This was done to ensure easy integration
of the detection component with other systems, such as a border router, and also
due to claims that this should increase prediction speed as the board has a Tensor
Processing Unit (TPU). A TPU is a custom application-speciﬁc integrated circuit
designed by Google, for the speciﬁc purpose of speeding up the inference phase of
neural networks (i.e. the phase when the NN is used to predict based on data),
and in this phase it is 15 - 30 times faster than contemporary CPUs and GPUs
[16].Furthermore, the board includes a Quad-core Arm Cortex-A53 processor and 1
GB LPDDR4 RAM, and detailed speciﬁcations can be found here1.
In order for the model to be compatible with the edge TPU, it is ﬁrst necessary to
convert it to a tensorﬂow lite model, and afterwards compile it using the Edge TPU
compiler. Full integer post-training quantization is used to convert the model to
1https://coral.ai/docs/dev-board/datasheet/
52
==PAGE:65==
6.2. Setup and the Online Pipeline
Online implementation and evaluation
Figure 6.1: The Coral Dev Board
tensorﬂow lite, which is where all numbers (such as weights and activation outputs)
are converted to 8-bit ﬁxed-point numbers after the model has already been trained
[8]. The code for this process can be seen in convert lite.py which can be found on
my github2. Afterwards, the tensorﬂow lite model was then compiled for the Edge
TPU using the edgetpu compiler command line tool, which can be downloaded for
Linux systems from one of Googles repositories.
After the model had been converted to a form that was compatible with the Edge
TPU, it was transferred to the Dev Board. It was then time to design the pipeline.
6.2
Setup and the Online Pipeline
To set up and test the real-time classiﬁcation in an environment similar to real life, a
simple pipeline was constructed, which consisted of 3 components. Each component
had its own role, and these roles can loosely be though of as: An attacker, a border
router, and naturally the IDS. All communication between the components was done
through ports, and an overview of the setup and pipeline can be seen in ﬁgure 6.2.
Alternative designs were considered, and these will be brieﬂy mentioned at the end
of this section.
As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the attack component was run directly on the
host computer and consisted of Nping, which is a command-line network packet
generation tool. Nping was used to generate the DoS attack traﬃc in real-time,
2https://github.com/coolpotato1/IDS_project
53
==PAGE:66==
6.2. Setup and the Online Pipeline
Online implementation and evaluation
Figure 6.2: An overview of the pipeline.
which was then sent to a Kali Linux virtual machine, where the “border router” was
placed. An example of a command that can be used to execute a UDP DoS attack
with nping, can be seen in ﬁgure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: An example of the UDP DoS attack using nping. Here, UDP packets are
sent to the address 192.168.0.80:80 at 50 packets per second. The ﬂag ”-N” ensures
that nping does not try to capture replies.
The attack was then in this case directed at the “border router” which ran in a
virtual Kali Linux environment. This was probably the component in the setup that
was least similar to real life, as it was not doing any actual routing. Instead, it was
constantly sniﬃng on port 80 for any IP traﬃc it might receive there, and for that
purpose the library pyshark was used, which is a python wrapper for the wireshark
CLI. When sniﬃng, packets were collected in intervals of ﬁve seconds, after which
they were sent on for preprocessing. The preprocessing was run locally on the border
router, and included converting the collected packets to ﬂows, changing these ﬂows
into a format that matched the dimensions expected by the IDS, and normalizing
the ﬂow values. As it is necessary to have max and min values for each feature for the
purpose of normalization, these had been observed and exported during the training
process, and were then read from a ﬁle in order to normalize on the border router.
54
==PAGE:67==
6.3. The Generated Attack and results
Online implementation and evaluation
For the entire preprocessing, a sliding window approach was once again adapted,
where ﬂows were generated on the basis of data from 30 seconds, and the window
would move ﬁve seconds at a time. After a ﬂow had been through the entire process,
it would then be sent to the IDS for classiﬁcation through UDP.
The IDS consisted of the exported neural network model as well as the python script
“classify lite server.py”, and it was run on the Dev Board with the edge TPU, as was
explained in the previous section. The script listened on port 2525 for incoming UDP
data from the ”Border Router” and whenever a ﬂow was received, it would pass this
to the neural network for classiﬁcation. In an actual system, the ﬂow data would
naturally be sent via a more secure connection, such as SSH, but this setup was
designed for the sole purpose of showing that real-time classiﬁcation could work,
and as such, a quick and simple connection was used. The neural network would
then classify the ﬂow, and output a number between 0 and 1 that reﬂected to which
degree the traﬃc was deemed abnormal. Afterwards the script would convert this
number to 0 or 1 based on some threshold for a ﬁnal prediction. When making a
prediction, the IDS does not currently send the info back to the Border Router, but
simply prints the prediction to its standard output, such that we can see it.
Alternatively, the IDS and ”border router” components could have been combined,
such that the preprocessing part would also be done on the Dev Board, and the
attack traﬃc would be sent directly there instead. This was not done for two reasons:
First oﬀ, the architecture of the Dev Board is built speciﬁcally for neural networks,
which means, that while it may be fast at running the detection algorithm, it may
become overburdened if it is responsible for preprocessing as well. Secondly, this
design would be less reminiscent of an actual system, as the IDS runs on specialized
hardware, and attempting to physically integrate this specialized hardware with
an actual Border Router may be a diﬃcult and unnecessary process. In contrast,
communicating with the IDS through a protected channel would be a much easier
approach. The presented design was chosen for the given reasons, and using this
setup, diﬀerent variations of a DoS attack were run. Their conﬁguration along with
the results will be presented in the next section.
6.3
The Generated Attack and results
As was mentioned in the ”Exporting the Model” section, the model was converted
to a more lightweight representation before being compiled for the Edge TPU. This
process may cause a minor drop in accuracy, and for that reason, the model on the
Edge TPU was once again tested on the combined dataset, before proceeding to the
55
==PAGE:68==
6.3. The Generated Attack and results
Online implementation and evaluation
real-time classiﬁcation. To do this, the classify lite.py script was run from an open
shell on the dev board, and an example of the script being run with arguments, as
well as its output, can be seen in ﬁgure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: An example of oﬄine evaluation on the Dev Board. The –model argument
decides which NN to load, the –input decides the dataset to classify, and the –count
decides how many times the classiﬁcation should be run.
There are two main takeaways from the output seen in the ﬁgure. First oﬀ, the
accuracy had dropped a bit (around 2.5 percentage points), however, it is still suf-
ﬁciently high to provide solid protection against most attacks. Secondly, the time
taken to make predictions for the entire test set, had increased signiﬁcantly. When
the model was running on my computer, it took around two thirds of a second to
predict the entire set, whereas here it took 19.3 seconds, which is almost 29 times
longer! However, it should be mentioned, that when compiling the DNN, the com-
piler said two operations in the network could not be made TPU compatible, which
means that some of the neural network runs on the CPU of the Dev board. Ac-
cording to Coral themselves (the producers of the board) this signiﬁcantly degrades
the speed of predictions [8]. Due to the deadline for this project, and the fact that
the neural network was not the bottle neck in the pipeline, the model has not been
made completely TPU compatible, however, in the future this could be an area of
focus. Since the speed and accuracy was still more than enough to ensure a good
IDS when using the ﬂow-based approach, it was time to proceed to the classiﬁcation
of a real-time attack.
As mentioned previously, in order to test the IDS in real-time a UDP DoS attack
was carried out by using the nping tool. Since it was necessary to test whether the
IDS could properly identify both normal traﬃc as well as DoS traﬃc, four diﬀerent
runs were carried out with four diﬀerent packet rates. For each run, I registered the
time it took for the neural network to identify whether it was an attack or not, as
well as the value predicted by the neural network. I deﬁne the time taken to identify
whether it was an attack, as the time taken from the start of the run, till the network
makes the ﬁrst correct prediction that remains correct for subsequent predictions.
Furthermore, the prediction value registered is the “resting” prediction value, i.e.
the prediction value being output from the network when the prediction has become
56
==PAGE:69==
6.3. The Generated Attack and results
Online implementation and evaluation
constant, which in this case happens after the sliding window has been ﬁlled up, i.e.
after 30 seconds. For these 4 runs, the predictions have not been binarized, since
the continuous output from the neural network can provide valuable information.
The packet rates, identiﬁcation times, and prediction values for the four runs can
be seen in table 6.1. Throughout the rest of this report, pps stands for packets per
second.
Run no.
Traﬃc type
Packet rate
Identiﬁcation time
Prediction value
1.
Normal
0.2 pps
12.5 seconds
0.0859375
2.
Normal
2 pps
11 seconds
0.0390625
3.
DoS
20 pps
15.5 seconds
0.99609375
4.
DoS
200 pps
10.5
0.99609375
Table 6.1: An overview of the neural network’s identiﬁcation time and predicted
value for the 4 runs. For all runs, ﬂows were generated based on a sliding window of
30 seconds length, which moved 5 seconds at a time, however, ﬂows would also be
sent to the IDS every 5 seconds before the window was ﬁlled.
There are several things to take away from this table. First oﬀ, it takes the system
a very short time to detect whether the generated data corresponds to an attack
or not. As can be seen from the table, across the four runs it took between 10.5 -
15.5 seconds. It should be mentioned, that since the attack and detection ran on
diﬀerent systems, and since the time is included simply for the purpose of showing
that identiﬁcation is quick, not to provide an exact estimate, the time was taken
manually using a stopwatch. This means, that the registered time includes both the
time it took for the attack to start up, and the time it took for the border router
to collect the data. As the border router sniﬀs in intervals of ﬁve seconds, most
of the diﬀerence in identiﬁcation time is caused by whether the ﬁrst UDP packet
was received at the start or end of an interval, as this aﬀects how soon after the
arrival of a packet, the ﬁrst ﬂow is sent to the IDS. Actually, for runs 1, 2, and 4 the
neural network correctly identiﬁed whether the generated traﬃc was anomalous or
not based on the ﬁrst received ﬂow (which in this case corresponded to data collected
for ﬁve seconds or less). For the third run, the neural network needed slightly more
data to identify the traﬃc correctly, but managed to do so from the second received
ﬂow and onwards (less than 10 seconds of collected data). Thus, this DoS attack
was quickly identiﬁed by the IDS.
Another takeaway from the table, is that the neural network was generally quite
sure of its predictions. If the prediction threshold was set to 0.45 as in the oﬄine
evaluation, both the normal predictions and anomalous predictions would be far
from the threshold, thus providing some measure of how far the network was from
predicting the opposite class. However, when looking at the prediction values one
57
==PAGE:70==
6.3. The Generated Attack and results
Online implementation and evaluation
may still wonder why the neural network is more certain that a packet rate of 2 pps is
normal than a packet rate of 0.2 pps is. As the network is complex it can be diﬃcult
to know for sure, but a possible explanation could be, that the low packet rate is
more reminiscent of the blocked ﬂows in the selective forwarding attack, which may
make the network a bit more wary.
Lastly, some might argue that the NN starts treating traﬃc as an attack at somewhat
low traﬃc rates. This would be true for some routers, where receiving 20 UDP
packets per second between two single IP addresses for some time is nothing out of
the ordinary. However, as this system is intended for a border router, continuously
receiving this many UDP packets for a single sensor may signiﬁcantly increase packet
loss in the RPL network, and diminish the battery life of the sensor. In case one
fears that this may cause some normal traﬃc bursts to be falsely registered as an
attack, the network can be trained and tested on longer window lengths to better
accommodate these bursts, but at the cost of longer identiﬁcation times.
Now, as was seen from the presented results, the IDS is capable of detecting the
UDP DoS attack quickly and with high certainty. However, in actual systems there
are other considerations to take into account as well, such as whether the system has
any potential bottlenecks. A quick analysis will explore how the system performs in
this regard.
Currently, the system consists of the border router (which is in charge of processing
the packets into ﬂows) and the IDS (which determines if a ﬂow is anomalous or
not), and we are interested in knowing if either of these could become a bottleneck.
For this reason, the time taken to generate and classify each ﬂow was measured for
the four runs in table 6.1, and the times are presented in ﬁgure 6.5. As mentioned
previously, the IDS ran on the Dev Board and the “border router” ran in a virtual
environment with access to 2 GB RAM and 1 core from a i5-8300H 2.3 GHz CPU.
As can be seen from the ﬁgure, the time taken to classify each ﬂow remains mostly
constant across the four runs, even at the highest generated packet rates. This
was expected, since the ﬂows that the neural network receives will not increase in
complexity because of higher packet rates, the only diﬀerence in the ﬂows will be
that a couple of the values are larger. In contrast, the time needed to generate
each ﬂow increases drastically when the packet rates increase, in fact, it goes from
0.0021 seconds on average (in the ﬁrst run) to 0.21 seconds per ﬂow (in the last
run). This was no surprise either, as the ﬂows include information from all relevant
packets received within a certain time interval, which means, that when the packet
rate increases by a factor of 10, the amount of packets needed to be processed for a
58
==PAGE:71==
6.3. The Generated Attack and results
Online implementation and evaluation
Figure 6.5: The time taken to generate and classify each ﬂow, measured across the
four runs. For each run, 20 ﬂows were generated and classiﬁed and the mean time
and standard deviation has been plotted.
single ﬂow also increases by a factor of 10.3
There are two main conclusions that can be drawn from this observation: First oﬀ,
the preprocessing is currently ineﬃcient as it seems to scale worse than linearly
with the packet rate, however, eﬃcient preprocessing was not within the scope of
this report, and the ineﬃciency will thus be accepted for the time being. Secondly,
for the ﬂow-based approach it seems that the preprocessing will almost always be
the bottleneck, atleast for similiar DoS attacks. Even if it were made much more
eﬃcient, the preprocessing will not realistically be able to compete with a prediction
time which is constant for all packet rates. Thus, to avoid bottlenecks, future groups
may want to focus on optimizing the preprocessing or switching to a packet-based
approach.
An important last note about the ﬂow classiﬁcation and generation times is, that
while the diﬀerence between the two times has been quite extreme for this setup, one
should not expect these results to translate to all scenarios. As mentioned, the ﬂows
are also generated based on source and destination IP’s as well as whether the traﬃc
3Flows are currently generated based on a time window, source and destination ip, and whether
tcp, udp or icmp was used. Therefore, this statement is true when the packet rate increases between
the same two hosts using the same protocol, as was the case for the four runs.
59
==PAGE:72==
6.3. The Generated Attack and results
Online implementation and evaluation
was TCP, UDP or ICMP based. This means, that in a scenario with lots of unique
traﬃc there will likely be less packets included in each ﬂow (meaning the generation
of each ﬂow will be faster), and instead many more ﬂows will be generated. While the
prediction time per ﬂow should stay the same, the neural network will in this case
have to make predictions much more often (due to the higher amount of ﬂows), thus
increasing the strain put on the IDS component. In this case, the timing performance
of the ﬂow generation and ﬂow classiﬁcation will be much closer. However, as can
be seen from ﬁgure 6.5 even for very low packet rates (and therfore few packets per
ﬂow) the ﬂow generation is not much faster than the classiﬁcation. Thus, it seems
fair to conclude that in almost all cases the preprocessing is the bottleneck.
In this chapter, the online pipeline has been explained and the performance of the
IDS in real-time has been evaluated with respect to diﬀerent parameters. It was
seen, that the IDS was capable of quickly predicting a UDP DoS attack with high
certainty, and that the preprocessing component is likely to be the bottleneck in the
current system. With these results in mind, the overall contributions and weaknesses
of this project will be discussed in the next section, and considerations for future
work that could be done within the area of anomaly-based IDSs will be presented.
60
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 7
Discussion and Future Work
Throughout this report, the generation of the data, the design of the neural network,
as well as the results achieved on datasets and in real-time have been discussed
thoroughly. However, some overall design choices have up till now been taken for
granted, such as the fact that the IDS is composed of a single, central unit. The
strengths and limitations of the overall IDS design, and whether it could have been
done diﬀerently, will be discussed in this section, and will be based on the results
and diﬃculties encountered when creating the current system. Lastly, based on this
discussion, the future work section will explore which improvements could be made
to the system, given more time.
7.1
The ﬂow-based approach
In the current system, a ﬂow-based approach has been adopted for the purpose of
representing the received network data, such that classiﬁcation is made on a per
ﬂow basis. Initially, this approach was chosen for the reason, that ﬂows are able to
capture traﬃc patterns that emerge across groups of packets, which may be diﬃcult
to spot when looking at packets individually. An example could be, that for the self-
generated UDP DoS attack that was explained in section 3, each individual packet
may seem normal, however, the rate at which they are sent is abnormal. This is easily
spotted with the ﬂow-based approach, as the contents of all the packets within 30
seconds are added to the same ﬂow, which will then show that an abnormal amount
of bytes has been received within that window. In contrast, if classiﬁcation was
performed on a purely per packet basis, such an attack may be missed. However, as
we saw from the online classiﬁcation, the current ﬂow generation puts strain on the
border router, and may become a bottleneck at higher packet rates. This can likely
61
==PAGE:74==
7.2. The Centralized IDS
Discussion and Future Work
be avoided by switching to classifying on a per-packet-basis, such that the border
router has to do very little preprocessing.
In order to minimize preprocessing, while still maintaining some overview of traﬃc
patterns, it may be possible to adopt a pseudo packet-based approach. In this case,
relevant features would still be extracted on a per-packet-basis and passed to the
IDS for classiﬁcation, however, the border router would also maintain a couple of
counters. These counters would monitor how many packets have been received from
a certain IP and protocol within some time window, and this would be sent alongside
the packet for classiﬁcation. While this does require the border router to perform
some preprocessing still, it would be a sharp reduction compared to what is currently
needed, and it would still allow the DNN to observe some traﬃc patterns across
packets. An important thing to note, is that for this approach to be successful in
real-time, changes would need to be made to the current DNN, such that it can be
made fully compatible with the Edge TPU. If this is not achieved, the preprocessing
bottleneck will instead be replaced by a bottleneck at the DNN, which will be equally
as restrictive as the DNN currently uses 2.4 ms to classify each ﬂow, and classifying
each packet would likely take as long. Thus, unless the model is fully adapted to the
TPU, the per packet classiﬁcation approach would only be able to handle packet
rates of around 400 pps.
All in all, it is too early to say if the suggested pseudo packet-based approach
would be more successful than the current ﬂow-based one. However, it would remove
signiﬁcant workload from the border router, and if the DNN can be made TPU
compatible, the approach can possibly handle high packet rates as well. For those
reasons, it may be an interesting approach to study in the future.
7.2
The Centralized IDS
Perhaps the design decision with the largest inﬂuence on which attacks could be
detected, and how, was the decision to design the IDS as a single, centralized com-
ponent. Originally, this decision was made for two main purposes: Firstly, to allow
eﬀorts to be focused on creating a powerful machine learning algorithm, such that
the algorithm would be able to detect a wide variety of internal and external attacks.
Such an algorithm would need to run on a device without strict constraints on en-
ergy consumption or computational power, which is why the IDS was chosen to run
on a centralized component. Secondly, in the hope that an IDS could be developed
that would not introduce any energy or communication overhead on the resource
constrained nodes in the RPL network.
62
==PAGE:75==
7.2. The Centralized IDS
Discussion and Future Work
As has been seen demonstrated throughout this report, the ﬁrst goal was achieved.
In the oﬄine evaluation section, it was shown that the DNN managed to achieve
88 % recall across 20 diﬀerent attacks of both internal and external origin that
were carried out using several diﬀerent protocols. This variety of attacks would be
extremely diﬃcult to detect with simpler algorithms or heuristics. As an example,
the reader can refer to the SVELTE IDS in [34] or the RPL-based IDS in [11], both
of which used heuristic algorithms and achieved nice results, but were only capable
of detecting two diﬀerent attacks each. Thus, the system in this paper is capable of
detecting a wide variety of attacks, as hoped. Furthermore, since the system is only
running centrally, it introduces no energy or communication overhead to any of the
resource constrained nodes in the network, which means that the second goal was
achieved as well.
While the chosen design has some impressive strengths, it seems to include one
severe limitation. Based on the RPL simulations conducted throughout this report,
it seems unlikely that a purely-centralized IDS will ever be able to detect every
type of RPL-based attack. As an example, we can study the SF attack which was
simulated in section 3. An observant reader will remember, that for the datasets
exported from that simulation, we focused on identifying the blocked ﬂows, instead
of identifying ﬂows from the node performing the attack. While identifying blocked
ﬂows is still beneﬁcial (which is why the datasets where included), identifying the
attacker node would be of more help, as it could then be blacklisted. The reason for
the choice was therefore, that detecting the attacker node using only information
available to the border router, seemed infeasible.
To explain why it may be very diﬃcult to detect the attacker in the SF attack
centrally, we can refer back to the background section, where it was explained that
a RPL network has two diﬀerent modes for routing, non-storing and storing mode. In
the storing mode, the border router is only in charge of routing a packet to its optimal
one-hop neighbor, and the nodes in the network are then themselves responsible for
onwards routing [41]. This means, that in the storing mode the border router has
very little information about the topology of the RPL network. Thus, while it may
be possible to detect which nodes are blocked by the selective forwarding attack at
the border router, it may be very diﬃcult to determine which node is the common
parent, and therefore the attacker. This can naturally be worked around by having
all nodes periodically report their parents and neighbors to the border router, as was
done by the SVELTE group, but in this case we no longer have a purely centralized
IDS. Alternatively, if we are dealing with a RPL network that uses the non-storing
mode for routing, the entire routing table is stored in the border router, in which
63
==PAGE:76==
7.3. Limitations of the available data
Discussion and Future Work
case it may be possible to consult the routing table to ﬁgure out which node is the
attacker. However, this may be diﬃcult to integrate with the neural network, which
expects a standard ﬂow format for prediction purposes, and will likely require a
separate algorithm. Even then, adding this algorithm will only protect against this
speciﬁc selective forwarding attack1, since for a blackhole attack, for example, the
victim nodes will not even be a part of the routing table. Thus, there are some RPL
speciﬁc attacks, which may be near impossible to detect with a purely centralized
IDS.
In this section, the strengths and weaknesses of the current IDS design have been
explored. As could be seen, the current system manages to satisfy its original goals
of being able to detect a variety of internal and external attacks, as well as to not
introduce any overhead for the resource constrained nodes. However, there are some
RPL attacks that it may not be able to detect anytime soon. An alternative IDS
design which addresses this issue, will be presented in the future work section.
7.3
Limitations of the available data
The data that was used to train and test the model, was comprised of four diﬀerent
datasets, namely the NSL-KDD dataset, the MitM (MQTT) dataset, and the self-
generated selective forwarding attack and UDP DoS attack datasets. Of these four
datasets, it was only the data included in the NSL-KDD set that corresponded to
external attacks, which means that all external training of the model is based on this.
Currently, the NSL-KDD dataset may be the most widely used dataset within the
anomaly-based IDS ﬁeld, and it is considered as a benchmark dataset, which is why
it was used for the purpose of this report [37]. However, it has two main weaknesses
that may aﬀect the detection capabilities of the IDS in real-life scenarios, and for
this reason they will be discussed here.
First oﬀ, while the NSL-KDD dataset was created in 2009 [40] it has been con-
structed based on data that was captured in 1998. As such, the traﬃc included in
the dataset is now more than 20 years old, and current network traﬃc may therefore
contain signiﬁcant diﬀerences compared to the traﬃc in the dataset. It is important
to note, that this in no way means that the NSL-KDD dataset is useless. It contains
a high degree of complexity, a variety of attacks in the training set, and novel at-
tacks in the test set, thus making it a great dataset for testing and comparing the
detection capabilities of a classiﬁer. However, it does mean, that before the designed
1This speciﬁc SF attack is one where RPL control messages are sent and forwarded as normal,
but application data is dropped.
64
==PAGE:77==
7.4. Future work
Discussion and Future Work
IDS can be deployed as a complete protection system in a real network, it should
be trained on more up-to-date data, in order to best protect the desired network.
The other weakness of the NSL-KDD dataset is mostly a weakness due to the type
of IDS designed in this project. This IDS is designed to run on a border router
and protect 6LoWPAN networks from internal and external attacks. In contrast,
the NSL-KDD dataset is constructed based on simulated data, that was meant
to be similar to a small Air Force base [15]. Thus, while this dataset does contain
information about many external attacks, as was desired, the speciﬁc nature of these
attacks may vary slightly compared to typical external attacks against 6LoWPAN
networks. For example, an external DoS attack against a 6LoWPAN network can
likely be destructive at much lower packet rates, than an external DoS attack against
an air force base. Therefore, while the current IDS may be eﬀective at detecting
the external attacks included in the NSL-KDD dataset, it may not be suﬃcient to
provide complete external protection for 6LoWPAN networks. For example, it may
be possible for an attacker to construct an attack that would be insigniﬁcant against
an Air Force base, and thus go unnoticed by the current IDS, but which would still
be damaging for a 6LoWPAN network.
In this section it has been revealed, that while the NSL-KDD dataset is widely
used and is considered a benchmark dataset within the ﬁeld, it has some signiﬁcant
weaknesses. It should be emphasized, that the dataset is still very useful, as it
provides an important measure of the detection capabilities of a classiﬁer, and as
such, gives an indication of how the current IDS would perform in the real world.
However, the future work section will still discuss some alternative ways, in which
the current IDS could be trained for external attacks.
7.4
Future work
From the previous discussion subsections, it has become apparent that there are two
main areas which could be the focus for future work on the current IDS. Either, one
could focus on reworking the current, centralized IDS design to a design which may
better accommodate detection of RPL speciﬁc attacks. Alternatively, future work
could look into training the current model on newer external attack data, that is
more closely related to external traﬃc for a 6LoWPAN network.
7.4.1
The IDS Design
In order to eﬀectively support detection of RPL speciﬁc attacks, it is proposed
that instead of one detection model, the IDS could be expanded to include two
65
==PAGE:78==
7.4. Future work
Discussion and Future Work
detection models and a distributed component. The ﬁrst model would be a powerful,
purely centralized machine learning algorithm, that would make predictions based
on locally available information, as the model that is currently used. In the second
model, predictions would be made centrally as well, but would instead be based
on information provided by the distributed component, which would be distributed
across all nodes in the RPL network and report topological information back to the
model (in a similar approach to SVELTE [34]).
As it is desirable to minimize energy consumption on the resource constrained nodes,
the second model as well as the distributed component would mostly be turned
oﬀ. In this way, the ﬁrst model would be in charge of detecting external attacks,
and would furthermore work as the ﬁrst line of defense against internal attacks.
As we have seen throughout this paper, whilst a purely centralized approach may
not be able to identify an attacker node, it may be able to detect blocked ﬂows.
Therefore, if the centralized model starts detecting too many anomalous ﬂows on
the internal side, it would send the signal to start the second model along with the
distributed component, and these would then work together in order to identify any
potential attacker nodes. If the second model identiﬁes an attacker node, this will
then be blacklisted from the RPL network, otherwise, if the model decides with high
certainty that no attack is taking place, it will shut down and send a signal for the
distributed component to do the same.
The design described above, can hopefully enable an IDS in providing fantastic pro-
tection against both internal and external attacks on 6LoWPAN networks. It should
enable protection against a wide variety of external attacks, as it has the machine
learning model to analyze traﬃc passing through the border router. Furthermore,
the design includes the secondary model with the distributed component, which
should provide protection against internal RPL attacks. Lastly, the hope is that the
secondary model will be turned oﬀmost of the time, in which case, there will be an
insigniﬁcant energy and computational overhead placed on the 6LoWPAN nodes.
While reality may not be as simple as presented here, the suggested design could
deﬁnitely be an interesting avenue of research in the future.
7.4.2
More Relevant External Attack Data
Another future improvement could be to train the current model on newer external
traﬃc, which more closely resembles external traﬃc for 6LoWPAN networks. Gain-
ing access to a high-quality dataset that matches these criteria is not an easy task,
otherwise such a dataset would simply have been used instead of the NSL-KDD in
this report. However, in recent years a couple of IoT datasets have emerged that
66
==PAGE:79==
7.4. Future work
Discussion and Future Work
potentially can help the model learn how to eﬀectively protect 6LoWPAN networks
against external attacks. It should be mentioned, that these datasets have not been
reviewed or discussed to nearly the same degree as the NSL-KDD dataset, and their
quality is therefore less certain. But hopefully, one of these datasets may better ﬁt
the needs of this IDS. One such set that may be promising, can be seen in [21].
It is a very real possibility that no dataset exists, which has high enough complexity,
is up-to-date, and includes traﬃc that is similar to external traﬃc for 6LoWPAN
networks. In this case, it could be a possibility to generate such a dataset. This
would be a signiﬁcant task, however, making such a dataset publicly available could
help advance the entire ﬁeld as a whole. Thus, if the necessary resources can be
gathered, it could be a possible area for future research.
67
==PAGE:80==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The amount of IoT devices is increasing globally at a rapid rate, and due in part
to several of these devices being resource constrained, they may be particularly
vulnerable to attacks. This is especially true for WSNs, and due to their signiﬁcant
monetary and research value, it is important to properly protect them.
In order to enable such protection, this report has designed an anomaly-based IDS,
which has achieved all the project objectives laid out in section 1.2. The IDS has been
designed such that it can detect several diﬀerent attack types of both internal and
external origin, while sparing the resource constrained sensors from computational
overhead. To fulﬁll those requirements, a centralized system has been implemented
with a DNN as the detection algorithm, which was trained on several external at-
tacks, two attacks in RPL and one attack in MQTT (MitM).
The oﬄine results of the implemented IDS have been impressive, with the system
achieving recalls of 85 % and 86 % across several diﬀerent external DoS and Probe
attacks, with some of these attacks being novel. Even better, the neural network
reached recalls in the high nineties for the internal attacks, scoring 96.3 %, 99.7
% and 100 % recall for the MitM, the UDP DoS, and the SF attacks respectively.
Furthermore, the model showed promise for being scaled to include more attacks in
the future, as there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in recall when using one model to
classify all attacks, versus using a separate model for each dataset.
To demonstrate its practicality, the IDS was also tested in real time, where it was
exposed to four diﬀerent UDP packet rates. In this setup, the model performed well,
and managed to detect whether the traﬃc was normal or abnormal within 10-16
seconds of the traﬃc generation tool having been started. Furthermore, the NN was
very certain in its predictions, and the results indicate that the current model could
68
==PAGE:81==
Conclusion
be of much use in real life systems.
While the ﬁnal system has performed admirably, it has some shortcomings. The main
ones are, that the current preprocessing may become a bottleneck at higher packet
rates, the current IDS design may never be capable of detecting all types of RPL
attacks, and the external data that was used to train the current system is slightly
outdated. To address these issues, future work could be to adapt a pseudo packet-
based detection approach, to expand the current IDS to include a secondary model
for RPL attacks, or to generate a new external attack dataset with high complexity.
Either of these endeavors could potentially provide a valuable contribution to the
ﬁeld of IDSs in 6LoWPAN networks.
69
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
[1]
“6LoWPAN and RPL”. eng. In: Internet of Things: Key Applications and
Protocols (2011), pp. 193–208. doi: 10.1002/9781119958352.ch12.
[2]
Hector Alaiz-Moreton et al. “Multiclass Classiﬁcation Procedure for Detecting
Attacks on MQTT-IoT Protocol”. eng. In: Complexity 2019 (2019), p. 6516253.
issn: 10990526, 10762787. doi: 10.1155/2019/6516253.
[3]
Jose Aveleira-Mata and Hector Alaiz-Moreton. “Functional prototype for in-
trusion detection system oriented to intelligent iot models”. eng. In: Advances
in Intelligent Systems and Computing 1006 (2020), pp. 179–186. issn: 21945365,
21945357. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-24097-4_22.
[4]
V Kishore Ayyadevara. “Random Forest”. eng. In: Pro Machine Learning Al-
gorithms (2018), pp. 105–116. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-3564-5_5,10.
1007/978-1-4842-3564-5.
[5]
Candice Bent´ejac, Anna Cs¨org˝o, and Gonzalo Mart´ınez-Mu˜noz. “A Compar-
ative Analysis of XGBoost”. und. In: (2019).
[6]
Filippo Maria Bianchi et al. “An overview and comparative analysis of Recur-
rent Neural Networks for Short Term Load Forecasting”. und. In: Springer-
briefs in Computer Science (2018). issn: 21915776, 21915768. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-70338-1.
[7]
Zouhair Chiba et al. “Intelligent approach to build a Deep Neural Network
based IDS for cloud environment using combination of machine learning al-
gorithms”. eng. In: Computers and Security 86 (2019), pp. 291–317. issn:
18726208, 01674048. doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2019.06.013.
[8]
Coral. TensorFlow Models on the Edge TPU. 2020. url: https://coral.ai/
docs/edgetpu/models-intro/ (visited on 07/18/2020).
[9]
Adam Dunkels, Bj¨orn Gr¨onvall, and Thiemo Voigt. “Contiki - A lightweight
and ﬂexible operating system for tiny networked sensors”. eng. In: Proceedings
- Conference on Local Computer Networks, Lcn (2004), pp. 455–462. issn:
07421303. doi: 10.1109/LCN.2004.38.
70
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10]
Nabila Farnaaz and M. A. Jabbar. “Random Forest Modeling for Network
Intrusion Detection System”. eng. In: Procedia Computer Science 89 (2016),
pp. 213–217. issn: 18770509. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2016.06.047.
[11]
Behnam Farzaneh, Mohammad Ali Montazeri, and Shahram Jamali. “An
anomaly-based IDS for detecting attacks in RPL-based internet of things”.
eng. In: 2019 5th International Conference on Web Research (icwr) (2019),
pp. 61–6, 61–66. doi: 10.1109/ICWR.2019.8765272.
[12]
Jorge Granjal, Jo˜ao M. Silva, and Nuno Louren¸co. “Intrusion detection and
prevention in CoAP wireless sensor networks using anomaly detection”. eng.
In: Sensors (switzerland) 18.8 (2018), p. 2445. issn: 14243210, 14248220. doi:
10.3390/s18082445.
[13]
L. Haripriya and M. A. Jabbar. “Role of Machine Learning in Intrusion Detec-
tion System: Review”. eng. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference
on Electronics, Communication and Aerospace Technology, Iceca 2018 (2018),
pp. 8474576, 925–929. doi: 10.1109/ICECA.2018.8474576.
[14]
Elike Hodo et al. “Threat analysis of IoT networks using artiﬁcial neural net-
work intrusion detection system”. eng. In: 2016 International Symposium on
Networks, Computers and Communications, Isncc 2016 (2016), p. 7746067.
doi: 10.1109/isncc.2016.7746067.
[15]
David J. Fried et al. “Evaluating intrusion detection systems: The 1998 darpa
oﬀ-line intrusion detection evaluation”. eng. In: (2009).
[16]
Norman P. Jouppi et al. “In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor pro-
cessing unit”. eng. In: Proceedings - International Symposium on Computer
Architecture 128643 (2017), pp. 1–12. issn: 10636897. doi: 10.1145/3079856.
3080246.
[17]
V. Jyothsna, V. V. Rama Prasad, and K. Munivara Prasad. “A Review of
Anomaly based Intrusion Detection Systems”. und. In: International Journal
of Computer Applications 28.7 (2011), pp. 26–35. issn: 09758887. doi: 10.
5120/3399-4730,10.5120/ijca.
[18]
Chris Karlof and David Wagner. “Secure routing in wireless sensor networks:
attacks and countermeasures”. eng. In: Ad Hoc Networks (2003). issn: 15708713,
15708705. doi: 10.1016/S1570-8705(03)00008-8.
[19]
A.A. Karlov. “CYBERSECURITY OF INTERNET OF THINGS –RISKS
AND OPPORTUNITIES”. eng. In: Proceedings of the XXVI International
Symposium on Nuclear Electronics and Computing (NEC’2017) (2017).
[20]
Phil Kim. “Neural Network”. eng. In: Matlab Deep Learning (2017), pp. 19–
51. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-2845-6_2,10.1007/978-1-4842-2845-6.
[21]
Nickolaos Koroniotis et al. “Towards the development of realistic botnet dataset
in the Internet of Things for network forensic analytics: Bot-IoT dataset”.
71
==PAGE:84==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
eng. In: Future Generation Computer Systems 100 (2019), pp. 779–796. issn:
18727115, 0167739x. doi: 10.1016/j.future.2019.05.041.
[22]
Anis Koubˆaa et al. “IEEE 802.15.4 for Wireless Sensor Networks: A Technical
Overview”. eng. In: (2016).
[23]
F. Lau et al. “Distributed denial of service attacks”. eng. In: Smc 2000 Con-
ference Proceedings. 2000 Ieee International Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics. ’cybernetics Evolving To Systems, Humans, Organizations, and
Their Complex Interactions’ (cat. No.0 3 (2000), 2275, 2276, 2277, 2278, 2279,
2280, 2275–2280 vol.3. issn: 1062922x. doi: 10.1109/ICSMC.2000.886455.
[24]
Anhtuan Le et al. “6LoWPAN: A study on QoS security threats and coun-
termeasures using intrusion detection system approach”. eng. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Communication Systems 25.9 (2012), pp. 1189–1212. issn:
10991131, 10745351. doi: 10.1002/dac.2356.
[25]
Tayyab Mehmood. “COOJA Network Simulator: Exploring the Inﬁnite Possi-
ble Ways to Compute the Performance Metrics of IOT Based Smart Devices to
Understand the Working of IOT Based Compression and Routing Protocols”.
und. In: (2017), p. 7.
[26]
Umberto Michelucci. “Regularization”. eng. In: Applied Deep Learning (2018),
pp. 185–216. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4842-3790-8_5,10.1007/978-1-4842-
3790-8.
[27]
Nour Moustafa, Benjamin Turnbull, and Kim Kwang Raymond Choo. “An
ensemble intrusion detection technique based on proposed statistical ﬂow fea-
tures for protecting network traﬃc of internet of things”. eng. In: Ieee Inter-
net of Things Journal 6.3 (2019), pp. 8470090, 4815–4830. issn: 23274662,
23722541. doi: 10.1109/jiot.2018.2871719.
[28]
Mohamad Nazrin Napiah et al. “Compression Header Analyzer Intrusion De-
tection System (CHA - IDS) for 6LoWPAN Communication Protocol”. eng.
In: Ieee Access 6 (2018), pp. 16623–16638. issn: 21693536. doi: 10.1109/
ACCESS.2018.2798626.
[29]
Michael Nielsen. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. eng. 2019.
[30]
Fredrik Osterlind et al. “Cross-level sensor network simulation with COOJA”.
eng. In: Local Computer Networks (lcn), Conference on (2006), pp. 641–648.
issn: 07421303.
[31]
Yazan Otoum, Dandan Liu, and Amiya Nayak. “DL-IDS: a deep learning-
based intrusion detection framework for securing IoT”. eng. In: Transactions
on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies (2019). issn: 21615748, 21613915.
doi: 10.1002/ett.3803.
72
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[32]
Danijela Proti´c. “Review of KDD Cup ’99, NSL-KDD and Kyoto 2006+
datasets”. eng. In: Vojnotehnicki Glasnik 66.3 (2018), pp. 580–596. issn: 22174753,
00428469. doi: 10.5937/vojtehg66-16670.
[33]
Karvenagar Pune, Priyanka Jadhav, and Karvenagar Pune. “Wireless Intru-
sion Detection System”. eng. In: (2011).
[34]
Shahid Raza, Linus Wallgren, and Thiemo Voigt. “SVELTE: Real-time in-
trusion detection in the Internet of Things”. eng. In: Ad Hoc Networks 11.8
(2013), pp. 2661–2674. issn: 15708713, 15708705. doi: 10.1016/j.adhoc.
2013.04.014.
[35]
Hichem Sedjelmaci, Sidi Mohamed Senouci, and Tarik Taleb. “An accurate
security game for low-resource iot devices”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on
Vehicular Technology 66.10 (2017), pp. 7920414, 9381–9393. issn: 19399359,
00189545. doi: 10.1109/TVT.2017.2701551.
[36]
Alexander Semenov, Vladimir Boginski, and Eduardo L. Pasiliao. “Neural
networks with multidimensional cross-entropy loss functions”. eng. In: Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 11917 (2019). Ed. by
Hanghang Tong Tagarelli Andrea, pp. 57–62. issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi:
10.1007/978-3-030-34980-6_5.
[37]
Nathan Shone et al. “A Deep Learning Approach to Network Intrusion Detec-
tion”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intel-
ligence 2.1 (2018), pp. 41–50, 41–50. issn: 2471285x. doi: 10.1109/TETCI.
2017.2772792.
[38]
Dharmini Shreenivas, Shahid Raza, and Thiemo Voigt. “Intrusion detection in
the RPL-connected 6LoWPAN Networks”. eng. In: Iotpts 2017 - Proceedings
of the 3rd Acm International Workshop on Iot Privacy, Trust, and Security,
Co-located With Asia Ccs 2017 (2017), pp. 31–38. doi: 10.1145/3055245.
3055252.
[39]
Nitish Srivastava et al. “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks
from overﬁtting”. eng. In: (2015).
[40]
Mahbod Tavallaee et al. “A detailed analysis of the KDD CUP 99 data set”.
eng. In: Ieee Symposium on Computational Intelligence for Security and De-
fense Applications, Cisda 2009 (2009), p. 5356528. doi: 10.1109/CISDA.
2009.5356528.
[41]
Tsvetko Tsvetkov. “RPL: IPv6 Routing Protocol for Low Power and Lossy
Networks”. eng. In: (2011).
[42]
Mikkel N. Schmidt Tue Herlau and Morten Moerup. Introduction to Machine
Learning and Data Mining. eng. Technical University of Denmark, 2018.
73
==PAGE:86==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[43]
Yiyun Zhou et al. “Deep learning approach for cyberattack detection”. eng.
In: Infocom 2018 - Ieee Conference on Computer Communications Workshops
(2018), pp. 262–267. issn: 21594228. doi: 10.1109/INFCOMW.2018.8407032.
74
