==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
A Bayesian Approach to a Genome Wide
Association Study
of Childhood Respiratory Illnesses
Hrafnhildur Agnarsdóttir (s182471)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Bioinformatics
Department of Bio and Health Informatics
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This MSc. thesis was prepared at the department of Bio and Health Informatics at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring
a MSc. degree in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology at the Technical University
of Denmark (DTU). The project is a follow-up project of a special course conducted
between January and July 2019. The project, representing 35 ETCS points began
in January 2020 and concluded on July 10th 2020. Both projects were done through
a collaboration between Copenhagen Prospective Studies on Asthma in Childhood
(COPSAC) and DTU.
The supervisor for the project was :
Professor Anders Gorm Pedersen
Department of Bio and Health Informatics
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, July 10, 2020
Hrafnhildur Agnarsdóttir (s182471)
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to dedicate this thesis to my parents, Agnar and Rósa, who have been
incredibly supportive despite being an ocean away. I would also like to thank my
friend Þóra Margrét, who has endured my endless rambling about the limitations
of p-values, something she allegedly enjoyed. Klaus Bønnelykke provided important
medical insights, and gave a me necessary push in the midst of the Covid-19 pan-
demic. Professor Anders Gorm Pedersen for guiding me through advanced statistical
modeling and theory. Nespresso, Tuborg and Joe & The Juice are among the com-
panies I would like to thank, for fulfilling my dietary needs. Lastly, I would like to
thank especially thank Anders Ulrik Eliasen who I could not have done this without.
His insights, code review and professional experience were paramount through this
process.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Genetic Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Respiratory Illnesses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Statistical Inference
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4
Linear Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
1.5
Project Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2
Materials & Methods
27
2.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.2
Quality Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.3
Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3
Results
41
3.1
Antibiotics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.2
Infections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3
Metabolites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.4
Exacerbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
3.5
UK Biobank Exacerbations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
4
Discussion
89
4.1
Discrete Decision Making
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
4.2
Bayesianism vs Frequentism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
4.3
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A An Appendix
93
A.1 All SNPs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
A.2 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
Bibliography
117
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In an era governed by rapid growth in information, science, and technology, scientists
have been able to do anything from using artificial intelligence to beat the world’s
best poker players, to predicting stock market changes on Wall Street.
Although
the era’s resulting discoveries and inventions are certainly not all beneficial, a vast
majority has aided in increasing quality of life and life expectancy.
Genetic mapping tools, high throughput sequencing methods and high performance
computing algorithms are examples of just a few such tools, having substantial ap-
plications in modern medicine and genetics. The increase in computational power
has enabled modern genetics to map entire genomes of organisms, to detect genetic
variants within organisms, and associate those variants with traits.
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are the most popular approaches in lo-
cating trait associated variants. These approaches utilize the entire genome of an
organism rather than a specific region of interest, and test for population-wide signif-
icance in association between a variant and a phenotype which are often in the form
of diseases or disease traits.
One of the major causes of morbidity and mortality in young children are respira-
tory infections and exacerbations[1]. Hospitalizations due to lower respiratory tract
infections occur in 1/200 infants annually, with a mortality rate up to 5%. A ma-
jority of infections is caused by respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), which is believed
to account for over 60% of acute lower respiratory tract infections in children. Most
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
children have been infected with RSV before the age of two, with half being infected
more than once[2]. RSV is believed to be a predictor of pulmonary function abnor-
malities, wheezing and the development of asthma [3]. Recurring respiratory episodes
carry large a economic burdens on societies, but a limited number of respiratory sus-
ceptibility loci have been identified thus far. Shedding light on the genetic causes of
increased morbidity is therefore of vital importance for public health.
1.1
The Genetic Code
The idea that organisms carry hereditary units was initially proposed by the Austrian
abbot and scientist Gregor Mendel in 1855, with the presentation of his paper Experi-
ments on Plant Hybridization [4]. Mendel’s seminal work was however largely ignored
by his contemporaries until the independent rediscovery of his ideas by DeVries, Cor-
rens and von Tshermak in 1900 [5]. The concept of Mendelian inheritance and its
principles have since been the cornerstone of classical genetics. One hundred years
after Mendel’s presentation, the hereditary unit had been identified as a deoxyribose
nucleic acid molecule (DNA), and its structure and organization defined [6]. The sig-
nificance of understanding the structure of the DNA molecule, the genetic code, and
the central dogma has revolutionized the biology industry, giving rise to multiple
subfields within biology such as population genetics, molecular genetics, genomics,
transcriptomics, and a myriad of other omics.
This section will cover the structure of the DNA molecule, genes, the mechanism of
inheritance, and sources of genetic diversity in populations.
1.1.1
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, is a molecule vital to all organisms. It acts as an infor-
mation carrier which directs growth, reproduction and development when expressed.
The molecule has a double helical structure of two strands, which are composed of
==PAGE:11==
1.1 The Genetic Code
3
multiple nucleotides.
Each nucleotide is then composed of a five-carbon sugar, a
phosphate group and one of four types of nitrogenous bases. Nitrogenous bases are
categorized into two groups, pyrimidines and purines, where the former group is com-
prised of cytosine (C) and thymine (T), and the latter of guanine (G) and adenine
(A). The sequence of these bases is what is referred to as the genetic sequence, and
determines the information carried, much like a sequence of letters forms a word. The
nucleotides line up on opposite strands, where the bases pair with their complement,
through hydrogen bonds, adenine with thymine and guanine with cytosine (fig 1.1).
The hydrogen bond pairing the bases connects the two strands and forms a ladder-like
structure, where the sugar and phosphate form the vertical sides and the paired bases
the horizontal bridges, ensuring a stable molecular structure.
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: The DNA double helix. Adapted from YourGenome. Retrieved May 22,
2020, from https://www.yourgenome.org/facts/what-is-dna
1.1.2
Genetic Diversity
The difference in composition and order of nucleotides determines the differences
between any two organisms. The human genome consists of an estimated 3.2 billion
base pairs, where they differ less than 0.01% on average between each individual [7].
If sequence variations are present in germ cells, these traits are heritable between
generations, known as inheritance. Consequently, the driving force of evolution are
mutation-caused sequence variations introduced through DNA replication.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 The Genetic Code
5
The human DNA replication process is speedy, acting at a rate of 2-3kB min−1
[8], with an error rate between 10−7 and 10−8 [9], demonstrating its high accuracy.
Genome stability is then further ensured with processes that repair erroneous DNA,
such as nucleotide excision repair and base excision repair. In spite of this, errors
do occur through DNA replication, and mutations become introduced and possibly
fixed if inherited.
Few mutations do however become fixed, and even fewer have
biologically significant effects, as many mutations either do not detectably alter the
protein product or do not alter the protein product at all [10].
Insertions, deletions, copy number variations, duplications, frameshifts, intragenic re-
combination and basepair substitutions are all types of sequence mutations. Basepair
substitutions, or single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), are the main source of ge-
netic variation in populations [11]. Basepair substitutions occur when a single base
is replaced by another base, and these substitutions are classified as SNPs if they are
carried by >1% of the population [12]. SNPs are estimated to occur at every 1000th
base on average, and may occur anywhere throughout the genome. If found within
coding regions, the mutations may be a) silent, where the altered codon codes for the
same amino acid as a non-mutated codon but may affect amount produced, b) non-
sense mutations, where a premature stop codon results in a truncated protein product
(or no protein at all due to nonsense-mediated RNA decay), or c) missense mutations,
where the protein product is altered (fig 1.2). Phenotypic variation can also be caused
by SNPs located in non-coding regions of genes. Non-coding SNPs may for example
alter transcription, affect post-transcriptional modification and transposons. A study
from 2015 estimated that a typical genome differs from a reference genome at about
4-5 million sites, with >99% of variation due to SNPs or insertion-deletions (indels).
The number of identified SNPs is much lower than 4-5 million, which may indicate
that most mutations are nearly neutral and current statistical methods have not been
optimized for identifying non-neutral mutations.
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
Figure 1.2: Types of point mutations at each replication stage.
1.2
Respiratory Illnesses
Many mutations within the human genome have been associated with an increased
risk of disease, such as a mutation within BRCA2 gene, associated with an increased
risk of breast cancer, and CFTR associated with cystic fibrosis. SNPs associated
with other diseases, which characterized by a heterogenous phenotype and a complex
inheritance pattern such as asthma, have proven more difficult to identify.
Respiratory illnesses such as asthma and RSV all cause morbidity in young children
globally [2]. Although all illnesses are very common and few children have severe
disease burden, respiratory illnesses due continue to be one of the leading causes
of mortality in young children [2]. However, a comprehensive understanding of the
pathophysiology of respiratory infections and acute respiratory episodes is lacking.
Human respiratory syncitial virus is found within the Pneumoviridae family and is
an enveloped, spherical virus. Most children have been infected by the time they
turn two years old and infants are exceptionally vulnerable to infection of RSV, due
to high surface area-to-volume of in the developing airways of young children [13].
Infant lungs have much smaller dimensions than adult lungs, and thus infant bron-
chioles are much smaller. This makes bronchiolar obstruction much more likely in
infants than adults. Obstruction of the bronchioles and airways reduces exhalation
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Respiratory Illnesses
7
capacity, increases respiratory rates, leading to decreased lung function [14]. Most
RSV infections pass within two weeks, and few require hospitalization [15].
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease of the airways, resulting in reverse airflow
obstruction which is often accompanied to an overreaction to stimuli, both of which
impairs breathing. While the condition may have minor impact on quality of life for
some, this can have a high burden of disability for others. Children aged 10-14 and
people aged 75-79 carry the highest disease burden, although mortality is low [16].
In infants, recurrent wheezing is the most common expression of asthma and early
intervention has been demonstrated to help manage further complications such as
prevalent severe asthma attacks and hospitalizations.
Common triggers of asthma include upper respiratory tract infections, allergies, exer-
cise, and to a lesser extent emotional stress and smoke. Viruses causing the common
cold such as rhinovirus and RSV have been shown to predict development of asthma
and a decrease in lung function, and risk of exposure to such viruses could possibly be
decreased by delaying day-care attendance, strict avoidance of second-hand tobacco
smoke and decreased exposure to air pollution [16].
1.2.1
Pathophysiology of Asthma
Asthma is a relatively heterogenous disease, and is often misdiagnosed, especially in
adults. Adult-onset asthma seems to have a different development and manifestation
than childhood-onset asthma [17], and the latter will be the focus of this study.
Several functional and pathophysiological subtypes of asthma have been described,
where phenotypic features such as age of onset and severity have been further catego-
rized into endotypes. Further subcategorizing phenotypes provides an advantage in
targeting endotype specific treatments. Severe asthma has a significant effect on the
quality of life, and requires heavy medication. Medicated patients can still however
experience severe symptoms with life-threatening or even fatal attacks. The best de-
==PAGE:16==
8
1 Introduction
scribed endotype of severe asthma is the T-helper type 2 (TH2) asthma, sub-grouped
into TH2high and TH2low [18]. The characteristics of TH2high include eosinophilic
inflammation, whereas the TH2low is characterized by neutrophilic or paucigranu-
locytic inflammation.
Eosinophils and neutrophils are granulocyte and and their
sputum levels are used to determine the endotype. Inflammation is is considered pau-
cigranulocytic when neutrophilic and eosinophilic levels are unelevated, and is the
most common endotype of stable asthma [19].
A type 2 immune response is induced by secretion of interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-5 and
IL-13 cytokines by TH2 cells upon antigen presentation (fig. 1.3), characterized by
airway inflammation. A TH2 cytokine locus is located on chromosome 5 and is regu-
lated by RAD50 [20], acting as a locus control region. Interleukins play an important
role in immune responses and generally promote development and differentiation of
T, B and hematopoeitic cells.
IL-4 triggers differentiation of naive TH cells into
TH2 cells and trigger class switching of B-cell into IgG1 and IgE . [21]. IgE is then
released into circulation and attaches to mast cells and basophils, thus triggering
an immune response. IL-13 secretion also induces B-cell IgE production, generation
of eosinophil chemoattractants and maturation of mucus-secreting goblet cells. IL-5
induces activation, maturation and production of eosinophils [22].
A majority of asthma treatments and prevention strategies target the TH2high en-
dotype [23]. Corticosteroid and IgE-directed treatments have become commonplace,
but a large portion of asthmatic patients do not have airway eosinophilia. Unrespon-
siveness to corticosteroids experienced by many patients may therefore be due to their
underlying asthma endotype, rather than steroid resistance [24].
1.2.2
Asthma associated genes
Several genes have been previously associated with susceptibility to asthma. The
NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog of Published Genome-Wide Association Studies [25]
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Respiratory Illnesses
9
Figure 1.3: Type 2 immune responses in asthma. CD4+T cells are activated to a
IL-4-competent state by dendritic cells which migrate to the lymph node when the
OX40 ligand is expressed. IL-4 T cells migrate to B cell follicles and mature into TH2
cells. IgE class-switching in B cells is induced by IL-4 secreting cells, and TH2 cells
migrate to the epithelium and secrete IL-5 and IL-13. Reprinted from [24].
was used to search for genes previously associated with early-onset asthma (EOF ID
EFO_0004591) (table 1.1). 492 associations from 24 studies had been discovered as of
July 1st 2020, but this number does not represent the number of unique genes found.
A study by Zhu et al. on the relationship between obesity and asthma related subtypes
revealed 219 genetic associations with childhood onset asthma. The data set consisted
of 13,435 cases with early-onset asthma and 393,186 controls, all of European ancestry.
Another study by Ferreira et al. on the UK Biobank data revealed 105 associations,
with 25 novel associations many of which were shared with the study by Zhu et al.
==PAGE:18==
10
1 Introduction
Since the list of associated SNPs is lengthy, only genes with known molecular function
that have been verified by more than one study are included in the list of previously
associated genes. The exception to this is the CDHR3 gene identified by Bønnelykke
et al. as it is relevant to the study.
Table 1.1 is therefore not a complete list of
early-onset asthma-associated genes, but merely genes reported by >1 study to the
NHGRI-EBI- GWAS catalog.
1.2.3
Metabolites and Respiratory Illnesses
Metabolites are intermediate or end products of cellular metabolism. Metabolism oc-
curs when cells break down naturally occurring substances, creating energy needed for
development, growth and reproduction. Most diseases are consequences of metabolism
of cellular processes, and thus metabolites are often highly associated with complex
diseases [33]. Utilizing metabolites as biomarkers for diseases can help to illuminate
the molecular mechanisms of diseases which are not fully understood.
Metabolites can be divided into two major sub-types: primary and secondary metabo-
lites. Primary metabolites directly affect survival of an organism while secondary
metabolites can lead to lack of fitness if scarce.
A ubiquitous class of metabolites known as sphingolipids is found in various species.
They are involved in important processes such as signal transduction and cell recogni-
tion. Functional diversity of sphingolipids has been studied for a range of conditions,
and defects have been shown to have significant effects on the nervous system [34]
along with immune responses and inflammation. Human rhinovirus and respiratory
syncytial virus rely on sphingolipids for viral entry, and contracting both these viruses
before the age of three has been correlated with asthma induction, with an odds ratio
of 10 [35]. 10-15% of phospholipid content consists of the sphingolipid sphingomyelin
[36]. Sphingomyelin resides predominantly in the plasma membrane where it is bound
to cholesterol (fig. 1.4). These tightly bound domains, called lipid rafts, play impor-
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Respiratory Illnesses
11
Table 1.1: A list of genes previously associated with childhood-onset asthma.
Gene
Function
CXCR5 [26, 27, 29]
Help migrate TFH* cells
BACH2 [26, 27]
Promotes antibody class switching
CD247 [27, 29]
Encodes for T-cell receptor
CDHR3 [28]
Cell adhesion
CLEC16A [26, 27, 29]
Autophage regulator
D2HGDH [26, 27, 29]
Indirect effect on histone and DNA methylation
EMSY [26, 27, 29]
anscriptional regulation and skin barrier formation
FCER1G [26, 27]
IgE Binding
FLG [26, 27, 29]
Forming skin barrier
GSDMB [26, 27, 29][28] [30]
Airway smooth-muscle contraction
GTF3AP1, IL33 [26, 27, 29, 30]
Activates inflammation-related eosinophils
HLA-DQ [26, 29]
MHCII surface receptor on AGP*
IKZF3 [26, 31]
Regulation of B lymphocyte proliferation and differentiation
IL1RL1/IL18R1 [27, 29, 30]
Interleukin 1 receptor
IL2 [26, 27, 29]
TH2 cytokine
IL4R [26, 27, 29]
Interleukin receptor
ITGB8 [26, 27, 29]
Interleukin signaling mediator
LPP [26, 27, 29]
Cell adhesion
MICB [26, 32]
Activation of natural killer and CD8 T cells
NDFIP1 [26, 27, 29]
Regulation of the IgE/Fc￿RI signal transduction pathway in mast cells.
NOD2 [26, 27, 29]
Bacterial sensor
OVOL1 [26, 27, 29] [31]
Regulates FLG expression
RAD50 [26, 27, 29] [28]
TH2 cytokine locus regulator
RORA [26, 27, 29]
Implicated in epithelial cell differentiation
SMAD3 [26, 27, 29]
Transcriptional modulator
STAT6 [26, 27, 29]
Th2 differentiation
TLR1 [26, 27, 29]
Mediates the innate immune response to bacterial lipoproteins or lipopeptides
TSLP [26, 27, 29]
Activation of antigen presenting cells for T cell maturation
WDR36 [27, 26]
T cell activation
tant roles in lymphocyte maturation [g], antigen presentation [37], signal transduction
in lymphocytes [38] and mast cell activation to name a few. Events leading to a cellu-
lar response depends on receptors and proteins present in the plasma membrane. The
positioning and movement of the proteins in the plasma membrane depends on the
fluidity and flexibility of the membrane which is determined by its composition. A
decrease in cholesterol to sphingomyelin ratio, and an increase in sphingomyelin and
sphingomyelinase activity has been observed in asthmatic patients.
Consequently,
targeting sphingomyelin inhibitors may be useful for treatment of asthma [39].
==PAGE:20==
12
1 Introduction
Figure 1.4: Composition of lipid rafts. Reprinted from [LipidRaftsPhase)]
Another metabolite with an association to asthma is homocitrulline. Homocitrulline
co-localized with eosinophil peroxidase, which is released by active eosinophils has
been identified in asthmatic airways [37]. Post-translational modification of lysine
with cyanate produces homocitrulline, and the presence of this amino acid has been
shown to trigger primary immune responses, such as proliferation of CD4+ cells and
production of IL-10, IFN-γ and IL-17 [40].
1.3
Statistical Inference
The branch of inferential statistics utilizes statistical models to make generalizations
about a population parameter from a sample. The two main schools that deal with
this are the frequentist school and the Bayesian school, which differ in their inter-
pretation of probability. The classical definition of probability describes probability
as a numerical estimate of how likely an event is to occur, based on the principle of
indifference, and the definition of probability by the two schools of thought are de-
rived from this. The frequentist school defines the probability of an event as equal to
the long-term frequency of the occurrence of the event, were the sampling process re-
peated multiple times. It means that probabilities cannot be assigned to single trials,
but rather the proportional outcome of infinite imaginary repetitions of the sampling
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Statistical Inference
13
process. The Bayesian definition, which provides a more intuitive approach, states
that probability is a quantification of belief, i.e. the uncertainty of the occurrence of
an event.
The fundamental differences between these two philosophies, along with their advan-
tages, limitations and applications in GWAS, will be covered in this section in order
to give enough statistical context for subsequent sections.
1.3.1
Frequentist Inference
Frequentist inference is based on long-term frequencies where probabilities are only
attached to random and repeatable events, and the uncertainty is aleatoric.
The parameter estimate, along with the true parameter value, is fixed in the eyes of
a frequentist, and carries no uncertainty. Therefore, the frequentist refuses to model
the parameter’s probability distribution, and can never answer the logical question
of the probability of the parameter being equal to or greater than a certain value.
Instead, the maximum likelihood estimate is reported as the best estimate of the true
parameter.
The maximum likelihood estimate is often accompanied by confidence intervals and p-
values. Expressing confidence intervals is a way of conveying more than a mere point
estimate by specifying a range of estimates. The intervals typically range from 95%
to 99%, signifying that the true parameter would lie within the 95% of the generated
intervals if the experiment were to be repeated multiple times. The p-value is the
most widely used statistical value in modern science, and conveys the probability of
observing data under the null hypothesis that is at least as extreme as the actual
observed data. If observing extreme data under H0 is likely, relflected by high p-
value, H0 is not rejected. In contrast, a low p-value corresponds to the probability of
observing such extreme data being low and rejecting H0.
==PAGE:22==
14
1 Introduction
One of the advantages of the frequentist approach is that the maximum likelihood
estimate is computationally cheap to determine. The likelihood is simply maximized
by deriving the log-likelihood with respect to the model parameters and solving for
zero.
Another advantage is that it is is straight forward to implement for hypothesis testing,
as no prior information about the parameter is required, so the data can simply be
inserted into a formula and the probability estimated without any subjectivity.
The limitations of frequentist inference and the use of p-values are however noteworthy.
One of the fundamental problems with p-values is that they are in part determined by
unobserved data. This was eloquently put by Harold Jeffreys in 1961 “What the use
of P implies, therefore, is that a hypothesis that may be true may be rejected because
it has not predicted observable results that have not occurred” [41]. This opens up for
statistical bias in experiments, as a researcher may opt to stop the experiment when a
significant p-value has been reached. This can also be demonstrated by the negative
binomial vs binomial sampling plans, which can render very different p-values for the
same sample data, as the p-value is affected by expected hypothetical data under the
null distribution [42].
Another limitation of the p-value is that it does not quantify statistical evidence. If
two experiments, A and B, with sample size 10 and 1000 respectively, report the same
p-value of p = 0.025, then according to Fisher, they provide equal evidence against the
null hypothesis [43]. However, an article written by 10 of the most reputable statis-
ticians in the world, argues that larger sample size provides more evidence against
the null hypothesis than the smaller sample size, as it is less likely to be affected by
chance [44]. Thirdly, some researchers argue that small sample size actually provides
more evidence against the null hypothesis, stating then that the smaller sample has a
much higher effect size since it is detected in only 10 samples [45]. These discrepancies
in interpretation of p-values provide more than enough basis to revisit how statistical
testing is performed in modern science.
==PAGE:23==
1.3 Statistical Inference
15
Historically, genome wide association studies have utilized a frequentist approach with
p-values. Each SNP is independently fit as a predictor and tested for a significant asso-
ciation with a phenotype. Often covariates, such as age and sex, along with principal
componentes are included to adjust for potential biases. A genome-wide significance
threshold of P < 5 * 10−8 has been the standard, but as statistical significance must
be determined by an appropriate threshold and multiple testing must be corrected
for, p-values should be determined differently for each study, based on SNP count
included in the study. Multiple testing is often corrected by Bonferroni methods, but
those adjustments may overcorrect, as Bonferroni corrections assume that all tests
are independent, which is not the case for SNPs in high linkage disequilibrium, i.e.
are inherited together more often than random.
1.3.2
Bayesian Inference
The second school of inferential statistics, based on Bayes theorem, approaches prob-
ability more generally than the frequentist school in the sense that it can model a
probability distribution for a non-repeatable event that has not occurred. Bayes the-
orem combines prior knowledge about the parameter with the data, resulting in a
parameter probability distribution. Bayes theorem is defined in equation 1.1,
p(θ|X) = p(X|θ) × p(θ)
p(X)
(1.1)
where θ is the parameter, X is the data, p(X|θ) is the likelihood and p(θ) is the prior
probability.
The likelihood expresses the plausibility of the data through a mathematical formula,
such as the binomial or normal distribution. The likelihood function computes how
relatively likely the data was generated with the parameter set at different values,
i.e. as a function of θ. For example in the case of the normal distribution, it is the
relative number of ways to see the data, given the parameters mean, µ and standard
deviation, σ.
==PAGE:24==
16
1 Introduction
Parameters will differ depending on the likelihood function chosen, and what one
is attempting to estimate. The parameter estimate is then used to infer about the
population. In Bayesian inference, parameters are unfixed, random variables, while
samples are viewed as fixed, so the parameter space be modeled with uncertainty.
This is contrary to frequentist belief, where the parameter is a fixed value but the
data carries uncertainty. The Bayesian machinery uses the likelihood, the observed
data, and a range of plausible parameter values (or combination of parameter val-
ues for multi-parameter likelihood functions), and returns a parameter probability
distribution. Therefore, the entire probability distribution is therefore the Bayesian
estimate of the parameter. Using Bayesian inference, probability distributions can be
placed on anything with uncertainty. This can aid with as missing data or measure-
ment errors.
Bayes theorem combines the sampled data with prior information, which are initial
sets of plausible parameter values. The combination of the prior and the likelihood
distribution of the data makes up the posterior distribution, and is determined by
the relative strength of each source of information (fig. 1.5). When a sample is small,
the data carries limited information, and the posterior distribution will be governed
by the prior. However, as sample size increases, the relative strength of the prior
distribution decreases and the posterior distribution is governed by the likelihood.
Taking the product of the prior and likelihood, and dividing it by the average over
the entire parameter space of the likelihood, and weighing it by the prior, ensures
that the posterior behaves as a proper probability density distribution and integrates
to 1 (eq. 1.2).
p(X) =
Z
θ
p(X|θ) p(θ) dθ
(1.2)
This denominator value is known as the marginal likelihood, evidence, or average
likelihood, and becomes increasingly difficult to compute when the number of pa-
rameters is large. For example, 1, 000K values must be computed sequence of one
thousand possible parameter values, for K parameters. This becomes impossible due
==PAGE:25==
1.3 Statistical Inference
17
to combinatorial explosion, and the integral becomes unsolvable. Instead, one esti-
mate the entire posterior distribution, without directly having to integrate over all
possible parameter values to calculate the marginal likelihood. This can be achieved
with Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods (MCMC).
1.3.3
Markov Chain Monte Carlo
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) are empirical tools useful for finding posterior
distributions in Bayesian models by producing samples through an algorithm. MCMC
relies on Monte Carlo methods, which are based on the law of large numbers, where
R −inf
inf
f(x) is interpreted as the expected value, Ef(x), and an approximation of E can
be found by taking a mean of n independent samples. The samples are generated by a
construction of Markov chains, which model sequences of events, where the probability
of each event is based on the previous event’s state (eq. 1.3). The sampling logic is
the following:
1. Set an initial parameter value at position θcurrent and maximum number of
positions to test .
2. Propose a move to a new position, θproposed.
Figure 1.5: The effect of the prior distribution and likelihood on the posterior. a) flat
prior b) weak prior, c) a strong prior
==PAGE:26==
18
1 Introduction
3. If the probability of the data, given the product of the prior and the likelihood,
is greater or equal under the proposed position parameter value compared to
the current parameter value accept the move and set the parameter value to
the proposed value.
Else, compute the ratio of the likelihood of the proposed parameter and the
current parameter and:
• Draw a random real number between 0 and 1.
• If the random number is smaller than the ratio, reject the move, and the
position remains unchanged.
Else, accept the move to a new position.
4. Continue until maximum number of positions have been tested.
θ =











θproposed
P(X|θcurrent)<P(X|θproposed)
θcurrent
u ∈[0, 1] < P (X|θproposed)
P (X|θcurrent)
θproposed
u ∈[0, 1] > P (X|θproposed)
P (X|θcurrent)
(1.3)
The sampling described is a case of the Metropolis-Hastings Algorithm from which
the widely used Gibbs sampling and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) are derived.
The Metropolis-Hastings algorithm lacks efficiency, as the proposals for a new position
are random, which leads to a long time being spent on re-exploring the same areas
and rejecting moves. When the complexity of the target is low enough, and given
sufficient time, the target may be heuristically reached, but this becomes less reliable
with increased complexity. Therefore, the efficiency of the sampling therefore depends
on the distribution of proposals, but comes at a computational cost. This is the case
of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, which needs fewer samples than the highly random
Metropolis-Hastings and Gibbs samplers. HMC reduces correlation between sample
positions by proposing moves to distant positions that have a high probability of
==PAGE:27==
1.3 Statistical Inference
19
being accepted.
The acceptance probability is determined by approximating the
energy conserving properties using a a numerical integration scheme for Hamiltonian
system, the symplectic integrator (SI). This reduces the number of samples needed
to cover the entire sample space.
As mentioned before, frequentist methods have ruled the world of genome-wide asso-
ciation studies using single SNP analysis. Many recent methods using the Bayesian
framework have focused on both single SNP models, creating whole-genome predic-
tion models, and multi-SNP models. The Bayesian approach helps to overcome the
previously described limitations of frequentist p-values, along with allowing for multi-
ple possible genetic models, at the cost of computational resources, along with model
assumptions using priors. One of the major advantages of using MCMC with the
Bayesian framework is that it is very flexible with respect to complexity. With an
increased number of parameters, a frequentist approach handles the high dimensional
fit through maximum likelihood poorly, except under normal and linear conditions.
Bayesian MCMC approaches allow for multilevel models, and are able to incorporate
multiple genetic models with estimating, for example SNP effect sizes for example.
The biggest advantage of the Bayesian paradigm is the use of prior evidence and
reasoning, pooling together all the knowledge a researcher has about a parameter,
which helps to reduce biases and noisy estimates generated by the frequentist method.
Bayesian posterior distributions are also much more intuitive to interpret compared
to frequentist confidence intervals, where the 95% Bayesian interval means that the
probability that the true parameter lies within the interval is actually 95%.
The
skepticism of Bayesian methods is understandable, as many researchers have been
conditioned to not introduce any subjectivity into their experiments. Subjectivity is
also present in frequentist methods, as the choice of likelihood function and inclu-
sion of interaction terms but exclusion of others, clearly introduces subjectivity. The
skepticism of Bayesian methods arises fundamental misunderstanding of the Bayesian
approach, which actually closely mimics the scientific method. As a scientist obtains
more samples for his or her dataset, less weight is put on the previous sample taken
==PAGE:28==
20
1 Introduction
- this also goes for prior knowledge; with more data collected, the less weight is put
on the prior. By testing different prior beliefs that individuals might have, conver-
gence of opinion can be tested: if important differences in posteriors are present, then
one can conclude that the data does not provide enough information to settle these
differences.
1.4
Linear Models
This section will give insight into generalized linear models (GLMs) and their calcu-
lations.
1.4.1
Generalized Linear Models
Generalized linear models express the relationship between a response variable as a
function of its predictor(s) (eq. 1.4).
yi = β0 + β1xi + εi
(1.4)
where yi is the response variable, xi is the variable, β0 is the intercept, β1 is the
regression coefficient, and ε is the noise term.
All GLMs consist of three components
• A linear predictor
• A link function
• A probability distribution
The linear predictor is the combination of the explanatory variable, xi and the re-
gression coefficient β1. The regression coefficient expresses the relative effect of the
==PAGE:29==
1.4 Linear Models
21
explanatory variable on the predicted response variable, yi, where i refers to each
individual element of a list ranging from 0 to n.
The link function relates the response variable to the predictor in a linear manner,
g(µ) = β0 + β1xi.
When the relationship between the explanatory and response
variable is already linear, the identity link function is used, as in linear regression,
where g(µ) = µ. The link functions vary between families of distributions, but all
provide a relationship between the predictors and the mean distribution function.
The third component is the probability distribution, which describes the process
of data generation. Determining an appropriate distribution is important and can
sometimes be difficult when the data does not seem to follow a specific distribution.
However, factors such as modality, symmetry,whether the distribution has upper and
lower bounds, whether the data is discrete or continuous, and previous research, can
aid in choosing the appropriate distribution for the dataset.
In GWAS these generalized linear models can be utilized to find SNPs associated with
a phenotype. Using equation 1.4, the variables can all be translated into a genetic
linear model, where the phenotype is a function of the number of minor alleles in a
given individual. yi then corresponds to the phenotype, β0 represents the background
probability of having the trait, xi is the genotype of individual i, encoded according
to a genetic model, with respect to number of minor alleles, and lastly β1 would be
the relative effect of the genotype on the phenotype. An example of this can be found
in figure 1.6
==PAGE:30==
22
1 Introduction
Figure 1.6: Example of fitting SNP genotypes to phenotypic data using linear regres-
sion.
The following subsections will explain different linear models required for this study.
1.4.1.1
Linear Regression
Linear regression is used when the response variable is a continuous function of the
predictors and are able to on take any value. When the relation between explanatory
and response variables is assumed to be linear, the model is referred to as a linear
regression. As was mentioned before, linear regression uses the identity link function
to establish a linear relationship between the explanatory and response variables.
µ = β0 + β1xi
(1.5)
The likelihood function of the normal distribution is defined as:
L(
 y | µ, σ2
=
1
σ
√
2π e−1
2(
y−µ
σ )
2
(1.6)
Where the probability of y, given the mean µ (eq 1.5) and the variance σ2 is estimated
by equation 1.6. Since working with sums is easier than working with products, the
log of the likelihood is often used, and it determines the goodness of fit of the model
conditional on the data (eq. 1.7). The highest probability of the observed data, given
==PAGE:31==
1.4 Linear Models
23
a parameter is found by maximizing the log-likelihood, which gives a frequentist
point estimate of the most probable parameter value. This is done by deriving the
log-likelihood with respect to the parameters.
ℓ(y | µ, σ2) = −n
2 log 2π −n log σ −
1
2σ2
n
X
i=1
(yi −(µ))2
(1.7)
The Bayesian estimate is however the entire distribution of possible parameters, all
of which are generated from their own distributions. The posterior distribution can
then be defined as the being proportional to the product of the normally distributed
likelihood and prior distribution (eq. 1.8).
f(β0, β1, σ2|Y, X)
|
{z
}
posterior
∝
Y
i=1
N
 yi|β0 + β1xi, σ2
|
{z
}
likelihood
fβ0(β0)fβ1(β1)fσ2(σ2)
|
{z
}
priors
(1.8)
Putting priors on β0, β1 and σ2 is required, which confines the parameters to a
reasonable space.
If the regression coefficient β1 is believed to be approximately
normally distributed and rarely has an effect, then one can argue a normal distribution
with a mean of zero and a low standard deviation is appropriate.
Linear regression can be used to predict phenotypes such as blood pressure, metabolite
concentrations and microbial biomass to name a few.
1.4.1.2
Logistic Regression
Simple logistic regression is applied when modeling the probability of a binary class,
given some parameters. As there is a non-linear relationship between the response
and explanatory variables, the response variables must be converted to probabilities,
and log-transformed in order to get an unbounded range of values by the logit link-
function(eq. 1.9). θ can then be solved for by exponentiating the linear predictors
(eq. 1.10).
logit(θ) = log

θ
1 −θ

(1.9)
==PAGE:32==
24
1 Introduction
θ =
exp (β0 + β1xi)
1 + exp (β0 + β1xi)
(1.10)
The likelihood function, assuming that the observations follow a Bernoulli distribu-
tion, is then defined as:
L(y = k | θ) = θk(1 −θ)1−k
(1.11)
where θ is the probability of k = 1. As in linear regression, the log of the likelihood
(eq. 1.12) is taken and derived with respect to the parameters in order to calculate
maximum likelihood estimate.
ℓ(p(y = k | θ)) =
n
X
i=1
ki(log θ) + (1 −ki) log(1 −θ)
(1.12)
Both the Bayesian and frequentist frameworks use the logit link function along with
a Bernoulli distribution. As is the case in all Bayesian inference, priors are set for the
parameter distribution. The Bayesian relation between the likelihood and the prior
to generate the posterior is defined as:
f(β0, β1|Y, X)
|
{z
}
posterior
∝
Y
i=1
Bernoulli

yi|
exp (β0 + β1xi)
1 + exp (β0 + β1xi)

|
{z
}
likelihood
fβ0(β0)fβ1(β1)
|
{z
}
priors
(1.13)
Logistic regression can be used to predict binary phenotypes such as cases and con-
trols.
1.4.1.3
Negative Binomial Regression
The negative binomial distribution is a generalization of the Poisson distribution,
both of which model count data where the response variable is a nonnegative integer.
These are therefore both unbounded discrete distributions. Poisson assumes an equal
mean and variance, unlike the negative binomial where they are unequal.
Multiple parametrization exist for the negative binomial, depending on whether the
variance is known, in which case, estimating the likelihood is more straight forward.
==PAGE:33==
1.4 Linear Models
25
However, for the sake of this project, the negative binomial is a two parameter distri-
bution where variance is based on the relationship between the location parameter µ
and dispersion parameter ϕ:
var(Y ) = µ + µ2
ϕ
(1.14)
The negative binomial uses the same link function as the logistic regression, the logit.
The negative binomial distribution with an unknown dispersion parameter is then
defined as:
L(y|µ, ϕ) =
y + ϕ −1
y
 
µ
µ + ϕ
y 
ϕ
µ + ϕ
ϕ
.
(1.15)
ℓ(y|µ, ϕ) = log
y + ϕ −1
y

+ y log

µ
µ + ϕ

+ ϕ log

ϕ
µ + ϕ

.
(1.16)
When estimating ϕ via maximum likelihood estimation, one must keep in mind that if
the mean exceeds the variance, causing an under-dispersion, the maximum likelihood
estimate does not exist, as one cannot take the logarithm of negative numbers. It is
obvious that this also means that no solution exists for µ = 0. When the variance
only slightly exceeds the mean, ϕ becomes very large, and converges towards a Poisson
distribution.
f(β0, β1, ϕ|Y, X)
|
{z
}
posterior
∝
Y
i=1
NegBinomial

yi|
exp (β0 + β1x)
1 + exp (β0 + β1x), ϕ

|
{z
}
likelihood
fβ0(β0)fβ1(β1)fϕ(ϕ)
|
{z
}
priors
(1.17)
The negative binomial can be used to model count data where the mean and the
variance are unequal, such as number of infections and number of hospitalizations. If
the mean and variance are equal, a Poisson distribution is more appropriate.
==PAGE:34==
26
1 Introduction
Figure 1.7: The three distributions described in the previous section.
1.5
Project Objective
The aim of this project is to use Bayesian and frequentist approaches to perform
genome-wide association studies for multiple phenotypes related to asthma, and non-
asthma related metabolite phenotypes and their implications in single-SNP analyses.
This will be achieved through the following objectives:
• Generate Bayesian and frequentist models for estimating effect sizes of single
SNPs on eight different phenotypes of varying scales and distributions and com-
pare the two methods.
• Compare Bayesian models of different distributions with respect to model fit
and information content.
• Generate Bayesian mixture models for three different genetic models and com-
pare estimates.
• Validate SNPs found in previous research through Bayesian approaches.
• Optimize for model speed through parameter and data transformations.
The following section will introduce the means to achieve the project objectives, in-
cluding an introduction to the software utilized along with explicit model definitions.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 2
Materials & Methods
Genome-wide association studies require both genotype and phenotype information
from individuals. DNA samples are collected from individuals and purified, and their
genotypes can determined most commonly by SNP microarrays or whole genome
sequencing methods. This chapter will describe the data collection process, quality
control pipeline, the statistical and analytical methods used to perform the genome-
wide association study.
2.1
Data
The Copenhagen Prospective Study on Asthma in Childhood (COPSAC) is a clinical
research unit for pediatric asthma with the aim of investigating prevention strate-
gies. A myriad of endophenotypes have been collected by COPSAC, with regular
assessments and physical examinations throughout early life. In this study, three dif-
ferent cohorts from COPSAC were studied for genetic association with eight different
phenotypes (table 2.1).
2.1.1
Cohorts
2.1.1.1
COPSAC2000
The COPSAC2000 is prospective clinical birth cohort study of 411 children born by
asthmatic mothers, recruited between 1998-2001 in the greater Copenhagen area [46].
==PAGE:36==
28
2 Materials & Methods
The primary objective of the study was to investigate interactions between genetics
and environmental factors, and and their effect on atopic diseases. The first assess-
ment of the children occurred one month after birth, and then bi-annually until the
age of seven, with additional visits at the onset of acute troublesome lung symptoms
(TLS) or acute dermatitis symptoms [46]. Various metrics were measured throughout
the study, such as urine metabolites, microbiome culture in gut and airway, occur-
rence of infection and use of medication. The phenotypes analyzed from the cohort
for this study were the number of antibiotic administrations and number of respira-
tory infections from birth until the age of three. DNA was extracted from blood and
genotyped using IlluminaInfiniumTM II HumanHap 550 SNP BeadChip technology
[28].
2.1.1.2
COPSAC2010
The COPSAC2010 cohort is a population-based clinical study of 736 pregnant women
and 700 children, recruited from 2008-2010 in the greater Copenhagen area [46]. The
primary objective of the study was to investigate the influence of maternal diet during
pregnancy on maturation and regulation of neonatal immune responses. The children
were assessed at one month after birth, and bi-annually for various metrics such as
lung function, use of medication, blood pressure, blood metabolite levels, etc. A total
of seven phenotypes were collected from the COPSAC2010 cohort: the number of
antibiotic administrations and number of respiratory infections until the age of three,
along with plasma metabolite levels of five different metabolites. Genotyping was
performed using Illumina Infinium™HumanOmniExpressExome BeadChip [28].
2.1.1.3
COPSACexacerbations
The COPSACexacerbations cohort is a study of children who were hospitalized more
than once due to exacerbations asthma exacerbations between the age of two and six,
identified by the Danish National Patient Register [47]. Inclusion criteria included the
duration of hospitalizations lasting longer than one day, and that the hospitalizations
==PAGE:37==
2.1 Data
29
were separated by at least six months. DNA was extracted from dried blood which
was sampled through the Danish neonatal screening program and stored the Danish
Neonatal Screening Biobank. Genotyping was performed using Affymetrix Axiom
CEU array [28].
2.1.1.4
UK Biobank
UK Biobank is a study of individuals from the ages of 40-69 from the United Kingdom
with the aim of investigating the effects of genetics and environment on disease de-
velopment [48]. For phenotypic assessment, the individuals answered a questionnaire
regarding their health and medical history, followed by an interview.
Individuals
diagnosed by a doctor as children were used as a phenotype as a counterpart to
the COPSACexacerbations cohort. Genotyping was performed using the UK Biobank
Axiom Array [48].
2.1.2
Phenotypes
2.1.2.1
Antibiotics
The number of antibiotic prescriptions from birth until the age of three was collected
from the medical data of 1098 children from the COPSAC2000 and COPSAC2010
cohorts. The antibiotic prescriptions were not confined to respiratory illnesses, so any
illness suspected to be caused by bacterial infection was reported. Due to covariate
data only being available for 967 individuals for the phenotype, 131 individuals were
excluded from the dataset. The mean number of antibiotic prescriptions was 3.455,
the median was 3, and the standard deviation 3.275865.
145 individuals had no
antibiotics prescribed while one individual had a total of 28 during the first three
years of life (fig. 2.1(b)).
==PAGE:38==
30
2 Materials & Methods
2.1.2.2
Infections
The number of respiratory infections from birth until the age of three was collected
from the medical data of 1085 children from the COPSAC2000 and COPSAC2010 co-
horts. Due to covariate data only being available for 955 individuals for the phenotype,
130 individuals were excluded from the dataset. The mean number of respiratory in-
fections was 1.286, the median was 1, and the standard deviation 1.75. 431 individuals
had no respiratory infections while one individual had a total of 13 during the first
three years of life (fig. 2.1(a)).
2.1.3
Metabolites
Semi-quantitative metabolite values from blood plasma were collected at the age of
six months and six years for 1024 individuals from the COPSAC2010 cohort. Semi-
quantitative concentrations of metabolites cannot be directly compared in terms of
abundance. The data used was preprocessed before analysis by transformation to fit
Figure 2.1: Distribution of number of infections and antibiotic prescriptions for chil-
dren from birth till the age of three. a) Number of infections for 955 individuals. b)
Number of antibiotics for 966 individuals.
==PAGE:39==
2.1 Data
31
a standard normal distribution, by adjusting for the first ten principal components,
sex, and number of days solely being breastfed.
The SNP effect size is therefore
measured in units of standard deviation. Due to less variance in diet at the age of
six months, the samples collected at age six were excluded from the analysis, leaving
558 individuals.
Three metabolites known to correlate with asthma were chosen: homocitrulline [49],
sphingomyelin (d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) sphingomyelin (d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0) [50].
The nomenclature of sphingolipids is combined of the number of hydroxyl groups of
sphingosines and sphinganines (d for di-), followed by the chain length (18), and the
number of double bonds(1). The number of amide-linked fatty acids then follows,
with the chain length preceding the colon, followed by the number of hydroxyls (fig.
?? Two additional metabolites suggested by Dr. Klaus Bønnelykke at COPSAC with
high signal strength were also used for analysis: 2-aminooctanoic acid and N-acetyl-
aspartyl-glutamate (NAAG). The presence of NAAG has been shown to be more
abundant in higher grade cancers [51], but 2-aminooctanoic acid is not well studied
and no human phenotypes could be found associated with it.
2.1.3.1
Exacerbations
The exacerbations phenotype comes from the COPSACexacerbations cohort, containing
1208 cases and a control group from the Inter99 cohort from the Center for Clinical
Research and Prevention at Fredriksberg Hospital [52] of 5328 controls, totaling 6536
individuals. The individuals were adjusted for the first ten principal components and
Figure 2.2: Nomenclature of sphingoids
==PAGE:40==
32
2 Materials & Methods
sex.
2.1.3.2
UK Biobank Exacerbations
Due to time sensitivity, only the SNPs with highest effect sizes from the COPSACexacerbations
cohort were fitted for the UK Biobank dataset. After applying exclusion criteria of
non-Caucasians, 93978 individuals remained with 88097 controls and 5881 cases. The
individuals were adjusted for the first 15 principal components and sex but are not
included in table 2.1 due to the entire dataset not having been modeled.
All models were run with 2 chains, each with 800 iterations, 200 of which were warmup
chains.
==PAGE:41==
2.2 Quality Control
33
Table 2.1:
A summary of all phenotypes, their cohorts, number of individuals and
collected covariates.
Phenotype
Cohort
#Individuals
Covariates
# Infections
2000,2010
955
PC1-5
Sex
# Antibiotics
2000,2010
967
PC1-5
Sex
NAAG
2010
510
PC1-10
Sex
Days Solely Breastfeeding
Arginine & Proline
2010
510
PC1-10
Sex
Days Solely Breastfeeding
Mother’s use of fish-oil
2-Aminooctanoic acid
2010
510
PC1-10
Sex
Days Solely Breastfeeding
Mother’s use of fish-oil
Sphingomyelin (d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0)
2010
510
PC1-10
Sex
Days Solely Breastfeeding
Mother’s use of fish-oil
Sphingomyelin (d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0)
2010
510
PC1-10
Sex
Days Solely Breastfeeding
Mother’s use of fish-oil
Exacerbations
COPSACexacerbations
6536
PC1-10
Sex
2.2
Quality Control
Identifying proper genetic association depends highly on the quality of the data. Im-
proper quality control and cleaning may lead to increased false-negative or false-
positive associations, which will affect any future prospects. This includes controlling
for batch effects and marker quality as well as sample quality. The quality control of
the data had already been conducted by COPSAC before the start of the study but
the steps will be described below.
2.2.1
Sample Quality Control
Sample identity problems are a common result of handling errors and mix-ups [53].
These may include inconsistencies in the samples’ sex. This can be verified by using
e.g. heterozygosity rates on the X chromosome in order to determine the sex of the
==PAGE:42==
34
2 Materials & Methods
sample. Depending on the protocol and on the nature of the study, samples with
undetermined sex may be discarded or an attempt to retrieve the original data may
be made.
Samples with a higher frequency of shared alleles than expected could reveal identity
by descent. Therefore, samples with high identity by descent were considered related
and thus excluded. Related samples may introduce type I and type II errors causing
errors in downstream analysis [54].
Population stratification was also a accounted for.
Since natural differences are
present between populations of different genetic ancestry. Therefore, spurious sig-
nals due to inherent differences in genetic ancestry, rather than a true association
with an allele, may occur.
These biases can also be introduced through sex and
age. Adjusting for confounding effect by performing a principal component analysis
helps to remove biases introduced by heterogenous population samples.
The first
ten principal components were used to remove biases for the COPSACsevere and the
metabolites from the COPSAC2010 cohort. Additionally the metabolite genotypes
were adjusted for age, sex, mother’s use of fish oil and number of days solely being
breastfed. Population biases can be examined by quantile-quantile (QQ) plots, where
the observed p-values of SNPs are compared to theoretically expected p-values. This
relationship is roughly linear when no systematic bias is present, but a deviation from
a linear relationship may shed light on such biases.
Samples where a genotype could not be determined for >5% of the SNPs were removed
as this indicates poor sample quality.
2.2.2
Marker Quality Control
Like samples can have high missing rates, markers can as well. SNPs with a call rate
below 99% were removed from the study. A test for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium was
also conducted where SNPs significantly deviating from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium
==PAGE:43==
2.3 Models
35
of allele frequency were removed. This was tested for on the control group, where as
the control group may have an unexpected genotype frequency due to an association
with the disease. No minor allele frequency (MAF) threshold was set when receiving
the data, but SNPs with MAFs < 0.05 were removed from the analysis.
2.3
Models
2.3.1
Frequentist Models
Frequentist regression was performed on all phenotypes. The exacerbation and metabo-
lite phenotypes were fit via PLINK v1.90b6.7 [55] [56], with logistic and linear regres-
sion respectively.
One limitation of PLINK is its inability to model discrete non-
binary data, and therefore it cannot be utilized to fit the infection and antibiotic
phenotypes. To solve this, the generalized linear models found in R’s base-package
[57] were used for model fitting under the quasi-Poisson distribution which is useful
for modeling over-dispersed count data. All models were fit under the assumption of
an additive genetic where each additional minor increases the risk of the phenotype
by r.
2.3.2
Bayesian Models
All Bayesian models were fit via Rstan version 2.19.3 [58]. Rstan is an R-wrapper
for the Stan programming language for statistical modeling, which conducts Bayesian
inference through MCMC sampling. The Stan language is compiled in C++ which
allows for speedy compilation of Bayesian models. When fitting Bayesian models,
one should specify a prior, although, Stan provides a uniform prior if no explicit
priors are set. Before fitting models to the actual data, simulations with some added
stochasticity were done, where the coefficients of the linear predictors were pre-set,
and an attempt was made to extract the correct values. This was done both in order
==PAGE:44==
36
2 Materials & Methods
to get a better understanding of the genotypic data generation process, the effect of
priors, possible causes of divergent chains and bad parameter estimates.
Priors were set after a discussion with Professor Anders Gorm Pedersen, along with
general prior choice recommendations made by the Stan development team [59].
All of the phenotypes were fit using the same priors, with the intercept and covariates
∼N(0, 1), and the SNP effect size ∼N(0, 0.22), which nudges the probability mass
very close to 0.
Each covariate was scaled to have a mean of zero and standard
deviation of one.
As both Poisson and negative binomial models can be used to fit count data, a choice
between the two models had to be made.
A subset of 100 SNPs was fit to both
models for antibiotic prescriptions and infection phenotypes in order to determine
model fit. A comparison of the prediction accuracy between a Poisson, zero-inflated
Poisson, negative binomial and zero-inflated negative binomial was made, using leave-
one-out cross-validation with the loo package in R [60]. Loo uses Pareto-smoothed
importance sampling, which smooths the importance ratios of the input variables,
by using the maximum likelihood fit of the generalized Pareto distribution and the
model with the higher estimated out-of-sample prediction accuracy was chosen. Both
phenotypes showed preference for the negative binomial distribution, with an over-
dispersion parameter. The model distributions chosen, along with their link functions
and priors are shown in table 2.2.
2.3.3
Significance Thresholds
Although making discrete decisions should generally be avoided in research [61], some-
times making them is unavoidable since they are very entrenched in modern science.
The frequentist framework approaches this by deciding on a p-value threshold α,
where a rejection of the null hypothesis occurs when p < α. Bayesian frameworks
have several alternatives to p-values, such as the Bayes factor which is the ratio of
==PAGE:45==
2.3 Models
37
Table 2.2:
A list of phenotypes, their distributions and link function, along with
priors for model parameters.
Phenotype
Distribution
Link Function
Prior
Antibiotics
Negative Binomial
Logit
β0 ∼N(0, 1)
β1 ∼N(0, 0.22)
βcov ∼N(0, 1)
1
√
ϕ ∼N(0, 1)
Infections
Negative Binomial
Logit
β0 ∼N(0, 1)
β1 ∼N(0, 0.22)
βcov ∼N(0, 1)
1
√
ϕ ∼N(0, 1)
Metabolites
Normal
Identity
β0 ∼N(0, 1)
β1 ∼N(0, 0.22)
σ ∼N(0, 1)
Exacerbations
Bernoulli
Logit
β0 ∼N(0, 1)
β1 ∼N(0, 0.22)
support between two models. Kruschke (2018) suggested an alternative approach,
with using the Region of Practical Equivalence (ROPE) and Highest Density Inter-
val (HDI). The highest density interval is the range of the most credible values in
the posterior, so a 95% HDI would contain 95% of the most credible values of the
parameter. The region of practical equivalence describes a range of values that are
practically equivalent to null. As the name suggests, this range is defined by practical
considerations, but this is also the case when using p-values, where larger ranges or
stricter p-values are chosen relative to the risk. Using a combination of the HDI and
ROPE, one can choose to accept or reject a null value when the entire 95% HDI lies
outside of the ROPE (fig. 2.3).
After setting a significance threshold, the SNPs which were estimated to be outside
of the ROPE were tested for linkage disequilibrium through PLINK [56]. This was
done by using the –clump argument, where significant SNPs that are in linkage dise-
quilibrium are clumped together, and represented by the SNP with the lowest p-value.
As Bayesian modeling does not render p-values, the odds ratios of the posterior were
==PAGE:46==
38
2 Materials & Methods
Figure 2.3: Relationship between a highest density interval (HDI) and the region
of practical equivalence and the decisions to which they lead. a) The entire HDI is
outside of the ROPE and the null value is rejected. b) The entire HDI is within the
ROPE and the null value is accepted. c) The entire HDI is within the ROPE, and
the null value is therefor accepted, even though the true null is not within the HDI.
d) The HDI is partly equivalent to null as some of it falls outside the ROPE and
some inside, resulting in neither accepting nor rejecting the null value.
==PAGE:47==
2.3 Models
39
multiplied by 5*10−10 to achieve appropriate formatting for plink.
2.3.4
Diagnostics
When fitting Bayesian models using MCMC, model diagnostics and fit must be in-
spected to check for any divergences in chains or autocorrelation. Stan uses a No-U-
Turn Sampler (NUTS), which is a recursive algorithm that generates a set of candidate
parameter points, but halts when the sampler begins to retrace its steps. One of the
major factors that determine efficiency in MCMC is the distance between parameter
points, i.e. the step size. If the step size is too small, the sampler stops before ever
retracing its steps, and exceeds the maximum steps allowed. If the step size is too
large, the simulation will diverge as the sampler never approaches the target. It is
therefore important to check for convergence in chains in order to assess whether the
posterior estimate can be trusted. This can be done by looking at the trace plots
(fig. 2.4) and ˆR values. ˆR values compare the equilibrium distribution to randomly
initialized chains and measures the ratio of average variance of draws within each
chain to the merged draws across chains. If the chains have converged, ˆR will be 1,
but values greater than 1.05 suggests a divergent chains [63]. Another diagnostic issue
that should be monitored is the number of effective samples. The MCMC method
is highly autocorrelated and if enough space is not sampled, then the two parameter
values are likely to be close to each other. Effective sample size is a measure of how
truly independent the samples are, i.e. how many samples are actually providing
additional information. For this project, a threshold of ˆR < 1.1 and effective sample
size > 200 were set.
==PAGE:48==
40
2 Materials & Methods
Figure 2.4: Trace plots of two MCMC chains. a) Two chains that have converged to
a parameter value. b) Two divergent chains that have not reached equilibrium.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3
Results
The results of the eight GWASes performed is divided into four sections: antibiotics,
infections, metabolites with a subsection for each metabolite, and exacerbations, in-
cluding exacerbations from the UK Biobank. All sections contain results from both
Bayesian and frequentist frameworks where summaries of estimated SNP effect sizes
are in the form of Manhattan plots and tabulated with additional SNP information.
However, as Manhattan plots generally describe frequentist results on a -log10(P)
scale, another approach had to be taken to describe Bayesian SNP effects.
The
Bayesian Manhattan plots instead represent odds ratios of the posterior mean SNP
effect size, where SNPs with a 97.5% HDI outside of the ROPE are represented as
statistically significant, acting as a counterpart to frequentist p-values. This leads to
multiple SNPs located above or below the ROPE threshold line, when in fact it is
merely their means that are outside of the ROPE. Instead, SNPs with their entire
97.5% HDI are represented in a different color for emphasis.
Quantile-quantile (QQ) plots were also generated to determine whether any system-
atic biases were present in the data.
QQ plots examine the relationship between
the distribution of expected and observed p-values and is therefore based on purely
frequentist values. If systematic biases are present in the data, a deviation from a lin-
ear relationship between the two is observed. However, depending on the number of
genome-wide significant SNPs, the end of the slope will show will display non-linearity,
with observed p-values being smaller than expected.
==PAGE:50==
42
3 Results
Gene annotation was performed using the biomaRt package from Bioconductor [64,
65]. The genome reference consortium human build 37 (GRCh37) in Ensembl was
used for retrieving gene names for each SNP [66]. When multiple genes are located
near a SNP, the SNP was inserted into the Variant Effect Predictor [67] from Ensembl,
and the gene symbol with the most hits was selected. Not all SNPs had known gene
symbols, and are therefore not annotated on the Manhattan plots.
Two databases were used for previous association look-ups. The NHGRI-EBI GWAS
Catalog of Published Genome-Wide Association Studies [25] was used as a primary
source of information, where the SNP gene symbol was used as input. The secondary
source of information was the GWAS ATLAS database [68], which contains GWAS
ATLAS combines over forty GWAS databases. Functional annotation was done using
UniProt [69] and The U.S. National Library of Medicine [70].
Considering the extensiveness of this project with respect to number of phenotypes,
only SNPs with known gene symbols were chosen for the analysis. A comprehensive
list of all associated SNPs can be found in Appendix A.
3.1
Antibiotics
The number of antibiotic prescriptions phenotype consisted of 967 individuals from
the COPSAC2000 and COPSAC2010 cohorts. A Bayesian negative-binomial regression
and frequentist quasi-Poisson regression were performed on the phenotype to attempt
identification of SNPs associated with number of antibiotics prescribed to children
below the age of four. No associations with number of antibiotic prescriptions were
found using either framework. A summary of SNPs can be seen in figure 3.1
No systematic biases were found using visual inspection of QQ-plots (fig. 3.4)
==PAGE:51==
3.1 Antibiotics
43
Figure 3.1: Manhattan plot from Bayesian negative binomial regression on number of
prescribed antibiotics for 967 individuals. The points are the estimated means of the
posterior distribution. The points represent the estimated posterior means of each
SNP, while the two horizontal lines represent the upper and lower ROPE limits, 1.15
and 0.85.
Figure 3.2: Quantile-quantile (QQ) plot of frequentist quasi-Poisson regressed ob-
served -log10(p) to expected -log10(p) under the null distribution. The black dashed
line shows the expected relationship between the expected and observed p-values. The
pink points represent the observed relationship between the expected and observed
p-values.
==PAGE:52==
44
3 Results
3.1.1
Conclusion
No signal was found in association with number of antibiotic prescriptions. As was
established in chapter 2.1, the prescribed antibiotics were not limited to bacterial
respiratory infections, which increases noise in the data as no metadata was collected
to adjust for. The fact that multiple prescriptions may have been given for the same
illness within a short period of time, where the antibiotics proved ineffective is a noise
increasing factor. Parental behavior and birth order are also variables that may result
in a larger variance within the data. First-born children are generally provided with
more attention compared non first-borns [71], indicating that parents may be less
hesitant to consult their pediatrician when an illness occurs in their first-born[72].
Some physicians also prescribe broad-spectrum antibiotics more freely than others
[73], depending on a variety of factor such as accumulated professional experience,
patient temperament and geographic location. Metadata on all of these factors may
increase signals and should be reported if this study is to be replicated.
3.2
Infections
The number of respiratory phenotype consisted of 955 individuals from the COPSAC2000
and COPSAC2010 cohorts. A Bayesian negative-binomial regression and frequentist
quasi-Poisson regression were performed on the phenotype to attempt to identify
SNPs associated with number of respiratory infections in children below the age of
four.
Eight associations with the number of respiratory infections were found using the
Bayesian framework (fig. 3.3). None of the SNPs reached genome-wide significance of
p < 5e−8 using the frequentist framework through R’s generalized linear models. The
direction of association was consistent in both frameworks with regards to increase or
decrease of risk when carrying the minor allele. Four of the SNPs could be annotated
by Ensembl [67] and underwent further analysis (table 3.1). A full list of associated
==PAGE:53==
3.2 Infections
45
SNPs can be found in Appendix A.1.1.
No systematic biases were found using visual inspection of QQ-plots (fig. 3.4).
One SNP on chromosome 1 was found to associate with the number of respiratory
infections.
rs757578 is an intron variant located on the ATP1A1 gene.
ATP1A1
encodes ATPase Na+/K+ Transporting Subunit Alpha 1 [74] and has previously
been associated with leukocyte counts in humans [75]. A study by Lingemann et
al. [77] observed that ATPA1 was activated by human respiratory syncytial virus
and that signaling by ATP1A1 was a required factor for efficient viral uptake. This
led to the conclusion that ATP1A1 is a vital protein for RSV entry into respiratory
epithelial cells [76]. The SNP had an odds ratio of 0.6845, indicating that it may have
a protective effect against susceptibility to respiratory infections. This is, however
not supported by the frequentist approach, which had a p-value of 1.2389e-04, but
SNPs with low minor allele frequencies require high statistical power in frequentist
approaches in order to be identified.
rs1729976 is an intron variant located on the CPOX gene which codes for the enzyme
coproporphyrinogen oxidase[78]. CPOX is involved in heme production, a vital com-
ponent in hemoproteins such as hemoglobin. The rupturing of red blood cells, known
as hemolysis, has widely been associated with a increased susceptibility to bacterial
infections as hemolysis releases iron into plasma, on which pathogens are dependent
[79]. The exact mechanism of how heme affects immunity is not yet well-understoodt.
No direct association of CPOX with respiratory diseases or immunological defects
Table 3.1: Summary statistics from the Bayesian negative binomial regression on
number of respiratory infections for 955 individuals. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the
highest density interval located outside of the ROPE are shown, along with frequentist
odds ratios and P values.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
ORbayes
SD
ORfreq
P-value
Gene Symbol
rs757578
1
116918385
0.08547
T
C
0.68
0.11
-0.53
0.00012
ATP1A1
rs1729976
3
98284330
0.1208
C
A
1.38
0.08
0.40
1.50-06
CPOX
rs17195563
16
6202108
0.08188
C
A
0.66
0.11
-0.57
7.77e-05
RBFOX1
rs7250193
19
52385520
0.1194
A
G
1.36
0.08
0.37
5.57e-06
ZNF577
==PAGE:54==
46
3 Results
Figure 3.3: Manhattan plot from Bayesian negative binomial regression on number
of respiratory infections for 955 individuals. The points are the estimated means of
the posterior distribution.
==PAGE:55==
3.2 Infections
47
Figure 3.4: Quantile-quantile (QQ) plot of frequentist quasi-Poisson regressed ob-
served -log10(p) to expected -log10(p) under the null distribution. The black dashed
line shows the expected relationship between the expected and observed p-values. The
pink points represent the observed relationship between the expected and observed
p-values.
has previously been made, but the Bayesian frameworks indicates that rs1729976
may increase the risk of infection when carrying the minor allele, with an odds ratio
of 1.38.
rs17195563 is a genic upstream transcript variant located on RBFOX1 at the p13.3
region on chromosome 16. RBFOX codes for RNA-binding proteins in the Fox-1 fam-
ily and has previously been associated with susceptibility for chronic sinus infections
[80], allergic rhinits [81] (OR 1.43), a decrease in interleukin-1-beta levels [82] (0.11
SD units), and an adverse response to inhaled corticosteroid treatment in asthma
[83] (OR 2.13). The genomic location of rs17195563, 16p13.3 is associated with a
syndrome known as Chromosome 16p13.3 deletion syndrome, that is believed to be
caused by microdeletion within the CREBP gene located in the middle of the 16p13.3,
between 3,775,055-3,930,727 base pairs [84]. The syndrome is characterized by failure
to thrive, hypotonia and vulnerability to infections. However, RBFOX1 is located 3
million basepairs downstream of the CREBP, so a true association with 16p13.3 dele-
tion syndrome is unlikely. The Bayesian found that rs17195563 has protective effect
against the increased number of respiratory infections.
==PAGE:56==
48
3 Results
rs7250193 is an intron variant located in the ZNF577 gene on chromosome 19. ZNF577
encodes the Zinc finger protein 577, which is involved in regulation of cellular pro-
cesses. A previous association of ZNF577 and asthma was made by Han et al. [85].
It has also been associated with eosinophil counts in a study of 440,000 individuals
of European ancestry [86], although the odds ratio was not specified. However, the
mechanism of ZNF577 action remains elusive.
3.2.0.1
Conclusion
Respiratory infections are strongly connected with the phenotype analyzed in chapter
3.1. This phenotype has considerable less noise, as the antibiotics prescriptions were
not limited to one type of infection and the fact that multiple antibiotics could have
been prescribed for a single infection. This is supported by a lower average number of
respiratory infections compared to the average number of antibiotic prescriptions (1.29
vs 3.46). This provided a much stronger signal in both the Bayesian and frequentist
approaches.
Although no SNP was considered significant through the frequentist approach, at
least two of the four SNPs identified by the Bayesian framework indicate possible
biologically significant associations. This is supported by previous association studies
and the biological functions of the proteins encoded by the genes in which the SNPs
are located.
These could be important in targeting the proteins for treatment of
respiratory infections which are the most common causes of death and illness in
children under the age of 5. The average number of respiratory episodes for children
under five is between three and six, regardless of socioeconomic status [87].
The
average number of respiratory infections within the COPSAC2000 and COPSAC2010
cohorts, was however only 1.29, but the number of infections was only reported till
the age of four.
The commonness of respiratory episodes in children has an economic burden on fami-
lies and proper management is necessary and proper identification of genetic variants
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Metabolites
49
is therefore valuable. The SNPs found here should be verified by larger sample sizes,
but could possibly be important in management of recurrent infections in children.
3.3
Metabolites
An analysis was performed on three asthma-associated metabolites Sphingomyelin
(d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0), Sphingomyelin (d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) and homocitrulline.
Two additional metabolites, without any previous association with asthma were also
analyzed, 2-aminooctanoic acid and N-acetyl-aspartyl-glutamate (NAAG). As before,
all phenotypes were modeled through a Bayesian framework using RStan [58], but
the frequentist performed a linear regression using PLINK [56].
All coefficients are reported in units of standard deviation since the data has been
transformed to fit a standard normal distribution.
3.3.1
2-Aminooctanoic Acid
Semi-quantitative levels of 2-Aminooctanoic acid from blood plasma from 510 indi-
viduals from the COPSAC2010 cohort were modeled through linear regression in order
to attempt to identify SNPs associated with altered 2-Aminooctanoic acid leves in
six month old children.
21 associations with 2-Aminooctanoic acid were identified using the Bayesian frame-
work (fig. 3.5). Four variants were identified on chromosome 2. The frequentist linear
regression, performed with PLINK [56], detected five significant SNP associations in
total, all located on chromosome 2 (fig. 3.6). All SNPs identified with the frequentist
approach were also considered significant with the Bayesian approach.
Nine SNPs found with Bayesian methods were annotated, none of which were also sig-
nificant through the frequentist framework. These SNPs underwent further analysis.
The full list of SNPs can be found in Appendix A.1.2.
==PAGE:58==
50
3 Results
Figure 3.5: Manhattan plot from Bayesian linear regression on 2-aminooctanoic acid
for 510 individuals. The points are the estimated means of the posterior distribution.
==PAGE:59==
3.3 Metabolites
51
Figure 3.6: Manhattan plot from frequentist linear regression on 2-aminooctanoic
acid for 510 individuals.
==PAGE:60==
52
3 Results
Figure 3.7: Quantile-quantile (QQ) plot of frequentist linearly regressed observed
-log10(p) to expected -log10(p) under the null distribution. The black dashed line
shows the expected relationship between the expected and observed p-values. The
pink points represent the observed relationship between the expected and observed
p-values.
Table 3.2 shows the summary statistics of the SNPs with the 97.5% HDI outside of
the ROPE.
Two SNPs on chromosome 2 were annotated, rs17792710 and rs3813230. rs17792710,
is an intron variant located on the CFAP36 gene which encodes a cilia and flagella
associated protein and has no previous associations with any disorder and was found
to be non-significant by the frequentist approach. rs3813230 is a 3 prime UTR variant
Table 3.2: Summary statistics from the Bayesian linear regression on 2-aminooctanoic
acid levels for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the highest density interval
located outside of the ROPE are shown, along with frequentist odds ratios and P
values.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
ORbayes
SD
ORfreq
P-value
Gene Symbol
rs17792710
2
55762576
0.09
C
T
1.39
0.10
1.51
0.0001731
CCDC104
rs3813230
2
74093652
0.31
T
C
0.74
0.06
0.71
1.488e-07
STAMBP
rs1806067
5
9205587
0.11
T
C
0.73
0.08
0.67
2.804e-05
SEMA5A
rs3822799
5
9450746
0.05
C
T
1.44
0.11
1.68
7.901e-05
SEMA5A
rs10827977
10
20451608
0.08
A
G
0.70
0.10
0.62
4.136e-05
PLXDC2
rs2370982
14
79890677
0.21
C
T
1.32
0.07
1.37
1.546e-05
NRXN3
rs4969049
17
71000940
0.13
T
C
1.35
0.08
1.43
1.959e-05
SLC39A11
rs11672652
19
8308957
0.12
C
T
0.69
0.09
0.63
3.032e-06
CERS4
rs12461154
19
10073324
0.10
T
G
1.38
0.09
1.49
6.217e-05
COL5A3
==PAGE:61==
3.3 Metabolites
53
and is located in STAMBP, coding for a STAM binding protein The STAM binding
protein does not have a well-defined function, but it is known to interact with the
endosomal sorting complex which has a role in endocytosis [88]. Multiple mutations
in STAMBP have been found in people with microcephaly and capillary malforma-
tions and decreased levels of the STAM binding protein may alter signaling pathways
necessary for development. Although having a low p-value, it did not surpass the
genome-wide significant threshold.
Two SNPs on chromosome 5 were a in SEMA5A, rs1806067 and rs3822799, neither of
which were considered significant by the frequentist approach. SEMA5A encodes a
Semaphorin-5A protein which are involved in neural development and has previously
been associated with autism [89].
rs10827977 is an intron variant located in PLXDC2. This gene has previously been
associated with FEV1/FVC ratio [27]. It encodes the transmembrane protein Plexin
Domain Containing 2, which has been identified as as a cell-surface receptor for
Pigment Epithelium Derived Factor (PEDF), which may be therapeutic to cancer
[90]. It does not however have any previous associations with blood protein levels.
rs2370982 on chromosome 14 is an intron variant located on the NRXN3 gene. The
gene encodes proteins involved in cell adhesion and for receptors in the nervous system
[91]. This was found to be not significant using the frequentist method, nor has any
previous associations with blood protein levels.
rs4969049 on chromosome 17 is an intron variant located in SLC39A11 which encodes
solute carrier family 39 member 11 proteins. The gene has previously been associated
with ulcerative colitis and inflammatory bowel disease [92], but was found to have a
non-significant association with 2-Aminooctanoic acid levels by the frequentist frame-
work.
Two SNPs on chromosome 19, rs11672652 and rs12461154, located in CERS4 and
==PAGE:62==
54
3 Results
COL5A3 respectively. CERS4, encoding for the ceramide synthase 4 protein, has
previously been associated with sphingomyelin levels [93] [94]. COL5A3, encodes the
collagen type V alpha 3 chain protein which has a previous association with blood
protein levels [95].
One SNP, rs12995433, was annotated by the frequentist method and considered sig-
nificantly associated with 2-aminooctanoic acid levels, but it is not displayed in the
figures or in the list. This is due to the fact that the SNPs in high linkage disequilib-
rium were clustered together. The SNPs for the Bayesian regression and frequentist
regression were clustered separately, and only the SNPs considered significant in each
framework underwent clustering. For the Bayesian approach the SNP with the high-
est posterior mean odds ratio distance from 1, was used as a representative SNP,
while the frequentist approach used the SNPs with the lowest p-value. rs12995433
had a p-value of 2.596e-18 but was in high LD with rs6546862, which had a p-value of
8.284e-19. Table 3.2 is therefore only representative of SNPs that are available from
both frameworks after clustering. The full list can be seen in Appendix A.1.2. The
four SNPs in identified by the frequentist approach were all located on 2p13.2-p13.3.
3.3.1.1
Conclusion
No real conclusion can made about the associations between the genotypes of the 510
individuals and 2-Aminooctanoic acid levels. However, a strong signal on the 2p13.1-
p13.3 region in both frameworks may suggest some biological effect of the region on
metabolism of 2-Aminooctanoic acid. These genes have poor functional annotation,
so even if the sample size were larger, the exact roles of the variants cannot be further
hypothesized at this time.
3.3.2
N-Acetyl-Aspartyl Glutamate
Semi-quantitative levels of N-acetyl-aspartyl glutamate (NAAG) acid from blood
plasma from 510 individuals from the COPSAC2010 cohort were modeled through
==PAGE:63==
3.3 Metabolites
55
linear regression in order to attempt identification of SNPs associated with altered
NAAG levels in six month old children. NAAG levels have no previous associations
with respiratory illnesses, but have been found to be higher in high grade cancers
[51].
53 associations with NAAG were found using the Bayesian framework (fig.
3.8).
48 variants were found on chromosome 11. The frequentist framework with a linear
regression using PLINK [56] found 39 genome-wide significant SNPs, all of which were
located on chromosome 11 (fig. 3.9). 15 of the 53 SNPs identified by the Bayesian
framework were shared by the frequentist framework. A complete list of significant
SNPs is found in Appendix A.1.3.
Four SNPs were annotated, one of which was also significant through the frequentist
framework, and underwent further analysis.
No systematic biases were found using
visual inspection of QQ-plots (fig. 3.10).
Out of the four annotated SNPs associated with NAAG levels, three were located on
chromosome 11. rs11039358 and rs1566729 are both located on 11p11.2, in FNBP4
and PTPRJ respectively. FNBP4 encodes fomin binding protein 4 and may have
a role in cytoskeletal dynamics [96]. It has previously been associated with alcohol
consumption [97] and neuroticism [98]. PTPRJ encodes a member of the protein
tyrosine phosphatase family which is involved in multiple processes such as growth,
differentiation of cells but also has been shown to negatively regulate T cell receptor
signaling [99]. An association with acute lymphoblastic leukemia [100], and other
Table 3.3: Summary statistics from the Bayesian linear regression on NAAG levels
acid for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the highest density interval located
outside of the ROPE are shown, along with frequentist odds ratios and P values.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
ORbayes
SD
ORfreq
P-value
Gene Symbol
rs11039358
11
47746962
0.06
A
G
0.69
0.10
0.60
5.449e-05
FNBP4
rs6485807
11
48102867
0.30
A
G
0.75
0.06
0.72
9.561e-07
PTPRJ
rs588458
11
49214048
0.43
C
A
0.63
0.05
0.60
1.04e-17
FOLH1
rs2836935
21
40566372
0.16
T
G
1.34
0.07
1.40
1.459e-05
BRWD1
==PAGE:64==
56
3 Results
Figure 3.8: Manhattan plot from Bayesian linear regression on NAAG for 510 indi-
viduals. The points are the estimated means of the posterior distribution.
==PAGE:65==
3.3 Metabolites
57
Figure 3.9: Manhattan plot from frequentist linear regression on NAAG for 510
individuals.
==PAGE:66==
58
3 Results
Figure 3.10: Quantile-quantile (QQ) plot of frequentist linearly regressed observed
-log10(p) to expected -log10(p) under the null distribution. The black dashed line
shows the expected relationship between the expected and observed p-values. The
pink points represent the observed relationship between the expected and observed
p-values.
blood cell phenotypes such as eosinophil counts [86] and neutro- and basohpil counts
[101]. Neither SNP was considered significant by the frequentist framework.
rs588458 was the only SNP considered significant by both frameworks. rs588458 is an
intron variant located on in FOLH1, which encodes the folate hydrolase 1 protein, a
glycoprotein that functions as a glutamate carboxypeptidase on NAAG. A mutation
in the gene may, therefore affect protein expression in individuals with conditions
associated with glutamate exotocicity [102], such as spinal or brain trauma.
An
association between FOLH1 and acute myeloid leukemia [103].
rs2836935 is a variant in the BRWD1 gene on chromosome 21 which encodes the
bromodomain and WD repeat domain containing 1 protein. BRWD1 is involved in
multiple cellular processes such as signal transduction, apoptosis and regulation [104].
It has previously been associated with Down’s syndrome [105].
==PAGE:67==
3.3 Metabolites
59
3.3.2.1
Conclusion
Although only three SNPs were annotated on chromosome 11, 48 SNPs around
11p11.2 were found using the Bayesian framework and 27 with the frequentist frame-
work. This region has previously been associated with Potocki-Shaffer syndrome [106].
Potocki-Shaffer syndrome is characterized by abnormal development, mental retarda-
tion and genital abnormalities in males. Haploinsufficiency of at least two genes in
the region has been linked to Potocki-Shaffer syndrome. However, NAAG levels have
not been directly associated with Potocki-Shaffer syndrome.
FOLH1 which was found significant in both frameworks, seems though to have a
strong enough signal to be identified. The fact that FOLH1 is known to function as a
glutamate carboxypeptidase, suggests that rs588458-C may cause decreased NAAG
levels, with an odds ratio of 0.6253. As NAAG is an excitatory neurotransmitter, a
balance in transmission is important, as very high levels may cause neuronal damage
[107]. Both FOLH1 and PTPRJ have previous associations with leukemia and and
they may have some involvement with white blood cells.
3.3.3
Sphingomyelin (d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0)
Semi-quantitative levels of sphingomyelin (d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) from blood plasma
from 510 individuals from the COPSAC2010 cohort were modeled through linear re-
gression in order to attempt to identify SNPs associated with altered sphingomyelin
(d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) levels in six month old children.
Twelve associations with sphingomyelin (d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) were found using the
Bayesian framework (fig. 3.11). Three variants were found on chromosome 6 and three
on chromosome 9. The frequentist framework with a linear regression using PLINK
[56] found 44 genome-wide significant SNPs, 43 of which were located on chromosome
11, (fig. 3.12). None of the twelve SNPs identified by the Bayesian framework were
shared by the frequentist framework. A complete list of SNPs considered significant
==PAGE:68==
60
3 Results
is found in Appendix A.1.4.
Five SNPs were annotated and underwent further analysis, four from the Bayesian
framework and four from the frequentist framework.
No systematic biases were
found using visual inspection of QQ-plots (fig. 3.13).
rs5705 is a synonymous variant located in the REN gene on chromosome 1. REN
encodes the renin protein, which is produced in the kidneys. Renin mostly functions
in within the renin-angiotensin system which is involved in blood pressure regula-
tion and electrolyte balance [108]. The renin-angiotensin system has previously been
investigated in association with asthma.
A study by Ramsay et al. [109] investi-
gated forty individuals with severe exacerbations, 19 of which had elevated renin and
angiotensin II levels. Renin functions in converting angiotensin into angiotensin I
and subsequently into angiotensin II, which is a weak bronchoconstrictor [109]. The
mechanism of renin-angiotensin activation in respiratory illnesses is however still not
understood and a direct association between [108] and asthma has not previously
been found.
rs2176830 is an intron variant located in TTC1 on chromosome 1. TTC1 encodes
the tetratricopeptide repeat domain 1 protein, which is involved in protein-protein
interactions but has shown no association with sphingomyelin levels nor respiratory
diseases.
Two proximal SNPs located in the PARK2 gene on chromosome 6q26 were considered
Table 3.4: Summary statistics from the Bayesian linear regression on Sphingomyelin
(d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) levels for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the
highest density interval located outside of the ROPE are shown, along with frequentist
odds ratios and P values.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
ORbayes
SD
ORfreq
P-value
Gene Symbol
rs5705
1
204131186
0.11
T
G
1.38
0.09
1.48
4.83e-05
REN
rs2176830
5
159448136
0.07
C
T
1.44
0.11
1.69
3.835e-05
TTC1
rs9346859
6
161900525
0.35
T
C
1.34
0.06
1.39
1.174e-07
PARK2
rs545310
6
161935928
0.20
C
T
1.33
0.07
1.38
2.599e-05
PARK2
rs11177370
12
69175793
0.20
C
T
1.31
0.07
1.37
3.967e-05
SLC35E3
==PAGE:69==
3.3 Metabolites
61
Figure 3.11:
Manhattan plot from Bayesian linear regression on Sphingomyelin
(d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) levels for 510 individuals.
The points are the estimated
means of the posterior distribution.
==PAGE:70==
62
3 Results
Figure 3.12:
Manhattan plot from Bayesian linear regression on Sphingomyelin
(d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) levels for 510 individuals.
==PAGE:71==
3.3 Metabolites
63
Figure 3.13: Quantile-quantile (QQ) plot of frequentist linearly regressed observed
-log10(p) to expected -log10(p) under the null distribution. The black dashed line
shows the expected relationship between the expected and observed p-values. The
pink points represent the observed relationship between the expected and observed
p-values.
significant through the Bayesian framework. PARK2 encodes Parkin RBR E3 ubiq-
uitin protein ligase (parkin), which is involved in protein degradation of excess and
damaged proteins. It is also involved in mitochondrial regulation and mitophagy[110],
although the exact mechanism is not fully understood. A study by Sachdeva et al.
[111] demonstrated that environmental stressors such as particulate matter PM2.5 can
trigger increased reactive oxygen species and mitochondrial damage, which triggers
mitophagy regulated by Parkin. Studies have shown that mitophagy is important in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and lung fibrosis [112]. Although neither SNP
was considered significant by the frequentist framework, rs9346859 had low p-values
and might indicate true biological effect.
rs11177370 is an intron variant located on SLC35E3 on chromosome 12. SLC35E3
encodes the Solute Carrier Family 35 Member E3 protein, and has not shown any
previous associations with asthma or sphingolipid metabolism.
Five SNPs had a significant association with the frequentist method, which were
not shared with the results from the Bayesian approach and can be seen in figure
==PAGE:72==
64
3 Results
3.12. Four of them were annotated, all of which are located genes on chromosome
11p11.2 which was highly associated with NAAG levels in section 3.3.2. All of them
had a p-value < ∼3.65*10−10. FNBP4 had no previous association with asthma
but PTPRJ had been shown to negatively regulate T cell receptor signaling [99].
TRIM49B encodes the tripartite motif containing 49 protein, has previously been
associated with trans fatty acid levels [113]. OR5T2 encodes the olfactory receptor
family 5 subfamily T member 2 protein and has not had a previous association with
asthma.
3.3.4
Conclusion
44 SNPs were found with the frequentist method, while only twelve with the Bayesian
one. This is due to the fact that most SNPs had an odds ratio extremely close to
1. The Bayesian method only identifies biologically significant SNPs and focuses on
estimating the parameter, rather than finding an association, as an odds ratio of
0.999999 is of no biological significance. This highlights some differences in the two
methods overall.
No SNPs were directly associated with asthma, but a few might have associations
by proxy. Most of the genes associated with the SNPs identified in this analysis do
not have well-defined functions, so mapping their relation to immune responses is
a non-trivial task. PARK2 and REN do have well defined functionalities, however
their exact mechanisms in relation to asthma are not fully mapped. Many studies
have tried to locate the exact role of renin and angiotensin II, without success, as
the renin-angiotensin system is activated in acute severe asthma, but not in chronic
asthma. The absence of the enzyme acid sphingomyelinase (ASM), which separates
the phosphorylcholine and the ceramide that make up sphingomyelin, has been shown
to be linked to lung pathology in mice, and that the differentiation and activation of
TH cells is defective in ASM deficient mice. This may indicate that sphingomyelin and
thus shpingomyelinase may play an important role in asthma development. However,
==PAGE:73==
3.3 Metabolites
65
ORMDL3, which regulates homeostasis in sphingolipids, was not shown to have an
association with sphingomyelin levels. As the mechanism of sphingomyelin in immune
activation is not perfectly understood, using sphingomyelin values as proxies might
not be helpful in detecting associations with asthma.
Lastly, the 11p11.2 region has shown strong associations in two phenotypes in this
study, but this location has genes with undefined protein function, and should be
further investigated.
3.3.5
Sphingomyelin (d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0)
Semi-quantitative levels of sphingomyelin (d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0) from blood plasma
from 510 individuals from the COPSAC2010 cohort were modeled through linear re-
gression in order to attempt to identify SNPs associated with altered sphingomyelin
(d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) levels in six month old children.
14 associations with sphingomyelin (d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0) levels were found using
the Bayesian framework (fig. ??). Three variants were found on chromosome 6. The
frequentist framework with a linear regression using PLINK [56] found 44 genome-
wide significant SNPs, 43 of which were located on chromosome 11, (fig. 3.15). None
of the 14 SNPs identified by the Bayesian framework were shared by the frequentist
framework. A complete list of SNPs considered significant is found in A.1.5.
Seven SNPs were annotated and underwent further analysis, none which were consid-
ered significant by the frequentist framework.
No systematic biases were found using visual inspection of QQ-plots (fig. 3.16).
Table 3.5 shows the summary stats of the SNPs with the 97.5% HDI outside of the
ROPE.
rs10497761 located in SLC39A10 on chromosome 2.
SLC39A10 codes the Solute
==PAGE:74==
66
3 Results
Figure 3.14:
Manhattan plot from Bayesian linear regression on Sphingomyelin
(d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0) levels for 510 individuals.
The points are the estimated
means of the posterior distribution.
==PAGE:75==
3.3 Metabolites
67
Figure 3.15: Manhattan plot from frequentist linear regression on Sphingomyelin
(d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0) levels for 510 individuals.
==PAGE:76==
68
3 Results
Figure 3.16: Quantile-quantile (QQ) plot of frequentist linearly regressed observed
-log10(p) to expected -log10(p) under the null distribution. The black dashed line
shows the expected relationship between the expected and observed p-values. The
pink points represent the observed relationship between the expected and observed
p-values.
Table 3.5: Summary statistics from the Bayesian linear regression on Sphingomyelin
(d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0) levels for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the
highest density interval located outside of the ROPE are shown, along with frequentist
odds ratios and P values.
Chr
SNP
Position
MAF
REF
A
ORbayes
SD
ORfreq
P-value
Gene Symbol
rs10497761
2
196442199
0.20
A
C
1.32
0.07
1.37
2.618e-05
SLC39A10
rs2294418
6
11759376
0.16
T
C
1.34
0.08
1.40
5.097e-05
ADTRP
rs9346859
6
161900525
0.35
T
C
1.29
0.06
1.32
9.613e-06
PARK2
rs12349878
9
74968193
0.07
T
C
1.44
0.10
1.65
7.341e-05
ZFAND5
rs447347
14
89992265
0.38
G
A
1.29
0.06
1.31
1.175e-05
FOXN3
rs628271
19
5965388
0.06
T
C
0.67
0.11
0.56
1.385e-05
RANBP3
rs6009068
22
47349718
0.07
A
G
1.40
0.09
1.54
0.0001005
TBC1D22A
Carrier Family 39 Member 10 protein, which is a zinc transporter.
SLC39A10 is
involved in multiple metabolic processes along with being a transcription, growth,
development and differentiation regulator. A previous association with food allergy
in children and adults has been shown, to a SNP located in the gene [114], and
rs10497761-A shows an association with increased sphingolipids here.
Two SNPs on chromosome 6 were identified by the Bayesian framework, rs2294418 in
ADTRP and rs9346859 in PARK2. rs9346859 was also associated with with the other
isoform of sphingomyelin analyzed in this study, but has a slightly lower odds ratio
==PAGE:77==
3.3 Metabolites
69
here (Bayes - 1.29 vs 1.34 and frequentist 1.32 vs 1.39). rs9346859 did not surpass
the genome-wide threshold in the frequentist framework in either isoform, but an
association with two isoform may indicate that rs9346859-C increases sphingomyelin
levels in plasma. ADTRP codes for androgen dependent TFPI regulating protein
but its physiological understudied. A study by
[115] demonstrated that ADTRP
plays a role in vascular development through endothelial cells by affecting membrane
events. Sphingomyelins role in membrane composition may therefore be affected by
ADTRP. rs2294418 was not found significant in the other sphingomyelin isoform,
because the 97.5% HDI did not lie outside of >1.15. However, the lower bound of the
posterior distribution was located at the odds ratio of 1.09 - so a signal is definitely
found through the Bayesian framework, depending on where the ROPE is set. An
odds ratio of 1.09 can be biologically significant, and therefore rs2294418 should be
studied. In support of this, ADTRP has been associated with post bronchodilator
FEV1/FVC ratios [116] [] and blood white cell counts [86].
rs12349878 is a 3 prime UTR variant in ZFAND5 located on chromosome 9. ZFAND5
codes for a zinc finger AN1-type containing 5 and is involved in protein degradation
much like PARK2.
A previous association with lung function has been made by
Kichaev et al. [86]. Similar to rs2294418, it was not found to be outside the ROPE
of the Bayesian framework, as its lower end of the 97.5% posterior distribution had
an odds ratio 1.10. It is therefore worth considering its role in respiratory diseases.
rs447347 is an intron variant located in FOXN3 on chromosome 14. The forkhead
box N3 (FOXN3) protein acts as a transcriptional repressor and may be involved in
DNA-damage checkpoints. A previous association with acute myeloid leukemia [103],
and cerebrospinal fluid clusterin levels [117], which may be associated with immune
responses in combination with interleukin-6. This SNP had 97.5% HDI right outside
of the ROPE in the other sphingomyelin isoform, with its lower end having an odds
ratio of 1.12.
rs628271 on chromosome 19 is located in RANBP3, which codes for RAN binding
==PAGE:78==
70
3 Results
protein 3. RANBP has a relation with the T-cell leukemia virus 1 infection [118].
A previous association with forced vital capacity and lung function was found by
Kichaev et al. In the other sphingomyelin isoform, rs628271 had its upper 97.5%
odds ratio at 0.85134, and was not determined significant by a very small margin.
Lastly, rs6009068 on chromosome 22 in TBC1D22A, encoding TBC1 domain family
member 22A protein. A previous association with interleukin-6 levels has been made
by Ahola-Olli et al. [82], which is a pro-inflammatory cytokine. The other sphin-
gomyelin isoform had its lower bound 97.5% at an odds ratio of 1.148, resulting it
having been missed significance by mere 0.012.
3.3.5.1
Conclusion
Both isoforms of sphingomyelin found an association with PARK2, where rs9346859-
C showed to increase sphingomyelin levels by 1.3 SD units. Most of the SNPs had
similar levels in both isoforms, but due to the ROPE being set at 0.85 and 1.15, this
resulted in a few being missed in the sphingomyelin (d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) isoform.
Setting a lower threshold for a biological effect would result in a large portion of
SNPs being considered biologically significant. Decreasing the threshold to 0.9 and
1.10 resulted a total of 212 SNPs considered significant by the Bayesian framework
in sphingomyelin (d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0), and 198 in sphingomyelin (d18:1/19:0,
d19:1/18:0). Since SNP effect decreases with increased sample size, and the sample
size here was rather low, one can argue that setting a lower ROPE threshold would
mean that most of the signals would disappear with larger sample size.
However, the SNPs found here and in the other sphingomyelin isoform are worth
further exploring, as they have been shown to have roles in immune responses.
==PAGE:79==
3.3 Metabolites
71
3.3.6
Homocitrulline
Semi-quantitative levels of homocitrulline acid from blood plasma from 510 individu-
als from the COPSAC2010 cohort were modeled through linear regression in order to
attempt to identify SNPs associated with altered homocitrulline levels in six month
old children.
No SNPs were considered significantly associated with homocitrulline levels through
the Bayesian approach. However, frequentist approach found 44 SNPs. 4 of those
were annotated.
No systematic biases were found using visual inspection of QQ-plots (fig. 3.19).
The four annotated genes in the frequentist methods were all located on chromosome
11, FNBP4, TRIM49B, PTPRJ and OR5T2. rs11039358-G in FNBP4 was found
associated with decreased NAAG levels in chapter 3.3.2 and was detected by the
Bayesian framework, but not the frequentist. It was also detected by the frequentist
approach in both sphingomyelin isoforms, but its odds ratios were too low to be
detected by Bayesian methods.
TRIM49B was found to be associated via the frequentist framework in NAAG and
both sphingomyelin isoforms, but was not detected by the Bayesian methods as it
overlapped 0.
rs1566729-T in PTPRJ was associated with decreased NAAG levels through Bayesian
approaches from the previous section, and increased sphingomyelin levels through
the frequentist methods. The odds ratios for rs1566729 were too low to be detected
by Bayesian methods in sphingomyelin, and the 97.5% overlapped zero.
OR5T2
was found to be associated with sphingomyelin through frequentist methods, but
overlapped zero in the Bayesian method.
==PAGE:80==
72
3 Results
Figure 3.17: Manhattan plot from Bayesian linear regression on homocitrulline levels
for 510 individuals. The points are the estimated means of the posterior distribution.
==PAGE:81==
3.3 Metabolites
73
Figure 3.18: Manhattan plot from frequentist linear regression on homocitrulline for
510 individuals.
==PAGE:82==
74
3 Results
Figure 3.19: Quantile-quantile (QQ) plot of frequentist linearly regressed observed
-log10(p) to expected -log10(p) under the null distribution. The black dashed line
shows the expected relationship between the expected and observed p-values. The
pink points represent the observed relationship between the expected and observed
p-values.
3.3.6.1
Conclusion
No SNPs were significantly associated with homocitrulline levels through the Bayesian
framework, but familiar genes were associated with homocitrulline levels through the
frequentist methods. The signals of homocitrulline and both sphingomyelin isoforms
through the frequentist framework were almost identical.
This could be because
carbomyolation when lysine reacts with cyanate to form homocitrulline, has effects
both on lipid metabolism and the immune system.
3.4
Exacerbations
The exacerbation phenotype consisted of 6536 individuals from the COPSACexacerbations
cohort. A Bayesian logistic regression and frequentist logistic regression were per-
formed on the phenotype to attempt to identify SNPs associated with severe exacer-
bations in children between the age of two and six.
47 associations with exacerbations were found using the Bayesian framework (fig.
==PAGE:83==
3.4 Exacerbations
75
3.20).
14 variants were found on chromosome 6 and 11 on chromosome 17.
The
frequentist framework using PLINK [56] found 23 associations in total, seven on
chromosome 6, and nine on chromosome 17. Five out of 47 SNPs found with the
Bayesian approach were significant with the frequentist approach. All SNPs had the
same direction of SNP effects, i.e. behaved consistently in terms of increasing or
decreasing the risk of disease.
22 SNPs were annotated, three of which were also significant through the frequentist
framework, and underwent further analysis. The full list of SNPs can be found in
Appendix A.1.7.
No systematic biases were found using visual inspection of QQ-plots (fig. 3.13).
rs11582098 had an OR of 0.7618, indicating a decreased risk of exacerbations when
carrying the the minor allele. It is an intron variant located in the ADORA1 gene.
ADORA1, which encodes the Adinosine A1 receptor, has previously been associated
Table 3.6: Summary statistics from the Bayesian logistic regression on exacerbations
for 6536 individuals. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the highest density interval located
outside of the ROPE are shown, along with frequentist odds ratios and P values.
Chr
SNP
Position
MAF
REF
A
ORbayes
SD
ORfreq
P-value
Gene Symbol
rs3766568
1
203101029
0.31
G
A
0.77
0.05
0.76
9.072e-08
ADORA1
rs10185897
2
102350330
0.12
C
A
0.71
0.07
0.68
1.002e-06
IL1RL1
rs12328681
2
102736867
0.17
G
T
0.73
0.06
0.70
2.033e-07
IL1R1
rs67571220
3
14939471
0.04
G
A
0.62
0.12
0.48
1.98e-06
FGD5
rs34586473
5
5303424
0.02
G
A
0.63
0.13
0.43
2.963e-05
ADAMTS16
rs2301713
5
131951996
0.23
T
C
1.27
0.05
1.29
1.303e-06
RAD50
rs145798898
5
176813246
0.02
G
A
1.60
0.11
1.95
1.373e-07
SLC34A1
rs6910071
6
32354401
0.25
T
C
1.27
0.05
1.30
5.686e-07
C6orf10
rs41521946
6
32362703
0.13
G
T
0.73
0.07
0.70
2.521e-06
BTNL2
rs2073045
6
32371771
0.39
G
A
1.31
0.04
1.33
5.2e-09
C6orf10
rs9391858
6
32373621
0.14
A
G
0.74
0.07
0.72
5.941e-06
C6orf10
rs1894406
6
32819279
0.33
C
T
0.78
0.05
0.76
1.218e-07
TAP2
rs10258293
7
105662690
0.18
T
C
1.32
0.05
1.35
2.225e-07
CDHR3
rs6312
13
47470824
0.07
T
C
0.71
0.09
0.65
4.476e-05
HTR2A
rs16946071
13
92163357
0.07
T
C
1.32
0.07
1.40
6.59e-05
GPC5
rs17806299
16
11199980
0.19
G
A
0.74
0.06
0.72
1.852e-07
CLEC16A
rs2643195
17
37853118
0.33
G
A
1.65
0.05
1.70
3.68e-29
ERBB2
rs2269457
17
38254689
0.26
T
C
1.29
0.05
1.31
6.296e-08
NR1D1
rs931992
17
39665182
0.36
T
G
1.55
0.05
1.59
1.22e-22
TCAP
rs62135329
19
20044932
0.03
G
A
1.49
0.10
1.73
3.333e-06
ZNF93
rs6011928
20
62246541
0.16
G
A
0.74
0.06
0.72
1.546e-06
GMEB2
==PAGE:84==
76
3 Results
Figure 3.20: Manhattan plot from Bayesian logistic regression on exacerbations for
6536 individuals. The points are the estimated means of the posterior distribution.
==PAGE:85==
3.4 Exacerbations
77
Figure 3.21: Manhattan plot from frequentist logistic regression on exacerbations for
6536 individuals.
==PAGE:86==
78
3 Results
Figure 3.22: Quantile-quantile (QQ) plot of frequentist logistically regressed observed
-log10(p) to expected -log10(p) under the null distribution. The black dashed line
shows the expected relationship between the expected and observed p-values. The
pink points represent the observed relationship between the expected and observed
p-values.
with asthma in numerous studies [hanGenomewideAnalysisHighlights2020 johanssonGenomew
119, 120, 121, 27, 29, 32, 86]. Adenosine is a strong bronchioconstrictor and can have
both pro- and anti-inflammatory effects [122]. The transition mutation of C to T may
therefore have a protective effect against exacerbations in children.
Three SNPs located on chromosome 2.q12.1, rs10185897, rs12328681, rs11465702 are
all intron variants located in genes that encode for proteins in the interleukin-1 su-
perfamily. The three genes that contain these variants have previous associations
with asthma [32, 26, 27, 123], but these failed to be detected using the frequentist
framework. Interleukins play a pivotal role in immune regulation so their association,
detected using the Bayesian framework is thus worth investigating further.
One SNP was detected by the Bayesian framework on chromosome 3, rs67571220. The
SNP is located in the FGD5 (FYVE, RhoGEF And PH Domain Containing 5) gene,
and has previously been associated with erythrocyte count [86]. The functional role
of FGD5 has been found to be a genetic regulator of vascular pruning by activation
of endothelial cell-targeted apoptosis [124].
Three SNPs on chromosome 5 were detected, rs2301713, rs145798898 and rs34586473.
==PAGE:87==
3.4 Exacerbations
79
rs2301713 had an odds ratio of 1.27, indicating that the transition of T to C seems
to increase the risk of exacerbations in childhoold.
The variant is an intron vari-
ant located in RAD50, which encodes is for a TH2 cytokine locus regulator. The
RAD50 gene has been associated with asthma in multiple studies [77, 26, 121].
rs145798898, a missense variant located in SLC34A1, has also shown a previous asso-
ciation with asthma [85]. rs34586473 with an estimated odds ratio of 0.6293, located
in ADAMTS16 has previously not shown an association with asthma, but the gene
encodes ADAM Metallopeptidase With Thrombospondin Type 1 Motif 16 and was
not determined significant by the frequentist framework.
Chromosome 6 had six associated SNPs, all of which are located on 6p21.32 that
is refered to as the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) locus. The locus is composed
of proteins that are encoded by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), and
regulate human immune responses. Figure 3.23 plot shows the quantitative trait loci
(QTL) in higher resolution. This area has notoriously been associated with a variety
of immune responses, including asthma [121, 29, 125, 26]. However, only one of these
SNPs was found to have a significant association with asthma however, although
many SNPs not detected by the Bayesian framework had an association that can be
seen in figure 3.23
Chromosome 7 had one associated SNP, rs10258293, a synonymous variant located
in CDHR3. CDHR3 has previously been associated with childhood onset asthma,
and was discovered by Bønnelykke et al. using the COPSAC cohort [28]. The gene
is a protein coding gene encoding for the cadherin related family member 3 protein
which plays a role in cell adhesion. It was not considered significant by the frequentist
method.
rs2066362 on chromosome 9 is an intron variant located in IL33. IL33 is an interleukin
protein and is also a part of the interleukin-1 superfamily, which is important for
immune regulation. As the other interleukins on this list, the gene has been found to
be associated with asthma in multiple studies [126, 119] .
==PAGE:88==
80
3 Results
Figure 3.23: Regional plot of the QTL associated with asthma at the 6p21.32 region.
The circle represents the -log10 P values (y-axis) of SNPs plotted against their chromo-
somal position (x-axis). The bottom half of the figure shows the protein-coding genes
located at their respective positions. The red points represent SNPs that reached
genome-wide significance.
==PAGE:89==
3.4 Exacerbations
81
rs16946071 and rs6312 on chromosome 13 did not pass the genome-wide significance
threshold nor have they previously been associated with asthma. rs16946071 is an
intron variant located in GPC5. Although GPC5 has not been directly associated
with asthma Kichaev et al. found an association with forced expiration volume (FEV)
and forced vital capacity (FVC), indicating that GPC5 may have some effect on lung
function. rs6312 located in HTR2A and has not shown association with asthma.
rs17806299 is an intron variant located in CLEC16A on chromosome 16. A previous
study estimated a 0.1 unit decrease in the risk of developing asthma when carrying
the A allele for the SNP[30], consistent with the direction of effect estimated in this
study.
Chromosome 17 had 8 SNPs found associated with exacerbations. All 8 SNPs are
located on 17q21, and these have been replicated in numerous studies [127]. All SNPs
reached a genome-wide threshold in the frequentist framework, and two SNPs showed
a very strong signal, namely rs931992 located in TCAP and rs11078928 located in
GSDMB. Figure 3.24 plot shows the QTL in higher resolution, but 38 SNPs in total
were located in the region using the frequentist approach.
Lastly, rs6011928 is an intron variant located in GMEB2 on chromosome 20. Although
it has not been associated with asthma, a study by Kichaev et al. [86] shown an
association with eosinophil counts which play a role in TH2 immune responses.
This analysis was replicated on the UK Biobank data, but due to the limited time,
only the 45 SNPs considered significant by the Bayesian framework were analyzed
(see next section).
==PAGE:90==
82
3 Results
Figure 3.24: Regional plot of the QTL associated with asthma at the 17q21.1 region.
The circle represents the -log10 P values (y-axis) of SNPs plotted against their chromo-
somal position (x-axis). The bottom half of the figure shows the protein-coding genes
located at their respective positions. The red points represent SNPs that reached
genome-wide significance.
==PAGE:91==
3.5 UK Biobank Exacerbations
83
3.5
UK Biobank Exacerbations
As sample size increases the effect size generally decreases [128]. Therefore the ROPE
range was decreased to an odds ratio of 1, so SNPs with 97.5% HDI that does not
overlap 1, are considered significant. An analysis of the 47 SNPs found using the
COPSAC cohort, replicated on the UK Biobank dataset found 32 significant SNPs
using the Bayesian framework shown in figure 3.25. Using the frequentist approach,
28 out of the 47 passed the genome-wide significance threshold, which increased sig-
nificant associations by 10 compared to the COPSAC cohort. This may indicate that
a larger sample size is needed to reach the genome-wide significance using the fre-
quentist framework. 21 SNPs were annotated via Ensembl [67] and can be seen in
table 3.7 and on figure 3.25. A full list of SNPs can be seen in tables A.13 and A.14.
A total of 10 annotated SNPs surpassed the genome-wide significant threshold via
the frequentist framework. ADORA1 was considered significant by the frequentist
framework in the COPSAC cohort with a p-value of 4.126e-08, but replication on
UK Biobank resulted in an increased p-value from 4.126e-08 to 1.475e-05, thus not
surpassing the genome-wide significance threshold.
Table 3.7: Summary statistics from the Bayesian logistic regression of exacerbations
for 93978 individuals from the UK Biobank. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the highest
density interval located outside of the ROPE are shown, along with frequentist odds
ratios and P values.
Chr
SNP
Position
MAF
REF
A
ORbayes
SD
ORfreq
P-value
Gene Symbol
rs10185897
2
102350330
0.11
C
A
0.70
0.04
0.69
1.539e-24
IL1RL1
rs12328681
2
102736867
0.17
G
T
0.83
0.03
0.83
1.155e-11
IL1R1
rs2301713
5
131951996
0.19
T
C
1.16
0.02
1.17
2.712e-11
RAD50
rs2073045
6
32371771
0.35
G
A
1.15
0.03
1.17
7.841e-13
C6orf10
rs10258293
7
105662690
0.16
T
C
1.08
0.02
1.08
0.00306
CDHR3
rs2066362
9
6219176
0.16
G
T
1.31
0.03
1.32
1.983e-28
IL33
rs17806299
16
11199980
0.20
G
A
0.86
0.02
0.87
2.643e-08
CLEC16A
rs11657058
17
37699378
0.16
G
T
1.19
0.03
1.18
4.831e-11
CDK12
rs2643195
17
37853118
0.32
G
A
1.28
0.02
1.29
1.857e-37
ERBB2
rs8066582
17
38146929
0.46
C
T
1.12
0.02
1.13
5.198e-10
PSMD3
rs2269457
17
38254689
0.24
T
C
1.15
0.03
1.14
1.004e-08
NR1D1
rs931992
17
39665182
0.34
T
G
1.24
0.02
1.25
1.781e-28
TCAP
rs6011928
20
62246541
0.19
G
A
0.95
0.02
0.95
0.03524
GMEB2
==PAGE:92==
84
3 Results
Figure 3.25: Manhattan plot from Bayesian logistic regression of exacerbations for
93978 individuals from the UK Biobank. The points are the estimated means of the
posterior distribution.
==PAGE:93==
3.5 UK Biobank Exacerbations
85
Figure 3.26: Manhattan plot from frequentist logistic regression of exacerbations for
93978 individuals from the UK Biobank.
==PAGE:94==
86
3 Results
FGD5, SLC34A1, ADAMTS16, GPC5, HTR2A and were all considered non-significant
by the Bayesian framework with the UK Biobank data. rs6910071 on C6orf10 failed
to show an association but was considered significant on a nearby SNP within the
same gene, rs2073045. FGD5 had not been directly associated with asthma and in-
creasing sample size increased the p-value from 1.98e-06 to 0.7392. SLC34A1 had
been previously associated with asthma [85] but increasing sample size increased the
p-value from 1.373e-07 to 0.4115 and the posterior overlapped the region of practi-
cal equivalence. Similarly, the increased sample size increased the p-value and the
standard deviation of the Bayesian analysis of ADAMTS16 which had shown no pre-
vious association with asthma. CDHR3 failed to detect a signal via the frequentist
method as before, but remained outside the ROPE using the Bayesian one. GPC5
and HTR2A have not previously been associated with asthma and failed to pass
significance in both frameworks.
3.5.1
Conclusion
This section focused on children considered to be suffering from severe asthma and
the results then replicated in the UK Biobank. A comparison was made between
the cohorts and between the frameworks, and the Bayesian framework exhibited less
sensitivity than the frequentist method on the COPSAC cohort. Increasing sample
the size drastically improved the fit using the frequentist method, increasing the
number of significantly associated SNPs from 18 to 28. This implies that the analysis
on the COPSAC cohort was underpowered due to limited sample size, as almost
half of the SNPs from the COPSAC cohorts were not considered significant, but a
replication on UK Biobank increased detection by 55%. Increasing the sample size
also filtered out SNPs not having been previously associated with asthma, possibly
indicating that these might have been spurious associations.
As mentioned before, the effect size generally decreases with increased sample size.
The results from this study support this, as odds ratios decreased for all SNPs in the
==PAGE:95==
3.5 UK Biobank Exacerbations
87
UK Biobank cohort (table 3.8). Table 3.8 demonstrates a positive correlation with
p-values and odds ratios, but both values are highly affected by the sample size.
Table 3.8:
A comparison of odds ratios between the COPSAC and UK Biobank
cohorts for the four SNPs with the highest odds ratios from the COPSAC cohorts.
Gene
PCOP SAC
PUKBIOBANK
ORCOP SAC
ORUKBIOBANK
GSDMB
1.118e-62
3.28e-73
0.4244
0.6982
IL33
3.316e-10
1.983e-28
1.45
1.321
TCAP
1.225e-22
1.781e-28
1.589
1.246
ERBB2
3.679e-29
1.857e-37
1.703
1.293
==PAGE:96==
88
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion
4.1
Discrete Decision Making
As was mentioned in chapter 2.3.1, discrete decision making should generally be
avoided, and Bayesian approaches are able to avoid this by expressing the entire
posterior distribution. However, in studies of this sort, this cannot be avoided, and
thresholds have to be set, such as the ROPE. The effect of the setting region of
practical equivalence was clearly shown in the metabolites section, namely when com-
paring the two isoforms of sphingomyelin. A Bayesian regression on sphingomyelin
(d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) failed to identify all of the SNPs found by sphingomyelin
(d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0), due to the fact that the odds ratios of those SNPs were
slightly inside the ROPE. This also highlights the problem with making discrete de-
cisions, as was mentioned in section 2.3.1, and shows that even though a SNP is non-
significantly associated with a phenotype, does not imply biological non-significance,
and vice versa. Decreasing the ROPE for sphingomyelin isoforms resulted in qua-
drupling in the number of associations, which is implausible. Decreasing the ROPE
however had to be done in order to find any signal within the UK Biobank cohort,
as it is comprised of over 90,000 individuals. As sample size increases, SNP effect
size decreases, and maintaining a threshold of OR 1 ± 0.15 resulted in no associated
SNPs being found. ROPE thresholds should therefore be carefully chosen in terms
of biological significance.
The highest density interval will also have an impact on the number of associations
==PAGE:98==
90
4 Discussion
found, when one is forced to make discrete decisions. This study chose to use 97.5%
HDI rather than 95%, since sample size was small in seven out of eight phenotypes.
Had the 95% HDI been used, more SNPs would have been associated with pheno-
types, especially in the smaller samples such as the metabolites. Outcome is much
determined by these thresholds, much like the p-value.
4.2
Bayesianism vs Frequentism
A red thread throughout the results, was that the Bayesian framework detected many
more variants than the frequentist framework, and very few associations would have
been found via the frequentist framework for the phenotypes with smaller sample
size, i.e. antibiotics, infections and the five metabolites. Most of the SNPs identi-
fied through the Bayesian approach had previously been associated with respiratory
pathways or immune response pathways. However, due to small sample sizes in most
phenotypes, these were not verified by the frequentist approach. As p-values are a
function of the sample size and the effect size, larger samples are needed to surpass the
genome-wide threshold if the effect size is not extremely high. Sensitivity is therefore
much higher in Bayesian methods, enabling them to infer from smaller datasets.
The exacerbations phenotype in the COPSAC cohort and the UK Biobank cohorts
showed the effect of increasing the sample size when using the frequentist approach.
More SNPs were found to be associated with exacerbations when replicated on a
larger dataset. This was not observed in the Bayesian framework, where most SNPs
where consistently outside of the ROPE regardless of sample size. Bayesian methods
may therefore be superior when working with smaller datasets.
==PAGE:99==
4.3 Future perspectives
91
4.3
Future perspectives
As the extensiveness of the project did not allow for a profound deep dive into all
SNPs associated with a phenotype, their biological functions and mechanisms of ac-
tion were only shallowly investigated.
Most SNPs did have previous associations
with their respective phenotypes, but the mechanism of action was often unknown.
The associations with asthma exacerbations verified previous studies which had been
associated with both the HLA region and and 17q21 region. No novel SNPs were
identified for that phenotype using either framework. One can not say with much
conviction that a novel SNP associated with respiratory infections was found, as they
all had some prior associations with pathways related to the immune system. How-
ever they should all be further studied, namely CPOX which was close to surpassing
the genome-wide threshold. Same can be said about the asthma related metabolite
phenotype, which consisted of only 510 individuals. Using the frequentist method,
four SNPs on chromosome 11 were found associated with all three asthma related
phenotypes, and may be worth further investigating.
Apart from replicating this with larger datasets, testing different priors, different
genotype coding i.e. recessive and dominant genotype coding, and SNP interactions
would also be of interest. This study was conducted strictly with additive genotype
coding but an alternative approach might render different results.
==PAGE:100==
92
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX A
An Appendix
A.1
All SNPs
A.1.1
Infections
A.1.1.1
Bayesian Framework
Results from the Bayesian framework
Table A.1: Summary statistics from the Bayesian linear regression on 2-aminoctanoic
acid levels for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the highest density interval
located outside of the ROPE are shown.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
ORbayes
SD
2.5%
97.5%
n_eff
Rhat
rs757578
1
116918385
0.08547
T
C
0.68
0.11
0.56
0.84
2001.77
1.00
rs16985379
2
18831162
0.05629
G
A
1.41
0.10
1.16
1.74
1876.21
1.00
rs1729976
3
98284330
0.1208
C
A
1.38
0.08
1.17
1.63
1737.63
1.00
kgp4381729
8
13109818
0.2216
A
G
1.33
0.07
1.17
1.52
1544.12
1.00
rs7039240
9
80722684
0.08086
C
T
1.38
0.09
1.16
1.67
2176.33
1.00
rs17195563
16
6202108
0.08188
C
A
0.66
0.11
0.53
0.81
2311.73
1.00
rs7250193
19
52385520
0.1194
A
G
1.36
0.08
1.16
1.60
1393.76
1.00
rs11669762
19
52421804
0.1631
A
G
1.36
0.07
1.19
1.56
1191.03
1.00
A.1.2
2-Aminooctanoatic Acid
A.1.2.1
Bayesian Framework
==PAGE:102==
94
A An Appendix
Table A.2: Summary statistics from the Bayesian linear regression on 2-aminooctanoic
acid levels for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the highest density interval
located outside of the ROPE are shown.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
ORbayes
SD
2.5%
97.5%
n_eff
Rhat
rs12139694
1
244391489
0.14
G
T
1.37
0.08
1.16
1.60
731.20
1.00
rs17792710
2
55762576
0.09
C
T
1.39
0.10
1.16
1.67
605.12
1.01
rs17349049
2
73529077
0.23
G
A
0.73
0.07
0.64
0.83
714.46
1.00
rs13008860
2
73774019
0.41
G
A
0.65
0.06
0.58
0.73
592.08
1.00
rs6759452
2
73878352
0.16
C
T
0.54
0.07
0.47
0.62
675.95
1.01
rs4514898
2
73966271
0.06
C
T
0.61
0.10
0.50
0.74
929.95
1.00
rs10193032
2
74051612
0.30
C
T
0.72
0.06
0.65
0.81
708.07
1.00
rs3813230
2
74093652
0.31
T
C
0.74
0.06
0.66
0.83
625.73
1.00
rs10519327
2
74110021
0.13
A
G
0.72
0.08
0.61
0.85
640.47
1.00
rs16864757
2
224275952
0.17
C
T
0.74
0.07
0.65
0.85
803.78
1.00
exm348940
3
129137188
0.06
C
T
1.42
0.10
1.16
1.72
853.77
1.00
rs1806067
5
9205587
0.11
T
C
0.73
0.08
0.61
0.85
871.00
1.00
rs3822799
5
9450746
0.05
C
T
1.44
0.11
1.16
1.81
1046.04
1.00
rs1414743
6
142277769
0.10
G
A
1.38
0.09
1.16
1.67
697.62
1.00
rs10827977
10
20451608
0.08
A
G
0.70
0.10
0.57
0.85
748.29
1.00
rs2370982
14
79890677
0.21
C
T
1.32
0.07
1.16
1.52
934.08
1.00
exm1291696
17
8166458
0.07
T
A
1.44
0.10
1.18
1.77
1126.05
1.00
rs4969049
17
71000940
0.13
T
C
1.35
0.08
1.16
1.58
609.34
1.00
rs11672652
19
8308957
0.12
C
T
0.69
0.09
0.58
0.83
729.36
1.00
rs12461154
19
10073324
0.10
T
G
1.38
0.09
1.17
1.63
816.50
1.00
rs239676
21
28775234
0.15
A
G
1.36
0.08
1.17
1.59
658.81
1.00
==PAGE:103==
A.1 All SNPs
95
A.1.2.2
Frequentist Framework
Table A.3:
Summary statistics from the frequentist linear regression on 2-
aminooctanoic acid levels for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with < 5*10−8 are shown.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
exm2265329
2
73785358
0.23
A
G
0.47
1e-27
rs6546862
2
73860348
0.36
A
G
0.58
8.28e-19
rs17009372
2
73955571
0.24
G
A
0.62
1.6e-12
rs4514898
2
73966271
0.06
C
T
0.51
2.56e-08
rs3738846
2
74091805
0.29
C
T
0.68
3.48e-09
A.1.3
N-acetyl-aspartyl glutamate
A.1.3.1
Bayesian Framework
Table A.4: Summary statistics from the Bayesian linear regression on NAAG levels
for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the highest density interval located
outside of the ROPE are shown.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
SD
2.5%
97.5%
n_eff
Rhat
rs13419691
2
4767683
0.09
A
C
1.44
0.10
1.19
1.74
785.34
1.00
exm2273380
3
157161305
0.06
G
A
0.69
0.11
0.55
0.85
851.25
1.00
rs12001203
9
109140030
0.07
T
C
1.42
0.10
1.17
1.71
1044.25
1.00
rs11039358
11
47746962
0.06
A
G
0.69
0.10
0.57
0.84
1025.07
1.00
rs6485807
11
48102867
0.30
A
G
0.75
0.06
0.66
0.84
569.24
1.00
exm2271499
11
48162305
0.35
T
C
0.72
0.06
0.65
0.82
506.50
1.00
rs7940877
11
48225680
0.29
G
A
0.72
0.06
0.64
0.81
616.36
1.00
rs11039588
11
48234357
0.09
C
T
0.61
0.09
0.51
0.72
890.05
1.00
rs11040730
11
48359268
0.09
C
T
0.56
0.09
0.47
0.66
745.44
1.00
rs717897
11
48375604
0.20
G
A
0.72
0.07
0.63
0.83
587.78
1.00
rs650021
11
48476690
0.19
C
T
0.70
0.07
0.62
0.80
906.15
1.00
rs7115814
11
48556387
0.05
A
G
0.54
0.11
0.44
0.67
956.42
1.00
exm2271607
11
48558249
0.46
T
G
0.68
0.06
0.61
0.75
587.78
1.00
Continued on next page
==PAGE:104==
96
A An Appendix
Table A.4 – continued from previous page
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
SD
2.5%
97.5%
n_eff
Rhat
rs10838987
11
48646903
0.11
G
T
0.54
0.08
0.46
0.63
887.86
1.00
rs1588069
11
48694871
0.20
A
G
0.71
0.07
0.63
0.82
726.08
1.00
rs11040198
11
49000558
0.19
G
A
0.69
0.07
0.60
0.79
673.59
1.00
rs10839224
11
49146066
0.11
T
C
0.52
0.08
0.45
0.62
596.40
1.00
rs588458
11
49214048
0.43
C
A
0.63
0.05
0.56
0.69
631.54
1.00
exm2263486
11
49227620
0.25
A
G
0.66
0.06
0.58
0.75
830.20
1.00
rs17556442
11
49325425
0.05
C
T
0.47
0.11
0.38
0.58
638.92
1.00
rs7113075
11
49458055
0.09
C
A
0.54
0.09
0.45
0.65
905.17
1.00
rs1846285
11
49470419
0.20
A
G
0.50
0.07
0.44
0.57
822.87
1.00
rs7483795
11
49704930
0.49
A
G
0.67
0.05
0.60
0.74
696.83
1.00
rs7106742
11
49770268
0.06
G
T
0.55
0.10
0.45
0.68
1013.19
1.00
rs11530438
11
49836893
0.08
T
C
0.60
0.10
0.49
0.73
907.10
1.00
rs2007068
11
50095560
0.49
A
G
0.66
0.06
0.60
0.74
491.76
1.00
rs7940985
11
50117758
0.06
T
C
0.55
0.10
0.45
0.68
1013.19
1.00
rs7943197
11
50447311
0.06
G
A
0.55
0.10
0.45
0.68
1013.19
1.00
rs1916207
11
50461838
0.38
T
C
1.41
0.06
1.26
1.58
570.93
1.00
rs8188857
11
50467961
0.15
G
A
0.71
0.08
0.61
0.82
768.99
1.00
rs7294233
11
51222017
0.06
C
A
0.56
0.10
0.46
0.69
895.75
1.00
rs1791433
11
51385894
0.49
G
A
0.68
0.06
0.61
0.76
558.59
1.01
rs7481153
11
51391183
0.10
C
T
0.63
0.09
0.52
0.75
757.53
1.00
rs11826952
11
51474852
0.06
T
C
0.55
0.10
0.45
0.68
715.72
1.00
rs7944067
11
51525878
0.31
G
T
1.36
0.06
1.21
1.53
609.89
1.00
kgp5773129
11
54794727
0.16
C
T
0.65
0.07
0.56
0.75
952.58
1.00
rs28826070
11
54801549
0.06
C
T
0.55
0.11
0.45
0.68
680.11
1.00
rs4540846
11
54835203
0.48
G
A
0.68
0.06
0.60
0.75
501.74
1.00
rs12222718
11
55049310
0.11
C
T
0.61
0.09
0.52
0.72
662.26
1.00
exm907378
11
55111238
0.46
C
A
1.40
0.05
1.26
1.55
415.84
1.01
exm907404
11
55111480
0.06
A
C
0.57
0.11
0.46
0.70
992.33
1.00
rs17159005
11
55303865
0.13
C
T
0.63
0.08
0.54
0.74
556.63
1.00
Continued on next page
==PAGE:105==
A.1 All SNPs
97
Table A.4 – continued from previous page
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
SD
2.5%
97.5%
n_eff
Rhat
exm907952
11
55541620
0.07
G
T
0.62
0.10
0.51
0.75
1010.24
1.00
rs11231175
11
55586960
0.12
T
G
0.61
0.08
0.52
0.72
924.96
1.00
rs2512961
11
55872876
0.07
T
C
0.62
0.10
0.52
0.76
897.53
1.00
rs11606821
11
55899797
0.08
A
G
0.69
0.10
0.57
0.85
490.16
1.00
rs11227400
11
55929181
0.22
C
T
1.32
0.07
1.16
1.50
729.12
1.00
exm909039
11
56000471
0.20
G
A
0.74
0.07
0.65
0.84
796.84
1.00
rs661090
11
56209204
0.18
A
C
0.73
0.07
0.63
0.83
923.82
1.00
rs17628164
11
56236635
0.08
G
T
0.62
0.10
0.52
0.75
898.75
1.00
rs7925905
11
56511875
0.08
T
C
0.64
0.09
0.53
0.77
743.81
1.00
rs12310762
12
115683169
0.09
C
T
1.38
0.09
1.15
1.65
638.29
1.00
rs2836935
21
40566372
0.16
T
G
1.34
0.07
1.17
1.54
568.74
1.00
A.1.3.2
Frequentist Framework
Table A.5: Summary statistics from the frequentist linear regression on NAAG levels
for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with < 5*10−8 are shown.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
exm2271499
11
48162305
0.35
T
C
0.70
1.51e-08
rs7940877
11
48225680
0.29
G
A
0.70
1.87e-08
rs11039588
11
48234357
0.09
C
T
0.53
1.23e-09
rs11040730
11
48359268
0.09
C
T
0.49
2.63e-13
exm906772
11
48510654
0.39
C
A
0.61
3.7e-17
rs7115814
11
48556387
0.05
A
G
0.42
2.72e-11
rs10838987
11
48646903
0.11
G
T
0.47
1.26e-15
exm2264424
11
48987539
0.39
A
C
0.60
2.79e-18
Continued on next page
==PAGE:106==
98
A An Appendix
Table A.5 – continued from previous page
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
rs10431006
11
49010832
0.11
A
G
0.46
1.36e-17
rs2696923
11
49053601
0.19
G
A
0.65
1.33e-08
rs588458
11
49214048
0.43
C
A
0.60
1.04e-17
rs679470
11
49242990
0.26
G
T
0.62
1.67e-12
rs17556442
11
49325425
0.05
C
T
0.34
3.67e-16
rs7113075
11
49458055
0.09
C
A
0.47
4.79e-14
rs10839287
11
49498923
0.16
T
C
0.41
1.51e-31
rs7101891
11
49598257
0.08
G
T
0.43
1.9e-14
rs7483795
11
49704930
0.49
A
G
0.64
6.88e-14
rs1623556
11
49907856
0.09
A
G
0.49
2.63e-13
rs2007068
11
50095560
0.49
A
G
0.63
2.15e-14
rs7120107
11
50248332
0.06
T
G
0.44
4.9e-11
rs1411423
11
50369683
0.48
A
C
1.49
2.69e-11
rs490842
11
50417549
0.09
G
A
0.49
2.63e-13
rs1608275
11
50476268
0.19
T
G
0.62
1.3e-10
rs2193309
11
50668400
0.11
C
T
0.56
1.65e-10
rs11827854
11
51401787
0.06
G
T
0.44
3.63e-11
rs7112290
11
51478072
0.17
G
A
0.48
1.15e-22
rs11246584
11
51481576
0.49
C
T
0.65
1.11e-12
kgp5773129
11
54794727
0.16
C
T
0.61
4.75e-10
rs28826070
11
54801549
0.06
C
T
0.44
3.63e-11
rs4540846
11
54835203
0.48
G
A
0.65
1.48e-12
Continued on next page
==PAGE:107==
A.1 All SNPs
99
Table A.5 – continued from previous page
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
rs12222718
11
55049310
0.11
C
T
0.56
1.01e-10
exm907410
11
55111584
0.46
A
T
1.45
3.8e-10
rs4537777
11
55241556
0.06
A
C
0.44
2.92e-11
rs7935887
11
55550960
0.11
G
T
0.55
6.6e-11
rs17511601
11
55681375
0.08
T
G
0.52
5.16e-09
rs10895996
11
55857698
0.12
C
T
0.56
1.43e-10
exm909031
11
56000288
0.08
G
A
0.52
7.1e-09
rs1876924
11
56347636
0.08
G
A
0.53
1.96e-08
rs17559185
11
56609719
0.08
C
T
0.54
4.76e-08
A.1.4
Sphingomyelin (d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0)
A.1.4.1
Bayesian Framework
Table A.6: Summary statistics from the Bayesian linear regression on Sphingomyelin
(d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) levels for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the
highest density interval located outside of the ROPE are shown.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
SD
2.5%
97.5%
n_eff
Rhat
rs5705
1
204131186
0.11
T
G
1.38
0.09
1.16
1.63
912.12
1.00
rs11925641
3
31173171
0.17
C
T
0.73
0.07
0.63
0.84
449.37
1.00
rs2176830
5
159448136
0.07
C
T
1.44
0.11
1.16
1.77
802.03
1.00
rs17082485
6
120937827
0.06
T
C
1.43
0.11
1.15
1.79
601.12
1.00
rs9346859
6
161900525
0.35
T
C
1.34
0.06
1.20
1.51
695.63
1.00
rs545310
6
161935928
0.20
C
T
1.33
0.07
1.16
1.52
886.96
1.00
rs11564004
7
27351980
0.07
T
G
0.68
0.10
0.56
0.84
914.46
1.00
rs10960372
9
1201248
0.11
A
G
0.71
0.08
0.61
0.84
457.06
1.00
rs1408320
9
13598413
0.17
T
C
1.38
0.07
1.20
1.58
691.28
1.00
rs10984217
9
121524247
0.25
A
G
1.31
0.06
1.16
1.50
762.66
1.00
rs11177370
12
69175793
0.20
C
T
1.31
0.07
1.15
1.50
635.32
1.00
kgp11406783
17
55619316
0.10
A
C
1.37
0.09
1.16
1.61
863.31
1.00
A.1.4.2
Frequentist Framework
==PAGE:108==
100
A An Appendix
Table A.7: Summary statistics from the frequentist linear regression on Sphingomyelin
(d18:1/19:0, d19:1/18:0) levels for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with < 5*10−8 are
shown.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
exm2273380
3
157161305
0.06
G
A
0.97
3.45e-10
rs11039358
11
47746962
0.06
A
G
1.07
3.46e-10
exm2259795
11
48085189
0.19
G
A
1.03
3.65e-10
exm2271499
11
48162305
0.35
T
C
1.07
3.62e-10
rs1566729
11
48164721
0.18
C
T
0.99
3.52e-10
rs7940877
11
48225680
0.29
G
A
1.03
3.6e-10
rs11039588
11
48234357
0.09
C
T
1.11
3.03e-10
rs11040730
11
48359268
0.09
C
T
0.96
2.79e-10
rs666165
11
48457439
0.20
T
C
1.02
3.56e-10
rs650021
11
48476690
0.19
C
T
1.03
3.52e-10
exm906772
11
48510654
0.39
C
A
1.04
3.15e-10
rs7115814
11
48556387
0.05
A
G
0.94
2.72e-10
rs10838987
11
48646903
0.11
G
T
1.06
2.68e-10
exm2264424
11
48987539
0.39
A
C
1.04
3.12e-10
rs10431006
11
49010832
0.11
A
G
1.04
2.6e-10
rs2696923
11
49053601
0.19
G
A
1.04
3.43e-10
rs679470
11
49242990
0.26
G
T
1.10
3.25e-10
rs17556442
11
49325425
0.05
C
T
0.88
2.34e-10
rs1917325
11
49370004
0.43
A
G
1.07
3.13e-10
Continued on next page
==PAGE:109==
A.1 All SNPs
101
Table A.7 – continued from previous page
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
rs7113075
11
49458055
0.09
C
A
0.93
2.71e-10
rs10839287
11
49498923
0.16
T
C
0.93
2.28e-10
rs7101891
11
49598257
0.08
G
T
0.94
2.59e-10
rs1623556
11
49907856
0.09
A
G
0.96
2.79e-10
rs7946556
11
49944874
0.49
A
G
0.98
3.3e-10
rs7120107
11
50248332
0.06
T
G
0.93
2.76e-10
rs490842
11
50417549
0.09
G
A
0.96
2.79e-10
rs1608275
11
50476268
0.19
T
G
1.05
3.26e-10
rs2193309
11
50668400
0.11
C
T
0.98
3.08e-10
rs11827854
11
51401787
0.06
G
T
0.87
2.76e-10
rs7112290
11
51478072
0.17
G
A
0.93
2.61e-10
rs11246584
11
51481576
0.49
C
T
1.00
3.35e-10
kgp5773129
11
54794727
0.16
C
T
0.99
3.24e-10
rs28826070
11
54801549
0.06
C
T
0.87
2.76e-10
rs4540846
11
54835203
0.48
G
A
1.00
3.38e-10
rs4537777
11
55241556
0.06
A
C
0.87
2.75e-10
rs10896971
11
55264310
0.12
C
T
0.97
3.06e-10
rs7935887
11
55550960
0.11
G
T
0.98
3.03e-10
rs17501535
11
55561893
0.07
T
C
0.95
3.01e-10
rs10895996
11
55857698
0.12
C
T
0.96
3.09e-10
exm909031
11
56000288
0.08
G
A
1.03
3.04e-10
rs11227599
11
56000471
0.20
G
A
1.04
3.63e-10
Continued on next page
==PAGE:110==
102
A An Appendix
Table A.7 – continued from previous page
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
rs661090
11
56209204
0.18
A
C
0.90
3.64e-10
rs1876924
11
56347636
0.08
G
A
1.07
3.08e-10
rs17559185
11
56609719
0.08
C
T
1.10
3.14e-10
A.1.5
Sphingomyelin (d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0)
A.1.5.1
Bayesian Framework
Table A.8: Summary statistics from the Bayesian linear regression on Sphingomyelin
(d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0) levels for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the
highest density interval located outside of the ROPE are shown.
[H] Chr
SNP
Position
MAF
REF
A
ORbayes
SD
2.5%
97.5%
n_eff
Rhat
rs11687448
2
138789029
0.44
G
T
1.29
0.06
1.15
1.44
679.54
1.00
rs10497761
2
196442199
0.20
A
C
1.32
0.07
1.17
1.50
747.88
1.00
rs9826061
3
31176949
0.17
T
C
0.74
0.07
0.65
0.84
935.66
1.00
rs13145878
4
186078324
0.05
C
T
1.41
0.11
1.15
1.73
1023.66
1.00
rs2294418
6
11759376
0.16
T
C
1.34
0.08
1.15
1.55
973.36
1.00
rs16890234
6
79326617
0.10
G
A
0.70
0.09
0.59
0.83
660.37
1.00
rs9346859
6
161900525
0.35
T
C
1.29
0.06
1.15
1.45
484.21
1.01
rs1408320
9
13598413
0.17
T
C
1.38
0.08
1.19
1.60
783.57
1.00
rs12349878
9
74968193
0.07
T
C
1.44
0.10
1.18
1.76
944.55
1.00
rs447347
14
89992265
0.38
G
A
1.29
0.06
1.15
1.45
666.96
1.00
rs628271
19
5965388
0.06
T
C
0.67
0.11
0.53
0.82
615.00
1.00
rs2834034
21
34334237
0.10
A
G
1.36
0.09
1.15
1.61
766.79
1.00
rs6009068
22
47349718
0.07
A
G
1.40
0.09
1.17
1.68
747.45
1.00
rs6007710
22
48032445
0.12
G
A
0.72
0.08
0.61
0.83
757.88
1.00
A.1.5.2
Frequentist Framework
==PAGE:111==
A.1 All SNPs
103
Table A.9: Summary statistics from the frequentist linear regression on Sphingomyelin
(d18:2/21:0, d16:2/23:0) levels for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with < 5*10−8 are
shown.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
exm2273380
3
157161305
0.06
G
A
0.95
3.45e-10
rs11039358
11
47746962
0.06
A
G
1.05
3.46e-10
exm2259795
11
48085189
0.19
G
A
1.05
3.65e-10
exm2271499
11
48162305
0.35
T
C
1.06
3.62e-10
rs1566729
11
48164721
0.18
C
T
1.01
3.52e-10
rs7940877
11
48225680
0.29
G
A
1.02
3.6e-10
rs11039588
11
48234357
0.09
C
T
1.08
3.03e-10
rs11040730
11
48359268
0.09
C
T
0.90
2.79e-10
rs666165
11
48457439
0.20
T
C
1.02
3.56e-10
rs650021
11
48476690
0.19
C
T
1.00
3.52e-10
exm906772
11
48510654
0.39
C
A
1.01
3.15e-10
rs7115814
11
48556387
0.05
A
G
0.89
2.72e-10
rs10838987
11
48646903
0.11
G
T
1.02
2.68e-10
exm2264424
11
48987539
0.39
A
C
1.02
3.12e-10
rs10431006
11
49010832
0.11
A
G
1.02
2.6e-10
rs2696923
11
49053601
0.19
G
A
1.01
3.43e-10
rs679470
11
49242990
0.26
G
T
1.08
3.25e-10
rs17556442
11
49325425
0.05
C
T
0.82
2.34e-10
rs1917325
11
49370004
0.43
A
G
1.05
3.13e-10
Continued on next page
==PAGE:112==
104
A An Appendix
Table A.9 – continued from previous page
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
rs7113075
11
49458055
0.09
C
A
0.89
2.71e-10
rs10839287
11
49498923
0.16
T
C
0.89
2.28e-10
rs7101891
11
49598257
0.08
G
T
0.90
2.59e-10
rs1623556
11
49907856
0.09
A
G
0.90
2.79e-10
rs7946556
11
49944874
0.49
A
G
0.97
3.3e-10
rs7120107
11
50248332
0.06
T
G
0.89
2.76e-10
rs490842
11
50417549
0.09
G
A
0.90
2.79e-10
rs1608275
11
50476268
0.19
T
G
1.00
3.26e-10
rs2193309
11
50668400
0.11
C
T
0.92
3.08e-10
rs11827854
11
51401787
0.06
G
T
0.84
2.76e-10
rs7112290
11
51478072
0.17
G
A
0.89
2.61e-10
rs11246584
11
51481576
0.49
C
T
0.97
3.35e-10
kgp5773129
11
54794727
0.16
C
T
0.93
3.24e-10
rs28826070
11
54801549
0.06
C
T
0.84
2.76e-10
rs4540846
11
54835203
0.48
G
A
0.97
3.38e-10
rs4537777
11
55241556
0.06
A
C
0.84
2.75e-10
rs10896971
11
55264310
0.12
C
T
0.92
3.06e-10
rs7935887
11
55550960
0.11
G
T
0.92
3.03e-10
rs17501535
11
55561893
0.07
T
C
0.91
3.01e-10
rs10895996
11
55857698
0.12
C
T
0.92
3.09e-10
exm909031
11
56000288
0.08
G
A
1.00
3.04e-10
rs11227599
11
56000471
0.20
G
A
1.02
3.63e-10
Continued on next page
==PAGE:113==
A.1 All SNPs
105
Table A.9 – continued from previous page
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
rs661090
11
56209204
0.18
A
C
0.89
3.64e-10
rs1876924
11
56347636
0.08
G
A
1.04
3.08e-10
rs17559185
11
56609719
0.08
C
T
1.05
3.14e-10
A.1.6
Homocitrulline
A.1.6.1
Frequentist Framework
Table A.10: Summary statistics from the frequentist linear regression on homoc-
itrulline levels for 510 individuals. Only SNPs with < 5*10−8 are shown.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
3
exm2273380
157161305
0.06
G
A
1.01
3.45e-10
11
rs11039358
47746962
0.06
A
G
1.04
3.46e-10
11
exm2259795
48085189
0.19
G
A
1.09
3.65e-10
11
exm2271499
48162305
0.35
T
C
0.99
3.62e-10
11
rs1566729
48164721
0.18
C
T
1.03
3.52e-10
11
rs7940877
48225680
0.29
G
A
0.98
3.6e-10
11
rs11039588
48234357
0.09
C
T
0.94
3.03e-10
11
rs11040730
48359268
0.09
C
T
0.95
2.79e-10
11
rs666165
48457439
0.20
T
C
1.02
3.56e-10
11
rs650021
48476690
0.19
C
T
0.89
3.52e-10
11
exm906772
48510654
0.39
C
A
0.94
3.15e-10
11
rs7115814
48556387
0.05
A
G
0.99
2.72e-10
Continued on next page
==PAGE:114==
106
A An Appendix
Table A.10 – continued from previous page
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
11
rs10838987
48646903
0.11
G
T
0.94
2.68e-10
11
exm2264424
48987539
0.39
A
C
0.92
3.12e-10
11
rs10431006
49010832
0.11
A
G
0.92
2.6e-10
11
rs2696923
49053601
0.19
G
A
0.89
3.43e-10
11
rs679470
49242990
0.26
G
T
0.99
3.25e-10
11
rs17556442
49325425
0.05
C
T
1.03
2.34e-10
11
rs1917325
49370004
0.43
A
G
1.03
3.13e-10
11
rs7113075
49458055
0.09
C
A
0.97
2.71e-10
11
rs10839287
49498923
0.16
T
C
0.98
2.28e-10
11
rs7101891
49598257
0.08
G
T
1.00
2.59e-10
11
rs1623556
49907856
0.09
A
G
0.95
2.79e-10
11
rs7946556
49944874
0.49
A
G
1.03
3.3e-10
11
rs7120107
50248332
0.06
T
G
0.97
2.76e-10
11
rs490842
50417549
0.09
G
A
0.95
2.79e-10
11
rs1608275
50476268
0.19
T
G
0.97
3.26e-10
11
rs2193309
50668400
0.11
C
T
0.99
3.08e-10
11
rs11827854
51401787
0.06
G
T
1.01
2.76e-10
11
rs7112290
51478072
0.17
G
A
1.00
2.61e-10
11
rs11246584
51481576
0.49
C
T
1.04
3.35e-10
11
kgp5773129
54794727
0.16
C
T
0.99
3.24e-10
11
rs28826070
54801549
0.06
C
T
1.01
2.76e-10
11
rs4540846
54835203
0.48
G
A
1.02
3.38e-10
Continued on next page
==PAGE:115==
A.1 All SNPs
107
Table A.10 – continued from previous page
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
11
rs4537777
55241556
0.06
A
C
1.01
2.75e-10
11
rs10896971
55264310
0.12
C
T
1.01
3.06e-10
11
rs7935887
55550960
0.11
G
T
1.00
3.03e-10
11
rs17501535
55561893
0.07
T
C
0.96
3.01e-10
11
rs10895996
55857698
0.12
C
T
1.03
3.09e-10
11
exm909031
56000288
0.08
G
A
0.92
3.04e-10
11
rs11227599
56000471
0.20
G
A
0.92
3.63e-10
11
rs661090
56209204
0.18
A
C
1.11
3.64e-10
11
rs1876924
56347636
0.08
G
A
0.91
3.08e-10
11
rs17559185
56609719
0.08
C
T
0.93
3.14e-10
==PAGE:116==
108
A An Appendix
A.1.7
Exacerbations
Table A.11: Summary statistics from the Bayesian logistic regression on exacerbations
for 6536 individuals. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the highest density interval located
outside of the ROPE are shown.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
ORbayes
SD
2.5%
97.5%
n_eff
Rhat
rs3766568
1
203101029
0.31
G
A
0.77
0.05
0.69
0.85
1481.03
1.00
rs10185897
2
102350330
0.12
C
A
0.71
0.07
0.62
0.83
1723.81
1.00
rs12328681
2
102736867
0.17
G
T
0.73
0.06
0.64
0.83
1394.87
1.00
rs11692065
2
102883975
0.11
C
T
0.72
0.08
0.62
0.83
1508.51
1.00
rs67571220
3
14939471
0.04
G
A
0.62
0.12
0.49
0.77
1720.93
1.00
rs34586473
5
5303424
0.02
G
A
0.63
0.13
0.49
0.81
1718.21
1.00
rs2301713
5
131951996
0.23
T
C
1.27
0.05
1.15
1.39
1031.91
1.00
rs145798898
5
176813246
0.02
G
A
1.60
0.11
1.30
1.96
3182.93
1.00
rs6910071
6
32354401
0.25
T
C
1.27
0.05
1.16
1.41
1268.46
1.00
rs41521946
6
32362703
0.13
G
T
0.73
0.07
0.64
0.84
1822.08
1.00
rs2073045
6
32371771
0.39
G
A
1.31
0.04
1.20
1.43
876.93
1.00
rs9391858
6
32373621
0.14
A
G
0.74
0.07
0.66
0.84
1208.31
1.00
rs9268605
6
32432056
0.37
G
A
1.26
0.05
1.15
1.37
892.86
1.00
rs9368726
6
32438542
0.32
T
C
1.26
0.05
1.15
1.38
1202.99
1.00
rs5875382
6
32653817
0.42
G
A
0.75
0.05
0.68
0.82
878.40
1.00
AA_DRB1_71_32659935_K
6
32659935
0.19
A
P
1.34
0.06
1.19
1.51
1236.80
1.00
HLA_DRB1_0401
6
32660042
0.07
A
P
1.38
0.08
1.19
1.58
1075.06
1.00
AA_DRB1_13_32660109_HG
6
32660109
0.26
A
P
1.28
0.05
1.17
1.42
1839.89
1.00
rs6457614
6
32698320
0.10
A
C
0.71
0.07
0.62
0.82
1626.58
1.00
HLA_DQA1_01
6
32716284
0.40
A
P
0.78
0.05
0.71
0.85
1189.66
1.00
SNP_DQA1_32717084
6
32717084
0.34
T
C
1.26
0.05
1.16
1.38
1376.21
1.00
rs1894406
6
32819279
0.33
C
T
0.78
0.05
0.71
0.85
1123.49
1.00
rs10258293
7
105662690
0.18
T
C
1.32
0.05
1.19
1.47
1586.40
1.00
rs4289865
9
5850834
0.39
C
T
1.26
0.05
1.15
1.38
1009.15
1.00
rs340933
9
6085078
0.15
G
T
0.70
0.07
0.61
0.80
1816.18
1.00
rs2079
9
6166653
0.35
G
A
1.30
0.05
1.19
1.42
1026.24
1.00
rs1412426
9
6188652
0.33
C
A
1.35
0.05
1.23
1.49
1107.30
1.00
rs2066362
9
6219176
0.16
G
T
1.41
0.06
1.27
1.57
1788.19
1.00
rs731585
9
6342328
0.31
A
G
1.27
0.04
1.16
1.39
1310.56
1.00
rs11611796
12
115374033
0.04
C
T
0.69
0.10
0.56
0.83
2061.92
1.00
rs6312
13
47470824
0.07
T
C
0.71
0.09
0.59
0.85
1316.15
1.00
rs16946071
13
92163357
0.07
T
C
1.32
0.07
1.15
1.53
1790.45
1.00
rs7995998
13
112698776
0.05
G
T
0.69
0.09
0.57
0.83
1244.31
1.00
rs17806299
16
11199980
0.19
G
A
0.74
0.06
0.65
0.84
1661.03
1.00
rs11655972
17
37407072
0.15
T
C
1.37
0.06
1.22
1.54
1257.95
1.00
rs4795369
17
37609120
0.29
A
G
1.28
0.05
1.18
1.40
1160.25
1.00
rs11657058
17
37699378
0.15
G
T
1.38
0.06
1.24
1.55
1413.81
1.00
rs2643195
17
37853118
0.33
G
A
1.65
0.05
1.51
1.80
875.31
1.00
rs907091
17
37921742
0.49
T
C
0.49
0.05
0.45
0.54
981.60
1.00
rs12150079
17
38025417
0.31
G
A
0.55
0.05
0.50
0.61
1259.02
1.00
rs8066582
17
38146929
0.48
C
T
1.29
0.04
1.19
1.39
779.81
1.00
rs12453334
17
38153473
0.34
C
T
0.70
0.05
0.64
0.77
1108.95
1.00
rs2269457
17
38254689
0.26
T
C
1.29
0.05
1.17
1.43
1470.91
1.00
rs931992
17
39665182
0.36
T
G
1.55
0.05
1.42
1.70
1057.43
1.00
rs8070454
17
40004501
0.41
C
T
1.38
0.04
1.26
1.50
916.95
1.00
rs62135329
19
20044932
0.03
G
A
1.49
0.10
1.22
1.82
1277.14
1.00
rs6011928
20
62246541
0.16
G
A
0.74
0.06
0.65
0.84
1478.90
1.00
==PAGE:117==
A.1 All SNPs
109
A.1.7.1
Frequentist Framework
Table A.12: Summary statistics from the frequentist logistic regression on exacerba-
tions for 6536 individuals. Only SNPs with < 5*10−8 are shown.
SNP
Chr
Position
MAF
REF
A
OR
P
rs7555556
1
203090976
0.31
C
T
0.7504
3.45e-08
rs2073045
6
32371771
0.39
G
A
1.334
5.2e-09
rs3763313
6
32447647
0.20
A
C
0.7116
4.04e-08
rs3763316
6
32447922
0.28
C
T
1.368
6.31e-10
rs602457
6
32605785
0.19
T
C
1.509
2.71e-13
rs1129740
6
32609105
0.41
A
G
0.732
2.38e-10
rs5875382
6
32653817
0.42
G
A
0.7372
3.76e-10
AA_DQA1_47_32717191_RK
6
32717191
0.49
P
A
1.303
3.08e-08
rs6967330
7
105658451
0.18
G
A
1.476
1.19e-11
rs7047575
9
5841438
0.49
A
G
1.335
4.61e-10
rs10975412
9
6049547
0.16
A
G
0.6677
4.44e-09
rs10124250
9
6161686
0.41
C
T
1.369
9.48e-12
rs992969
9
6209697
0.27
G
A
1.441
4.74e-13
rs10975539
9
6308729
0.23
C
T
1.342
2.88e-08
rs801427
17
37436711
0.15
G
A
1.434
9.88e-10
rs8069451
17
37504933
0.26
T
C
1.361
9.51e-10
rs11654954
17
37745979
0.19
G
A
1.579
8.07e-17
rs2643195
17
37853118
0.33
G
A
1.703
3.68e-29
rs11078928
17
38064469
0.43
T
C
0.4244
1.12e-62
rs1045929
17
38175426
0.41
C
T
1.413
8.15e-14
rs2302777
17
38179492
0.35
A
G
0.6816
5.06e-14
rs931992
17
39665182
0.36
T
G
1.589
1.22e-22
rs8070454
17
40004501
0.41
C
T
1.407
1.61e-13
A.1.8
UK Biobank
A.1.8.1
Bayesian Framework
These are the SNPs found significant via the Bayesian frame-
work including quantiles
==PAGE:118==
110
A An Appendix
Table A.13: Summary statistics from the Bayesian logistic regression of exacerbations
for 93978 individuals from the UK Biobank. Only SNPs with 97.5% of the highest
density interval located outside of the ROPE are shown.
Chr
SNP
Position
MAF
REF
A
ORbayes
SD
2.5%
97.5%
n_eff
Rhat
1
rs11582098
203082811
0.322
C
T
0.9110
0.0221
0.8701
0.9491
836.6904
1.0029
2
rs10185897
102350330
0.1108
C
A
0.6984
0.0355
0.6497
0.7471
868.1765
0.9997
2
rs12328681
102736867
0.1725
G
T
0.8304
0.0292
0.7833
0.8796
1296.1226
1.0000
2
rs11465702
103057892
0.1361
A
G
0.7016
0.0353
0.6566
0.7521
970.9777
1.0000
5
rs2301713
131951996
0.1931
T
C
1.1616
0.0228
1.1111
1.2133
955.8379
1.0012
6
rs2073045
32371771
0.3519
G
A
1.1516
0.0266
1.0937
1.2093
815.5418
0.9993
6
rs9268605
32432056
0.3654
G
A
1.0829
0.0275
1.0249
1.1450
1221.8784
0.9992
6
rs4248166
32437611
0.1634
T
C
0.8104
0.0327
0.7592
0.8627
1246.8171
0.9988
6
rs9368726
32438542
0.3518
T
C
1.1089
0.0275
1.0522
1.1708
1064.0369
1.0008
6
rs3763313
32447647
0.1911
A
C
0.8055
0.0315
0.7559
0.8538
1160.1574
0.9986
6
rs3830135
32580687
0.1153
G
A
0.7911
0.0381
0.7349
0.8532
1003.6014
1.0002
6
rs1129740
32609105
0.4132
A
G
0.8177
0.0238
0.7813
0.8555
934.6225
1.0007
6
rs241455
32842979
0.2499
C
A
0.8351
0.0275
0.7909
0.8822
1171.5927
0.9992
7
rs10258293
105662690
0.1636
T
C
1.0824
0.0242
1.0323
1.1354
903.3405
0.9997
9
rs4289865
5850834
0.3452
C
T
1.0639
0.0204
1.0236
1.1100
843.6386
1.0007
9
rs10975412
6049547
0.1822
A
G
0.7942
0.0278
0.7506
0.8373
1013.7634
1.0000
9
rs2079
6166653
0.3407
G
A
1.1540
0.0205
1.1081
1.1993
920.7154
1.0026
9
rs1412426
6188652
0.332
C
A
1.1950
0.0217
1.1467
1.2438
677.5048
1.0026
9
rs2066362
6219176
0.157
G
T
1.3148
0.0270
1.2475
1.3838
963.5232
0.9992
9
rs731585
6342328
0.3301
A
G
1.1715
0.0204
1.1244
1.2189
1069.1041
1.0015
16
rs17806299
11199980
0.1955
G
A
0.8625
0.0247
0.8218
0.9050
1099.9127
1.0023
17
rs11655972
37407072
0.1589
T
C
1.1804
0.0256
1.1219
1.2453
752.8551
1.0000
17
rs4795369
37609120
0.2807
A
G
1.1412
0.0224
1.0921
1.1918
1086.4807
0.9991
17
rs11657058
37699378
0.1564
G
T
1.1926
0.0279
1.1260
1.2585
1380.7631
0.9990
17
rs2643195
37853118
0.3152
G
A
1.2831
0.0215
1.2321
1.3349
793.1563
0.9985
17
rs11078928
38064469
0.457
T
C
0.6993
0.0211
0.6723
0.7278
824.6062
1.0000
17
rs8066582
38146929
0.4584
C
T
1.1161
0.0219
1.0714
1.1654
786.8687
0.9987
17
rs7502233
38218804
0.3365
A
G
0.8604
0.0226
0.8221
0.8979
948.8363
0.9998
17
rs2269457
38254689
0.2381
T
C
1.1524
0.0254
1.0967
1.2134
974.8700
0.9995
17
rs931992
39665182
0.3415
T
G
1.2417
0.0212
1.1923
1.2941
1004.2086
0.9993
17
rs8070454
40004501
0.3837
C
T
1.1468
0.0204
1.1002
1.1924
985.7216
0.9988
20
rs6011928
62246541
0.1864
G
A
0.9486
0.0246
0.9042
0.9955
997.2091
0.9997
==PAGE:119==
A.1 All SNPs
111
A.1.8.2
Frequentist Framework
Table A.14: Summary statistics from the frequentist logistic regression of exacerba-
tions for 93978 individuals from the UK Biobank. Only SNPs with < 5*10−8 are
shown.
Chr
SNP
Position
MAF
A
OR
P
2
rs12328681
102736867
0.1725
T
0.8317
1.155e-11
2
rs10185897
102966790
0.1108
A
0.6912
1.539e-24
2
rs11465702
103057892
0.1361
G
0.7132
3.096e-27
5
rs2301713
131951996
0.1931
C
1.17
2.712e-11
6
rs2073045
32339548
0.3519
A
1.166
7.841e-13
6
rs4248166
32366421
0.1634
C
0.7905
2.033e-17
6
rs3763313
32376471
0.1911
C
0.7769
6.249e-22
6
rs9268605
32399833
0.3654
A
1.121
7.101e-09
6
rs9368726
32438542
0.3518
C
1.116
2.801e-08
6
rs3830135
32548464
0.1153
A
0.7553
5.929e-18
6
rs1129740
32609105
0.4132
G
0.8116
8.064e-24
6
rs241455
32796019
0.2499
A
0.8089
2.293e-19
9
rs10975412
6049547
0.1822
G
0.7842
2.449e-19
9
rs2079
6166653
0.3407
A
1.162
5.512e-14
9
rs1412426
6188652
0.332
A
1.201
7.619e-20
9
rs2066362
6219176
0.157
T
1.321
1.983e-28
9
rs731585
6342328
0.3301
G
1.176
1.103e-15
16
rs17806299
11199980
0.1955
A
0.8699
2.643e-08
17
rs11655972
37407072
0.1589
C
1.17
5.119e-10
17
rs4795369
37609120
0.2807
G
1.139
5.053e-10
17
rs11657058
37699378
0.1564
T
1.181
4.831e-11
17
rs931992
37821435
0.3415
G
1.246
1.781e-28
17
rs2643195
37853118
0.3152
A
1.293
1.857e-37
17
rs11078928
38064469
0.457
C
0.6982
3.28e-73
17
rs8066582
38146929
0.4584
T
1.127
5.198e-10
17
rs8070454
38160754
0.3837
T
1.159
4.329e-14
17
rs7502233
38218804
0.3365
G
0.864
2.619e-12
17
rs2269457
38254689
0.2381
C
1.141
1.004e-08
==PAGE:120==
112
A An Appendix
A.2
Code
A.2.1
Stan Code
A.2.1.1
Infections and Antibiotics
This is the code used for fitting Bayesian models to number of
respiratory infections and antibiotic prescriptions phenotype.
1
data {
2
int<lower=1> N; // Number of samples (phenotypes)
3
int<lower=1> n_cov; // Number of covariates
4
vector[N] GT; // Genotypes
5
int<lower=0> PT[N]; // Phenotypes
6
matrix[N,n_cov] cov; // Matrix of covariates
7
}
8
9
parameters {
10
real u; // Intercept
11
real beta; // Slope of genotype coefficient
12
vector[n_cov] beta_cov; // Slope of covariates
13
real<lower=0> inv_sqrt_phi;
14
}
15
16
transformed parameters{
17
real phi;
18
phi = pow((1/inv_sqrt_phi),2);
19
}
20
21
model {
22
u
~ normal(0,1); // Prior for intercept
23
inv_sqrt_phi ~ normal(0,1); // Prior for overdispersion parameter
24
beta ~
normal(0,0.2); // Prior for genotype coefficient
25
beta_cov ~ normal(0,1);
// Prior for covariate coefficients
26
PT ~ neg_binomial_2_log(u + GT * beta + cov * beta_cov, phi); //
Model code
==PAGE:121==
A.2 Code
113
27
}
28
generated quantities {
29
vector[N] log_lik;
30
for (n in 1:N) {
31
log_lik[n] = neg_binomial_2_log_lpmf(PT[n] | (u + GT * beta + cov
* beta_cov)[n], phi);
32
}
33
}
A.2.1.2
Metabolites
This is the code used for fitting Bayesian models to metabolite
phenotypes.
1 data{
2
int<lower=0> N; // Number of samples (phenotypes)
3
real PT[N]; //Metabolite levels
4
vector<lower=0>[N] GT; // Genotypes
5 }
6
7 parameters{
8
real b0; // Intercept
9
real b1; // Slope of genotype coefficient
10
real<lower=0> sigma; // Standard deviation
11 }
12
13
14 model{
15
b0 ~ normal(0,1); // Prior for intercept
16
b1 ~ normal(0, 0.2);
// Prior for genotype coefficient
17
sigma ~ normal(0,1);
// Prior for covariate coefficients
18
PT ~
normal(b0+(b1*GT), sigma); // Model code
19 }
==PAGE:122==
114
A An Appendix
A.2.1.3
Exacerbations
This is the code used for fitting Bayesian models to exacerba-
tions with the COPSACexacerbations and UK Biobank cohorts.
1 data{
2
int<lower=1> N; // Number of samples (phenotypes)
3
int<lower=1> M; // number of SNPs
4
int<lower=1> n_cov; // Number of covariates
5
matrix[N, M+n_cov] X; // Covariate predictor matrix
6
int<lower=0, upper=1> PT[N];// Number of samples (phenotypes)
7 }
8
9 parameters{
10
real u; // Intercept
11
vector[M+n_cov] beta; // Slope of genotype coefficient
12 }
13
14 model{
15
u ~ normal(0,1); // Prior for intercept
16
beta[M] ~ normal(0, 0.2); //
17
beta[M+1:n_cov] ~ normal(0,1);
18
PT ~
bernoulli_logit_glm(X, u, beta);
19 }
A.2.2
Plink Code
A.2.2.1
Metabolites
This is the code used for fitting linear models to exacerbations
with the COPSAC2010 metabolites.
1 plink
2 --bfile data/copsac2010/genotypes/copsac2010
==PAGE:123==
A.2 Code
115
3 --linear
4 --out results/metabolites/metabolite_plink
5 --pheno data/copsac2010/phenotypes/transformed/metabolite.txt
A.2.2.2
Exacerbations
This is the code used for fitting logistic models to exacerbations
with the COPSACexacerbations and UK Biobank cohorts.
1
plink
2
--bfile data/exacerbations/genotypes/Merged_HLA_Imputed
3
--covar data/exacerbations/covariates.txt
4
--logistic
5
--out results/exacerbations/logistic
6
--pheno data/exacerbations/phenotypes/phenotype.txt
A.2.2.3
LD Clustering
Code for clustering together SNPs in high LD, with the SNP
with the lowest p-value as a representative of the cluster.
1
plink
2
--bfile data/copsac2010/genotypes/copsac2010
3
--clump results/metabolites/metabolite_ldpruned.txt
4
--out results/metabolites/metabolite_ldpruned.txt
A.2.3
R Code
==PAGE:124==
116
A An Appendix
1 model = glm(snp$PT
~ snp$`SNPmatrix[, snp_index]`+snp$PC1+snp$PC2+snp$PC3+
snp$PC4+snp$PC5+snp$SEX, family = quasipoisson())
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
[1]
Mark L. Everard. “Paediatric Respiratory Infections”. en. In: European Respi-
ratory Review 25.139 (March 2016), Pages 36–40. issn: 0905-9180, 1600-0617.
doi: 10.1183/16000617.0084-2015.
[2]
Melvin Wright and Giovanni Piedimonte. “Respiratory Syncytial Virus Preven-
tion and Therapy: Past, Present, and Future”. eng. In: Pediatric Pulmonology
46.4 (April 2011), Pages 324–347. issn: 1099-0496. doi: 10.1002/ppul.21377.
[3]
J. T. McBride. “Pulmonary Function Changes in Children after Respiratory
Syncytial Virus Infection in Infancy”. eng. In: The Journal of Pediatrics 135.2
Pt 2 (August 1999), Pages 28–32. issn: 0022-3476.
[4]
Gregor Mendel. “Versuche Über Pflanzen-Hybriden”. In: Der Züchter 13.10-11
(1941), Pages 221–268. doi: 10.1007/bf01804628.
[5]
Robin Marantz. Henig. The Monk in the Garden: The Lost and Found Genius
of Gregor Mendel, the Father of Genetics. Houghton Mifflin, 2000.
[6]
J. D. Watson and F. H. C. Crick. “Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids: A
Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid”. In: Nature 171.4356 (1953), Pages 737–
738. doi: 10.1038/171737a0.
[7]
“A Global Reference for Human Genetic Variation”. In: Nature 526.7571 (2015),
Pages 68–74. doi: 10.1038/nature15393.
==PAGE:126==
118
Bibliography
[8]
Marcel Méchali. “Eukaryotic DNA Replication Origins: Many Choices for Ap-
propriate Answers”. eng. In: Nature Reviews. Molecular Cell Biology 11.10
(October 2010), Pages 728–738. issn: 1471-0080. doi: 10.1038/nrm2976.
[9]
Lawrence A. Loeb, Keith R. Loeb, and Jon P. Anderson. “Multiple Mutations
and Cancer”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 100.3 (February 2003), Pages 776–781. issn: 0027-8424. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0334858100.
[10]
National Institutes of Health (US) and Biological Sciences Curriculum Study.
Understanding Human Genetic Variation. en. National Institutes of Health
(US), 2007.
[11]
Genetics Home Reference. What Are Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs)?
en. https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/primer/genomicresearch/snp.
[12]
Single Nucleotide Polymorphism / SNP | Learn Science at Scitable. https://www.nature.com/scit
295/.
[13]
Alison A. Hislop. “Airway and Blood Vessel Interaction during Lung Devel-
opment”. eng. In: Journal of Anatomy 201.4 (October 2002), Pages 325–334.
issn: 0021-8782. doi: 10.1046/j.1469-7580.2002.00097.x.
[14]
Raymond J Pickles and John P DeVincenzo. “Respiratory Syncytial Virus
(RSV) and Its Propensity for Causing Bronchiolitis”. In: The Journal of Pathol-
ogy 235.2 (January 2015), Pages 266–276. issn: 0022-3417. doi: 10.1002/path.
4462.
[15]
RSV | Symptoms and Care | Respiratory Syncytial Virus | CDC. en-us. https://www.cdc.gov/rsv/
February 2019.
[16]
Global Asthma Network. The Global Asthma Report 2014. en. OCLC: 898870555.
2014. isbn: 978-0-473-29125-9.
[17]
S. Bronnimann and B. Burrows. “A Prospective Study of the Natural History
of Asthma. Remission and Relapse Rates”. eng. In: Chest 90.4 (October 1986),
Pages 480–484. issn: 0012-3692. doi: 10.1378/chest.90.4.480.
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
119
[18]
Sarah Svenningsen and Parameswaran Nair. “Asthma Endotypes and an Overview
of Targeted Therapy for Asthma”. In: Frontiers in Medicine 4 (September
2017). issn: 2296-858X. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2017.00158.
[19]
Omar Tliba and Reynold A. Panettieri. “Paucigranulocytic Asthma: Uncou-
pling of Airway Obstruction from Inflammation”. English. In: Journal of Al-
lergy and Clinical Immunology 143.4 (April 2019), Pages 1287–1294. issn: 0091-
6749, 1097-6825. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2018.06.008.
[20]
Jinfang Zhu. “T Helper 2 (Th2) Cell Differentiation, Type 2 Innate Lymphoid
Cell (ILC2) Development and Regulation of Interleukin-4 (IL-4) and IL-13
Production”. eng. In: Cytokine 75.1 (September 2015), Pages 14–24. issn: 1096-
0023. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.05.010.
[21]
Ilkka S. Junttila. “Tuning the Cytokine Responses: An Update on Interleukin
(IL)-4 and IL-13 Receptor Complexes”. English. In: Frontiers in Immunology
9 (2018). issn: 1664-3224. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2018.00888.
[22]
Corrado Pelaia et al. “Interleukin-5 in the Pathophysiology of Severe Asthma”.
In: Frontiers in Physiology 10 (December 2019). issn: 1664-042X. doi: 10.
3389/fphys.2019.01514.
[23]
Diana Raedler and Bianca Schaub. “Immune Mechanisms and Development
of Childhood Asthma”. English. In: The Lancet Respiratory Medicine 2.8 (Au-
gust 2014), Pages 647–656. issn: 2213-2600, 2213-2619. doi: 10.1016/S2213-
2600(14)70129-8.
[24]
John V. Fahy. “Type 2 Inflammation in Asthma — Present in Most, Absent
in Many”. In: Nature reviews. Immunology 15.1 (January 2015), Pages 57–65.
issn: 1474-1733. doi: 10.1038/nri3786.
[25]
Annalisa Buniello et al. “The NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog of Published Genome-
Wide Association Studies, Targeted Arrays and Summary Statistics 2019”. eng.
In: Nucleic Acids Research 47.D1 (January 2019), Pages D1005–D1012. issn:
1362-4962. doi: 10.1093/nar/gky1120.
==PAGE:128==
120
Bibliography
[26]
Zhaozhong Zhu et al. “Shared Genetic and Experimental Links between Obesity-
Related Traits and Asthma Subtypes in UK Biobank”. eng. In: The Journal of
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 145.2 (February 2020), Pages 537–549. issn:
1097-6825. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2019.09.035.
[27]
Manuel A. R. Ferreira et al. “Genetic Architectures of Childhood- and Adult-
Onset Asthma Are Partly Distinct”. eng. In: American Journal of Human
Genetics 104.4 (April 2019), Pages 665–684. issn: 1537-6605. doi: 10.1016/j.
ajhg.2019.02.022.
[28]
Klaus Bønnelykke et al. “A Genome-Wide Association Study Identifies CDHR3
as a Susceptibility Locus for Early Childhood Asthma with Severe Exacerba-
tions”. en. In: Nature Genetics 46.1 (January 2014), Pages 51–55. issn: 1061-
4036, 1546-1718. doi: 10.1038/ng.2830.
[29]
Milton Pividori et al. “Shared and Distinct Genetic Risk Factors for Childhood-
Onset and Adult-Onset Asthma: Genome-Wide and Transcriptome-Wide Stud-
ies”. eng. In: The Lancet. Respiratory Medicine 7.6 (June 2019), Pages 509–522.
issn: 2213-2619. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(19)30055-4.
[30]
Florence Demenais et al. “Multiancestry Association Study Identifies New
Asthma Risk Loci That Colocalize with Immune-Cell Enhancer Marks”. eng.
In: Nature Genetics 50.1 (January 2018), Pages 42–53. issn: 1546-1718. doi:
10.1038/s41588-017-0014-7.
[31]
Ingo Marenholz et al. “Meta-Analysis Identifies Seven Susceptibility Loci In-
volved in the Atopic March”. eng. In: Nature Communications 6 (November
2015), Page 8804. issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9804.
[32]
Zhaozhong Zhu et al. “Shared Genetics of Asthma and Mental Health Dis-
orders: A Large-Scale Genome-Wide Cross-Trait Analysis”. eng. In: The Eu-
ropean Respiratory Journal 54.6 (December 2019). issn: 1399-3003. doi: 10.
1183/13993003.01507-2019.
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography
121
[33]
D.-S. Lee et al. “The Implications of Human Metabolic Network Topology
for Disease Comorbidity”. eng. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 105.29 (July 2008), Pages 9880–9885.
issn: 1091-6490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0802208105.
[34]
Anthony H. Futerman and Frances M. Platt. “The Metabolism of Gluco-
cerebrosides — From 1965 to the Present”. en. In: Molecular Genetics and
Metabolism. The Lysosome (Feb 2017) 120.1 (January 2017), Pages 22–26.
issn: 1096-7192. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.11.390.
[35]
William W. Busse, Robert F. Lemanske, and James E. Gern. “Role of Viral
Respiratory Infections in Asthma and Asthma Exacerbations”. English. In:
The Lancet 376.9743 (September 2010), Pages 826–834. issn: 0140-6736, 1474-
547X. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61380-3.
[36]
R. A. Zager, K. M. Burkhart, and A. Johnson. “Sphingomyelinase and Mem-
brane Sphingomyelin Content: Determinants ofProximal Tubule Cell Suscepti-
bility to Injury”. eng. In: Journal of the American Society of Nephrology: JASN
11.5 (May 2000), Pages 894–902. issn: 1046-6673.
[37]
Imre Gombos et al. “Rafting MHC-II Domains in the APC (Presynaptic)
Plasma Membrane and the Thresholds for T-Cell Activation and Immuno-
logical Synapse Formation”. eng. In: Immunology Letters 92.1-2 (March 2004),
Pages 117–124. issn: 0165-2478. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2003.11.022.
[38]
B. Guo et al. “Engagement of the Human Pre-B Cell Receptor Generates
a Lipid Raft-Dependent Calcium Signaling Complex”. eng. In: Immunity 13.2
(August 2000), Pages 243–253. issn: 1074-7613. doi: 10.1016/s1074-7613(00)
00024-8.
[39]
Prachi Gupta, Vannan Kandi Vijayan, and Surendra Kumar Bansal. “Sphin-
gomyelin Metabolism in Erythrocyte Membrane in Asthma”. eng. In: The Jour-
nal of Asthma: Official Journal of the Association for the Care of Asthma 47.9
==PAGE:130==
122
Bibliography
(November 2010), Pages 966–971. issn: 1532-4303. doi: 10.1080/02770903.
2010.517590.
[40]
Piotr Mydel et al. “Carbamylation-Dependent Activation of T Cells: A Novel
Mechanism in the Pathogenesis of Autoimmune Arthritis”. eng. In: Journal
of Immunology (Baltimore, Md.: 1950) 184.12 (June 2010), Pages 6882–6890.
issn: 1550-6606. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000075.
[41]
Harold Jeffreys. “Frequency Definitions and Direct Methods”. In: Theory and
Probability. Third. Clarendon Press, 1998, Page 385.
[42]
Eric-Jan Wagenmakers. “A Practical Solution to the Pervasive Problems Ofp
Values”. en. In: Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 14.5 (October 2007), Pages 779–
804. issn: 1069-9384, 1531-5320. doi: 10.3758/BF03194105.
[43]
R.A Fisher. Statistical Methods for Research Workers. Oliver & Boyd, 1950.
[44]
R. Peto et al. “Design and Analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials Requiring
Prolonged Observation of Each Patient. I. Introduction and Design.” In: British
Journal of Cancer 34.6 (December 1976), Pages 585–612. issn: 0007-0920.
[45]
Nanette Nelson, Robert Rosenthal, and Ralph L. Rosnow. “Interpretation of
Significance Levels and Effect Sizes by Psychological Researchers.” In: Ameri-
can Psychologist 41.11 (1986), Pages 1299–1301. issn: 1935-990X(Electronic),0003-
066X(Print). doi: 10.1037/0003-066X.41.11.1299.
[46]
Hans Bisgaard. “The Copenhagen Prospective Study on Asthma in Childhood
(COPSAC): Design, Rationale, and Baseline Data from a Longitudinal Birth
Cohort Study”. English. In: Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology 93.4
(October 2004), Pages 381–389. issn: 1081-1206, 1534-4436. doi: 10.1016/
S1081-1206(10)61398-1.
[47]
Morten Schmidt et al. “The Danish National Patient Registry: A Review of
Content, Data Quality, and Research Potential”. In: Clinical Epidemiology
7 (November 2015), Pages 449–490. issn: 1179-1349. doi: 10 . 2147 / CLEP .
S91125.
==PAGE:131==
Bibliography
123
[48]
UK Biobank: An Open Access Resource for Identifying the Causes of a Wide
Range of Complex Diseases of Middle and Old Age. https://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/ar
[49]
Zeneng Wang et al. “Eosinophil Peroxidase Catalyzed Protein Carbamylation
Participates in Asthma”. eng. In: The Journal of Biological Chemistry 291.42
(October 2016), Pages 22118–22135. issn: 1083-351X. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M116.
750034.
[50]
Daniela Rago et al. “Fish-Oil Supplementation in Pregnancy, Child Metabolomics
and Asthma Risk”. en. In: EBioMedicine 46 (August 2019), Pages 399–410.
issn: 23523964. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2019.07.057.
[51]
Tu Nguyen et al. “Uncovering the Role of N-Acetyl-Aspartyl-Glutamate as a
Glutamate Reservoir in Cancer”. In: Cell reports 27.2 (April 2019), 491–501.e6.
issn: 2211-1247. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2019.03.036.
[52]
Evaluation of Dietary Intake in a Danish Population: The Inter99 Study: Scan-
dinavian Journal of Nutrition: Vol 48, No 3. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
[53]
Quality Control Procedures for Genome Wide Association Studies. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih
[54]
Stephen Turner et al. “Quality Control Procedures for Genome Wide Asso-
ciation Studies”. In: Current protocols in human genetics / editorial board,
Jonathan L. Haines ... [et al.] CHAPTER (January 2011), Unit1.19. issn:
1934-8266. doi: 10.1002/0471142905.hg0119s68.
[55]
Christopher C. Chang et al. “Second-Generation PLINK: Rising to the Chal-
lenge of Larger and Richer Datasets”. en. In: GigaScience 4.1 (December 2015).
doi: 10.1186/s13742-015-0047-8.
[56]
Second-Generation PLINK: Rising to the Challenge of Larger and Richer
Datasets | GigaScience | Oxford Academic. https://academic.oup.com/gigascience/article/4/
015-0047-8/2707533.
[57]
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.
Manual. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria, 2017.
==PAGE:132==
124
Bibliography
[58]
Stan Development Team. “RStan: The R Interface to Stan”. In: (2018).
[59]
Andrew Gelman. Prior Choice Recommendations. en. https://github.com/stan-
dev/stan.
[60]
Aki Vehtari, Andrew Gelman, and Jonah Gabry. “Practical Bayesian Model
Evaluation Using Leave-One-out Cross-Validation and WAIC”. en. In: Statis-
tics and Computing 27.5 (September 2017), Pages 1413–1432. issn: 1573-1375.
doi: 10.1007/s11222-016-9696-4.
[61]
Geoff Cumming. “The New Statistics: Why and How”. en. In: Psychological
Science (November 2013). doi: 10.1177/0956797613504966.
[62]
John K. Kruschke. “Rejecting or Accepting Parameter Values in Bayesian Esti-
mation”. en. In: Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Science 1.2
(June 2018), Pages 270–280. issn: 2515-2459. doi: 10.1177/2515245918771304.
[63]
Gelman Andrew. “Bayesian Data Analysis, Third Edition”. en. In: (), Page 656.
[64]
Steffen Durinck et al. “BioMart and Bioconductor: A Powerful Link between
Biological Databases and Microarray Data Analysis”. eng. In: Bioinformatics
(Oxford, England) 21.16 (August 2005), Pages 3439–3440. issn: 1367-4803. doi:
10.1093/bioinformatics/bti525.
[65]
Steffen Durinck et al. “Mapping Identifiers for the Integration of Genomic
Datasets with the R/Bioconductor Package biomaRt”. eng. In: Nature Proto-
cols 4.8 (2009), Pages 1184–1191. issn: 1750-2799. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2009.
97.
[66]
Andrew D. Yates et al. “Ensembl 2020”. en. In: Nucleic Acids Research 48.D1
(January 2020), Pages D682–D688. issn: 0305-1048. doi: 10 . 1093 / nar /
gkz966.
[67]
William McLaren et al. “The Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor”. In: Genome
Biology 17.1 (June 2016), Page 122. issn: 1474-760X. doi: 10.1186/s13059-
016-0974-4.
==PAGE:133==
Bibliography
125
[68]
Kyoko Watanabe et al. A Global Overview of Pleiotropy and Genetic Architec-
ture in Complex Traits. en. Preprint. Genetics, December 2018. doi: 10.1101/
500090.
[69]
UniProt: A Worldwide Hub of Protein Knowledge | Nucleic Acids Research | Ox-
ford Academic. https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/47/D1/D506/5160987.
[70]
Genetics Home Reference. Genetics Home Reference, Your Guide to Under-
standing Genetic Conditions. en. https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/.
[71]
Kasey Buckles and Shawna Kolka. “Prenatal Investments, Breastfeeding, and
Birth Order”. In: Social Science & Medicine 118 (October 2014), Pages 66–70.
doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.07.055.
[72]
Gerald J Pruckner et al. “Birth Order, Parental Health Investment, and Health
in Childhood”. en. In: Birth Order (2019), Page 48.
[73]
Rachel McKay et al. “Antibiotic Prescribing for Pediatric Respiratory Infec-
tions: What Explains a Large Variation among Physicians?” en. In: Canadian
Family Physician 65.6 (June 2019), e278–e291. issn: 0008-350X, 1715-5258.
[74]
Genetics Home Reference. ATP1A1 Gene. en. https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/ATP1A1.
[75]
Genevieve L. Wojcik et al. “Genetic Analyses of Diverse Populations Im-
proves Discovery for Complex Traits”. eng. In: Nature 570.7762 (June 2019),
Pages 514–518. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1310-4.
[76]
Matthias Lingemann et al. “The Alpha-1 Subunit of the Na+,K+-ATPase
(ATP1A1) Is Required for Macropinocytic Entry of Respiratory Syncytial
Virus (RSV) in Human Respiratory Epithelial Cells”. eng. In: PLoS pathogens
15.8 (August 2019), e1007963. issn: 1553-7374. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.
1007963.
[77]
Xingnan Li et al. “Genome-Wide Association Study of Asthma Identifies RAD50-
IL13 and HLA-DR/DQ Regions”. eng. In: The Journal of Allergy and Clin-
ical Immunology 125.2 (February 2010), 328–335.e11. issn: 1097-6825. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2009.11.018.
==PAGE:134==
126
Bibliography
[78]
Genetics Home Reference. CPOX Gene. en. https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/CPOX.
[79]
Rui Martins et al. “Heme Drives Hemolysis-Induced Susceptibility to Infec-
tion via Disruption of Phagocyte Functions”. en. In: Nature Immunology 17.12
(December 2016), Pages 1361–1372. issn: 1529-2916. doi: 10.1038/ni.3590.
[80]
Chao Tian et al. “Genome-Wide Association and HLA Region Fine-Mapping
Studies Identify Susceptibility Loci for Multiple Common Infections”. eng. In:
Nature Communications 8.1 (September 2017), Page 599. issn: 2041-1723. doi:
10.1038/s41467-017-00257-5.
[81]
Supinda Bunyavanich et al. “Integrated Genome-Wide Association, Coexpres-
sion Network, and Expression Single Nucleotide Polymorphism Analysis Iden-
tifies Novel Pathway in Allergic Rhinitis”. eng. In: BMC medical genomics 7
(August 2014), Page 48. issn: 1755-8794. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-7-48.
[82]
Ari V. Ahola-Olli et al. “Genome-Wide Association Study Identifies 27 Loci
Influencing Concentrations of Circulating Cytokines and Growth Factors”. eng.
In: American Journal of Human Genetics 100.1 (January 2017), Pages 40–50.
issn: 1537-6605. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.007.
[83]
Amber Dahlin et al. “Genome-Wide Interaction Study Reveals Age-Dependent
Determinants of Responsiveness to Inhaled Corticosteroids in Individuals with
Asthma”. eng. In: PloS One 15.3 (2020), e0229241. issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.
1371/journal.pone.0229241.
[84]
Chromosome 16p13.3 Deletion Syndrome | Genetic and Rare Diseases Informa-
tion Center (GARD) – an NCATS Program. https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/10754/ch
16p133-deletion-syndrome#ref_10604.
[85]
Yi Han et al. “Genome-Wide Analysis Highlights Contribution of Immune Sys-
tem Pathways to the Genetic Architecture of Asthma”. en. In: Nature Commu-
nications 11.1 (April 2020), Page 1776. issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-
020-15649-3.
==PAGE:135==
Bibliography
127
[86]
Gleb Kichaev et al. “Leveraging Polygenic Functional Enrichment to Improve
GWAS Power”. eng. In: American Journal of Human Genetics 104.1 (January
2019), Pages 65–75. issn: 1537-6605. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2018.11.008.
[87]
Eric A. F. Simoes et al. “Acute Respiratory Infections in Children”. eng. In: Dis-
ease Control Priorities in Developing Countries. Edited by Dean T. Jamison
et al. Second. Washington (DC): World Bank, 2006. isbn: 978-0-8213-6179-5.
[88]
Genetics Home Reference. STAMBP Gene. en. https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/STAMBP.
[89]
SEMA5A Semaphorin 5A [Homo Sapiens (Human)] - Gene - NCBI. https://www.ncbi.nlm.n
[90]
Guo Cheng et al. “Identification of PLXDC1 and PLXDC2 as the Transmem-
brane Receptors for the Multifunctional Factor PEDF”. In: eLife 3 (December
2014). Edited by Michael S Brown, e05401. issn: 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/
eLife.05401.
[91]
NRXN3 Neurexin 3 [Homo Sapiens (Human)] - Gene - NCBI. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
expression.
[92]
Katrina M. de Lange et al. “Genome-Wide Association Study Implicates Im-
mune Activation of Multiple Integrin Genes in Inflammatory Bowel Disease”.
eng. In: Nature Genetics 49.2 (February 2017), Pages 256–261. issn: 1546-1718.
doi: 10.1038/ng.3760.
[93]
Rubina Tabassum et al. “Genetic Architecture of Human Plasma Lipidome
and Its Link to Cardiovascular Disease”. eng. In: Nature Communications 10.1
(September 2019), Page 4329. issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-
11954-8.
[94]
Jin-Fang Chai et al. “Associations with Metabolites in Chinese Suggest New
Metabolic Roles in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s Diseases”. eng. In: Human
Molecular Genetics 29.2 (January 2020), Pages 189–201. issn: 1460-2083. doi:
10.1093/hmg/ddz246.
==PAGE:136==
128
Bibliography
[95]
Valur Emilsson et al. “Co-Regulatory Networks of Human Serum Proteins
Link Genetics to Disease”. eng. In: Science (New York, N.Y.) 361.6404 (August
2018), Pages 769–773. issn: 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.aaq1327.
[96]
Genetics Home Reference. FNBP4 Gene. en. https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/FNBP4.
[97]
Sandra Sanchez-Roige et al. “Genome-Wide Association Study Meta-Analysis
of the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) in Two Population-
Based Cohorts”. eng. In: The American Journal of Psychiatry 176.2 (Febru-
ary 2019), Pages 107–118. issn: 1535-7228. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2018.
18040369.
[98]
Michelle Luciano et al. “Association Analysis in over 329,000 Individuals Identi-
fies 116 Independent Variants Influencing Neuroticism”. eng. In: Nature Genet-
ics 50.1 (January 2018), Pages 6–11. issn: 1546-1718. doi: 10.1038/s41588-
017-0013-8.
[99]
Genetics Home Reference. PTPRJ Gene. en. https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/PTPRJ.
[100]
E. Ellinghaus et al. “Identification of Germline Susceptibility Loci in ETV6-
RUNX1-Rearranged Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia”. eng. In: Leukemia
26.5 (May 2012), Pages 902–909. issn: 1476-5551. doi: 10.1038/leu.2011.
302.
[101]
William J. Astle et al. “The Allelic Landscape of Human Blood Cell Trait Vari-
ation and Links to Common Complex Disease”. eng. In: Cell 167.5 (November
2016), 1415–1429.e19. issn: 1097-4172. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.10.042.
[102]
FOLH1 Folate Hydrolase 1 [Homo Sapiens (Human)] - Gene - NCBI. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
[103]
Hongchao Lv et al. “Genome-Wide Haplotype Association Study Identify the
FGFR2 Gene as a Risk Gene for Acute Myeloid Leukemia”. eng. In: Oncotar-
get 8.5 (January 2017), Pages 7891–7899. issn: 1949-2553. doi: 10.18632/
oncotarget.13631.
[104]
Human Gene BRWD1 (ENST00000333229.6) Description and Page Index.
https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgGene?db=hg38&hgg_gene=BRWD1.
==PAGE:137==
Bibliography
129
[105]
Antônio Francisco Alves da Silva et al. “Trisomy 21 Alters DNA Methyla-
tion in Parent-of-Origin-Dependent and -Independent Manners”. eng. In: PloS
One 11.4 (2016), e0154108. issn: 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0154108.
[106]
Keiko Wakui et al. “Construction of a Natural Panel of 11p11.2 Deletions
and Further Delineation of the Critical Region Involved in Potocki-Shaffer
Syndrome”. eng. In: European journal of human genetics: EJHG 13.5 (May
2005), Pages 528–540. issn: 1018-4813. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201366.
[107]
NAAG Peptidase Inhibitors and Their Potential for Diagnosis and Therapy |
Nature Reviews Drug Discovery. https://www.nature.com/articles/nrd1903.
[108]
Genetics Home Reference. REN Gene. en. https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/REN.
[109]
S. G. Ramsay et al. “Investigations on the Renin-Angiotensin System in Acute
Severe Asthma”. eng. In: The European Respiratory Journal 10.12 (Decem-
ber 1997), Pages 2766–2771. issn: 0903-1936. doi: 10.1183/09031936.97.
10122766.
[110]
Genetics Home Reference. PRKN Gene. en. https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/gene/PRKN.
[111]
Karan Sachdeva et al. “Environmental Exposures and Asthma Development:
Autophagy, Mitophagy, and Cellular Senescence”. eng. In: Frontiers in Im-
munology 10 (2019), Page 2787. issn: 1664-3224. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.
02787.
[112]
Kazuya Tsubouchi, Jun Araya, and Kazuyoshi Kuwano. “PINK1-PARK2-Mediated
Mitophagy in COPD and IPF Pathogeneses”. In: Inflammation and Regenera-
tion 38 (October 2018). issn: 1880-9693. doi: 10.1186/s41232-018-0077-6.
[113]
Dariush Mozaffarian et al. “Genetic Loci Associated with Circulating Phos-
pholipid Trans Fatty Acids: A Meta-Analysis of Genome-Wide Association
Studies from the CHARGE Consortium”. eng. In: The American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 101.2 (February 2015), Pages 398–406. issn: 1938-3207. doi:
10.3945/ajcn.114.094557.
==PAGE:138==
130
Bibliography
[114]
Xiumei Hong et al. “Genome-Wide Association Study Identifies Peanut Allergy-
Specific Loci and Evidence of Epigenetic Mediation in US Children”. eng. In:
Nature Communications 6 (February 2015), Page 6304. issn: 2041-1723. doi:
10.1038/ncomms7304.
[115]
Role of ADTRP (Androgen-Dependent Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor Reg-
ulating Protein) in Vascular Development and Function | Journal of the Ameri-
can Heart Association. https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/JAHA.118.010690.
[116]
Sharon M. Lutz et al. “A Genome-Wide Association Study Identifies Risk Loci
for Spirometric Measures among Smokers of European and African Ancestry”.
eng. In: BMC genetics 16 (December 2015), Page 138. issn: 1471-2156. doi:
10.1186/s12863-015-0299-4.
[117]
Yuetiva Deming et al. “A Potential Endophenotype for Alzheimer’s Disease:
Cerebrospinal Fluid Clusterin”. eng. In: Neurobiology of Aging 37 (January
2016), 208.e1–208.e9. issn: 1558-1497. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . neurobiolaging .
2015.09.009.
[118]
KEGG PATHWAY: Human T-Cell Leukemia Virus 1 Infection - Homo Sapi-
ens (Human). https://www.kegg.jp/kegg-bin/show_pathway?hsa05166+8498.
[119]
Thorunn A. Olafsdottir et al. “Eighty-Eight Variants Highlight the Role of
T Cell Regulation and Airway Remodeling in Asthma Pathogenesis”. eng. In:
Nature Communications 11.1 (January 2020), Page 393. issn: 2041-1723. doi:
10.1038/s41467-019-14144-8.
[120]
Joseph K. Pickrell et al. “Detection and Interpretation of Shared Genetic
Influences on 42 Human Traits”. eng. In: Nature Genetics 48.7 (July 2016),
Pages 709–717. issn: 1546-1718. doi: 10.1038/ng.3570.
[121]
Manuel A. Ferreira et al. “Shared Genetic Origin of Asthma, Hay Fever and
Eczema Elucidates Allergic Disease Biology”. en. In: Nature Genetics 49.12
(December 2017), Pages 1752–1757. issn: 1546-1718. doi: 10.1038/ng.3985.
==PAGE:139==
Bibliography
131
[122]
Sang-Heon Kim et al. “Adenosine Deaminase and Adenosine Receptor Poly-
morphisms in Aspirin-Intolerant Asthma”. eng. In: Respiratory Medicine 103.3
(March 2009), Pages 356–363. issn: 1532-3064. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.
10.008.
[123]
Miriam F. Moffatt et al. “A Large-Scale, Consortium-Based Genomewide As-
sociation Study of Asthma”. In: The New England journal of medicine 363.13
(September 2010), Pages 1211–1221. issn: 0028-4793. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0906312.
[124]
Cheng Caroline et al. “Endothelial Cell–Specific FGD5 Involvement in Vas-
cular Pruning Defines Neovessel Fate in Mice”. In: Circulation 125.25 (June
2012), Pages 3142–3159. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.064030.
[125]
Byung Lae Park et al. “Genome-Wide Association Study of Aspirin-Exacerbated
Respiratory Disease in a Korean Population”. eng. In: Human Genetics 132.3
(March 2013), Pages 313–321. issn: 1432-1203. doi: 10.1007/s00439-012-
1247-2.
[126]
Zhaozhong Zhu et al. “A Genome-Wide Cross-Trait Analysis from UK Biobank
Highlights the Shared Genetic Architecture of Asthma and Allergic Diseases”.
eng. In: Nature Genetics 50.6 (June 2018), Pages 857–864. issn: 1546-1718.
doi: 10.1038/s41588-018-0121-0.
[127]
Aristea D. Binia et al. “Chromosome 17q21 SNP and Severe Asthma”. In:
Journal of human genetics 56.1 (January 2011), Pages 97–98. issn: 1434-5161.
doi: 10.1038/jhg.2010.134.
[128]
Robert Slavin and Dewi Smith. “The Relationship between Sample Sizes and
Effect Sizes in Systematic Reviews in Education”. In: Educational Evaluation
and Policy Analysis 31.4 (2009), Pages 500–506. issn: 0162-3737.
==PAGE:140==
