==PAGE:1==
Master of Science
Transportation & Logistics
Master Thesis in Operations Management
The Role of Power and Trust in
Supply Chain Performance in
Collaborative Supply Chains
Author: Anna Maria Stavrakaki (s182548)
Kongens Lyngby, 2020
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Associate Professor Melanie E. Kreye
Co-supervisor: Professor Allan Larsen
Advisor: Postdoc Researcher Daniel Alberto Sepúlveda-Estay
DTU Management Engineering
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
i
Spongebob:“What if I break your trust someday?”
Patrick: “Trusting you is my decision, proving me wrong is your choice.”
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master thesis investigates the roles of power and trust on collaborative buyer-
supplier dyadic relationships. The existing research gap concerning the concurrent im-
pact of these two factors on paired buyer-supplier relationships triggered the research
concerning this particular topic. In order to address the research questions, a buying
firm belonging to the oil and gas sector was used as a case company, and an analysis of
five strategic suppliers of this company was carried out for this purpose. To tackle the
objectives of this project, a thorough literature review of relevant studies was conducted,
followed by the development of a conceptual framework and the selection of the case
company. Next, 10 interviews were executed with stakeholders from both the buying
firm and the supplier companies. For the analysis of the interview data, thematic quali-
tative analysis principles were used. Comparing the views of the relationship dimensions
of the buying firm and the suppliers, it was found that there are significant differences
in their perceptions, in particular regarding power asymmetry and the most powerful
trading partner, the exercise of power in the relationship, the impact and existence of
trust in the relationship and the overall assessment of supply chain collaboration. These
findings have some important theoretical implications, supporting but also contradicting
some of the literature studies reviewed for this project, as well as practical implications
that can help managers optimize their supplier relationship management efforts.
Keywords:
Power, trust, buyer-supplier dyads, supply chain collaboration, perceptions, partners,
supplier relationship management, oil and gas industry
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis was conducted at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and
is a conclusion of the Master of Science program in Transportation and Logistics. The
project has been developed over a period of 5.5 months and represents 32.5 ECTS points.
The author will graduate with a Master’s degree in Transport and Logistics within the
focus area of Logistics and Transport Optimization at the Department of Management
Engineering, DTU.
Kongens Lyngby, 12th July 2020
Anna Maria Stavrakaki
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
Above all, I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisors: Melanie Kreye, Allan
Larsen and Daniel Sepúlveda. It was really enriching and rewarding to collaborate with
the three of them. I very much appreciate all the insightful conversations and good
suggestions. A special thanks goes also to the Supply Chain Department of the case
company for the months that we shared. Thanks to the Managers and employees for
their valuable input and support, but also a big thanks to the Managers of the supplier
companies for their unparalleled collaboration. A huge “thanks”: to my family in Greece
for their unlimited love and support through all of my ventures, to all my friends from
the university but also outside of it, to all my friends here in Denmark but also in
Greece and all over the world. To all of you that have helped made this project possible,
sincerely: Thank you!
Anna Maria Stavrakaki
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
3PL
Third Party Logistics
B2B
Business to Business
BF
Buying Firm
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer
O&G Oil & Gas
RDT Resource Dependence Theory
SCC
Supply Chain Collaboration
SCI
Supply Chain Integration
SPS
Special Periodic Survey
TCE
Transaction Cost Economics
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Abstract
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Abbreviations
ix
Contents
xi
List of Figures
xv
List of Tables
xv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background & Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Question & Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Thesis Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review & Conceptual Development
5
2.1
Supply Chain Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.1
Defining Supply Chain Collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.2
Issues, effects and factors affecting Supply Chain Collaboration
.
9
2.1.3
The components of successful Supply Chain Collaboration
. . . .
10
2.1.4
The impact of Supply Chain Collaboration on Supply Chain Per-
formance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
Definition of trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Types of trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
The constructs of trust . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.4
The effect of trust in supply chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Power
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.1
Definition of power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.2
Types of power . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.3
The effects of power in supply chain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:14==
xii
Contents
2.4
Identified gap in the literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5
Conceptual Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Research Approach
27
3.1
Case study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Data Collection Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1
Formulating the interview questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.2
Interview Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3
Data Analysis Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4
Findings
35
4.1
General Perceptions of the Buyer versus the Supplier Companies . . . . .
35
4.1.1
The effect of Power on Supply Chain Collaboration . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.2
The effect of Trust on Supply Chain Collaboration
. . . . . . . .
39
4.1.3
The effect of trust on power asymmetry in the studied relationships 41
4.1.4
The effect of power on trust in the studied relationships . . . . . .
43
4.1.5
Aspects of Supply Chain Collaboration present in the studied re-
lationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.6
Overall effect of Supply Chain Collaboration in the studied rela-
tionships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2
Dyadic Relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2.1
Dyad #1: Buying Firm & Original Equipment Manufacturer and
Spare Parts Provider (OEM & SPP)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2.2
Dyad #2: Buying Firm & Third Party Logistics provider (3PL) .
51
4.2.3
Dyad #3: Buying Firm & Service Provider (Manpower)
. . . . .
53
4.3
Summary of Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5
Discussion
59
5.1
Different perspectives in the relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
The role of Power in collaborative relationships
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.3
The role of Trust in collaborative relationships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.4
Assessment of the supply chain collaboration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6
Limitations & Suggestions for Future Research
67
7
Conclusion
69
Bibliography
73
Appendices
81
Appendix A Project Plan
83
Appendix B Supporting Tables
87
==PAGE:15==
Contents
xiii
Appendix C Coded Interview Transcripts
113
==PAGE:16==
xiv
==PAGE:17==
List of Figures
2.1
An illustration of the literature review keywords used in this project.
. . . .
6
2.2
The different types and constructs of trust. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
The different types of power. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
The conceptual framework.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1
Methodology for data collection and data analysis (flow-chart). . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Identified suppliers (anonymized) and the Category in which they belong. . .
29
3.3
Connection of interview questions to the conceptual framework. . . . . . . .
32
List of Tables
2.1
Definitions of Supply Chain Collaboration in the literature. . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1
Interview questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
B.1 Perceptions of the most powerful trading partner in the studied relationships.
87
B.2 Perceptions of power exercise in the studied relationships.
. . . . . . . . . .
88
B.3 Perceptions of the overall effect of power in the studied relationships. . . . .
90
B.4 The type of trust present in the studied relationships. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
B.5 Perceptions of the effect of trust on SCC in the studied relationships. . . . .
94
B.6 Perceptions of the impact of trust on power asymmetry in the studied rela-
tionships.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
B.7 Perceptions of the effect of power on trust in the studied relationships.
. . .
99
B.8 The aspect of collaborative communication in the studied relationships. . . . 101
B.9 The aspect of information sharing in the studied relationships. . . . . . . . . 104
B.10 The aspect of resources sharing in the studied relationships.
. . . . . . . . . 106
B.11 The aspect of decision synchronisation in the studied relationships.
. . . . . 107
B.12 The aspect of joint knowledge creation in the studied relationships. . . . . . 109
B.13 The overall evaluation of SCC on SCP in the studied relationships.
. . . . . 111
==PAGE:18==
xvi
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background & Motivation
In the past decade, firms have been looking outside their organizational boundaries for
opportunities to collaborate with supply chain partners to ensure the efficiency and
responsiveness of their supply chains, so as to leverage the resources and knowledge of
their suppliers and customers (Fawcett & Magnan 2004). This collaboration fostered
information and knowledge sharing within supply chains and allowed firms to access
data across their supply chains, enabling them to collaborate in activities such as sales,
production, and logistics and ultimately enhance the supply chain performance through
integrated information networks (Cao & Zhang 2011, Handfield & Bechtel 2002, Lorentz
et al. 2011, Simatupang & Sridharan 2002). From a theoretical point of view, there
is an increasing research body focusing on buyer-supplier relationship interactions in
business-to-business contexts, and even more so in the procurement and supply chain
field.
When looking to identify relevant inter-organizational factors and understand
how their interplay affect firm-level performance outcomes, three of the most relevant
factors mentioned in the current supply chain management literature are supply chain
collaboration, trading partner power and trading partner trust (Ambrose et al. 2010,
Cuevas et al. 2015, Jain et al. 2014, Khoja et al. 2011, Mora-Monge et al. 2019).
Despite the wealth of research on power and trust and their impact on supply chain
collaboration and overall performance, there are still some unanswered questions. First,
since both the power and the trust mechanisms do not occur in isolation, their mutual
effect on supply chain collaboration and supply chain performance, as well as the inter-
play between them needs to be further clarified. Moreover, it was considered insightful
to examine buyer-supplier dyads, where one player remains the same (case study of the
relationships of a buying firm or a supplier firm), as most of the studies so far are inves-
tigating non-dyadic buyer-supplier relationships. To further narrow the research field,
the Oil and Gas sector was used as an industry case study.
1.2
Research Question & Objectives
Consequently, this project attempted to answer the overarching research question of:
==PAGE:20==
2
Introduction
How do power asymmetry and trust act as key drivers affecting the performance of col-
laborative dyadic buyer-supplier relationships in the oil and gas sector and what is their
respective impact on each other?
This can be further broken down into the following sub-questions:
1. How does power affect supply chain collaboration?
2. How does trust affect supply chain collaboration?
3. How does trust affect the use/perception of power in a business relationship?
4. How does power affect the presence/type of trust developed in a business relation-
ship?
5. Which components of SCC are present in collaborative supply chains and how do
they affect the overall collaboration?
6. What is the effect of SCC on the overall supply chain performance?
Apart from the research question, several learning objectives were set out in the
beginning of this project. These were the following:
• Identify and critically reflect on relevant scientific and engineering knowledge
within the effects of trust and power in supplier-buyer relationship management
based on research literature.
• Identify relevant scientific problems within trust and power in buyer-supplier rela-
tionship management and formulate clear and relevant research questions.
• Identify and review the relevant scientific literature and based on a literature re-
view, develop a conceptual framework guiding the empirical work.
• Assess, select and apply appropriate scientific methods, tools and competencies
within supplier-buyer relationship management.
• Analyse, explain and discuss relevant professional and scientific problems.
• Describe the findings of this work and critically discuss these in the light of the
literature and the conceptual framework that guided the empirical work.
• Manage work and development situations that are complex and unforeseen and
require new solution models.
• Independently initiate and carry out discipline-specific and cross-disciplinary co-
operation and to assume professional responsibility.
• Disseminate research-based knowledge as well as the final project approach and
outcome.
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Thesis Outline
3
• Provide proper documentation, including proper referencing throughout the project
and provide a complete reference list.
In order to achieve the above goals, the research methodology that was followed
was: (i) to conduct an extensive literature review of relevant academic sources, (ii) to
develop a conceptual framework that best fits the research questions, (iii) to identify a
case company serving as an industry example to explore the variables and aspects of the
framework, (iv) to conduct semi-structured interviews, and (v) to analyse the interview
data by applying qualitative thematic analysis tools, in order to obtain the final findings
of the study.
1.3
Thesis Outline
The remainder of this report is structured as described below:
Chapter 2: Literature Review & Conceptual
Development
In this chapter, a structured and thorough analysis of the extant literature on the topics
of supply chain collaboration, trust and power are presented, with the aim to identify
their main constructs as well as their effects on each other and on supply chain perfor-
mance. Next, the conceptual framework that was developed is presented, illustrating
these relationships and the effects between trust, power, supply chain collaboration and
supply chain performance.
Chapter 3: Research Approach
This chapter outlines the research methodology that was followed. First, there is an
introduction of the case study, followed by a detailed description of the data collection
and data analysis methods used.
Chapter 4: Findings
This chapter presents the findings of the analysis of the interview data, supported by
quotes taken verbatim from the interview transcripts.
==PAGE:22==
4
Introduction
Chapter 5: Discussion
Important remarks on the implications and interpretations of the findings of this research
project, as well as their connection to the literature and research questions are discussed
in this chapter.
Chapter 6: Limitations & Suggestions for Future Research
The limitations of this study are outlined in this chapter and some recommendations
are made for future research on this subject.
Chapter 7: Conclusion
In the last chapter of the report, the major conclusions of the thesis are presented.
Bibliography
A list of all the scientific papers and reports that were utilized for this project report.
Appendices
The appendices of this report consist of the project plan that was created in the beginning
of the project together with an evaluation of it, supporting tables that include the most
relevant quotes from the interviews and the complete interview transcripts.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review &
Conceptual Development
With the dawn of the new millennium, supply chain management (SCM) has progressed
from a narrow emphasis on procurement and logistics during the 90’s to a wider, more
holistic emphasis on value creation (Chopra et al. 2013). Supply chain excellence is
increasingly seen by leading businesses as more than just a means of cost savings - they
see it as a source of competitive advantage, with potential for enhancing customer ser-
vice efficiency, increasing revenue streams, maximizing resource utilization and reducing
waste (Corsten & Kumar 2005, Sridharan & Simatupang 2013). For the achievement of
these goals, successful cooperation within each organization (intra-organisational) and
between chain partners (inter-organisational) is necessary. This has led to increasing
efforts in both the acedemia and the industry, to identify and implement those factors
that can foster successful collaboration in supply chains.
From a theoretical point of view, there is an increasing research body focusing on
buyer-supplier relationship interactions in business-to-business contexts, and even more
so in the procurement and supply chain field. In this project, the main focus was placed
on the effects of power and trust on supply chain collaboration.
Therefore, in this
chapter, a structured and thorough analysis of the extant literature on these topics will
be presented, with the aim to identify their main constructs as well as their effects on
each other and on supply chain performance.
To gather the initial database of scientific research papers, an extensive research
was conducted, using primarily three search engines, namely “Google Scholar”, “Web of
Science” and “DTU Findit”. The keywords that were used were: supplier relationship
management, supply chain collaboration, buyer-supplier relationship management, inter-
firm relationship, trust, power, power asymmetry, procurement and others. An initial
database of 86 research papers was identified, and was then screened by reviewing the
titles and the abstracts. Some of the inclusion criteria were relevance with the topic,
significance of the research findings, literature review relevance and methodology. Then,
more papers were identified as relevant by reviewing some commonly cited papers in the
obtained database. The final database consisted of 130 research papers on the before
mentioned topics. Figure 2.1 depicts a word-cloud, which was formed by collecting the
keywords of the 130 research papers in the literature database to illustrate the focus on
the specific areas of this research project.
Finally, the conceptual framework that was developed will be presented, illustrating
==PAGE:24==
6
Literature Review & Conceptual Development
Figure 2.1. An illustration of the literature review keywords used in this project.
these relationships and the effects between trust, power, supply chain collaboration and
supply chain performance.
2.1
Supply Chain Collaboration
In recent decades, companies have had to look outside of their organizations for opportu-
nities to work with partners to make sure the supply chain is efficient and responsive to
dynamic market needs. Companies have sought greater collaboration in the supply chain
to leverage their suppliers and customers’ resources and knowledge (Fawcett & Magnan
2004). Supply chain collaboration includes two or more separate companies working
together to coordinate and carry out supply chain operations (Simatupang & Sridharan
2002) which may provide significant benefits to the partners (Lorentz et al. 2011). For
instance, in order to reduce transaction costs and gain a stronger competitive position
(Handfield & Bechtel 2002), companies such as Procter & Gamble and IBM have formed
long-term relationships with their suppliers. Some of the most common collaborative
objectives are to improve overall business performance, share risks, access additional
resources (Kim et al. 2010), reduce transaction costs, improve profitability as well as
forecast accuracy (Lorentz et al. 2011, Simatupang & Sridharan 2002), thereby improv-
ing income efficiency and competitive advantage over time (Handfield & Bechtel 2002,
Simatupang & Sridharan 2002).
First, it should be noted that Supply Chain Collaboration (SCC) and Supply Chain
Integration (SCI) were often used interchangeably as both apply to a close pairing pro-
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Supply Chain Collaboration
7
cess between Supply Chain Partners. The term integration, however, means the central-
ized control (or ownership) of many related processes which were previously carried out
independently (Zhang & Huo 2013, Zhao et al. 2008). It thus places greater focus on
centralized control, ownership or contractually controlled process integration. Accord-
ing to the transaction cost economics (TCE) theory, collaboration is an intermediate
type of hybrid governance between the two ends of the management spectrum of ver-
tical integration and market exchange (Bakos & Brynjolfsson 1993, Poppo et al. 2016).
Although there are overlaps between SCC and SCI, it is easier for SCC to capture the
shared relationship between the autonomous supply chain partners (Nyaga et al. 2010).
2.1.1
Defining Supply Chain Collaboration
Several authors have described the supply chain collaboration in different ways. Ta-
ble 2.1 contains a summary of the various available definitions, and it was created by
chronologically ranking the most cited definitions of SCC in the obtained database of
studies.
Overall it can be argued that the different definitions of supply chain collaboration
can typically be divided into two conceptualization groups: process integration focus
and relationship focus.
Process Integration Focus
A business process through which two or more supply chain partners work together
towards common goals (Cao & Zhang 2011, Fawcett & Magnan 2004, Simatupang
& Sridharan 2002, Sridharan & Simatupang 2013).
Relationship Focus
Forming close, long-term partnerships where supply chain members work together
and share information, resources, and risk to achieve mutual goals (Cai et al. 2013,
Cao & Zhang 2011, Hudnurkar et al. 2014, Wang et al. 2016).
The literature review shows the importance of organizing activities (Mora-Monge
et al. 2019), incorporating cross-functional processes, integrating the supply chain (Zhang
& Huo 2013), setting expectations for the supply chain (Samaddar & Kadiyala 2006),
and setting criteria for sharing of information (Baihaqi & Sohal 2013, Hudnurkar et al.
2014, Simatupang & Sridharan 2002). Combining both the process and the relationship
emphasis, SCC can be characterized as a collaboration process in which two or more
independent firms work together to plan and execute supply chain operations towards
shared goals and mutual benefits.
Hence, depending on the objectives of the researchers, the two theories that have
been utilised the most when studying the effects of SCC in supply chain performance
or overall business performance are the Transaction Cost Economics theory (TCE) and
the Resource Dependence Theory (RDT). Through the TCE lenses, SCC is viewed as
==PAGE:26==
8
Literature Review & Conceptual Development
a tool that enables firms to reduce the negative consequences of opportunism that are
implicitly involved in business transactions, by fostering mutual trust and integrating
processes between the trading partners. Thus, the probability that partners will behave
in the best interests of the relationship is increased (Buvik & Reve 2002). On the other
hand, RDT argues that investing in relationship-specific assets helps partnering firms to
gain competitive advantage due to their unique, important, non-replaceable and hard-to-
imitate nature (Buvik & Reve 2002). SCC also helps companies to concentrate on their
particular core operations, which improve firm-specific expertise and realize economies
of scale and learning impacts, thereby strengthening their competitive positions (Park
et al. 2010).
Table 2.1. Definitions of Supply Chain Collaboration in the literature.
Source
Definition
Simatupang et al. (2004)
Collaboration is a cooperative strategy of supply chain part-
ners with a common goal of serving customer through inte-
grated solutions for lowering cost and increasing revenue.
Kampstra et al. (2006)
Financially independent entities try to get the dependent
parts of the chain to “play” together, i.e. ensuring that
the entities in a chain interact successfully to provide the
necessary coordinated outputs.
Fawcett et al. (2008)
The ability to work across organizational boundaries to
build and manage unique value-added processes to better
meet customer needs.
Simatupang & Sridharan
(2008)
Collaboration describes the cooperation among indepen-
dent, but related firms to share resources and capabilities to
meet their customers’ most extraordinary or dynamically
changing needs.
Whipple et al. (2010)
Supply chain collaboration is a long-term relationship
where participants generally cooperate, share information,
and work together to plan and even modify their business
practices to improve joint performance.
Cao & Zhang (2011)
A partnership process where two or more autonomous firms
work closely to plan and execute supply chain operations
toward common goals and mutual benefits.
Sridharan & Simatupang
(2013)
Supply chain collaboration starts with communicating ob-
jectives, plans, and forecasts to working closely with part-
ners to create efficient flows of products to end customers.
In any collaborative efforts, open communication to other
chain members means taking a risk of vulnerability to the
actions of another party.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Supply Chain Collaboration
9
2.1.2
Issues, effects and factors affecting Supply Chain
Collaboration
In this section the extant literature on supply chain collaboration will be analyzed, by
presenting a brief description of the reviewed studies and their key findings. Special
emphasis is given towards the identified issues affecting the success of SCC, the overall
effects SCC has on supply chain and firm performance, as well as the identification of
the factors that promote and enable successful collaborative supply chains.
In one of the first studies regarding SCC, Simatupang & Sridharan (2002) argued
that the mutual benefits of SCC are rarely realised by all the trading partners. They
suggested that the collaborative supply chain should continuously consider information
sharing and incentive alignment in line with relevant performance metrics and coordi-
nated strategies as measures to minimize the adverse effects of managerial bias on supply
chain performance. In line with this previous observation, the paper by Simatupang et al.
(2004) attempts to apply the Theory of Constraints in order to address the difficulties of
understanding the possible advantages of SCC, by highlighting the underlying difficulty
of collaboration, namely the adaptation of decisions that take into account the interests
of the supply chain as a whole and the protection of the interests of individual firms.
Recognizing that the collaborating participants are rarely able to see all potential collab-
orative benefits, Lorentz et al. (2011) suggests a framework to evaluate the performance
of companies involved in initial and advanced stages of the collaboration. Fawcett et al.
(2008) applied problems contingency theory and force field theory with the goal to study
effectively overcome the cultural and technical barriers to SCC.
Whipple et al. (2010) compare collaborative and transactional relationships in buy-
ing companies to assess whether collaborative relationships provide greater benefits than
transactional relationships, and their findings indicate that collaborative relationships
provide higher levels of satisfaction and success than transactional ones. In the same
spirit, the objective of the study by Cao & Zhang (2011) was to uncover the essence
of supply chain collaboration and explore its effect on firm performance based on a col-
laborative advantage paradigm, while the aim of the study by Patrucco et al. (2019)
was to investigate the dynamics of the buyer – supplier relationships involved in collab-
orative projects. Their findings support the importance of collaborative partnerships in
improving performance, highlighting the key role that the buying firm’s procurement
department can play in managing the different elements included in supplier collabora-
tion.
Cai et al. (2013) attempt to interpret the processes underlying the knowledge sharing
in dyadic buyer-supplier relationships, noting that trust and power are two important
precedents of two forms of knowledge sharing between buyer and supplier, namely techni-
cal exchange and technology transfer. Sridharan & Simatupang (2013) offer a conceptual
framework to understand how trust and power interact and exert influence over value
creation and appropriation as the outcomes of supply chain collaboration. Nyaga et al.
(2013) in their study examine how perceptions of power use affect behavioral and opera-
tional outcomes and prevailing relationship quality in dyadic relationships characterized
==PAGE:28==
10
Literature Review & Conceptual Development
by substantial power asymmetry. Results indicate that power use affects partner be-
havior and operational performance, but the nature of the relationship dictates which
power sources are most appropriate.
The study by Nyaga et al. (2010) aimed at finding the factors that promote successful
collaborations and the results showed that collaborative activities, such as information
sharing, joint relationship effort, and dedicated investments contribute to trust and
commitment, which in turn lead to improved satisfaction and performance. Samaddar
& Kadiyala (2006) argued that efficient allocation and sharing of resources is important
for any successful collaboration, and discussed the conditions for resource sharing in
which organizations are encouraged to work together towards knowledge creation, as well
as the conditions for continued collaboration. In the work by Kampstra et al. (2006),
the authors highlight the need for an effective supply chain plan and well-articulated
objectives, arguing that such an approach enables the stakeholders involved to improve
the efficiency of their supply chains. Lee & Ha (2018) find that both cognitive and
structural capital theories indicate that buyers consider that they may obtain sufficient
information from their suppliers, but are often unwilling to provide their suppliers with
information themselves.
2.1.3
The components of successful Supply Chain
Collaboration
Synthesizing the literature, there are seven interconnecting components that together
form the principle of successful supply chain collaboration, namely information sharing,
joint knowledge creation, resources sharing, decision synchronization, collaborative com-
munication, goal congruence and incentive alignment between independent supply chain
partners (Cao & Zhang 2011, Nyaga et al. 2010). These seven components are consid-
ered to be interrelated and co-variate with each other while causal explanations can
exist between them. Collectively, they are considered to contribute positively to SCC
by optimizing resource utilization, lowering costs, enhancing innovation and increasing
supply chain responsiveness. Below, these components are described in more detail.
Information sharing is defined as the degree to which an organization exchanges
with its supply chain partners a variety of appropriate, accurate, and complete informa-
tion in a timely manner (Baihaqi & Sohal 2013, Hudnurkar et al. 2014, Lee & Ha 2018,
Simatupang & Sridharan 2002). Tactical information such as inventory levels, forecasts,
sales and marketing promotion strategies are the most common information being ex-
changed among supply chain partners. Some scholars have described information sharing
as the foundation and most important requirement of supply chain collaboration (Bai-
haqi & Sohal 2013, Hudnurkar et al. 2014).
Joint knowledge creation refers to the degree to which supply chain partners
work together to gain a deeper understanding of and response to demand and the com-
petitive environment (Samaddar & Kadiyala 2006). Knowledge exploration (i.e. the
search for and acquisition of new and relevant information) and knowledge exploitation
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Supply Chain Collaboration
11
(i.e. knowledge assimilation and application) are the two forms of knowledge creation
activities most commonly cited in the literature (Harland et al. 2004). According to
the same study, capturing, sharing, and assimilating information (e.g. process, technol-
ogy, or business awareness) between supply chain partners, facilitates innovation and
long-term sustainability of the supply chain as a whole.
Resource sharing refers to the process of optimizing resources and assets and
investing in capacity and assets with supply chain partners. These resources can include
both physical resources, such as production equipment, facilities and technologies, and
human resources (Harland et al. 2004). An indicative example of this practice found
primarily in the retail sector is the vendor-managed inventory (VMI), which allows
suppliers to analyze stock-level data through Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) and
take the required replenishment action (Cao & Zhang 2011).
Decision synchronization refers to a framework through which supply chain part-
ners plan and execute decisions in supply chain management that maximize the supply
chain benefits (Simatupang & Sridharan 2002). Planning decisions are made to decide
how to use a company’s resources most efficiently and effectively to accomplish a partic-
ular set of objectives. In general, there are seven key supply chain management decision
planning categories, namely: demand planning, production planning and scheduling,
operations strategy planning, procurement, delivery on promise, change balancing, and
distribution management (Chopra et al. 2013). Joint planning is used to coordinate
strategic stakeholders and to make operational decisions, including replenishment of
inventory and placement and delivery of orders.
Collaborative communication can be regarded as the effective communication
system and methods of collaboration for supply chain partners working towards com-
mon goals or objectives. The attributes of collaborative communication are frequency,
direction, mode, and influence strategy. Open, regular, structured, two-way, multilevel
communication is typically an indicator of close relationships between organizations (Cao
& Zhang 2011, Maestrini et al. 2018).
Goal congruence is the extent to which supply chain partners consider their own
goals being achieved by achieving the supply chain goals. This is the degree of goal
agreement between supply chain partners (Cuevas et al. 2015, Kim et al. 2010). In the
case of true goal congruence, supply chain partners either assume that their priorities
align perfectly with those of the supply chain, or, in the case of discrepancies, believe
that their goals can be accomplished as an immediate result of working towards the
supply chain priorities (Cuevas et al. 2015).
Incentive alignment refers to the system of cost, benefit and risk sharing between
supply chain partners (Simatupang & Sridharan 2008, Simatupang et al. 2004). This
requires the assessment of costs, risks, and advantages, and the design of incentives.
Effective supply chain collaborations require that each participant has an even share
of gains and losses and that the results of the collaboration benefit all participants
unarguably (Simatupang & Sridharan 2002, Sridharan & Simatupang 2013). Incentive
alignment requires careful interpretation of profit-sharing structures, ensuring benefits
are directly proportional to investment and risk (Kampstra et al. 2006).
Apart from these components, the extant literature indicates that the overall success
==PAGE:30==
12
Literature Review & Conceptual Development
of a collaborative supply chain heavily depends on the level of trust between the trading
partners (Nyaga et al. 2010, Whipple et al. 2010), as well as the existence or perception
of power asymmetry in the exchange relationship (Chicksand 2015, Rehme et al. 2016,
Wang et al. 2016). These two key aspects of the relationships are further discussed in
the following sections 2.2 and 2.3, highlighting their respective effects on SCC as well as
their interaction, as seen through the lenses of the currently existing academic research.
2.1.4
The impact of Supply Chain Collaboration on
Supply Chain Performance
The primary goal of introducing collaboration in any supply chain is to improve the
overall performance of the supply chain, and this can be accomplished by the collective
efforts of all supply chain partners. The rationale behind this lies heavily in the antici-
pated improvements in performance, agility and a competitive advantage on the market,
with many studies suggesting that improved supply chain and overall business perfor-
mance are linked to collaborative relationships (Cao & Zhang 2011, Doney & Cannon
1997, Giannakis 2007, Mora-Monge et al. 2019, Nyaga et al. 2010).
Daugherty et al. (2006) found that companies involved in collaborative relationships
achieved improved visibility, increased service levels, increased flexibility, increased
end-customer satisfaction and reduced cycle times.
Ampe-N’DA et al. (2020) argue
that, through successful supplier relationships, businesses are offered the opportunity to
shorten lead times and product life cycles, thereby allowing them to maintain a compet-
itive edge. Therefore, as the world becomes increasingly globalized, collaboration is a
vital element of success for any organization with a desire to expand and develop.
Important specifics, however, are often ignored, such as choosing the right partner,
matching needs and capabilities across organisations, and clearly identifying priorities
and objectives. In addition, questions arise as to whether the collaboration benefits both
buyers and suppliers. In a research project of collaborative partnerships between suppli-
ers and large retailers, Corsten & Kumar (2005) found that while both parties benefited
from the collaboration, suppliers felt greater sense of inequity in the relationship. This
indicates that there is skepticism among suppliers regarding equality in relationships.
Nevertheless, there’s no final answer to this problem and it’s hard to identify the best
way to invest in long-term supplier relationships.
Synthesizing the literature, most studies agree that effective supply chain col-
laboration leads to collaborative advantage and better firm performance (Ampe-N’DA
et al. 2020, Cao & Zhang 2011, Daugherty et al. 2006, Doney & Cannon 1997, Mora-
Monge et al. 2019, Nyaga et al. 2010). In order to ensure that the supply chain as a
whole performs well, firms should try to create a win-win situation. Long-term relation-
ships must be motivated by the mutual motives, goal congruence, and sharing of benefits
(Simatupang & Sridharan 2002). According to Carr & Pearson (1999), managers need
to align goals and benefits with supply chain partners for creating a collaborative ad-
vantage, which is found to directly increase the financial performance for each partner
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Trust
13
in the chain. It can also be an effective means of transferring knowledge and new tech-
nical skills across firms. Last but not least, it is worth noting that a firm may have a
better chance of accomplishing its objective of acquiring new skills and competencies by
collaborating with a firm that is exemplary in that area (Cao & Zhang 2011).
2.2
Trust
As previously mentioned in 2.1, trust plays an extremely important role in collaborative
supply chains, with many scholars naming it the “foundation” of SCC and one of the
most important antecedents of every successful business relationship (Cai et al. 2013,
Handfield & Bechtel 2002, Sridharan & Simatupang 2013). In the following sections, a
large body of literature on trust was analyzed, with an emphasis on the effect of trust
on supply chain collaboration and exchange relationships between trading partners.
2.2.1
Definition of trust
In order to better understand the term “trust” and its different aspects, it is essential
to attempt to interpret/define it.
There are several definitions of trust available in
many different disciplines like philosophy, social psychology, economics, contract law,
and marketing, trying to define the inherently broad and complex nature of the term.
Each discipline offers unique insights into the nature of trust, its interpretation, and its
development processes (Doney & Cannon 1997).
Moorman et al. (1992) define trust as “a willingness to rely on an exchange partner
in whom one has confidence”. Caniëls et al. (2010) and Ambrose et al. (2010) support
this by also adding that trust can only exist when there is confidence in the reliability
and integrity of the exchange partner. On a similar note, the empirical study by Pa-
paroidamis et al. (2019) treats trust as “the extent to which an organizational customer
is confident in the credibility and benevolence of its supplying partner”. Thus, when look-
ing at an exchange relationship, trust is the firm’s willingness to accept being vulnerable
on the basis of positive expectations of the trading partner’s behavior in the business
association (Jain et al. 2014, Mora-Monge et al. 2019).
The definition that is considered to better represent the term in the context of supply
chain management - and will, therefore, be in mind for the remainder of this project -
comes from Anderson & Narus (1990). For them, trust reflects a firm’s confidence that
another organization would engage in activities that would result in favorable outcomes
for the business and would not take unforeseen steps that will result in negative results for
the firm. Therefore, in assessing the existence or lack of trust in an exchange relationship,
both positive and negative outcomes are taken into account with equal focus.
==PAGE:32==
14
Literature Review & Conceptual Development
2.2.2
Types of trust
According to the literature, there are also different types of trust. These types mainly
refer to the different foundation based upon trust is built or perceived between the
trading partners.
For instance, literature distinguishes between goodwill trust and competence
trust (Caniëls et al. 2010). Goodwill trust is based upon the belief that both partners
are interested in each other’s benefit/progress, and that they will not engage themselves
in actions that would potentially harm their partner in any way (Anderson & Narus 1990,
Geyskens et al. 1998). On the other hand, competence trust is based upon the objective
credibility of a trading partner. In other words, it refers to the confidence that since a
partner is in possession of high technical expertise and expertness, they will therefore
act and perform according to the established agreements between the trading partners
(Caniëls et al. 2010). Competence trust is also found with other names in literature,
such as “cognitive trust” or “cognitive-based trust”. However, cognitive-based trust is
perceived to include a few more aspects in it, such as the reliability and dependability of
the trading partner, and hence can sometimes be differentiated from competence trust
(Mayer et al. 1995).
Another type of trust commonly cited in the literature is normative/affective trust
(Dadzie et al. 2018, Handfield & Bechtel 2002, Jain et al. 2014, Mayer et al. 1995,
Rogers & Fells 2017). Normative trust is a judgment anchored in past behavior and
characterized by a shared identity between partners. This type of trust is associated with
high levels of commitment in the relationship and is based on the feelings of affiliation,
identification, and loyalty (Gounaris 2005, Jain et al. 2014).
The last type of trust identified in the literature is calculative trust (Jain et al.
2014, Poppo et al. 2016). Calculative trust is typically founded on a system of incen-
tives and penalties in the relationship between the trading partners, making it more
realistic in nature. Expectations are analyzed by intentionally and pragmatically ex-
amining future situations, including cost-benefit considerations and depending on the
relative importance of cheating and cooperation. If calculative trust is high, parties
assume that cooperation and performance goals will be accomplished since failure to do
so, will result in punitive measures, including termination of the exchange relationship.
Therefore penalties and rewards minimize opportunistic behavior, control interactions,
and preserve cooperation.
2.2.3
The constructs of trust
Being such a broad and complex term, trust has a number of key components that to-
gether constitute the term. Rogers & Fells (2017) identified different dimensions of trust
that emerged through the interviews with supply chain and procurement professionals.
First, trust was seen as being developed out of someone’s personal performance over
time. Moreover, trust seemed to be about the approach each individual takes to deal
with problems, such as fairness and openness. Frequent communication with counter-
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Trust
15
parts, for example, offers opportunities to build trust (openness), while fairness is re-
garded as both parties getting something out of the relationship, which also contributes
to reciprocal commitment. With that in mind, trust can be viewed as an element of
personal integrity. When the parties identify with one another and acknowledge each
other’s needs and goals, a deeper degree of trust comes into play (identification-based
trust).
Undoubtedly, trust is deemed to be very important for business relationships, but
also easily assumed. Trust should be founded upon the honesty of an individual. Lastly,
the trust between buyer and supplier will be mainly self-interested and calculative in
the first phases of forming an exchange relationship, but even for this minimal degree of
trust to be established, there must be certainty (Rogers & Fells 2017).
All in all, the most frequently mentioned constructs of trust in literature are depen-
dence, rewards/penalties, integrity, reliability, competence, closeness, openness, secu-
rity, and credibility. These can further be grouped to reflect the types of trust discussed
above. A suggested grouping could be as illustrated in Figure 2.2. It can, therefore, be
argued that the basic constructs of calculative trust are dependence and the existence of
rewards/penalties. Similarly for cognitive-based trust, integrity, reliability, and compe-
tence are the most important constructs. Lastly, for normative/affective trust the basic
constructs are closeness, openness, and security/credibility. These are supported by the
review of the extant literature presented in 2.2.2.
Figure 2.2. The different types and constructs of trust.
==PAGE:34==
16
Literature Review & Conceptual Development
2.2.4
The effect of trust in supply chain
There has been a substantial amount of research focusing on the effects of trust in
exchange relationships. Focusing more on the supply chain context, trust has often been
seen as a vital mechanism in the inter-organizational framework to facilitate coordination
and collaboration among trading partners (Mora-Monge et al. 2019).
However, this
impact of trust is yet considered ambiguous.
The trust literature offers theoretical reasoning that underlies the assumption that
organizational customers who trust their suppliers will remain loyal to the exchange re-
lationship. It has been proposed that trusting business organizations enable the achieve-
ment of improved outcomes by increasing the value of transactions and reducing the
transaction costs of inter-organizational exchanges (Cai et al. 2013, Paparoidamis et al.
2019, Poppo et al. 2016, Whipple et al. 2010). Research indicates that trusting firms
experience a reduction in transaction costs as they spend less time and effort on, and
commit fewer resources to, resolving issues, tracking each other’s performance of one
another, and implementing agreements. In particular, trust enables partner companies
to engage in collaborative activities by exchanging valuable information and expertise,
contributing to joint projects and, in effect, orchestrating their needs and ways of work-
ing. Trusted partners make effective use of valuable knowledge as each party contributes
openly important information that facilitates the smooth functioning of their relation-
ship exchanges. Partnering companies thus engage more productively and cope more
efficiently with day-to-day problems, which in turn increases the value of transactions
in the relationship.
The study by Lee & Ha (2018) used the relational, social, and cognitive capital
theories, and the findings suggest that mutual trust and reciprocity in relationships can
be key to fostering collaborative and long-term exchange relationships by preventing
information asymmetry from occurring in the relationship. In the study by Rogers &
Fells (2017), the participants were asked about three primary factors contributing to
successful long-term relationships, and trust seemed to be central to these. Zhao et al.
(2008), Yeung et al. (2009) and Zhang & Huo (2013) support that there is clear evidence
that effective supply chain partnerships generally depend largely on trust because of
their ability to reduce exchange risks, such as uncertainty and opportunism, while at
the same time fostering information sharing, cost savings and increased willingness of the
trading partners to collaborate outside contractual requirements. Handfield & Bechtel
(2002) and Doney & Cannon (1997) argue that trust can have a significant impact on the
responsiveness of supply chains, allowing a deeper understanding of supplier performance
and capacity constraints, improving communication and information sharing (leading to
more accurate forecasting), enhancing proactive problem resolution and paving the way
for Business-to-Business (B2B) e-commerce applications.
The study by Gorton et al. (2015) indicates that greater buyer trustworthiness has
an important, beneficial impact on the supplier’s satisfaction with the partnership and
their performance in terms of both quantity and quality of product. This reinforces
the idea that increased rates of customer opportunism hinder the ability of suppliers to
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Power
17
make an extra effort or to engage in investments, and thereby serves as a constraint on
improvements in the quality and quantity of production from suppliers. Such a finding
thus inhibits efforts to improve profitability and market competitiveness (Handfield &
Bechtel 2002). Zhang & Huo (2013) add that in fact, the majority of scientific evidence
points to the positive impacts of trust on the multiple dimensions of supply chain man-
agement, such as the integration of customers and suppliers, the duration and scope
of cooperation between trading partners and the overall successful cooperation between
them.
Despite the above-mentioned trust benefits, some researchers recognized a “secret”
side of trust in inter-organizational contexts and observed an inverted U-shaped rela-
tionship between trust and business performance. Evidence seems to indicate that if the
trust between trading partners exceeds a certain point, it can negate its potential bene-
fits and, in turn, lead to a decline in performance (Mora-Monge et al. 2019, Yeung et al.
2009). This decrease in business performance can be explained by the over-optimistic
and subjective view of a trading partner, which can lead to dysfunctional mechanisms
such as reduction of monitoring, aversion to conflict, opportunism, and discriminatory
treatment of potentially better trading partners, leading to higher costs and lower rev-
enues.
In the empirical study by Caniëls et al. (2010), the authors quantified the changes in
mutual dependence and trust/commitment in various relationship development stages.
The hypotheses they formulated were largely confirmed. More precisely, they argue that
as buyers and suppliers develop and extend their relationship, their connection intensifies,
and the perceived mutual dependency, as well as trust/commitment increases until an
enhanced partnership, is achieved. When the business relationship becomes undesirable,
the positive pattern becomes negative, with commitment and trust declining rapidly,
while the dependence of the supplier begins to break. The dependence of the buyer
remains relatively constant and weakens only slightly as the relationship reaches the
final stage. In general, the simple existence of asymmetric positions of dependency in
relationships is linked with instability and conflict (Anderson & Narus 1990, Geyskens
et al. 1998). However, Caniëls et al. (2010) argue that asymmetry of dependence does
not necessarily have to be bad for a relationship. Even though trust and dependence are
influencing the bargaining power of firms, trust could act as a moderating mechanism to
counteract the potential negative effects of dependence asymmetry on the relationship.
2.3
Power
As stated in 2.1, power is central to supply chain relationships. How to gain and use
power with other parties in the supply chain is a frequent concern in management prac-
tice, and an even bigger issue in strategic collaborative relationships, where power asym-
metry plays an important role in relationship evolution and longevity. Power asymmetry
results from one company needing the resources of another company more than the other.
By selectively withholding or granting access to its resources in exchange for favorable
==PAGE:36==
18
Literature Review & Conceptual Development
terms, the more powerful company can make use of its power. The degree to which
this power difference is exploited depends on factors such as how likely it is that the
difference will erode over time and whether it can be controlled by the executives. It is
intuitive that the ability to use power, as well as the actual use of power, is to the benefit
of the more powerful companies and to the disadvantage of the less powerful company.
In this section, a large body of literature on power was analyzed, with an emphasis on
its impact on supply chain collaboration and exchange relationships between trading
partners.
2.3.1
Definition of power
Power is fundamental to inter-organizational relationships. As a multidimensional term,
power occurs at various stages of analysis, i.e. organisations, individuals, and relation-
ships, and has different states such as potential power, perceived power, and realized
power.
The literature distinguishes also between structural power (i.e.
dependence)
and behavioral power (i.e. utilization of power), with a few studies considering both at
the same time (Huo et al. 2019, Roseira et al. 2010, Wu & Wu 2015). Opportunism
is frequently associated with the use of power, but it is uncertain if the use of power
is deterrent or opportunistic. Previous research examined power using various lenses,
including power sources, power use in organizations, the disparity between potential
and actual power, and power imbalance or power asymmetry. Studies in the area of
use of power account for a significant proportion of power-related studies in operations
management (Cao & Zhang 2011, Ghadge et al. 2017, Zhao et al. 2018).
The two most appropriate definitions of power in the supply chain literature and
context are found in Dahl (1957) and Sturm & Antonakis (2015). Dahl (1957) defines
power as “the ability of one individual or group to get another unit to do something that
it would not otherwise have done”. Sturm & Antonakis (2015) offer an apt definition of
power as “having the discretion and the means to asymmetrically enforce one’s will over
entities”.
2.3.2
Types of power
The debate on power has constantly revolved around the concept of power in terms of
its roots, bases, and forms (Benton & Maloni 2005, Cowan et al. 2015, Leonidou et al.
2008), often centered on the power-holders (Cox 2001). The terminology has become
increasingly common over time. Widely used concepts include coercive and non-coercive
types of power (Yeung et al. 2009) and exercised and non-exercised sources of power (Cho
et al. 2019, Cowan et al. 2015, He et al. 2013, Leonidou et al. 2008), with power effects
on different outcomes, including conflict (Ampe-N’DA et al. 2020, Arnott et al. 2007,
Gao et al. 2005, Leonidou et al. 2008) and, in particular, satisfaction (Benton & Maloni
2005, Gorton et al. 2015), which are often debated.
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Power
19
The paper by Gölgeci et al. (2018) presents a context for explaining power-based
actions as they develop in supply chain relations. The authors introduce the terms of
dominance, egalitarian, and submissive behaviors and explain the possible impact of
those behaviors on supply chain partners’ relational satisfaction.
Dominance behavior refers to actions taken by a company to force a partner to
behave arbitrarily in the company’s interests (Gölgeci et al. 2018).
Committing to
dominance behavior is a phenomenon when a supply chain partner expects their partner
to comply, often with an implied or explicit suggestion that failure to comply would
have negative consequences. As per Cox (2001), the power status of an organization in
a dyad determines the decision to exercise dominance. Organizations can have various
power advantages, providing them with the ability to use behaviors to exert control
over a partner.
For example, if dependency among partners is imbalanced, the less
dependent company can appear to behave more assertively, assuring in its awareness
that the more dependent partner will likely adhere to expectations. Furthermore, the
less dependent partner may be indifferent regarding the effects of their behavior on the
perception of their relationship by the more dependent partner (Johnsen & Lacoste 2016,
Kumar et al. 1995, 1998). Interestingly, even if there are insufficient power sources to
explain the actions or ensure that the response will be as anticipated, a firm may perform
dominance behaviors (Caniëls et al. 2010).
On the other hand, egalitarian behavior denotes a higher level of reciprocity, equity,
and compromise between the parties, as well as bilateral relationship management (Göl-
geci et al. 2018). While either or both organizations may be able to use dominant forms
of power as such, their intention is to work as equals. The dual concern model acknowl-
edges that self-respect may be followed by concern for the other, resulting in reciprocal
behaviors, including a willingness to negotiate, cooperate and co-manage the relationship,
with equal sharing of relational rents (Johnston et al. 2004). Equity between partners
is achieved by displaying qualities such as reliability and enduring opportunism, with
results that may include establishing trust between partners.
Lastly, Gölgeci et al. (2018) define submissive behavior as compliance with the part-
ner’s criteria. Submissive behaviors are actions that are adaptive, accommodating, and
compliant with the requirements set by a business partner. This generally positions the
compliant partner in a passive partner’s position, using obliging and yielding actions to
establish agreement between the parties. A firm is more likely to adopt a submissive
behavior when it becomes aware that it is more dependent and/or lacks countervailing
power (Caniëls et al. 2010). Gölgeci et al. (2018) identify two primary forms of submis-
sive behavior: willing submissiveness and resentful submissiveness. Willing submissive-
ness is characterized by intrinsic motivation and low to nil resistance to the demanding
partner’s requirements. Conversely, resentful submissiveness is characterized by feeling
obligated to submit while at the same time wanting but feeling incapable of resisting
the partner’s demands.
Based on the source of power, French et al. (1959) identified five power types: expert,
reference, legitimate, reward, and coercive. Later studies further classified them into co-
ercive and non-coercive dimensions (Yeung et al. 2009). Coercive power is characterized
as an overt attempt by one party to exert control over partners through negative ac-
==PAGE:38==
20
Literature Review & Conceptual Development
tions, such as punishments and attempts to withhold support or commitments (Benton
& Maloni 2005, Yeung et al. 2009, Zhaoquan & Yi 2014), whereas non-coercive power
includes the other four power sources and refers to one party’s attempt to encourage
desired behavior in its partners through supportive actions, such as providing assistance
or encouragement (Benton & Maloni 2005, Zhaoquan & Yi 2014). According to French
et al. (1959), the strength of the expert power varies with the degree of knowledge or
perception which the power recipient attributes within a given area to the power holder,
whereas referent power is based on the identification of the power recipient with the
power holder. For example, when a supplier wants to associate with Microsoft on the
basis of admiration and respect, this is referent power.
Legitimate power is defined
as that power stemming from internalized values in the recipient of the power, which
dictates that the holder of the power has a legitimate right to influence the recipient of
the power and that the recipient of the power has an obligation to accept that influence.
Quoting French et al. (1959): “Reward power relies on the power holder’s willingness to
administer positive valences and to suppress or decrease negative valence.” For instance,
when a purchasing company has the power to compensate a supplier with additional
business or favorable care.
In this project, the concepts of coercive and non-coercive power were used to ex-
plain the behavioral dimension of power and investigated the usage of coercive and
non-coercive power by both the buyer and the supplier in a dyadic exchange relation-
ship.
Figure 2.3. The different types of power.
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Power
21
2.3.3
The effects of power in supply chain
Power and dependence were recognized as core elements affecting behaviors in inter-
organizational relationships in the foundational works by French et al. (1959) and Dahl
(1957).
As they accurately stated, a company’s ability to have power over another
mainly relies on a partner’s dependence on it. Power has birthed valuable theories, such
as the resource dependence theory (RDT), which is based on the realisation that the
concept of power is directly associated with control over vital resources (Buvik & Reve
2002). Literature in Supply Chain and Logistics follows this tradition, with a number of
conceptual and empirical projects pertaining to the significance of power and dependence
in portraying the behavior of trading firms (Gölgeci et al. 2018).
As previously mentioned in 2.3.2, supply chain partners are influenced by the effects
of coercive and non-coercive power sources exercised by the partner (Gaski 1984), as well
as by perceptions of the other partner’s power position even if power sources are not
being used (Gaski & Nevin 1985). Consistent with that, Gölgeci et al. (2018) recognize
that dependence plays a pivotal role in the conceptualization of how power-based actions
are chosen by supply chain partners. Dependence can, therefore, be interpreted as the
degree to which one partner needs the other for its business purposes (Kumar et al.
1995, 1998), which is dictated by scarcity, including the number of alternative partners
available with the necessary skills, services, and products.
Power-dependence dynamics have an impact on the actions/responses of supply chain
partners, namely offering rewards and/or enforcing punishments, together with decisions
to accept, oppose or reject partners’ behaviors (Gölgeci et al. 2018, Leonidou et al. 2008,
Terpend & Ashenbaum 2012). As a consequence, the power-dependence positions of the
partners are among the main factors influencing the choice of power-based behaviors
and the response to those behaviors in the supply chain. Generally, relationships must
shift beyond the spot market - where cost is a significant factor and the companies
retain “arm length” ties by having multiple suppliers/customers as near-equivalents for
business needs - in order for power-based conduct to be important to the supply chain
dyad. At the same time, once relations have moved slightly past the spot market and
there is any element of asset specificity, relative power/dependency affects the parties’
dominant, egalitarian, and submissive tendencies.
It is worth noting that power and dependence can change over time between the buyer
and the supplier. For example, as the supply chain literature suggests, a bargaining
position for negotiating in a dyadic relationship may change over time for the better
or the worse (Ghadge et al. 2017, Nair et al. 2011). Relationships between partners
may change from a state of locked-in dependence to a more open commitment (Nair
et al. 2011). Charting the transitions for each partner requires a behavioral vocabulary,
nuanced to reflect both sides of the buyer-supplier relationship.
In the work by Ambrose et al. (2010), the authors employ transaction cost theory
and social exchange theory to compare how buyers and suppliers perceive relationship
mechanisms. According to their study, buyers and suppliers in the same supply chain
relationship (dyadic relationship) have significantly different perceptions of trust, com-
==PAGE:40==
22
Literature Review & Conceptual Development
mitment, resource dependence, power, and relationship success, supporting the findings
of the literature (Corsaro & Snehota 2011, Kumar et al. 1998). For instance, when asked
about satisfaction with the relationship, suppliers typically rate the relationship more
highly than buyers.
The study by Huo et al. (2019) explores how buyer and supplier dependence influ-
ences the other and their own use of coercive and non-coercive power, which contribute
to the two parties’ opportunism, based on data from 240 Chinese companies on their
perceived relations with key suppliers. Their findings illustrate that dependence on the
buyer/supplier is positively linked to the use of coercive and non-coercive power by the
supplier/buyer. The use of coercive power by buyers and suppliers seems to have a
positive impact on their opportunism. Moreover, the use of non-coercive power often
tends to have different effects depending on who is the powerful actor: the use of coer-
cive power by the buyer has a detrimental impact on buyer and supplier opportunism,
whereas the use of power by the supplier does not. Lastly, they find that the use of
coercive and non-coercive power by the buyer has negative effects on its opportunism.
The results of the work by Terpend & Ashenbaum (2012) which examines the in-
tersecting effects of power, trust and supplier network size on various dimensions of
supplier performance indicate that coercive power has a negative association with sup-
plier quality and innovation, referent power has a positive association with all dimensions
of supplier efficiency, and legitimate power has a positive association with supplier pro-
duction, cost, and flexibility. They also argue that increasing network size of suppliers
appears to dampen the impact of coercive and referent power on the performance of
suppliers, while at the same time strengthening this link in the case of legitimate power.
Lastly, they argue that the use of expert power has a negative relationship with the
delivery performance of the supplier, which is aggravated by an increase in the size of
the supplier network.
Overall, literature research findings suggest that coercive forms of power tend to
have a negative effect on supply chain performance, whereas non-coercive forms of power
have a positive effect on performance. These results have been confirmed by the extant
literature by measuring both the direct and indirect effects of coercive and non-coercive
forms of power. For instance, Benton & Maloni (2005) found that coercive forms of power
have a negative effect on trust and commitment while non-coercive forms of power have
a positive effect on trust and commitment. It is possible that when the buyer–supplier
relationship dynamic is characterized by coercion, the trading partner may simply wish
to avoid attention, or at least has no inclination to help his partner beyond meeting
basic performance expectations. Legitimate power, which flows more from a sense of
obligation felt by one’s trading partner, seemed to most influence the performance areas
that might be characterized as the basics of customer service — fast delivery, good price,
and flexibility to volume or mix changes.
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Identified gap in the literature
23
2.4
Identified gap in the literature
To sum up, there is undoubtedly a wealth of literature on power and trust and their
impact on supply chain collaboration and overall performance. And while the analysis
of the literature referred to above has contributed to valuable insights, it has also led to
the detection of gaps in the subject under investigation.
First, the interrelationships between trust, power, supply chain collaboration and
their effect on cooperation and success in the supply chain have generally been indepen-
dently examined (Arnott et al. 2007, Chicksand 2015, Dahwa et al. 2013, Gaski & Nevin
1985, Ghosh & Fedorowicz 2008, Huo et al. 2019, Jain et al. 2014, Lorentz et al. 2011,
Whipple et al. 2010); thus, the knowledge base in this field can be described as somewhat
fragmentary. As both the power and the trust mechanisms do not occur in isolation,
their mutual effect on supply chain collaboration and supply chain performance, as well
as the interplay between them needs to be further clarified. Therefore, additional work
is required, that pools the isolated results in this field and describes the interaction
between them, as well as how these factors affect the collaboration and performance
outcomes of the supply chain.
In addition to untangling the relative influences of trust, power, and SCC on supply
chain performance, more research is needed in the context of dyadic relationships. Most
of the studies focus on either the buyer side (Ghadge et al. 2017, Huo et al. 2019,
Makkonen et al. 2016, Poppo et al. 2016, Wickramanayake & Jayaratne 2016), or the
supplier side (Paparoidamis et al. 2019, Xia et al. 2008, Yeung et al. 2009, Zhaoquan &
Yi 2014), with several studies looking at buyer-supplier relationships (Cho et al. 2019,
Nassar et al. 2019, Roseira et al. 2010, Teller et al. 2016, Wu & Wu 2015) that however
do not belong in the same relationship. There have been a few studies looking at buyer-
supplier dyads (meaning “paired” buyer and supplier companies that are trading partners
in a collaborative or transactional relationship) (Cai et al. 2013, Espadinha-Cruz & Grilo
2019, Mangus et al. 2017). However, in general, these studies used different dyads (i.e.
nor the buyer, neither the supplier firms remained the same). It can, therefore, be argued
that it will be insightful to examine buyer-supplier dyads, where one player remains the
same (case study of the relationships of a buying firm or a supplier firm).
Furthermore, the literature review suggests that more research is needed in the con-
text of Oil and Gas (O&G) supply chains. As Chima (2007) highlights, O&G companies
can benefit more than any other sector from maximizing supply chain efficiencies. In
exploration and production, the types of shipments made vary widely from gloves to
cranes and cement to name a few, and much of the work and tasks are routine with
most of the large and critical operations being planned in advance (Chima 2007). How-
ever, according to this literature review sample, the author was able to find only a few
studies focusing on how supply chain collaboration and integration can be used by an
O&G company to improve operational efficiency (Chima 2007, Ebrahimi 2015, Hoffman
et al. 2004). It, therefore, seemed appropriate to concentrate the emphasis of this study
in the oil and gas sector.
==PAGE:42==
24
Literature Review & Conceptual Development
2.5
Conceptual Framework
After carefully reviewing the relevant literature, different variables describing the con-
cepts of trust, power, and supply chain collaboration were determined. These variables,
were then further grouped depending on similarities/differences in their constructs and
their results on trust, power and SCC respectively. The determined variables and their
groups are presented in Figure 2.4. Then, the relationships between these variables and
the key concepts were identified, as well as the relationships between the key concepts
and their effects on Supply Chain Performance. The identified relationships are also pre-
sented in Figure 2.4, and were explored throughout the course of this research project
and the analysis of the data.
As previously discussed in 2.2.3, it was deduced that trust can be split into three
categories, namely normative-affective trust, cognitive-based trust, and calculative trust.
The variables of normative-affective trust are closeness, openness, security, and credibil-
ity. In the same fashion, the variables of cognitive-based trust are integrity, reliability
and competence, while calculative trust can be described by reward/penalties schemes
and dependence. These variables were used in order to determine the (dominant) type
of trust in the studied relationships.
Similarly, power can be split into two categories: exercised and unexercised power.
This distinction is deemed very important, as according to the literature, it can have
majorly different results on the effects of power in the relationship. Hence, exercised
power can further be split into two variables, namely coercive and non-coercive power,
while unexercised power will be described by the perception of power from the trading
partners in the relationship. These variables were used to determine the type of power
that is present in the studied relationships.
As far as Supply Chain Collaboration (SCC) is concerned, the variables that consti-
tute SCC have been identified and analysed in 2.1.3. It is assumed that all of the seven
components/variables of SCC should be present in a successful collaborative relation-
ship, hence this research attempted to investigate their contribution to SCC (how many
of these were actually utilized and in which ways).
The concepts that were investigated, and, therefore, the subsequent research ques-
tions of this project were:
1. How does power affect supply chain collaboration?
2. How does trust affect supply chain collaboration?
3. How does trust affect the use/perception of power in a business relationship?
4. How does power affect the presence/type of trust developed in a business relation-
ship?
5. Which components of SCC are present in collaborative supply chains and how do
they affect the overall collaboration?
==PAGE:43==
2.5 Conceptual Framework
25
Trust
Power
Supply Chain
Collaboration
Supply Chain 
Performance
Exercised Power
Unexercised Power
Perception of Power
Coercive
Non-coercive
Calculative
Cognitive-based
Normative-affective
Rewards/penalties, 
Dependence
Integrity, Reliability, 
Competence
Closeness, Openness, 
Security, Credibility
•
Information 
Sharing
•
Goal Congruence
•
Decision 
Synchronization
•
Incentive 
Alignment
•
Resource Sharing
•
Collaborative 
Communication
•
Joint Knowledge 
Creation
Figure 2.4. The conceptual framework.
6. What is the effect of SCC on the overall supply chain performance?
The conceptual framework that was developed, was consequently “explored” using a
case company as the buying firm, and examining dyadic relationships with some of their
most strategic suppliers. This was done through interviews with Category and Contract
Managers from the buying firm, as well as Key Account Managers from the supplier
companies. The exact research process and analysis is described in more detail in the
chapters that follow.
==PAGE:44==
26
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3
Research Approach
After carrying out an extensive literature review of relevant academic sources, and de-
veloping the conceptual framework, a case company was chosen as an industry example
to explore the variables and aspects of this framework that were actually present in
the studied collaborative relationships, in connection with the research questions of this
study. In this chapter, the methodology that was followed regarding the data collec-
tion, and the data analysis of this project is described. First, a brief description of the
case company used for this study is presented, followed by a detailed explanation of the
data collection method. Finally, the last section of this chapter includes a thorough
description of the data analysis method. In Figure 3.1 an illustration of the complete
methodology process is depicted.
3.1
Case study
In order to answer the research questions set out at the beginning of this project, five
dyadic buyer–supplier relationships (i.e. paired buyers and suppliers that are involved
in a business relationship), drawn from the Oil & Gas industry, were examined. The oil
and gas sector was chosen, as it is a theoretically relevant context for studying power
in relationships (Chima 2007). Very few sectors can profit more than the oil and gas
companies from optimizing the supply chain efficiencies through effective supplier re-
lationship management, since these companies are highly dependent on suppliers to
provide complex services and critical equipment to support ongoing projects and opera-
tions (Chen et al. 2011, Chima 2007). Moreover, the fact that the author was employed
at the case company as a student assistant in Supply Chain Project Management team,
simplified the processes, since communication was easier and data/resource availability
was increased.
The case company (buying firm) is a drilling contractor and one of the market leaders
in the Oil and Gas industry, with a reported revenue of 279 million USD and a financial
uptime of 97.5% in the first quarter of 2020. Having more than 4000 active suppliers,
and being involved in more than 30 collaborative relationships with their strategic and
operational suppliers, this company was a very interesting case to investigate the effects
of power and trust in collaborative buyer-supplier relationships. To identify the specific
relationships that would be investigated, the following criteria were used:
• The supplier should be of strategic importance to the buying firm.
==PAGE:46==
28
Research Approach
Selection of case company
Data Collection – Semi-structured Interviews
Determination of dyadic relationships
Selection of interviewees
Formulation of interview questions
Transcription of interview data
Data Analysis – Thematic Qualitative Analysis
Familiarization with the interview data
Generation of codes
Detection of themes/connections
Findings
In-depth analysis of findings through comparison
Execution of interviews
Figure 3.1. Methodology for data collection and data analysis (flow-chart).
==PAGE:47==
3.2 Data Collection Method
29
• There should be some form of established relationship management with the sup-
plier (either interdependent relationship where collaboration initiatives were suc-
cessful, or non-interdependent (e.g. buyer dominance, supplier dominance, or in-
dependence) where collaboration initiatives are not as successful).
• The supplier companies should belong in different categories or competing in the
same category, based on the products/services they offer to the buying firm.
• The companies would be willing to be completely open and transparent with the
researcher, in order to ensure that full and reliable data collection would be possi-
ble.
After careful consideration of the above criteria, five key supplier firms were identified.
These suppliers belong in the categories shown in Figure 3.2, together with their coded
names (to ensure confidentiality).
SUP1

Original
Equipment 
Manufacturer 
& Spare Parts 
Provider 
(OEM & SPP)
 Relationship
duration: >30 
years
SUP2

Third Party 
Logistics 
provider 
(3PL)

Relationship
duration: >10 
years
SUP3

Service 
provider -
Manpower

Relationship
duration: >20 
years
SUP4

Remote 
Operated 
Vehicles 
provider 
(ROV)

Relationship
duration: >10 
years
SUP5

Original
Equipment 
Manufacturer 
& Spare Parts 
Provider 
(OEM & SPP)

Relationship
duration: >25 
years
Figure 3.2. Identified suppliers (anonymized) and the Category in which they belong.
3.2
Data Collection Method
When faced with the dilemma of choosing the best and most appropriate method for
collecting the qualitative data necessary, two methods were considered. The first one
was to send out questionnaires, and the second was to conduct face-to-face or phone
interviews.
==PAGE:48==
30
Research Approach
Questionnaires can either be delivered online or paper-based, and consist of sets
of questions which all respondents are required to complete. Once a questionnaire is
developed, it can be handed out with little effort to a large number of people (Akbayrak
2000, Phellas et al. 2011). However, this does not guarantee a high response rate, as it
is very often the case that people do not concern themselves with responding properly
or at all to these questionnaires. In addition, questionnaires imply a large volume of
data that needs to be coded, analysed and evaluated in the case of a large number of
responses (Akbayrak 2000, Phellas et al. 2011).
Interviews, on the other hand, are usually conducted on a one-on-one basis (Alshen-
qeeti 2014, Gill et al. 2008). They require a large amount of time for the researcher during
the interviews and also for transcribing and coding the data. Another way of conducting
interviews is through “focus groups” typically consisting of one researcher and several
participants in a single session (Gill et al. 2008). In interviews and focus groups, the
researcher has better control over the response rate and the quality/validity of the data.
Moreover, the researcher has a better understanding of whether specific questions make
the interview subjects nervous or whether the subjects struggle to answer the question
where the interviewer may clarify questions not understood by the respondent and may
even ask for further elaboration, as well as the use of open questions, which allows for
more detailed answers and enables the researcher to guide the interview in the desired
direction (Akbayrak 2000, Gill et al. 2008, Phellas et al. 2011). Last but not least, in
general, respondents experience questions being asked by a sympathetic listener as more
rewarding than the chore of filling in a form for some anonymous researcher.
Taking all of the above into account, it was decided to continue with conducting
one-on-one interviews and focus groups, instead of distributing questionnaires.
This
particular method was considered the most appropriate considering the nature of the
research, being an exploratory case study, and the amount of data required. This way,
the researcher would be able to gain valuable insights into the key stakeholders’ distinct
perspectives on the effects of power and trust in collaboration and the most important
aspects of SCC in the relationships being studied. Furthermore, a deeper understanding
of the challenges faced in these relationships was made possible through the collection of
the interviewees’ subjective points of view. In the following sections, the exact procedure
for the preparation of interview questions and the set-up of interviews is described in
detail.
3.2.1
Formulating the interview questions
A list of questions presented in Table 3.1 was formulated using the conceptual framework
provided in Figure 2.4, which was introduced in section 2.5, taking into account the
literature review and the research questions underlying the scope of this project. The
questions were divided into five categories/groups, representing the five relationships-
arrows in the conceptual framework (see Figure 3.3). These questions were then used
during the interviews with the buying firm and its suppliers. This way, the interview
==PAGE:49==
3.2 Data Collection Method
31
questions were directly related to the aspects of the collaborative relationships that are
of research interest.
Table 3.1. Interview questions
G1: Power on SCC
1. How would you describe the power asymmetry in your relationship with company X?
Who is the strongest trading partner and how is this power exercised to the weakest counterpart?
2. In which ways would you say that this power has affected your collaboration with company X?
Is it an overall positive outcome or negative?
G2: Trust on SCC
3. How would you describe the trust in your relationship with company X?
Is it more based on dependence and rewards/penalties, on integrity/reliability and competence
or on closeness/openness and credibility?
4. In which ways would you say that trust has affected your collaboration with company X?
Is it an overall positive outcome or negative?
G3: Trust on Power
5. How would you interpret the effect of trust has affected the power asymmetry/power
exercise in your relationship with company X?
G4: Power on Trust
6. How would you interpret the effect of (coercive/non-coercive/perceived) power
has affected trust in your relationship with company X?
G5: SCC & SCP
7. How frequently do you communicate with the supplier/buyer?
(collaborative communication)
8. To what degree do you share sensitive and/or supply chain-related information with the
strategic partner (information sharing)? Do you also share resources? (resource sharing)
9. To what extent do you orchestrate decisions in supply chain planning and operations in
order to optimize the supply chain benefits (decision synchronization)?
10. Would you say that you have developed a better understanding of and response to
the market and competitive environment by working together with company X?
(joint knowledge creation)
11. How would you interpret this collaboration with company X has affected the supply chain
performance? Is it an overall positive outcome or negative?
As can be seen by Table 3.1, the five question categories are the effect of power on
supply chain collaboration, the effect of trust on supply chain collaboration, the effect
of trust on power in the collaborative relationship and the other way around (the effect
of power on trust), and lastly the effect of supply chain collaboration on the overall
supply chain performance. The questions were approved by experienced professors and
academics before they were finalized.
==PAGE:50==
32
Research Approach
Trust
Power
Supply Chain
Collaboration
Supply Chain 
Performance
Exercised Power
Unexercised Power
Perception of Power
Coercive
Non-coercive
Calculative
Cognitive-based
Normative-affective
Rewards/penalties, 
Dependence
Integrity, Reliability, 
Competence
Closeness, Openness, 
Security, Credibility
•
Information 
Sharing
•
Goal Congruence
•
Decision 
Synchronization
•
Incentive 
Alignment
•
Resource Sharing
•
Collaborative 
Communication
•
Joint Knowledge 
Creation
G1
G2
G3
G4
G5
Figure 3.3. Connection of interview questions to the conceptual framework.
3.2.2
Interview Process
In order to gather as reliable and accurate empirical data as possible, a total of 10 in-
terviews were conducted. The initial goal was to interview a Category Manager and a
Contract Manager from the buying firm for each dyadic relationship and the Key Ac-
count Manager or Sales Representative managing the relationship from each supplier
company (total of 5 interviews with representatives from the supplier companies). Sev-
eral restrictions and unprecedented events following the COVID-19 pandemic and the
historically low oil prices that shook the oil and gas industry, did not allow for that goal
to be achieved in the tight available time-frame. More specifically, while all interviews
were conducted with the managers of the buying firm (half of them in the form of focus
groups, and half of them in one-on-one interviews), only 3 of 5 of the suppliers’ represen-
tatives were reached and interviewed (one-on-one interviews). This poses a significant
limitation in the research, one which is well acknowledged and taken into account in the
validity of the findings that are presented in later chapters.
Most of the respondents were based in Europe (two-thirds) with the remaining third
situated in North America (mainly at European companies’ regional offices). This also
offered a clear insight into both headquarters and subsidiaries’ opinions. As previously
mentioned, the respondents were senior managers (ca.
11 years of management ex-
perience on average) highly involved in managing the exchange relationship, holding
roles such as Category Manager or Contract Manager (buying firm) and Key Account
Managers (supplier companies). The interview questions were sent in advance to all
respondents, enabling fuller answers to be obtained. As part of the interview preamble,
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Data Analysis Method
33
the respondents were asked to keep in mind only the specific dyadic relationship which
was investigated. All the interviews were carried out using a widely known online confer-
encing platform and all respondents were asked if they agreed to be recorded during the
sessions to maximize the transcription quality, with the understanding that confidential-
ity would be observed. This maximised openness and objectivity. The interviews were
semi-structured, following the interview questions of Table 3.1, but with flexible and in-
formal dialogue that provided the opportunity for the interviewer to obtain an in-depth
understanding of the opinions, perceptions, and expectations of the respondents towards
the effect of trust and power between buyers and suppliers on supply chain collaboration
and supply chain performance. Each of the interviews had a duration between 40 and
50 minutes. All interviews were conducted within a period of seven weeks.
3.3
Data Analysis Method
In order to analyze the interview data, an adaptation of the Thematic Qualitative
Analysis process described in Burnard (1991) was used. More specifically, the exact
steps that were followed are described below:
• Step 1: Familiarization with the interview data.
Transcripts were read through, and notes on general themes within transcripts
were made throughout the reading. These first notes reflected the first impressions
one would get by reading the transcripts.
• Step 2: Carefully reviewing the transcripts.
In this step, the goal was to be immersed in the interview data.
Hence, the
transcripts were read again, one by one and line-by-line very carefully, trying to
become more fully aware of the “frame of reference” of the respondent.
• Step 3: Open coding.
Transcripts were read again, and as many headings as needed were written down to
describe all dimensions of the content. At this point headings were freely created.
Some of the criteria used for coding were if something was repeated in several
places, if the respondent explicitly stated that something was of great importance,
if something similar was stated in the literature or reminded of a theory/concept
that was studied during the literature review, or simply if the researcher considered
something relevant and important.
• Step 4: Categorizing the coded data.
In this step, the list of headings was surveyed and grouped under higher-order
categories in order to reduce the number of headings by integrating some of the
similar ones into broader categories. The work in this step was more general and
abstract, as the attempt was to further conceptualise the data.
==PAGE:52==
34
Research Approach
• Step 5: Re-coding each transcript.
Then, each transcript was “coded” according to the list of categories and sub-
categories. This was achieved by collating the transcripts’ text into spreadsheets
and labeling the data, using “color-coding” too. Adjustments were made where
deemed necessary, to ensure that the vast majority of data was covered.
• Step 6: Connecting the categories.
The transcripts were reread alongside the categories and sub-categories that were
identified in the previous steps. The goal was to identify the connections between
the categories and the sub-categories and to make sure that all the data was covered
with this structure, as these categories and connections would be the main findings
of the study.
• Step 7: Side-by-side comparing buyer vs. supplier interviews.
Lastly, the transcripts were also compared per relationship studied, to exemplify
similarities and differences between the perspectives of the respondents on the
same questions or categories.
This process was followed and implemented in the each interview transcript and the
resulted coded transcripts can be found in Appendix C. This method for analyzing the
interview data can be categorized as “inductive”, as although the questions were directly
connected to the conceptual framework, the data analysis did not aim at testing this
framework or its validity, but rather at exploring the variables and aspects that actually
apply in the studied relationships and narrowing the field.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4
Findings
This chapter presents the findings of the analysis of the interview data that were drawn
specifically to the case study of the five dyadic buyer-supplier relationships, and more
specifically the common insights of the buying firm regarding the effect of trust on SCC;
the effect of power on SCC; the effect of power on trust and vice versa and the present
collaborative initiatives of the studied relationships. Then, a dyadic comparison is also
presented of the three dyadic buyer-supplier relationships that the author was able to
interview both the buyer and the supplier, to exemplify the most prominent differences
and similarities in their perceptions. Some important quotes from the interviews are
also included in this chapter, while the interested reader is prompted to Appendix B
where the relevant quotes are summarized in the form of tables. Lastly, the complete
set of transcripts can be found in Appendix C.
4.1
General Perceptions of the Buyer versus
the Supplier Companies
In this section, the general perceptions of the buying firm representatives are presented,
together with a comparison of the respective views of the supplier companies’ represen-
tatives. The section is divided in six sub-sections, corresponding to the six higher-order
categories that were identified during the analysis of the interview data, namely (i) the
effect of power on SCC, (ii) the effect of trust on SCC, (iii), the effect of trust on power
asymmetry, (iv) the effect of power on trust, (v) aspects of SCC present in the studied
relationships, and (vi) the overall effect of SCC on the studied relationships.
4.1.1
The effect of Power on Supply Chain
Collaboration
Regarding the effect of power on SCC, the analysis of the interview data revealed three
key dimensions: (i) the perception on the most powerful trading partner, (ii) the per-
ception and exercise of power in the relationship by the trading partners, and (iii) the
assessment of the overall impact of power on SCC and the business relationship. These
three dimensions are further analysed below.
==PAGE:54==
36
Findings
Most powerful trading partner
As far as the perception on which company is the most “powerful” in the relationship
and has the most leverage, in 4 out of the 5 studied relationships, the buying firm con-
siders the supplier to be most powerful trading partner, as opposed to only 1 in 5 where
they consider that they are in a better position than the supplier. The main reasons
they mention are the size of the organisations, the level of dependency and the current
market conditions (oil prices, COVID-19 etc.).
“
They (SUP5) have much more power over us than we have over them,
and they can certainly dictate things: they can affect the uptime and
the performance of our rig. So the power sits in their hands.
– Category Manager for SUP5
”
On the other hand, the supplier companies seem to agree that the buying firm has
more leverage in the relationship, the reason being that the buying firm is the ultimate
decision maker with regard to whether to collaborate with them or choose one of their
competitors.
“
...When it comes to the power symmetry in the relationship, ulti-
mately (and I don’t feel like it’s pushed down our throat), BF has
the most power in the relationship, […] because they make the final
commercial decision.
– Key Account Manager for SUP1
”
More insights into the other quotes from the interviews are available in Table B.1.
Perception and exercise of power
Regarding the perception and exercise of power in the studied relationships, the respon-
dents from the buying firm seem to agree that the suppliers make sure that the buying
firm knows who holds the most power in the business relationship, even when they are
not making “explicit” use of it. They share some examples of incidents where the suppli-
ers (who they perceive to be more powerful than them) exercised their power on them,
such as in negotiations or other business deals to achieve the most profitable results
for their company, regardless of what the effect would be in the collaboration and the
overall business relationship. However, they also highlight that the use of power varies
==PAGE:55==
4.1 General Perceptions of the Buyer versus the Supplier Companies
37
substantially from case to case and that the power-holders make vigilant/strategic use
of their respective power, since the overall market conditions are very dynamic and even
cyclical, so they acknowledge that they might not stay for long in this favourable po-
sition. In the one case where the buying firm considers themselves as more powerful
than the supplier, they perceive that they do not make use of their power/leverage in
order to achieve more favorable outcomes for their organisation (e.g. strategic sourcing,
negotiating lower prices etc.).
“
...on general terms whether they use their power or not, that varies
a lot from case to case.
[…] (In negotiations) I feel that SUP2 is
more confident and using more of their market position, and what
they are providing to us to their benefit. I am not saying that I have
experienced any kind of mistrust, or misuse of power.
Not yet at
least. […] It’s all fine at the beginning, but then at some point, this
power kicks in.
– Category Manager for SUP2
”
The suppliers’ views on this (who consider the buying firm as being the most powerful
trading partner in the relationship) are very similar to those of the buying firm, noting
that the buying firm utilises their power strategically, usually when capital expenditures
are concerned or big investment projects (see Table B.2). They also mention that the
buying firm utilizes their power by making them work harder to earn their business so
that the suppliers understand who is the most powerful partner. It is also mentioned in
one of the interviews with the Global Key Account Manager for SUP2, that even though
the buying firm consider themselves as a collaborative and partnering organisation, when
it comes to business transactions and agreements, they are usually very straightforward
and they use their power by offering ultimatums. One of the examples shared by the Key
Account Manager for SUP1, is that the buying firm has “threatened” to recertify some
of the supplier’s equipment as their own to reduce their dependency on them. He also
highlights that although SUP1 understand the high level of dependency of the buying
firm for their equipment/services, they consider that they never took advantage of that.
“
What bothers me […] is that they talk partnership all day long, but
at the end of the day […] when they want something, it’s a one way
conversation. You do this or don’t, your choice. No discussion. You
either accept it or you don’t accept it.
– Global Key Account Manager for SUP2
”
==PAGE:56==
38
Findings
Overall effect of power on SCC
From the buyer’s perspective, the overall outcome of use of power is negative in any
relationship. In certain examples that were shared during the interview with the Senior
Partnering Manager for SUP1 from the buying firm (see Table B.3 or Appendix C), it
was highlighted several times that when the supplier did not live up to their promises
and they used their market position and power advantage towards the buying firm, the
trust was broken down at a very high level and even though SUP1 make efforts to gain
the trust back, it is emphasized that it will take a lot of time to rebuild the trust. The
respondent stresses that this use of power from SUP1 left a mark in the relationship
and negatively affected the collaboration thereafter. The Category Manager for SUP5
mentions that although they could “bypass” this supplier in order to reduce their total
cost of ownership, that would have negative effects on the collaboration with SUP5 in
the longer term, hence the buying firm choose not to use their power in the relationship,
but instead they try to increase the collaboration in the hopes of reducing the exertion
of power from SUP5. Finally, the Category Manager for SUP2 makes an interesting re-
mark that both partners (buyer and supplier) should leave their power baggage outside
the relationship in order to ensure close collaboration and partnership.
“
That (misuse of power) leaves a footprint or a fingerprint on the
relationship long term. They’re just hard things to forget […] I think
there’s still pockets within the organization that still reflect back on
that mistrust and I think that’s the negative outcome that there is
still a little bit of a stress.
– Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1
”
“
...you could say that the use of our power was at least perceived
as coercive, in order to get work done.
In fact, we did.
It took
about a year, […] but what is funny is that the company did come
forward, and we ended up having an open collaboration. […] Unfor-
tunately, we lost all the business after the fact that we used our power.
– Global Key Account Manager for SUP2
”
In general, the perspective of the suppliers is in agreement with that of the buying
firm, as they also point out that there can be no genuine collaboration if the partners
exercise their respective powers on each other. An interesting finding emerged from an
example that was shared by the Global Key Account Manager for SUP2, in which the
==PAGE:57==
4.1 General Perceptions of the Buyer versus the Supplier Companies
39
use of power was found to momentarily improve the business performance, but with
adverse effects on the long-term benefits of the collaboration, as the trust was “broken”
and the relationship became purely transactional thereafter.
4.1.2
The effect of Trust on Supply Chain Collaboration
Regarding the effect of trust on SCC, the analysis of the interview data revealed two
key dimensions: (i) the trading parters’ perception on the type of trust present in the
relationship, (ii) the assessment of the overall impact of trust on SCC and the business
relationship. These dimensions are further analysed below.
Dominant type of trust in the studied relationships
When asked about the type of trust in the studied relationships, the respondents from
the buying firm highlight the high dependence on some of these suppliers (e.g. SUP1,
SUP5), as well as the reliability and competencies of their partners (e.g. SUP2, SUP3).
Regarding the use of rewards or penalties and the effect these have on building and
maintaining the trust between the partners, the general finding is that although there
might be some penalties (e.g. liquidated damages or interest for late payments) or re-
wards (e.g. retroactive annual bonuses) in place, these are used very rarely or not at all,
and therefore they do not have an impact on trust. Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1
points out that this can also be seen as testament of the trust in the relationship, as re-
sorting to utilising rewards or penalties would make the relationship purely transactional.
“
...we are completely dependent upon them, but they are also generally
quite reliable. I think they are a quite open company to […] collabo-
rating and sharing in how we work together.
– Category Manager for SUP5
”
On the other hand, the suppliers mention that closeness, openness and credibility
are the most important constructs of trust that are currently present in the studied
relationships. The Key Account Manager for SUP3 mentions that although there have
been projects where there were rewards, these were purely performance-based and they
did not affect the level of trust in the relationship (see Table B.4).
An interesting
remark is made by the Global Key Account Manager for SUP2, who mentions that
effective collaboration requires credibility and trust to be built and maintained in the
relationship.
Another important finding emerging from the responses of the respondents is that
the level of trust varies significantly in the different hierarchy levels within the organisa-
tions. For example, both the Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1 from the buying firm
==PAGE:58==
40
Findings
and the Key Account Manager for SUP1 from the supplier SUP1 mention that there is
more trust in the lower hierarchy levels (operational and tactical levels) and much less
at the higher levels (strategic and senior leadership levels).
“
I think the last one. I get some more based closeness openness and
credibility. […] There’s more to it […] The fact that we’re “married”,
and they got a ton of our equipment, it forces us into our relationship.
And I think that at the lower levels, there’s a good amount of trust. I
think at the senior leadership levels, at times, there’s been a little bit
of mistrust.
– Key Account Manager for SUP1
”
Overall effect of trust on SCC in the studied relationships
Regarding their overall perception of trust in the relationship and if they evaluate its
impact as positive or negative, the respondents from the buying firm shared some in-
teresting insights. For example, the Senior Negotiator & Contract Manager for SUP1
mentioned that the buying firm shows some kind of “false trust”, where on the surface
it looks like there is trust in the relationship with their partners, but deep down that
trust is not really there. He also said that they have a difficulty to evaluate “the things
where you can’t put a number to” and that they tend to rely a lot on past experiences.
This view was also supported by the Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1, who men-
tioned that the buying firm does not give “much leeway” to their partners, as well as
the Category Manager for SUP2 who doubted the overall existence of trust in the rela-
tionship with SUP2. Moreover, the buying firm representatives generally seemed more
reluctant to evaluate positively the impact of trust in the studied business relationships,
evaluating it as “rather negative”, “maybe neutral”, “maybe not negatively”.
“
I don’t think the trust has never been there in this relationship,
unfortunately.
– Category Manager for SUP2
”
Conversely, the representatives of the supplier companies seemed to have a more
positive view on the impact of trust in the studied relationships, evaluating it as “100%
positive”, “definitely […] positive”, “always been positive”. Furthermore, both the Key
Account Manager for SUP1 and the Key Account Manager for SUP3 agreed that the
existence of trust in the respective relationships has never made them too complacent,
==PAGE:59==
4.1 General Perceptions of the Buyer versus the Supplier Companies
41
highlighting that despite the trust, they always get monitored by the buying firm. Fi-
nally, the Global Key Account Manager exemplified the importance of trust and being
proactive and transparent in effective and successful collaborative supply chains.
“
It’s 100% positive (the impact of trust on SCC). I know it can become
complacent for sure […] but if something feels out of place, we get
questioned on it and if we start charging something that’s stupid,
it’s a red flag it’s easily caught if we’re trying to be complacent than
gouge BF.
– Key Account Manager for SUP1
”
Another interesting finding arose from the answers of both the supplier companies
and the buying firm, and it is regarding the consistency of the people managing the
business relationships. More specifically, it was emphasized by both the Senior Part-
nering Manager for SUP1 and the Key Account Manager for SUP3, that the buying
firm is a “dynamic organisation”, where people change positions very often, especially
in Procurement. According to their responses, this instability in the people managing
the relationships has always been a challenge for the buying firm, as there is “just a
handful of people that have maintained the continuity between the companies”. This is
an interesting finding, especially considering the fact that it is people who build and
maintain the relationships between organisations. Table B.5 in Appendix B summarizes
all the relevant quotes from the interviews.
“
We have a dynamic organization. […] (There are) just a handful of
people that have maintained the continuity between the two companies.
[…] that is hugely important in defining all of BF’s relationships, and
where some of the pitfalls are.
– Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1
”
4.1.3
The effect of trust on power asymmetry in the
studied relationships
When asked about the effect of trust on power asymmetry, the answers retrieved from
the buying firm respondents seem to vary depending on the individual relationship.
Some contended that signals of trust have aided in limiting the exercise of power in
==PAGE:60==
42
Findings
the relationships, while others mentioned that it had no significant effect on the power
asymmetry.
More specifically, according to the Category Manager for SUP2, if there was more
trust between the two partners (BF and SUP2), that would have led to less exercise
of power from both sides, which is in agreement with the views of Senior Negotiator &
Contract Manager for SUP1 who mentioned that the lack of trust adds to the power
dynamics in the relationship. The Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1 also disclosed
that SUP1 have been using their power more strategically due to the trust and commit-
ment that has been exhibited by the buying firm, while the Category Manager for SUP5
observed that the supplier has become more flexible and open due to the commitment
and trust that the buying firm showed towards them, thus limiting the impact of power
asymmetry.
“
...sometimes there’s a lack of trust and that adds to the power
dynamics. […] Then that lack of trust has probably resulted in both
parties not getting what they optimally could have gotten from the
relationship, the negotiation, whatever you want to look at it as.
– Senior Negotiator & Contract Manager for SUP1
”
On the other hand, the Category Manager for SUP3 pointed out that despite the
established long-standing trusted relationship between the two partners (BF and SUP3),
this has not limited the use of power from SUP3 now that they are in a more favorable
market - and therefore power - position. In addition, the Category Manager for SUP4
divulged that possibly the only reason for not utilizing any leverage the buying firm has
over SUP4 is due to the potential partnering benefits, and not because of the existence
of trust.
As far as the views of the suppliers are concerned, there appears to be a consensus
towards the notion that trust can scale down the exercise of power from the business
partners involved in the collaboration. For instance, the Key Account Manager for SUP1
stated that if there is a challenging issue that can negatively impact the partnership, if
this partnership is built on trust, then the partners will be able to overcome these difficul-
ties and come up with better solutions. The Global Key Account Manager for SUP2 gave
another insightful perspective, using an example where the buyer used coercive power
towards them and illustrated his point that being trustful, responsive, and transparent
can minimize the negative effects of the exercise of power in a business relationship. A
summary of the quotes relating to the impact of trust on power asymmetry can be found
in Table B.6.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 General Perceptions of the Buyer versus the Supplier Companies
43
4.1.4
The effect of power on trust in the studied
relationships
Regarding the impact that power exercise has on trust in the studied collaborative rela-
tionships, the general consensus among the buying firm and their suppliers seems to be
that use of coercive power “breaks” the trust in the relationship, leaving a long-lasting
negative imprint that is difficult to be restored. The Senior Partnering Manager for
SUP1 shared an insightful example, explaining that when SUP1 took advantage of their
auspicious market position and used coercive power towards the buying firm, that inci-
dent broke the trust between the two firms and left a “fingerprint” in the relationship.
That led to having “pockets of trust” and “pockets of mistrust” between the two compa-
nies even after many years of working together. The Category Manager for SUP3 also
expressed the same opinion when she was asked the same question about the current
situation with SUP3 taking advantage of their power. Another intriguing example was
shared by the Category Manager for SUP2, in which she emphasized that when partners
resort to using their respective power in the relationship, that is a result of losing the
trust in the collaboration and each other.
“
...then that (misusing your power) leaves a footprint or a fingerprint
on the relationship long term. […] And so, ultimately what it does -
and it’s very clear - is it breaks down trust. And so that’s probably
where we’re at with SUP1. The trust […] WAS broken down at a very
high level. […] And I would say we have pockets of trust and pockets
of distrust still from a long legacy of engagement.
– Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1
”
The suppliers seem to agree with these views, with the Global Key Account Manager
for SUP2 sharing a very illustrative example of the effects of power on trust and SCC
overall (see Table B.7 or Appendix C). In the example, the supplier company (SUP2)
used coercive power in a business relationship to ensure the money they were owed would
be paid. The consequence of this was that they obtained the desired outcome, but their
use of coercive power also resulted in a termination of the contractual partnership once
the responsibilities of the partners had been met. The Key Account Manager for SUP3
had a more conservative view on this, and accentuated that if the trust foundation is
solid enough, moderate use of power in the relationship cannot have a long-term negative
outcome.
==PAGE:62==
44
Findings
4.1.5
Aspects of Supply Chain Collaboration present in
the studied relationships
As far as the specific aspects of SCC that are present in the studied relationships, the
analysis of the interview data revealed that (i) collaborative communication, (ii) in-
formation sharing, (iii) resources sharing, (iv) decision synchronization, and (v) joint
knowledge creation were present on some level in each of the studied relationships. A
more detailed presentation of these findings is available in this section.
Collaborative communication
One of the aspects of supply chain collaboration that has been present in all the studied
relationships was collaborative communication. As indicated by the relevant quotes in
Table B.8, the different levels inside the organisations utilize different means and have
different frequency of communication. More specifically, it was widely mentioned by
both the buying firm respondents and the suppliers that communication at the oper-
ational level is the most frequent (multiple times per week), utilizing emails or phone
calls and exchanging transactional information and updates. The tactical levels (Catego-
ry/Contract Managers and Key Account Managers) are said to have regular structured
calls (for example biweekly or monthly) to discuss current challenges, whereas at the
strategic levels, the communication is even more structured, with Quarterly Business
Reviews (QBR) or biannual meetings, where the senior leadership members meet to
discuss supply chain performance, escalated issues, project pipeline and current open
issues.
However, as highlighted by the Senior Negotiator and Contract Manager for SUP1,
the Category Manager for SUP3 and the Key Account Manager for SUP3, reality is usu-
ally different than what was planned, with QBRs for example not happening as often
as they should. Each of them deemed that the aspect of collaborative communication
would be a potential area of improvement for the buying firm.
“
So, the more strategic levels, we are supposed to meet and discuss
more critical issues and performance issues in our Quarterly Business
Review meetings (QBRs), but they just never get organized, because
there is always something happening. Personally, I talk with them
once a month to discuss some ongoing issues and projects.
– Category Manager for SUP3
”
==PAGE:63==
4.1 General Perceptions of the Buyer versus the Supplier Companies
45
“
Communication is the number one key […] but especially when
it comes to supply chain collaboration, if you don’t have timely,
effective, proactive communication, you’re never going to build trust
or credibility with anybody.
[…] Without having collaborative com-
munication both with your clients, your suppliers, your contractors,
you’re going to fail. Your supply chain you’ll never, never perform.
– Global Key Account Manager for SUP2
”
A couple other important findings from the supplier side may also be identified when
analysing the interview transcripts. For instance, the Key Account Manager for SUP3
mentioned that in the past the collaborative communication with the buying firm was
better organized, more structured, more formalized and more open, pointing out to
the lack of proper planning and organizing. He also acknowledged the impact of the
current uncertain business environment on SCC, which, according to him, has led many
people to change positions or become redundant, disturbing the balance and continuity
of communication between supply chain partners. The Global Key Account Manager for
SUP2 also emphasized that collaborative communication and openness are the number
one key components of collaborative supply chains, and that without effective, timely
and proactive communication between all the supply chain partners, their supply chains
will never deliver high performance.
Information Sharing
Regarding the information sharing aspect of SCC, the respondents from the buying firm
seem to agree that the buying firm is generally open in sharing any kind of information
necessary to their suppliers, apart from commercially sensitive information that could
be subject to legal compliance and antitrust issues. For example, the Senior Partnering
Manager for SUP1 mentioned that they “talk as openly as the law allows”. Furthermore,
they generally consider the buying firm as being more open in information sharing than
the suppliers in the studied relationships (see the quotes from the Category Manager for
SUP1, Category Manager for SUP2, Contract Manager for SUP4 in Table B.9). The
types of information shared by the buying firm with their suppliers are performance re-
lated (equipment uptime/downtime, benchmarking against competitors of the suppliers),
technical and maintenance related, spend numbers and project pipeline, and it was also
mentioned that they are open in sharing forecasts and even more sensitive information
in order to be more engaging, open and proactive in the collaboration.
On the other hand, the suppliers representatives mentioned that they are very open in
sharing information with the buying firm, even market-sensitive information or sharing
their knowledge about the buying firm’s competitors way of working. The Key Account
Manager for SUP3 said that: “we also share information on how other companies are
==PAGE:64==
46
Findings
doing things” and the Key Account Manager for SUP1 seemed to agree with this, say-
ing that “sharing of information that shouldn’t be shared is part of the deal”. Finally,
the Global Key Account Manager for SUP2 shared some interesting insights about the
importance and the value of information sharing, characterizing it as “key” in building
stronger relationships and helping both companies overcome the forthcoming challenges
by allowing them to be prepared and make informed decisions. All the relevant quotes
from the interviews are summarized in Table B.9.
Resources Sharing
As far as sharing of resources is concerned, this aspect seems to be treated quite differ-
ently depending on the specific studied relationship. With the biggest and more powerful
OEM & SPP suppliers (SUP1 and SUP5), it was mentioned that the trading partners
have had some projects in the past which involved sharing of resources, or investing
together in joint responsibility projects. On the other hand, with the 3PL provider and
the Manpower Service Provider (SUP2 and SUP3 respectively), the joint resources as-
pect involves collaborative teams with personnel of both companies being allocated to
the same project or use of consultants (see Table B.10 for the specific relevant quotes as
they were obtained from the interviews) to achieve mutually beneficial results.
Decision Synchronisation
Both the buying firm representatives and the suppliers commonly cited that the aspect
of decision synchronisation is not at the desired levels from both sides of the partnership.
More specifically, the buying firm commented that they try to share their project plans
in advance with their partners to help them plan their respective operations accordingly,
as well as by engaging people from different departments on the organisations in these
plans to ensure cross-departmental agreement.
“
...sometimes we would consult them much in advance. Sometimes,
probably not.
– Contract Manager for SUP4
”
On the other side, some of the suppliers mentioned utilizing B2B (Business-to-
Business) solutions to simplify some common processes (e.g. order processing) or being
involved in consultation processes, but the main finding was their almost unanimous
request for proper forecasts from the buying firm to help them plan and schedule their
operations. The Senior Negotiator & Contract Manager for SUP1 also recognises this
need for the buying firm to become better at providing reliable forecasts to their sup-
==PAGE:65==
4.1 General Perceptions of the Buyer versus the Supplier Companies
47
pliers. The specific quotes regarding decision synchronisation can be found in Table B.11.
“
...we would love it if BF were able to provide us with some forecasts
or any indications about their future projects. They did that in the
past […] so we always kind of knew what was going on the next half
year. That we don’t see any longer, and it’s a shame because it was
a great help […] also because we might have some input for it. […]
So, if we can just look half year into the future, that would be brilliant.
– Key Account Manager for SUP3
”
Joint Knowledge Creation
Different views were provided regarding the joint knowledge creation aspect of SCC in
the studied relationships, varying not only among the suppliers but also within the buy-
ing firm. Firstly, some of the respondents from the buying firm agreed that when there
is a good and open relationship with the suppliers, the buying firm can gain a better
understanding and response to the Oil and Gas market, through the valuable insights
and knowledge that can be obtained and created in these relationships (see quotes from
Senior Negotiator and Contract Manager for SUP1, Category Manager for SUP2, Cat-
egory Manager for SUP3 and Category Manager for SUP5 in Table B.12). It was also
highlighted that this is one aspect where improvements can be made in the collaborative
relationships (Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1 and Senior Negotiator & Contract
Manager for SUP1).
“
I would say, yes, to some extent reflected on my discussions and what
I have. […] Now, the question is to what level? I think neither one
of us leverages as much as we should. […] I don’t think we’ve tapped
into it enough and I think […] the relationship is probably consuming
enough time with SUP1 […] that hasn’t allowed us to do that yet. But
I think there’s room for improvement.
– Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1
”
The interesting finding on the side of the suppliers is that the suppliers consider
that they can offer more to the buying firm in this respect than they can get back.
For instance, a recent example of how they approach the joint knowledge creation was
shared by the Global Key Account Manager for SUP2, who talked about hosting col-
==PAGE:66==
48
Findings
laborative and informative webinars with the buying firm and other clients, in order
to help them form a better understanding of the current market conditions, after the
disruptions caused by COVID-19. The Key Account Manager for SUP3 also explicitly
stated that there is more for the buying firm to gain from them in this regard, rather
than the opposite, because they are working closely with many of the buying firm’s main
competitors also, and therefore he considers that SUP3 have a better understanding of
the industry that they can offer to the buying firm.
“
I would actually say […] that for a lot of the people that we are
speaking to in BF, then we know more about the market. Because we
are dealing with all the other companies as well.
– Key Account Manager for SUP3
”
4.1.6
Overall effect of Supply Chain Collaboration in
the studied relationships
The last question on the interview questionnaire was regarding the respondents’ eval-
uation of the overall effect of the collaboration with the respective companies on the
supply chain performance. Here, the key finding is that the respondents from the sup-
plier companies are generally more prone to evaluate the effect of SCC on supply chain
performance positively than the buying firm ones. Although most of the buying firm
representatives may consider that the collaboration had a positive effect on the overall
performance, they still added a relatively negative comment to that too.
“
I would say it’s overall positive with pockets of negative incidents
here and there as would be expected.
– Senior Negotiator Contract Manager for SUP1
”
The Category Manager for SUP5 recognised that this partner is becoming more col-
laborative and that the buying firm can also improve in some areas in order to achieve
greater efficiencies in performance. The responses obtained from the suppliers’ represen-
tatives were more in line with this idea, with a fairly positive assessment of the impact of
collaboration on the performance of their supply chains, while also noting the presence
of opportunities for further improvements. An overview of the specific quotes can be
found in Table B.13.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Dyadic Relationships
49
4.2
Dyadic Relationships
In this section, the findings emerging from the direct comparison between the views of
the managers managing the same business relationship are presented. Therefore, the
section is divided in three sub-sections, corresponding to the three relationships that the
author was able to contact both the buying firm and the supplier representatives.
4.2.1
Dyad #1: Buying Firm & Original Equipment
Manufacturer and Spare Parts Provider (OEM &
SPP)
When assessing the relationship between the buying firm and this supplier company
(SUP1), which belongs to the category of Original Equipment Manufacturers and Spare
Parts Providers (OEM & SPP), the general perceptions of the success of the collaboration
were quite different between the two players, with the buying firm being less satisfied
and the supplier company being more satisfied by the overall collaboration.
For instance, when asked about their perceptions on the power asymmetry in the
relationship, the the supplier identified the buyer as more powerful, as they are the final
decision makers, whereas the buying firm identified the supplier as the most powerful
partner due to the high dependency on them, their size and their better market position,
acknowledging that they are also sitting in “a pretty good level of strength right now”
in this relationship. The exact quotes can also be found in Table B.1, as well as in
Appendix C.
As far as the exercise of power in the relationship is concerned, the buying firm
representatives mentioned that the supplier usually exercises power in negotiations, in
order to obtain the most profitable deal for their shareholders, pointing out that this
has been perceived from the buying firm as coercive use of power towards them. On the
other hand, the supplier representative noted that the buying firm exercise their power in
a non-coercive way, and he also shared an example where the buying firm has exercised
power over them by threatening to recertifying some of the supplier’s equipment as their
own in order to reduce the dependency on them and the supplier’s power over the buying
firm. For the specific quotes, the reader is asked to refer to Table B.2 or Appendix C.
Both sides seem to agree that use of power has negative impact on the collaboration,
with the Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1 sharing an example of how the power
exercise from the supplier has impacted the collaboration thereafter, mentioning charac-
teristically that “it leaves a fingerprint on the relationship long term” and the Category
Manager for SUP1 mentioning that they are also looking at other opportunities. The
supplier representative stressed the level of dependence between the two partners by
saying that “they are married to us whether they like it or not, and so, there has to be
collaboration.”, highlighting the need to balance the power in the relationship for the
collaboration to exist (Table B.3).
==PAGE:68==
50
Findings
Although both sides agreed that trust levels vary significantly across the different
hierarchy levels of the two organisations - with the existence of trust being less prominent
in the higher levels, and more prominent at the lower levels of the organisations - however
their views on the foundation of trust in their relationship were quite different, as can
be observed by Table B.4. The Category Manager from the buying firm mentioned the
high dependency on the supplier and the Senior Partnering Manager added to that by
highlighting the absence of utilization of penalties in the relationship with this supplier.
Therefore, from the buying firm side, trust is calculative.
On the other hand, the
Key Account Manager for SUP1 mentioned closeness, openness and credibility as the
foundation where the trust is based with this trading partner, which are all components
of normative trust.
Their views remain divergent about the presence and effect of trust in this collabora-
tive relationship. The supplier company evaluated the impact of trust on the examined
collaboration as “100% positive”, acknowledging that too much trust in a partner can
cause the performance of the relationship to deteriorate due to lack of monitoring, but it
was also mentioned that the buying firm is monitoring them closely. At the same time,
the buying firm assess the same impact rather negatively noting that they tend to keep
feelings of grievance, and disclosed two important aspects that affect the impact of trust
on SCC, namely the fact that the people managing the relationship and building the
trust have been changing too often, and that the buying firm company generally finds
it difficult to appreciate the inestimable benefits of trust and relationship building. The
reader is prompted to Table B.5 or Appendix C if interested in the exact responses.
With regard to the impact of trust on power asymmetry and the exercise of power,
both sides seem to agree that the lack of trust intensifies the power asymmetries in
the relationship, and that signals of trust from both sides have assisted in limiting the
exercise of power (see Table B.6). As far as the impact of power on the existence of trust
in the relationship is concerned, the Senior Partnering Manager from the buying firm
highlighted the long-term negative effects of coercive power on trust using an example
of a time when SUP1 used coercive power in a business deal, and the trust has not been
rebuilt since then. The Key Account Manager from the supplier company also shared
an example of the “power-play” between the two companies, but he explained that “it
has nothing to do with trust in the relationship”. The reader is prompted to Table B.7
for the specific quotes.
Regarding the effect of SCC on the supply chain performance and the aspects of SCC
that are present in this collaborative relationship, the views of the two representatives
varied. On the collaborative communication aspect of SCC, both parties noted that
there is frequent and open communication between the partners the format of which
varies depending on the level of hierarchy, albeit not in the level they would rather
it be. A difference in their views can be observed in the information sharing aspect
of SCC, where the Key Account Manager for SUP1 heavily accentuated the openness
of SUP1 in sharing any kind of relevant information they have with the buying firm
to optimize benefits for both firms - even sensitive market information - whereas the
Category Manager for SUP1 pointed out that the buying firm is more open in infor-
mation sharing than the supplier. It was also mentioned by both sides that there were
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Dyadic Relationships
51
projects where the two companies shared resources in the past, but not currently. Both
agreed that the decision synchronisation initiatives between the two companies can be
improved, especially from the buying firm’s side and their failure to provide accurate
forecasts to the supplier, whereas, in the aspect of joint knowledge creation, the buying
firm representatives posited that they have improved their knowledge of the market by
working closely with this supplier, but they also noted that “neither one of us leverages
as much as we should”, which is in agreement with the supplier’s views. Lastly, regard-
ing their perception of the overall impact of this collaboration on their supply chains’
performances, the Key Account Manager for SUP1 evaluated it positively, noting that
there is room for improvements, while the Category Manager and the Senior Negotiator
& Contract Manager for SUP1 provided a more neutral-to-negative assessment, saying
that working with this supplier complicated their processes and that the overall outcome
is “positive with pockets of negative incidents”. The specific answers of the respondents
can be found in Table B.8 - Table B.13, or in Appendix C.
4.2.2
Dyad #2: Buying Firm & Third Party Logistics
provider (3PL)
Similarly with the previous dyad, analyzing the relationship between the buying firm and
SUP2 which belongs in the category of Third Party Logistics Providers (3PL), revealed
that the general perceptions on the success of the collaboration were quite different
between the two players, with the buying firm being less satisfied and the supplier
company being more satisfied by the overall collaboration.
More specifically, when asked about their perceptions on the power asymmetry in
the relationship, the buying firm identified the supplier as the most powerful partner:
“they definitely have more leverage than we have due to their size”, whereas the supplier
identified the buyer as more powerful, as they can always “take away their business”, but
also mention that the power is somewhat equal in this relationship. The exact quotes
can also be found in Table B.1, as well as in Appendix C.
As far as the exercise of power in the relationship is concerned, the buying firm
representative considers that it varies from case to case, without sharing any specific
examples. On the other hand, the supplier noted that coercive power can just as well be
“perceived” as such, meaning that one of the two partners may consider that the other
is exercising coercive power in the collaboration. Moreover, the Global Key Account
Manager for SUP2 shared that even though the purchasing firm likes to talk a lot about
partnership and collaboration, when it comes to the way they actually work together
with their suppliers, they are very straightforward and exercise their power, leaving little
leeway to their suppliers. For the specific quotes, the reader is asked to refer to Table B.2
or Appendix C.
Both sides agreed that use of power has negative impact on the collaboration. More-
over, the buying firm representative noted that their company is an attractive client
==PAGE:70==
52
Findings
for SUP2, and therefore if both companies wish the collaboration between them to be
successful, they need to leave any power/leverage outside of the relationship (Table B.3).
The trading partners views on the foundation of trust in their relationship were
also quite different (see Table B.4). The Category Manager from the buying firm cited
reliability and competencies of the supplier (calculative trust) as the foundation where
the trust is based with this trading partner, whereas the Key Account Manager from
the supplier company cited integrity, reliability and openness (cognitive-based trust).
On the existence and impact of trust in this collaborative relationship, their views
continue to be divergent. The supplier company evaluated the impact of trust on the
examined collaboration as “definitely positive”, acknowledging that the negative bits
can be resolved through trust and openness from both parties. On the contrary, the
Category Manager from the buying firm assessed the existence and impact of trust
in this relationship rather negatively, pointing out that “trust has never really been
there in this relationship”, and underlining that “unfortunately” it is the 3PL provider’s
responsibility to build the trust. Moreover, she pointed out that the buying firm tends
to focus on the supplier’s mistakes a lot, whereas they have a “short memory” when the
supplier steps out and provides high quality services. However, she also mentioned that
under the current COVID-19 crisis, this supplier emerged as one of the most reliable
partners for the buying firm. The reader is prompted to Table B.5 or Appendix C if
interested in the exact responses.
With regard to the impact of trust on power asymmetry and the exercise of power,
both sides seem to agree that the existence of trust in the relationship can have a
moderating effect on the use of power and power asymmetry as a whole (see Table B.6).
Their views seem to coincide also regarding the impact of power on the existence of
trust in the relationship, where the Category Manager from the buying firm highlighted
the importance of balancing the power usage, as well as her opinion that when either
party resorts to utilizing their power in the relationship, that is a result of the trust
being broken already in the collaboration.
The Global Key Account Manager from
the supplier company also shared a quite illustrative example, showcasing the negative
impact of power on trust and on the overall collaboration in the longer term.
Regarding the effect of SCC on the supply chain performance and the aspects of SCC
that are present in this collaborative relationship, the views of the two representatives
varied. On the collaborative communication aspect of SCC, both parties noted that there
is frequent and open communication between the partners, whereas in the information
sharing aspect of SCC, there seems to be a misalignment of opinions between them. The
Global Key Account Manager for SUP2 emphasized quite heavily the openness of SUP2
in sharing any kind of relevant information they have with the buying firm to optimize
benefits for both firms, whereas the Category Manager for SUP2 pointed out that they
are not as open as she would have expected from a 3PL provider. She also mentioned that
they are not as open to the sharing of resources as some other 3PL providers. Both agreed
on the lack of decision synchronization in this collaboration, as well as on the notion that
there have been incidents that can be characterized as joint knowledge creation, that
emerged from working together. Lastly, regarding their perception of the overall impact
of this collaboration on their supply chains’ performances, the Global Key Account
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Dyadic Relationships
53
Manager for SUP2 evaluated it positively, suggesting some improvements in the trust
and openness between the two firms, while the Category Manager for SUP2 provided a
more neutral-to-negative assessment, saying that: “we have gotten what we pay for” and
that the supplier is even “underperforming” for her expectations. The specific answers
of the respondents can be found in Table B.8 - Table B.13, or in Appendix C.
4.2.3
Dyad #3: Buying Firm & Service Provider
(Manpower)
In this section, the findings of the comparison between the answers of the dyad of
the buying firm with the supplier company SUP3 which belongs in the category of
Service Providers (Manpower) will be presented. The interpretations of the collaboration
performance were generally quite different between the two parties, with the buying
firm being less satisfied and the supplier company being more satisfied with the overall
collaboration.
Firstly, when asked about their perceptions on the power asymmetry in the relation-
ship, the buying firm identified the supplier as the most powerful partner at the moment,
noting that before the COVID-19 crisis both partners stood in the same level of power,
whereas the supplier identified the buyer as more powerful, saying that “we are more
reliant on BF than BF is reliant on us”. The exact quotes can also be found in Table B.1,
as well as in Appendix C.
With respect to the exercise of power in the relationship, the buying firm represen-
tative considers that this supplier stopped treating them as a trusted partner after they
gained more power. On the other hand, the supplier noted that the way the buying firm
use their power is by making them “waste a lot of time” trying to comply with their
ideas, without actually using them afterwards. When asked about the power’s impact
on the collaboration, the Category Manager from the buying firm noted that the overall
outcome of power is negative, whereas the Key Account Manager for SUP3 commented
that the power asymmetry had no impact in the collaboration between the two com-
panies. For the specific quotes, the reader is asked to refer to Table B.2, Table B.3 or
Appendix C.
On the other hand, the trading partners’ views on the foundation of trust in their
relationship were quite similar (see Table B.4). The Category Manager from the buying
firm cited reliability, competencies and reliability of the supplier (calculative trust) as
the foundation where the trust is based with this trading partner, and the Key Account
Manager from the supplier company agreed mentioning that the buying firm always
chooses SUP3 on difficult assignments because of their competences. He also noted that
reward schemes have no effect on the level of trust, as they are purely performance-based.
On the existence and impact of trust in this collaborative relationship, their views
are quite different. The supplier company evaluated the impact of trust on the examined
collaboration as “always been positive”, noting that they struggle with the lack of stability
in the personnel at the Procurement department of the buying firm. On the contrary,
==PAGE:72==
54
Findings
the Category Manager from the buying firm assessed the existence and impact of trust
in this relationship rather negatively, pointing out that “for me it’s neutral to negative”.
The reader is prompted to Table B.5 or Appendix C if interested in the exact responses.
With regard to the impact of trust on power asymmetry and the exercise of power,
the perspectives of the two respondents are similar, with the Category Manager from the
buying firm attesting that the signs of trust that the buying firm has exhibited did not
limit the use of power from the supplier now that they are in a more powerful position
(see Table B.6), while the Key Account Manager does not value the impact of trust has
had any effect in the use of power in the relationship, although it is sometimes used
in negotiations. In addition, the Category Manager pointed out that the exercise of
power from the supplier side has now eroded the buying firm’s trust in SUP3, while the
supplier representative mentioned that, the fact the the buying firm continues to choose
them given the presence of power or negative incidents in the relationship, is a positive
sign that trust is still there.
The opinions of the two Managers differed with respect to the impact of SCC on the
supply chain performance and the dimensions of SCC that are present in this collabora-
tive partnership. On the collaborative communication aspect of SCC, both parties noted
that there is frequent and open communication between the partners, with the supplier
underscoring that, in the past, collaborative communication was more structured and
organised. In the information sharing aspect of SCC, there seems to be a misalignment
of opinions between them. The Key Account Manager for SUP3 emphasized quite heav-
ily that SUP3 shares sensitive information about how the competitors of the buying
firm are working too. Conversely, the buying firm does not share any kind of sensitive
information with them, only necessary and relevant information. This dyadic relation-
ship seems to vastly utilize the resources sharing aspect of SCC, by having collaborative
teams with employees from both companies working on joint projects. As far as decision
synchronization is concerned, the supplier representative stresses the importance of the
buying firm providing them with reliable forecasts, disclosing that something like that
would benefit the buying firm as well, as they might have some relevant and valuable
input to offer, that would optimize the benefits for both companies. The Category Man-
ager from the buying firm mentioned that the way they currently orchestrate decisions
with SUP3 is “by engaging people from different departments and positions”. Regard-
ing joint knowledge creation, the Key Account Manager for SUP3 explicitly stated that
there is more for the buying firm to gain from them in this regard, rather than the oppo-
site, because they are working closely with many of the buying firm’s main competitors
also, and therefore he considers that SUP3 have abetter understanding of the industry
that they can offer to the buying firm, with the Category Manager from the buying
firm agreeing with this statement. Finally, concerning their perception of the overall
effect of this collaboration on the performance of their supply chains, the buying firm
representative stressed that in this crisis, the supplier did not engage in collaborative
initiatives with them, but rather chose to take advantage of the situation, putting their
relationship with the buying firm in a difficult position, while the Key Account Manager
for SUP3 evaluated it positively, saying that: “we are happy working with BF”, but also
mentioning that he does not think this collaboration has had an impact on their supply
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Summary of Key Findings
55
chain. The specific answers of the respondents can be found in Table B.8 - Table B.13,
or in Appendix C.
4.3
Summary of Key Findings
A summary of the key findings presented in the above sections can be found below:
• In 4 out of the 5 studied relationships, the buying firm considers the supplier
to be most powerful trading partner, mentioning reasons such as the size of the
organisations, the level of dependency and the current market conditions. On the
other hand, the supplier companies seem to agree that the buying firm has more
leverage in the relationship, the reason being that the buying firm is the ultimate
decision maker with regard to whether to collaborate with them or choose one of
their competitors.
• Each of the partners considers that the other makes sure that the most powerful
partner shows their power in the relationship. The buying firm shares some ex-
amples of incidents where the suppliers exercised their power on them. However,
they also highlight that the use of power varies substantially from case to case.
They acknowledge that the overall market conditions are very dynamic and even
cyclical.
• Suppliers consider the buying firm as being the most powerful trading partner
in the relationship and they mention that the buying firm utilises their power
strategically, usually when capital expenditures are concerned or big investment
projects. They use their power by offering ultimatums and making suppliers work
harder to earn their business. Although some suppliers understand the high level
of dependency of the buying firms for their equipment/services, they consider they
never took advantage of that.
• From both the buying firm’s and the suppliers’ perspective, the overall outcome
of use of power is negative in any relationship and that there can be no genuine
collaboration if the partners exercise their respective powers on each other. Buyer
and supplier should leave their power baggage outside the relationship in order
to ensure close collaboration and partnership, according to a representative of the
buying firm. The buying firm try to increase the collaboration efforts in the hopes
of reducing the exertion of power from a powerful supplier.
• An interesting finding emerged from an example in which the use of power was
found to momentarily improve the business performance, but with adverse effects
on the long-term benefits of the collaboration.
• When asked about the type of trust in the studied relationships, the respondents
from the buying firm highlight the high dependence on some of these suppliers.
==PAGE:74==
56
Findings
Regarding the use of rewards or penalties and the effect these have on building
and maintaining the trust between the partners, the general finding is that these
are used very rarely or not at all, and therefore do not have an impact on trust. For
suppliers, closeness, openness and credibility are the most important constructs of
trust that are currently present in the studied relationships and they mention that
although there have been projects where there were rewards, these were purely
performance-based and had no impact on trust.
• Another important finding emerging from the responses of the respondents is that
the level of trust varies significantly in the different hierarchy levels within the
organisations. There is more trust in the lower hierarchy levels (operational and
tactical levels) and much less at the higher levels.
• The buying firm highlights that there is some kind of “false trust’’ in the relation-
ships they have with their partners. They have a difficulty to evaluate the things
that cannot be monetized, and they are generally more reluctant to evaluate posi-
tively the impact of trust on the relationships. Supplier companies seemed to have
a more positive view on the impact of trust in the studied relationships. Despite
the trust, they always get monitored by the buying firm, so the relationship does
not get complacent. The importance of trust and being proactive and transparent
was exemplified by a supplier company.
• The buying firm is a dynamic organisation, where people change positions very
often, especially in Procurement and this instability in the people managing the
relationships has always been a challenge for the buying firm. This is an interesting
finding, especially considering the fact that it is people who build and maintain
the relationships between organisations.
• When asked about the effect of trust on power asymmetry, the answers retrieved
from the buying firm respondents seem to vary depending on the individual rela-
tionship. Some contented that signals of trust have aided in limiting the exercise
of power in the relationships, while others mentioned that it had no significant
effect in the power asymmetry.
• Lack of trust adds to the power dynamics in the relationship. Suppliers have been
using their power more strategically due to the trust shown by the buying firm.
This has led to less exercise of power from both sides, thus limiting the impact of
power asymmetry. Being trustful and responsive can minimize the negative effects
of power in a business relationship.
• The consensus among buying firm and suppliers seems to be that use of coercive
power “breaks” the trust in the relationship. If the trust foundation is solid enough,
moderate use of power in the relationships cannot have a long-term negative out-
come, according to the respondents.
• Communication at the operational level is the most frequent (multiple times per
week), utilizing emails or phone calls and exchanging transactional information and
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Summary of Key Findings
57
updates. The tactical levels (Category/Contract Managers and Key Account Man-
agers) are said to have regular structured calls (for example biweekly or monthly)
to discuss current challenges. At the strategic levels, the communication is even
more structured, with Quarterly Business Reviews (QBR) or biannual meetings.
The aspect of collaborative communication is deemed as a potential area of im-
provement for the buying firm.
• The buying firm is generally open in sharing any kind of information necessary
to their suppliers, apart from commercially sensitive information. The types of
information shared by the buying firm with their suppliers are performance related,
technical and maintenance related, spend numbers and project pipeline. Suppliers
share even market-sensitive information with the buying firm.
• Sharing of resources is treated quite differently depending on the specific studied
relationship. With the biggest and more powerful OEM & SPP suppliers, it was
mentioned that the trading partners have had some projects in the past which
involved sharing of resources.
On the other hand, with the 3PL provider and
the Manpower Service Provider, the joint resources aspect involves collaborative
teams.
• Both the buying firm and suppliers commonly cited that the aspect of decision syn-
chronisation is not at the desired levels. The buying firm commented that they try
to share their project plans in advance with their partners to help them plan their
respective operations. Suppliers mentioned utilizing B2B (Business-to-Business)
solutions to simplify some common processes and had an almost unanimous re-
quest for proper forecasts from the buying firm.
• Suppliers consider that they have a better understanding of the industry, so they
can offer more to the buying firm in this respect than they can get back. They
do that by hosting webinars to help them form a better understanding of the
current market conditions and by sharing information about competitors, as they
are working closely with many of the buying firm’s main competitors. The buying
Firm agrees that when there is a good and open relationship with the suppliers,
they can gain a better response to the Oil and Gas market.
• Supplier companies are more prone to evaluate the effect of SCC on supply chain
performance positively than the buying firm. Buying firm representatives may
consider that the collaboration had a positive effect on the overall performance,
but they still added a relatively negative comment to that too. The responses
obtained from suppliers’ representatives included a more positive assessment of
the impact of collaboration on the performance of their supply chains, but they
also noted the presence of opportunities for further improvements.
==PAGE:76==
58
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
The analysis of the interview data produced some interesting findings, which were pre-
sented in chapter 4. In this chapter, important remarks are discussed regarding the the
implications and interpretations of the findings of this research project, drawing up to
the literature and the research questions.
5.1
Different perspectives in the relationships
Comparing the buying firm’s and suppliers’ perceptions of relationship dimensions, it
was found that there are significant differences in the perception of these dimensions
in the relationship, especially for power asymmetry and most powerful trading partner,
exercise of power in the relationship, impact and existence of trust in the relationship
and overall assessment of supply chain collaboration. This overarching result confirms
previous research and specifically the findings of Ambrose et al. (2010) and Whipple
et al. (2010).
More specifically, regarding power asymmetry and the perception of the most pow-
erful trading partner, the views of the buying firm were diametrically opposite to those
of their suppliers, with each of the partners perceiving the other as more powerful. The
buyer measured the suppliers’ power based on company size, profitability and depen-
dence, whereas the suppliers measured the buying firm’s power based on the number
of their competitors and the buyer’s market position.
This finding is in agreement
with the findings of Ambrose et al. (2010), who argued that buyers and suppliers in
a dyadic relationship have significantly different perceptions of trust, commitment, re-
source dependence, power and relationship success, adding an important aspect: that
of the power-holder in the relationship. The findings also suggest that the buying firm
might consistently underestimate the suppliers’ dependence on themselves, by perceiv-
ing higher levels of buyer dependence (Caniëls et al. 2010). Managers from both sides
of the partnership can benefit from this insight in each other’s perspective, as they can
have more leverage in business transactions and negotiations, that will probably enable
them to obtain better results for their firms.
In a similar fashion, since each of the partners perceives the other as more powerful,
their views on perception and exercise of power (coercive and non-coercive) were also
divergent. Each partner cited the other as utilizing their respective power, either in
negotiations or in big investment projects. This means that supply chain partners can
generally be influenced by the effects of coercive and non-coercive power sources exercised
==PAGE:78==
60
Discussion
by the other partner, as well as by perceptions of the other partner’s power position
even if power sources are not being used. Thus, supporting the findings of Gaski (1984)
and Gaski & Nevin (1985). Generally, if one side perceives the other as coercive, it
would possibly respond by refusing to participate in collaborative initiatives.
These
behaviors indicate little tolerance to coercion. Practical implications of this finding are
that managers from both sides can have a better understanding of how their actions are
perceived by their partners, and therefore adjust their use of power accordingly, in order
to achieve the desired outcomes.
Another area where the views of the buyer and the suppliers are quite different is
that of the type and existence of trust in the relationship. The buying firm’s trust is
usually based on dependency, reliability and competencies of their suppliers, thus ex-
hibiting a calculative and cognitive-based type of trust. Therefore, the buying firm’s
trust is based upon the high dependency and objective credibility of their trading part-
ners, meaning that since their partners are reliable and in possession of high technical
expertise and expertness, they trust that they will therefore act and perform according
to the established agreements between them (Caniëls et al. 2010, Mayer et al. 1995).
Conversely, the suppliers generally mention the openness, closeness and credibility of
the buying firm as the foundation of their trust in the relationship, which is identified
as normative trust. This means that the suppliers’ trust is characterized by a shared
identity between partners and is associated with high levels of commitment and loyalty
in the relationship (Gounaris 2005, Jain et al. 2014). Those two different trust forms
reflect different behavioral conditions. The former represents a desire to sustain the
partnership based on pragmatic criteria, whereas the latter represents a willingness to
preserve the relationship based on optimistic beliefs. This is a beneficial setting for the
managers of the buying firm, as they can get the most out of the collaboration (both
through their objectivity and through their supplier’s commitment). The same cannot
be said for the suppliers, as this type of buyer trust can attenuate the positive effect
of their actions. Therefore, suppliers should try to develop the buyer’s normative trust
in order to gain a more advantageous place in the partnership, by providing incentives,
knowledge sharing, and providing the buying firms with expert advice. This way, the
buyer will tend to overlook the negative actions of their partners seeking to maintain a
positive working atmosphere in the collaboration.
Moreover, another interesting difference in the views of the trading partners is re-
garding the impact of trust on the collaboration. As shown in section 4.1, the buying
firm representatives generally seemed more reluctant to assess positively the impact of
trust on the business relationships studied, evaluating it rather negatively, while the
representatives of the supplier firms seemed to have a more positive evaluation of the
impact of trust on the relationships studied. This finding contradicts those of Corsten &
Kumar (2005), who found that it was the suppliers who felt greater sense of inequity and
dissatisfaction in the relationship, and not the buyers. This finding can be associated
with the above insight regarding the type of trust of each partner, and therefore the
practical implications can be the same, i.e. the suppliers’ attempt to ensure that the
buyer’s trust is also normative.
Attempting to answer the third research question of this study, the analysis of the
==PAGE:79==
5.2 The role of Power in collaborative relationships
61
data revealed that the views on the impact of trust on power asymmetry varied quite
significantly, both between the buying firm and their suppliers, but also within the buy-
ing firm. Lending support to the previous study of Caniëls et al. (2010) who contended
that trust could act as a moderating mechanism to counteract the potential negative
effects of power and dependence asymmetry on the relationship, representatives of the
buying firm and the supplier companies attested that lack of trust intensifies the power
asymmetry and the power dynamics, and that they have experienced less use of power
from their powerful partner because of their signs of trust and commitment. However,
there were also testimonies of no significant impact of the existence of trust in the use
of power. Therefore, further research is needed to investigate different scenarios where
trust can act as a moderator or power exercise in business relationships.
Lastly, a significant contradiction of the views between the buying firm and their
suppliers was present at the topic of the effect of SCC on supply chain performance.
Once again, the suppliers were generally more likely to assess this impact as positive than
the buying firm. This finding is very much in line with those of Ambrose et al. (2010),
Corsaro & Snehota (2011) and Kumar et al. (1998), and is therefore strengthening the
argument that suppliers typically rate the relationship more highly than buyers. This
specific difference in perception can be based on the different expectations of the partners,
and therefore the different criteria they have for success. Thus, managers need to align
on their perceptions of success and increased performance, by setting SMART goals and
KPIs commonly shared with all the supply chain partners, enabling for goal congruence
and incentive alignment to be established in the relationship (Cao & Zhang 2011).
5.2
The role of Power in collaborative
relationships
Several valuable insights were drawn from the findings regarding the instrumental role of
power in collaborative supply chain relationships, answering the first research question
of this thesis project. These findings have both theoretical and practical implications,
which are discussed in detail below.
One of the important findings in this area was that power asymmetry is not static
in the relationship, but instead, since it is based on the dependence of the partners on
each other, it is very much influenced by macroeconomic factors and market conditions.
Therefore, the “power-holders” change, depending on the current phase of the market,
confirming the findings of Ghadge et al. (2017) and Nair et al. (2011). Ergo, effective
relationship management requires managers in both the buyer and the supplier compa-
nies to be wary of their position of power and influence, and to use the appropriate
level of control depending on the power structure of the relationship. By adjusting their
type of control and exercise of power, firms will substantially enhance the collaborative
actions of their supply chain partners and improve their operational efficiency (Nyaga
et al. 2013).
==PAGE:80==
62
Discussion
Another quite significant finding of this project regarding the impact of coercive
power usage (or the perception of it) on supply chain collaboration is that, although it
can improve the performance of the supply chain momentarily, the long term impacts on
collaboration are strongly negative. This means that partners should be very strategic
and vigilant on the occasions where they need to utilize coercive power against their
partners, as the benefits they may experience will most likely be short-lived and they
will end up diminishing the value generating potential of the relationship thereafter. This
was also observed by Nyaga et al. (2013) and Johnsen & Lacoste (2016). In such cases,
non-coercive types of power could be more beneficial (e.g. reward power), as studies
indicate that they can have positive effect on trust and commitment in the collaboration
(Benton & Maloni 2005), which also agrees with another finding of this project, namely
that circumspect use of non-coercive power from partners cannot have long term negative
results on the collaboration.
In the same wavelength, one of the aspects where there was a unanimous agreement
between the buying firm and the suppliers was that the overall outcome of coercive
power is always negative for the trust, answering the fourth research question of this
study. This finding is quite important, supporting the arguments of Cox (2001), Gaski
(1984), Gaski & Nevin (1985) and Jain et al. (2014), and has some significant practical
implications for both the buying firms and the suppliers. More precisely, both buyers
and suppliers should mitigate threatening and imposing harsh penalties and sanctions
on their partners because these can have quite serious negative ramifications on trust
and therefore the collaboration overall.
Although not supported fully by all respondents, it is also suggested by the findings of
this study that engaging in truly collaborative relationships with key suppliers limits the
use of coercive power from both parties. This means that increased levels of trust, loyalty,
openness and transparency foster deeper collaboration between the firms, enabling more
flexibility and new ways of working with each other to achieve mutual goals. Therefore,
trust and collaboration act as discouraging factors for using coercive power by the most
powerful partners (Cowan et al. 2015). This finding is also in line with another important
finding of this project, namely that when partners resort to using their power on each
other, that is a result of losing the trust in each other.
5.3
The role of Trust in collaborative
relationships
Many useful insights have been derived from the results concerning the integral role of
trust in collaborative supply chain relationships, addressing this project’s second research
question. The theoretical as well as managerial implications of these results are discussed
in depth below.
Trust was found to be a critical mechanism for facilitating coordination and collabo-
ration between trading partners, lending support to Huo et al. (2019) and Rogers & Fells
==PAGE:81==
5.3 The role of Trust in collaborative relationships
63
(2017). This has important managerial implications, as trusted partners can therefore
make more efficient use of valuable information, as each party can share openly impor-
tant information allowing their partnership interactions to run seamlessly. Partnering
firms therefore engage more efficiently and cope more effectively with day-to-day chal-
lenges, which then in turn leads to increasing the value of the relationship transactions
and provides them with “coopetitive advantage” (Nair et al. 2011).
What is more, the findings of this study contradict those of Mora-Monge et al.
(2019) and Yeung et al. (2009) regarding the negative impacts of trust on SCC. More
specifically, the existence of trust in the studied business relationships did not reduce
the monitoring of the partners and did not create any kind of discriminatory treatment
of potentially better trading partners, and therefore, did not make the relationship
complacent. This adds even more value to the previous argument that the existence of
trust is crucial and fundamental in collaborative relationships, by accentuating the lack
of negative implications associated with it. Nonetheless, managers ought to be cautious
about this possibility and ensure a reasonable degree of mutual monitoring to prevent
these detrimental outcomes of too much trust.
As previously mentioned, the analysis of the interview data revealed that the degree
of trust varied significantly across the various levels of hierarchy within the organisations.
This means that there is generally more trust at the lower levels of the organisations
and less trust at the higher hierarchy levels (senior leadership and C-suite management),
which can be explained by the inherently different degree of openness, frequency of
communication and amount of collaboration between those levels. To the best of the
author’s knowledge, no other incidents of this finding have been documented in the
trust literature, making this an important contribution, also to the management practice.
Organisations should identify how big these discrepancies in trust levels are and act upon
them, to minimize the adverse effects these low trust levels of the higher management
can have if they disseminate on the lower ones.
Moreover, the findings indicate that trust is seen as being developed and maintained
between people, supporting the findings of the extant literature (Caniëls et al. 2010,
Kwon & Suh 2004, Rogers & Fells 2017). This poses a critical challenge for the buying
firm, which was described as a “very dynamic” organisation, where people change po-
sitions very frequently, thereby not allowing for the managers to develop and maintain
the desired levels of trust in the relationships they manage. Hence, it is imperative that
supplier relationship management should be well aligned with the overarching strategic
goals of the supply chain department and the organisation as a whole, if the companies
wish to benefit from engaging in collaborative partnerships.
A quite interesting finding about the buying firm’s trust emerged from the analysis
of the interview data, that is that the buying firm’s highly calculative trust does not
allow for deep trust (normative trust) to be developed between them and their partners.
As a result, they do not allow their partners to make any mistakes and they tend to stick
with negative past experiences more than they appreciate the positive ones. This inhibits
their efforts for supply chain collaboration, since trust is an integral part of collaborative
partnerships. Rogers & Fells (2017) argued that the trust between buyer and supplier
will be mainly self-interested and calculative in the first phases of forming an exchange
==PAGE:82==
64
Discussion
relationship, but in the studied relationships, the trust does not seen to have developed
from this phase (from the buying firm’s perspective). Therefore, procurement managers
should be wary of this irregular characteristic of their partnerships and act upon it,
by engaging in relationship building activities with the managers from the partnering
organisations.
According to the literature, using rewards and penalties is an effective way to in-
centivise the partners to work towards the best interests of the exchange relationship.
Nyaga et al. (2013) and Zhao et al. (2008) found that establishing and using rewards and
incentives in the partnership can be a measurable indication from the partners that they
are in a long-term partnership and therefore that they respect the relationship, making
the partners feel that they have a say in partnerships. However, the findings of this
study indicated that although such systems are in place, they are hardly ever used in
practice, because - according to the respondents - falling back to such incentives is a last
resort and a sure way to turn the collaborative relationship into a purely transactional
one. A reason for this might be that the respondents generally had in mind penalties
rather than rewards when explaining the damaging effects on collaborative relationships.
Hence, a practical recommendation emerging from this finding is that managers should
focus more on establishing and using performance-based rewards and for their partners
(such as increasing the spend with them or offering discounts), in order to increase the
levels of trust and “buy-in” in the partnerships rather than resorting to settling penal-
ties (such as canceling orders or settling late payment fees). Such incentives can boost
reciprocity and collaboration, as the recipients are more likely to meet the requirements
of their partner in order to continue to receive rewards. This can be utilized at the first
stages of the partnership (Rogers & Fells 2017), to establish calculative trust, which
consequently can be turned into normative trust by engaging in relationship building
activities as discussed above.
Lastly, it is worth mentioning that the analysis of the interview data indicated that
in order for businesses to achieve effective collaboration, openness and transparency,
credibility and trust are required to be built and maintained in the relationship. This
underscores the criticality of the existence of trust in these business relationships, and its
role as antecedent for successful supply chain collaboration (Ambrose et al. 2010, Doney
& Cannon 1997). Thus, practitioners should focus their efforts in building trust with
their supply chain partners in order to achieve high levels of openness and transparency
and therefore successful supply chain collaboration.
5.4
Assessment of the supply chain
collaboration
Regarding the degree of supply chain cooperation and the key SCC structures present in
the relationships examined, a lot of valuable insights were extracted from the findings,
==PAGE:83==
5.4 Assessment of the supply chain collaboration
65
answering the fifth and sixth research questions of this project. The theoretical and
managerial implications of these findings are discussed in further detail below.
Regarding the collaborative communication aspect of SCC, the following conclusions
can be drawn from the analysis of the data. Firstly, the communication between the
buying firm and the suppliers is quite frequent and regular at operational and tactical
levels, while it is much less frequent and more structured at the strategic levels. This
type of collaborative communication indicates a close relationship between the suppliers
and the buying firm at the lower hierarchy levels, and a more formal and impersonal
at the higher ones, confirming the literature (Cao & Zhang 2011, Maestrini et al. 2018).
Moreover, frequent communication between partners was found to offer opportunities to
build trust (as part of openness), which also contributes to reciprocal commitment in
collaborative supply chains. However, it was also acknowledged by both the buying firm
and the suppliers that communication between them can still be improved and that the
frequent change of people managing the relationships inside the organizations affects
the continuity of communication.
Therefore, the effectiveness of the communication
channels used should be taken unto consideration by the managers of the buying firm,
both personally and across the organisation. Since effective communication is especially
significant to the suppliers, relatively little effort on the part of the buying firm to
improve communication could reap substantial advantages in the performance of their
business relationships.
Looking at the aspect of information sharing, the processing of the interview data
suggested that both the buying firm and suppliers are open in sharing of information
with each other, and more specifically project pipeline, spend numbers and inventory
levels that align well with the findings of Hudnurkar et al. (2014) and Baihaqi & Sohal
(2013). Nonetheless, it was also determined from the interviews that the suppliers are
more willing and open in sharing also more sensitive information in comparison with
the buying firm that shares only the necessary information and protects any sensitive
information. This finding is very much in line with the findings of Lee & Ha (2018),
who argued that buyers consider that they may obtain sufficient information from their
suppliers, but are often unwilling to provide their suppliers with information themselves.
In general, all respondents agree that information sharing is a significant building block
for SCC, contributing to trust and cooperation, improving proactive problem solving,
facilitating innovation and long-term sustainability, which in turn contribute to increased
supply chain efficiency and performance as a whole (Baihaqi & Sohal 2013, Doney &
Cannon 1997, Hudnurkar et al. 2014).
As far as the resources sharing aspect of SCC is concerned, the findings of this
study indicated that there have been projects where the partners shared resources too,
both in terms of capital, physical and human resources (Harland et al. 2004), however
not in a very advanced level. Drawing up to the arguments of Samaddar & Kadiyala
(2006) regarding factors that promote successful SCC, efficient allocation and sharing
of resources is deemed critical for any successful collaboration, and organizations should
be encouraged to work together towards knowledge creation.
The decision synchronization aspect of SCC in the studied relationships was found
to be inadequate by both the suppliers and the buying firm. Some of the suppliers
==PAGE:84==
66
Discussion
have introduced B2B solutions, simplifying some of the procurement processes for the
buying firm, but the buying firm does not help the demand and production planning
and scheduling of their suppliers due to their inability to provide them with forecasts
about their anticipated purchases and projects (Chopra et al. 2013). This means that
measures to boost these procedures should be taken by the supply chain partners, such
as open discussions and sharing of information regarding upcoming projects and repairs,
and retrieval of historical data from both the buying firm and the supplier companies,
that would therefore enable the buying firm to create more accurate forecasting tools to
share with their partners.
With regard to joint knowledge creation, i.e.
the degree to which supply chain
partners work together to gain a deeper understanding of and response to demand and
the competitive environment (Samaddar & Kadiyala 2006), the key finding was that
suppliers had more to offer to the buying firm than the other way around, supported
by the opinions of both the buyer and the supplier companies. This means that there
are knowledge exploitation mechanisms (i.e. knowledge assimilation and application) in
the studied relationships (Harland et al. 2004), where the buying firm is the partner
that benefits the most from. Improving the joint knowledge creation aspect of SCC
from the buying firm side will create additional incentives for the suppliers to invest in
collaborative initiatives and boost the overall performance of SCC.
Finally, the overarching finding regarding the impact of SCC on the supply chain
performance of the partners was that there are opportunities for improvements from
both sides of the collaboration and for all aspects of SCC. The diverging evaluations were
discussed in detail in section 5.1, and the specific recommendations for improvements
and the managerial implications of the findings were discussed above. Ultimately, these
aspects can provide managers with valuable guidelines for achieving better relationship
development, management and performance.
In order to ensure that the supply chain as a whole performs well, companies should
try to create a win-win situation. Long-term partnerships ought to be driven by shared
interests, congruence of objectives and profit sharing (Simatupang & Sridharan 2002).
According to Carr & Pearson (1999), managers need to align objectives with supply chain
partners in order to create a collaborative advantage that directly increases the financial
performance of each partner in the chain. This can also become an effective means of
transferring knowledge, innovation and new technical skills across firms. Collaboration
is great, but is usually failing because it is not well implemented. Companies really
have to invest time and resources in order to make it work for their benefit. However,
collaboration may also result in increased cost of teamwork and inflexibility, meaning
that managers will need to find the right balance and the optimum degree of collaborative
efforts for their organisations.
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 6
Limitations & Suggestions
for Future Research
Several limitations should be noted, that need to be considered when interpreting the
results of this study.
First of all, this study has limited universality, particularly because of the central
importance of the buying firm in research study. The research design included only
long-term, high-value partnerships of a central buying firm in the Oil and Gas industry.
Before attempting to generalize the results of this study, one should evaluate whether
they are unique to certain types of relationships, to the buying firm, to this industry, or
to a combination of all three.
Second, as mentioned in chapter 3, several restrictions and unprecedented events
following the COVID-19 pandemic and the historically low oil prices that shook the
Oil and Gas industry, did not allow for the desired amount of data to be collected in
the tight available time-frame. More specifically, while all interviews were conducted
with the managers of the buying firm, only 3 of 5 of the suppliers’ representatives were
reached and interviewed. This poses a significant limitation in the research, one which
is well acknowledged and taken account in the validity of the findings that are presented
in later chapters.
Data limitations were also imposed due to the case study of only one buying firm with
its strategic suppliers. Although this buying firm can be considered as a representative of
the sector of drilling contractors, it cannot be considered as representative of the whole
Oil and Gas industry companies. It is therefore suggested that future research should
attempt answering these research questions using a bigger sample of buyer-supplier dyads
in the O&G industry. This sample could be determined either from the buyer side, i.e.
testing the relationships of a number of buying firms with their respective strategic
suppliers, or from the supplier side, i.e. testing the relationships of a number of supplier
companies with some of their major customers.
A limitation regarding the data collection method that is also related to the COVID-
19 pandemic and the social distancing measures taking place globally, is that all these
interviews were conducted using an online conferencing platform and not ‘face-to-face’.
This means that the author had limited control over the readiness of the subjects and
the suitability of the environment.
For future studies it is suggested that researchers should use multiple methods to
obtain data, such as questionnaires combined with in-depth interviews, and maybe even
basing the questions on specific scenarios. Additionally, inaccuracy and errors can be
==PAGE:86==
68
Limitations and Suggestions for Future Research
produced when only one respondent is being used and expected to represent broader
variables in the supply chain. In this study, there were multiple respondents from the
buying firm, but only one from each supplier company. Thus, in the future, researchers
should seek to use multiple respondents from each organization participating in the
collaborative relationship, in order to maximize the reliability of the research findings.
Moreover, an “industry-based” analysis of supply chain collaboration would be very
beneficial. Examining how trust and power impact the collaboration and performance
in the relationship, how these mechanics are used/evaluated across buyer-supplier dyads
from different industries, and and what is the most common level of collaboration in the
supply chain in each industry would help identify any industry-specific bias towards or
against collaboration between supply chains.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The objective of this thesis was the investigation of the role of power and trust in
the performance of collaborative dyadic buyer-supplier relationships in the oil and gas
sector. The research was mainly driven by the limited existing knowledge concerning
the interplay of both power and trust in dyadic buyer-supplier relationships, even more
so in the chosen industry sector.
Reviewing the extant literature on supply chain collaboration and relationship man-
agement, it was deduced that trust, power, supply chain collaboration and their effect
on cooperation and success in the supply chain have generally been independently ex-
amined. It was therefore concluded that additional work was required to untangle the
relative influences of trust, power and SCC on supply chain performance. Moreover, it
was found that most of the studies focus on either the buyer side or the supplier side.
Hence, it was considered insightful to examine buyer-supplier dyads, where one player
remains the same (case study of the relationships of a buying firm or a supplier firm).
The research methodology that was followed was to conduct an extensive literature
review of relevant academic sources, to develop a conceptual framework, to identify a case
company and to conduct semi-structured interviews. The data was analysed by applying
qualitative thematic analysis tools to obtain the final findings. These findings were then
discussed in connection with the research questions of this project, the literature review
and the management practices.
Answering the research questions of this study, some of the key findings are summa-
rized below:
1. How does power affect supply chain collaboration?
Firstly, it was found that the perceptions of the buyer and their suppliers were dia-
metrically opposite regarding the most powerful trading partners in the relationship
and how they exercise their power. In addition, from both the buying firm’s and the
suppliers’ perspective, the overall outcome of use of power was considered negative in
any relationship and both stressed that there can be no genuine collaboration if the
partners exercise their respective power on each other. Lastly, an interesting finding
regarding this research question emerged from an example in which the use of power
was found to momentarily improve the business performance, but with adverse effects
on the long-term benefits of the collaboration.
==PAGE:88==
70
Conclusion
2. How does trust affect supply chain collaboration?
Examining the trust in the relationship, it was found that the types of trust between the
buying firm and their suppliers were different. More specifically, the buying firm’s trust
was based on dependency, reliability, and competencies of their suppliers (calculative
trust), while the suppliers’ trust was characterized by a shared identity between partners,
associated with high levels of commitment and loyalty (normative trust). Furthermore,
the degree of trust varied significantly across the various levels of hierarchy within the
organisations.
This can be explained by the inherently different degree of openness,
frequency of communication and amount of collaboration between those levels. Lastly,
another important finding in this area was that there is a high degree of inconsistency
in the people managing the supplier relationships in the Procurement department of
the buying firm, and this has always been a challenge for them, hindering the potential
benefits of trust, especially considering the fact that it is people who build and maintain
the relationships between organisations.
3. How does trust affect the use/perception of power in a business
relationship?
Regarding the effect of trust on power asymmetry, the answers retrieved from the buy-
ing firm respondents varied significantly depending on the individual relationship. Some
contented that signals of trust have aided in limiting the exercise of power in the relation-
ships, while others mentioned that it had no significant effect in the power asymmetry.
However, the general finding underlying the responses was that lack of trust adds to the
power dynamics in the relationship, and that being trustful and responsive can minimize
the negative effects of power in a business relationship. Moreover, there have been cases
where trust has led to less exercise of power from both sides, thus limiting the impact
of power asymmetry. Further research is considered to be needed though, to investigate
different scenarios where trust can act as a moderator or power exercise in business
relationships.
4. How does power affect the presence/type of trust developed in
a business relationship?
Concerning the effect of power on trust, there was a consensus among the buying firm
and suppliers that use of coercive power has a strongly negative impact,“breaking” the
trust in the relationship. Another interesting finding in this area was that if the trust
foundation is solid enough, moderate use of non-coercive power in the relationships
cannot have a long-term negative outcome, according to the respondents.
==PAGE:89==
Conclusion
71
5. Which components of SCC are present in collaborative supply
chains and how do they affect the overall collaboration?
First, the communication between the buying firm and suppliers was found to be quite
frequent and regular at operational and tactical levels, and less regular at the strategic
levels.
Second, regarding information sharing, the suppliers were found to be more
willing to share more sensitive information with the buying firm, while the buying firm
was often unwilling to provide their suppliers with information themselves. This has an
impact also in decision synchronisation, where it was found that the buying firm does not
help the demand and production planning and scheduling of their suppliers by aligning
with them or providing them with forecasts. As far as the resources sharing aspect of
SCC is concerned, the findings of this study indicated that there have been projects
where the partners shared resources, however, not in a very advanced level. Regarding
the joint knowledge creation aspect of SCC, the suppliers were found to have more to
offer to the buying firm than the other way around.
6. What is the effect of SCC on the overall supply chain
performance?
Regarding the overall effect of SCC, the suppliers were more likely to provide a positive
assessment than the buying firm, supporting the argument that suppliers rate the rela-
tionship more highly than buyers. This specific difference in perception can be based on
the different expectations of the partners, and therefore the different criteria they have
for success.
These findings have some important theoretical implications, proving but also con-
tradicting some of the literature studies reviewed for this project, as well as practical
implications that can help managers optimize their supplier relationship management
efforts. Specifically:
• Managers from both sides of the partnership can benefit from the insight in each
other’s perspectives, and have a better understanding of how their actions are
perceived by their partners, and therefore adjust their use of power accordingly, in
order to achieve the desired outcomes.
• Effective relationship management requires managers in both the buyer and the
supplier companies to be wary of their position of power and influence. Partners
should be very strategic and vigilant on the occasions where they need to utilize
coercive power against their partners. In such cases, non-coercive power could be
more beneficial, as studies indicate that it can have positive effect on trust and
commitment in the collaboration.
• Suppliers should try to develop the buyer’s normative trust in order to gain a more
advantageous place in the partnership.
==PAGE:90==
72
Conclusion
• Trust, loyalty, openness, and transparency foster deeper collaboration between the
firms, enabling more flexibility and new ways of working with each other to achieve
mutual goals. Trust and collaboration act as discouraging factors for using coercive
power by the most powerful partners.
• Since the degree of trust varied significantly across the various levels of hierarchy
within the organisations, firms should identify how big these discrepancies in trust
levels are and act upon them.
• Measures to boost the information sharing and decision synchronisation procedures
should be taken by the supply chain partners.
• Improving the joint knowledge creation aspect of SCC from the buying firm’s
side will create additional incentives for the suppliers to invest in collaborative
initiatives. This will boost the overall performance of the SCC and improve the
overall business performance.
Finally, this study was subject to various limitations, which were outlined in chap-
ter 6, together with some suggestions for future research. Overall, it is deemed that this
study successfully managed to answer the research questions and offered some valuable
insights in the trust and power dynamics in dyadic buyer-supplier relationships.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
Akbayrak, B. (2000), ‘A comparison of two data collecting methods: interviews and
questionnaires’, Hacettepe Üniversitesi Eğitim Fakültesi Dergisi 18, 1–10.
Alshenqeeti, H. (2014), ‘Interviewing as a data collection method: A critical review’,
English linguistics research 3(1), 39–45.
Ambrose, E., Marshall, D. & Lynch, D. (2010), ‘Buyer supplier perspectives on supply
chain relationships’, International Journal of Operations & Production Management
30(12), 1269–1290.
Ampe-N’DA, L. D., Payne, B. A., Spake, R. I., Sharpe, S. & Arora, A. (2020), Buyer-
supplier relationships: Role of collaboration, sustainability, and technology, in ‘Sus-
tainable Innovation’, Springer, pp. 47–58.
Anderson, J. C. & Narus, J. A. (1990), ‘A model of distributor firm and manufacturer
firm working partnerships’, Journal of marketing 54(1), 42–58.
Arnott, D. C., Wilson, D., Canning, L. & Hanmer-Lloyd, S. (2007), ‘Trust in buyer-seller
relationships: the challenge of environmental (green) adaptation’, European Journal
of marketing .
Baihaqi, I. & Sohal, A. S. (2013), ‘The impact of information sharing in supply chains
on organisational performance: an empirical study’, Production Planning & Control
24(8-9), 743–758.
Bakos, J. Y. & Brynjolfsson, E. (1993), ‘From vendors to partners: Information tech-
nology and incomplete contracts in buyer-supplier relationships’, Journal of Organi-
zational Computing and Electronic Commerce 3(3), 301–328.
Benton, W. & Maloni, M. (2005), ‘The influence of power driven buyer/seller relation-
ships on supply chain satisfaction’, Journal of Operations Management 23(1), 1–22.
Burnard, P. (1991), ‘A method of analysing interview transcripts in qualitative research’,
Nurse education today 11(6), 461–466.
Buvik, A. & Reve, T. (2002), ‘Inter-firm governance and structural power in industrial
relationships: the moderating effect of bargaining power on the contractual safeguard-
ing of specific assets’, Scandinavian Journal of Management 18(3), 261–284.
==PAGE:92==
74
Bibliography
Cai, S., Goh, M., De Souza, R. & Li, G. (2013), ‘Knowledge sharing in collaborative
supply chains: twin effects of trust and power’, International journal of production
Research 51(7), 2060–2076.
Caniëls, M. C., Gelderman, C. J. & Ulijn, J. M. (2010), ‘Buyer-supplier relationship
development: an empirical study among dutch purchasing professionals’, Journal of
Enterprising Culture 18(02), 107–137.
Cao, M. & Zhang, Q. (2011), ‘Supply chain collaboration: Impact on collaborative
advantage and firm performance’, Journal of operations management 29(3), 163–180.
Carr, A. S. & Pearson, J. N. (1999), ‘Strategically managed buyer–supplier relationships
and performance outcomes’, Journal of operations management 17(5), 497–519.
Chen, J. V., Yen, D. C., Rajkumar, T. & Tomochko, N. A. (2011), ‘The antecedent
factors on trust and commitment in supply chain relationships’, Computer Standards
& Interfaces 33(3), 262–270.
Chicksand, D. (2015), ‘Partnerships: The role that power plays in shaping collaborative
buyer–supplier exchanges’, Industrial Marketing Management 48, 121–139.
Chima, C. M. (2007), ‘Supply-chain management issues in the oil and gas industry’,
Journal of Business & Economics Research (JBER) 5(6).
Cho, W., Ke, J.-y. F. & Han, C. (2019), ‘An empirical examination of the use of bar-
gaining power and its impacts on supply chain financial performance’, Journal of
Purchasing and Supply Management 25(4), 100550.
Chopra, S., Meindl, P. & Kalra, D. V. (2013), Supply chain management: strategy,
planning, and operation, Vol. 232, Pearson Boston, MA.
Corsaro, D. & Snehota, I. (2011), ‘Alignment and misalignment in business relationships’,
Industrial Marketing Management 40(6), 1042–1054.
Corsten, D. & Kumar, N. (2005), ‘Do suppliers benefit from collaborative relationships
with large retailers? an empirical investigation of efficient consumer response adop-
tion’, Journal of Marketing 69(3), 80–94.
Cowan, K., Paswan, A. K. & Van Steenburg, E. (2015), ‘When inter-firm relationship
benefits mitigate power asymmetry’, Industrial Marketing Management 48, 140–148.
Cox, A. (2001), ‘Understanding buyer and supplier power: a framework for procurement
and supply competence’, Journal of Supply Chain Management 37(1), 8–15.
Cuevas, J. M., Julkunen, S. & Gabrielsson, M. (2015), ‘Power symmetry and the develop-
ment of trust in interdependent relationships: The mediating role of goal congruence’,
Industrial Marketing Management 48, 149–159.
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
75
Dadzie, K. Q., Dadzie, C. A. & Williams, A. J. (2018), ‘Trust and duration of buyer-
seller relationship in emerging markets’, Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing
.
Dahl, R. A. (1957), ‘The concept of power’, Behavioral science 2(3), 201–215.
Dahwa, M. P., Al-Hakim, L. & Ng, E. (2013), ‘The importance of trust in procurement
practices and its impact on business performance: An empirical investigation from the
perspective of the buyer–supplier dyad’, Journal of Relationship Marketing 12(4), 280–
300.
Daugherty, P. J., Richey, R. G., Roath, A. S., Min, S., Chen, H., Arndt, A. D. & Genchev,
S. E. (2006), ‘Is collaboration paying off for firms?’, Business horizons 49(1), 61–70.
Doney, P. M. & Cannon, J. P. (1997), ‘An examination of the nature of trust in buyer–
seller relationships’, Journal of marketing 61(2), 35–51.
Ebrahimi, S. M. (2015), Examining the impact of supply chain integration on organiza-
tion structure and operational performance in oil and gas supply chains: A contingency
approach, PhD thesis, University of Sheffield.
Espadinha-Cruz, P. & Grilo, A. (2019), ‘The business interoperability decomposition
framework to analyse buyer-supplier dyads’, Computers in Industry 109, 165–181.
Fawcett, S. E. & Magnan, G. M. (2004), ‘Ten guiding principles for high-impact scm’,
Business Horizons 47(5), 67–74.
Fawcett, S. E., Magnan, G. M. & McCarter, M. W. (2008), ‘A three-stage implementa-
tion model for supply chain collaboration’, Journal of Business Logistics 29(1), 93–112.
French, J. R., Raven, B. & Cartwright, D. (1959), ‘The bases of social power’, Classics
of organization theory 7, 311–320.
Gao, T., Sirgy, M. J. & Bird, M. M. (2005), ‘Reducing buyer decision-making uncertainty
in organizational purchasing: can supplier trust, commitment, and dependence help?’,
Journal of Business Research 58(4), 397–405.
Gaski, J. F. (1984), ‘The theory of power and conflict in channels of distribution’, Journal
of marketing 48(3), 9–29.
Gaski, J. F. & Nevin, J. R. (1985), ‘The differential effects of exercised and unexercised
power sources in a marketing channel’, Journal of marketing research 22(2), 130–142.
Geyskens, I., Steenkamp, J.-B. E. & Kumar, N. (1998), ‘Generalizations about trust
in marketing channel relationships using meta-analysis’, International Journal of Re-
search in marketing 15(3), 223–248.
==PAGE:94==
76
Bibliography
Ghadge, A., Dani, S., Ojha, R. & Caldwell, N. (2017), ‘Using risk sharing contracts for
supply chain risk mitigation: A buyer-supplier power and dependence perspective’,
Computers & Industrial Engineering 103, 262–270.
Ghosh, A. & Fedorowicz, J. (2008), ‘The role of trust in supply chain governance’,
Business Process Management Journal .
Giannakis, M. (2007), ‘Performance measurement of supplier relationships’, Supply chain
management: An international Journal .
Gill, P., Stewart, K., Treasure, E. & Chadwick, B. (2008), ‘Methods of data collection in
qualitative research: interviews and focus groups’, British dental journal 204(6), 291–
295.
Gölgeci, I., Murphy, W. H. & Johnston, D. A. (2018), ‘Power-based behaviors in supply
chains and their effects on relational satisfaction: A fresh perspective and directions
for research’, European Management Journal 36(2), 278–287.
Gorton, M., Angell, R., Dries, L., Urutyan, V., Jackson, E. & White, J. (2015), ‘Power,
buyer trustworthiness and supplier performance: Evidence from the armenian dairy
sector’, Industrial Marketing Management 50, 69–77.
Gounaris, S. P. (2005), ‘Trust and commitment influences on customer retention: insights
from business-to-business services’, Journal of Business research 58(2), 126–140.
Handfield, R. B. & Bechtel, C. (2002), ‘The role of trust and relationship structure in
improving supply chain responsiveness’, Industrial marketing management 31(4), 367–
382.
Harland, C., Zheng, J., Johnsen, T. & Lamming, R. (2004), ‘A conceptual model for
researching the creation and operation of supply networks 1’, British Journal of Man-
agement 15(1), 1–21.
He, Q., Ghobadian, A. & Gallear, D. (2013), ‘Knowledge acquisition in supply chain
partnerships: The role of power’, International Journal of Production Economics
141(2), 605–618.
Hoffman, B. et al. (2004), ‘Integrated tubular-supply-chain management reduces cost’,
Journal of petroleum technology 56(10), 40–41.
Hudnurkar, M., Jakhar, S. & Rathod, U. (2014), ‘Factors affecting collaboration in sup-
ply chain: a literature review’, Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences 133(1), 189–
202.
Huo, B., Tian, M., Tian, Y. & Zhang, Q. (2019), ‘The dilemma of inter-organizational
relationships’, International Journal of Operations & Production Management .
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
77
Jain, M., Khalil, S., Johnston, W. J. & Cheng, J. M.-S. (2014), ‘The performance
implications of power–trust relationship: The moderating role of commitment in the
supplier–retailer relationship’, Industrial Marketing Management 43(2), 312–321.
Johnsen, R. E. & Lacoste, S. (2016), ‘An exploration of the ‘dark side’associations of con-
flict, power and dependence in customer–supplier relationships’, Industrial Marketing
Management 59, 76–95.
Johnston, D. A., McCutcheon, D. M., Stuart, F. I. & Kerwood, H. (2004), ‘Effects
of supplier trust on performance of cooperative supplier relationships’, Journal of
operations Management 22(1), 23–38.
Kampstra, R., Ashayeri, J. & Gattorna, J. (2006), ‘Realities of supply chain collabora-
tion’, The international journal of logistics management .
Khoja, F., Adams, J., Kauffman, R. et al. (2011), ‘The inside story of relationship devel-
opment: power asymmetry in a buyer? supplier relationship’, International Journal
of Integrated Supply Management 6(1), 73–91.
Kim, K. K., Park, S.-H., Ryoo, S. Y. & Park, S. K. (2010), ‘Inter-organizational coopera-
tion in buyer–supplier relationships: Both perspectives’, Journal of Business Research
63(8), 863–869.
Kumar, N., Scheer, L. K. & Steenkamp, J.-B. E. (1995), ‘The effects of perceived inter-
dependence on dealer attitudes’, Journal of marketing research 32(3), 348–356.
Kumar, N., Scheer, L. K. & Steenkamp, J.-B. E. (1998), ‘Interdependence, punitive
capability, and the reciprocation of punitive actions in channel relationships’, Journal
of Marketing Research 35(2), 225–235.
Kwon, I.-W. G. & Suh, T. (2004), ‘Factors affecting the level of trust and commitment
in supply chain relationships’, Journal of supply chain management 40(1), 4–14.
Lee, C.-H. & Ha, B.-C. (2018), ‘The impact of buyer-supplier relationships’ social capital
on bi-directional information sharing in the supply chain’, Journal of Business &
Industrial Marketing .
Leonidou, L. C., Talias, M. A. & Leonidou, C. N. (2008), ‘Exercised power as a driver of
trust and commitment in cross-border industrial buyer–seller relationships’, Industrial
Marketing Management 37(1), 92–103.
Lorentz, H., Shi, Y., Hilmola, O.-P., Srai, J., Ramanathan, U., Gunasekaran, A. & Sub-
ramanian, N. (2011), ‘Supply chain collaboration performance metrics: a conceptual
framework’, Benchmarking: An international journal .
Maestrini, V., Maccarrone, P., Caniato, F. & Luzzini, D. (2018), ‘Supplier performance
measurement systems: Communication and reaction modes’, Industrial Marketing
Management 74, 298–308.
==PAGE:96==
78
Bibliography
Makkonen, H., Vuori, M. & Puranen, M. (2016), ‘Buyer attractiveness as a catalyst for
buyer–supplier relationshipdevelopment’, Industrial Marketing Management 55, 156–
168.
Mangus, S. M., Bock, D. E., Jones, E. & Folse, J. A. G. (2017), ‘Gratitude in buyer-seller
relationships: a dyadic investigation’, Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Manage-
ment 37(3), 250–267.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H. & Schoorman, F. D. (1995), ‘An integrative model of organi-
zational trust’, Academy of management review 20(3), 709–734.
Moorman, C., Zaltman, G. & Deshpande, R. (1992), ‘Relationships between providers
and users of market research: The dynamics of trust within and between organiza-
tions’, Journal of marketing research 29(3), 314–328.
Mora-Monge, C., Quesada, G., Gonzalez, M. E. & Davis, J. M. (2019), ‘Trust, power and
supply chain integration in web-enabled supply chains’, Supply Chain Management:
An International Journal .
Nair, A., Narasimhan, R. & Bendoly, E. (2011), ‘Coopetitive buyer–supplier relationship:
an investigation of bargaining power, relational context, and investment strategies’,
Decision Sciences 42(1), 93–127.
Nassar, S., Kandil, T., Kara, M. E. & Ghadge, A. (2019), ‘Automotive recall risk: impact
of buyer–supplier relationship on supply chain social sustainability’, International
Journal of Productivity and Performance Management .
Nyaga, G. N., Lynch, D. F., Marshall, D. & Ambrose, E. (2013), ‘Power asymmetry,
adaptation and collaboration in dyadic relationships involving a powerful partner’,
Journal of Supply Chain Management 49(3), 42–65.
Nyaga, G. N., Whipple, J. M. & Lynch, D. F. (2010), ‘Examining supply chain rela-
tionships: do buyer and supplier perspectives on collaborative relationships differ?’,
Journal of operations management 28(2), 101–114.
Paparoidamis, N. G., Katsikeas, C. S. & Chumpitaz, R. (2019), ‘The role of supplier
performance in building customer trust and loyalty: A cross-country examination’,
Industrial marketing management 78, 183–197.
Park, J., Shin, K., Chang, T.-W. & Park, J. (2010), ‘An integrative framework for
supplier relationship management’, Industrial Management & Data Systems .
Patrucco, A. S., Luzzini, D., Moretto, A. & Ronchi, S. (2019), ‘Attraction in buyer–
supplier relationships’, Business Process Management Journal .
Phellas, C. N., Bloch, A. & Seale, C. (2011), ‘Structured methods: interviews, question-
naires and observation’, Researching society and culture 3, 181–205.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
79
Poppo, L., Zhou, K. Z. & Li, J. J. (2016), ‘When can you trust “trust”? calculative trust,
relational trust, and supplier performance’, Strategic Management Journal 37(4), 724–
741.
Rehme, J., Nordigården, D., Ellström, D. & Chicksand, D. (2016), ‘Power in distribution
channels—supplier assortment strategy for balancing power’, Industrial Marketing
Management 54, 176–187.
Rogers, H. & Fells, R. (2017), ‘Successful buyer–supplier relationships: The role of
negotiations’, Journal of Strategic Contracting and Negotiation 3(3), 121–136.
Roseira, C., Brito, C. & Henneberg, S. C. (2010), ‘Managing interdependencies in sup-
plier networks’, Industrial Marketing Management 39(6), 925–935.
Samaddar, S. & Kadiyala, S. S. (2006), ‘An analysis of interorganizational resource
sharing decisions in collaborative knowledge creation’, European Journal of operational
research 170(1), 192–210.
Simatupang, T. M. & Sridharan, R. (2002), ‘The collaborative supply chain’, The inter-
national journal of logistics management 13(1), 15–30.
Simatupang, T. M. & Sridharan, R. (2008), ‘Design for supply chain collaboration’,
Business Process Management Journal .
Simatupang, T. M., Wright, A. C. & Sridharan, R. (2004), ‘Applying the theory of con-
straints to supply chain collaboration’, Supply chain Management: an international
journal .
Sridharan, R. & Simatupang, T. M. (2013), ‘Power and trust in supply chain collabora-
tion’, International journal of value chain management 7(1), 76–96.
Sturm, R. E. & Antonakis, J. (2015), ‘Interpersonal power: A review, critique, and
research agenda’, Journal of Management 41(1), 136–163.
Teller, C., Kotzab, H., Grant, D. B. & Holweg, C. (2016), ‘The importance of key
supplier relationship management in supply chains’, International Journal of Retail
& Distribution Management .
Terpend, R. & Ashenbaum, B. (2012), ‘The intersection of power, trust and supplier
network size: Implications for supplier performance’, Journal of Supply Chain Man-
agement 48(3), 52–77.
Wang, Y., Wang, N., Jiang, L., Yang, Z. & Cui, V. (2016), ‘Managing relationships with
power advantage buyers: The role of supplier initiated bonding tactics in long-term
buyer–supplier collaborations’, Journal of Business Research 69(12), 5587–5596.
Whipple, J. M., Lynch, D. F. & Nyaga, G. N. (2010), ‘A buyer’s perspective on collabora-
tive versus transactional relationships’, Industrial marketing management 39(3), 507–
518.
==PAGE:98==
80
Bibliography
Wickramanayake, R. & Jayaratne, P. (2016), ‘Impact of information sharing on supplier-
buyer relationship and supply chain performance’, Colombo, Sri Lanka 3 rd and 4 th
June, 2016 .
Wu, J. & Wu, Z. (2015), ‘Key supplier relationships and product introduction success:
The moderating roles of self-enforcement and interdependence between buyer and
supplier’, Industrial Marketing Management 46, 183–192.
Xia, L. X. X., Ma, B. & Lim, R. (2008), Supplier performance measurement in a supply
chain, in ‘2008 6th IEEE International Conference on Industrial Informatics’, IEEE,
pp. 877–881.
Yeung, J. H. Y., Selen, W., Zhang, M. & Huo, B. (2009), ‘The effects of trust and
coercive power on supplier integration’, International journal of production Economics
120(1), 66–78.
Zhang, M. & Huo, B. (2013), ‘The impact of dependence and trust on supply chain
integration’, International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management .
Zhao, X., Huo, B., Flynn, B. B. & Yeung, J. H. Y. (2008), ‘The impact of power and
relationship commitment on the integration between manufacturers and customers in
a supply chain’, Journal of operations management 26(3), 368–388.
Zhao, X., Pan, J. & Song, Y. (2018), ‘Dependence on supplier, supplier trust and green
supplier integration: The moderating role of contract management difficulty’, Sustain-
ability 10(5), 1673.
Zhaoquan, J. & Yi, L. (2014), The effects of power and relationship commitment between
integrator and supplier on the integration in service supply chain: The moderating
role of competitor network competence, in ‘2014 11th International Conference on
Service Systems and Service Management (ICSSSM)’, IEEE, pp. 1–6.
==PAGE:99==
Appendices
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX A
Project Plan
This work is the culmination of the author’s efforts to obtain an MSc degree in Transport
and Logistics at DTU. Reflecting on the planning and execution of this project, one thing
that can be said for sure, is that certain things are so unpredictable, that nobody can
be prepared for them.
The official initiation date of this thesis project was the 27th of January 2020, with
5.5 months ahead until the final deadline for submitting the final report. As early as
the 29th of the same month, the author handed in a first draft of the project plan, which
was quite abstract in its form, but was used as a guide to keep track of the progress of
the project. In this first project plan, the basic activities of the thesis were laid out, and
six “milestone dates” were marked, where major meetings would take place between the
author and the supervisors of this project, apart from the established weekly meetings.
The first and second milestone meetings were executed at the agreed dates and the
overall project seemed well “on-track”, until the COVID-19 pandemic and the general
lockdown measures that took place globally around mid-March. Such an unprecedented
event had of course a big impact on this project for several reasons, such as:
• Meetings with the supervising team had to be held virtually and much less often,
resulting in reducing the number of “milestone meetings” from 6 to 4.
• The increased workload and the fact that people were working from home greatly
complicated the data collection process, as the majority of the interviews had
to be rescheduled up to 3 times, and some were even rendered impossible to be
conducted on time.
• Significant fluctuations in the productivity levels of the author were observed,
directly linked to the effects of the lockdown measures and the pandemic.
Nonetheless, agility and high drive from both the author and the supervision team
enabled the author to complete the project on time. The revised and much more detailed
project plan can be found below, with a layout of the different activities and tasks that
had to be completed in order to accomplish the objectives of this thesis project. The
biggest discrepancies between the initial project plan and the revised one can be found in
the “Data collection” and “Analysis” activities, where the time-span of these activities
is larger and overlapping with each other.
==PAGE:102==
84
Appendix A Project Plan
All in all, it was a challenging but also exciting project.
The main reflection after
this extensive work is completed, is that sometimes things happen that are out of our
immediate control and we must adapt to these changes and do our best, even if we know
that it will not be as perfect as we had initially hoped for. Despite the limitations of
this work which are well acknowledged, I am very satisfied with the final result and the
overall learning experience of managing a 5-month project.
==PAGE:103==
Project Start 
27-Jan
1st Milestone
17-Feb
2nd Milestone
16-Mar
3rd Milestone
13-Apr
4th Milestone
11-May
5th Milestone
25-May
6th Milestone
08-Jun
Project End
12-Jul
Easter
Plan
Weeks
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Completion 
rate
4%
8%
13%
17%
21%
25%
29%
33%
38%
42%
46%
50%
54%
58%
63%
67%
71%
75%
79%
83%
88%
92%
96%
100%
Initial Project Plan
Recommendations
Report writing
Analysis:
- Conceptual framework 
Interviews and 
data/information 
collection 
Theory (a study of the relevant existing 
literature to provide the theoretical context 
and rationale for the project)
Interview 
Preparation: 
- Identification of 
the managers and 
suppliers that will be 
interviewed 
- Formulation of the 
right questions for 
the different 
interviewees to 
ensure the 
information 
provided  can be 
used in the project 
scope
Evaluation of 
results/findings
Analysis:
- Conceptual framework 
testing/application
==PAGE:104==
Project Start 
27-Jan
1st Milestone
17-Feb
2nd Milestone
16-Mar
Easter
3rd Milestone
11-May
4th Milestone
10-Jun
Project End
12-Jul
Calendar Weeks
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Completion rate
4%
8%
13%
17%
21%
25%
29%
33%
38%
42%
46%
50%
54%
58%
63%
67%
71%
75%
79%
83%
88%
92%
96%
100%
1. Literature research 
1.1 Initial database of research papers
1.2 Review of initial database
1.3 Researching more papers
1.4 Review of final database of literature
2. Development of Conceptual Framework
2.1 Mapping of literature review findings
2.1 Develop Conceptual Framework
3. Interview Preparation
3.1 Drafting of interview questions
3.2 Validation of final interview questions
3.3 Identification of supplier companies
3.4 Scheduling of interviews
4. Data Collection - Interviews
4.1 Facilitation of interviews
4.2 Transcription of interview data
5. Analysis of interview data
5.1 Familiarization with the data
5.2 Coding of the data
5.3 First findings
5.4 Final evaluation of key findings
5.5 Interpretation of the findings
6. Report writing process
6.1 1st Draft
6.2 2nd Draft
6.3 3rd Draft
7. Final submission of the report
Final Project Plan
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX B
Supporting Tables
This section includes tables with a summary of relevant quotes for each theme of this
study, for easy comparison.
Table B.1. Perceptions of the most powerful trading partner in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“I would say that in the power dynamics
between buyer-supplier negotiation power
and that kind of stuff, we would look like
the weaker party.” -Senior Negotiator &
Contract Manager for SUP1
“So, SUP1 […] is definitely in a more
powerful position than us.”
-Category
Manager for SUP1
“...we have a pretty good level of strength
right now in our relationship.”
-Senior
Partnering Manager for SUP1
“...When it comes to the power symmetry
in the relationship, ultimately (and I don’t
feel like it’s pushed down our throat), BF
has the most power in the relationship, […]
because they make the final commercial de-
cision.” -Key Account Manager for SUP1
“So, when I think of them as the strongest
partner, it’s because they definitely have
more […] leverage than we have due to their
size.” -Category Manager for SUP2
“I think in general BF or the client anyway
is always going to be the strongest trading
partner, simply because they can always
take their business away and go to a com-
petitor. So, they always have this power
over us.” -Global Key Account Manager
for SUP2
“Currently, and with the COVID-19 cri-
sis, I think that SUP3 is stronger than BF.
But before COVID-19, I think that BF and
SUP3 were pretty much at the
“I think that we are more reliant on BF
than BF is reliant on us, in the sense that
[…] BF is not forced to use us. So, defi-
nitely we’re the weakest.” -Key
same power.”
-Category Manager for
SUP3
Account Manager for SUP3
Continued on next page
==PAGE:106==
88
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.1 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“So, SUP4 offers us ROVs within inte-
grated services, and this is where I think
we have the most power in the relationship,
[…] because SUP4 is a smaller company.”
-Contract Manager for SUP4
-
“They have much more power over us than
we have over them, and they can certainly
dictate things: they can affect the uptime
and the performance of our rig.
So the
power sits in their hands.” -Category Man-
ager for SUP5
-
Table B.2. Perceptions of power exercise in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“Yes (they exercise their power).
We’re
just one other client for them and we’re
not a big one […] and in any business or
any deal that we get to have with them,
they push a lot. They try to get as much
profit as they can get out of the business
rather than developing a partnership with
us.” -Category Manager for SUP1
“...the
industry
has
traditionally
been
cyclical. So, you could say that all parties
know that maybe you have the power now,
but you might not have the power in the
future. So, you need to be strategic and
playing your cards and not “misusing”
your power if I can say it like that.”
-Senior Negotiator &
“Oh, sure! Yes, obviously (the buying firm
exercise their power in the relationship),
[…] they make us work for it.
I don’t
think
they
shove
it
down
our
throat
or flex their muscles,
but maybe it’s
interpreted as that. That’s perceived and
everybody knows that that’s how the power
play works within BF, and the relation-
ship with SUP1, which is fine.
Again,
it’s used very little.
When it does get
used it’s usually it’s not done in a bad way.
Obviously,
we
do
have
some
power
also. […] I personally don’t feel like we’ve
ever taken advantage of it.
And based
on some regulations, […] BF is able to
potentially recertify
Continued on next page
==PAGE:107==
Appendix B Supporting Tables
89
Table B.2 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
Contract Manager for SUP1
“...the
only
way
they
exercised
their
power at that time was that they did
what any company would do to position
themselves in the best financial position
for their shareholders. […] I wouldn’t say
they did take advantage of us; I would
say that’s a no.
[…] However, it was
probably perceived as a negative.” -Senior
Partnering Manager for SUP1
our equipment as their own, where they
would not become dependent on us. They
could also use a different vendor. I know
BF looks at that […] and that is something
that C. and M. have both stated their feel-
ings on that. And BF has actually done
that, so... It was not funny at the time but
again, we’re in a market where BF tries
to reduce their total cost of ownership, we
get it. So, they make us work harder to
win the business.” -Key Account Manager
for SUP1
“...on general terms whether they use a
power or not, that varies a lot from case
to case. […] (In negotiations) I feel that
SUP2 is more confident and using more of
their market position, and what they are
providing to us to their benefit. I am not
saying that I have experienced any kind of
mistrust, or misuse of power. Not yet at
least. […] It’s all fine at the beginning, but
then at some point, this power kicks in.”
-Category Manager for SUP2
“...in their culture, they feel that they are
powerful, they have the most leverage in
what they say to their suppliers - you either
abide or you don’t abide. In some cases,
there’s leeway but in most cases it’s very
straightforward. What bothers me […] is
that they talk partnership all day long, but
in the end of the day when it comes to
when they want something, it’s a one way
conversation. You do this or don’t, your
choice. No discussion. You either accept
it or you don’t accept it.”
-Global Key
Account Manager for SUP2
“They haven’t been treating us as a trusted
partner. They see us just as every client,
like we do not have a relationship. […] we
end up paying more.” -Category Manager
for SUP3
“I would say that we are struggling a bit
with a lot of the ”fluff” ideas generated that
are not as well done as they should. For
example, last fame agreements, they put a
big tender for big frame agreement […] and
it’s more or less not being used. So they
waste a lot of our time and that means that
we then see it as negative, when we waste
a lot of time on something that we don’t
seem to use, even
if we win the agreement, but there’s noth-
ing coming out of it.” -Key Account Man-
ager for SUP3
Continued on next page
==PAGE:108==
90
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.2 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“I guess we are more, or we dare be a
little bit more aggressive with them. […] It
can also be when you’re trying to get an
agreement in place that you can be a little
bit more aggressive and say ”you have to
accept these terms”, because they’re more
likely to accept them where we’re the bigger
player.” -Contract Manager for SUP4
-
“I’m not sure whether or not we have re-
ally utilized the full potential of the lever-
age that we might have in terms of power
towards SUP4.”
-Category Manager for
SUP4
-
“Yes, well, I think they make sure we’re
aware of it.
[…] because prior to that
we had built four jack-up rigs, which we
awarded to their competitors and they
were quite frustrated with us. So, we re-
gained some power leverage with them.” -
Category Manager for SUP5
-
Table B.3. Perceptions of the overall effect of power in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“So far, I think that we have big bond with
them. But I think right now there is more
focus in, and we are also seeing some
other opportunities.” -Category Manager
for SUP1
“That (misuse of power) leaves a footprint
or a fingerprint on the relationship long
term. It’s just they’re
“I think there has always been a good col-
laboration with BF. I mean I think, ulti-
mately, the power is always going to be
with the buyer. We obviously have some
leverage, because BF has so much of our
equipment there’s not many options. They
are married to us whether they like it or
not. And so,there has to be collaboration.’
-Key Account
Continued on next page
==PAGE:109==
Appendix B Supporting Tables
91
Table B.3 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
hard things to forget […] I think there’s still
pockets within the organization that still
reflect back on that mistrust and I think
that’s the negative outcome that there is
still a little bit of a stress.” -Senior Part-
nering Manager for SUP1
Manager for SUP1
“In general, I think, the overall outcome
of power is negative. […] And I think that
going into a business relation, as we have
done with SUP2, both parties tried to pack
that power on the front door so to speak
when you’re into a relationship.
[…] it
probably hasn’t affected our collaboration,
and the challenges that we see along the
way are not connected to an unbalance in
the power between the two companies.” -
Category Manager for SUP2
“...you could say that the use of our power
was at least perceived as coercive, in or-
der to get work done. In fact, we did. It
took about a year, […] but what is funny is
that the company did come forward, and
we ended up having an open collaboration.
[…] Unfortunately, we lost all the business
after the fact that we used our power.” -
Global Key Account Manager for SUP2
“I think that the overall outcome (of
power) is negative.”
-Category Manager
for SUP3
“I don’t think the power asymmetry has af-
fected our company.” -Key Account Man-
ager for SUP3
“So technically we could bypass SUP5 and
buy a lot of these parts from the original
equipment manufacturer.
However, that
means we could significantly reduce our
spend with SUP5 and if we’re trying to
maintain some level of power with an in-
fluence we want to then continue to have
a reasonable spend with them. […] Yet we
know they can put the 200% markup on
some parts.
[…] If there are opportuni-
ties for both companies maybe to improve
the efficiency and reduce costs, they don’t
always take that opportunity because they
might be getting enough money from other
customers of theirs.” -Category Manager
for SUP5
-
==PAGE:110==
92
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.4. The type of trust present in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“...there’s a dependency from us to them.
[…] we currently don’t have a prize/reward
scheme, but we do have penalties for us.
[…] They tend to be more closed up.”
-Category Manager for SUP1
“There are various levels of trust, se-
nior leadership trust is one element that
drives the business. Technical leadership
and the middle management trust is one
level, and then you have the transactional
day to day frontline trust.
[…] Because
there are areas […] that there is little
or no trust and it’s very transactional,
and then there are areas where there’s
a lot of collaboration and a great deal
of trust and openness and.
[…] I think
we’re dependent of them […] we need
their products to be reliable […] and they
understand when there’s a challenge at
the transactional level from our side. […]
(Regarding rewards and penalties) I think
it’s a bit of a testament to the relationship
we have with SUP1 […] is,
I cannot
remember in the past five years ever going
to SUP1, and discussing that we need to
settle a penalty (an LD). […] (the penalty
discussions) that’s a last resort, and I
believe a sure way to get into a purely
transactional and non-collaborative supply
chain relationship.”
-Senior Partnering
Manager for SUP1
“I think the last one.
I get some more
based closeness openness and credibility.
[…] There’s more to it than just the trust
factor. The fact that we’re “married”, and
they got a ton of our equipment, it forces
us into our relationship. And I think that
at the lower levels, there’s a good amount
of trust. I think at the senior leadership
levels, at times, there’s been a little bit of
mistrust. […] Now J. P. M. is the category
manager and then J. P. M. has reached
out to me more in the last three months
than D. S. ever did in four years.” -Key
Account Manager for SUP1
“I think it’s the reliability and the com-
petencies. […] So, I think that’s how the
competence is to find the right solutions,
“So, that’s what it is: it’s been building
credibility, building trust and having open
communication and transparency.
Continued on next page
==PAGE:111==
Appendix B Supporting Tables
93
Table B.4 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
and the reliability of having the reality
meeting that promise, or as close as you
can.” -Category Manager for SUP2
[…] This collaboration must be based not on
dependency or rewards penalties, but on in-
tegrity, reliability, and openness, which all
have a positive effect on the trust in the col-
laboration overall.’’ -Global Key Account
Manager for SUP2
“I think with SUP3 the trust is based on
reliability, competence, and credibility.” -
Category Manager for SUP3
“I think we have a status […] when there
are problems or something special needs
to be solved, they often call us.
[…] BF
has trust in SUP3 that we will solve a
given assignment, no matter what.
And
we have of course a trust in them that we
are getting our money because that’s quite
a thing in these times.
Beside that we
have trust and we’re both open, especially
in supply chain. […] We’ve actually been
doing some projects where we have been
working with open books. […] We’ve not
been working with rewards and penalties
or so. […] We’ve done it on a few larger
projects where there was a reward if we did
it faster than expected, but that was perfor-
mance based and didn’t have an effect on
trust.” -Key Account Manager for SUP3
“...for me, there’s no reason not to trust
them, there’s nothing that I’ve experienced
as broken the trust. And I generally only
heard good things. But I don’t have long
enough of experience of the collaboration.
[…] I doubt there’s bonuses because I’ve
never really heard of us doing that. And
then penalties there could be like liquidated
damages.
There could also be bonuses
given to us, like a retroactive annual bonus,
if we spend a certain amount of money or
we place a certain amount of orders. But
I think the reason why we have been
-
working so much with them is their com-
petencies and their abilities to “get the job
done”.” -Contract Manager for SUP4
Continued on next page
==PAGE:112==
94
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.4 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“...we are completely dependent upon them,
but they are also generally quite reliable. I
think they are a quite open company to […]
collaborating and sharing in how we work
together.” -Category Manager for SUP5
-
Table B.5. Perceptions of the effect of trust on SCC in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“...my experience has been rather nega-
tive.” -Category Manager for SUP1
“I
think
BF
in
general
has
in
the
past been very cost focused, and maybe
harder to see the things where you can’t
put a number to.
And […] I think on
the surface there is a lot of trust, but
sometimes when you go deeper maybe the
trust isn’t really there because you always
have to check your numbers.
[…] If the
business case doesn’t show a […] financial
gain that’s clear cut, then it’s like a no
go.
[…] If we were both to open all our
cards and put them on the table (which we
don’t because there is always some sort
of lack of trust and protecting your own
interests), I think it would probably have
a better outcome for both parties.[…] And
also, people’s past experiences - if they got
burned once, then they carry that along.”
-Senior Negotiator and Contract Manager
for SUP1
“It’s 100% positive (the impact of trust on
SCC). I know it can become complacent for
sure […] but if something feels out of place,
we get questioned on it and if we start
charging something that’s stupid, it’s a red
flag it’s easily caught if we’re trying to be
complacent than gouge BF.” -Key Account
Manager for SUP1
Continued on next page
==PAGE:113==
Appendix B Supporting Tables
95
Table B.5 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“We have a dynamic organization.
[…]
(There are) just a handful of people that
have maintained the continuity between
the two companies. […] that is hugely im-
portant in defining all of BF’s relation-
ships, and where some of the pitfalls are.
[…] So it does become somewhat about per-
sonalities and knowing each other. Hav-
ing the ability to really look forward and
wipe the slate clean on bad deals.
And
with some suppliers, we do a very good job
of that and some suppliers, we don’t give
them much leeway.”
-Senior Partnering
Manager for SUP1
“You do have to earn your trust as the
3PL. So, there’s definitely imbalance there
in who has the biggest stake or
“...it’s definitely been a positive outcome.
[…] Another thing that’s so key in trusted
relationships, is that you don’t
the biggest work in creating this trust. It
is unfortunately, on the supplier side, to
make sure that the trust is built. […] The
trust has not really been built in the begin-
ning of the relationship […] and I think
there’s definitely mistakes on both sides
that has occurred.
[…] I don’t think the
trust has never been there in this relation-
ship, unfortunately. […] (The level of trust
in the relationship) has varied a lot. […] I
think that’s also a bit what they suffer of,
that we actually often don’t see when they
have done 10 rights, but we do get back
to them when they have done one thing or
one shipment wrong. […] But in these cir-
cumstances as we have right now with the
COVID-19, SUP2 is probably one of the
partners we have that gives us the most re-
liable updates. […] So, it’s difficult to say
what it is overall. […] It’s really situation
dependent.” -Category Manager for SUP2
be reactive but proactive. Being reactive,
leads in negative trust and credibility with
your customer.
[…] taking the steps up
front, making sure you monitor, making
sure you can communicate, you are trans-
parent, and you will continue to have a
very good partnership as long as you want.”
-Global Key Account Manager for SUP2
Continued on next page
==PAGE:114==
96
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.5 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“I don’t think it’s positive or negative.
Maybe neutral. […] Maybe in the past or if
you ask someone else, maybe they say it’s
positive but for me it’s neutral to negative.”
-Category Manager for SUP3
“...we have a really good relationship […]
maybe not that much with Procurement,
mainly because there has been many big
changes with the people sitting in Procure-
ment, , so that’s also why. I know it has
been discussed for many years in BF that
they have to do something about that and
have more stability in the people who are
sitting in the Procurement so that’s also
why. I know it has been discussed for many
years in BF that they have to do some-
thing about that and have more stability
in the people who are sitting in the Pro-
curement department because that makes
the relationships with their suppliers very
difficult, but I haven’t seen the outcome
of that done yet. […] I would say it (the
effect of trust on the collaboration) has al-
ways been positive. Of course, we are get-
ting monitored so we can’t start charging
crazy fees or anything like that. […] But
once we have won the job, we will approach
this as “one team” approach, meaning that
we have good cooperation and then we are
very open at what we are doing.”
-Key
Account Manager for SUP3
“All I can say is that my dealings with
them have been good. And I have no reason
not to trust them.” -Category Manager for
SUP4
-
“With SUP5 then the trust and the collab-
oration, in terms of development together
has been quite good. […] I think (trust has
affected SCC) maybe not negatively. They
are quite open to collaborating
Continued on next page
==PAGE:115==
Appendix B Supporting Tables
97
Table B.5 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
and sharing in how we work together. So
that also fosters more trust because it’s a
bit of a win-win because they’re also try-
ing to improve the efficiencies of what they
do.” -Category Manager for SUP5
-
Table B.6. Perceptions of the impact of trust on power asymmetry in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“I think the trust has affected the power.
Our signals of trust, and let’s say our
loyalty towards them.
They understood
that: “okay they rely on us a lot!”.
So,
they think that they have their bargaining
power and they just use that in the
negotiations.”
-Category Manager for
SUP1
“...sometimes
there’s
a
lack
of
trust
and that adds to the power dynamics.
[…] Then that lack of trust has probably
resulted in both parties not getting what
they optimally could have gotten from
the relationship, the negotiation, what-
ever you want to look at it as.”
-Senior
Negotiator & Contract Manager for SUP1
“Yes.
They definitely use their power
more strategically and that I think is very
much due to the trust and the commitment
that BF has shown.”
-Senior Partnering
Manager for SUP1
“If both companies trust each other It
makes the difficult cons a little bit eas-
ier.
So, if there’s a situation or some-
thing bad happens, the fact that you have
a good relationship based on trust […] we’re
able to work through it and come to a
conclusion on it so […] In our situation
with BF and SUP1, I think we’re literally
married to each other. I mean, I know it
sounds terrible, but divorce really isn’t an
option. […] They’re taking a huge leap of
faith. […] The price of that equipment is
more than just the price of the equipment.
There has to be spares purchased, there
has to be training purchased, and there’s
literally probably 20 years of commitment
there. That’s a huge leap of faith, but for
BF to invest that much money in SUP1
equipment, the trust and relationship has
to be there.” -Key Account Manager for
SUP1
Continued on next page
==PAGE:116==
98
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.6 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“Yes, I think that if there was more trust
with SUP2, then both of us would have
to use our respective power much less and
much fewer times.”
-Category Manager
for SUP2
“...when a good partner comes to me and
says: “You got two days to respond to this
or extend it”, those type of actions don’t
show a good deal of trust or a good deal of
collaboration, and it just shows the power
of the buyer. But at the end, us being open
and talking and being transparent did im-
prove the relationship and enabled us not
to lose, I don’t know how many thousands
dollars in the month of April.”
-Global
Key Account Manager for SUP2
“...we though that SUP3 was a long stand-
ing trusted supplier, and that even in bad,
difficult times like these they would sup-
port us. But turns out no. So, our trust
in them didn’t help in this situation and in-
stead they are making use of their new in-
creased power because of their better mar-
ket position on us, forcing us to pay more.”
-Category Manager for SUP3
“The jobs we can get within BF are based
on our capabilities, price, and relation-
ships. I’ve seen that trust has been men-
tioned sometimes in the negotiations.”
-
Key Account Manager for SUP3
“I will say that our reason for maybe not
utilizing leverage that we might have in
terms of the power balance, if we haven’t
utilized it fully then I don’t believe it’s be-
cause supplier has delivered accordingly. I
think that’s not too much
-
to expect from a supplier actually. I think,
the only reason we will not utilize any
leverage that we might have in terms of
power is simply because we might see some
potential benefits from partnering with this
supplier.” -Category Manager for SUP4
Continued on next page
==PAGE:117==
Appendix B Supporting Tables
99
Table B.6 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“...if it was a true collaboration and part-
nership, we would be able to source those
parts from the original equipment manu-
facturers, without affecting our total spend
with SUP5 or our larger relationship or
without affecting the warranties. […] We
also need to maintain a level of prioritiza-
tion and we want to be one of their pre-
ferred customers.
So, they are opening
up to more flexible ways of working. That
then makes our lives easier and […] the col-
laboration is certainly improving and being
beneficial to both.” -Category Manager for
SUP5
-
Table B.7. Perceptions of the effect of power on trust in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“...then that (misusing your power) leaves
a footprint or a fingerprint on the rela-
tionship long term. It’s just they’re hard
things to forget, so to speak. And so, ulti-
mately what it does - and it’s very clear -
is it breaks down trust. And so that’s prob-
ably where we’re at with SUP1. The trust
was probably broken down at a very high
level - not just probably - it WAS broken
down at a very high level. […] And I would
say we have pockets of trust and pockets
of distrust still from a long legacy of en-
gagement.”
-Senior Partnering Manager
for SUP1
“SEALYTICS! Houston loves the idea,
Copenhagen is just ”poo-pooing” on it (to
dismiss an idea or suggestion).
I mean,
Copenhagen is slowly treckling into this op-
portunity, and making us work hard at it.
But it has nothing to do with trust on the
relationship.
It’s how this power-play is
being played out. 100%.” -Key Account
Manager for SUP1
Continued on next page
==PAGE:118==
100
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.7 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“It’s really about balancing, if you want to
put your trust into a company that takes
care of your goods that are your eyes at the
warehouse, that go into your systems, you
really need to keep that power off, on the
front door and not bring it into the busi-
ness relationship.
[…] I think that when
you use the power you have, that’s a re-
sult of losing the trust in each other. So, if
you need to utilize threatening with passive
contract, going into legal things, or just be-
ing the one that could say that ”okay then
we will terminate the contract”, that is
maybe our power, they could do something
in terms of rates, depending on the given
market situation. That’s their power. If
you start using those mechanics that is a
result of not having trust in the collabora-
tion.” -Category Manager for SUP2
“...if we’ve always talked about partnership
and trust and collaboration, and then if
there is an incident in the relationship that
you come across very coercive, that is go-
ing to have a very strong, negative result.
It immediately affects the trust on the ei-
ther side. […] So, yes there can be times
when a perceived power-play needs to be
taken.
So, once again does it affect the
trust? Of course, it does. Unfortunately,
we lost all the business after the fact that
we used our power because they didn’t pay
on time, BUT we did get paid, which was
the goal to be done, but the business re-
lationship was terminated after that.”
-
Global Key Account Manager for SUP2
“...trust with SUP3 is put at challenge
right now and it is due to their use of
power on us.
[…] their increased power
and their use of it has broken the trust
that was there before. That is what hap-
pens always when one partner starts using
or misusing their power over the other one,
either in negotiations or in every day op-
erational business relations. It breaks the
trust and then it is difficult to gain it back.”
-Category Manager for SUP3
“So of course, we can always do a bad job.
[…] We are human beings. That of course
will tear a bit on the trust. […] And also the
fact that this relationship has been going
on for so many years, it shows that even if
something bad happens, then there is still
the trust there because they know we do
a great job. They keep choosing us. So,
it’s a positive sign there.” -Key Account
Manager for SUP3
“One example would be spare parts where
we can purchase them directly from the
equipment manufacturers. In some cases,
have 200% higher price for that part that
we do when we buy from SUP5 so that is
a significant markup
Continued on next page
==PAGE:119==
Appendix B Supporting Tables
101
Table B.7 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
and when we approach SUP5 about that,
the parts price remains the same.
They
apply a fixed percentage discount to all
the parts that BF buys from them.
[…]
And that certainly affects relationships so
they’re using their power there to make
sure that we do, stick with them.”
-
Category Manager for SUP5
-
Table B.8. The aspect of collaborative communication in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“...theoretically, and the way we would
like to do it, maybe is different to what
it is in reality as always.
[…] The
strategic interactions which are usually
less frequent and maybe on a quarterly
or biannual or annual basis, and then
you would have the transactional, which
can be on a day to day but also on a
monthly, and both informal and formal
basis.
And how that is in real life?
It
is probably not as good as it should
be, if I’m to be really frank.”
-Senior
Negotiator & Contract Manager for SUP1
“How
frequently
do
we
communicate
with them?
On a daily technical basis.
The organization probably talks to them
three days plus out of five days of the
workweek on technical aspects.
[…] In
terms
of
formal
communication
now,
over the past few years we are doing
these quarterly business reviews (QBRs)
that will take into consideration supply
chain performance, technical challenges
or discussions,
“Like every day or every other day. […] At
some point during the day, someone in BF
is reaching out to somebody within SUP1.
[…] We have the QBR with the senior lead-
ership. […] The senior levels probably meet
once a quarter with my senior leadership,
or a little bit more than once a quarter
[…] we’ll meet just to catch up, nothing
overly structured. […] We’ve tried to have
a QBR which is a little bit lower level and
for one reason or another, it just hasn’t
worked out. […] But at my level, […] we
try and have an actual structured meeting
once every three weeks. J. P. M. is to set
up a structured 30-minute call once a week
I think it’s every Thursday, so I would say
very frequently.” -Key Account Manager
for SUP1
Continued on next page
==PAGE:120==
102
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.8 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
and any open items, or what we call “hot
topics” that need to be escalated or agreed
to be escalated to a higher level. And then,
we also have biannual meetings with a se-
lect executive team that talk just about es-
calated issues, which should be very few
maybe one to two, but more about dis-
cussing strategic opportunities and collab-
oration.” -Senior Partnering Manager for
SUP1
“It depends on which level. So, on oper-
ational level, there’s this daily communi-
cation with them and from different parts
of our operations. On a more “strategic
level” we have QBRs, which are quarterly
or supposed to be quarterly, but in between
I also have informal discussions or when-
ever it’s needed ad hoc discussions with the
global key account manager.”
-Category
Manager for SUP2
“Communication is the number one key
[…] but especially when it comes to sup-
ply chain collaboration, if you don’t have
timely, effective, proactive communication,
you’re never going to build trust or cred-
ibility with anybody.
And unfortunately,
it makes it even more difficult today in
our environment, […] because you have so
many companies that are firing their em-
ployees or get redundancies. […] And what
happens is then that reduces the trust when
something goes wrong and reduces your
credibility. […] Me personally as a global
account manager I have daily communica-
tion. And as far as SUP2 operational and
customer service, they have multiple daily
conversations with buyers supply with the
collateral of BF. […] Without having col-
laborative communication both with your
clients, your suppliers, your contractors,
you’re going to fail.
Your supply chain
will never, never perform.” -Global Key
Account Manager for SUP2
“So, the more strategic levels, we are sup-
posed to meet and discuss more critical is-
sues and performance issues in our Quar-
terly Business Review meetings
“We are supposed to have QBRs, but they
just never get organized.
[…] We have
some contracts where KPIs and so on are
mentioned […] and in three years
Continued on next page
==PAGE:121==
Appendix B Supporting Tables
103
Table B.8 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
(QBRs), but they just never get organized,
because there is always something happen-
ing. Personally, I talk with them once a
month to discuss some ongoing issues and
projects.” -Category Manager for SUP3
or four years we never touched it again.
[…] So, on the strategic level and so on
we are not speaking that much. […] I’m
speaking, I think, weekly, at least with var-
ious people within BF but normally once a
month I speak with some of the managers
in TO at least get some of these guys on
what’s going on, what projects are coming,
how can we assist and so on. […] BF is
not in that position any longer where they
have somebody who was trying to get the
best out of their vendors. For at least the
last two or three years, we’ve not been in
any contract where it is strategic sourcing
in BF.” -Key Account Manager for SUP3
“So, I would say there are three levels of
the relationship, there’s the formal meet-
ings, like the QBRs.
Then there’s the
contractual interactions when there’s a
project. […] And then the final one is the
operational daily type of contact. More ad-
min. So, there’s those three and I would
say, we’re at varying levels and we’re not
as strategic as we want to be. Just because
we’ve just come into this.” -Contract Man-
ager for SUP4
-
“...the operational level of the business,
they have almost daily communication
with the sales and logistics departments at
SUP5. And then we have QBRs which are
quarterly business review meetings which
are generally more structured […] and we
generally look very quickly into the opera-
tional aspects […] the uptime of their equip-
ment […] about digitalization in our future
collaboration
-
Continued on next page
==PAGE:122==
104
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.8 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
[…] review the project outlook so what we
were expecting to work on […] and then
we discuss some of the different individual
divisions within SUP5 and how they are
performing. And then maybe once every
three or four weeks we’ll have a call, just
over general issues or updates regarding
systems or ongoing activities.” -Category
Manager for SUP5
Table B.9. The aspect of information sharing in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“I think we disclose more information
than they do to us.” -Category Manager
for SUP1
“My
experience
is
yes
(the
supplier
is
open
in
sharing
of
information),
whether you’re talking about open book,
I don’t know, I’d probably say no.
But
in terms of sharing information, […] I
would say yes, as long as it’s maybe
not
commercially
sensitive.”
-Senior
Negotiator and Contract Manager for
SUP1
“I think we talk as openly as the law
allows.
I mean, we don’t share any
proprietary information on either side.
[…] looking at maintenance programs, (we
are) sharing how some of our equipment
is performing to help them improve.”
-Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1
“(we share information) all the time. […]
There ’s a fine line but to me personally
to play both sides of the fence to convince
my business to do certain things that they
might be a little bit uncomfortable with
but, sharing of information that maybe
shouldn’t be shared, is part of the deal.
That’s how it works.” -Key Account Man-
ager for SUP1
Continued on next page
==PAGE:123==
Appendix B Supporting Tables
105
Table B.9 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“(The supplier is) not as open as I have
previously experienced, not as open as I
was is hoping for a 3PL. […] We don’t
share any sensitive information.
[…] I
don’t think they actually play a big role
in our planning as such. […] They have
some schedules that they follow for ship-
ments and their SOPs are in place that
they follow. But if we need to do some-
thing else than the standard then we will
give them a new deadline. So, it’s us being
proactive.” -Category Manager for SUP2
“As you can tell, I’m a huge believer in
sharing information.
I think it is truly
powerful. […] So, any market information
I have, I share with my clients. Informa-
tion Sharing is key in building stronger
partnerships. […] I mean, the more infor-
mation we can share between ourselves as
individuals and Companies then the much
more stronger we are and much more we’ll
be able to manage those challenges as they
come along. But this information sharing
has to be bilateral. It’s a two-way street.
[…] Especially with us being a 3PL or 4PL,
I think it’s our job or one of our jobs to
clearly open up and share what’s going on
because it gives them an insight of what
challenges are coming early on and we can
all prepare.” -Global Key Account Man-
ager for SUP2
“...as far as information sharing is con-
cerned, I would say that we only share with
them what they need to know, so only nec-
essary information and no sensitive data
or information at all.”
-Category Man-
ager for SUP3
“We also share information on how other
companies are doing things.
We are of
course, not only working with BF, we’re
also working with BFCompetitor1 and BF-
Competitor2 and BFCompetitor3. […] So,
we of course can offer some information
how others are doing it or come up with
another view of how to do things. And we
do that a lot. […] And of course, BF also
shares information with us regarding for
example upcoming projects or contracts.”
-Key Account Manager for SUP3
“...we were trying to be as open as we can
be by sharing what kind of spend numbers
we have also, what do we see in the pipeline
and also some performance related com-
ments. […] In terms of the integrated ser-
vices subcategories like
-
Continued on next page
==PAGE:124==
106
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.9 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
ROVs,
I think there we’re willing to
be more collaborative and more sharing.
Maybe if you compare that to some con-
sumable categories maybe there it’s just
transactional.”
-Contract Manager for
SUP4
“...I believe that we are as a company […]
quite open towards that (entering much
more close collaboration with many of our
key suppliers and share different kinds of
probably also sensitive information and a
lot of technical information). […] We are
actually trying to share some forecasting
activities on some of the projects that we
might have coming up with other suppliers,
in order to be more engaging and proactive
and open in the cooperation that we have.”
-Category Manager for SUP4
-
“So, maybe the market outlook could be
sensitive. Or we can share how we’re do-
ing maybe with some competitors […] to
improve efficiency or […] to get data from
the equipment so then we get to find a
willing or adverse to start working on to
that, what would it mean from a contract
perspective and sharing of information.” -
Category Manager for SUP5
-
Table B.10. The aspect of resources sharing in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“We’ve had 20K, we had riser […] Whether
it was good or bad that’s a different conver-
sation but that was joint resources looking.”
- Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1
“...at one point there was an opportunity
for 20K, where both companies had teams
that worked together on what that would
look like.
So yes, there was definitely a
sharing of resources.” -Key Account Man-
ager for SUP1
Continued on next page
==PAGE:125==
Appendix B Supporting Tables
107
Table B.10 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“With others 3PLs, we have had consul-
tants sitting in house, but that’s not some-
thing SUP2 provides.” -Category Manager
for SUP2
(No quotes available)
“We have collaborative teams with em-
ployees from both companies working to-
gether on projects, so I guess that is our
resources sharing aspect of the collabora-
tion.” -Category Manager for SUP3
“We are trying to embed the concept of
“one team” approach.
We’ve been doing
a couple of projects already now where we
have had people from SUP3 sitting in the
BF organization. […] And that’s our goal
going forward is to run out of big projects
in such a way. Then you can say that’s the
way we share resources.”
-Key Account
Manager for SUP3
“When there are development opportuni-
ties we’re trying new business models and
new ways of doing things, and they might
invest in something we might also invest
in it as a joint responsibility.” -Category
Manager for SUP5
-
Table B.11. The aspect of decision synchronisation in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“I think yes, from an operational/technical
perspective.
[…] We just come to them,
some good time in advance, in order to
prepare everything. […] I mean from the
technical there’s a lot of
“...we send out a yearly price list.
And
we also have a B2B kind of process where
purchase orders are sent in and they’re
[…] entered into our system, and a order
acknowledgement is generated.
Continued on next page
==PAGE:126==
108
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.11 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
coordination.
In supply chain, I think
there is not.”
-Category Manager for
SUP1
“I think the frank,
or the short an-
swer is we’re probably not very good at
that. […] in terms of forecasting, I think
we’re not good at that. And whether they
can use our forecasts to serve us better.”
-Senior Negotiator & Contract Manager
for SUP1
So that optimizes in my opinion the sup-
ply chain benefits on both for both compa-
nies. […] (Forecasting) is something that
we’ve asked repeatedly, especially if BF is
able to get into the smaller parts actually
spare parts, that would be amazing. But
for us the big win is knowing the schedule
for your overhaul repair 3-6 months out,
that way we can optimize our manufactur-
ing swap plan. […] That has probably been
one of our biggest battles. […] I don’t think
it’s as good as it should/could be.” -Key
Account Manager for SUP1
“Well, this is the same with all 3PLs, there
are these SOPs in place and these sched-
ules that are followed, and these are dis-
cussed and planned together, so you could
say there is orchestration here.” -Category
Manager for SUP2
“As part of information sharing and effec-
tive communication, there are times where
I get involved in decisions in their supply
chain planning and operations. We might
give them ideas of possibilities to reduce
their costs. Maybe they’re looking for lead
time, overall lead time. […] But when it
comes to getting in and actually doing a
synchronization, not really.” -Global Key
Account Manager for SUP2
“I think that orchestrating decisions is
made by engaging people from different de-
partments and positions, for example the
technical organization or the rig managers
so that the relevant stakeholders are di-
rectly in contact with the right people from
supplier company.”
-Category Manager
for SUP3
“...we would love it if BF were able to pro-
vide us with some forecasts or any indi-
cations about their future projects. They
did that in the past with T. G., we had
forecast on what jobs are coming in […] so
we always kind of knew what was going on
the next half year. That we don’t see any
longer, and it’s a shame because it was a
great help […] also because we might have
some input for it. […] So, if we can just
look half year into the future, that would
be brilliant.” -Key Account Manager for
SUP3
“...sometimes you would consult them
much in advance.
Sometimes, probably
not.” -Contract Manager for SUP4
-
Continued on next page
==PAGE:127==
Appendix B Supporting Tables
109
Table B.11 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“...we give them the overview of projects
and what we’ve got coming up so if we
have a number of SPS, then the earlier we
get that to them the better and they can
then make sure that they can work on it.”
-Category Manager for SUP5
-
Table B.12. The aspect of joint knowledge creation in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“...we do get some knowledge, but probably
not to the extent that we would want it.”
-Category Manager for SUP1
“I think if you have a good relation-
ship, this supplier is willing to tell you
more
general
market
information
but
sometimes maybe they tell you more than
they should […] this is also a sensitive topic
in antitrust and legal compliance areas, so
I think […] we need to be vigilant of that.
[…] I definitely think we’ve probably gained
some stuff, whether we’ve put ourselves
fully out there? I don’t think so.” -Senior
Negotiator & Contract Manager for SUP1
“I would say, yes, to some extent re-
flected on my discussions and what I have.
[…] Now, the question is to what level?
“...so there’s some stuff as far as market
knowledge that is not shared for obvious
reasons. So, we would love to know what
contracts BF is bidding on, what contracts
they have won, what contracts they are
about to lose. […] I don’t think we collab-
orate very well in that. That’s not joint
knowledge creation. There’s also a mar-
ket knowledge presentation at the BF web-
site […] for BF shareholders that we can
read to get an idea of what how they see
the market, but as far as us talking to BF
it doesn’t happen.”-Key Account Manager
for SUP1
I think neither one of us leverages as much
as we should.
[…] I don’t think we’ve
tapped into it enough and I think […] the
relationship is probably consuming enough
time with SUP1 […] that hasn’t allowed us
to do that yet. But I think there’s room for
improvement.”
-Senior Partnering Man-
ager for SUP1
Continued on next page
==PAGE:128==
110
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.12 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“...there’s definitely been learnings on both
sides after we joined this collaboration to-
gether. […] Personally […] I would say I’ve
learned some from SUP2 for the oil and
gas industry, I wasn’t from the oil and gas
industry before. But mainly that learning
has come from within the company.” - Cat-
egory Manager for SUP2
“...every month or every couple of weeks
since COVID-19 stepped in, we give over-
land sea freight and air freight global up-
dates to all our clients. We […] have client
webinars. […] We give a presentation we
have a q&a. So, it’s a very open and col-
laborative. And we have found it to be ex-
tremely, extremely valuable. […] that has
helped them look at things differently, hav-
ing that joint knowledge to understand the
current market landscape. […]So, it could
be, as you mentioned, joint knowledge cre-
ation.” -Global Key Account Manager for
SUP2
“I think that they’re generally very open
and they share information and knowledge
or best practices, because they also work
with our competitors.” -Category Manager
for SUP3
“I don’t know if we are getting that un-
derstanding regarding our competitors, be-
cause it’s normally not that open. […] I
would actually say […] that for a lot of the
people that we are speaking to in BF, then
we know more about the market. Because
we are dealing with all the other compa-
nies as well.” -Key Account Manager for
SUP3
“...they share information when equipment
is down at the data usage so yes, I think it
is enabling us to improve our competitive
position. And we’re always sharing infor-
mation regarding what goes through some
of their systems
-
the efficiency of equipment. So they also
learn from that […] so that’s an enabler for
them, that also allows them to hopefully
improve the efficiency of their equipment.”
-Category Manager for SUP5
==PAGE:129==
Appendix B Supporting Tables
111
Table B.13. The overall evaluation of SCC on SCP in the studied relationships.
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“...definitely
made
our
process
more
complicated. […] In terms of supply chain
and logistics some aspects with them are
more complicated, since […] I don’t see
that there’s too much collaboration from
their side. […] Our costs are higher with
them.” -Category Manager for SUP1
“I would say it’s overall positive with pock-
ets of negative incidents here and there as
would be expected.” -Senior Negotiator &
Contract Manager for SUP1
“I think there’s really pretty good collab-
oration between both companies, and get-
ting to a good solution for both.
[…] I
think it’s an overall positive outcome and
a very good collaboration, there are some
good processes in place […] but there is al-
ways room for improvement.”
-Key Ac-
count Manager for SUP1
“I think we have gotten what we pay for.
[…] I don’t think they have exceeded ex-
pectations. And generally, in some cases
they definitely haven’t met expectations
[…] overall, they might be even a bit under-
delivering, in terms of at least what my ex-
pectations are for a 3PL.” -Category Man-
ager for SUP2
“I think overall, it’s been positive. They
need to take some actions on themselves
to improve. […] And I think anybody that
can have collaboration based on solid trust,
they can have open communication and
transparent dialogue. Ans then, both com-
panies will see a positive result in their
supply chain’s performance. But the ones
who don’t have that they are not going to
last as partners and there is never going
to be trust between them.”
-Global Key
Account Manager for SUP2
“I think what we learnt from this big cri-
sis lately is that we need to establish a fall-
back option of critical supplier. Trust is
important but during crisis, like this with
COVID-19, it is not enough.” -Category
Manager for SUP3
“...no doubt that BF is one of the big
clients at least for SUP3 in Denmark, we
adore working with each other. […] In gen-
eral, we are very happy to work with BF.
We enjoy the collaboration and we enjoy
working with the people over there.
[…]
If it’s affecting our supply chain’s perfor-
mance, I don’t think so. We do our utmost
every day and try to come with the best
prices and we try also to educate BF on
how to do things better. And I think that’s
because the part when we try to be part-
ners, is to get the best out of both parties.”
-Key Account Manager for SUP3
Continued on next page
==PAGE:130==
112
Appendix B Supporting Tables
Table B.13 Continued from previous page
Buying Firm
Suppliers
“I would say in most cases it’s positive, I
haven’t heard of any negative cases. […]
The question is how to measure them.” -
Category Manager for SUP4
-
“There are a lot of factors where we can
be better.
Like with our planning and
forecasting.
[…] So, we don’t help their
capacity to produce the parts and often
we’re screaming to get the parts urgently
for downtime or for repair.
So, we can
improve the way we collaborate with them
and I think they are becoming easier to
work with.” -Category Manager for SUP5
-
==PAGE:131==
APPENDIX C
Coded Interview Transcripts
==PAGE:132==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 1 of 70 
 
Coded Interview Transcripts 
The following pages contain the reviewed-commented and coded interview transcripts. Table 1 below can 
be used as legend, explaining the meaning of the different colors used in the coding process.  
Table 1: Color-coding of Interview Transcripts according to Coding Category 
Coding Category Assigned Color 
Effect of Power on Supply Chain Collaboration  
Effect of Trust on Supply Chain Collaboration  
Effect of Trust on Power  
Effect of Power on Trust  
Supply Chain Collaboration Components  
 
Interview #1:  
One-on-one Interview with: 
• J. P. M.: Category Manager for SUP1 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Hi J. P. M. I will just share my screen a little bit so we can go through the questions one by one and you can 
provide your insights. If you can answer some of them. I should also let you know that I'm recording this session 
to get my notes transcribed later. So, then the first question it's regarding the power of the two players so BF 
and SUP1. So, for example, who is the most powerful player in this relationship?  
 
J. P. M.   
Yes, so SUP1 definitely. They are definitely in a more powerful position than us. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
And do you think that they, they actually exercise this power against BF or..? 
 
J. P. M.   
Yes, I think so. I mean we're just one other client for them and we're not a big one. So, we're not even a key 
client for them. So, they, I don't know, in any business or any deal that we get to have with them, they push a 
lot. They try to get as much profit as they can get out of the business rather than developing a partnership 
with us. They rather try to obtain as much profitability as possible from their side. So just an example, right now 
we're dealing with the latest project so yeah some analytical system in order to identify any issue with our BOP 
stack and they are just pushing too much, they're selling us this technology but also they're charging us a 
certain percentage of the savings we get with that technology so like, that's kind of too much. It's like you're 
sending a car that saves fuel but I'm going to charge you for the fuel you get to save something like that. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay. And would you say that this power exertion from their side has, in a way, affected the relationship with 
them, negatively or positively? 
Commented [AS1]: Power on SCC: 
The most powerful partner (the supplier) uses their 
power over the weakest (buyer) during negotiations and 
in any deal, they just push a lot to achieve the most 
profitable results for their company. 
 
Most powerful partner: 
The supplier is more powerful. 
Commented [AS2]: Power on SCC: 
 
Overall effect: 
The two companies have a big bond, but lately the 
focus is to explore other options for the products and 
services they provide because the buyer is not very 
happy with the collaboration. 
 
==PAGE:133==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 2 of 70 
 
 
J. P. M.   
So far, I think that we have big bond with them for the services like the well control services. But I think right 
now there is more focus in, and we are also seeing some other opportunities and then other third parties might 
supply the service so we're exploring other options right now. But before and until recently, we were going 
exclusively for them.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Good. Okay. And then we also want to investigate the effect of trust in supply chain collaboration. And then, 
my question is Would you say that there is a sufficient amount of trust between BF and SUP1, and is this trust 
based on, for example, some rewards or penalties or, mostly in dependency that BF has on SUP1? 
 
J. P. M.   
I think they see the relationship more like that, like you said, there's a dependency from us to them. So, we 
currently don't have a prize reward scheme, but we do have penalties for us. We have penalties for 
cancellations penalties for late payments, but not too many things if they deliver late. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay. And then the overall collaboration, is it an open collaboration or do they tend to be more closed up 
and do not share information that much? 
 
J. P. M.   
They tend to be more closed up.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay. And would you assess this as a negative effect on the collaboration or positive? 
 
J. P. M.   
Well, so far, my experience has been rather negative. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Great. And the next question is, how would you interpret the effect of trust on the power asymmetry in this 
relationship? 
 
J. P. M.   
Can you explain that. 
 
Commented [AS3]: Trust on SCC: 
 
There is trust in the relationship, but it is based on the 
high dependency of the buyer to the supplier. There are 
penalties, but they are never used.  
 
The supplier is not as open as the buyer would like to 
be, negatively affecting the collaboration. 
 
In the respondent’s experience, the trust has too little to 
have a positive effect on the collaboration. 
 
 
Commented [AS4]: Trust on Power: 
 
The buyer’s trust and loyalty towards the supplier has 
alleviated the use of power from the supplier in the 
relationship.  
 
 
==PAGE:134==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 3 of 70 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Yes of course. So for example, there is a certain amount of trust, I gather in this company from BF, because 
they've been working together for, I don't know how many years but they have been in close collaboration 
for many years, and they keep choosing them, and it's probably due to the dependency as you explained 
earlier.  But then how would you say that this trust that is based on the dependency has affected their 
perception of power against BF? Has SUP1 become less coercive against BF or are they still exerting the same 
amount of power? 
 
J. P. M.   
Um, I think that there's definitely trust, I think trust differs from collaboration I mean, yes, we rely on their service, 
and we trust them on their deliverables and what they are giving us. But uh, I think trust doesn't affect that 
much the collaboration side, it goes pretty much aside from the... Like, of course, since they know like trust 
and that we rely kind of on them, probably they also think that they have the bargaining power, as well. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay. And so, you would mostly say that their power has affected the trust, and not the other way around in 
the relationship? 
 
J. P. M.   
I think the trust has affected the power. Our signals of trust, and let's say our loyalty towards them. They 
understood that: “okay they rely on us a lot!”. So, they think that they have their bargaining power and they 
just use that in the negotiations.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Good. So, now last category. That's about supply chain collaboration and supply chain performance and 
there's our more general questions. So, for example, how frequently do you have structured meetings with the 
supplier? 
 
J. P. M.   
Well, we're communicating constantly with them. Mostly the Well control team, they have a pretty close 
collaboration with them. And we are doing every quarter or every six months a QBR quarterly business review. 
So, every six months we properly meet with them to analyze basically, the overall scope of all the services. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Great, and to what degree do you share sensitive information with this partner? For example, does BF share 
forecasts, or future plans with SUP1, or the other way around if they provide forecasts for spare parts or 
availability...? 
 
J. P. M.   
So far not that much. And I was just looking at the previous QBR and they were more focusing on the current 
performance on the services but not much on the forecast performance and ways to improve and how are 
Commented [AS5]: Trust on Power: 
 
The buyer’s trust and loyalty towards the supplier has 
alleviated the use of power from the supplier in the 
relationship. 
Commented [AS6]: Power on Trust: 
- 
 
Commented [AS7]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Collaborative communication: 
Operations have very frequent communication and are 
quite open in sharing of information with each other. 
Strategic levels have the QBRs on biannual meetings 
discussing more strategic scopes and projects in the 
pipeline. 
Commented [AS8]: Information sharing: 
 
The buyer is more willing and open to disclose 
information than the supplier. 
==PAGE:135==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 4 of 70 
 
they positioning within the industry. I think we disclose more information than they do to us, for example, we're 
sharing with them on cost analyses of these projects where we basically are trying to show them that it's not 
profitable for us from a financial perspective so yes, I think from our side yes, on their side not that much. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay. So, in your opinion, BF is more open, and SUP1 is more closed to sharing information?  
 
J. P. M.   
Yes.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay, good. And then, to what extent do you orchestrate decisions together to optimize the overall supply 
chain benefits? For example, does BF share information with SUP1 some time in advance, when you know that 
you will need a service from them, or a PO will be issued, so that they can also improve their operations and 
orchestrate? 
 
J. P. M.   
I think yes, from an operational/technical perspective. The engineers share their concepts with them and 
when we're going to have new services to be provided. We just come to them, some good time in advance, 
in order to prepare everything. Yes. However, from the logistic perspective and the supply chain if that's what 
you're asking. I mean from the technical there's a lot of coordination. In supply chain, I think there is not. I think 
they have two standards. They work under certain way and, as I said we're not such a big player for them. 
So, they leave a lot of tasks to us, like for example they're not offering us any type of shipping services or trying 
to deliver to us. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Great. And then, would you say that BF has developed a better understanding of the market and the 
competitive environment because of working together with SUP1, or not? 
 
J. P. M.   
I wouldn't say nothing of course I mean; they are like the market leaders, so their prices and we get a little bit 
of access to their technologies, their new products, etc. But, I mean, we do get some knowledge, but 
probably not to the extent that we would want it, we don't. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay, makes sense. And how would you interpret this collaboration has affected the overall supply chain 
performance of BF? 
 
J. P. M.   
Commented [AS9]: Decision synchronization: 
 
From technical perspective there is a lot of coordination, 
but for supply chain not so much. 
 
The buyer company does not consider themselves as a 
big client for the supplier.  
 
The buyer thinks that the service they provide is not as 
high standard as they wanted. 
Commented [AS10]: Joint Knowledge Creation: 
 
Not at a noticeable extent. 
Commented [AS11]: SCC on SCP overall: 
 
Working with this supplier made the processes more 
complicated, not necessarily improving them. 
==PAGE:136==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 5 of 70 
 
Well definitely made our processes more complicated. Let's say in terms of supply chain and logistics some 
aspects with them are more complicated, since like I told you I don't see that there's too much collaboration 
from their side. Of course, our costs are higher with them. And, yes, I think this was the idea behind diversifying 
a little bit our scope and trying to go to other suppliers, so we don't rely so much on their systems and their 
services. But that's why we're trying to develop other relationships. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay. That's great. I think that's it. Thank you for your time. I will also send you a small questionnaire regarding 
what is your title, how long have you been working with BF, this kind of things. It will be like two minutes, just for 
me to be able to have an overview of who I have spoken to and how long they've been managing the 
relationships. And lastly, I would like to ask if you could share with me the contact details of a representative 
from SUP1 who would be willing to talk with me to do this interview with them too? 
 
J. P. M.   
Okay sure. I will let them know and I'll copy you in an email I'm going to send to P. A., who is the global account 
manager. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Awesome. Thank you very much. Have a good day.  
 
J. P. M.   
You too. Bye. 
 
 
==PAGE:137==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 6 of 70 
 
 
Interview #2: 
Focus group Interview with: 
• J. M.: Senior Negotiator & Contract Manager for SUP1 
• D. F.: Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Hi D.F. and J. M. Thank you for participating in this interview. So, first of all, an Introduction from me. I'm currently 
doing my master's thesis at DTU, where I am studying Transport and Logistics, and then the thesis project title 
is the role of trust and power in supply chain collaboration, and how this affects supply chain performance. 
And we're doing this in collaboration with BF a little bit so we're looking into some key suppliers, strategic and 
operational ones. And we want to drill down a little bit in these relationships and see how trust and power, 
have an effect in the collaboration and their overall performance. So, the first group of questions is regarding 
the effect of power on supply chain collaboration. But before that, I would like an introduction from you 
regarding SUP1, because I'm not very sure that I understand the company overall and how they have 
become one company. So, if you could spend a few minutes explaining this to me that would be great. 
 
D. F.   
Sure, of course. So, a little history of the company that you refer to as "company x" in your questionnaire.  It's 
been through an iteration of a number of I would say acquisitions or ownership changes or structural changes 
within the H. brand. So, our relationship from BF to SUP1, as what it's known today, started with the H. brand. 
That H. brand produces subsea equipment, predominantly blowout preventers which we refer to that as a 
BOP, and our relationship goes all the way back to the "R-rigs" when we first built the "R-rigs", we equip them 
with the SUP1, or the at that time the H. blowout preventers. As years transpired, we started a new-build 
program with our Deepwater fleet, first building the Deepwater semies, and upon that we went to tender with 
our two main suppliers being SUP5 and SUP1, where we chose SUP1 - at that time H. (again I'm sorry, I keep 
referring to their current name), but H. was chosen to be the equipment provider for our Deepwater fleet at 
that time, which was the "D-rigs". So, we not only, so we chose H. to provide the blowout preventers, but A. - 
a different company - to provide the risers. Fast forward a few more years when we started our new build 
program with the, with the "V-rigs". During the period of selecting the "D-rigs" to the time where we built the 
"V-rigs", H. was acquired by G. The H. brand, along with a number of other components was acquired by the 
G. organization as they were expanding in their whole oil and gas division. With that, then eventually, there 
was a merger, where G. merged with SUP1, they - some call it an acquisition, but it was known as a merger - 
where G. had a majority share of the ownership of SUP1. Upon that merger, the H. oilfield equipment was 
placed under the SUP1 brand. And then, eventually GE decided to exit from the oil and gas industry. That's 
when it was then called "SUP1 a G. company", now it's just SUP1. So that's where we have the name today, 
but the majority of the relationship resides with the H. brand, and for the "V-rigs", it also includes the V. brand, 
which was also part of the acquisition of G. So, does that make sense? 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Yes, it's a lot clearer to me right now because I had no idea about all these changes and how it became one 
company and then split again, all these things before so 
 
D. F.   
Commented [AS12]: History of the Hydril-Baker 
Hughes-GE corporation and background. 
==PAGE:138==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 7 of 70 
 
It was just where G decided in their transformation, they exited the merger agreement where SUP1 was then 
to buy back the shares for G, and SUP1 - part of that option was to keep the oilfield businesses which included 
the V. and H. brand. So now it's just a SUP1 company, and are related, again, just to repeat our relationship, 
from an equipment perspective lies with the H. and the V. brand, our relationship with SUP1 on the third party 
services are falls under the SUP1 oilfield Services Division. So, if you look, if you try to kind of visualize SUP1 as 
the name brand it has two different pillars that it stands on which is what they call OFS and OFE, the OFS being 
offshore services, the OFE being offshore equipment, or oilfield equipment, sorry. The oilfield equipment will 
include any of their legacy of manufacturing brands, which is H., V....the name is going to come to me in a 
second. Anyway, there's four or five of elements or pieces of equipment that they manufacture. All the 
services that's basically third party services which is something that is a direct in the old traditional model as a 
direct hire from the, the same clients that we cater to also utilize SUP1 services for their third party services 
such as wireline, mud logging, seismic interpretation. The list goes on and on - mud fluid, fluid property 
development... So, it's a number of activities in that vertical. So, I hope that gives you a little bit of a better 
picture. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Yes, it certainly gives me a better image of the company that we're about to discuss. Okay. Then, if that's 
okay then I can start with the questions from the file that I had attached in the meeting invitation. 
 
D. F. 
Sure. Sure, so I have to be conscious of J. M. 's time. So, J. M.  how much time do you have? Are you have a 
hard stop at 9:30? 
 
J. M.   
I'm just quite busy at the moment like the supply chain is going a bit crazy with stocking and. 
 
D. F.   
So - can I suggest this? Why don't you take the first part here and let's run through yours? Okay. And then, we 
could follow up on a separate call. I'm pretty free today or tomorrow, later today and tomorrow, we can 
follow up, and I could give you my responses. That might be a better utilization of J. M. 's time. Does that sound 
okay? 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
For me, yes. I don't mind. 
 
D. F.   
Yes. Does that sound good. All right go ahead J. M., I'll let you take it in because I have a feeling our answers 
will kind of vary from someone but I think it would be good. And from the different perspectives for Anna 
Maria here. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
==PAGE:139==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 8 of 70 
 
Yes, so let's go ahead. Great. Okay, so the first group of questions is about looking a little bit in the effect of 
power in supply chain collaboration. And I would like to know how you would describe the power asymmetry 
in the relationship with SUP1? Who is the strongest trading partner, and how is this power exercised towards 
the weakest one? 
 
J. M.   
So, I would say from my knowledge that the relationship, on paper, they would be... If you look at the current 
state, I would say that we are in the weaker position. Considering that we have gone from being a big group 
into a standalone company, and they have kind of merged into to more than one brand. So, if you just look 
on paper, I would say that in the power dynamics between buyer supplier negotiation power and that kind 
of stuff, we would look like the weaker power, or the weaker party. But if you look at it from, how would a 
company like us, a punch above our weight, then I would say that, in the current market if you look at drilling 
contractors, then we're actually in a better financial position than most. So, from that perspective, we would 
be interesting. You could also say that there's a change in the market. In the past, the operators would go 
directly to all the different subcontractors and make contracts with them. But now we're in a position where 
a lot of sub or a lot of operators are looking at reducing the number of suppliers that they have, and having 
kind of like a main contractor who is taking care of all the subcontractors. This is, , in looking at things like 
SeaPulse - I don't know if you're aware of that, but also integrated services in general, the A. B. Alliance, I think 
the marketplace is changing, where we own the rig. Where, where it's kind of there from start to end for drilling 
campaign. So, all these things, give us or make us interesting to a company like SUP1 and others in that case. 
Traditionally we were talking to G. where it was H. and it was V. And these kinds of things where now with 
what we're what some of the operators are asking, we could potentially even broaden the scope with the 
SUP1 brand and the extra things that they bring to the table. So, and we're a company that likes or would like 
to test different things. So we could be a guinea pig for them to test new innovation, and maybe be interesting 
I think one of the downsides with us maybe is that we're very risk adverse so where we're willing to test things 
when we don't have to put our money on the table. But the moment we have to put money on the table 
and commit, then then we're quite risk adverse and quite difficult to, to deal with. So, so the dynamic is not 
as simple as it could look on paper if you just compare the financials of each company. I think there's a lot of 
other aspects to it. One of the things that you could look at is - Now I forget what it's called - is called the 
procurement chessboard, which is how a company like us from a procurement standpoint could kind of 
strategically see where we are placed with a company like SUP1. I think we would like to be in what is called 
the partnership box. That's where we work towards, whether from a pure, looking at the data and the facts if 
we actually fall in there. I don't know. But I think our ambition is definitely to fall in there and to work in that 
direction. And to punch above our weight. So, I don't know if that answers your question or you have any 
follow up questions. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
No, no, you actually provided a very in depth, understanding of how you view this power relationship in this 
relationship from both sides. So, it's really, really great. Thank you. And, but would you say that there is a power 
that is exercised from the supplier to BF, or the other way around. When they were in the negotiations for 
example? 
 
J. M.  
I mean, I haven't been directly involved in the negotiations maybe more from a from a back seat supporting 
some of the people who have which was J. P. M. now and D. previously. But I don't know maybe that's better 
for D. F.   or J. P. M. to answer. But I would say... Yeah, I don't know. 
 
D. F.   
Commented [AS13]: Power on SCC: 
 
Most powerful partner: 
The supplier is more powerful, but we are an attractive 
client to them. 
 
The buyer company is attractive also because they are 
willing to experiment and try new things (innovation). 
But only as long as they do not have to invest on that. 
When investments are involved, the buyer company is 
more risk adverse. 
 
The buyer company is involved in integrated services 
projects. 
 
In the procurement chessboard, the buyer company 
would like to be placed with a company like Baker 
Hughes in what is called the partnership box. That's 
where they work towards, whether they don’t know if 
they actually fall in that category right now, but that is 
their ambition and they work in that direction. 
 
 
 
Commented [AS14]: Power exercise and power 
dynamics: 
 
Very dynamic and heavily dependent on the market and 
the oil price.  
 
There is high dependency to this supplier and they (the 
supplier) tend to make use of that as leverage in 
negotiations etc. to achieve favorable terms. 
 
The buyer company is an innovative and forward-
thinking organization. They manage their equipment 
better than anybody in the industry, and they are 
attractive to suppliers because they (the suppliers) can 
learn a lot from them. 
 
Currently the buyer company has a good level of power 
and strength in the industry and in the power dynamics 
of this relationship. Sometimes they use that power and 
sometimes not, because they acknowledge the 
importance of being strategic and playing their cards 
without misusing their power because the market is very 
dynamic and they don’t know how soon they will end 
up in the not-so-favorable power position. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:140==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 9 of 70 
 
Yes, we know we could come back to that one, Anna-Maria. That's a very good question and in it. So, the 
position of power kind of depends on what season the industry we're in. If we're in an upcycle, down cycle, 
mid cycle. And I must admit, it is one that is very fluid in our relationship as it is with SUP5. So, it's a very dynamic 
question, but one that. Yes, I mean, we can reflect back to a period of when we're in the uptake and 
everything, we're earning $500,000 a day and the whole industry is very good. The negotiations are where 
they really leverage our dependency on them because, again, once you buy this very expensive equipment, 
whether it's SUP5, SUP1 or whatever it is, you form a level of dependence on one another. And that level of 
dependence, in the early stages of implementation, you're very, very reliable on the OEM, so we become 
very reliable on our equipment providers. As the equipment starts to age and deteriorate and as we learn 
more and they learn more, that level of dependence becomes a little bit less and less. And so, in a perfect 
world, you have a good partnership relationship where you can work through those ebbs and flows of the 
industry. In our business it's sometimes difficult because it's so CAPEX heavy. So, I would say that at times we've 
been at a position of power for a lot of the reasons J. M.  had mentioned in his statements. So why we're so 
interesting? We're very innovative we're a forward-thinking organization, we manage our equipment better 
than anybody in the industry that's why we're so attractive to them, they learn a lot from us. However, it's what 
value they place on that, they also have a mentality if they need to make hay while the sun is shining. So in 
an up market, they're going to, they're going to leverage their position pretty heavy because, they also have 
other customers that they do the same with and have much larger spend than we do probably have a lot 
more spare parts in active markets so we don't quite get that, that love without that strong position of strength. 
But in today's market, I would say we - again for the financial reasons J. M.  mentioned in his answer - we have 
a pretty good level of strength right now in our relationship. However, there's a whole other dialogue of how 
do we use that, and how do we exercise that? Sometimes we take advantage of that, sometimes we don't. 
But that's the question. 
 
J. M.  
Maybe to add to what D. F.   is saying is the industry has traditionally been cyclical. So, you could say that all 
parties know that maybe you have the power now, but you might not have the power in the future. So, you 
need to be strategic and playing your cards and not "misusing" your power if I can say it like that. But we are 
entering what I would assume is unprecedented times with COVID and with the low oil price and the transition 
to a more balanced energy mix with other sources. So, what we're going into I think is unprecedented and I 
don't know if anybody knows how that will affect the power dynamic. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Great. Thank you very much, both. You highlighted different angles and you both, like a helped me develop 
a better understanding of the power dynamics in this relationship. Then I will jump to the next. That's about 
trust in supply chain collaboration, and it's actually the same question: how would you perceive and describe 
this trust that's been built with a SUP1, and I gather it's based more on dependence on the supplier. But I would 
also like to know if it's also may be due to integrity or reliability towards them? 
 
J. M.  
I think it's very linked to your last question. Yeah, so negotiation always has some, especially in a long-term 
relationship with power dynamics shifting, depending on the macro market environment. I would say that the 
trust change is also a fluid thing. And, I think we - I don't know how to say this in the right way,  but I think BF in 
general has in the past been very cost focused, and maybe harder to see the things where you can't put a 
number to. And then when you deal with each other, I think on the surface there is a lot of trust, but sometimes 
when you go deeper maybe the trust isn't really there because you always have to check your numbers, you 
always have to do a business case. If the business case doesn't show a mathematical or economical financial 
gain that's clear cut, then it's like a no go. Different things happen that one rig will complain about x supplier, 
another rig might love them. It's two relatively big organizations. We used to be even bigger but now we're 
Commented [AS15]: Trust on SCC: 
 
Just as power, trust is also fluid in the relationship and it 
changes. 
 
The buyer was very cost-focused in the past and failed 
to see the things that you can’t put a number to. 
 
On the surface, there is a lot of trust, but if you dig 
deeper, the trust isn’t really there. 
 
Changes in trust levels may also be linked to changes in 
the sizes of the organizations (the bigger, the less true 
trust). 
 
The lack of trust adds to the power dynamics. 
 
Many touchpoints between the organizations that do 
not always have aligned agendas and different 
objectives. 
 
==PAGE:141==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 10 of 70 
 
smaller. They've also changed in size with the historical journey that the D. F.   just went through. So I think that 
it always changes in terms of trust and sometimes there's a lack of trust and that adds to the power dynamics, 
so it's actually quite complicated in reality, I would say, especially since there's quite a few touch points within 
both organizations and different, I don't want to say agendas, but different goals from the different parties 
and even within the same organization you could say the different departments may have varying objectives. 
And then within the SUP1 organization it's probably the same thing. So, I definitely think it's complicated and 
fluid and it depends on what's currently going on. And if something negative happens like an Equipment 
Breakdown when we lose the day rate, and it's a more high-risk game, then trust can be broken. So, I think it's 
quite complicated. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay, great. And could you maybe mention for how many years has been BF working with this company? 
 
J. M.  
Well, if you look back to H. G., I guess it's from, I don't know, I haven't been, the 80s probably. 
 
D. F.   
Yes, well we I mean we've always had some rigs. It probably starts before; we've always bought wellheads 
and they're the number one wellhead provider. But it's a long historical relationship right. But I think what's - 
and of course we can have a separate talk on this I think, cause as J. M.  said it's complicated. It's a 
complicated relationship. There are various levels of trust, senior leadership trust is one element that drives the 
business. Technical leadership and the middle management trust is one level, and then you have the 
transactional day to day frontline trust. And then you have the rig, each individual rig asset, so, that's a very 
good, and complicated question and of course on our call I can get more in detail than that but maybe a 
challenge for you is how do you really want to approach that. You want to approach it from a brand to brand 
discussion with where the brand to brand trust level is and try it which is a is an average whole or how it truly 
works from our organization to theirs and the real world. Because there are areas and pillars or verticals that 
there is little or no trust and it's very transactional, and then there are areas where there's a lot of collaboration 
and a great deal of trust and openness and. So, it is complicated to say the least. 
 
J. M.  
I think that's a good point from D. F. that it depends on the different levels, all the way from transactional to 
strategic. And then on the individual rig level and brand level.  
 
D. F.   
You know it. Yeah. Anyway, I don't want to take up too much time while he's here so we'll, we'll keep moving 
on. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Yes, great. So, and about the interplay of trust on power and power on trust, I feel like you have kind of covered 
that within the discussion saying that it's very dynamic and it also has to do with how the market, the oil market 
is, and these kind of things that affect this power asymmetry. But would you overall, say that having a trusted 
Commented [AS16]: There are areas where there is 
little trust and the relationship is transactional and there 
are other areas where there is great openness, trust and 
collaboration. 
 
Level of trust depends on the different levels (e.g. 
transactional vs. strategic level). 
==PAGE:142==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 11 of 70 
 
partner in some respects in SUP1 has, let's say, limited the exertion of coercive power from one partner to 
another, or has it had the opposite result? 
 
J. M.  
If I understand the question correctly, then I would say that the lack of trust, could lead to us. I think if you look 
at both parties, if we were both to open all our cards and put it on the table (which we don't because there 
is always some sort of lack of trust and protecting your own interests), I think it would probably have a better 
outcome for both parties. But because there is always some kind of lack of trust depending on what you're 
talking about and when you're talking about it, then that lack of trust has probably resulted in both parties 
not getting what they optimally could have gotten from the relationship, the negotiation, whatever you want 
to look at it as. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Yes, great. Thank you. D. F. you wanted to add something or…? 
 
D. F.   
No, no, we'll come back around, we'll circle back around. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Perfect. Then I will go to the last category about supply chain collaboration and supply chain performance. 
And these are a lot of more general questions, like for example number seven: How frequently do you 
communicate with the supplier? I mean structured meetings where you discuss main issues in the relationship 
or things that could be improved, this kind of things. How often is that? 
 
J. M.  
So, I would say that, theoretically, and the way we would like to do it, maybe is different to what it is in reality 
as always. But I think the textbook answer is that you would have a kind of regular tactical transactional 
operational meetings where it's very much how does it work in terms of us, requesting quotations, getting 
prices, flipping that into purchase orders then giving an order confirmation and giving quotations on time and 
then delivering on time, and that sort of thing. That's usually done very frequently, because that is something 
that needs to be done to run the business. Then you could say there's different levels of meetings where there's 
also the more strategic angle, where you might have meetings that are in relation to innovations that we're 
exploring together. And then there could be meetings to do with getting the "C levels" together so that we 
build relationships on all relevant levels of the organization, which both organizations can benefit from when 
something happens or if something doesn't happen if we want supplier enabled technology. So, I think you 
would split it into two: the strategic interactions which are usually less frequent and maybe on a quarterly or 
biannual or annual basis, and then you would have the transactional, which can be on a day to day but also 
on a monthly, and both informal and formal basis. And how that is in real life? It is probably not as good as it 
should be, if I'm to be really frank. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Good. And I guess the most frequent communication is with the buyers, and then the sales department, right? 
 
Commented [AS17]: Power on trust: 
 
 
 
Trust on power: 
The lack of trust leads to more use of the power and to 
both parties not getting what they wanted. 
 
There is always some lack of trust and protecting our 
own interests.  
 
The parties are not completely open with each other. 
Commented [AS18]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Collaborative communication:  
Theory and reality is different. They have frequent 
tactical transactional meetings. More strategic meetings 
in relation to innovations etc. should be done quarterly 
or biannually but that’s not always possible. The overall 
collaborative communication is not as good as it should 
be. 
==PAGE:143==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 12 of 70 
 
J. M.   
Yeah, so the transactional, that's our operational supply chain from buyers and even to logistics and inventory 
people to their relevant counterparts. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Would you say that they this company is open to sharing information with BF, like forecasts? 
 
J. M.   
My experience is yes, whether you're talking about open book, I don't know, I’d probably say no. But in terms 
of sharing information, from what I've observed and seen, I would say, yes, as long as it's maybe not 
commercially sensitive. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay. And do you know if there have been any projects with SUP1 that there has been also a sharing of 
resources like joint ventures or projects that both companies had invested capitals or other resources in the 
same project? 
 
J. M.  
To my knowledge, no, but I think D. F. would know better than me. 
 
D. F.   
Yes, we can touch on that. We've had 20K, we had riser, we've also done. We're looking at the original riser 
inspection program - whether it was good or bad that's a different conversation but that was joint resources 
looking. How do you solve that problem we've also done a couple of other things? But there have been a 
few projects. Probably 20 k was the most in depth project that we've had. So that was a lot of resources. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
And to what extent does BF and SUP1 orchestrate their decisions in supply chain planning to optimize their 
benefits? 
 
J. M.  
I think the frank, or the short answer is we're probably not very good at that. I don't know if it's more on our 
end that that or they're in but, but I think it's very much we send a requisition, they quote. We send a purchase 
order. They send an order confirmation. And then the logistics happens but in terms of forecasting, I think 
we're not good at that. And whether they can use our forecasts to serve us better. I guess we don't truly know 
because we're probably not very good at that. 
 
D. F.   
Commented [AS19]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Information sharing and openness: 
Not “open book” relationship. They share non-sensitive 
information. 
 
Resource sharing and collaborative projects: 
There have been cases in the past – not sure if it was a 
good collaboration and positive outcome or not. 
Commented [AS20]: Decision synchronization: 
They are not very good at that. They don’t even share 
forecasts. 
 
Trust on SCC: 
People change all the time: 
On the buyer side, people change all the time and they 
have different priorities and perspectives. The 
relationship works as long as it is managed by the same 
people who are invested in it, but in this company that 
changes very frequently even more than once in a year. 
That is deemed as hugely important in defining the 
buyer firm’s relationships with its partners. There is only 
a handful of people who are in the company for a long 
time in the same role. Usually that changes a lot and 
that is a huge challenge for the relationships with 
partners as these usually go back to people’s 
personalities, knowing each other and being eager to 
set a bad deal quickly so that it does not have a bad 
effect in the relationship.  
 
Trust on SCC: 
The company doesn’t give much leeway to its suppliers 
(not much room for mistake and they do not forgive 
easily – no real trusted relationships). If they get burnt 
once then they carry that along. 
 
==PAGE:144==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 13 of 70 
 
I think that J. M. 's view of today's world is absolutely correct. I think we've had pockets of success in this. I can 
name one where we had a 10-year MMA agreement that worked very good for nine years and not very 
good on the 10th year. But there's many reasons behind that, where there was a great level of orchestration 
done, and service in our BOPs, but again it goes back to the trust and dynamic of the relationship and we 
can talk about that later of why your 10 failed as an example. But, yeah, go ahead J. M. 
 
J. M.  
Yes, maybe adding to that I don't know so much on their side, but on our side people change all the time, 
and the new people or the old people have different perspectives and different priorities, and so, if you're 
managing such a long relationship, it's like, it's so fluid and dynamic and everybody has a different perspective 
so maybe it works for the first couple of years with the people who are truly invested and then they change 
and somebody else comes in, and then it's like: "Oh, that's not a priority anymore", so, yeah. 
 
D. F.   
Man, that is hugely important in defining all of BF's relationships, and where some of the pitfalls are exactly 
what J. M.  just said. We have a dynamic organization. If I can sit here in one hand and look at the relationship 
from a senior level with two of our big companies and tell you and at least just a handful of people that have 
maintained the continuity between the two companies. Luckily myself because I've been here so long for the 
exception of a year and a half, but still, I've been the most, consistent person in a single role and F. S. being, 
the CTO, back to the senior level engagement and how that senior level relationship, also drives brand to 
brand trust. And so, there's a challenge. There's a challenge with some organizations and there's, and then 
there are some organizations where there's less of a challenge there, so it does become somewhat about 
personalities and knowing each other. Having the ability to really look forward and wipe the slate clean on 
bad deals. And with some suppliers, we do a very good job of that and some suppliers, we don't give them 
much leeway. And that's just human nature I would say but there's some good examples that we can touch 
on later on. 
 
J. M.  
And also, people's past experiences you know if they got burned once, then they carry that along.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
That's great, that's all the information I needed to hear so thank you. It's exactly what I have seen in my study 
so far while doing my literature research and these are exactly the same things that have come up so far 
from my research, so it's very good to see that these are also validated from the real world. Then we'll jump 
up to the next and that is if you would say that BF has developed a better understanding to the oil and gas 
market overall from working with SUP1? For example, has this supplier helped BF understand the competition 
better or not? 
 
J. M.  
I would say yes. I think if you have a good relationship, this supplier is willing to tell you more general market 
information but sometimes maybe they tell you more than they should. And the more relationships you have, 
and with the different suppliers who are competitors you get quite a lot of information where you can build a 
picture of how things are with your competitors and in the industry. Yet this is also a sensitive topic in antitrust 
and legal compliance areas, so I think it's somewhere where we need to be vigilant of that. But at the same 
Commented [AS21]: Joint Knowledge creation: 
 
Yes, if there is a good relationship with the supplier, 
they are willing to share more general market 
information, maybe even more than they should. 
 
The more good relationships you have, and with the 
different suppliers who are competitors you get quite a 
lot of information where you can build a picture of how 
things are with your competitors and in the industry. 
 
Sensitive topic in anti-trust and they need to be vigilant. 
But at the same time, they need to share what they can 
legally and use that to their advantage, without 
breaking any of these laws that are in place. 
 
 
==PAGE:145==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 14 of 70 
 
time, we need to, to share what we can legally and use that to our advantage, without breaking any of these 
laws that are in place. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
And I guess, it's not only what SUP1 might assist BF with but it's also maybe a foul BF is using the equipment or, 
I don't know, service, people from SUP1 and then they gain more knowledge or they get an understanding 
and transfer best practices to their other customers. 
 
J. M.  
I think in this day and age, now that we have big data and we have data analytics and we have sensors all 
over the rig and SUP1 gets it from other competitors and we have our own data, and I think the more you 
share the more insights you will get and, and you could probably do quite amazing things with that. But that 
also goes back to the trust game, like how much do you want to share? mean intellectual property is always 
an issue in this kind of thing. And I think, by sharing your data with SUP1 who could then anonymize what they 
get from the market and give you insights. But then your competitors can also benefit. So, that is also another, 
it's also legal thing and it's quite complex. I definitely think we've probably gained some stuff, whether we've 
put ourselves fully out there? I don't think so. Where we could gain the most and then sometimes you just hear 
things.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Thank you. 
 
J. M.  
I don't know if that answered your question. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Yeah, it did. Um, so the last one is, how would you interpret this collaboration has affected the supply chain 
performance of BF. Is it an overall positive or negative outcome? 
 
J. M.  
I would say it's overall positive with pockets of negative incidents here and there as would be expected. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay. Perfect. Thank you. I think I don't need to keep you any longer. In the call. 
 
J. M.  
Thanks for interviewing me and I would be very interested to see what your, what your paper looks like and 
what your recommendations are and if it's something we can use and implement 
 
Commented [AS22]: Information sharing and Joint 
knowledge creation: 
 
Using data analytics and getting insights off of the data 
to improve the business and the processes, best 
practices, knowledge transfer. Thy can benefit, but also 
their competitors. Not sure if they are fully open to that. 
 
Data ownership issues – legal. 
Commented [AS23]: SCC on SCP overall: 
 
Overall positive outcome, with pockets of negative 
incidents here and there. 
 
==PAGE:146==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 15 of 70 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Yes, I hope it's going to be something interesting and insightful in the end. But for now, I would like to thank 
you both for your time and D. F., I will send you a separate invitation for later this week if it works for you or 
next week. And I have also interviewed J. P. M. because he wasn't able to participate in this call, and we 
discussed a little bit and he will ask SUP1 if I can contact them about having an interview so that they can 
also share their side of things. So that was it. Thanks again and have a great day! 
 
==PAGE:147==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 16 of 70 
 
Interview #3: 
One-on-one Interview with: 
• D. F.: Senior Partnering Manager for SUP1 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Hi D. F. Thanks for joining me on a second separate session. So, I made this presentation to make it easier for 
me to switch through the questions and make sure that we are both on the same page. Okay, so I'm going 
to jump right into it. And as you can recall the first group of questions about the effect of power supply chain 
collaboration, and how you would describe the power asymmetry in their relationship with SUP1. So, would 
you like to say anything more on that or do you think that it's been covered already? 
 
D. F.   
No, I think the important element here is that the power asymmetry is very market driven. And it's also very 
much that we can't deny the fact that we have with all of our OEM suppliers, whether it's SUP1, SUP5, there is 
a high level of dependency, because they are the original equipment manufacturer. So, once you acquire 
that equipment there becomes a high high level of dependency for at least the first few years of the 
equipment's life. One is because it's new to us because of warranty three is because you're very dependent 
on working out the kinks and making sure that it runs optimally. And most of our customers want to ensure that 
the equipment we provide them has some reliability to it, and therefore they - our customers - also expect 
that we have a close collaboration with our OEM suppliers to ensure that reliability is solid throughout these 
drilling campaigns, and especially at the time when we bought the equipment originally, there were long 
term contracts - we're talking about three, three to five year contracts. Now, the markets change right the 
market dynamics are different most contracts are short, we're doing what we can to reduce cost, and they're 
feeling that throughout the industry, maybe in the OEMs like SUP1. And so, the market dynamics change so 
the asymmetry of power changes a little bit. So, it kind of sits a little bit with us as the consumer. However, it 
doesn't take away from the high-level dependency. So, I think that that's one piece that I think J. M.  alluded 
to it pretty well in the first interview. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Right. Yes, I agree. And I would just like to have a small follow up on that because last time you highlighted 
that it's very dynamic, and it depends on the oil price and on the oil industry overall, who is going to be the 
strongest partner in this relationship. So sometimes it might be SUP1 and sometimes it might be BF. Is that 
correct? 
 
D. F.   
Yes, it's to some extent it can be. So if you look at the pyramid right, or you have the hierarchy of buyer-
supplier dynamics, , there's no doubt SUP1, in terms of OEM provider, they sit in a position that they're serving 
us as the client. So, but however what you have again it's a market demand back. When there was a high oil 
price at $90 to $100 or even $85 to $100, there was also a large newbuild program. Which means that 
everybody was building assets like us. So, our competition was growing. So that meant that there was fierce 
competition on a limited supply of equipment that SUP1 was a provider of. So, there were two OEMs, there 
were basically SUP1 supplying BOPs and there was SUP5 supplying BOPs. So, the industry worked in their favor 
because of the demand of that particular piece of equipment. And so therefore they had the ability to 
control pricing, they had, to an extent right but we were all competing for slots. We were all competing to 
get that equipment, the soonest, the fastest because we needed to acquire the equipment in order to start 
Commented [AS24]: Power on SCC: 
It’s very market driven. 
There is a high level on dependency. 
Close collaboration is expected with the suppliers to 
ensure solid reliability. 
 
Commented [AS25]: Most powerful partner: 
When the oil price is high the power dynamics are in the 
supplier’s favor (high demand for their equipment). 
With low oil price the dependency is not as high and the 
power dynamics shift to the buyer side. 
The industry is going to force buyer and supplier to 
work together if they want to survive and prosper, with 
more transparency and more balanced power in the 
relationship. 
 
==PAGE:148==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 17 of 70 
 
working sooner. The sooner we were able to get the rigs out and start on a contract that means we're able 
to start earning revenue. So, at that point in time, you can say that in a negotiation the dynamics were 
probably in the favor of SUP1, or all the OEM suppliers at the time. Everybody wanted the product, everybody 
needed it faster, quicker. And there were limited number of time slots. So, come to today's world, oil price is 
low, rigs are being stacked, their shop is empty because nobody's building new rigs. It's not a desired 
commodity or a required part anymore, nobody's buying that type of car anymore. So, they have to also find 
new ways of generating revenue, because their revenue has extremely declined as ours. So now from the 
market perspective, we still have a dependency to them, however that dependency isn't as great as it was 
five years ago. So, I would say we probably sit with a little bit more of the negotiation power in today's market. 
So that's kind of the dynamics of SUP1, per se. Now what's going to happen - do we ever see the market climb 
up to where it was five years ago? Probably not. We won't see those, it's highly unlikely and if that happens, 
it'll be years from now. So, I think that it will you'll start seeing, in today's market.  we're all going to sit and it's 
going to be painful in this downturn - or it is painful. But you'll look two years from now and I think you'll see a 
balance of power, where it's equal. We're going to have to work together. The industry is going to force us. 
And what service we deliver to partner and work closer together and be more transparent. So, I think you'll 
see a more balanced position of power. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay, thank you. You're very elaborate and describe it extremely well. So, thank you for that. Because it was 
the part that it was mentioned in the last session we had but it wasn't like it was just more broadly just brought 
up that there is this dynamic relationship and it's not always the same sometimes it's them sometimes it's you. 
But now I think I have a better understanding of this. And the next one, I would like to discuss with you is about 
how the power has affected the collaboration. If it has had a positive or negative outcome in the collaboration 
specifically. For example, back then, when SUP1 had this superior power position over BF and all the other 
drilling companies, did they try to exercise this power, and if they did that, how it affected the collaboration? 
 
D. F.   
Wow, that's a real good question. So, I would think that they did, they exercised their power. I'm going to say 
that there wasn't a... -  Yeah, I'm just trying to think of the right words, so I want to articulate this correctly, and 
I'm trying to sit in a medium position. Because I think there were various views within our organization of this. 
So, I want to say is the only way they exercised the power at that time was that they did what any company 
would do to position themselves in the best financial position for their shareholders. Which means it was still a 
competitive environment because they had to compete with SUP5, so there was competition there. However, 
as I mentioned earlier, when you get in these relationships, and as you know, once you make those 
commitments and start moving down that path of acquiring the equipment, there's a bit of - I don't want this 
to be defined as okay -  "I got you now. Now I'm in control." I think there was a lot of open dialogue with that. 
However, I think the challenge became us being able to maneuver or influence SUP1 as much as we wanted 
in that very active environment. And so what do I mean by that, if I wanted SUP1 to prioritize something for 
us, it would come at a great deal of cost, or they just wouldn't do it at all. And they couldn't do it, they just 
didn't have the ability and their capacity was chocked full. So, I think that their ability to be flexible to do 
some of the things that met our requirements was very limited. Now, does that mean they took advantage of 
us? I wouldn't say they did take advantage of us; I would say that's a no. However, it was probably perceived 
as a negative. So, and that leads us to where we have a dynamic relationship with them today. So, to give 
you a little, little example of that. So, we have a, they have a one BOP stack with us, which you can equate 
it to a widget. It's a very big and expensive and dynamic widget that takes one year to build, and everything 
is predicated on the delivery of that large piece of equipment - it is usually one of the rate limiting steps of the 
whole program. So, it needs to be on time so they can put it on the rig, so it's very important piece of 
equipment. So if they fall behind schedule, or they're late in that process - You know, usually depending on 
the market you could do a lot of extraordinary things to catch up, to make up time, and I think in this case, 
they were just so far behind that nothing could be done, so our ability to go in there and influence them was 
very limited, and this thus caused pain on our side, and therefore that's perceived as "they took advantage 
Commented [AS26]: Power on SCC (overall outcome): 
Exercised VS perceived power and effects on SCC. 
The buyer company perceived as negative and as 
coercive use of power from the supplier when they (the 
supplier) were in a more powerful position. 
 
Power on SCC & Power on Trust: 
The supplier did not live up to their promises and they 
used their power advantage towards the buyer 
company. This left a mark in the relationship and 
negatively affected the collaboration. The trust was 
broken down at a very high level. Now there are pockets 
of trust and distrust in the relationship as the roles have 
been reversed. The supplier is trying to gain the trust 
back, but it will take time. 
 
==PAGE:149==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 18 of 70 
 
of the market and their power position, and just acquired, more than they could basically, they took 
advantage of the market and everybody and acquired as much revenue and commitment in business as 
they possibly could to make money, and rightfully so it's what any business would do. They were going to sell 
as much as they could sell and "make hay while the sun is shining", so to speak, so that was their approach. 
But after those commitments and as you start working down these delivery programs in this relationship, the 
challenge becomes: if they're not able to deliver or they have some inefficiencies in their process, that don't 
quite live up to what they've committed to do, you're kind of stuck with them, and we're stuck with them. And 
so, their inability to react in an expeditious manner cost us money. And so, then that leaves a footprint or a 
fingerprint on the relationship long term. It's just they're hard things to forget, so to speak. And so, ultimately 
what it does - and it's very clear - is it breaks down trust. And so that's probably where we're at with SUP1. The 
trust was probably broken down at a very high level - not just probably - it WAS broken down at a very high 
level. And as you can imagine, when you have a culture or affiliate if the top brass feels a certain way, that's 
going to disseminate down to the rest of the organization. So, I think we've been in that position with SUP1 
before. Now, what we've done, the relationship has kind of turned the other way. And I would say we have 
pockets of trust and pockets of distrust still from a long legacy of engagement. So, we have a pocket of trust 
is probably more at the execution phase now because SUP1 also is a different organization, and they realize 
"yes, we did some bad things. Yes, we didn't perform the way we should have performed, but we've made 
corrective action. We hope you could see that we're very open and that you are a very important customer 
to us. You're the one of the, the most important customers to us. So, we want to make sure to do things right, 
fix the past". So that has worked. It's worked in a very transactional level, it's worked at a bid management 
level, but I think there's still pockets within the organization that still reflect back on that mistrust and I think 
that's the negative outcome that there is still a little bit of a stress.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
I see what you mean. And so it goes on a little bit in the next group of questions about the trust, and how this 
affects the supply chain collaboration because this collaboration, in order to be achieved, there must be 
some degree of trust in the first place like when you make a contract with the supplier then there must be at 
least this kind of credibility trust or reliability trust, that you know this supplier will live up to the expectations of 
your project and will deliver the equipment, and it will be technically correct and on the right time and all 
these things. So, and then you, you said that what they did in the beginning, they did not deliver on time and 
that negatively affected the relationship, is that it? 
 
D. F.   
They did not deliver on time. Okay, so they were late on some items. And then they have some quality issues 
on some items, because the manufacturing was going so fast. So those were probably the two things that 
kind of, I would say - and this started in our new build program and we built the D rigs and the V rigs - But I 
would say that's probably what really laid the foundation for the negative relationship that we had at first. 
Now again, were they maliciously distrustful? I don't I don't think so. I don't think even our organization believes 
they did this out of malice, these things happen just out of sheer volume. The ability to control the process 
throughout their whole organization and manufacturing and engineering process. So, I think, I think it was just 
a large volume of things being sold and a large volume of work for highly engineered piece of equipment. 
So, and that just led to some project management challenges and engineering challenges as they continue 
to build these and learn. So, but I don't think it's any different than our other OEMs. But the point back to this. 
You know the trust in the on the supply chain collaboration, I think it affected it at first. I think there's a pretty 
good deal of trust right now - again I'll go back to the transactional side of things from a supply chain 
perspective. I would say it's based in you have on here is it more based on dependence or reward penalties 
or integrity reliability. So it's a great question. I think we're dependent of them. Yes, I would say, what's very 
important is we need their products to be reliable, and we utilize them because we feel that, , 99% of the 
products are very reliable, and they understand when there's a challenge at the transactional level from our 
side. However, there are still some challenges of trust for things beyond a supply chain transaction. When you 
start talking about larger bigger programs or long-term programs or supply chain agreements that last beyond 
Commented [AS27]: Trust on SCC: 
The supplier did not deliver on time and that cost a lot 
of money to the buyer, resulting in a negative 
relationship especially in the first years.  
Now there is a good deal of trust in the relationship, still 
based on dependence on the supplier. No use of 
rewards/penalties (even though LDs are in place they 
are never used), because that would drive the 
relationship in a purely transactional stage and non-
collaborative. 
 
==PAGE:150==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 19 of 70 
 
two years, that's where there's still some hesitation from our side I would say to that. Now, I think what's also 
important, and I think this is a testament of the relationship and where we're at today, is you have something 
in here regarding rewards and penalties. We did in the past, and when markets. Everything's detrimental on 
the delivery of this complex equipment there they are driven by rewards and penalties there's no doubt, 
there's a lot of LDS liquidated damages to be an incentive because there's so much on the line. Even in our 
MSA today, there's liquidated damages and there's payment penalties. But I think what it's a bit of a testament 
to the relationship we have with SUP1 and also maybe even with a couple of other OEMs is, I cannot 
remember in the past five years ever going to SUP1, and discussing that we need to settle a penalty (an LD). 
And nor has SUP1 ever come to us and said: "Hey, by the way, you are 160 days late on this invoice and the 
contract says if you don't pay on time, it's LIBOR plus 3% for every month". Never have they done that to us. 
So, I think the transactional side and the businesses, try to do what they can not to get in these penalty 
discussions, because that's a sure track, that's a last resort, and I believe a sure way to get into a purely 
transactional and non-collaborative supply chain relationship. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
That's good to know. I'm going to go to the next one, which is the effect that trust has on the power asymmetry, 
or the exercise of power in the relationship. And so, would you say that maybe this trust that BF has shown 
towards SUP1, this has also led them to reconsider the about their tactics a little bit and try not to exercise their 
power when they have it over BF? 
 
D. F.   
Yes. Yes. They definitely use their power more strategically and that I think is very much due to the trust and 
the commitment that BF has shown. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay. Good. And regarding the effect of power on trust, we covered that in the first and second question you 
talked about it a little bit. I would like to just ask you one more thing, because you talked about how the 
power is perceived from the BF perspective, so that you don't think that what they did was malicious or that 
they didn't do it on purpose they just wanted to do business. So, you think that it wasn't a coercive power that 
they exercised, or it was just perceived like that from BF that SUP1 had this power and they tried to exercise 
it? 
 
D. F.   
Well, that's a good question. I think it depends on who you ask. I think if you ask our CTO at the time, he would 
say that it was perceived as a coerced power, because we were very clear, and if I go to a supplier and I 
say "hey I'm very clear on what my TPS is or my specifications right product scope". So, if I have a super clear 
requirement that list out everything technically and I hand it to the supplier and I said: "I need this, and I need 
this delivered by x. Can you do it?", and they say "yes, I can do it and I can do it for this price y". And you say 
"well that price y is too expensive, but I'm going to do this tops three or tops four. So, can this price y change?" 
and they say "yes price y changes". And they ask: "Well, what's your delivery schedule need to be?" and we 
tell them about our desired delivery schedule, and they say: "Yes, we can do it by then". And then you sit 
down and based on that, then you enter into a contract or a negotiation to finalize the deal with a client. It's 
a bit of - they're not there, they're of course like any other company, not going to air the challenges because  
behind closed doors they say “Wow. that's going to be tough!”, “Wow, I don't know if I can do it!”.  I'm going 
to lean out a little bit and say: “Hey, this is the challenge for BOP five or six or, down the delivery of seven. I 
know I'm going to have challenges there, but I'm hoping we're going to lean out and say yes based on lessons 
learned, we'll be able to move those dates in no problem”. So, they convince you and give you the comfort 
Commented [AS28]: Trust on Power: 
The supplier has alleviated the use of their power 
because of the existence of trust in the relationship. 
Commented [AS29]: Power on Trust: 
Use of power or the perception of power exercise in the 
relationship created feelings of dishonesty and broke 
down the trust at the very high levels (C-levels) of 
management, so the effect of power on trust is 
negative. 
==PAGE:151==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 20 of 70 
 
that they can deliver on time. Right, so I think there was probably a bit of coercion, in the fact that they know 
that we're going to enter into something and walk into it and be committed to them, and we would negotiate 
for a price based on their upfront disclosure that they can make that delivery. And then when they're late 
and don't do that. That's probably where the feeling of coercion comes in. When we cannot start drilling and 
we are behind our promises to our clients because they did not deliver on promise. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay. Good. Thank you. It's also good to have this aspect, cleared out. So, the last group of questions is about 
the effect of collaboration in on the performance side of supply chain. So, the first one is about the frequency 
of communication. We got a little bit on that last time. But I'm also a bit more interested in the more structured 
communication such as meetings and what is discussed there. 
 
D. F.   
So, this is a great question. And I don't know where your paper is going, what direction you're taking the supply 
chain collaboration and communication right with the supplier, what, when, when I think of think of a couple 
of things. One is supply chain. At some point in the relationship in an optimal supplier buyer relationship, and 
this is just my view so if I could just give you a little, a little how I think of this before I answer your question, right 
so this might not resonate with yourself or what they're teaching. But when headed procurement for BF in 
North America for a little bit, it was one of our goals was back in the day to have a very, let's say, efficient 
supplier-buyer relationship. What I would want is the need for data communication on the front line to reduce. 
And I would want that to be on an infrequent basis or an exceptional basis, and the reason being is that I 
would rather communicate at a strategic level, have fixed pricing and create and generate tools for my 
frontline, to be able to execute flawlessly. Right. So, what I want is the frontline to put the least amount of 
effort, punch the fewest number of keys to get a price for something that they need or want. And so, from 
that aspect, we've always kind of pushed and pushed. How can we ensure that the front line, and the inside 
sales, don't have to communicate as frequently because the process is so smooth, that when they need 
something they can look in the system, pull up a price and execute it and just send over a purchase order 
and get a purchase order confirmation digitally. That would be the ultimate world, right. So, we've worked in 
that direction. So, I would say is How frequently do we communicate with them? On a daily technical basis. 
The organization probably talks to them three days plus out of five days of the workweek on technical aspects. 
How do I resolve a technical challenge, or if I have a supply chain or if I have an urgent or if I have an 
exception, that's impacting the business the way the business is operating that's a very frequent discussion, 
but it's important to understand that 80% of that discussions around the technical discussion, and how to solve 
a technical issue because if you recall back to what I said earlier, is there is a dependency, a codependency 
now because we have the equipment on board. So, you have to be able to have those very open discussions 
to resolve things on a technical level. And sometimes those technical issues will lead to commercial issues. But 
that's that happens. What we have done, working through a number of challenges because of the level of 
our execution. In terms of formal communication now, over the past few years we are doing these quarterly 
business reviews (QBRs) that will take into consideration supply chain performance, technical challenges or 
discussions, and any open items, or what we call “hot topics” that need to be escalated or agreed to be 
escalated to a higher level. And then, we also have biannual meetings with a select executive team that talk 
just about escalated issues, which should be very few maybe one to two, but more about discussing strategic 
opportunities and collaboration. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay, great. But do you think that it has worked? I mean what you mentioned earlier that the day to day 
transactional communication has been reduced. 
 
Commented [AS30]: SCC on SCP 
Commented [AS31]: Collaborative communication: 
 
Efficient supplier-buyer relationship takes the 
communication away from the “front line” and the 
“working bees” and limits it to the minimum. It is 
preferable to have frequent communication in the 
strategic levels and fixed pricing etc. to create tools for 
the front lines to be able to execute flawlessly. Still, this 
is not achieved, although there have been efforts and 
there is transactional level communication 3-5 times a 
week.  
 
Then there are quarterly business reviews that will take 
into consideration, supply chain performance, technical 
challenges or discussions, and any open items, or “hot 
topics” that need to be escalated or agreed to be 
escalated to a higher level.  
 
Bi-annual meetings with a select executive team that 
talk just about escalated issues, which should be very 
few maybe one to two, but more discuss strategic 
opportunities and collaboration. 
 
==PAGE:152==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 21 of 70 
 
D. F.   
Yes, I do. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay, because I am working a little bit on that, and it's sometimes it like they have this great website that 
where we can go and punch in the number of the order and see the status like if it's shaped or when it's going 
to be delivered, and all these kinds of things. Yes, exactly. So, they are trying to be open to that, but it doesn't, 
it isn't always working smoothly it's not always updated. So then in a way, it was  I think it kind of creates a bit 
of friction or like it then again goes back to the buyers, having to reach out to the sales department and ask 
them about a specific order, 
 
D. F.   
where the engaged drilling wasn't working. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Well, no, it's working but it's not always very updated. 
 
D. F.   
Yeah, so give me. Just out of curiosity, give me a quick so you say it's not updated. It's not updated with 
delivery date or PO numbers? 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
The delivery dates. I mean, sometimes I might search for a PO number to check for the delivery status and 
the promised date is for example 20 days ago, and the actual ship date is blank. So, that means that the 
order hasn't been shipped, and they haven't updated the next promised delivery date, so I still have to reach 
out to their sales department and ask about this. 
 
D. F.   
Okay, good point, and I'll bring that up. So those are those are some internal things that we need to get better 
at right yeah so, I wasn't aware of that was an issue because that feeds right out of their SAP system. But 
there's also. But that is important to ensure how to get reliability in the information we get from them. Yeah, 
and we've been told, time and time again that engaged drilling has that for us. But there's another aspect 
that I've also challenged our own organization, regarding IFS and what date, are we putting in there. How 
old, how long are we sitting on the requisitions, POs, yada yada yada right? So, I know we've internally had 
some challenges there. And what's the best way to take as much workload off our own team with this? It I 
know if I if I remember correctly, there was an issue brought up a while back regarding quotations. Right. Or 
ordered. So, if we would sit down on our QBR with SUP1 and discuss performance, and let's just say it was 
January that we sent them an RFQ. Then they'd look in their system and they probably had 10 pieces of stock 
at the time of quotation with a 30-day delivery lead time. But we didn't place the order till March. And then 
their internal system delivery changes. But we don't change our promised delivery date. So that's an inherent 
problem with IFS as well as it sticks with the requisition. And then that creates huge discrepancies on our KPIs. 
And then finally, the craft out board, the rig decides, yes, I'm going to place it this month because I have the 
budget for it this month, then have it last month. But somehow the delivery dates, , we it does it puts the buyer 
==PAGE:153==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 22 of 70 
 
in a position where they don't know if you don't want the buyer to have to sit back and, , go and get a record 
on everything or go and look up everything that they've already seen a quotation for a delivery date on. 
Right. So, most buyers naturally. What I would want them to do is they just transmit the order. So then this is 
where we see a big disparity. When I sit down in some of these QBRs, look at our data and our percentage of 
SUP1 late orders in our system, and it's 80% or 60% or 50% of the time that a requisition or PO was late. And 
then when we ask SUP1 what's their delivery on time percentage and they show that they’re delivering 85% 
or 92% on time. I'm always baffled by how we get to this big disparity. And so, I think that's something that 
maybe we should challenge and we need to figure out how do we close that gap. 
 
ANNA MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Yes, it's definitely a gap in their communication there between I think between the systems. But it's still like 
something that could be figured out in order to have an integrated supply chain from both sides, right? 
 
D. F.  
Yes, I think so. But it costs a lot of money and time and resources to do these things. But we don't have enough 
resources to do a B2B or EDI system. So, what do you do next? I actually don't know. It's tough.  
 
ANNA MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Yeah, sure. Okay. I'm going to fast forward to the next ones because I've taken up too much of your time, I 
think. And it's about information sharing. And I remember that you wanted to discuss this a little bit more and 
last time. And it's about if there are any projects that have been used, shared resources or a lot of information 
sharing, sensitive one maybe, or not with the supplier? 
 
D. F.  
Yes. I think we talk as openly as the law allows. I mean, we don't share any proprietary information on either 
side. But in terms of trying to look at these two long term projects or programs, I think we've been through 
we've been pretty open about that in terms of resources. I mean, we've had some joint collaborative teams, 
looking at maintenance programs, sharing how some of our equipment is performing to help them improve. 
And when I would say there's a pretty open collaborative discussion now when you start talking supply chain 
performance. I mean, P. A. is very open, we just we had some conversations again. Again, why engage 
drilling? Why not ShipServ? Why not investment? Why...? , what's the challenges on their side and resources? 
So, there's that collaboration. That's why they they've created this engaged drilling platform because that's 
their limited resources internally to manage all their clients. But I would say from a technical perspective and 
large projects, we do collaborate quite a bit. Supply chain. I mean. I think they know what the numbers are. 
I think we share with them what our spend is, how many? They have all that data. There is a lot of data that 
we share with them. 
 
ANNA MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
And then about decision synchronization, that we talked last time and J. M. mentioned that BF generally is 
not very good at providing them with forecasts. So, it’s not always possible for BF to help them plan their supply 
chain also or their manufacturing plans according to the demand for spares or equipment that BF might need 
in the future. Anything else to add to this? 
 
D. F. 
No, I remember, his answer was pretty spot on. I don't think we do. This is pockets of the organization that are 
everywhere across the board. I think if we were more synchronized in our organization, I think we could supply 
them with more information. But I get back to what I mentioned earlier, there's pockets of trust and distrust. 
Commented [AS32]: Information sharing:  
There is no sensitive information shared.  
The buyer company does not share any forecasts, but 
they are open to share non-sensitive info and so is the 
supplier. They share a lot of data with them also on 
equipment performance. 
 
Resource sharing: 
There have been collaborative teams working together 
on projects.  
 
Commented [AS33]: Decision Synchronization: 
There is no decision synchronization. No forecast 
sharing, due to pockets of mistrust. Only on big projects 
that can also be anticipated like SPS and Riser 
programs. They do not get the details, but they are 
working towards improving that.  
 
==PAGE:154==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 23 of 70 
 
So, I think there's an element of we want to keep them a little bit on their toes on the rover status, so to speak. 
So, for some reason, we hold back. Some know there's subgroups to be very open and it's possible. Maybe it 
does. I'm not saying… I think for the majority we're pretty open about what is going to take place? I mean, 
SUP1 knows I mean, they know what rig, what BOPs we're going to we're going to be working on and how 
many stacks they'd have SPS. They know the riser program but getting to the details of it, I would say we're 
getting better. It's not there yet. 
 
ANNA MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Yeah, of course, it also takes a lot of like more effort from the project management side of the these large 
projects like SPS or like these kind of projects that you can see that you will need some equipment, but you're 
not very sure exactly what, or the timeframe is not always pretty well set. So that's also a challenge, if you did 
share these forecasts and they’re completely inaccurate, then there's a reliability issue. 
 
D. F. 
Right. So, this is also why we're talking to this organization and other. Know, how do we use technology better? 
That's kind of where we're having our discussions. 
 
ANNA MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Great. And I think this is one of the last questions and it's about joint knowledge creation. So, do you think that 
BF has developed a better understanding of the market overall, the oil and gas market by working with SUP1? 
 
D. F. 
Good question. It comes from working with SUP1. I would say, yes, to some extent reflected on my discussions 
and what I have. I think I would say yes. Now, the question is to what level? I think neither one of us leverages 
as much as we should. 
 
ANNA MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Yes, but it's also a bit tricky, right? Because when you share information about competitors, for example, if 
they share information about BF competitors, then it's in legal compliance and antitrust needs. 
 
D. F. 
Yes, I can definitely say there's never any discussions regarding that would ever, ever going to break any 
regulations, that's for sure. I think we get close to that when they get more of work in a competitive working 
environment. It's more about the conversations around the other verticals within the SUP1 organization. I don't 
think we do a good enough job understanding or we are creating that collaboration of what do we do with 
the shared customers? Where do we see happening and where do we hear in the marketplace who's going 
to be? I think we don't leverage that ability as much as we should collaborate with industry activity, so to 
speak. If I know that they're fixing to go in a part of that is because we just don't do day to day business with 
the other divisions, again, because they have shared customers. So, the well-head division for example, it 
would be nice to be able to sit down and say, “we're very active”. We see a lot of tender's going on in the 
Gulf of Mexico for wellheads. We see a lot going on Ghana or Suriname or wherever our subsid. But the 
challenge because they also were very siloed. , I think what it really means is, , if you want to have those types 
of really good collaboration discussions, how do we really connect the senior leaders in a better fashion to sit 
down and have those different vertical discussions? Then you did the other challenges. Also, as, what is the 
motivation for a senior leader in the OFS equipment to handle subsea? , what is their motivation to collaborate 
with us? They don't get any spend from us. But we have to also come up with some bit of information for them. 
So, it's a tricky balance. I don't think we've tapped into it enough and I think we've tried enough. I think just 
Commented [AS34]: Joint Knowledge Creation: 
The buyer has gained a better understanding and 
response to the market by working together with the 
supplier, but there is room for improvement. The 
supplier is very siloed and it is tricky and difficult to 
ensure collaboration with all departments within the 
organization. 
 
==PAGE:155==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 24 of 70 
 
the relationship is probably consuming enough time with SUP1, who we're dealing with today, that hasn't 
allowed us to do that yet. But I think there's room for improvement. 
 
ANNA MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Thank you. Last one is if you think that the overall collaboration has affected positively or negatively BF’s supply 
chain performance? 
 
D. F. 
Yeah, I think it's mostly related to the buyers and then the supply chain coordinators. These are the ones to 
actually answer this question. Does SUP1 deliver as promised? Do they obey to the five “Rs” of procurement? 
Right quality, right quantity, right price, right place, right time? But I think we also touched upon this the last 
time with J. M., and I would say it is mostly positive. 
 
ANNA MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Okay, great. Thank you very much for your time and input. It was a very insightful conversation. I believe I 
have sent you the link from a Google form that I would just like some more information, like “demographical” 
information I need. I sent this to you. It’s just so that I know, the titles of the people that I've spoken to, how 
long they've been working in the industry, this kind of things. Great. Thanks again.  
 
D. F. 
You're welcome. Thank you. Bye. 
 
 
Commented [AS35]: Overall effect of SCC on SCP: 
Positive. 
==PAGE:156==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 25 of 70 
 
Interview #4: 
One-on-one Interview with: 
• P. A.: Key Account Manager for SUP1 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Hi P. A. Thanks for participating in this session. So, throughout this interview I am going to use the interview 
questions that I attached in the email that I sent you about a week ago. Let me just share my screen and we 
can start. 
 
P. A.   
I looked at your questions and maybe I should start with a small introduction on my relationship with BF. I'm 
the key account manager for BF for SUP1. I manage the account for, I believe, five years. I've been with SUP1 
for 12 years. And it's been a great account to have. So, I appreciate the questions and letting me answer 
them I appreciate the invite. I may not have the exact answers or wrong answer, but I'll try and answer them 
the best I can.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Great, thank you! So, we'll just jump into it right now. The first group of questions is regarding the effect of power 
on supply chain collaboration. And so, I would like you to describe a little bit how you perceive the power 
asymmetry in the relationship of SUP1 with BF. 
 
P. A.  
Forgive me, power asymmetry, I'm a little slow. Oh, what do you mean by power symmetry in in my relationship 
with BF, as far as who has the power and who doesn't have the power? 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Yes, exactly. Who is the most powerful partner? At the moment, or historically, or if it's dynamic, you can 
describe. 
 
P. A.  
Okay, so the power dynamics were a little bit different. BF headquarters are located in Copenhagen and I 
located in Houston, we don't have a SUP1 office in Copenhagen so it's been a distant relationship, but there 
is obviously a BF office in Houston, that we have a great relationship so. But when it comes to the power 
symmetry in the relationship, ultimately, and I don't feel like it's pushed down our throat, BF has the power in 
the relationship. The Copenhagen office specifically just makes the final commercial decision. So, generally 
there's a lot of nuts and bolts that go into the relationship. There's spare parts purchases, they're just are 
general day to day operational purchases that really, there's no wheeling and dealing or such that we have 
our services portion of the business which is the hiring of field service personnel, overhaul and repair etc. That 
portion of the business also generally flows pretty easily and there's again no negotiation needed so there's 
really no power struggle back and forth on that. And then there's capital equipment purchases. Generally 
really no back and forth, unless it's really big big big multimillion dollar, or you think probably over a million 
dollars that Copenhagen, kind of... Look, Copenhagen may be getting involved behind the scenes but I don't 
Commented [AS36]: Key account manager 
 
Managing the account for 5 years – at BH for 12 years. 
He says it is a great account to have. 
 
 
 
Commented [AS37]: Power on SCC: 
The buyer only exercises their power in big CAPEX heavy 
purchases and projects. 
 
 
Most powerful partner: 
The buyer – BF HQ is the ultimate decision maker on 
whether they will do business with the supplier 
 
==PAGE:157==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 26 of 70 
 
have direct discussions with them for the day to day field service stuff but anything over 1-2 million dollars, the 
discussion with Copenhagen happens along with the Houston team. And then, so that said big projects, 
Copenhagen gets involved Special Projects Copenhagen gets involved. But again, I know I may be jumping 
ahead here a little bit, but I think there's really pretty good collaboration between both companies and 
getting to a good solution for both. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Good, thank you. And how would you say that BF has exercised this power towards SUP1? Or have they 
exercised their power at all? 
 
P. A.  
Oh, sure! Yeah, obviously, if they don't want to pay for something or they think the price is too high, they make 
us work for it. And obviously, it has to be something that they are comfortable with and so. Are you looking 
for like a specific example or...? 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
You can use an example if you have something in mind or you can just explain how you perceive it in general. 
 
P. A.  
I'm going to give you an example. It's kind of a difficult example because we're actually currently in the middle 
of negotiations on it. It's a program that we're selling called SEALYTICS. And it's a fleet-wide proposal, and it 
actually involves quite a lot of departments with BF, not just the sourcing department. It involves the operation 
department, the technical department the finance department. And so, there's a business case that's being 
put together by BF to put in front of the senior management team to make a decision. And this is been an 
ongoing negotiation for probably say six months. And ultimately the power is with Copenhagen. They've 
pushed back and push back and push back and so, as great as we think the offer is ultimately, they get to 
say yes or no.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Thank you. I will now jump to the next question, which is how you would say that the overall power asymmetry 
has affected the collaboration with BF. Would you say it was a positive or a negative result and if you could 
also share an example maybe? 
 
P. A.  
I think there has always been a good collaboration with BF. I mean I think, ultimately, the power is always 
going to be with the buyer. We have to understand that it's their money that they're spending. We obviously 
have some leverage, because BF has so much of our equipment there's not many options. They are married 
to us whether they like it or not. And so, there has to be collaboration. I mean, without our drilling equipment, 
their rigs are just expensive posthole diggers. They know they have to have BOPs on the bottom of the ocean 
for the rigs to operate. We obviously recognize that. So, there's a comfort level with us also the deal has to 
work for us too. And ultimately, they're the ones that sign the purchase order. I'm going to read your question 
again; I apologize for that rambling. In which ways would you say that this power has affected the 
collaboration with the company. So as the salesperson I know going into the negotiation or the collaboration 
Commented [AS38]: Power on SCC: 
 
The buyer uses their power in negotiations of big 
projects, usually CAPEX heavy projects and equipment 
purchases. 
Commented [AS39]: Power on SCC: 
 
There has always been a good collaboration with this 
buyer. 
 
The power ultimately is always with the buyer. 
 
The supplier has some leverage because the buyer has 
so much of their equipment, that it makes their 
relationship inevitable. The two partners are “married”, 
whether they like it or not and thus there has to be 
collaboration. 
 
There is a comfort level at the supplier side that the deal 
also has to work for them because the buyer is s 
dependent on them. 
==PAGE:158==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 27 of 70 
 
that I have to sell it tomorrow, whatever it is. And I understand they have the power, the pen or power the 
purchase order so I know that a little bit if that answers your question. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Yes, thank you. But would you say - because you mentioned it earlier, and I know that BF is also very 
dependent on sourcing spare parts for example from SUP1 - so would you say that, then maybe SUP1 have 
tried to use this dependence-based power to, I don't know, improve or worsen the collaboration? 
 
P. A.  
Obviously, we do have some power also right. Without our equipment they won't be able to drill. And I 
personally don't feel like we've ever taken advantage of it. I personally don't feel like we've ever taken 
advantage of it. And in today's world, all drilling contractors are looking to reduce their total cost of ownership. 
And based on some of the regulations out there, API regulations, our customers - BF also - are able to 
potentially recertify our equipment as their own, where they would not become dependent on us. They could 
also use a different vendor. So, for instance, you can take a telescopic joint that we manufactured, and you 
can have it recertified by a different vendor, but that piece of equipment will now be a different vendors 
piece of equipment you can't come back. You could come back to us and say, we'd like to recertify that 
now as a SUP1' piece of equipment but it's going to be awfully expensive the fact that you went to another 
third party, and then came back to us, it's not looked upon as being a good collaboration opportunity there. 
And I know BF looks at that. And that is something C. and M, have both stated their feelings on that, and BF 
has actually done that, so... It was not funny at the time but again, we're in a market where BF tries to reduce 
their total cost of ownership, we get it, I get it. So, they make us work harder to win the business.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Okay, thank you for the example! I will jump to the next group of questions, that is about the effect of trust on 
supply chain collaboration. And my next question is: In which ways would you say that the trust between SUP1 
and BF has affected the overall collaboration between the two companies? 
 
P. A.  
I think that's a big picture. There's more to it than just the trust factor. The fact that we're “married”, and they 
got a ton of our equipment, it forces us into our relationship. And I think that at the lower levels, there's a good 
amount of trust. I think at the senior leadership levels, at times, there's been a little bit of mistrust. And obviously, 
they don't have the touch points that I do on a daily basis or weekly basis with the - I'm going to call them as 
"the worker bees". But the CEOs and the VPs of the company are not talking to each other every week or 
even every month is generally during a crisis negotiation or QBR. So, for them to build a relationship is a little 
bit more difficult than us worker bees, but I do think, us worker bees have a really good trust and relationship 
established. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
And then, is it (trust), in your opinion, mostly based on dependence? Because, BF is dependent on SUP1, or is 
it also because there's been a high integrity, reliability and competence that can justify that? 
 
P. A.  
Commented [AS40]: The supplier acknowledges that 
the dependence of the supplier to their products and 
services gives them power in the relationship, but they 
don’t think they have ever taken advantage of that. 
 
The buyer has the ability to recertify the equipment 
bought from this supplier as their own to reduce their 
dependency on the supplier, but something like that 
would be catastrophic for the relationship and 
extremely expensive. On occasions, the buyer has used 
that as a threat to the supplier. 
 
The buyer tries to make the supplier work harder to 
earn their business. 
 
Commented [AS41]: Trust on SCC: 
 
The relationship is forced due to the high dependency 
of the buyer to the supplier. 
 
At the senior leadership levels, there has always been 
pockets of mistrust. At the more operational levels, not 
so much – there is more trust there. It is more difficult to 
build a strong relationship based on trust at the senior 
leadership levels because the communication is limited. 
 
 
Commented [AS42]: Trust on SCC: 
 
Trust is based on closeness, openness, and credibility. 
==PAGE:159==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 28 of 70 
 
So, let me read it: “How would you describe the trust in your relationship with BF? Is it more based on 
dependence and reward/penalties or integrity/reliability and competence, or on closeness openness and 
credibility?” … I think the last one. I get some more based closeness openness and credibility. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay. And I gather that, for example, you are based in the Houston office, you have had the closest 
collaboration and communication with category managers there, is that correct? 
 
P. A. 
Yeah. So, I've had a lot of collaboration with the technical team, and not a whole lot with the category 
managers to be really honest now. I don't know if you're aware now, D. S. category manager for the last four 
years, he was unfortunately let go, I think January. Now J. P. M. is the category manager and then J. P. M. has 
reached out to me more in the last three months than D. S. ever did in four years. But I still had a great, great 
relationship with D. S. because I'd seen him, when I went into the office, we talked on the phone, he was 
being included in in meetings. But J. P. M. is definitely more forcing of the relationship "patient look", he's got 
a lot of catch up to do since he's new to the business and relationship but... I completely forgot your question, 
I've rambled on, I apologize. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
No, no worries, it's fine. So, as I understand from what you described right now also, that it's indeed, mostly 
based on closeness and openness like sharing of information or following up. Moving on, my next question is: 
in which ways, would you say that trust has affected your collaboration? Is it in a positive or a negative manner 
overall? 
 
P. A.  
It's 100% positive. I know it can become complacent for sure. I think that's probably more of a checkup 
question for BF, right? And we get tested! They ask questions in regard to pricing our items and kind of hold us 
accountable when something doesn't look right or doesn't smell right. And so, again I think in the worker bee 
level from VP down, I think the trust is there. I think historically, they're trying to build up the trust. I think at the 
senior leadership level, in the past there wasn't that much trust or there was a little hiccup in the trust and 
obviously, with new leadership with M., replacing A.? Anyways, at the lower levels, I think the category 
manager like we send out yearly pricing for spare parts, and so that's kind of a checking point for spare parts, 
making sure that we're staying in line and gouging you on pricing so that's always a check. But again, your 
people do a decent job of, if something feels out of place, we get questioned on it and if we start charging 
something that's stupid, it's a red flag it's easily caught if we're trying to be complacent than gouge BF. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Okay, thank you. The next one is: How would you interpret the effect of Trust has affected the power 
asymmetry/power exercised in your relationship with BF? 
 
P. A.  
So, if you have a good relationship based on trust... At the end of the day it's business, right? BF is trying to 
make money, we're trying to make money, and to try and find the win-win for both companies. If both 
Commented [AS43]: There has been a change in the 
category manager managing the relationship. The new 
category manager is more open and seeking the 
collaboration and communication more than the 
previous one. 
Commented [AS44]: Trust on SCC: 
 
Trust has had 100% positive result on SCC. It has never 
become complacent. Thy always check up on the 
supplier for their prices etc. and the existing trust in the 
operational levels has had an overall positive result on 
SCC. 
 
 
Commented [AS45]: Trust on Power: 
 
If you have a good relationship built on trust when bad 
things happen, it makes it easier to work through that 
bad thing, reducing the use of power in the relationship. 
 
==PAGE:160==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 29 of 70 
 
companies trust each other It makes the difficult cons a little bit easier. So, if there's a situation or something 
bad happens, the fact that you have a good relationship based on trust, albeit that situation is not palatable 
for everybody, like a stack drop, or  we had a riser pin issue that we had to work through and the riser pin 
issue, I know it was painful for BF because it costs millions of dollars. But at my level, we have a good 
relationship built on trust and we're able to work through it and come to a conclusion on it so if you have a 
good relationship built on trust when bad things happen, it makes it easier to work through that bad thing. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay, that's what my follow up would be, if you would say that trust has limited the use of power between the 
two partners? 
 
P. A.  
I think, in our in our situation with BF and SUP1, I think we're literally married to each other. I mean, I know it 
sounds terrible, but divorce really isn't an option. All of BF floaters have our subsea stacks on it. And BF has 
spares for all those rigs. And so, I don't want to say it's impossible to switch everything out, but it would cost 
hundreds of millions of dollars and that's just not an option. So, we have to work through the problems, that's 
just how this relationship is and, , what happens is when a company - when BF - decides to build a new vessel, 
drillship, semi, whatever, at that point, they're taking a huge leap of faith. If let's say they decided to go with 
a competitor, the price of that equipment is more than just the price of the equipment. There has to be spares 
purchased, there has to be training purchased, and there's literally probably 20 years of commitment there. 
Right. As the BOP is engineered or has a lifespan of a minimum of 20 years and so that there's a huge leap of 
faith, but for BF to invest that much money in SUP1 equipment, the trust and relationship has to be there. 
Again, I need to emphasize that it's more than just the supply chain for our equipment. Look, we're not selling 
ropes open dope. It’s a special piece of equipment. There are really only three manufacturers in the world 
that manufacture this type of equipment, okay there's a couple here and there, but they're random. And 
then so it takes more than just the supply chain involved. There are technical engineering operations, supply 
chain, it's a collaborative effort within BF and SUP1 to provide you with a good technical offering as well as a 
commercial offering and for you to purchase our equipment. There's a lot of hands involved with that decision. 
So, I know it's centered around a supply chain thesis but it for me and my relationship with BF, it encompasses 
way more than just the supply chain. I definitely have way more interaction with your technical team than 
the category manager the last five years. So... 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Yes, thank you for pointing that out. Now, to the next question. How would you interpret the effect use of 
coercive/non-coercive/perceived power has affected trust in your relationship with BF?  
 
P. A.  
Again, we've known each other for many years. They know us very well; we know them very well. We do know 
that the key to BF for us is obviously Copenhagen is the final decision maker. I do the wheeling and dealing 
and the presentations of ideas to the local Houston team M., D. F., J. P. M., and then it trickles over to 
Copenhagen when it needs to be finally decided on especially if it's a million dollar stuff. So coercive/non-
coercive/perceived power. I think, BF Copenhagen understands the power dynamic that they have over the 
Houston office. They know that they have the ultimate say. SUP1 also knows that Copenhagen has the 
ultimate power on a yay or nay. And at the end of the day, that's it. I mean, I don't think they shove it down 
our throat or flex their muscles, it's interpreted as that. That's perceived and everybody knows that that's how 
the power play works within BF, and the relationship with SUP1, which is fine. Again, it's used very little. When it 
does get used it's usually it's not done in a bad way. 
Commented [AS46]: Trust on Power: 
 
 
The need for trust in the relationship: 
The two companies are married to each other and 
divorce is not an option.  
 
To even enter such a relationship, the buyer takes a 
huge leap of faith, because they know they will be 
“married” to that supplier for at least 20 years. 
 
But for a buyer to invest that much money in Baker 
Hughes equipment, the trust and relationship has to be 
there. 
  
Commented [AS47]: There are only a couple of other 
suppliers that can provide the same equipment and 
services. 
 
It is more than supply chain involved. There is technical 
engineering and operations too. 
Commented [AS48]: Power on trust: 
 
The buyer knows they are the final decision maker.  
 
The buyer does not necessarily use that power (used 
very little), but it is sometimes perceived as if they use it 
by the supplier company. When it is used is not in a bad 
way and it does not have a big negative effect on trust. 
==PAGE:161==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 30 of 70 
 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Could you share an example of, maybe one partner, using power towards the other and if that had maybe a 
negative or positive effect on trust? 
 
P. A.  
SEALYTICS! Houston loves the idea, Copenhagen is just "poo-pooing" on it (to dismiss an idea or suggestion). 
So that has been a very frustrating opportunity that we're trying to get over the finish line. I mean, 
Copenhagen is slowly treckling into this opportunity, and making us work hard at it. But it has nothing to do 
with trust on the relationship. It's how this powerplay is being played out. 100%.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Okay. Thank you. Next one is: How frequently do you communicate with BF? 
 
P. A.  
Like every day or every other day. Every day I get emails and there's like several people within my organization 
that it's every day, whether it's my region, UK region, Singapore, Myanmar or wherever. At some point during 
the day, someone in BF is reaching out to somebody within SUP1. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Yes, but this is in a more transactional aspect of the business. But I'm curious also about the more structured 
meetings, for example where the C-levels or the VPs meet. 
 
P. A.  
Yes, so we have the QBR with the senior leadership. So, they probably meet. So there's a couple different 
levels of communication, the senior levels probably meet once a quarter with my senior leadership, or a little 
bit more than once a quarter, once every third of the year, we'll meet just to catch up, nothing overly 
structured. Like I said, we've tried to have a QBR which is a little bit lower level and for one reason or another, 
it just hasn't worked out. With the coronavirus or people being moved to different job functions over the last 
12 to 18 months, so we actually are trying to have another QBR at the end of next month. But at my level, me 
and D. F., J. P. M. - that level - we try and have an actual structured meeting once every three weeks. But 
then that's been kicked to the curb. J. P. M. is to set up a structured 30-minute call once a week I think it's 
every Thursday, so I would say very frequently. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Okay. That's a good. Thank you. So, to what degree do you share sensitive or supply chain related information 
with the strategic partner? 
 
P. A.  
Commented [AS49]: Power on Trust: 
 
SEALYTICS is a project that the buyer is making the 
supplier work very hard on it, 100% powerplay there.  
 
But it does not affect the trust in the relationship. 
Commented [AS50]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Collaborative communication: 
Every day or every other day at the operational levels, 
QBRs and biannual meetings at the higher levels but 
they don’t always work out with people moving to 
different job functions etc. A weekly 30 minute catch-up 
call with the category manager is also established lately. 
 
Commented [AS51]: Information sharing: 
 
The supplier is very open and sharing a lot of 
information (and sensitive too) with the buyer.  
 
“sharing of information that maybe shouldn't be shared, 
is part of the deal. That's how it works.” 
  
==PAGE:162==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 31 of 70 
 
Sure. All the time, all the time, all the time. I mean as part of their openness to us, right? There is a fine line but 
to me personally to play both sides of the fence to convince my business to do certain things that they might 
be a little bit uncomfortable with but, sharing of information that maybe shouldn't be shared, is part of the 
deal. That's how it works. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Right. And did you also have any projects where you like both companies, put in resources? 
 
P. A.  
So, it's a little bit before my time but at one point there was an opportunity for 20K, where both companies 
had teams that work together on what that would look like. So yes, there was definitely a sharing of resources. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Okay, great. Thank you. And to what extent you orchestrate decisions and supply chain planning and 
operations in order to optimize the supply chain benefits? 
 
P. A.  
So again, we send out a yearly price list. And we also have a b2b kind of process where purchase orders are 
sent in and they're read by PDF reader automatically entered into our system, and an order 
acknowledgement is generated. So that optimizes in my opinion the supply chain benefits on both for both 
companies. And then we also kind of have set pricing for some overhaul and repair. We've tried to structure, 
global agreements on certain type of equipment pricing. And that also optimizes the supply chain benefit to 
make it more efficient. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Would you also prefer, or do you think it would be beneficial for SUP1 if BF would be able to provide more 
structured or accurate forecasts of what services are expected etc...? 
 
P. A.  
YEAH!! Big bold letters! Because that's something that we've asked repeatedly, especially if BF is able to get 
into the smaller parts actually spare parts, that would be amazing. But for us the big win is knowing the 
schedule for your overhaul repair 3-6 months out, that way we can optimize our manufacturing swap plan. 
We can get parts in that are in our warehouse that can be used in that overhaul and repair. That has probably 
been one of our biggest battles, getting better detail on BF overhaul and repair plan. I don't think it's as good 
as it should/could be. There's been a lot of pushback on that, BF just went through what they call their "five 
year go away plan", we were actually close to a good commercial deal prior to the five year go away plan 
where we were going to have set pricing, set quantities, better visibility project teams on both sides, and it fell 
apart in the 11th hour. But teams led through the "five year go away plan" as best we could. But the visibility 
just was not given as much as we would like, and there you go. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Commented [AS52]: Resource sharing: 
 
There have been such projects in the past but not now. 
Commented [AS53]: Decision Synchronization: 
 
They have yearly set prices that simplify the 
procurement process by being automated to a high 
extent making it more efficient.  
Commented [AS54]: Decision synchronization: 
 
The supplier would like to receive forecasts for 3-6 
months ahead regarding spare parts to plan and 
optimize their manufacturing swap plan. They have 
been requesting this info from the buyer repeatedly 
over the QBRs.  
 
The supplier has rejected offers to do business with 
them in projects because they did not have the visibility 
and transparency, they needed from the buyer for their 
operations to make it a successful project. 
==PAGE:163==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 32 of 70 
 
And I also wanted to ask you about the engaged drilling website that you have, and I know that this has 
helped a lot in the supply chain collaboration at least to my side because I've been working with operations 
for a little bit, and it's I think it's really easy to use and very beneficial. We actually save a lot of time from 
sending back and forth emails. So, but how long has it been in in place and do you, I would like to see your 
take on this like, do you think it has improved the collaboration or has it reduced the same unnecessary calls? 
 
P. A.   
It's been awesome. Yeah, it's an evolving platform. It's probably been 3-4 years, maybe, maybe longer, 
probably longer than four years, maybe 5-6 years. And again it's been an evolving platform where more and 
more features are added to the engage drilling and it has been - an hour ago actually just send you 
something where I can find it - It has been a really good tool and we've received really good feedback from 
our customers. Have you seen our Fleet Compass? So this fleet compass it grabs information from engaged 
drilling and it shows metrics: usage, fleet performance, on time delivery. And we love it, BF is a big user of 
engaged drilling. And to your point, it is makes our business more efficient, it reduces the number of phone 
calls, email requests, BF is able to go in and retrieve documents, data books, COCs, requests, service requests, 
technical information, pricing and delivery, so all in all Engage drilling has been fantastic for both companies. 
It is updated every night so our customers can be sure that all the information in there is as accurate and as 
up-to-date as possible. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Great, thank you for the insights. Now I will go to the next question, because I don't want to take too much of 
your time, so we are on question #10:  Would you say that you have developed a better understanding of 
and response to the market and the competitive environment by working together with BF? 
 
P. A.  
Yeah. So obviously BF is a publicly traded company now, we are also a publicly traded company, so there's 
some stuff as far as market knowledge that is not shared for obvious reasons. So, we would love to know what 
contracts BF is bidding on, what contracts they have won, what contracts they are about to lose. They share 
on their website a little when the existing contracts are about to end, but I don't think we collaborate very 
well in that. That's not joint knowledge creation. There's also a market knowledge presentation at the BF 
website that BF senior leadership CFO and CEO have prepared for BF shareholders that we can read to get 
an idea of what how they see the market, but as far as us talking to BF it doesn't happen. I think their focus is 
on their customers, that's BF’s senior leadership's focus and the commercial team’s focus - these are worried 
about keeping the race working their cars. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
And do you think that SUP1 has helped BF maybe in this regard?  
 
P. A.  
Yes,  it really is a small world the drilling market. Everybody knows everybody, everybody kind of knows what 
everybody's doing. So yeah, I may get snippets of information that I can incorporate into the BF account. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Commented [AS55]: Engaged Drilling website 
(provided by Baker Hughes): It makes our business more 
efficient, it reduces the number of phone calls, email 
requests, BF is able to go in and retrieve documents, 
data books, COCs, requests, service requests, technical 
information, pricing and delivery, so all in all Engage 
drilling has been fantastic for both companies. It is 
updated every night so our customers can be sure that 
all the information in there is as accurate and as up-to-
date as possible. 
 
Commented [AS56]: Joint Knowledge Creation: 
 
- Not really there. 
- The supplier gets information from a market 
knowledge presentation at the BF website that BF senior 
leadership CFO and CEO have prepared for BF 
shareholders, and they can read that to get an idea of 
how BF see the market, but as far as us talking to BF, it 
doesn't happen. 
Commented [AS57]: Joint knowledge creation: 
 
Not much, but snippets of information. 
==PAGE:164==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 33 of 70 
 
Great, thank you. And the last question is: How would you interpret this collaboration with BF has affected the 
supply chain performance? Is it an overall positive outcome or negative?   
 
P. A.  
I think it’s an overall positive outcome and a very good collaboration, there are some good processes in 
place. Obviously everything can be improved, there are no perfect processes but they provide an overall 
positive outcome for both companies, but there is always room for improvement, and I highlighted some of 
these aspects that could be improved during this call. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Great. I would like to thank you very much Paul for your participation in this interview. I value very highly your 
input and I appreciate you devoting your time for this. So, thanks again.  
 
 
Commented [AS58]: SCC on SCP: 
 
It is an overall positive outcome and a very good 
collaboration with some good processes in place. Not 
everything is perfect, there is always room for 
improvement. 
==PAGE:165==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 34 of 70 
 
Interview #5: 
Focus group Interview with: 
• C. A.: Category Manager for SUP2 
• P. K.: Contract Manager for SUP2 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
So, let me start by presenting the scope of this project. I'm on the last semester and I have to hand in my thesis 
in July, and my project is about the effect of trust and power in collaborative supply chains, and how these 
factors affect the supply chain performance. So, we're trying to investigate these two big factors and their 
antecedents and descendants. So for example, trust has different constructs like collaborative trust or 
cognitive based trust and these things, and power can be either coercive non coercive or perceived even, 
and we want to see that in five strategic relationships of BF with five strategic suppliers, one of which is SUP2. 
So, this is why I invited you to this interview. The purpose of the questions is for me to get a better insight in the 
relationship, and then to be able to assess how they these factors have affected the collaboration, and the 
performance of supply chain. So, I think we can now move on to the first group of questions, which is about 
the effect of power on supply chain collaboration. And the first question is: How would you describe the power 
asymmetry in your relationship with SUP2, who is the strongest trading partner, and how is the power exercised 
towards the weakest one? 
 
C. A.    
Okay, I guess that question is, most for me to answer. So, when you say "who is the strongest trading partner" 
but I guess you are looking into locations and not into persons as such. And so we have with SUP2, a global 
agreement. And, I would say probably Stavanger is the strongest relationship we have in any of the location 
and definitely Aberdeen is the weakest when we look into to trust. I think in Stavanger we have a close 
collaboration on a daily basis and they have part of our warehouse and there's a good collaboration 
between the operational team we have in Stavanger and also the operational team, of SUP2 inside 
Stavanger. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI, 3:20   
And would you say that SUP2 is the most powerful partner in the relationship than BF? 
 
C. A.   
In general, yes. So, when I think of them as the strongest partner, it’s because they definitely have more you 
could say leverage than we have due to their size. So, on general terms whether they use a power or not, 
that varies a lot from case to case. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Okay. Can you describe maybe an example where they have used the power? 
 
C. A.  
Commented [AS59]: Trust on SCC: 
 
The weakest trust relationship is with the Aberdeen 
affiliate of the supplier. 
 
SCC overall: 
 
With Stavanger, there is close collaboration. 
 
Collaborative communication: 
Daily communication. 
 
Commented [AS60]: Power on SCC: 
 
Strongest trading partner: 
The supplier is stronger, and they have more leverage 
due to their size. 
 
Use of power:  
Varies a lot from case to case 
 
==PAGE:166==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 35 of 70 
 
And, yes, let me think…Okay, I think I need to come back on that one. I need to think of an example as I can't 
remember anything on top of my head right now where I think it is relationship power as such.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Okay. That's fine we can move on to the next question and then maybe you will like the flow of the 
conversation, you will be reminded of something. So, I'm going to switch to the next one, which is also about 
power and supply chain collaboration. And I would like to know in which ways you think that this power 
asymmetry has affected the collaboration with SUP2?  
 
C. A. 
In general, I think, the overall outcome of power is negative. I think when you have an unbalanced 
relationship, it's always negative. And I think that going into a business relation, as we have done with SUP2, 
both parties tried to pack that power on the front door so to speak when you're into a relationship. And I think 
size-wise as mentioned before there's no doubt that SUP2 with being one of the biggest global providers, in 
terms of that, they have the power. They also split the organization into different divisions, meaning that they 
have an oil and gas or now it's called something else energy, a division, which is of course not as big and in 
that division, BF is a relatively attractive customer for them. Hence, we've been a customer for many years 
already, so they know us very well. So, in terms of that, I think the power kind of shift a bit and I think it also 
should. It's really about balancing, if you want to put your trust into a company that takes care of your goods 
that are your eyes at the warehouse, that go into your systems, you really need to keep that power off, on 
the front door and not bring it into the business relationship. So, I would say, it probably hasn't affected our 
collaboration, and the challenges that we see along the way are not connected to an unbalance in the 
power between the two companies. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Thank you. And you mentioned trust, which is also one of the factors that I'm looking into in this paper. So, 
when entering a business relationship with a vendor, there has to be some kind of trust before signing the 
contracts and starting to work with them but over the years I think this also builds up and develops towards 
either the better or worse. So how would you say that trust has developed with SUP2 and how it has affected 
the collaboration overall? 
 
C. A.    
So first of all, I don't think you enter a partnership or new collaboration with trust, to be fair, and I think that's 
why you always want to enter a new business relation like a with a 3PL. And I think that's where maybe 3PL is 
a bit different than if you're just buying parts from a supplier. You do have to earn your trust as the 3PL. So, 
there's definitely imbalance there in who has the biggest stake or the biggest work in creating this trust. It is 
unfortunately, on the supplier side, to make sure that the trust is built and what I've can see and hear - I wasn't 
there when the contract started - the Trust has not really been built in the beginning of the relationship, and 
that goes for both sides. And I think there's definitely mistakes on both sides that has occurred. So, yeah, given 
the situation where we don't really see the trust, and then we see it more momentarily. So, we do see situations 
where we certainly are not trusting each other, but we also see situations where we need and have to trust 
each other and where it also has been successful you could say. And so, I don't think the trust has never been 
there in this relationship, unfortunately. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Commented [AS61]: Power on SCC: 
 
The overall outcome of power is negative in any 
business relationship.  
 
The buyer and the supplier both left their “power 
baggage outside the front door” and tried not to bring 
it into the relationship. 
 
The buyer company is an attractive customer for this 
supplier. 
 
The challenges that they see along the way are not 
connected to power imbalances between the two 
companies. 
 
Power on Trust: 
 
It is all about balancing. To maintain trust with a partner, 
one must not bring their power in the relationship. 
 
Commented [AS62]: Trust on SCC: 
 
With 3PLs, it is different than vendors for parts. They 
(the 3PL) need to earn the buyer’s trust. 
 
There is an imbalance in who has the biggest work in 
creating this trust in the relationship.  
 
In this relationship, the trust was not built properly at 
the beginning of the relationship, and mistakes were 
made from booth sides. Now we are in a situation 
where the trust is not really there in the relationship, or 
it can only be seen momentarily. 
 
Unfortunately, the trust has never been there in this 
relationship. 
 
==PAGE:167==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 36 of 70 
 
Yes, what I meant is like for example, when choosing a business partner at least one of the factors mentioned 
below like dependence, integrity, reliability, competence, credibility… something like this helps you decide 
that maybe this partner is better than the alternative 3PLs, so you then go into partnership sign a contract with 
them for X number of years. And then we arrive to the second part of the question. So anyhow, this kind of 
trust that has been there in this relationship, even though it's not in the level that you would want it be, in which 
of these factors would you say it is based mostly, is it on dependence, integrity, closeness or openness…? 
 
C. A.    
I think it's the reliability and the competencies. That's the service that they provide us and the solutions that 
they come up with when we have a request, and it's how well they then a keep that promise. That could be 
a delivery date or that could be a price in the market. So, I think that's how the competence is to find the 
right solutions, and the reliability of having the reality meeting that promise, or as close as you can. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Thank you. And the next question is in which ways would you say that trust has affected the collaboration with 
SUP2, and is it overall positive or negative outcome? 
 
C. A.   
I honestly think it has varied a lot, and it's shift quite a lot of course  that the term when you, when you do 10 
right and I can only remember the one wrong you did, and I think that's also a bit what they suffer of, that we 
actually often don't see when they have done 10 rights, but we do get back to them when they have done 
one thing or one shipment wrong. But also, when we see, when they're not proactive for example, that does 
affect the trust very, very well. When we have agreements that are not met, and that's not necessarily at the 
shipment level, that could be on the warehousing or the follow up, everything around getting our things from 
A to B. So that has, I think, not been successful. But in these circumstances as we have right now with the 
COVID-19 and the corona situation, SUP2 is probably one of the partners we have that gives us the most 
reliable updates. And that's also something around, sending things from A to B. So, it's difficult to say what it is 
overall, it's not something you can sum up and put a result to. It's really situation dependent. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Okay. Yes, I understand. And then I have a group of questions about the effect of trust on power, and the 
other way around - the effect of power on trust. And you mentioned earlier that this kind of trust that has been 
developed in order to for the collaboration to be successful and “hassle free”, so as to say it has limited the 
use of power for both sides. I think what you said was that both parties need to leave their power asymmetry 
outside of the front door and not bring it into the relationship for it to be able to build the trust and then to 
ultimately work.  Could you please elaborate on that? 
 
C. A.   
Yes, I think that if there was more trust with SUP2, then both of us would have to use our respective power 
much less and much fewer times. I think that when you use the power you have, that's a result of losing the 
trust in each other. So, if you need to utilize threatening with passive contract, going into legal things, or just 
being the one that could say that "okay then we will terminate the contract", that is maybe our power, they 
could do something in terms of rates, depending on the given market situation. That's their power. If you start 
using those mechanics that is a result of not having trust in the collaboration. 
 
Commented [AS63]: Trust on SCC: 
 
Type of trust: 
Based on reliability and competencies. 
Commented [AS64]: Trust on SCC: 
 
Overall effect: 
It has varied a lot with time. It’s difficult to say overall. 
It’s really situation dependent 
 
The supplier is not proactive and that affects the buyer’s 
trust towards them.  
 
The buyer only remembers when the supplier does 
something wrong and they never remember when they 
do something right. 
  
The COVID-19 pandemic has made this supplier one of 
our most trusted partners. They are the most reliable in 
the information they provide and the most open in 
communication and information sharing. 
 
 
Commented [AS65]: Trust on Power: 
If there was more trust that developed with the supplier, 
that would have limited the use of power for both sides. 
 
Power on Trust: 
When partners resort to using their respective trust, that 
is a result of losing the trust in each other. 
==PAGE:168==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 37 of 70 
 
P.K.   
And from my side, I cannot fully elaborate as I just got into the logistics category, but what I can say is that 
when we start the contract negotiation, it's all fine and dandy. Both parties have a common interest and 
common expectation that the contract will be signed and closed successfully, which doesn't necessarily have 
to mean the same for either of the parties right. So, we have a certain expectation towards SUP2, and they 
have certain expected expectation towards us. Then we start the contract discussion. And this is where it gets 
interesting. Because then I feel that SUP2 is more confident and using more of their market position, and what 
they are providing to us to their benefit. I am not saying that I have experienced any kind of mistrust, or misuse 
of power. Not yet at least, but it's interesting to observe how you start the negotiation, how you start discussions 
and how that plays out. Because it's usually following the same scenario. It's all fine at the beginning, but then 
at some point, this power kicks in. Both parties want to make sure that the agreement is made, and they sign 
the contracts and then when the relationship actually starts, then things are not as shinny and bright as they 
seem to be. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Okay, good. Then we'll jump into the next group of questions, which more about the effect of collaboration 
in the supply chain performance. So, in these next few questions I would like you to keep in mind the supply 
chain performance of BF and how the collaboration with SUP2 has helped improve this, or maybe have a 
negative result on it. And so, the first question is how frequently you communicate with SUP2? 
 
C. A.    
It depends on which level. So, on operational level, there's this daily communication with them and from 
different parts of our operations. On a more “strategic level” we have QBRs, which are quarterly or supposed 
to be quarterly, but in between I also have informal discussions or whenever it's needed ad hoc discussions 
with the global key account manager. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
And are they normally open to these discussions? Do they share information? Are they prone to help, or …? 
 
C. A.   
Depending on the specific case, I would say. So, not as open as I have previously experienced, not as open 
as I was is hoping for a 3PL. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Could you maybe elaborate on that? So, up to what degree is there information sharing between the two 
parties? And do you also share sensitive information, or what kind of supply chain related information do you 
share? Do they share information that could assist BF’s supply chain planning process? 
 
C. A.  
We don't share any sensitive information. So this is really regulated so we don't, if we go out on a quote for an 
ad hoc shipment that is not in the rate matrix, it's not that we come back and say: "hey now what you sent us 
into too expensive, but if you lower your price, then you will get this one". So we never share that. When that 
shipment has been nominated to whoever gets the best solution, we can then go back to them and give 
Commented [AS66]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Collaborative Communication: 
Operational level: Daily communication 
More strategic level: QBRs 
Logistics Manager, Category Manager and Key Account 
Manager have ad-hoc informal discussions. 
 
Commented [AS67]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Information sharing: 
Depending on the case. The supplier is not as open in 
sharing information as the buyer company would expect 
them to be. 
 
No sharing of sensitive information. 
 
The supplier has schedules in place for regular 
shipments and they follow their SOPs on that. Anything 
ad-hoc, is up to the buyer to be proactive. 
==PAGE:169==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 38 of 70 
 
them an overall feedback on why they were not chosen but we never share the exact information. That 
doesn't only go for SUP2, that goes for all 3PL suppliers. I don't think they actually play a big role in our planning 
as such. We will come with a requested date but we have some, some standards set up for them so where 
they have our warehouses, they have some schedules that they follow for shipments depending on the rigs 
and their SOPs are in place that they follow. But if we need to do something else than the standard then we 
will give them a new deadline. So, it's us being proactive, they don't have the information to do that.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Perfect, thank you. Do you know if there has been ever project that both companies shared resources? 
 
C. A.   
Not with SUP2. With others 3PLs, we have had consultants sitting in house, but that's not something SUP2 
provides. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay, good. So, the next one is to what extent do you orchestrate decisions in supply chain planning and 
operations in order to optimize the supply chain benefits?  
 
C. A.   
Well, this is the same with all 3PLs, there are these SOPs in place and these schedules that are followed, and 
these are discussed and planned together, so you could say there is orchestration here. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay, thank you. Next one: would you say that BF has developed a better understanding of the market and 
the competitive environment - here I mean the oil and gas industry - by working together with SUP2? 
 
C. A.   
So again, to be honest it's difficult for me to actually give an exact answer on that because I wasn't here 
when we initially negotiated the contract. But looking back at what I've heard from both internally in BF and 
also from SUP2 side, there's definitely been learnings on both sides after we joined this collaboration together. 
I think, from our side the learnings has really been on our own processes and understanding them and 
understanding how important it is to actually have them standardized and described in, because that wasn't 
there and it's really difficult coming in as a 3PL with a customer that doesn't know their own processes very 
well. So, I think that has been a learning from us. Personally, when, I took over for this job, I would say I've 
learned some from SUP2 for the oil and gas industry, I wasn't from the oil and gas industry before. But mainly 
that learning has come from within the company. And in terms of the market. So, the 3PL market or the freight 
forwarding market. I don't think SUP2 has really put an effort in giving us knowledge. I think the knowledge we 
have; we have within the people that sits in our logistics organization and also in supply chain in general. To 
be honest I also don't think it's a 3PLs task to teach us about their market situation, because that's where we 
create value as a logistics function in a company, knowing the market and knowing when to use them, rather 
than another freight forwarder. So, I actually would never expect them, I would expect that to be within the 
buying company to have the market knowledge. 
 
Commented [AS68]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Resources sharing: 
Not with this supplier. With other 3PLs, there have been 
projects where consultants would sit in house, but not 
with this partner. 
Commented [AS69]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Decision synchronization: 
There are schedules that are planned and decided 
mutually. 
Commented [AS70]: SCC on SCP:  
 
Joint Knowledge Creation: 
There have definitely been learnings for both sides after 
joining this collaboration together, but not on the 
market knowledge. This is also not expected for the 
supplier.  
==PAGE:170==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 39 of 70 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Yeah, of course. And then the last question is, how would you interpret the collaboration with SUP2 has 
affected the supply chain performance of BF? 
 
C. A.   
I think we have gotten what we pay for. So, I think we get a service as we pay for it you can say. I don't think 
they have exceeded expectations. And generally, in some cases they definitely haven't met expectations 
and in other cases they do have exceeded expectations but overall, they might be even a bit under-
delivering, in terms of at least what my expectations are for a 3PL. But contract wise, I think they have 
delivered, what they should. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Good. Thank you. So, that's it. We're done. And thank you both very much for allocating this time for to help 
me with my thesis. One last thing is, I will send you a Google form which will take two minutes to fill that. It's just 
some misc. information about how long you've been with the company, how long you've been working with 
the supplier, this kind of things. It's only two minutes or under two minutes to fill that. And thank you, but one 
last thing is, if you could please remember to share with me the contact information of the person from SUP2 
that I could have this conversation with, so that I have both sides, because it's a dyadic relationship that I'm 
investigating in this project. 
 
C. A.    
Yes. Can I always like to comment on that when we are not recording? 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Sure, I'm going to stop recording right now. 
 
 
Commented [AS71]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Overall effect: 
Neutral to negative. The supplier may be characterized 
as generally “underperforming”, but the buyer got what 
they paid for. 
==PAGE:171==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 40 of 70 
 
Interview #6: 
One-on-one Interview with: 
• K. C.: Global Key Account Manager for SUP2 
 
K. C.   
Good afternoon. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Hi K. C. How are you? Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to pick your brain. So, I'm going to 
share my screen so that we can both see the same question and be on the same page. Okay, so as I 
explained briefly in my email, this interview is about supply chain collaboration. And BF was really so kind as 
to allow me to look into some strategic relationships that they have with some key suppliers. And they will also 
let me get in touch with you. C. A.  made sure of that and she said that it's fine if I ask you a few questions so 
that you can give me your perspective also, because as a buyer company BF can give me the perspective 
of the buyer but I also need the perspective of the supplier. 
 
K. C.  
Okay. And do you want the background on me or? 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Yes, that would be great if you could share a little bit about what it is that you do and a few words about 
SUP2. 
 
K. C.   
Sure, so I've been in the business 38 years. Right now, I'm the Vice President for global accounts, so I'm the 
commercial owner of a couple of our large energy accounts on a corporate global basis. And these 
accounts I have worked on as far as a partnership with for almost 15 years. I'm going close to 15 years with 
SUP2 now. So, in my past life, I've had management positions regional/national. They've all been on the sales 
and marketing or traveling side. So, I have a strong operational background but predominantly, my side is 
commercial here. My strength and my success have been building relationships, trust and collaboration 
exactly what you talked about in your presentation area. So, and M. was nice enough to ask me to help you 
as I’ve been dealing the longest with the group and I am happy to help you. One thing I will be honest with 
you from the beginning: I'm an opinionated guy. So, I might build some of my own opinions in there. Once 
again, it's my opinion and not necessarily an industry standard. Just based on my experience and what I've 
been able to do as far as on the successful side. So, the last 15 years has been really focused on managing 
energy related business, both normal supply chain business as well as when these companies might have to 
get engaged in a project scope type of work. So that is the background on me. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
That sounds wonderful. Thank you very much for the introduction and for taking the time to talk to me. Now, 
if we can get started, and look at the first question, which is: How would you describe the power asymmetry 
in the relationship with BF?  
Commented [AS72]: Power on SCC: 
 
Strongest trading partner: 
The supplier says that buyer is always the strongest 
partner as they have the ability to take away their 
business and go to a competitor.  
In general, the power asymmetry is very equal. 
 
Power exercise: 
The supplier thinks that the power is mostly perceived 
as used by both partners. Both use their respective 
power. 
This client makes sure the supplier knows who holds the 
power. 
The supplier mentions that the buyer is giving 
ultimatums to their suppliers and comments that there 
can be no collaboration when they treat their partners in 
that way – giving ultimatums, etc. 
 
Power on SCC Overall: 
Use of power can not breed collaboration. Once it’s 
done, trust is usually broken, and the relationship 
becomes transactional and not collaborative. 
==PAGE:172==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 41 of 70 
 
 
K. C.  
So, they are one of the world's largest, suffering big-time right now, because of the drop of the barrel prices, 
which killed everything in the stock price. So, it's a very very challenging time for them right now. Both from a 
financially as well as from a supply chain perspective. I mean, I've never seen anything like it in 35 years, put 
it that way. I've been through a lot of things, a lot of recessions, and downturns but nothing like this. I've never 
seen anything like this. So, this is really where power, and trust and collaboration really takes place. Because 
without that you'll never survive in this market. I can tell you that right now. So how would I describe it? I would 
describe it as very strong. And who is the strongest trading partner now? I think in general BF or the client 
anyway is always going to be the strongest trading partner, simply because they can always take their 
business away and go to a competitor. So, they always have this power over us.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Great. Thank you. Moving on to the next group of questions then, which is about trust on supply chain 
collaboration. And my next question is: How would you describe the trust in your relationship with BF? Is it more 
based on dependence and rewards/penalties, on integrity/reliability and competence or on 
closeness/openness and credibility? 
So, I'm a true believer that, you have to build credibility and trust, and that takes time and effort. And like I 
said, I've been very fortunate to actually maintain a good percentage of global business with this company, 
because I've done so. And I've been engaged, which means you have to build that trust not just on the lowest 
level, but all the way up to the image. I always say, “proof is in the pudding”, meaning you can talk the talk, 
but can you walk the walk? And so, what I've been able to do and what SUP2 tries to do is make the proof in 
the pudding. We want to do more than just talk. We want to reflect it. And we show it both in our collaboration 
and open discussion and being transparent. And then working together to find the right solution. So, that's 
what it is: it's been building credibility, building trust and having open communication and transparency. But 
once again, going back, this collaboration must be based not on dependency or rewards penalties, but on 
integrity, reliability, and openness, which all have a positive effect on the trust in the collaboration overall. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Good. Thank you. And so, in which ways would you say that trust has affected your collaboration with BF? Is 
it an overall positive outcome or negative? 
 
K. C.  
Again, it's definitely been a positive outcome. There are always going to be those segments that are going 
to go awry (wrong). The key is how do you, as a company, handle those? Do you handle those timely? Do 
you put it in a resolution? I mean, how are you going to come forward with a resolution? Openness, 
transparency, discontent, we're going to do it. We're clapping and we apologize, but these are the steps 
we're going to make. That way we will continue to have a positive outcome. Whether even though there's a 
negative connotation in that you didn't meet the target deliberately, at least you come forward with them, 
somewhat proactive process. That's another thing that's so key in trusted relationships, is that you don't be 
reactive but proactive. Being reactive, leads in negative trust and credibility with your customer. We struggle 
with that from time to time. But I'm a very big believer in taking the steps up front, making sure you monitor, 
making sure you can communicate, you are transparent, and you will continue to have a very good 
partnership as long as you want and of course as long as you can stay competitive in the market.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Commented [AS73]: Trust on SCC: 
 
An effective collaboration requires credibility and trust 
to be built and maintained in the relationship. 
Stakeholders must be engaged in the relationship at 
every level of the organizations, from the lowest to the 
highest. 
 
The supplier tries to be very open, transparent and 
proactive with their partner and they engage them in 
working together towards the right solutions. 
 
Overall effect: 
Definitely positive outcome. There are always going to 
be (and there have been) things that went wrong, but 
when these are resolved with openness and 
transparence and when the trust is there, then the 
outcome continues to be positive. 
Being proactive gives positive results, whereas being 
reactive acts negatively on the trust you have built and 
therefore on the overall relationship and collaboration. 
 
==PAGE:173==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 42 of 70 
 
Great. That is very important and thank you for highlighting that. I am now going to jump to the next set of 
questions which are about the interplay of the effect of trust on power and the effect of power on trust. And 
first I would like to know, how would you interpret the effect of trust has affected the power asymmetry/power 
exercise in your relationship with BF? 
 
K. C.  
That's a good question and, so I will be perfectly transparent, I've known these guys for a long time, and they 
have a procurement culture. This also goes along lines of supply chain consultants and procurement. They 
are leaders in their industry segment, so that automatically makes them feel powerful from that perspective 
and , I'm a true believer in what is a true partner. So once again in their culture, they feel that they are 
powerful, they have the most leverage in what they say to their suppliers - you either abide or you don't abide. 
In some cases, there's leeway but in most cases it's very straightforward. What bothers me because I've known 
this company for so long and some very high up individuals have disclosed to me is that they talk partnership 
all day long, but in the end of the day when it comes to when they want something, it's a one way 
conversation. You do this or don't, your choice. No discussion. So, once again, how would you interpret the 
effect of trust even though we have trust? So, in many cases when they're looking to gain something through 
cost reductions, sometimes it's either yay or nay. I'll give you a perfect example. When IMO 2020 was rolled 
out and we agreed together to join companies on pricing per train going on IMO 2020 certificate. And of 
course, now when the tool has dropped to nothing, they're immediately pulling that IMO even though some 
of the contracts we and others still carry that up until I think it was May it was still in effect. You either accept 
it or you don't accept it. No ways about because they needed a cost reduction immediately. And so, they 
say something like: “We trust you, but here's our power and if you want to remain a partner, you've got to do 
this”. So, when I got this, they gave me 48 hours to respond to that offer. So I said with all due respect, we 
agree, but you must understand some of your lowest cost pricing, where we are the number one provider is 
still faced in essence, IMO In your contract, you will not be told to notify and reduce or remove it, or we will 
have to charge it and we have to find the middle ground to agree upon. So, anyway, we did have some 
discussions, they say what we what you bring up we must make a mean, first of all, we should be charged us, 
we understand that agree with us for the next 30 days, but as of May 1, they no longer fit. So, without some 
of that trust and without going back and openly communicating and collaborating, we wouldn't have found 
a middle ground for a 30 day time or we would have acted, we would have either had to take a reduction 
on our rates of anywhere from $50 to up to 120. But they agreed. And I think once again how does it have a 
positive effect? Well, as it goes back, same thing I think it has, it didn't have a positive effect. Even though First 
of all, when a good partner comes to me and says: “You got two days to respond to this or extend it”. So 
those type of actions don't show a good deal of trust or a good deal of collaboration, and it just shows the 
power of the buyer. But at the end, us being open and talking and being transparent did improve the 
relationship and enabled us not to lose, I don't know how many thousands in the month of April. And because 
we were still able to charge the most in our contract to fill this week. So that's the best way I can explain 
something in that regard.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Thank you. And then, how would you interpret the effect of (coercive/non-coercive/perceived) power has 
affected trust in your relationship? Would you say that if BF has used some coercive power over you, does that 
affect the trust that you have to BF? 
 
K. C.  
100% It works both ways. So once again, if we've always talked about partnership and trust and collaboration, 
and then if there is an incident in the relationship that you come across very coercive, that is going to have 
a  very strong, negative result. It immediately affects the trust on the either side. I can even share an example 
where we (SUP2) came across as using coercive power. It was this company that they owed us 5.5 million USD 
Commented [AS74]: Trust on Power: 
 
At an example where the buyer used their power to try 
to force their will on the supplier, the supplier managed 
to limit the negative effects of this on their performance 
by showing their trust and their commitment and by 
being open and transparent with them. 
Commented [AS75]: Power on SCC: 
 
The buyer is a market leader and they are powerful in 
that perspective. According to the supplier, the buyer 
company likes to talk about partnership and 
collaboration a lot, but when it comes to how they 
actually conduct business with their suppliers, they are 
very straightforward and they use their power, not 
leaving much leeway to their suppliers. 
Commented [AS76]: Trust on power: 
 
The trust that the suppliers showed to the buyer limited 
the negative effects of the use of power. 
Commented [AS77]: Power on Trust: 
 
When a partner comes across very coercive and 
enforces their decisions on the other, then there is 
always a very strong negative result. It breaks down the 
trust at a very high level and depending on the severity, 
it is relatively difficult to rebuild it after that. 
 
Coercive power can just as well be “perceived” as such, 
meaning that one of the two partners may perceive that 
the other is making use of coercive power. 
 
Power on SCC: 
Use of power can momentarily improve the 
performance, but then the trust is broken, and the 
relationship becomes purely transactional. There can be 
no true collaboration when partners use their power on 
each other. 
==PAGE:174==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 43 of 70 
 
and we were afraid we were going to lose our money. So, we put together a strong – which I believe was 
perceived by the customer as coercive – case and we confronted them and we requested facts, timeline 
commitment. But what is funny is that the company did come forward, and we ended up having an open 
collaboration. We had global CFOs on the phone, we had our treasure on the phone, and we worked through 
it. So, at the end of the day, yeah, you could say that the use of our power was at least perceived as coercive, 
in order to get work done. We told them: “Look, we've got to find a way. You guys know that you owe us 
money. We understand there's a plan. We want to understand the plan of your reorganization, we want to 
get a payment plan so that both companies can maintain our partnership and have our trust and credibility”. 
In fact, we did. It took about a year, but it worked out. So, yes there can be times when a perceived 
powerplay needs to be taken. So, once again does it affect the trust? Of course, it does. Unfortunately, we 
lost all the business after the fact that we used our power because they didn't pay on time, BUT we did get 
paid, which was the goal to be done, but the business relationship was terminated after that.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Perfect. Thank you for the example. Now, the next group of questions is regarding supply chain collaboration 
and supply chain performance, and so I would like to know how frequently do you communicate with BF? 
(collaborative communication) 
 
K. C.  
As I said before, there is nothing more important in supply chain collaboration than communication. 
Communication is the number one key. As far as I'm concerned, in any way whatsoever, but especially when 
it comes to supply chain collaboration, if you don't have timely, effective, proactive communication, you're 
never going to build trust or credibility with anybody. And unfortunately, it makes it even more difficult today 
in our environment, to be honest, because you have so many companies that are firing their employees or 
get redundancies. Now that you've got a limited amount of people trying to manage business and sometimes 
you get lost in the lack of communication. And what happens is then that reduces the trust when something 
goes wrong and reduces your credibility. So, you're asking How frequently do I communicate? Daily. Me 
personally as an account manager, global account manager I have daily communication. And as far as 
SUP2 operational and customer service, they have multiple daily conversations with buyers supply with the 
collateral of BF. So, to me it's all about communication. Without having collaborative communication both 
with your clients, your suppliers, your contractors, you're going to fail. Your supply chain you'll never, never 
perform. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Thank you. And then on the next one regarding the information sharing, what are your views on this? To what 
degree do you share sensitive and/or supply chain-related information with this strategic partner? 
 
K. C.  
100%! As you can tell, I'm a huge believer in sharing information. I think it is truly powerful. Once again, I'm a 
very transparent collaborating individual. So, any market information I have, I share with my clients. 
Information Sharing is key in building stronger partnerships. If we are being a credible and transparent 
organization I mean, the more information we can share between ourselves as individuals and Companies 
then the much more stronger we are and much more we'll be able to manage those challenges as they 
come along. But this information sharing has to be bilateral. It's a two-way street. So, for example right now 
there's so much furloughs, so much redundancies of sometimes supply chain personnel, some supply chains 
are getting fully reengineered or they're looking to get reengineer, so it's important for our partners to at least 
give us an insight on what has happened. Especially with us being a 3PL or 4PL, I think it's our job or one of our 
Commented [AS78]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Collaborative communication: 
Daily communication between operational and tactical 
levels. 
 
Communication is number one key component of any 
collaborative relationship, but especially in supply chain. 
 
In order to have a successful and high-performing 
supply chain based on trust and credibility, it is crucial 
that there is effective, proactive and timely 
communication between the partners. 
 
People are very important in these relationships. The 
current uncertain and changing business environment 
has disturbed the balance in the communication 
between partners, as people are being made redundant 
and the relationship that was built between the 
managers is lost. 
Commented [AS79]: Information Sharing: 
 
The supplier is very open and they usually share every 
information they think might be relevant to their 
partners. But this has to be bilateral – the buyer must 
also be able to provide them with relevant information 
to help them run their business more efficiently. 
 
Information sharing is truly powerful and essential for 
both partners to be able to manage their businesses. 
==PAGE:175==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 44 of 70 
 
jobs to clearly open up and share what's going on because, once again, it gives them an insight of what 
challenges are coming early on and we can all prepare.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Good. And to what extent do you orchestrate decisions in supply chain planning and operations in order to 
optimize the supply chain benefits? Do you use at all a decision synchronization tool with BF? 
 
K. C.  
As part of information sharing and effective communication, there are times where I get involved in decisions 
in their supply chain planning and operations. We might give them ideas of possibilities to reduce their costs. 
Maybe they're looking for lead time, overall lead time. But very rarely are we involved in decision 
synchronization when it comes to their internal decisions. We give them the information, the facts, the options, 
okay. But at the end of the day, we're not involved in the supply chain design. Okay, we've been involved in 
supply chain discussions. But when it comes to getting in and actually doing a synchronization, not really. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Okay, and jumping on to the next one, would you say that you have developed a better understanding of 
and response to the market and competitive environment by working together with BF? 
 
K. C.   
It goes back to what I just said: information sharing. Anything regarding the market update. To give you an 
idea: every month or every couple of weeks since COVID-19 stepped in, we give overland sea freight and air 
freight global updates to all our clients. We also have the one thing we do as a company is, we have client 
webinars. We've been running them for three months, every week client to come in and talk to an industry 
executive on our side for that product. We give a presentation we have a q&a. So, it's a very open and 
collaborative. And we have found it to be extremely, extremely valuable. But once again, sharing information 
sharing is powerful. So they brought some of those ideas and what's going on within your company that has 
helped them look at things differently, having that joint knowledge to understand the current market 
landscape, and they have some insight on what can be done. So, it could be, as you mentioned, joint 
knowledge creation. We have the knowledge but we've jointly created a solution that may work for them in 
the long term, reduce their costs, reduce their overall lead time from ocean freight won't be as quiet as air 
freight but you reduce the cost of air freight by 40-60%. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Thank you. And we have now reached the last question: How would you interpret this collaboration with BF 
has affected the supply chain performance? Is it an overall positive outcome or negative? 
 
K. C.  
I think overall, it's been positive. They need to take some actions on themselves to improve overall one. Now, 
because they're in the energy side, they've gotten hit three ways to Sunday. It's not just one hit. On the 
transport side they have been hit due to the COVID-19, they've got a hit of their stock price financial, they've 
got hit by the low oil prices that has affected their contracts and their day rates. So, they've had many things 
to juggle besides COVID-19. So being very close and collaborative with this client, it has had a positive effect 
Commented [AS80]: Decision Synchronization: 
 
Only as part of information sharing. No real decision 
synchronization. 
Commented [AS81]: Joint Knowledge Creation: 
 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, the supplier hosted 
interactive webinars to provide a better understanding 
and overview of the transport system situation to their 
client, and that helped their client gain better insights 
on the current market landscape, how to improve their 
logistics and how to navigate through the 
unprecedented events of the world being closed down. 
Commented [AS82]: SCC on SCP overall: 
 
Overall positive result. They have had a very close 
collaboration, but there are things that can be 
improved. 
==PAGE:176==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 45 of 70 
 
and overall for our collaboration it has been positive. They have been able to maintain their costs, they've 
been very successful what they're doing, they've been able to make money, they've been a market leader, 
almost. So anyway, overall, it's been very positive. And I think anybody that can have collaboration based 
on solid trust, they can have open communication and transparent dialogue. Ans then, both companies will 
see a positive result in their supply chain’s performance. But the ones who don't have that they are not going 
to last as partners and there is bever going to be trust between them. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Perfect. Thank you very much. You have been extremely helpful, and I am sure that your answers will be of 
great value to my thesis project.  
 
K. C.  
Oh, I'm glad I'm glad. I'm very, very glad I could be of assistance to you. Do me a favor. Keep me posted. Let 
me know how everything ends up and if I can be of any help you will you know where you can reach me.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Sure. Thank you very, very much. Enjoy your day. 
 
K. C.  
You too, dear. You have a great one.  You're welcome. Bye 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Bye. 
 
 
==PAGE:177==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 46 of 70 
 
 
Interview #7: 
One-on-one Interview with: 
• M. P.: Category Manager for SUP3 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Hi M. P. Thank you very much for devoting some time out of your busy schedule to participate in this interview. 
So, the overall purpose of this interview is for my thesis project, which is about the role of power and trust in 
collaborative supply chains, and how these two factors impact the supply chain performance. I am using BF 
as a case company where I am looking into the relationships with some of strategic suppliers, one of which is 
SUP3, thus the reason I contacted you and arranged this interview. 
 
M. P.   
I’m glad you reached out to me and I really hope I can help you with your thesis project. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Great, but then let’s get started. So, the first group of questions is regarding the effect of power on supply 
chain collaboration. And the first one is how would you describe the power asymmetry in your relationship 
with SUP3? Who is the strongest trading partner and how is this power exercised to the weakest counterpart? 
 
M. P.   
Currently, and with the COVID-19 crisis, I think that SUP3 is stronger than BF. That is because, due to the COVID-
19, we do not really have that many alternatives in terms of yard or stacking locations. So now this current 
situation gives them more leverage and SUP3 can choose which company to sign contracts with. And of 
course, the more services to be performed at yard, the higher and the better the chances to be chosen by 
SUP3. But before COVID-19, I think that BF and SUP3 were pretty much at the same power. I don’t think that 
we were in better position than them, nor the opposite.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Great. Thank you. Moving on to the next one. Now, in which ways would you say that this power has affected 
your collaboration with SUP3? Is it an overall positive or negative outcome? 
 
M. P. 
I think that the overall outcome is negative, at least lately. They haven’t been treating us as a trusted partner. 
They see us just as every client, like we do not have a relationship. We are forced to propose booking fees or 
reservation fees to book in advance our rig, and we end up paying more. 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Perfect. The next set of questions is regarding the effect of trust in supply chain collaboration. And the first 
question is: How would you describe the trust in your relationship with SUP3? Is it more based on dependence 
and rewards/penalties, on integrity/reliability and competence or on closeness/openness and credibility? 
Commented [AS83]: Power on SCC: 
 
Strongest trading partner: 
The supplier is currently in a better position of power 
due to the COVID-19 crisis. Previously, there was no 
power asymmetry in the relationship. 
Commented [AS84]: Power on SCC: 
 
Overall outcome: 
Lately the outcome of the collaboration with this 
supplier is rather negative and it costs more to the 
company. 
Commented [AS85]: Trust on SCC: 
 
In the past there was trust between the two parties.  
Now, tryst has been broken, because the supplier 
became more money-driven and they so not value the 
relationship and the collaboration as much. 
 
Trust was based on reliability, competence and 
credibility. 
  
==PAGE:178==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 47 of 70 
 
 
M. P.   
Well, in the past there was a great deal of trust between the two companies, I think. We have been working 
together for so many years, I think since the beginning. And it is natural, to become familiar with each other, 
and when you see results from both sides that they delivered as promised and that we pay what was agreed 
and on time, then there is no reason not to have trust in each other. But now I think trust has changed, like it’s 
broken a little. That is because SUP3 now is more money driven. They are choosing clients that pay more or 
have more services to be performed at yard. So, where is the trust based on? I think with SUP3 the trust is 
based on reliability, competence, and credibility. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay, great. Thank you. Next one is: in which ways would you say that the trust has affected the collaboration 
with SUP3? Is it an overall positive or negative outcome? 
 
M. P.   
I don’t think it’s positive or negative. Maybe neutral. But the thing is that we are currently looking for alternative 
supplier because of what I explained before. Maybe in the past or if you ask someone else, maybe they say 
it’s positive but for me it’s neutral to negative.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Great, thank you. So, the next two questions are about the interplay between trust and power. And so first I 
would like to know how would you interpret the effect of trust has affected the power asymmetry/power 
exercise in your relationship with SUP3? Has it limited the use of power, or has it made the companies use 
more power because they don't trust each other for example? 
 
M. P.   
So, I’m going to stick with my example here about the current situation with the COVID-19. And I think a lot of 
people from the company would agree with me when I say that we though that SUP3 was a long standing 
trusted supplier, and that even in bad, difficult times like these they would support us. But turns out no. So, our 
trust in them didn’t help in this situation and instead they are making use of their new increased power 
because of their better market position on us, forcing us to pay more. Now we are forced to look for 
alternative locations. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Thank you. And then regarding the effect of power on trust, how would you interpret the effect of 
(coercive/non-coercive/perceived) power has affected trust in your relationship with SUP3?  
 
M. P.     
So, again, as I said the trust with SUP3 is put at challenge right now and it is due to their use of power on us. So 
pretty much what I said in your previous question, their increased power and their use of it has broken the trust 
that was there before. That is what happens always when one partner starts using or misusing their power over 
Commented [AS86]: Trust on SCC: 
 
Neutral outcome – not positive, not negative. Now the 
buyer is looking for alternative supplier as they value 
the overall outcome of this collaboration to be neutral 
to negative. 
 
Commented [AS87]: Trust on Power: 
 
The buyer’s trust on the supplier did not limit the 
exercise of the supplier’s increased power. 
 
Commented [AS88]: Power on Trust: 
 
The trust with this supplier is put at a challenge lately, 
due to their use of power in the relationship. This leads 
to breaking the trust that was there before and it will be 
difficult to be gained back. 
==PAGE:179==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 48 of 70 
 
the other one, either in negotiations or in every day operational business relations. It breaks the trust and then 
it is difficult to gain it back.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Great, thank you. Now I'm going to jump to the next group of questions which is about the overall effect of 
collaboration in the performance. And here, there are several aspects that I'm trying to look into. So, the first 
one is about the collaborative communication. And my question is: how frequently do you have 
communication with SUP3, both in transactional and more strategic levels? 
 
M. P.   
So, the more strategic levels, we are supposed to meet and discuss more critical issues and performance 
issues in our Quarterly Business Review meetings (QBRs), but they just never get organized, because there is 
always something happening. Personally, I talk with them once a month to discuss some ongoing issues and 
projects. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Great. The next one is about information sharing and resource sharing so, to what degree do you share 
sensitive and/or supply chain-related information with the strategic partner (information sharing)? Do you also 
share resources? 
 
M. P.   
We have collaborative teams with employees from both companies working together on projects, so I guess 
that is our resources sharing aspect of the collaboration. And then as far as information sharing is concerned, 
I would say that we only share with them what they need to know, so only necessary information and no 
sensitive data or information at all. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Thank you. Now, the next one is: to what extent do you orchestrate decisions in supply chain planning and 
operations in order to optimize the supply chain benefits? 
 
M. P.   
So, I am not really sure what is the correct answer here or if I am in the best position to answer this to you. I 
think that orchestrating decisions is made by engaging people from different departments and positions, for 
example the technical organization or the rig managers so that the relevant stakeholders are directly in 
contact with the right people from supplier company. I think this way both companies get the best results and 
orchestrate their decisions. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Okay, great. Thank you. And then the next one is about joint knowledge creation. So, would you say that you 
have developed a better understanding of and response to the market and competitive environment by 
working together with SUP3? 
Commented [AS89]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Collaborative communication: 
There were supposed to be QBRs, but they are never 
organized. 
Currently, the contract manager of the buying firm has 
monthly meetings with the supplier. 
Commented [AS90]: Information sharing: 
The supplier shares information about how other 
companies (especially competitors of the buyer 
company) are doing things. 
The buyer company does not share any sensitive 
information with the supplier, only what is necessary for 
the project scopes.  
 
Resources sharing: 
They have collaborative teams consisting of employees 
from both companies. 
Commented [AS91]: Decision synchronization: 
 
Decision synchronization is achieved by engaging the 
relevant stakeholders from the different parts of the 
organization. 
Commented [AS92]: Joint Knowledge Creation: 
 
The supplier is open and eager to provide market 
information to the buyer because they are dealing with 
the buyer’s competitors too, and the buyer has 
benefited from that. 
==PAGE:180==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 49 of 70 
 
 
M. P.     
Well, I think so, yes. I think that they’re generally very open and they share information and knowledge or best 
practices, because they also work with our competitors, so I think we have also benefited from that, I mean 
from working with them. But mostly now, due to the COVID-19 we have gained an even better understanding 
of the competitive environment, I think. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Perfect. Thank you. And then we have reached to the final question, which is about the overall effect of 
supply chain collaboration in the supply chain performance. So, how would you interpret this collaboration 
with SUP3 has affected the supply chain performance? Is it an overall positive outcome or negative? 
 
M. P.   
I think what we learnt from this big crisis lately is that we need to establish a fallback option of critical supplier. 
Trust is important but during crisis, like this with COVID-19, it is not enough. 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Perfect. Thank you for sharing your point of view and for your time today, I really appreciate it! Have a great 
day! Thank you very much. 
 
M. P.   
Glad to be of help. Let me know if you need to have a follow-up or anything. 
 
 
 
Commented [AS93]: SCC on SCP overall: 
 
The buyer is not satisfied by the collaboration and they 
are looking for alternative suppliers.  
 
Trust on SCC: 
Trust is important but the current crisis showed it is not 
enough.  
==PAGE:181==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 50 of 70 
 
Interview #8: 
One-on-one Interview with: 
• C. H.: Key Account Manager for SUP3 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Thank you very much for your interest to participate in this interview. So, the overall purpose of this interview is 
for my thesis project, which is about the role of power and trust in collaborative supply chains, and how these 
two factors have a direct or indirect impact on the supply chain performance. BF was very kind to allow me 
to look into some relationships they have with some of their strategic suppliers, one of which is SUP3, thus the 
reason I contacted you and tried to set up this interview. 
 
C. H.   
I don't know if you know the background between the corporation. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
No, actually it would be great if you would like to say a few words about what it is that SUP3 offers to BF and 
how the relationship has evolved over the years. 
 
C. H.      
I think BF and SUP3 has been working together ever since BF started, more or less, and they have been growing 
up together, you may say so. And there has always been very good relationship between the two parties. It's 
because for many years we have a MFSA democracy that we used, and that was the primary use of 
contracts, but it also been the fact that the corporation didn't go up and down, if you may say so. In that 
sense that for some reasons, everything has been going fantastic and we have been doing a lot of business 
together and over the years we've not done, more or less, everything has been pending a lot on who's sitting, 
of course in each pie in each company. And also specific in who's been sitting in Procurement in BF, at least 
for the past, some years. It's very much based on relationships. Not that much within procurement but a lot 
within the technical organization and is the operations. Back in time it was not connected to, procurement. 
At that time there was a guy called T. G., is now Head of Procurement in another company. And then we 
had regular meetings with him. But that has been closed down or, it's not existing any longer, and was more 
or less done after he left BF. But no doubt that BF is one of the big clients at least for SUP3 in Denmark, we 
adore working with each other, I think we have a status when the shit hits the fan BF knows where to go. When 
there are problems or something special needs to be solved, they often call us. But we have a really good 
relationship, but as stated, it is mainly within the technical organization, not that much with Procurement, 
mainly because there has been many big changes with the people sitting in Procurement, so that's also why. 
I know it has been discussed for many years in BF that they have to do something about that and have more 
stability in the people who are sitting in the Procurement department because that makes the relationships 
with their suppliers very difficult, but I have not seen the outcome of that done yet. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Great, thank you for the overview. I think it's very useful. And then I'm going to jump start with the questions so 
that we can finish as quickly as possible and you can go to your day to day. So, the first group of questions is 
regarding the effect of power on supply chain collaboration. And the first one is how would you describe the 
Commented [AS94]: SCC on SCP overall: 
 
The buyer company has always been one of the biggest 
clients of the supplier and they adore working with each 
other.  
There has always been a very good relationship 
between the two parties. Not so much with 
Procurement (mostly with technical organization) but 
that is because people change all the time in 
Procurement, and it is very difficult to build and 
maintain good relationships this way. It’s about people 
and it makes a difference. 
Commented [AS95]: Trust on SCC: 
 
The supplier is a trusted partner of the buyer company. 
The buyer trusts this supplier and they call them every 
time they have big problems.  
Trust based on competences and reliability. 
 
People change all the time: 
There has always been a very good relationship 
between the two parties. Not so much with 
Procurement (mostly with technical organization) but 
that is because people change all the time in 
Procurement, and it is very difficult to build and 
maintain good relationships this way. It’s about people 
and it makes a difference. 
 
==PAGE:182==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 51 of 70 
 
power asymmetry in your relationship with BF? Who is the strongest trading partner and how is this power 
exercised to the weakest counterpart? 
 
C. H.      
I think that we are more reliant on BF than BF is reliant on us, in the sense that we don't have a product as 
such, we're providing a service or an installation. So, we're not like SUP5 or some of the other component 
companies. BF is not forced to use us. So, I think we're the weakest, in that sense. But when that was said, we 
want to set that BF has just at least come back. BF was just as keen on using us as we were keen on servicing 
them. When we're saying that it's up to BF to say yes or no if they want to hire SUP3 or not, whereas if they're 
dealing with SUP5, they need to buy that from SUP5 for the given product or utilize a service. Then they can 
more or less say what they want to get for that offering, we cannot say that. We are competing with a lot of 
other companies, so that's we are more competitive on the market price sense. So, definitely we are the 
weakest. And there's been forces depending on price. Price and services. And then of course there is a bit of 
history, knowledge of each other, to some extent. It's not much, but it is there.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Great. Thank you. Moving on to the next one. Now, in which ways would you say that this power has affected 
your collaboration with BF? Is it an overall positive or negative outcome? 
 
C. H.    
I don't think the power asymmetry has affected our company. Because we know how the game is. I would 
say that we are struggling a bit with a lot of the fluff ideas generated that are not as well done as they should. 
For example, last fame agreements, they put a big tender for big frame agreement for manpower, some 
years ago, and it's more or less not being used. So they waste a lot of our time and that means that we then 
see it as negative, when we waste a lot of time on something that we don't seem to use, even if we win the 
agreement, but there's nothing coming out of it. But besides that, everything is great. We have a great 
relationship. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Perfect. The next set of questions is regarding the effect of trust in supply chain collaboration. And the first 
question is: How would you describe the trust in your relationship with BF? Is it more based on dependence 
and rewards/penalties, on integrity/reliability and competence or on closeness/openness and credibility? 
 
C. H.    
I would definitely say that these two companies have a great trust with each other, in the sense that BF has 
trust in SUP3 that we will solve a given assignment, no matter what. And we have of course a trust in them that 
we are getting our money because that's quite a thing in these times. Beside that we have trust and we're 
both open, especially in supply chain, if BF comes back to us and says: "Listen, SUP3 you're way too expensive 
in this and this point. Can you go back?" and we say, "okay we trust what you're saying here". Even, and the 
other way around, if we come to you and say: "listen, on this point we are down to the bone". We trust each 
other. We've actually been doing some projects where we have been working with open books. Also, where 
we have been involved where I know what BF is earning on a given project. Where we are working better. 
That's our target now, I think, between the two companies, is to make more projects where we work as one 
team and increased level of collaboration. And that's of course dependency and trust. We've not been 
working with rewards and penalties or so, not that much, I think. We've done it on a few larger projects where 
Commented [AS96]: Power on SCC: 
 
Strongest TP: 
The buyer is stronger, as the supplier belongs in a highly 
competitive market where there are many other 
suppliers offering the same services as they do, and in 
that sense the buyer power is larger.  
The buyer is not forced to use them (in contrast with 
SUP5 and BHGE) – they chose them. 
 
Although the buyer is more powerful than the supplier, 
they have been working together for many years and 
they have developed a better understanding of each 
other.  
Commented [AS97]: Power on SCC: 
 
The supplier does not think that the power asymmetry 
has affected their relationship with the buyer. They have 
a great relationship. 
 
They supplier struggles to earn the business of the 
buyer.  
 
The supplier wastes a lot of time trying to comply with 
the buyer company’s many “fluffy” ideas, which most of 
the times they end up not using at all. 
Commented [AS98]: Trust on SCC: 
 
There is great trust between the two companies. 
The supplier trusts the buyer that they will be paid for 
their services (credibility - normative/affective trust) 
The buyer trust that the supplier will deliver their 
services according to promises (reliability/competence – 
cognitive based trust) 
 
There have been projects where both companies would 
work with open books (complete transparency and 
openness) and had a “one team” approach. They are 
now working to more collaborative projects like that 
because they saw increased levels of collaboration and 
performance. 
 
Almost no rewards/penalties schemes. There are 
sometimes, but a performance based reward will not 
affect the trust. 
==PAGE:183==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 52 of 70 
 
there was a reward if we did it faster than expected, but that was performance based and didn't have an 
effect on trust. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Okay, great. Thank you. Next one is: in which ways would you say that the trust has affected the collaboration 
with BF? Is it an overall positive or negative outcome? 
 
C. H.   
I would say it has always been positive. Of course, we are getting monitored so we can’t start charging crazy 
fees or anything like that. So, for example when we are quoting for a job up against some other competitors, 
every time we need to be sharp on what we're doing. But once we have won the job, we will approach this 
as "one team" approach, meaning that we have good cooperation and then we are very open at what we 
are doing. Of course, both companies have one goal, and that is to earn money. But we have a golden 
circle that means that we need to be within budget, if possible. One thing is to get the job done within time, 
but another is to try to get it done within budget. At least if we are within the main scope because there might 
be coming 200 extra jobs that you're not in charge of that will of course cost more. When we're talking main 
scopes will also seek to be within budget. So, we always strive to be as prosperous as possible. And I'm not 
seeing neither positive nor negative side on that. Meaning I'm not seeing a lower performance or so. If you're 
doing a yard stay it's within all persons' goal to be done as fast as possible, or an offshore assignment to get it 
done as best as possible and as fast as possible as safe as possible. So, we're always getting monitored. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Great, thank you. So, the next two questions are about the interplay between trust and power. And so first I 
would like to know how would you interpret the effect of trust has affected the power asymmetry/power 
exercise in your relationship with BF? Has it limited the use of power, or has it made the companies use more 
power because they don't trust each other for example? 
 
C. H.    
It's not something that we are considering in our daily business, to be honest. But if you think about it, you're 
dealing with people. The jobs we can get within BF are based on our capabilities, price, and relationships. I've 
seen that trust has been mentioned sometimes in the negotiations. I've been in lots of negotiations where 
both procurement and technical management sit down, and they say: "Listen, we trust you. We know the 
product you are providing us, and we definitely trust you on this matter, now it comes back down to the 
price". And that is what we are discussing. And then, it's the power of that. And they of course are open, I 
don't know if they are more or less open-minded in the relation of what they tell us, they say "Listen, you are 
too expensive here, please see what you can do". I don't know if that's at the expense of trust or not. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Okay, thank you. And then regarding the effect of power on trust, how would you interpret the effect of 
(coercive/non-coercive/perceived) power has affected trust in your relationship with BF?  
 
C. H.   
Commented [AS99]: Trust on SCC: 
 
Overall positive outcome of the collaboration.  
They have a “one team” approach which means that 
there is increased collaboration and openness, but also 
closeness because they get to work together with 
people and form personal relationships and friendships. 
The goal is to earn money, but they achieve this better 
when working close together. 
 
Commented [AS100]: Trust on Power: 
 
Not significant effect., not even in the negotiations. 
 
Commented [AS101]: Power on Trust: 
 
Use of power has not had a negative result on trust, 
mainly because the trust is there for many years now 
and people from both companies have come close 
together and they are even friends.  
==PAGE:184==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 53 of 70 
 
We were not better than the last project. In the old days, there was a guy called “the Boss”, he was manager 
for technical knowledge. He had some flags standing on his table for various companies. For SUP3 he has a 
bunch of flags. And if we did a bad job, he would put one of the flags down. And when we would do a good 
job, again, then he would raise the flag again. So of course, we can always do a bad job, shit happens. We 
are human beings. That of course will tear a bit on the trust. We have done in the past that we have not still 
been trustworthy, or we have not been able to argue, what has happened, and at least inform how we'll do 
it better next time. And the trust is back. And also the fact that this relationship has been going on for so many 
years, it shows that even if something bad happens, then there is still the trust there because they know we 
do a great job. They keep choosing us. So, it's a positive sign there. Also, I think the majority of people 
employed in SUP3 rig department are Facebook friends with a lot of people within the BF organization. The 
main reason for that is that when you're doing a yard stay we've been working close together for one to three 
months, you're starting to get trust and you're starting together to speak to each other about more than just 
work. And that of course also generate a trust, because if I go to some of the guys that I know quite well and 
I say "you trust me you know what we're doing, we'll get to get to the target. Because we have done it before 
then, of course, we'll reach the target". 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Great. Now I'm going to jump to the next group of questions which is about the overall effect of collaboration 
in the performance. And here, there are several aspects that I'm trying to look into. So, the first one is about 
the collaborative communication. And my question is: how frequently do you have communication with BF, 
both in transactional and more strategic levels? 
 
C. H.     
We are supposed to have QBRs, but they just never get organized. We have a lot of contracts with BF. We 
have some contracts where KPIs and so on are mentioned. For example, we had a frame agreement on the 
SPS services on all the Deepwater rigs, once we have discussed KPIs and in three years or four years we never 
touched it again. Mainly because everything went fantastic. So, on the strategic level and so on we are not 
speaking that much. Now I can only speak for myself because we're a big company, they are a big company 
and I have a lot of colleagues who are speaking to various persons in BF. I know, one of our vice presidents 
has been involved with H., one of the procurement operations responsible. Our top manager is speaking with 
your top manager on strategic levels as well, but that is more on what's going on, how can we improve what 
we do. I'm speaking, I think, weekly, at least with various people within BF but normally once a month I speak 
with some of the managers in TO at least get some of these guys on what's going on how what projects are 
coming, how can we assist and so on. That was actually something we started with Tony back in time, when 
I had a meeting with him once a month or once every second month where we went through the list of 
upcoming projects and discussed how we could assist them so that is not so formalized any longer. At that 
time, it was procurement who was running it. Now it's most myself when I'm speaking, or discussing, giving BF 
a shout. So, as I was saying BF is not in that position any longer where they have somebody who was trying to 
get the best out of their vendors. For at least the last two or three years, we've not been in any contract where 
it is strategic sourcing in BF. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Thank you. The next one is about information sharing and resource sharing so, to what degree do you share 
sensitive and/or supply chain-related information with the strategic partner (information sharing)? Do you also 
share resources? 
 
C. H.    
Commented [AS102]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Collaborative communication: 
There were supposed to be QBRs, but they are never 
organized. 
 
They have some KPIs in some of their contracts bit they 
never measure them. 
 
Collaborative communication was better and more 
formalized in the past, more frequent and more 
structured (every 1-2 months), where they discussed 
upcoming projects. 
 
Currently, the supplier is initiating the meetings and not 
so much the buyer side.  
 
The supplier has no indication of strategic sourcing 
initiatives from the buyer company. 
Commented [AS103]: Information sharing: 
The supplier shares information about how other 
companies (especially competitors of the buyer 
company) are doing things. 
The buyer company shares information with the supplier 
regarding upcoming projects and contracts. 
 
 
 
Resources sharing: 
They have embedded the “one team” approach in their 
projects, where they have people from the supplier 
company sitting with the people from the buyer 
company when they are in projects and their plan for 
the future is to run big projects that way.  
==PAGE:185==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 54 of 70 
 
We are trying to embed the concept of "one team" approach. We've been doing a couple of projects 
already now where we have had people from SUP3 sitting in the BF organization, that has been either in 
Copenhagen or in for example Egypt. We have one person stationed in Egypt for a year, where he was sitting 
as part of one combined project. He was running a big project on one of the rigs there. And that's our goal 
going forward is to run out of big projects in such a way. Then you can say that's the way we share resources. 
And by that, I have such a close relationship I've worked together we of course have also tried to share 
information. We also share information on how other companies are doing things. We are of course, not only 
working with BF, we're also working with BFCompetitor1 and BFCompetitor2 and BFCompetitor3 and more or 
less all the other drilling contractors in the world. So, we of course can offer some information how others are 
doing it or come up with another view of how to do things. And we do that a lot. We have a lot of talks and 
discussions where we come over and sit down and we're not discussing anything specific but just how is the 
world going in BF and how do we see the world. But that's not only related to Procurement, that's related to 
everything. What is the trend of the market and what problems we see and how can how can we do things 
differently in relation to various jobs. And of course, BF also shares information with us regarding for example 
upcoming projects or contracts. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Thank you. Now, the next one is: to what extent do you orchestrate decisions in supply chain planning and 
operations in order to optimize the supply chain benefits? 
 
C. H.      
So, we would love it if BF were able to provide us with some forecasts or any indications about their future 
projects. They did that in the past with T. G., we had forecast on what jobs are coming in, and then he did his 
utmost to look into the future  so we always kind of knew what was going on the next half year. That we don't 
see any longer, and it’s a shame because it was a great help. Because then we knew who to go to, when is 
the contract, what can we expect. The strange thing about the rig market compared to regular oil and gas 
is the majority of the projects that we see, the future is not that long, the backlog is often not that long on 
projects. So, if we can just look half year into the future, that would be brilliant. The majority of the projects we 
see from when we hear about them until they're getting active doesn't normally go that many months. But at 
that time, we were able to look further into the future because if BF had something coming up, or they've 
heard about it, or they may do it as well. That was highly appreciated also because we might have some 
input for it. So, for example we could come back and say: "if you're bidding this or need to sign this, please 
have in mind this and this and this, because we have seen this problem in some similar projects". 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Okay, great. Thank you. And then the next one is about joint knowledge creation. So, would you say that you 
have developed a better understanding of and response to the market and competitive environment by 
working together with BF? 
 
C. H.    
I don't know if we are getting that understanding regarding our competitors, because it's normally not that 
open. We get informed if we get it or not, maybe we know what prices, but we often don't know what 
competitor will get the job, at least not at the beginning, we might get that information down the road when 
we pay BF a visit. I would actually say to some extent that for a lot of the people that we are speaking to in 
BF, then we know more about the market. Because we are dealing with all the other companies as well. 
Because you speak with one client and we speak with eight clients. 
Commented [AS104]: Decision synchronization: 
 
The supplier would like the buyer to be able to provide 
them with more concrete and formal forecasts about 
future projects. This was done in the past and it was 
successful for both companies, as the supplier would be 
able to better plan their resources, and they could also 
offer additional insights to the buyer. 
Commented [AS105]: Joint Knowledge Creation: 
 
The supplier is in a better position to provide useful 
market information to the buyer because they are 
dealing with their competitors too. 
==PAGE:186==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 55 of 70 
 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Perfect. Thank you. And then we have reached to the final question, which is about the overall effect of 
supply chain collaboration in the supply chain performance. So, how would you interpret this collaboration 
with BF has affected the supply chain performance? Is it an overall positive outcome or negative? 
 
C. H.    
In general, we are very happy to work with BF. We enjoy the collaboration and we enjoy working with the 
people over there. Now we are quite eager to see what's going to happen at the end of this week, to see 
who will be left in the company because that of course will have a big influence on our cooperation, as a lot 
of our collaboration is based on persons and not on agreements (talking about the 150 people from the 
onshore and 400 offshore organization who were made redundant). If it's affecting our supply chain’s 
performance, I don't think so. We do our utmost every day and try to come with the best prices and we try 
also to educate BF on how to do things better. And I think that's because the part when we try to be partners, 
is to get the best out of both parties.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
That's great. Thank you for your time and for sharing your point of view. I really appreciate you providing me 
with all this information and the fact that you devoted your time to this. So, have a great day! Thank you very 
much. 
 
C. H.   
All right, no problem. Let me know if you need anything else, I’m happy to help. Bye bye. 
 
 
Commented [AS106]: SCC on SCP overall: 
 
The supplier is happy with the collaboration with the 
buyer company so far and they think the collaboration 
has had positive outcome so far. No specific effect on 
their supply chain performance, but improvements can 
be made and through this collaboration they also try to 
educate the buyer on best practices so that both parties 
can benefit.  
==PAGE:187==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 56 of 70 
 
Interview #9: 
Focus group Interview with: 
• J. M.: Category Manager for SUP4 
• T. H.: Contract Manager for SUP1 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
So welcome both of you. I just got a reply from G. M.  that he will not be able to join us today. So, we will have 
to do this interview the three of us. First, I would like to apologize if you hear an echo, it's because I need to 
use the speaker of the computer and not the headphones because I need to record and then transcribe the 
conversation. So, let’s get started. And I will start by explaining a little bit about my thesis project scope. So, 
my thesis project is about the role of power and trust in supply chain performance in collaborative supply 
chains, and we're looking to investigate some strategic relationships that BF has with five of its critical suppliers. 
One of them is SUP4, hence, the purpose of this interview. And the first set of questions is regarding the effect 
of power in supply chain collaboration. And I would like to start by asking, how would you describe the power 
asymmetry in your relationship with SUP4? Who is a stronger trading partner and how is this power exercised 
towards the weakest counterpart? 
 
J. M.  
So, SUP4 offers us ROVs (remote operated vehicles) within integrated services, and this is where I think we 
have the most power in the relationship, out of the other subcategories of integrated services. The reason 
being because in the other ones are big companies like W., H., who normally deal with the operators and 
have much bigger companies in the market, comparable if not bigger to us, whereas SUP4 is a smaller 
company that's quite aggressive to get in the market and they will pursue all different kinds of avenues, going 
through the operator, going through us. And they have proven to my knowledge, relatively easy to work with. 
And, we have a quite good relationship, and we've done quite a bit of business with them. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Okay, great. Thank you very much J. M. T. H., do you have anything to add? 
 
T. H.  
That's a bit of a challenge for me because I had really very little interaction with SUP4 as a company and 
ROVs in general, and also to give the answer on that one, what J. M.  just said in terms of maybe SUP4 not 
being such a large player and making it much more competition with other ROV suppliers, they painted that 
there's another, there's a different balance of power there, compared to some of the other larger players. 
That sounds like I agree with J. M. 
 
J. M.  
I guess the challenge here is G. M.  knows most about this, but we'll try our best.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI,  
Commented [AS107]: Power on SCC: 
 
Most powerful partner: 
The buyer company is more powerful than the supplier 
in this dyad, because of their size. 
 
SCC overall: 
The supplier is very easy to work with and there is a 
quite good collaboration with them. 
==PAGE:188==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 57 of 70 
 
Yeah, well I'll try to book him for a later meeting, if I need more information. But for now, I think that so far you 
have had some really good input. And then the next question is: in which ways would you say that this power 
has affected the collaboration with SUP4? Has in any way BF utilized this power? 
 
J. M.  
Maybe one thing I could say before. I think we need to make sure that we don't tell SUP4 and when you 
interview them, we don't want them to know that we think we have power over them. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Yes, sure. I will not share any information in this regard, and I will only let the interview flow as per their answers 
to my questions. I will not be revealing if something different was said here. 
 
J. M. 
Nice to have that clear. So, to answer your question now, I guess we are more, or we dare be a little bit more 
aggressive with them. So if you look at the different kinds of relationships with our suppliers, then one is a) if 
we're smaller we try and go into a partnership, if we see value in that for our business, b) If we are where we 
see ourselves in a stronger position, then maybe we would try and leverage on that for different things. That 
could be the price, the capacity in the market, many different things…access to technology. It can also be 
when you're trying to get an agreement in place that you can be a little bit more aggressive and say "you 
have to accept these terms", because they're more likely to accept them where we're the bigger player. 
They're not in such a good position. 
 
T. H.  
Yes, but to add to that, the question says "in which ways would you say that this power has affected your 
collaboration". I've found the discussions that I hear is, I'm not sure whether or not we have really utilized the 
full potential of the leverage that we might have in terms of power towards SUP4. In fact, there are other 
players on the market. I don't know whether or not we have really challenged that with SUP4. I haven't at 
least heard whether we have spoken with other ROV players on the market and whether or not we have 
actually had a specific strategy as part of integrated services. Or we might have had one, but I don't know 
whether or not we utilized the benefits of anything there. 
 
J. M. 
I think this is the challenge with this company in general and category management is that we've had a lot 
longer relationship with them, but the people have kept changing. One person who hasn't changed who 
came before us was C. And he has run multiple tenders with them where we've included other players. I have 
run one tender on his behalf. And that was for ROVs to do U-weld inspections, which we did and which 
another person Bjorn did on the Deepwater side, and I did on the Jack-up side. On the Jack-up side, it turned 
out to be technically not feasible so we didn't go forward. But on the Deepwater side, it was awarded to SUP4 
and there was another company named S. So, in the past we've definitely run competitive tendering, but 
then this resulted in us kind of almost -I don't want to say "single-sourcing" to SUP4, but I would say 80% of 
probably our ROVs on board the rigs are SUP4, and then maybe the other 20% are S., and a lot of the times, 
it's actually not us who determines what's on board. In the old days, it wasn't us who determined it. It was the 
operators who contracted directly and brought the ROVs on board and we borrowed it for our own work 
once in a while. But then there became a shift in the market, where we started with replacement agreements, 
and then I think we became more into going directly. But I agree with you, since me and you have taken off, 
Commented [AS108]: Power on SCC: 
 
Impact: 
The buyer company does not wish the supplier to know 
that they consider themselves more powerful in the 
relationship. 
 
The buyer is a bit more aggressive with this supplier 
compared to others where they are not in a favorable 
power position. The use this power to achieve better 
prices, access to technology, favorable terms in 
agreements etc. 
 
The buyer thinks that they do not utilize the full 
potential of their leverage with this supplier. 
 
The buyer company does not have a strategic sourcing 
agenda within the category of ROVs. They have been 
practically single sourcing from this supplier. In the past 
they run competitive tenders. 
==PAGE:189==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 58 of 70 
 
it's basically been single sourcing and we haven't really looked further into it, there's no real strategy. I guess I 
was speaking for more of the longer perspective on how we ended up with SUP4. 
 
T. H.  
I guess if you identify that we have potential leverage, at least there is power advantage, then we would or 
should at least try to apply that into the category that we have them. 
 
J. M. 
And then that's definitely a good point, we're definitely not utilizing that to its full potential. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
So, for example, you mean that you could potentially negotiate better prices? Or how would you say that you 
could leverage this power over SUP4? 
 
T. H.  
As I see it, the best way to move forward is to understand the current situation and then as we... [technical 
issue]... I think ideally to utilize this, you would need to have again, a strategy and that needs to be aligned 
with the business because - I think J. M.  you might be able to confirm that - that one thing is what we want 
to do, but there's a whole business and a lot of stakeholders in that part of, let's say, fulfilling let's say... In order 
for this strategy to be a success, the stakeholders need to tip in and give a buy in on that. And if we, for some 
reason, single source, 80% of what we do with SUP4 for a specific reason, whether or not there's a technical 
reason or some kind of preference, then that needs to be somehow now addressed with the organization. 
 
J. M.  
I don't think it was a single source because there were tenders done. That's how we ended up with them, but 
you could say that that was a while ago with different people so maybe it needs to be revisited.  
 
T. H.  
Okay. Definitely but I believe that if we've done tenders, then if it was based on these tenders demonstrated 
that SUP4 was a preferred supplier, and then that was along based on price or some other parameters, I 
guess. I don't know the details of that I  
 
J. M. 
So, the frame agreement I think started with this Deepwater U-weld thing. And that was done on a 
competitive tender with TCO and it was done by this Icelandic guy. And then C. worked further with them 
and I don't know exactly what he did, but it ended up that we started working much closer with them. And 
then I did the tender for the Jack-ups, but never signed a contract, they actually were the ones that would 
want or share the business with somebody else. But it was not technically feasible on a Jack-up rig, so we 
abandoned it on the tender for the Deepwater. It was another company named S. also won, but then your 
point becomes very clear because the organization didn't want to use S. So, the tender was done with the 
TO department, and they agreed and signed off and they presented to the tender board and all that, but 
then operations didn't care and did whatever they wanted. As the standard typical. 
Commented [AS109]: Power on SCC: 
 
The buyer does not utilize their full power leverage 
potential in the relationship. They are considering doing 
so, but first this kind of initiative must be fully aligned 
with the strategy and all the stakeholders in the buyer 
organization. 
 
The buyer says it is not exactly single sourcing because 
there were tenders in the past.  
==PAGE:190==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 59 of 70 
 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Okay, great. Thanks for the insights. And then I think we can move on to the next part, which is about the 
effect of trust on supply chain collaboration. And how would you describe the Trust has evolved in your 
relationship with SUP4? 
 
J. M.  
I think for us it's kind of difficult to say, since we haven't had a long relationship with them. I've dealt with them, 
bits and pieces here and there. I'm now dealing with them on a case in Africa. I would say, for me, there's no 
reason not to trust them, there's nothing that I've experienced as broken the trust. And I generally only heard 
good things. But I don't have long enough of experience of the collaboration. So, I think G. M.  maybe the 
best person to, to give you a better answer here, unless T. H.  you have more on that.  
 
T. H.  
Well I think that to be able to answer this question you would need to know specifically how the as for the 
relationship development between last year of So, and that I simply don't have enough insight to the depth 
of the casting. If I were to add on that. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Okay, that's fine too. I will try to follow up on this with G. M., maybe I will just send him the questions that were 
not answered. Do you know what was it that led to this "almost single sourcing" relationship with SUP4?  
• 
For example, is there any framework with rewards or penalties to incentivize the supplier?  
• 
Or is it just purely based on their competences and their reliability?  
• 
Or maybe is it that they're open to share information or they have close relationships with the company? 
 
J. M.  
Again, I don't think it's single sourcing because a tender was run. So, in that and then you sign a frame 
agreement, then it's not by definition single sourcing. And I think we have to look through the contracts to see 
if there's bonuses and penalties and that kind of stuff. I doubt there's bonuses because I've never really heard 
of us doing that. And then penalties there could be like liquidated damages. There could also be bonuses 
given to us, like a retroactive annual bonus, if we spend a certain amount of money or we place a certain 
amount of orders. I'm trying to look at Coupa right now to see if there's something, but we have so many 
contracts with them, that I just can't tell you straight off the bat. For me, but I know G. M.  has been involved 
in the contracts. So again, I would think he would be the best person to answer. But I think the reason why we 
have been working so much with them is their competencies and their abilities to “get the job done”. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Great. Thank you. I will note this for G. M.. And do you know if there's a certain trust, built in this relationship 
and if it has had a positive impact overall, or not? 
 
J. M. 
Commented [AS110]: Trust on SCC: 
 
The category managers who were interviewed did not 
have a very long experience managing the relationship 
with this supplier.  
 
Their experience indicates that the supplier is 
trustworthy and has delivered according to promises. 
Commented [AS111]: Trust on SCC: 
 
The interviewees are not aware whether there has been 
a rewards/penalties scheme.  
 
They base the trust on the competences of the supplier. 
Commented [AS112]: Trust on SCC: 
 
Overall positive result. 
==PAGE:191==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 60 of 70 
 
So again, we just don't have - at least I don't have and from what T. H. said I don't think he does either - the 
long relationship with this company, personally, so it's very hard to say. All I can say is that my dealings with 
them have been good. And I have no reason not to trust them. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Okay, great. And then I would like to move on to the next group, which is about the effect of trust on power. 
So, how would you interpret the effect of trust has affected the power asymmetry/power exercise in your 
relationship with SUP4?  
 
J. M. 
I think it's because we keep changing people, we keep doing more changes. Maybe with C., he has done it 
more. I just haven't seen that documented in any way. So, it's again quite difficult to say unless T. H., I don't 
know.  
 
T. H.  
I have no idea. I will say that our reason for maybe not utilizing leverage that we might have in terms of the 
power balance, if we haven't utilized it fully then I don't believe it's because supplier has delivered 
accordingly. I think that's not too much to expect from a supplier actually. I think, the only reason I will not 
utilize any leverage that we might have in terms of power is simply because we might see some potential 
benefits from partnering with this supplier. And that also goes to the next question you have there about the 
effect of power on trust. I mean, it’s the same approach more or less from our company, but I don’t have the 
insights to tell you if power has changed trust. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Okay. So, then I think I will jump to the next group of questions which are regarding supply chain collaboration 
and supply chain performance. So, question no. 7: How frequently do you communicate with the supplier? 
 
J. M. 
So, we just kind of took this over from January, or maybe even could say, end January - early February. As 
you know, there were certain organizational changes. And the first thing we've done is we have worked to 
get a QBR a quarterly business review up. It was supposed to be two weeks ago, if I'm not mistaken, but 
because of COVID-19, we have cancelled it until further notice. And that will would kind of be the kickoff for 
T. H., me and G. M., taking over from what C. has done previously. But unfortunately, because of the COVID-
19, we've not. We had to cancel it, and we will pick it up at some point, but so we haven't had the formal 
one yet. I think the plan is to have agreed in that meeting, how many times we do this, we call it a QBR which 
means it’s supposed to be quarterly but I think that is something to be discussed in the first kickoff. How many 
times we should have this if we should have workshops, then you could say, in addition to the buyers having 
their daily contact in terms of purchase orders. We're also involved on a contractual side with work orders 
and free placement agreements. I'm currently working on putting in a global free placement agreement with 
them, which we now do rig by rig camp or for each specific purpose. So, I would say there are three levels of 
the relationship, there's the formal meetings, like the QBRs. Then there's the contractual interactions when 
there's a project. For example, when a client or when we're ramping down. And then there's the in between 
gaps where we want to keep their equipment on board the rig when we don't have a contract and not pay 
for it, those are called free placement agreements. And then the final one is the operational daily type of 
Commented [AS113]: Trust on Power: 
 
The trust has not played any role in limiting the use of 
power in the relationship.  
 
 
Power on Trust: 
 
No insights on the effects of power on trust in this 
relationship. 
Commented [AS114]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Collaborative communication: 
 
There are 3 levels that have 3 different types of 
collaborative communication: 
1)More operational level: Buyers with sales 
department - Almost daily contact 
2)Tactical Level (projects) – As needed 
3)Strategic Level – QBRs but that is to be discussed as 
there is new management in the relationship. Latest 
QBR cancelled due to COVID-19. 
==PAGE:192==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 61 of 70 
 
contact. More admin. So, there's those three and I would say, we're at varying levels and we're not as strategic 
as we want to be. Just because we've just come into this. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Thank you very much. And then, to what degree do you share sensitive information with this partner? I mean 
supply chain related information for example forecasts, or any other of this information that would help them 
improve their performance, and thereby the overall performance of their supply chain. 
 
J. M.  
So, we haven't done it yet in this new group, but in the QBR we would have shared some of that information, 
and we were trying to be as open as we can be by sharing what kind of spend numbers we have also, what 
do we see in the pipeline and also some performance related comments. But I don't know what has been 
done previously. 
 
T. H.  
So, yeah, maybe I can give an example because I agree with you J. M.  that going forward, we are actually 
trying to share some forecasting activities on some of the projects that we might have coming up with other 
suppliers, in order to be more engaging and proactive and open in the cooperation that we have. I know 
that six months ago we decided to get involved with BFCompetitorE. for “Rigs of the future” which is a project 
on how to develop the rigs of the future and how to optimize and transform an operating rig to reduce 
number of BOP on board. And long story short, I believe that - for that project at least - If we would be 
awarded the possibility to actually do it we would need to enter probably much more close collaboration 
with many of our key suppliers and share different kinds of probably also sensitive information, a lot of 
technical information going forward. So, I believe that we are as a company - that's at least the perception I 
have - quite open towards that. I don't believe that we have any information at least looking from a technical 
perspective where we have a patent pending or something like that, that we need to protect. I think our 
success is very much dependent on the success that our suppliers also have the terms of technology, etc. 
 
J. M.  
And maybe just to add to that, we would do things like have NDA (as non-disclosure agreements) and 
confidentiality clauses, so that we protect ourselves from a legal perspective. But, in terms of the integrated 
services subcategories like ROVs, I think there we're willing to be more collaborative and more sharing. Maybe 
if you compare that to some consumable categories maybe there it's just transactional. 
 
T. H.  
SUP4 is probably much more in the forefront of what's going on in that specific area. From a technological 
perspective of what's actually being developed, what kind of new technologies can you apply and solutions, 
etc. And that's actually where we at least start to integrate services would like to obtain this information from 
our suppliers in order to channelize that to our commercial team so if our suppliers, of Integrated Services 
have some new solutions that we might be able to test off into our own drilling solutions, then I think we would 
like to be the first to know. So, we get some kind of competitive edge, if we can. And I guess we would also 
be pulling for that information from our suppliers. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Commented [AS115]: Information sharing: 
 
In the QBRs the plan is to be open and share 
information about spend (current and expected), project 
pipeline and supplier performance review. 
 
The buyer is very eager and open to provide even 
sensitive information to their suppliers in order to 
improve collaboration and overall performance, if they 
see synergies in that regard. 
 
The buyer company says that their success is also very 
much dependent on their suppliers’ success. 
 
In the category of integrated services, the buyer is more 
willing to disclose information to the supplier than in 
more transactional categories such as consumables. 
 
The supplier is at the forefront of the new technologies 
and the buyer would like to take advantage of that “first 
access to technology” to gain competitive edge over 
their competitors. 
==PAGE:193==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 62 of 70 
 
Thank you very much. And do you know of any examples of projects where both companies were sharing 
resources, or they invested capital in a shared project? 
 
J. M. 
I think in the project that I was involved is also a good example of what T. H.  was saying with first access to 
technology. So, today if you are a drilling contractor, you have to - as part of your special periodic survey 
(SPS) of the rig every five years - you have to recertify certain equipment. You need to do like a whole check. 
If it's a jack-up rig you need to open the spud cans and do an examination to see that the steel is still good 
enough for another five years to be recertified. So, this was one of the first big projects at least that I'm aware 
of and that I was involved in, where we did it both on the Deepwater and on the Jack-up side, and that was 
to go out to the to these companies and say: “We don't want to take the rig out of service, put it in a yard or 
even take it out of service offshore to do these recertifications. We would like to see if there's a smarter way 
can we do it while the rig is in operation, and while we're being paid by the client”. And today, in many cases, 
you can do it using divers to do the UIDD, which stands for Underwater Inspection in view of Dry Docking 
(UIDD). So, you'd use divers to go and do the inspection, but normally if there's a diver going down then you 
can't be in full operation. So, we tried to challenge not only SUP4 but all their competitors to say, “Could you 
use an underwater Remote Operated Vehicle plus some robotic arms and stuff, to be able to do this?”. And 
on the deep water I think they concluded that it was possible, but not on the Jack-up's because the robot on 
the ROV could not open the door of the spud can which is the leg, the foot of the jacking legs. And because 
it's what you call a "man hold" I think, where you have to turn it like a steering wheel to open the hatch. And 
unfortunately, that was built for humans are for divers to do, but not built for robots so we could not do it. And 
SUP4 was one of the companies, I would say not the most innovative, but they have the largest amount of 
ROVs and robots, of any company out there that does offshore work. And that was their strongest thing. They 
did have some innovations, but there were some smaller companies that were even more innovative. I don't 
know if that helps answer. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Yes, very much. Thanks a lot. And then, is there any decision synchronization with SUP4? For example, before 
you place a work order or a purchase order to them, does BF try to also consult with them and discuss if it 
makes sense to maybe postpone the work or do it earlier, to also improve their supply chain planning? 
 
J. M. 
I think on work order level, if we run a tender we would try and do this and even in the bid stage, maybe not 
as formalized and as efficient as we would like. And then you could say on the purchase order level that's 
usually based on a work order, but it doesn't always have to be. And I think on that level yes sometimes you 
would consult them much in advance. Sometimes, probably not. And I think sometimes you're just stuck with 
certain ROV providers because that's what your client wants. So, I think maybe another thing you have to 
understand that this, and with any of the integrated services, is that it's not just a two way relationship, it's often 
a three way relationship so the client has had well huge power in this relationship so it's not, it's only on the SPS 
side where we have to do the recertification of the rig and even to that extent the client has some say if they 
have leased the rig. So, it is more complex because there's more parties in there. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Yes, thank you. Now, would you say that BF has developed a better understanding of their market, and the 
competitive environment by working together with SUP4 or maybe have created some competitive 
advantage for BF or for both, maybe? 
Commented [AS116]: Resources sharing: 
 
Yes, there have been such projects with this supplier. 
Commented [AS117]: Example of a joint project with 
shared resources. 
Commented [AS118]: Decision Synchronization: 
 
The buyer sometimes consults with the supplier.  
 
Sometimes working with a certain ROV provider is not 
their decision but their customer’s decision. 
 
Commented [AS119]: Joint Knowledge Creation: 
 
No information. 
==PAGE:194==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 63 of 70 
 
 
J. M.  
Probably in the past, but because we've had a personnel change, and we didn't get a hand over it's very 
difficult for us to tell you. And I think G. M.  would be the best person. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Okay. And then next and final question: How would you interpret that collaboration with SUP4 has affected 
the overall supply chain performance of BF? Would you say it is an overall positive or negative outcome? 
 
J. M. 
I would say in most cases it's positive, I haven't heard of any negative cases. To my knowledge, I don't know, 
T. H.  if you have 
 
T. H.  
The question is how to measure them, because let's say you make some kind of performance audits, you 
measure that across the different parameters while you've measured them on response towards this and that, 
and performance of the rig and responsiveness and also it's just like on an overall level, at least for ROVs, since 
I've been involved, that haven't heard anything negative. I don't know whether or not these audits that we 
are now supposed to have with the suppliers, where we will measure some kind of KPIs, will disclose something 
different. I don't know, I don't know whether or not we have accurately measured performance parameters, 
of our ROV suppliers. I guess it's just on the field basis right now. 
 
J. M.  
Yeah, this is too early, I think, unfortunately, you've come at a time where we've just changed personnel and 
haven't received a hand-over, so it's just too difficult to say,  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
No, don’t worry about that, I am sure I can work with what I have so far. So, thank you both very very much 
for your time and for your assistance in this project. 
 
J. M.  
Sorry we couldn't answer all the questions, but I think I hope G. M.  can fill in the gaps. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
No, don’t worry about that. But then, that’s all. Thank you again both for your time and your input. And I would 
like to ask from you T. H.  since you're the category manager who's managing this supplier, about the contact 
information of a person that I might be able to contact from SUP4 to conduct the same interview so that I 
also get their perspective. 
 
Commented [AS120]: SCC on SCP overall: 
 
Overall positive result. 
==PAGE:195==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 64 of 70 
 
J. M.  
So, I have a contact that I've been working with lately and I can share that with you. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI 
Perfect. Thank you very much, and Tomas, I will send you a link with a Google form where you will need to fill 
in a few information that's like two minutes of your time just about your title your how many years you've been 
in the oil and gas industry and BF. Thank you very much again. I hope I see you soon at the office. 
 
J. M. 
Yeah, sooner than later. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Yeah. Good talk. Thanks a lot. 
 
T. H. 
Take care. Bye. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:196==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 65 of 70 
 
Interview #10: 
One-on-one Interview with: 
• G. M.: Category Manager for SUP5 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Thank you for joining me for this interview today. So, let’s get started with the interview questions which are 
the same as the ones that I attached in the meeting invitation. There are five groups of questions, each one 
investigating the different aspects of the collaboration that we are interested in in this project. The first group 
of questions is about the effect of power on supply chain collaboration, and we would like to know, how would 
you describe the power asymmetry in your relationship with SUP5? Who is the strongest trading partner and 
how is this power exercised to the weakest counterpart? And if you could maybe start with a little bit of 
background in the relationship. 
 
G. M.   
Of course. So, they are one of our identified critical suppliers. They are top suppliers to the buying firm (BF) 
and have been probably for the last 20 years the designer and manufacturer of the majority of the equipment 
that we have on board that's relating to drilling. So, all of the drilling packages that we have on the rigs are 
(with the exception of four) from SUP5, so that means we're very much tied with them. When we did build the 
rigs, we had the options to choose one of three different providers and for 80% of the rigs then we chose SUP5 
as the provider. So obviously we buy their equipment that is manufactured and designed by them. So, that 
means they have much more power over us than we have over them, and they can certainly dictate things: 
they can affect the uptime and the performance of our rig. Because when it comes to software activities if 
the software fails, sometimes we can't utilize the equipment which then means we can't drill, so they can 
have a fundamental impact on the revenue that we can make as an organization. So, the power sits in their 
hands there about our actual equipment, and a lot of our competitors’ equipment also. And we are not the 
biggest drilling contractor, I think we are the fifth or sixth largest now in the market. So, you can see our power 
is quite limited in comparison to if we look at the biggest players in the market. T. for example, they are four 
times the size of BF. So, our approach has been to try and not use the size of our organization as a strength 
but maintain communication, collaboration and then development with the supplier. So, we try to work 
together with them to improve the efficiency for us and for them and to reduce cost, both for them and for 
us as a sales relationship. We try and compete with our competitors and spend a lot more money with them, 
purely on the collaboration aspect by involving them in digital initiatives, so we're using third party companies 
to work together with them. So, I think they more or less have a monopoly over ourselves we have some 
company decisions to take and that's whether or not we want to spend, and buy all of our spare parts from 
SUP5. They themselves rely on a lot of other manufacturers to produce parts, and then SUP5 uses these parts 
to then make the equipment. So technically we could bypass SUP5 and buy a lot of these parts from the 
original equipment manufacturer. However, that means we could significantly reduce our spend with SUP5 
and if we're trying to maintain some level of power with an influence we want to then continue to have a 
reasonable spend with them. If we drop $8 or $10 million article spend with them every year because we buy 
spare parts from the manufacturer, BF is probably doing ourselves injustice in the longer term. Yet we know 
they can put the 200% markup on some parts. So, it is a challenging market I guess with interesting 
opportunities both for that and for us, because we could decide to change over that approach. But that also 
might have an impact on the warranties that we have on the certain pieces of equipment. So, provide parts 
who have other vendors in defeating it might affect the warranty issued something happens in equipment so 
it's quite a larger scale of decisions that need to happen. So, let's say they are the strongest trading partner 
in this relationship, so they have the most power.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Commented [AS121]: Power on SCC: 
 
High degree of dependence on the supplier  
 
Most powerful partner:  
The supplier is more powerful than the buyer in this 
relationship, due to high degree of dependence. 
 
Buyer company’s approach to power asymmetry: 
-They try to collaborate with them by engaging in 
joint development ventures, collaborative 
communication and innovations, rather than use their 
respective power on them. 
-They keep a high spend with the supplier, although 
they could bypass them, because they want to 
maintain good relationship with the supplier and 
make themselves an attractive client. 
 
Commented [AS122]: Background information on the 
supplier and the relationship. 
==PAGE:197==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 66 of 70 
 
Okay. Thank you. And then, in which ways would you say that this power has affected your collaboration with 
SUP5? Do they exercise their power? And is it an overall positive outcome or negative? 
 
G. M.   
Yes, well, I think they make sure we're aware of it. Then there is also trust, which plays a big role when you 
have these critical suppliers. With SUP5 then the trust and the collaboration, in terms of development together 
has been quite good. But they're also not so proactive and willing to maybe change the way they work. So, 
if they can, if there are opportunities for both companies maybe to improve the efficiency and reduce costs, 
they don't always take that opportunity because they might be getting enough money from other customers 
of theirs. So, they may say, "Well, why should I change it?" because then they lose, or they don't see the true 
total cost or benefit or the total cost reduction to the industry. I think they have an opportunity and they take 
that opportunity.  But I think as we grow and as we get to know them better, and it's not a new relationship - 
it's over the last 20 years - so it's something that we have been aware of and have been able to mitigate and 
collaborate more closely together so the more open, we are, and cheating and what we're doing, and one 
big example would be the new building program. President awarded the four drillship contracts to SUP5 and 
that really gave us more power because it's a significant amount of spend - a drillship to produce is around 
between 500-600 million US dollars. So that is a huge asset today to win that business from us so that increased 
our relationship and collaboration with them because prior to that we had built four jack-up rigs, which we 
awarded to their competitors and they were quite frustrated with us. So, we regained some power leverage 
with them. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Okay. And so then would you say that the relationship with SUP5 is mostly based on dependence? 
 
G. M.   
Absolutely, yes. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
So how would you describe the trust in your relationship with SUP5? Okay, it is based on dependence, but are 
there also rewards/penalties? Would you say that there is trust based on integrity/reliability and competence 
or on closeness/openness and credibility?   
 
G. M.   
Yes, well see, we are completely dependent upon them, but they are also generally quite reliable. We know 
they charge a high price, but they also provide equipment that is mandatory for us to be able to operate as 
an organization. So therefore, that is the primary need to have such a close relationship with anybody. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Great, thank you! Now, how would you interpret the effect of trust has affected the power asymmetry/power 
exercise in your relationship with SUP5? For example, would you say that their power over BF has affected the 
trust that BF has on SUP5 negatively or positively? 
 
Commented [AS123]:   
Power on SCC: 
 
Power exercise from supplier to buyer: 
 
The supplier makes sure that the buyer knows who has 
the most power in the relationship. 
 
The supplier is not always very proactive and not so 
willing to change the way they work. So, if there are 
opportunities for both companies to improve efficiency 
and reduce costs, they might not always take that 
opportunity because they might be getting enough 
money from other customers of theirs. They don’t 
always see the total cost reduction or the benefit. 
 
 
 
Trust in SCC: 
 
Trust is a very big factor when dealing with critical 
suppliers. With this supplier, trust and collaboration in 
terms of developing together has been quite good. 
 
 
Commented [AS124]: Trust on SCC: 
 
The buyer’s trust on the supplier is based on 
dependence. 
Commented [AS125]: Trust on SCC: 
 
Trust is based on dependence mostly and on reliability.  
 
This calculative trust has driven the 20-year relationship. 
Commented [AS126]: Trust on SCC: 
 
Not a negative result overall. 
 
Very open company and eager to share information, 
which fosters more collaboration compared to some of 
their competitors. They are also open in looking at 
innovations together and that adds to the trust and 
enhances collaboration, offering win-win solutions for 
both companies. 
 
Very open in information sharing and knowledge 
sharing. 
 
Trust on Power: 
Trusting and being dependent on this supplier has not 
made them misuse their power over the buyer.  
==PAGE:198==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 67 of 70 
 
G. M.  
I think it's maybe not negatively. I think they are a quite open company to deal with. So that creates trust in 
itself. Whilst they demonstrate their power, they are also very open about it so that fosters more collaboration 
rather than some of their competitors who are not so willing to share information or no markup percentages. 
There are some examples, when we work on new digital initiatives where we try and sort of reduce the 
maintenance on the rigs, we look into how we can use data sensors to take information, and that is then 
sensitive data because they could in turn use that data to improve the efficiency within to sell it to other 
customers. If we manage to gain something from it. So, it's about rights, who owns that data. If it's a joint 
collaboration, then technically you bought more than the data you might want it to be 50-50% or might be 
different percentages. But does that mean that either party has the rights, then to use that to then gain profit 
from an alternative company or competitor. So, they are quite open to collaborating and sharing in how we 
work together. So that also fosters more trust because it's a bit of a win-win because they're also trying to 
improve the efficiencies of what they do. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay. And as I understand, they are very open in information sharing and knowledge sharing. But you also 
mentioned earlier that when it comes to for example, an initiative that would help both companies grow or 
reduce their costs, they might still decline such an initiative because they can still get profit from other 
customers that they have. So then how would you describe this collaboration between BF and SUP5 over the 
years? Has it improved over the years, or is it worsening? And how would you then connect this to the 
openness and trust that has been developed over time? 
 
G. M.   
I don't think it has decreased the relationship or the quality of that. One example would be spare parts where 
we can purchase them directly from the equipment manufacturers. In some cases, have 200% of bpos price 
for that part that we do when we buy from SUP5 so that is a significant markup and when we approach SUP5 
about that, the parts price remains the same. They apply a fixed percentage discount to all the parts that BF 
buys from them. So, if it was a true collaboration and partnership, we would be able to source those parts 
from the original equipment manufacturers, without affecting our total spend with SUP5 or our larger 
relationship or without affecting the warranties. But that's not feasible, because they want as much money as 
possible from BF. We also need to maintain a level of prioritization and we want to be one of their preferred 
customers. So, we've got a way that spend in spare parts, each year, or when we have yard stays because 
we buy it from multiple sources. And that certainly affects relationships so they're using their power there to 
make sure that we do, stick with them, but they're also becoming more flexible. When we do a five-year SPS 
project, we don't know which parts we're going to need to use on SUP5 equipment, but we know we're going 
to overhaul let’s just say five pieces of equipment. So now the new approach that we've adopted recently 
has enabled us or SUP5 to supply us a whole kit for each of these five pieces of equipment. But then we can 
return whatever we don't use. That means when the job starts, we won't be short of any of the spare parts 
because we have everything potentially required for the job. And then whatever we don't use we can send 
back. That didn't use to be possible. So, they are opening up to more flexible ways of working. That then 
makes our lives easier, because we when we go to overhaul a part, we know we have all the spare parts 
there. And that won't be the cause of delaying the rig getting out to the yard that it's in which then can affect 
when we get back on and day-rate. So, the collaboration is certainly improving and being beneficial to both. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Thank you. Now, moving one the next questions are about the overall supply chain collaboration and the 
supply chain performance. So, how frequently do you communicate with SUP5?  
 
Commented [AS127]: Trust on Power: 
 
The buyer’s trust on the supplier has not helped them 
reduce the prices for the equipment that they purchase 
from the supplier. 
 
The buyer tries to maintain a high amount of spend with 
this suppler to obtain favorable treatment and to limit 
the supplier’s use of power. 
 
Now the supplier is more open and flexible in new ways 
of working, because of the trust and the collaboration 
efforts of the buyer. For example when there is an SPS 
(special periodic survey), and the buyer is not 100% sure 
which parts will be needed, the supplier has offered the 
possibility to provide full kits in the beginning and then 
the buyer has the chance to return what was not used. 
This has been a huge help, because waiting for parts no 
longer delays the rig getting out of the yards to get 
back on a day-rate. 
 
Power on Trust: 
 
The supplier exerts power over the buyer regarding 
pricing and spend, making sure that the buyer “sticks 
with them”. The supplier is setting the boundaries in the 
collaboration, but those actions haven’t decreased trust 
or the quality of the relationship. 
 
 
Evolution of collaboration and trust in the relationship: 
 
It is not a true collaboration, because if it was, the buyer 
company would still be able to buy parts from the 
original equipment manufacturers without affecting the 
total spend with SUP5 or their larger relationship.  
But Collaboration is definitely improving and being 
beneficial for both. 
 
Commented [AS128]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Collaborative communication: 
In the lower levels (operational) it is multiples times 
weekly.  
In the more tactical level, there are calls every 3-4 weeks 
to discuss general issues and updates on ongoing 
activities.  
QBRs which are more structured, and they discuss more 
critical issues, investments and innovations and 
performance reviews. 
-Operational aspects (open PRs, Pos, Invoices) 
-Uptime/downtime of their equipment, 
pending/outstanding repairs 
-Future digital collaboration: More strategic initiatives 
-Project outlook and pipeline 
-Performance of the different divisions 
 
==PAGE:199==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 68 of 70 
 
G. M.   
Well, first of all, the buyers, so the operational level of the business, they have almost daily communication 
with the sales and logistics departments at SUP5. And then we have QBRs which are quarterly business review 
meetings which are generally more structured. So, in the QBRs we generally look very quickly into the 
operational aspects which are the number of open PRs POs and invoices. We then look into the uptime of 
their equipment. So how long has it been any downtime or the number of repairs that we have outstanding. 
And then a lot of it would be about digitalization in our future collaboration. It is more strategic initiatives, that 
nobody tries but it's just a short aspect. Again, review the project outlook so what we were expecting to work 
on. And then we discuss some of the different individual divisions within SUP5 and how they are performing. 
And then maybe once every three or four weeks we'll have a call, just over general issues or updates 
regarding systems or ongoing activities. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Perfect. And do you also share more sensitive information in these meetings? 
 
G. M.   
Yes, we can. So, maybe the market outlook could be sensitive. Or we can share how we're doing maybe with 
some competitors that could also apply to them or to us to improve efficiency or the example I gave was a 
data analysis to get data from the equipment so then we get to find a willing or adverse to start working on 
to that, what would it mean from a contract perspective and sharing of information. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
And has there been any projects where you have also shared resources with SUP5?  
 
G. M.   
Maybe not for joint ventures but we do, when there's development opportunities we're trying new business 
models and new ways of doing things, and they might invest in something we might also invest in it as a joint 
responsibility. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI  
Okay, great. And to what extent do you orchestrate decisions in supply chain planning and operations in 
order to optimize the supply chain benefits? What I mean is, do they try to influence the supply chain planning 
and operations of BF, or the opposite way? 
 
G. M.   
When we give them the overview of projects and what we've got coming up so if we have a number of SPS, 
then the earlier we get that to them the better and they can then make sure that they can work on it. For 
example, they can make sure that they have any equipment ready that we will need or the service personnel 
that we need available.  
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Commented [AS129]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Information sharing: 
They share info about the market outlook, 
benchmarking compared to competitors (for both sides 
– supplier and buyer – to be able to improve efficiency)  
Commented [AS130]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Resources sharing: 
Not any joint ventures, but they do try new business 
models when there are development opportunities, and 
they might both invest in something with joint 
responsibility. 
Commented [AS131]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Decision synchronization: 
Not as such. The buyer provides an overview of 
upcoming projects so that the supplier can have the 
equipment or the service personnel ready when needed.  
==PAGE:200==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 69 of 70 
 
Thank you. Then the next question is about joint knowledge creation, and would you say that working with 
SUP5 has enabled BF to develop a better understanding and response to the market, and the competitive 
environment? 
 
G. M.    
I think, from looking through initiatives and trying to improve the efficiency of equipment or reduce the 
downtime - that means we can maintain more uptime on the rigs which means we can pay more, then 
certainly, they're proactive to try and meet or increase that number. And they share information when 
equipment is down at the data usage so yes, I think it is enabling us to improve our competitive position. And 
we're always sharing information regarding what goes through some of their systems the efficiency of 
equipment. So they also learn from that because then you can identify patterns and trends across their 
equipment so that's an enabler for them, that also allows them to hopefully improve the efficiency of their 
equipment in future or make upgrades to it that they can then in turn also use that information to improve 
their customer's equipment so it's a bit of a whatever we give them, or whatever they get access to in terms 
of data, they can use to improve their business which ultimately, they share with other customers. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Great. And lastly, how would you interpret the collaboration with SUP5 has affected the supply chain 
performance of BF? 
 
G. M.    
There's a lot of factors where we, BF can be better. Like with our planning and forecasting, which parts we 
need and when. So, we don't help their capacity to produce the parts and often we're screaming to get the 
parts urgently for downtime or for repair. So, we can improve the way we collaborate with them and I think 
they are becoming easier to work with. They know they're one of our critical suppliers. From a supply chain 
perspective, the lead times are not are quite substantial when we buy spare parts from them. But again, we 
don't help them by giving them accurate forecasts at least of what we expect to buy. So, when we only share 
some information of what we expect to be needing in projects like these SPS then we see we're going to 
overhaul maybe this crating too so we'll need all of the spare parts or we're going to overhaul three top drives 
this year, so that means you need all the spare parts. But not for the operational use, that's just when the rigs 
are running there, we know we don't forecast. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Great. And I guess that covered all of my questions. And then I would like to thank you very much for your 
time and for answering my questions and being so open and honest and. And it would be great if you could 
share with me the contact information from a representative of SUP5, so that I can also interview them, 
regarding this relationship with BF. 
 
G. M.    
Let me just ask them first. 
 
ANNA-MARIA STAVRAKAKI   
Sure, of course. Perfect. So, thank you very much and have a great day. 
Commented [AS132]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Joint Knowledge Creation: 
Not as such. They are only very open to sharing of 
information about uptime/downtime so that the buyer 
company can improve their efficiency and their 
competitive position. 
 
The supplier learns from the data that the buyer 
provides (patterns and trends across their equipment) 
about their equipment’s efficiency and effectiveness and 
make upgrades in the future. 
Commented [AS133]: SCC on SCP: 
 
Overall effect of SCC on performance: 
The buyer company could improve in their forecasting 
and in providing the supplier more accurate forecasts 
and information sooner so that they can plan ahead and 
improve their collaboration and their relationship with 
this critical supplier. 
==PAGE:201==
Appendix – Coded Interview Transcripts 
 
Page 70 of 70 
 
 
G. M.    
Thank you. Take care. Bye. 
==PAGE:202==
184
==PAGE:203==
==PAGE:204==
