==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Optimal Scheduling of Electric Autonomous
Buses under Battery Constraints
MASTER THESIS
Pei Cao (s134762)
Kongens Lyngby 2020
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
LINC project is one of the largest test-beds of autonomous buses in Denmark, which
involves testing the shuttles to gain insights into what citizens think about the self-
driving shuttles as well as the new mode of autonomous collective mobility which can
become part of the public transport in the future. As a part of the LINC project,
this thesis aims to conduct the operational tests and provide a reference for design-
ing static and flexible schedules with fixed routes. The main contributions of this
thesis are three-fold. First, this thesis explores the property of the energy consump-
tion of the bus vehicles under different conditions, i.e., how battery consumption is
affected by passenger demand (weight of passenger loads) and slope angles of road.
Second, this thesis tends to investigate the influences of different settings including
timetable and demand of each route on the autonomous bus operation performance
(passengers travel time, waiting time, number of served passengers, energy consump-
tion, etc). As the passenger demand is time-dependent with stochasticity, as well as
the bus operation being influenced by the battery charging behavior, the traffic dy-
namics and passengers dynamics will be nonlinear, which leads to a complicated bus
scheduling problem. Due to the complexity of formulating an analytical model which
can depict the traffic dynamics of both buses and passengers as well as linking the
interactions between them, a simulation method is developed to mimic the operations
of the buses, the arrival, boarding and alighting processes of passengers. By setting
the performance indicators of the simulator, the effects can be evaluated concerning
different situations. A Monte Carlo method is then used to draw different samples
of simulation inputs, such as timetable and passenger demand, in order to find the
==PAGE:4==
ii
Abstract
distribution of output performance indicator like passenger travel time, waiting time
and system energy consumption. Third, this thesis optimizes the bus timetable for
a given passenger demand considering headway time constraints. In this study, a
genetic algorithm is applied to solve the timetable optimization problem.
Finally, we demonstrate the application of the simulation model to an illustrative
network and the DTU’s network, respectively.
For the first network, we mainly
show the performances of the simulation with different input settings.
Then the
similar simulation procedures are repeated on DTU’s network. In addition, we further
present the results of the GA to investigate the effectiveness of the simulation-based
optimization framework, aiming to provide a reference for the practical operations.
Keywords— Public transport network; Traffic simulation; Energy consumption;
Bus timetable; Genetic algorithm
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Management Engineering of the Tech-
nical University of Denmark. It is a part of the requirements to achieve the Master
of Science degree in Engineering in Transportation and Logistics. This project was
conducted from 20-01-2020 to 20-07-2020 during the spring semester of 2020.
It
represents 30 ECTS points.
The thesis was supervised by Prof. Jeppe Rich and Assistant Prof. Yu Jiang.
Kongens Lyngby, July 20, 2020
Pei Cao (s134762)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This project is completed with the collaboration of the LINC project, the largest
test project of autonomous buses in Denmark. The project involves various partners,
such as municipalities, DTU, Nobina, and IBM. It gave me a profound understanding
of autonomous buses, timetable scheduling problems, simulations and optimization
methods.
The thesis was supervised by Prof. Jeppe Rich and Assistant Prof. Yu Jiang from
the department of Management Engineering of the Technical University of Denmark.
I want to express my most profound appreciation to my supervisors for always being
open for guidance, discussions, and support. A great thanks to Jeppe Rich for the
productive discussions during the master thesis period, which made the program
much easier to comprehend. All of the technical details and suggestions throughout
the entire masters journey brought me to this promising research area which greatly
increased my knowledge.
Additionally, I would like to thanks my friends, Renming Liu, for the valuable
motivation, discussions and feedback during this period; Jintao Ren with the useful
suggestions regarding Python coding; Roy Tan, Jia Ning, Qin Zhang and Jiachen
Chen for the moral encouragement throughout.
Finally, I would like to thank my family for their continuous support and caring
during my education.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Simulation
13
2.1
Modelling the dynamics of bus and passenger . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Simulation process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Monte Carlo method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3
Optimization
29
3.1
Optimization model formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Genetic Algorithm (GA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Case study
37
4.1
Illustrative example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.2
Implementation and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Experiment on DTU’s network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Conclusion
63
5.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.2
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A Appendices
67
A.1 Energy consumption results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.2 Results of a single simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.3 Results of simulations with Monte Carlo sampling input . . . . . . . .
72
A.4 Correlations among the TT, WT, interval, σ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.5 Results of DTU’s network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.6 Simulation code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
A.7 GA code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Bibliography
109
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
In 2015, the United Nations (UN) presented the world with 17 global goals known
as the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) which are set to be achieved by 2030.
The SDGs’ ambition is to change the world and protect the planet by increasing the
use of renewable energy and building sustainable cities and communities. Diesel buses
running in the city however add substantially to air pollution (Li et al., 2016). For
achieving the SDGs and reducing pollution from the use of diesel buses, electric buses
have been increasingly utilized and operated in cities for the dual reduction in both
local emissions as well as noise levels (Hall et al., 2018).
Improving personal mobility via autonomous buses has attracted tremendous at-
tention in recent years in order to achieve cost-effective door-to-door services. Various
pilot projects are currently being tested or scheduled in different countries including
Denmark. Both private and public sector operators are heavily involved in both the
development and implementation processes given the huge potential from providing
new mobility services and mitigating existing traffic problem via attracting travellers
from private vehicles.
One of the largest test-beds of autonomous buses in Denmark is the LINC project
[LIN], which involves testing the shuttles to gain insights into what citizens think
about the self-driving shuttles as well as the new mode of autonomous collective
mobility which can become part of a sustainable urban environment and public trans-
port in the future. It proposes to use autonomous buses to provide demand-responsive
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
public transport services as the solution to the “first and last mile” challenge. The
project involves various partners, such as Municipality, DTU, Nobina and IBM.
Using DTU as the test-bed, this project will demonstrate the future adaptation of
electric, intelligent and autonomous buses complementing existing public transport
(i.e., Conventional Bus/Metro/S-train). To ensure the project can be carried out in
DTU, DTU is responsible for planning the autonomous bus services from scratch, i.e.,
bus route, frequency, and schedule. In addition to traditional static bus services, i.e.,
fixed route, fixed schedule, the project’s ambition is to achieve demand-responsive
services. Figure 1.1 shows the final test design at DTU.
Figure 1.1: Final test design at DTU.
With the route design at DTU shown in Figure 1.2 in this study, we aim to conduct
the operational tests and provide a reference for designing static and flexible schedules
with fixed routes. As the passenger demand is time-dependent with stochasticity, as
well as the bus operation being influenced by the battery charging behavior, the traffic
dynamics and passengers dynamics will be nonlinear, which leads to a complicated
bus scheduling problem.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Background
3
Figure 1.2: Route design at DTU.
Due to the complexity of formulating an analytical model which can depict the
traffic dynamics of both buses and passengers as well as linking the interactions be-
tween them, a simulation method is developed to mimic the operations of the buses,
the arrival, boarding and alighting processes of passengers. By setting the perfor-
mance indicators of the simulator, the effects can be evaluated concerning different
situations, such as different charging strategies, passenger demand, timetable and so
forth. Based on the performance evaluations, the optimal operation strategies can be
searched via optimization methods. In this study, we aim to optimize a static sched-
ule to guide the arrangement of all the buses considering a fixed passenger demand.
Specifically, a genetic algorithm is further proposed to gain a near-optimal timetable
for the purpose of minimizing total travel time and energy consumption.
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
1.2
Literature review
Due to the advanced driverless technology, autonomous buses are beneficial for re-
ducing the operation cost. A great deal of efforts are therefore made to investigate
the potential effects of deploying autonomous buses for public transport services.
[Wad17] simulated the effects of fully autonomous buses on a public transit network,
and the research results show that the fully autonomous buses can greatly reduce the
operation cost and passenger travel cost. [ZJB19] further demonstrates that the au-
tonomous buses have advantages in addressing moderate and high demand scenarios.
However, both researches investigated the impacts from a macroscopic perspective
without considering the traffic dynamics of bus operations and passenger loads. Thus,
more attentions should be paid into the microscopic operation level, i.e., the traffic
dynamics of bus operation and passenger load dynamics, as well as the design of bus
service timetable and vehicle schedule.
Even with the consideration of autonomous buses, the traditional transit timetabling
and scheduling methods are still meaningful and effective. To depict the dynamics
of the bus transit system, there has been a large amount of methods, which can be
categorized into analytical model-based and simulation-based methods. [New71] pro-
posed analytical formulations describing the moving of buses along a single route and
the loading and unloading processes of passengers through continuous variables, and
the optimal dispatching times can be derived numerically to minimize the total wait-
ing time. [JK19] constructed a linear programming model to deal with the problem of
scheduling with the consideration of charging process and limited charging stations,
aiming at minimizing the number of vehicles. Besides, from the global point of view,
it is becoming more and more urgent to simultaneously consider the timetable and
vehicle schedules with other practical factors such as users’ routings, energy consump-
tion, stochastic passenger demand and so on. For example, [Lap+17] collaboratively
solves the Transit Network Timetabling and Scheduling Problem (TNTSP) and users’
routine choice problem to determine an optimal timetable for a public transit network.
[CLZ19] proposed a dynamic programming algorithm to jointly optimize the depar-
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Literature review
5
ture time and capacity for a single corridor shuttle system, while the fleet size was as-
sumed to be unlimited. However, due to the complexity and the ’curse of dimensions’,
it is not always possible to formulate a theoretical model for the public transport sys-
tem. As a powerful technique, simulation tools are therefore playing a significant role
for analyzing and planning for the bus transit system. For example, [MSK07] pre-
sented a multi-agent simulation platform which captures the vehicle operations and
passenger movements. The advantages of this simulation tool are that the evolution
processes of buses, passengers and stations can be accurately tracked and the results
can be evaluated at different time and space scales. In addition, traffic simulation
is able to evaluate the new traffic mode like autonomous vehicles and management
strategies like charging strategies and dispatching rules. [MMD07] designed a traffic
model in WATSim to test the effects of signal priority. [Pap+12] incorporated the
traffic signals, priority rules, routing decisions, and pedestrian behaviors into a traffic
simulation model to evaluate the utilization of bus dedicated lanes and signal control.
Inspired by these previous researches, the operation dynamics of autonomous buses
and loading processes of passengers are analytically modelled while the queuing pro-
cesses at stations, charging behaviors and bus vehicles assignment are simulated in a
discrete-time way in this study.
Moreover, when designing the schedule for multiple electric automatic busses op-
erating in a transit network, the battery state is a significant factor to be considered
as the charging strategy will greatly influence the quality of the schedule. The bat-
tery state of the different busses may fluctuate over the day due to exogenous factors
such as differences in demand, differences in quality of the batteries, the weather and
road conditions, and endogenous factors such as driver behavior [PJL19]. [PJL19]
proposed a nonlinear formulation to calculated the energy consumption with the con-
sideration of several factors, like the weight of vehicle, the road angle and vehicle
speed, etc. Besides, [BJ+17] illustrated that the weight of the electric vehicles will
also have influence on the performances of the bus and provided a way to estimate the
parameters for electric automobiles. Nevertheless, the risk of running out of battery
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
of the bus, can be partly mitigated by switching the battery [Li14], different charging
techniques during the break [Häl+19] or mixed with diesel buses [Li+18]. [Li14] pro-
posed a vehicle-scheduling model for the electric transit buses with battery swapping
or fast charging strategies. [Rin+18] solved the problem of optimizing the sequence
of electric and hybrid buses departing from a multi-line bus terminal, considering
both service constraints (schedule adherence) and energy constraints (bus charging
status and bus recharging scheduling in capacitated facilities). [Li+18] developed an
integer program to maximize the total net benefit by using mixed fleet. [Häl+19] fur-
ther claimed that charging techniques will influence the planning process differently.
Therefore, the properties of energy consumption is necessary to be investigated and
the state of battery is also tracked in our simulation model when simulating the
operation of bus services. Table 1.1 summarized the related study concerning the
uncertainty, objectives and methodologies.
To achieve certain management purposes, optimization methods are commonly
used to optimize the operations of bus services. Among all kinds of optimization ap-
proaches, heuristic methods such as evolution algorithm [Ke+20], greedy algorithm
[SKW16] and dynamic algorithm [WKL20] are powerful for handling complex opti-
mization problems without closed-form formulations such as the simulation model.
[SKW16] developed a greedy algorithm to allocate bus vehicles to different routes
efficiently. [Ke+20] adopted a genetic algorithm to determine the battery charging
and discharging strategies. [WSZ20] designed a sorting genetic algorithm to optimize
the bus schedules for purpose of minimizing the number of driver needed. Therefore,
a genetic algorithm is also used in this study to optimize the bus service timetable,
aiming at minimizing the total travel time and energy consumption.
The previous work before this project can be concluded as two parts: Timetabling
and scheduling problems for traditional vehicles and the performance of the electrical
vehicles running in cities. Therefore, this project looks into three specific problems
by: i) exploring how battery consumption is affected by demand (weight); ii) investi-
gating to what extent the autonomous bus operation performance (passengers travel
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Problem statement
7
time, waiting time, number of served passengers, energy consumption, etc) will be in-
fluenced by different settings, which include timetable and demand of each OD pairs;
iii) optimizing the timetable for a given passenger demand with the objectives of total
travel time cost and energy consumption cost. In summary, the main contributions of
this study are to simulate the operations of electric autonomous shuttles performing
their services in cities with battery state and energy consumption considered. Then
based on the results of simulation, the public transport network performance can be
evaluated, therefore, the optimization of the bus timetable can be realized by the
family of derivative-free algorithms [CSV09]. In this study, a genetic algorithm is
developed to optimize the bus timetable.
1.3
Problem statement
The purpose of a bus timetable is to determine the departure times of buses on
each route.
When designing a reasonable timetable, a series of practical factors
need to be considered, such as the number of available vehicles, passenger demand
and the headway time constraints. When using the electric autonomous vehicle as
the commute bus, the energy consumption should also be taken into account as the
battery charging will influence the connection of bus services.
With different timetable, the resulting bus dispatching frequency should be differ-
ent, thus the passenger load dynamics will be influenced, then battery state of the
different busses may fluctuate over the day due to differences in demand, causing
different number of charging operations. All these changes may lead to large travel
time and energy consumption.
On the other side, when the timetable is fixed while the passenger demand varies,
the similar phenomenon will also happen, that the varying demand may lead to
unreasonable battery usage, and in turn it will influence the passenger load dynamics.
All the considerations above motivate our study to construct a simulator that
depicts the evolution of the states of buses, passengers and stations.
Meanwhile
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
this simulator can be used to evaluate the effect of different timetable and passen-
ger demand distribution. It could also help with finding an optimal timetable that
minimizes the system cost, such as total travel time and energy consumption.
This study then looks into this specific problem by: i) exploring the property of the
energy consumption of the bus vehicles under different conditions, i.e., how battery
consumption is affected by passenger demand (weight of passenger loads) and slope
angles of road. ii) investigating the influences of different settings including timetable
and demand of each OD pairs on the autonomous bus operation performance (pas-
sengers travel time, waiting time, number of served passengers, energy consumption,
etc). A Monte Carlo method is used to draw different samples of simulation inputs,
such as timetable and passenger demand, in order to find the distribution of output
performance indicator like passenger travel time, waiting time and system energy con-
sumption. iii) optimizing the timetable for a given passenger demand. In this study,
a genetic algorithm is applied to solve the timetable optimization problem.
Next, an example is given to illustrate how the passenger demand and charging
behavior determine the number of bus services and bus vehicles. Let us consider a
network shown in Figure 1.3, where there are five paths A→B→D, A→B→C, A→C,
B→C and B→D. And the passenger demands of different OD pairs A→B, A→D,
A→C, B→C and B→D are 50, 50, 40, 40 and 50, respectively. Besides, in path 1
(A→B→D ), the total travel time is 45 minutes from A to D. Path 2(A→B→C) takes
35 minutes. Path 3(A→C), path 4(B→C) and path 5(B→D) are take 25 minutes, 20
minutes and 30 minutes, respectively. Note that the dwelling time at each station,
which is 1 minute, is already included in the travel time of each OD pair. Suppose
that all the bus services are dispatched from station A within the same time window
between 8 a.m and 10 a.m, and the maximum capacity of each bus is 20. For the
first path A→B→D, the maximum passenger demand is 100 (the sum of passenger
demand of OD pair AD and BD), which calls for 5 bus services. As a bus on path 1
can at most return to station A once within the considered time period, at least 3 bus
vehicles are needed to undertake these 5 bus services. Similarly, for path A→B→C,
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Problem statement
9
the maximum passenger demand is 50, then 3 bus services and at least 1 bus vehicle
are needed.
Figure 1.3: An illustration for a travelling from station A to C.
Besides, when we further consider the energy usage and charging behavior, the
results might be different. For example, on path 1, if the bus needs to be charged for 45
minutes once it returns to station A, then 5 bus vehicles are needed to accommodate
all the passengers traveling between stations A and D within the considered period.
All these considerations can be explicitly captured by a bus network simulation.
In the real-life operation planning, a bus schedule is needed to provide a pre-trip
guidance operation when the route plan is determined, which is used to specify the
arrival, departure and dwelling times of each bus at each station. When designing the
bus schedule, we need to take the constraints, such as the number of available buses
(fleet size) and headway requirements, into account. Then performance indicators,
such as passenger travel time and total energy consumption, are adopted to evaluate
the quality of the designed timetable through the designed simulation. Considering
that passengers have a tolerance of waiting at stations, a timetable with high dis-
patching frequency will not necessarily lead to a small total passenger travel time,
as the load of each bus might be too small and the connections of bus services will
be greatly influenced by the charging behaviors, then some passengers will choose to
walk, resulting in a large travel time. With the above constraints, the feasible set for
the bus timetable is still too large to be be enumerated. Therefore, it is necessary
==PAGE:20==
10
1 Introduction
to develop an effective and efficient optimization algorithm to solve the timetable
optimization problem. One of the commonly used derivative-free algorithms, genetic
algorithm, is then adopted in this study.
1.4
Outline
This thesis is organized as follows. Chapter 2 provides the modelling of the bus transit
network, the architecture of the simulation and the Monte Carlo method. Chapter 3
proposes the bus timetable optimization problem and the genetic algorithm. Chapter
5 demonstrates the implementation of simulation to an illustrative network and the
DTU’s network, as well as the optimization results of the bus timetable. Then, the
conclusions and limitations are summarized in Chapter 6. Intuitively, the outline of
this study is presented in Figure 1.4.
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Outline
11
Figure 1.4: Outline of the thesis.
==PAGE:22==
12
1 Introduction
Table 1.1: Characteristics of reviewed studies on transit time tabling and scheduling problem with energy consumption.
Row
Reference
Uncertain
Objectives
Methodology
1
Pelletier et al.,
2019
Travel cost
Minimum cost delivery routes capable of provid-
ing strong guarantees that a given vehicle will not
run out of charge during its route
Robust mixed integer
linear program and
Two-phase
heuristic
method
2
Laporte et al.,
2017
Travel time; User demand
Optimal timetable for each line of a transit net-
work by establishing departure and arrival times
at each station and allocating a vehicle to each
timetable.
Transit
Network
Timetabling
and
Scheduling Problem;
Trade-off analysis
3
Rinaldi et al.,
2018
User demand; Travel cost
The sequence of electric and hybrid buses depart-
ing from a multi-line bus terminal, considering
both service constraints and energy constraints.
Mixed integer linear
program
4
Wang
and
Shen, 2007
Travel time; Travel cost
Defining vehicle scheduling problem with route
and fueling time constraints.
Multiple ant colony
algorithm;
Bipartite
graphic model
5
Li, 2014
User demand; Travel cost
Developing vehicle-scheduling model for electric
transit buses with either battery swapping or
fast charging at a battery station, and vehicle-
scheduling model with the maximum route dis-
tance
constraint
for
compressed
natural
gas,
diesel, or hybrid-diesel buses.
Column-generation-
based
algorithms;
Real-world
transit
data
6
Hall
et
al.,
2018
Travel time; User demand;
Types of vehicle energy
Investigating how the introduction of electric
buses, both battery and plugin hybrid electric
buses, will change the planning of a public transit
system.
Numerical
real-life
examples
and
tech-
nology analysis
7
Li et al., 2016
Travel cost; Types of buses
Solving the mixed bus fleet management (MBFM)
problem; Maximizing the total net benefit of early
replacement
Integer
program;
Real-world
data
analysis
8
Berjoza
and
Jurgena, 2017
Travel cost; Vehicle weight;
Battery number Developing
and
approbating
an
algo-
rithm for calculating com-
parative parameters for elec-
tric automobiles
Numerical model formed by vehicle parameters
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Simulation
2.1
Modelling the dynamics of bus and passenger
All the description of the symbols and decision variables in the mathematical model
are listed in Table 2.1 and Table 2.2 to set up the Transit Network Timetabling and
Scheduling Problem (TNTSP):
==PAGE:24==
14
2 Simulation
Table 2.1: Notations.
Symbol
Description
R
Set of bus routes R = {1, ..., |R|}
K
Set of stations K = {1, ..., |K|}
C
Capacity for each bus
q
Index of each bus
n
Index of passenger
tan,k,r
The planned arrival time of passenger n at station k on route r
lk,k+1,r
Distance between station k and k + 1 on route r
uk,r
The running time from station 1 to station k on route r
dk1,k2(t)
Passenger demand from station k1 to k2 at time t, k2 ̸= k1 ∈K
T
Time window of bus scheduling
h1min
Minimum headway time between two consecutive buses depar-
ture
at the same station
h2min/h2max
Minimum/maximum headway time between two consecutive
buses
departure on same route
Wq,r
Number of maximum trips on each route r
Ec
The total battery capacity in kWh for electric buses, Ec ∈R+
Wq,r
Number of trips on each route r
State variables
δn,t
Binary variable, if δn,t=1, passenger n is able to board at time
t
pq,k,r
The number of passengers on bus q while depart from station k
on route r
WTn
Waiting time of passenger n
TTn
Travel time of passenger n
Dq,k,r
Departure time of bus q from station k at route r
Eq,k,r
The battery allowance of the bus q at station k on route r
Elmq,k,r
The mechanical energy consumption rate of the bus q at station
k on route r
Blmq,k,r
The amount of energy consumption rate of the bus q at station
k on route r
Table 2.2: Decision variables of the mathematical model.
Variables
Description
yq,r ∈{0, 1}
Whether the route r is selected by bus q
D1,k,r
Departure time of the first bus at station k on route r
hr
The time interval between two consecutive buses on route r
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Modelling the dynamics of bus and passenger
15
2.1.1
Basic assumptions
To facilitate the model formulation, some assumptions are made throughout the paper,
which are stated as follows.
Assumption 1. Transfers between different route lines are not considered in this
study. In other words, passengers only take buses which will arrive at their destination
stations.
Assumption 2. All the buses are fully charged at the beginning of the day.
Assumption 3. All the buses can only be charged at the terminal stations of the
corresponding route lines. For example, as shown in Figure 1.2, the bus operating
on route A →E →F can only be charged at either station A or station F, while
the bus operating on route B →E →F can only be charged at either station B or
station F.
2.1.2
Modelling of bus operation and passenger load
As illustrated in [WS07] that electric bus scheduling problem can be defined as a
vehicle scheduling problem with route and fueling time constraints. The mathematical
formulation of the TNTSP is presented below at ((2.1))-(2.4). This base model is
denoted as follows:
Dq,k,r = Dq,1,r + uk,r
∀q, k, r
(2.1)
Equation (2.1) implies that the departure time of bus q at station k equals to the
departure time of bus q at the start station 1 plus the running time from station 1 to
station k.
Dq+1,1,r = Dq,1,r + hr
∀q, k, r
(2.2)
Equation (2.2) means that the departure time of bus q + 1 at the first station
equals to the departure time of bus q at the first station 1 plus the headway time on
route r.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 Simulation
Eq,k+1,r = Eq,k,r −(Elmq,k,r + Blmq,k,r) ∗lk,k+1,r
∀q, k, r
(2.3)
Equation (2.3) shows that the battery allowance when bus q departs from the
station k + 1 should be calculated by the battery allowance when bus q departs from
the station k minus the energy consumption on the link between station k and k + 1.
Specifically, Eq,k,r of each bus should equal to Ec at the beginning of the day.
pq,k+1,r = pq,k,r +
K
∑
j=k+2
Dq,k+1,r
∑
t=Dq−1,k+1,r
dk+1,j(t) −
k
∑
j=1
Dq,j,r
∑
t=Dq−1,j,r
dj,k+1(t)
∀q, k
(2.4)
Equation (2.4) represents that the number of passengers on bus q when departing
from station k + 1 on route r, equals to the number of passengers on bus q when
departing from station k on route r plus the number of boarding passengers at station
k + 1 and minus the number of passengers getting off at station k + 1.
2.1.3
Energy consumption model
In this section, the definitions and the values of each parameter are given in the
following Table 2.3 [PJL19]:
Table 2.3: parameter values used in energy consumption model.
Parameter
symbol
values
Vehicle weight
w
6,350 kg/3,000kg
Frontal area
A
3.912 m2
Expected air drag coefficient
Cd
0.7
Expected rolling friction coefficient
Cr
0.01
Expected auxiliary power demand
P
1575W
Gravitational constant
g
9.81m/s2
Expected air density
ρ
1.2041kg/ m3
Expected drive train efficiency
ϕ
1.3175
Average weight per passenger
f
70kg
Travel speed
vlm
3.33m/s
As suggested in [PJL19], to calculate the energy consumption of a vehicle traveling
a specific link between two adjacent stations k and k′ with a distance of dkk′, first we
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Modelling the dynamics of bus and passenger
17
assume that each vehicle has a weight w (unit: kg), a frontal area A (unit: m2), an
air drag coefficient Cd, and an auxiliary power demand P (unit: W). Next, the travel
speed on this link vkk′(unit: m/s) is considered as a constant. Then, the amount of
mechanical energy ekk′(unit: KWh) required for the vehicle to travel the link can be
calculated with a load f(unit: kg), the maximum value of which equals to the weight
of C passengers. The mechanical energy consumption model present as shown in
Equation (2.5).
ekk′ =
1
3.6 · 106
(
(w+f)gdkk′sinθkk′ +(w+f)gCrdkk′cosθkk′ + 1
2ACdρv2
kk′dkk′)
(2.5)
where g(unit: m/s2) is the gravitational constant, ρ(unit: kg/m3) is the air density,
Cr is the rolling friction coefficient, and θkk′ is the road angle of the link (k, k′). With
the travel time of this link tkk′ = dkk′/vkk′ and the total drivetrain efficiency of ϕ,
the amount of energy Bkk′(unit: KWh) required from the battery on link (k, k′) is
then given as:
Bkk′ =





ϕ · ekk′ +
1
3.6 · 106 · P · tkk′,
if ekk′ ≥0
1
3.6 · 106 · P · tkk′,
if ekk′ < 0
(2.6)
In the above Equation (2.6), the battery energy requirement mainly consists of two
parts: mechanical energy consumption ekk′ and auxiliary power demand P. When
ekk′ has a negative value (which mainly happens when running downhill), the me-
chanical energy consumption will not contribute to the results of battery energy
requirement. This is reasonable as in the downhill the gravity will do the job and
only the auxiliary power demand is needed.
As mentioned in the above table, the vehicle weight is chosen as 6350 kg and 3000
kg in the presented case. If we consider a link (k, k′) with a length of 1000 meters,
then the bus travel time should be 300.3 seconds. With the data in Table 2.3, the
mechanical energy consumption ekk′ becomes 0 when the angle of road is approximate
0.6 degree downhill for both 6350 kg and 3000 kg vehicle. So in that case, only the
==PAGE:28==
18
2 Simulation
auxiliary power demand P will contribute to the battery energy requirement. And
the value of the battery energy requirement Bkk′ will then be 0.131 kWh, which is
without any influence of weight of vehicle and people or the angle of road.
Next, we test the energy consumption when running uphill with three different
degrees, 0, 5 and 10 degree, respectively, and with different loads of passenger from 1
to 15 passengers. The mechanical energy consumption ekk′ in these cases is therefore
always positive as mentioned before. In Equation (2.6), the needed battery energy as
function of number of passenger can be calculated with angle of road of 0, 5 and 10
degree, respectively. As demonstrated in the following Figures 2.1-2.3, for instance,
the line with vehicle weight of 6350kg shows that the energy requirement for battery
increases linearly with the number of people. Furthermore, with the same number of
people, increasing the angle of road will lead to much higher energy consumption (for
10 people on board, the energy requirement are 0.369, 2.377 and 4.367 kWh for 0, 5
and 10 degree, respectively). We can conclude that, increasing 1 degree of the road
will induce much higher energy consumption, comparing by having 1 more passenger
on board.
In addition, the vehicle’s own weight also has an impact on energy consumption.
For example, at the angle 0 degree, the vehicle with 3000kg always consume less
energy compare to the heavy vehicle, and the same goes for other angles of road.
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Modelling the dynamics of bus and passenger
19
Figure 2.1: Energy consumption as function of number of people with 0 degree of
road.
Figure 2.2: Energy consumption as function of number of people with 5 degree of
road.
==PAGE:30==
20
2 Simulation
Figure 2.3: Energy consumption as function of number of people with 10 degree of
road.
2.2
Simulation process
Figure 2.5 shows the designed process for setting up the simulation model, where
the time window, fleet size, demand, battery size, timetable and bus capacity are
set as inputs, and travel time, waiting time and energy consumption are set as the
outputs, which are also considered as the system performance indicators. Based on
the mathematical formulations in Section 2.1.2, the proposed simulator contains three
components, the states of the passengers, buses and stations, which are discussed in
Sections 2.2.2 - 2.2.4. It is worth mentioning that this simulation is done in discrete
time, which is effective to capture the states of this dynamic system.
2.2.1
Simulation input and output
Input:
• Time window: it determines the start and end time of our simulation, for ex-
ample, in our first numerical example, the simulation period is from 8 a.m to 8
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Simulation process
21
p.m.
• Passenger demand: a time-dependent OD matrix.
• Timetable: it includes the headway time (hr) on each route, minimum/max-
imum headway time (h2min/h2max) at the same departure station, and the
departure times of the first bus on each route.
• Fleet size: it defines the number of buses available for each route. In this study,
each bus can undertake multiple bus services.
• Energy consumption rate: it is used to calculate the energy usage running on
each link. Figure 2.4 illustrates the variation of energy consumption rate along
with the number of passengers on-board.
• Bus capacity: the maximum number of passengers on-board.
• Technical parameters of bus vehicle: these can be obtained from the practise.
Figure 2.4: Energy consumption rate with different number of passengers.
Output:
==PAGE:32==
22
2 Simulation
• Travel time: the travel time of passenger n (TTn) is defined as the period from
the time passenger n getting on the bus to the time he/she getting off the bus.
• Waiting time: the waiting time of passenger n (WTn) is the period from the
time passenger n arriving at the station to the time he/she getting on the bus.
• Energy consumption: the total energy consumption of all the dispatched bus
services.
Note that according to the definitions above, the waiting time is included in the travel
time.
2.2.2
Simulation of passenger states
The first part of the simulation is to monitor the states of all passengers, including
arriving at the start stations, waiting at the start stations, traveling on a bus and
leaving the start stations due to the maximum tolerance of waiting.
A discrete time simulation implies that every time interval the system is updated.
For the states of passengers, in each time interval, we will first judge whether a
passenger arrives at his/her originate station at time t. If so, this passenger is added
into our system and then the corresponding waiting time (WT) is updated. This
passenger will wait at the station until getting on a bus or the maximum waiting
time is reached. In the former situation, the waiting time of this passenger is the
difference between the time he/she arrives at the station and the time the bus arrives,
and the in-vehicle travel time can be computed according to the bus running time
in each segment. In the later situation, the waiting time equals to the maximum
waiting time, and the travel time equals to the walking time plus the waiting time.
The simulation of passengers states are summarized in Algorithm 1.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Simulation process
23
Algorithm 1 Passenger
Step 1.Input the time-variant OD matrix of passengers, current time t, states of buses
Step 2. for each bus station k on route r do
if bus q arrives at station k at time t then
if pq,k,r < C then
Assign each passenger n with origin k an indicator δn,t
if δn,t = 1 then
passenger n is able to board bus q, or vice visa;
else
end
for each passenger n with origin k do
if δn,t = 1 then
WTn = t −tan,k,r
TTn = lk,D,r/Bus speed
else
if Max {(t −tan,k,r, 0} ≤WTmax then
WTn = Max {t −tan,k,r, 0}
else
WTn = WTmax
TTn = lO,D,r/Walking speed
Remove passenger n from the list
end
end
end
else
for each passenger n with origin k do
if Max {t −tan,k,r, 0} ≤WTmax then
WTn = Max {t −tan,k,r, 0}
else
WTn = WTmax
TTn = lO,D,r/Walking speed
Remove passenger n from the list
end
end
end
else
for each passenger n with origin k do
if Max {(t −tan,k,r, 0} ≤WTmax then
WTn = Max {t −tan,k,r, 0}
else
WTn = WTmax TTn = lO,D,r/Walking speed Remove passenger n
from the list
end
end
end
end
==PAGE:34==
24
2 Simulation
2.2.3
Simulation of bus states
The states of a bus include its location, the battery allowance and the number of
passengers on-board. We first divided all buses into two groups, the first one contains
those running on routes and idle buses, which are waiting at the terminal stations
due to the constraints of headway time, the second consists of those under charging.
Note that only the buses in the first group is able to undertake a bus service.
In each time interval, there are three status of the locations for buses in the first
group, arriving at an intermediate station, terminal (charging) station, and running
between two stations. When a bus arrives at a station, the passengers waiting at this
station gets on the bus under the first-come-first-board rule, i.e., passengers arriving
at the station earlier should have the priority to get on the bus. Then the number
of passengers on the bus, indexes of passengers, and battery allowance are updated
accordingly. At the same time, the travel time of passengers who get off the bus is
reported.
When a bus arrives at a terminal station, which allows the bus to charge, there
are two situations: 1) If the battery allowance is enough for the bus to arrive at the
next terminal station, then the bus is ready to undertake the next bus service. 2)
Otherwise, the bus will be charged and added into the second group until the battery
is fully charged. Lastly, if the bus is still on the way, then update the location of the
bus.
For the buses in the second group, the battery allowance is updated in each time
interval by the charge rate. Once the bus is fully charged, it is then ready to undertake
then next bus service.
Based on the considerations above, the bus operation is summarized in Algorithm
2.
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Simulation process
25
Algorithm 2 Bus operation
Step 1.Input the time-variant OD matrix of passengers, current time t, states of
passengers.
Step 2.Update the location of each bus q;
for each bus q do
if bus q is under charging then
Update the energy allowance
if it is full charged then
Stop charging
else
Continue
end
else
if bus q arrives at station k on route r at time t then
Update the energy allowance of each bus q Eq,k,r using equation2.3
Update pq,k,r using equation2.4
else
end
end
end
2.2.4
Simulation of station states
For the station part, the states describe the number of passengers waiting as the
stations. In each time interval, if there passengers arriving at the station, then these
passengers are added to the waiting list. Conversely, if there are passengers getting
on a bus or leaving the station, then they are subtracted from the list.
2.2.5
Main simulation
Based on the descriptions from Section 2.2.1 to 2.2.4, our simulation process can be
summarized as follows:
==PAGE:36==
26
2 Simulation
Algorithm 3 Main simulation
Step1. Initialization: start time t1 = 8 : 00, stop time tn = 20 : 00, current time
t = t1, WTn = 0, TTn = 0, pq,k,r = 0, Eq,k1,r = Ec.
Step2.
while t≤tn run the simulation do
Update the states for all passengers (i.e., WTn and TTn) using Algorithm Pas-
senger
Update the states for all buses (i.e., pq,k,r, Eq,k,r and locations) using Algorithm
Bus Operation
end
Step3. Output system performance indicators (WT, TT, Blm)
More intuitively, the flowchart of the detailed simulation components are shown
in Figure 2.5.
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Simulation process
27
Figure 2.5: Flowchart of simulation.
==PAGE:38==
28
2 Simulation
2.3
Monte Carlo method
Monte Carlo method is usually used to solve mathematical problems by relying on
repeated random sampling to obtain the numerical results. It is an effective method
to find the numerical solution for some problems which are too complicated to obtain
the analytic solution.
Monte Carlo simulation can approximate distributions of outcome variables by
setting a range of values from a given probability distribution for any input variables
with inherent uncertainty. According to the extent of uncertainties and the speci-
fied domain, thousands of calculations are often needed to complete a Monte Carlo
simulation. The Monte Carlo method are commonly used to approximate the distri-
butions of traffic flow and travel cost for a transport network [MSK07; Pap+12]. In
our study, we set different combinations of passenger arrival time and bus dispatching
intervals of each route and then draw samples of the OD pairs of passenger demand to
simulate the distributions of passenger travel time, waiting time, and system energy
consumption.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Optimization
The proposed simulation tool provides not only the states of buses, passengers and
stations, but also the way to evaluate the input bus timetable. Based on the per-
formance evaluations, the optimal bus timetable can be searched via optimization
methods to guide the arrangement of all the buses considering a fixed the passenger
demand and headway time constraints. Specifically, a genetic algorithm is further
proposed to gain a near-optimal timetable for the purpose of minimizing total travel
time and energy consumption.
In this chapter, the optimization model is formulated in Section 3.1, and a genetic
algorithm is then developed in Section 3.2.
3.1
Optimization model formulation
Firstly, in addition to the notations defined in Table 2.1 and Table 2.2, we further
define the performance indicators waiting time, travel time and energy consumption
in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Notations and description.
Variables
Description
WTn,k,r
The waiting time of passenger n at the station k on route r.
TTn,q,r
The travel time of passenger n on bus q on route r.
ECq,r
Energy consumption of bus q on route r.
θT T
The value of time
θE
The market price of energy
w1, w2
The linear weight coefficients
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Optimization
As the waiting time of passengers is already included in the travel time, then
the objective function in this study is the linear combination of travel time cost and
energy consumption cost as follows:
min Z = w1 ×
R
∑
r=1
Qr
∑
q=1
Nq,r
∑
n=1
TTn,q,r × θT T + w2 ×
R
∑
r=1
Qr
∑
q=1
ECq,r × θE
(3.1)
where w1 and w2 are the linear weight coefficients denoting the preference of the
operator, Qr is the total number of bus services on route r and Nq,r is the total
number of passengers taking bus q on route r.
Then, we also have some constraints on the decision variables as follows:
|Dq,k,r1 −Dj,k,r2| ≥h1min
∀q ∈Qr1, j ∈Qr2, r1 ̸= r2
(3.2)
According to Assumption 3, Constraint (3.2) shows there is a minimum headway
time h1min between two consecutive buses departing at the same station.
|Dq,k,r −Dj,k,r| ≥h2min
∀q, j ∈Qr
(3.3)
Constraint (3.3) means that two consecutive buses on a same route r should depart
with a headway time larger or equal to the minimum headway time h2min.
0 ≤Dq,1,r ≤T
∀q, k
(3.4)
Constraint (3.4) guarantees that on each route, all the buses should depart within
a specified time window.
3.2
Genetic Algorithm (GA)
Then, based on the Monte Carlo Simulation method, the departure time at start
terminal station of each line and headway intervals of each line can be evaluated.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Genetic Algorithm (GA)
31
GA is a global search algorithm for optimization problem, which uses recombi-
nation and selection strategies to produce better and better solutions. GA starts
from an initial collection of population, and each population with a set of randomly
selected chromosomes that encodes a set of possible solutions. Each variable is rep-
resented as genes in a chromosome, which has an associated fitness value to evaluate
some measures of profit or utility that we want to optimize. Besides, the fitness value
contributes to the generation of new populations by means of genetic operators, selec-
tion, crossover and mutation. The selection operator mimics the Darwinian survival
process based on the fittest among populations to generate new populations from
parent generations. Chromosomes with higher fitness values are more likely to be
selected. Crossover and mutation operators alters the composition of genes to create
new chromosomes according to given probabilities. After several generations, GA is
able to converge to a good solution.
Then, the following Genetic Algorithm incorporating Monte Carlo Simulation
method is be used to solve the TNTSP problem.
3.2.1
Initialization
The decision variables are departure time at start terminal stations of each line and
headway intervals of each line. Thus, the vector consists of Dq,1,r and hr forms the
chromosome as Xm = {Dq,1,1, Dq,1,2, . . . , h1, h2, . . . }.
Assume the size of population is M, for each chromosome we randomly generate
the departure time and headway intervals satisfying constraints (3.2)-(4.1).
3.2.2
Fitness function
Fitness function is used to measure the quality of a chromosome, which associates
with the likelihood of being selected for reproduction. In this study, we define the
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Optimization
following evaluation function to compute the fitness value of each chromosome,
fitm = a × Zm + b
a = (c −1) × ¯Z/( ¯Z −Zmax)
b = ¯Z × (c × ¯Z −Zmax)/( ¯Z −Zmax)
(3.5)
where Zm is objective value of chromosome m, Zmax is the maximum objective value
in current generation, ¯Z is the average objective value of the current generation, and
c is constant larger than 1.
It is thus that the chromosome with a lower objective value have a higher fitness
value, then it will be more likely to produce offspring.
3.2.3
Selection process
The selection process is to duplicate fitter chromosomes rather than producing new
ones. In this study, roulette wheel selection is adopted, and the probability of being
selected for each individual chromosome is computed by
probm =
fitm
∑M
i=1 fiti
(3.6)
The selection process is written as follows.
Step 1. Calculate the probability of being selected for each individual chromo-
some using Eq. (3.6).
Step 2. Calculate the cumulative probability Cprobm for each individual.
Step 3. Generate a random number u from [0,1].
Step 4. If Cprobm−1 ≤u ≤Cprobm, then chromosome m is selected.
Step 5. Repeat Step 3 and Step 4 M times.
3.2.4
Crossover operation
Crossover is an operation for generating new individuals. First, the whole population
is divided into different parent pairs (X1, X2), . . . , (Xm−1, Xm), . . . , (XM−1, XM). For
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Genetic Algorithm (GA)
33
each parent pair, there is a probability to conduct crossover operator that some genes
from the parents are exchanged to produce new individuals. In this study, the single-
point crossover operator is chosen and the procedure can be summarized as follows:
Step 1. Generate a random number u from [0,1].
Step 2. If u ≤Pc, where Pc is probability of crossover, go to Step 3; otherwise,
set the children pair (Ym−1, Ym) to be equivalent to the parent pair, and go to Step
5.
Step 3. The parent pair (Xm−1, Xm) conducts single-point crossover operation
and produces a new pair of individuals (Ym−1, Ym).
Step 4. Check the feasibility of the children pair (Ym−1, Ym), if it satisfies the
constraints (3.2)-(4.1), then go to Step 5; otherwise, two new feasible individuals are
randomly generated and go to Step 5.
Step 5. Replace the parent pair with the children pair.
Step 6. Repeat Step 1 to Step 5 M/2 times.
3.2.5
Mutation operation
Mutation is another operation for enhancing the diversity of the population. For each
individual, there is a probability to conduct mutation operator that some genes of
this parent chromosome are mutated to produce a new child individual. In this study,
the single-point mutation operator is adopted and the procedure is summarized as
follows:
Step 1. Generate a random number u from [0,1].
Step 2. If u ≤Pm, where Pm is probability of mutation, go to Step 3; otherwise,
set the child individual Ym to be equivalent to the parent individual Xm, and go to
Step 5.
Step 3. The parent individual Xm conducts single-point mutation operation and
produces a new child individual Ym.
Step 4. Check the feasibility of the child individual Ym, if it satisfies the con-
straints (3.2)-(4.1), then go to Step 5; otherwise, a new feasible individual is randomly
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Optimization
generated and go to Step 5.
Step 5. Replace the parent individual with the child one.
Step 6. Repeat Step 1 to Step 5 M times.
3.2.6
General procedure
A new population is generated by conducting evaluation, selection, crossover and
mutation operations. The criterion of algorithm termination is the algorithm reaches
the given number of iterations. Finally, the procedure for the GA is shown in Figure
3.1.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Genetic Algorithm (GA)
35
Figure 3.1: Framework of genetic algorithm.
==PAGE:46==
36
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4
Case study
In this chapter, we demonstrate the application of the simulation model to an illus-
trative network and the DTU’s network, respectively.
For the first network, we mainly show the performances of the simulation, i.e., the
passenger travel time, waiting time and total energy consumption, with different input
settings, i.e., different bus intervals and passenger demand. For DTU’s network, we
then repeat the similar simulation procedures, and further present the results of the
GA to investigate the effectiveness of the simulation-based optimization framework,
aiming to provide a reference for the practical operations.
4.1
Illustrative example
In this section, as shown in Figure 4.1, a small network, which contains five routes
and six stations, is used to illustrate the performance of the proposed model and
algorithm.
4.1.1
Network design
The baseline network consists of six different bus stations (nodes) A, B, C, D, E, and
F, and five routes indicated by different colors in Figure 4.1. Route 1 (red) connects
the stops A, E, and F, which has a travel time of 25 minutes from A to E, and 15
minutes from E to F. Route 2 (orange) is a direct link from station A to D with a
travel time of 25 minutes. Route 3 (blue) consists of three stations, which are from
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Case study
A to B with a travel time of 10 minutes, and B to E with a travel time of 15 minutes.
Those three lines have the same start terminal station A. Route 4 (green) connects
the stations B, E, and F, with a travel time of 15 minutes from B to E, and 15 minutes
from E to F. Route 5 (purple) connects the stations D, E and F, having a travel time
with 15 minutes from D to E, and 15 minutes from E to F.
Figure 4.1: Bus network.
Furthermore, the basic information for all routes are depicted in Table 4.1. Note
the total travel time of each route includes the in-vehicle time and the dwell time at
each intermediate station.
Table 4.1: Route Pool.
Line 1
Lin 2
Line 3
Line 4
Line 5
Route
A-E-F.
A-D
A-B-C
B-E-F
D-E-F
Total dwell time (min)
2
1
2
2
2
in-vehicle time (min)
38
24
23
28
28
Total travel time (min)
40
25
25
30
30
No.of transfer
1
0
1
1
1
Total walking time (min)
190
130
130
150
150
Regarding the energy consumption model in Section 2.1.3, we have calculated the
energy consumption rate for each link as shown in Figure 2.4.
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Illustrative example
39
4.1.2
Parameter setting
Table 4.2 presents the major parameter settings adopted for the simulation in this
scenario. To test the performance of the simulator, the values of these parameters
are rationally made up according to the LINC project.
Table 4.2: Parameter setting.
Parameter
Value
Time window
08:00-20:00
Bus capacity
15
Passenger demand
1000
Time interval at same station (minutes)
h1min ≥5
Time interval at same route (minutes)
5 ≤h2min ≤60
Departure time (minutes)
0< Dq,k,r ≤60
Maximum waiting time (minutes)
30
Walking time in each route (minutes)
[190, 130, 130, 150, 150]
Charge station
start-end station
Number of buses operate on each route
[3, 3, 2, 2, 2]
Beside, the bus vehicle used in this network is also assumed to be that of the
LINC project, i.e., EasyMile. The technical information of the vehicle is shown in
Table 4.3.
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Case study
Figure 4.2: EasyMile.
Table 4.3: Technical infromation of EasyMile.
Parameter
values
Batteries
Lithium LiFePO4
Maintenance
Maintenance free
Battery capacity
8 Kwh
Voltage
48V
Weight
93 Kg
Battery warranty
5 years or 1,500 cycles
Maximum speed when empty
20 Km / h
Autonomy
8h of operation
On-board charger
Yes
Battery monitoring
Yes
Power sector
(230V-16A)
Charging power
2,400 W
Charging time
7h (average)
Motor type
Asynchronous motor
Nominal power
4 Kw
Curb weight
2750 kg (fully loaded)
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Implementation and results
41
4.2
Implementation and results
This section aims at describing how the Monte Carlo simulation has been approached
and implemented in PYTHON to produces distribution of outcome values.
4.2.1
Passenger demand generation
In this study, a single day period is considered which incorporates morning peaks and
evening peaks of the passenger demand. It is assumed that the passenger demand
belongs to a bi-modal Gaussian distribution with the probability density function as
follows:
p(x) =
1
√
2πσ2 (e
−(x−µ1)2
2σ2
+ e
−(x−µ2)2
2σ2
)
(4.1)
σ: determines the standard deviation.
σ2: determines the variance of the distribution.
µ1 and µ1: determine the centers of morning peak and evening peak, respectively.
Figure 4.3 shows the distribution of passengers with a bi-modal Gaussian distribu-
tion. The total number of passengers is fixed as 1000, which are randomly generated
according to the truncated distribution in a time window from 8:00 to 20:00. The
two cluster peak hours indicate the average value (µ1 and µ2) chosen as 10:00 and
17:00 hours. Moreover, σ determines the variance of passenger arrival time, which is
initialized as 4500 in this case. If the value of σ becomes smaller, then the distribution
of passenger demand will be more concentrated in the two peak periods; conversely,
the distribution of the demand will be more evenly distributed throughout the day.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Case study
Figure 4.3: Passenger demand with different interval and departure time .
4.2.2
Results of a single simulation
In this simulation, the different bus intervals (headway time hr) and departure time
for each route are given in advance as following:
Bus intervals of routes 1-5 are [11, 20, 15, 10, 20] (unit: minutes), respectively.
Each value refers to the interval time between each bus services in a route. The depar-
ture time of the first bus service for each route are set as [8 : 05, 8 : 30, 8 : 20, 8 : 25, 8 : 06],
respectively.
To provide an illustrative instruction, Figure 4.4 shows a part of the results of a
single simulation. (See Appendix A.2 for the detailed results of single time simula-
tion).
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Implementation and results
43
Figure 4.4: Results of a single simulation.
The average waiting time and travel time for passengers are computed according
to the choice of passengers. As a passenger, they can choose to walk or get on a bus.
The results for passengers with different choices and all passengers are summarized
in a box plot (Figure 4.5). The first box indicates the waiting time of all passengers,
which includes the passengers who succeed to get on a bus and the passengers that
left the station. The lower bound of the first box is around 8 minutes, while the upper
bound of this box is approximately 27 minutes. The average waiting time, which is
shown by the orange line that divides the box into two parts, is about 16 minutes.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Case study
The second box presents the distribution of waiting time for passengers who get on
a bus and as shown, the average waiting time of passengers with this choice is 10
minutes. The third box shows the average waiting time of passengers who choose
to walk after a maximum waiting time. Their maximum tolerance for waiting is 30
minutes, which is defined by our input parameter. The fourth box gives the results of
travel times for all passengers. Their average travel time (including waiting time) is
around 40 minutes. The travel times of on-board passengers and walking passengers
are shown by the fifth box and the last box, respectively. The average travel time for
the former kind of passengers is about 30 minutes, which is smaller than that of all
passengers. On the contrary, the average travel time for the later kind of passengers
is 150 minutes, which is much larger than the average value for all passengers.
Figure 4.5: Boxplot of wait time, travel time for passengers.
Figure 4.6 further shows the relationship between the travel time and waiting time
of all the passengers in this simulation. The x-axis indicates the average travel time
and the y-axis shows the average waiting time. In the figure, each dot represents
an individual passenger. In this plot, each ’dot line’ shows the different travel time
of each link (10 minutes, 15 minutes, 25 minutes, 30 minutes and 40 minutes) illus-
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Implementation and results
45
trated in Figure 4.1. In addition, the up-right side some outlying points are observed,
which actually indicate the travel time for walking. The upper side and right side of
Figure 4.6 present the histograms for the travel time distribution and waiting time
distribution, respectively.
Figure 4.6: Correlation between TT mean and WT mean.
More intuitively, the histogram for the travel time distribution of all passengers
is plotted and shown in Figure 4.7. In this figure, the passengers are classified into
different groups by their travel time duration. It can be seen that most passengers
falls into the group with travel time between 0 to 4000 seconds, and these passengers
are those who succeed to get on a bus. For the passengers who choose to walk after
waiting 30 minutes, 140 of them have a travel time falling in the range of 5000 to 5500
seconds. There are 140 passengers with a total travel time between 5000 and 5500
seconds. The number of passengers with the travel time from 8500 to 9000 seconds
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Case study
is 158. Besides that, there are a few passengers with travel time in the range of 7500
to 8000 and over 10000 seconds.
Figure 4.7: Travel time for arrived passengers.
4.2.3
Results of simulations with Monte Carlo sampling input
In this section, we set the following two variables into different values to conduct
simulation for multiple times:
1. Standard deviation ’σ’ of Gaussian distributed passenger arrival time.
2. Bus intervals of each route. For simplicity, here we let all bus route share a
same interval.
The time interval (headway time hr) between bus services in a same route ranges
from 5 to 60 minutes, increased by 5 minutes every time, i.e., intervallist = [5, 10,
. . . , 60]. The standard deviation of passenger arrival time ranges from 3500 to 5000,
increased by 100 each, i.e., σlist = [3500, 3600, . . . , 5000].
There are 12 different intervals (from 5 to 60) and 16 different σ (from 3500 to
5000), each combination will be run 10 times with different random seeds. Therefore,
we totally have 192 sets of σ and bus intervals, which ends with 1920 times simulation
runs. When the interval is fixed, each σ includes (12*10) cases. Similarly, when the
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Implementation and results
47
σ is fixed, each interval includes (16*10) cases.
The simulation results are attached in appendix A.3.
The correlation matrix in Figure 4.8 represents a correlation among σ, interval,
average travel time, average waiting time and energy consumption. The greater the
absolute value of the correlation coefficient, the stronger the relationship between the
variables. In addition, the sign of the correlation coefficient represents the direction
of the relationship.
Figure 4.8: Correlation matrix.
As can be seen from the plot, the values of travel time (TT) and waiting time
(WT) are highly correlated with the highest positive coefficient value, which means
that as WT increases, TT also tends to increase.
This is necessary because the
travel time consists of the passenger waiting time (WT) at the station and in-vehicle
time, so TT and WT are positively correlated. Besides, if the waiting time (WT)
becomes smaller, it means more people get on the bus, which will increase energy
consumption. Therefore, WT and energy consumption are observed with a negative
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Case study
coefficient. Likewise, TT and energy also show a negative correlation: When TT
increases, the value of energy tends to decrease. Interval and energy also indicate
a negative correlation as larger bus service interval will lead to less passenger load,
and this also explains the positive correlation between interval and WT and TT,
respectively.
Additionally, the standard deviation σ of passenger arriving time distribution and
TT or WT shows negative coefficients. As mentioned in Section 4.2.1, the demand
will be more evenly distributed throughout the day with the increase of σ. Therefore,
it would also be possible that as the number of passengers who wait nearly 30 minutes
becomes smaller, then the TT or WT will decrease. The correlation between σ and
energy consumption is so small that it can be neglected.
The scatter plots 4.9 and 4.10 show the average travel time versus waiting time for
all samples of the multiple times simulation results. The x-axis indicates the average
travel time and the y-axis represents the average waiting time and each dot represents
the average value from one simulation. As shown in Figure 4.9, where the color is
darker means that more points are concentrated, especially for the travel time around
4250 to 4500 seconds. Furthermore, it can be seen that travel time (TT) conforms to
a bi-modal Gaussian distribution and waiting time (WT) conforms to a multi-modal
Gaussian distribution from the cross-section, upper side(TT) and right side(WT).
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Implementation and results
49
Figure 4.9: TTmean VS WTmean.
Figure 4.10: TTmean VS WTmean.
Figure 4.11 represents the changes in energy consumption with the bus service
interval.
The value of energy consumption tends to decrease as the bus interval
becomes larger. However, the scatter plot 4.12 shows that the travel time tends to
decrease at the beginning and then appears to increase gradually. In the case of bus
interval being equal to 30 minutes, the lowest average travel time is observed. A
similar phenomenon is also found in Figure 4.13. By combining all the information
from these three plots, it may be concluded that the optimal bus interval value for
this case should be around 30 minutes.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Case study
Figure 4.11: Interval VS Energy.
Figure 4.12: Interval VS TT.
Figure 4.13: Interval VS WT.
To show the results clearly, we compare relationship between the travel time (TT),
the waiting time(WT), energy assumption and bus interval in Figure 4.14. As shown
in the figure, the changes of TT and WT are the same with the increase of bus interval,
while the energy consumption states a reverse change direction. The waiting time is
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Implementation and results
51
negatively correlated with the number of passengers getting on the bus. Therefore,
in this figure, the shorter the waiting time is, the more passengers will get on the bus,
which induces a larger energy assumption.
Figure 4.14: Comparison among WT, TT, energy and interval.
The scatter plots 4.15, 4.16 and 4.17 display the influence of standard deviation
σ of passenger arriving time distribution on average travel time, average waiting
time and energy use of all simulation results. Each dot on the graph represents the
indicators of one simulation run. These plots show the varying range of TT, WT and
energy consumption associated with each σ . And it can be observed that σ does not
have a significant influence on the values of these indicators.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Case study
Figure 4.15: σ VS TT.
Figure 4.16: σ VS WT.
Figure 4.17: σ VS Energy.
More specifically, Figure 4.18 shows the relationship between TT and σ under two
different intervals, Figure 4.19 show the relationship between WT and σ under two
different intervals. The results are similar to that of Figures 4.15 and 4.16.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Implementation and results
53
Figure 4.18: TT VS σ with different intervals.
Figure 4.19: WT VS σ with different intervals.
In addition, Figures 4.20 and 4.21 show the relationship between interval and TT
and WT under different σ.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Case study
Figure 4.20: TT VS interval with different σ .
Figure 4.21: WT VS Interval with different σ .
4.3
Experiment on DTU’s network
The self-driving shuttles run in the southern part of DTU Campus Lyngby, while it
connects to the regular buses 30E, 300S, 180, 181 and 190. The shuttle travelling up
to 15km/hour on the approximately three-kilometer route. There are six stations on
the route with about 300-400 meters between them. Those stations connect students,
staff and visitors to classroom, bus stops, the EV Lab, Villum Kann Rasmussen
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Experiment on DTU’s network
55
Kollegiet, Netto, the student canteen, DTU Skylab and other cafeterias. The layout
of the DTU’s network is shown in Figure 4.22.
Figure 4.22: Network at DTU.
A simple diagram 4.23 is drawn based on the real network of DTU. The baseline
network consists of six different bus stations (nodes) A, B, C, D, E, and F, and five
routes indicated by different colors in Figure 4.23 . Route 1 (red) connects the stops
A, E, and F, which has a travel distance of 1200 meters from A to E, and 1000 meters
from E to F. Route 2 (orange) is a direct link from station A to D with a travel
distance of 550 meters. Route 3 (blue) consists of three stations, which are from
A to B with a travel distance of 400 meters, and B to C with a travel distance of
300 meters.Those three lines have the same start terminal station A. Route 4 (green)
connects the stations B, E, and F, with a travel distance of 1000 meters from B to
E, and 1000 meters from E to F. Route 5 (purple) connects the stations D, E and F,
having a travel distance with 1000 meters from D to E, and 1000 meters from E to
F.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Case study
Figure 4.23: network at DTU.
Furthermore, we give the basic information for all routes in DTU’s network in
Table 4.4. Note that the total travel time of each route includes the in-vehicle time
and the dwell time at each intermediate station.
Table 4.4: Route Pool.
Line 1
Lin 2
Line 3
Line 4
Line 5
Route
A-E-F.
A-D
A-B-C
B-E-F
D-E-F
Total dwell time (min)
2
1
2
2
2
in-vehicle time (min)
8.8
2.2
2.8
8
8
Total travel time (min)
10.8
3.2
4.8
10
10
No.of transfer
1
0
1
1
1
Total walking time (min)
53.2
22.8
29.2
50
50
4.3.1
Parameter settings
In this scenario, the number of passengers is still 1000, belonging to a bi-modal
Gaussian distribution with µ1 = 12, µ1 = 16 and σ = 4000, as shown in Figure 4.24.
Table 4.5 presents the major parameter settings for the simulation in this scenario.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Experiment on DTU’s network
57
Figure 4.24: Passenger demand generation.
Table 4.5: Parameter setting.
Parameter
Value
Time window
09:00-19:00
Bus capacity
15
Passenger demand
1000
Time interval at same station (minutes)
h1min ≥2
Time interval at same route (minutes)
5 ≤h2min ≤30
Departure time (minutes)
0< Dq,k,r ≤60
Maximum waiting time (minutes)
10
Walking time in each route (minutes)
[53.2, 22.8, 29.2, 50, 50]
Charge station
start-end station
Number of buses operate on each route
[3, 3, 2, 2, 2]
θT T (DKK/min)
1.1 [FHL07]
θE (DKK/kWh)
2.14 [Glo]
The energy consumption rate is calculated by the same way as section 4.1.2.
Besides, the parameters of GA are set as follows: population size is set as 30,
crossover rate is set as 0.8, mutation rate is set 0.2 and the number of generations is
set as 100.
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Case study
4.3.2
Results of simulations with Monte Carlo sampling inputs
Figure 4.25: Correlation matrix.
As shown is Figure 4.25, we can observe similar results to that of Figure 4.8. The value
of travel time (TT) and waiting time (WT) are highly correlated with the highest
positive coefficient value, which means as WT increases, TT also tends to increase.
WT and energy are observed with a negative coefficient, which is the same to the
correlation coefficient between TT and energy. Besides, the standard deviation ’σ’
of passenger arriving time distribution and TT or WT shows negative coefficients.
Likewise, interval and energy also indicate a negative correlation as larger bus service
interval will lead to less passenger load, and this also explains the positive correlation
between interval and WT and TT, respectively.
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Experiment on DTU’s network
59
Figure 4.26: comparison among WT, TT, energy and interval.
Figure 4.26 indicates the comparison of travel time (TT) and waiting time (WT)
change in the same direction with the increase of bus interval, while the energy
consumption states a reverse direction. The figure presents similar results to that of
Figure 4.14, thus the detailed discussion is omitted here.
4.3.3
Results of GA
To begin with, we construct a benchmark scenario for the purpose of quantifying
the improvement of the optimization. The bus dispatching interval of each route is
set as 10 minutes, and the departure time of the first bus service on each route are
set as [9:00, 9:05, 9:10, 9:10, 9:10] to satisfy the headway constraints. The average
travel time cost and total energy consumption cost of this benchmark scenario are
TT∗= 19.27 [DKK] and EC∗= 898.61 [DKK], respectively.
Next, we apply the GA to obtain the near optimal timetable of the DTU’s network.
Note that the objective function considered is a trade-off between the total travel time
of passengers and the total energy consumption, thus the linear weight coefficients
w1 and w2 need to be given according to the preference of the operator. Figure 4.27
shows the record of the best objective value at each generation with w1 = w2 = 0.5.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Case study
Figure 4.27: Convergence process of GA.
The best dispatching intervals are [10, 27, 6, 12, 11] (unit: minutes) for route 1-5,
and the departure time of the first bus service on each route are [9:18, 9:31, 9:25,
9:14, 9:18], respectively. The corresponding average travel time cost is 19.12 [DKK]
and the total energy consumption cost is 873.79 [DKK]. Compared to the benchmark
scenario, the travel time cost is reduced by 0.78% and the energy consumption cost
is reduced by 2.76%.
4.3.4
Results with different weigh coefficients
Then, to further investigate the performance of the proposed simulator and optimiza-
tion approach, we need to conduct experiments with different weigh coefficients. As
mentioned in Section 4.2.3, the minimization of total travel time tends to maximize
the number passengers getting on board, which calls for more bus services, while
minimizing the energy consumption means to reduce the passenger load or number of
dispatched bus services. Thus, we can balance between the passenger demand and op-
eration cost by setting different weigh coefficients. Though it is hard to directly find
the best trade-off theoretically, we expect the following cases can provide a sense of
coefficients adjustment. In this subsection, 9 cases are tested: w1 = 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Experiment on DTU’s network
61
and w2 = 1 −w1. The results are summarized in Table 4.6, which presents the values
of average travel time, energy consumption and the improvement of average travel
time and energy consumption compared to the benchmark scenario.
Table 4.6: Results with different coefficient.
Case
w1
w2
TT cost [DKK]
EC cost [DKK]
Base
-
-
19.27
898.61
1
0.1
0.9
19.16 (0.57%)
845.20 (5.94%)
2
0.2
0.8
19.16 (0.57%)
850.78 (5.32%)
3
0.3
0.7
19.14 (0.67%)
864.90 (3.75%)
4
0.4
0.6
19.13 (0.73%)
872.26 (2.93%)
5
0.5
0.5
19.12 (0.78%)
873.79 (2.76%)
6
0.6
0.4
19.09 (0.93%)
876.85 (2.42%)
7
0.7
0.3
19.05 (1.14%)
877.00 (2.4%)
8
0.8
0.2
19.03 (1.25%)
871.29 (3.04%)
9
0.9
0.1
18.99 (1.45% )
877.34 (2.37%)
As shown in Table 4.6, the average travel time cost decreases as the weight co-
efficient w1 increases since the operator cares more about the passengers benefit.
However, with the decreasing of the travel time cost, the number of passengers on-
board tends to increase, which will cause more energy consumption. When w2 be-
comes larger, the operator pays more attention to the operation cost, then the energy
consumption will become smaller. Practically, operators can flexibly formulate an
appropriate bus schedule by setting different weight coefficients.
==PAGE:72==
62
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
5.1
Summary
This research is devoted to develop a sophisticated simulator which is able to mimic
the nonlinear traffic dynamics and passengers dynamics for the LINC project where
autonomous buses are adopted to provide demand-responsive public transport ser-
vices. Efforts are made to conduct the operational tests and provide reference for
designing static and flexible schedule with fixed route, considering time-dependent
passenger demand with stochasticity, the battery allowance evolution and battery
charging behaviors. The main contributions are summarized as follows:
(1) This study investigated the property of energy consumption of the autonomous
bus vehicles under different conditions, which laid the groundwork for simulating the
operations of bus services. Specifically, we managed to compute the energy consump-
tion rates (unit: kWh/s) for different angles of road and different loads of passenger.
(2) This study formulated the mathematical model that depicts the bus traffic dy-
namics, passenger load dynamics and bus energy consumption evolution along with
the bus operations. Based on these mathematical formulations, we developed a sim-
ulator which captures the features of the passengers, buses and stations given the
time window, fleet size, passenger demand, battery size, timetable and bus capacity.
Then the system performance indicators, i.e., travel time, waiting time and energy
consumption, are adopted to evaluate the influences of different inputs. Then a Monte
Carlo method is used to draw different samples of timetable and passenger demand
in order to find the distribution of passenger travel time, waiting time and system
==PAGE:74==
64
5 Conclusion
energy consumption.
(3) In order to obtain a good bus schedule, we proposed an optimization model
including two conflicting objectives, the travel time cost and the energy consumption
cost. In the formulation, the systematic constraints are bus headway time constraints
on different routes and stations. A genetic algorithm is designed to optimize the bus
schedule by taking the departure time at start terminal stations of each route and
headway intervals of each route as decision variables.
(4) An illustrative baseline network is used to test the performance of the pro-
posed simulator. The results show that the time-discretized simulator can record the
states of the buses and passengers at each time interval. By applying the Monte
Carlo sampling method, we a) analysed the correlations among different elements,
i.e., passenger distribution, bus headway interval, passenger travel time, waiting time
and total energy consumption; and b) the distributions of the system performance
indicators, travel time, waiting time and energy consumption.
(5) A set of numerical experiment based on DTU’s network is then conducted to
illustrate the effectiveness of our proposed model and algorithm. The results show
that the optimized bus schedule can evidently reduce the passenger travel time and
total energy consumption compared to a benchmark scenario, which improves the
operation efficiency of the public transport services using autonomous buses. Also
the experiment provided a reference for adjusting the weight coefficients according to
practical needs.
5.2
Limitations
This research shows how the electric autonomous vehicles are operated when being
used for the public transport services through simulation method, and investigates
the possible benefit via optimization method. Nevertheless, there are some limitations
that needs to be further paid attention to.
(1) In this study, all the buses are assumed to be operated only on a given route.
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Limitations
65
Actually, in scenarios with imbalanced passenger demand (i.e., the passenger demand
for some routes are much higher than the others), the strategy that swapping the
routes for bus vehicles might have a promising benefit. It is essential to incorporate
different bus dispatching strategies into our simulator in future research.
(2) Bus vehicles with different capacities, and the locations of charge stations
are not considered in our study. Thus, a future work directions could be to extend
our simulator by considering more realistic scenarios with multiple charge stations,
different vehicle types, battery types and so on.
==PAGE:76==
66
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Appendices
A.1
Energy consumption results
A.1.1
Energy consumption in different road angel with vehicle
mass 6350kg
The following figures are the energy consumption for the 6350kg vehicle with three
angle of road sets. As shown in Figures A.1-A.3 .
Figure A.1: Energy
consump-
tion as function of
number
of
people
with
0
degree
of
road.
Figure A.2: Energy
consump-
tion as function of
number
of
people
with
5
degree
of
road.
==PAGE:78==
68
A Appendices
Figure A.3: Energy consumption as function of number of people with 10 degree of
road.
A.1.2
Energy consumption in different road angel with vehicle
mass 3000kg
The following Figures A.4-A.6 are the energy consumption for the 3000kg vehicle
with three angle of road sets. As shown in the figures below, the slope of the energy
consumption varying pattern is almost the same as the 6350kg vehicle.
==PAGE:79==
A.1 Energy consumption results
69
Figure A.4: Energy
consump-
tion as function of
number
of
people
with
0
degree
of
road.
Figure A.5: Energy
consump-
tion as function of
number
of
people
with
5
degree
of
road.
Figure A.6: Energy consumption as function of number of people with 10 degree of
road.
A.1.3
Energy consumption rate with different numbers of
passengers
Table A.1 calculates the energy consumption rate running on each link.
==PAGE:80==
70
A Appendices
Table A.1: Energy consumption rate with different numbers of passengers.
Number of passengers
Consumption rate(KWH/s)
0
0,0008925
1
0,0009030
2
0,0009135
3
0,0009240
4
0,0009344
5
0,0009449
6
0,0009554
7
0,0009658
8
0,0009763
9
0,0009868
10
0,0009972
11
0,0010077
12
0,0010182
13
0,0010287
14
0,0010391
15
0,0010496
A.2
Results of a single simulation
Figure A.7 indicates parts of the results of single simulation.
==PAGE:81==
A.2 Results of a single simulation
71
Figure A.7: Multiple simulation results.
==PAGE:82==
72
A Appendices
A.3
Results of simulations with Monte Carlo sampling
input
Figure A.8 indicates parts of the simulation results with Monte Carlo sampling input.
Figure A.8: Multiple simulation results.
==PAGE:83==
A.4 Correlations among the TT, WT, interval, σ
73
A.4
Correlations among the TT, WT, interval, σ
A.4.1
TTmean vs σ under different interval
Figures A.9-A.20 show the variation of average travel time (TTmean) along with σ
under different intervals=5, 10, . . . , 60, respectively.
Figure A.9: TTmean vs σ (interval=5). Figure A.10: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=10).
Figure A.11: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=15).
Figure A.12: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=20).
==PAGE:84==
74
A Appendices
Figure A.13: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=25).
Figure A.14: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=30).
Figure A.15: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=35).
Figure A.16: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=40).
Figure A.17: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=45).
Figure A.18: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=50).
==PAGE:85==
A.4 Correlations among the TT, WT, interval, σ
75
Figure A.19: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=55).
Figure A.20: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=60).
A.4.2
WTmean vs σ under different interval
Figures A.21-A.32 show the variation of average waiting time (WTmean) along with
σ under different intervals=5, 10, . . . , 60, respectively.
Figure A.21: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=5).
Figure A.22: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=10).
==PAGE:86==
76
A Appendices
Figure A.23: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=15).
Figure A.24: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=20).
Figure A.25: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=25).
Figure A.26: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=30).
Figure A.27: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=35).
Figure A.28: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=40).
==PAGE:87==
A.4 Correlations among the TT, WT, interval, σ
77
Figure A.29: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=45).
Figure A.30: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=50).
Figure A.31: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=55).
Figure A.32: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=60).
A.4.3
TTmean vs Interval under different σ
Figures A.33-A.48 show the variation of average travel time (TTmean) along with
interval under different σ=3500, 3600, . . . , 5000, respectively.
==PAGE:88==
78
A Appendices
Figure A.33: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=3500).
Figure A.34: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=3600).
Figure A.35: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=3700).
Figure A.36: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=3800).
Figure A.37: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=3900).
Figure A.38: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4000).
==PAGE:89==
A.4 Correlations among the TT, WT, interval, σ
79
Figure A.39: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4100).
Figure A.40: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4200).
Figure A.41: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4300).
Figure A.42: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4400).
Figure A.43: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4500).
Figure A.44: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4600).
==PAGE:90==
80
A Appendices
Figure A.45: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4700).
Figure A.46: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4800).
Figure A.47: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4900).
Figure A.48: TTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=5000).
A.4.4
WTmean vs Interval under different σ
Figures A.49-A.64 show the variation of average waiting time (WTmean) along with
interval under different σ=3500, 3600, . . . , 5000, respectively.
==PAGE:91==
A.4 Correlations among the TT, WT, interval, σ
81
Figure A.49: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=3500).
Figure A.50: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=3600).
Figure A.51: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=3700).
Figure A.52: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=3800).
Figure A.53: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=3900).
Figure A.54: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4000).
==PAGE:92==
82
A Appendices
Figure A.55: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4100).
Figure A.56: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4200).
Figure A.57: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4300).
Figure A.58: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4400).
Figure A.59: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4500).
Figure A.60: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4600).
==PAGE:93==
A.5 Results of DTU’s network
83
Figure A.61: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4700).
Figure A.62: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4800).
Figure A.63: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=4900).
Figure A.64: WTmean
vs
Interval
(σ=5000).
A.5
Results of DTU’s network
A.5.1
Results of single simulation
Figure A.65 summarizes the waiting time and travel time for passengers with different
choices and also for all passengers.
==PAGE:94==
84
A Appendices
Figure A.65: Boxplot of waiting time and travel time for passengers.
Figure A.66 shows the relationship between the travel time and waiting time of
all the passengers in the simulation of DTU’s network, and Figure A.67 plots the
histogram for the travel time distribution of all passengers.
Figure A.66: Correlation between TTmean and WTmean.
==PAGE:95==
A.5 Results of DTU’s network
85
Figure A.67: Travel time for arrived passengers.
The scatter plots A.68, A.69 and A.70 display the influence of standard deviation
σ of passenger arriving time distribution on average travel time, average waiting time
and energy use of all simulation results.
Figure A.68: σ VS TTmean.
Figure A.69: σ VS WTmean.
==PAGE:96==
86
A Appendices
Figure A.70: σ VS Energy.
Figure A.71-A.73 represents the changes in energy consumption, average travel
time and waiting time with the bus service interval, respectively.
Figure A.71: Bus
Interval
VS
Energy.
Figure A.72: Bus
Interval
VS
Travel Time.
==PAGE:97==
A.5 Results of DTU’s network
87
Figure A.73: Bus Interval VS Waiting Time.
TTmean vs σ under different interval
Figures A.74-A.82 show the variation of average travel time (TTmean) along with
σ under different intervals=2, 4, . . . , 18, respectively.
Figure A.74: TTmean vs σ (interval=2).Figure A.75: TTmean vs σ (interval=4).
==PAGE:98==
88
A Appendices
Figure A.76: TTmean vs σ (interval=6).Figure A.77: TTmean vs σ (interval=8).
Figure A.78: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=10).
Figure A.79: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=12).
Figure A.80: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=14).
Figure A.81: TTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=16).
==PAGE:99==
A.5 Results of DTU’s network
89
Figure A.82: TTmean vs σ (interval=18).
WTmean vs σ under different interval
Figures A.83-A.91 show the variation of average waiting time (WTmean) along
with σ under different intervals=2, 4, . . . , 18, respectively.
Figure A.83: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=2).
Figure A.84: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=4).
==PAGE:100==
90
A Appendices
Figure A.85: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=6).
Figure A.86: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=8).
Figure A.87: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=10).
Figure A.88: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=12).
Figure A.89: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=14).
Figure A.90: WTmean
vs
σ
(inter-
val=16).
==PAGE:101==
A.5 Results of DTU’s network
91
Figure A.91: WTmean vs σ (interval=18).
TTmean vs interval under different σ
Figures A.92-A.102 show the variation of average travel time (TTmean) along
with interval under different σ=4000, 4100, . . . , 5000, respectively.
Figure A.92: TTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4000).
Figure A.93: TTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4100).
==PAGE:102==
92
A Appendices
Figure A.94: TTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4200).
Figure A.95: TTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4300).
Figure A.96: TTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4400).
Figure A.97: TTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4500).
Figure A.98: TTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4600).
Figure A.99: TTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4700).
==PAGE:103==
A.5 Results of DTU’s network
93
Figure A.100: TTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4800).
Figure A.101: TTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4900).
Figure A.102: TTmean vs interval (σ=5000).
WTmean vs interval under different σ
Figures A.103-A.113 show the variation of average waiting time (WTmean) along
with interval under different σ=4000, 4100, . . . , 5000, respectively.
==PAGE:104==
94
A Appendices
Figure A.103: WTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4000).
Figure A.104: WTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4100).
Figure A.105: WTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4200).
Figure A.106: WTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4300).
Figure A.107: WTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4400).
Figure A.108: WTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4500).
==PAGE:105==
A.5 Results of DTU’s network
95
Figure A.109: WTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4600).
Figure A.110: WTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4700).
Figure A.111: WTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4800).
Figure A.112: WTmean
vs
interval
(σ=4900).
Figure A.113: WTmean vs interval (σ=5000).
==PAGE:106==
96
A Appendices
A.6
Simulation code
==PAGE:107==
A.6 Simulation code
97
==PAGE:108==
98
A Appendices
==PAGE:109==
A.6 Simulation code
99
==PAGE:110==
100
A Appendices
==PAGE:111==
A.6 Simulation code
101
==PAGE:112==
102
A Appendices
==PAGE:113==
A.7 GA code
103
A.7
GA code
==PAGE:114==
104
A Appendices
==PAGE:115==
A.7 GA code
105
==PAGE:116==
106
A Appendices
==PAGE:117==
A.7 GA code
107
==PAGE:118==
108
==PAGE:119==
Bibliography
[BJ+17]
D Berjoza, I Jurgena, et al. “Effects of change in the weight of electric
vehicles on their performance characteristics”. In: Agron. Res 15 (2017),
pages 952–963 (cited on page 5).
[CLZ19]
Zhiwei Chen, Xiaopeng Li, and Xuesong Zhou. “Operational design for
shuttle systems with modular vehicles under oversaturated traffic: Dis-
crete modeling method”. In: Transportation Research Part B: Methodolog-
ical 122 (2019), pages 1–19 (cited on page 4).
[CSV09]
Andrew R Conn, Katya Scheinberg, and Luis N Vicente. Introduction to
derivative-free optimization. SIAM, 2009 (cited on page 7).
[FHL07]
M Fosgerau, K Hjorth, and SV Lyk-Jensen. “The Danish value of time
study: final report”. In: Danish Transport Research Institute (2007) (cited
on page 57).
[Glo]
GlobalPetrolPrices. Denmark electricity prices. Available at https://www.
globalpetrolprices.com/Denmark/electricity_prices/ (2020/07/17)
(cited on page 57).
[Häl+19]
Carl H Häll et al. “Adjustments of public transit operations planning pro-
cess for the use of electric buses”. In: Journal of Intelligent Transportation
Systems 23.3 (2019), pages 216–230 (cited on page 6).
[JK19]
Maroš Janovec and Michal Koháni. “Exact approach to the electric bus
fleet scheduling”. In: Transportation Research Procedia 40 (2019), pages 1380–
1387 (cited on page 4).
==PAGE:120==
110
Bibliography
[Ke+20]
Bwo-Ren Ke et al. “Battery charging and discharging scheduling with
demand response for an electric bus public transportation system”. In:
Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments 40 (2020), page 100741
(cited on page 6).
[Lap+17]
Gilbert Laporte et al. “Multi-objective integration of timetables, vehicle
schedules and user routings in a transit network”. In: Transportation Re-
search Part B: Methodological 98 (2017), pages 94–112 (cited on page 4).
[Li+18]
Lu Li et al. “Mixed bus fleet management strategy for minimizing overall
and emissions external costs”. In: Transportation Research Part D: Trans-
port and Environment 60 (2018), pages 104–118 (cited on page 6).
[Li14]
Jing-Quan Li. “Transit bus scheduling with limited energy”. In: Trans-
portation Science 48.4 (2014), pages 521–539 (cited on page 6).
[LIN]
LINC. Your connection to a collective driverless future. Available at https:
//lincproject.dk/en/ (2020/07/17) (cited on page 1).
[MMD07]
Satyanarayana Muthuswamy, William R McShane, and Janice R Daniel.
“Evaluation of transit signal priority and optimal signal timing plans in
transit and traffic operations”. In: Transportation research record 2034.1
(2007), pages 92–102 (cited on page 5).
[MSK07]
David Meignan, Olivier Simonin, and Abderrafiâa Koukam. “Simulation
and evaluation of urban bus-networks using a multiagent approach”. In:
Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory 15.6 (2007), pages 659–671
(cited on pages 5, 28).
[New71]
Gordon F Newell. “Dispatching policies for a transportation route”. In:
Transportation Science 5.1 (1971), pages 91–105 (cited on page 4).
[Pap+12]
George Papageorgiou et al. “Planning for effective bus rapid transit sys-
tems: A scenario simulation modelling based approach”. In: IFAC Pro-
ceedings Volumes 45.24 (2012), pages 366–371 (cited on pages 5, 28).
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
111
[PJL19]
Samuel Pelletier, Ola Jabali, and Gilbert Laporte. “The electric vehicle
routing problem with energy consumption uncertainty”. In: Transporta-
tion Research Part B: Methodological 126 (2019), pages 225–255 (cited on
pages 5, 16).
[Rin+18]
Marco Rinaldi et al. “Optimal dispatching of electric and hybrid buses
subject to scheduling and charging constraints”. In: 2018 21st Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC). IEEE.
2018, pages 41–46 (cited on page 6).
[SKW16]
Gabriel E Sánchez-Martı́nez, Haris N Koutsopoulos, and Nigel HM Wil-
son. “Optimal allocation of vehicles to bus routes using automatically
collected data and simulation modelling”. In: Research in Transportation
Economics 59 (2016), pages 268–276 (cited on page 6).
[Wad17]
Zia Wadud. “Fully automated vehicles: A cost of ownership analysis to
inform early adoption”. In: Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice 101 (2017), pages 163–176 (cited on page 4).
[WKL20]
Jing Wang, Lixia Kang, and Yongzhong Liu. “Optimal scheduling for elec-
tric bus fleets based on dynamic programming approach by considering
battery capacity fade”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 130
(2020), page 109978 (cited on page 6).
[WS07]
Haixing Wang and Jinsheng Shen. “Heuristic approaches for solving tran-
sit vehicle scheduling problem with route and fueling time constraints”.
In: Applied Mathematics and Computation 190.2 (2007), pages 1237–1249
(cited on page 15).
[WSZ20]
Chunlu Wang, Hongyi Shi, and Xingquan Zuo. “A multi-objective genetic
algorithm based approach for dynamical bus vehicles scheduling under
traffic congestion”. In: Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 54 (2020),
page 100667 (cited on page 6).
==PAGE:122==
112
Bibliography
[ZJB19]
Wei Zhang, Erik Jenelius, and Hugo Badia. “Efficiency of semi-autonomous
and fully autonomous bus services in trunk-and-branches networks”. In:
Journal of Advanced Transportation 2019 (2019) (cited on page 4).
