==PAGE:1==
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
Using deep generative models
Master Thesis
Kristoffer Andersen (s153404) and Egil Hofgaard (s136383)
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
Using deep generative models
Master Thesis
Junly, 2020
By
Kristoffer Andersen
and
Egil Hofgaard
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, and machine
learning.
Kristoffer Andersen - s153404
——————————————————-
Signature
July 30, 2020
——————————————————-
Date
Egil Hofgaard - s136383
——————————————————-
Signature
July 30, 2020
——————————————————-
Date
ii
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
When producing medicine, it is extremely to know exactly what raw materials are used
in production. Therefore, it is common practice to conduct a NMR scan, to identify which
exact molecule you have received, and currently researches are using a lot of time ana-
lyzing whether or not the raw material are in fact what they expected.
We propose the use of deep generative modeling in the form of variational auto-encoders,
both with and without convolutional layers, to automate the process of deciding if the
raw material is indeed the desired material. We also try different ways to reduce the
dimensionality, and try a smoothing filter on the data, to increase model performance.
We found that models had great performance on the available data set, but the data set
has been a limitation, and it is still unknown how well the model will perform on the data
it was actually intended for, as well as for other spectral data sets.
Resumé
I medicinproduktion er det ekstremt vigtigt, hvilke råmaterialer der bruges i produktionen.
Derfor er det almindelig praksis at lave en NMR-skanning af råmaterialerne, for at kunne
bestemme præcist hvilket molekyle man har modtaget. Lige nu er det forskere, der skal
analysere skanningerne, hvilket tager værdifuld tid, der kunne bruges på andre ting.
Vi foreslår brugen af dybe generative modeller i for af variational auto-encoders, både med
og uden convolutional lag, til automatisering af beslutningstagelsesprocessen omkring
bestemmelse af råmaterialer. Vi afprøver også forskellige måder at udføre dimension-
sreduktion, samt afprøvning af et smoothing filter på data, i håbet om forøget præcision i
modellerne.
Vi konkluderende at, vores endelige model præsterer rigtig godt, på det tilgængelige data,
men datasættet brugt i dette projekt har haft nogle begrænsninger, og det er derfor stadigt
uvist, hvordan modellerne præsterer på det data, den er tiltænkt. Det er ligeledes ukendt,
hvor godt modellen vil præstere på andre typer spektral data.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Kristoffer Andersen and Egil Hofgaard, DTU Compute, DTU
We would like to thank the following people/companies, for their contribution to this project.
Tommy Sonne Alstrøm, Lektor, Supervisor
For great supervision, by providing structure, tools, and tips for how to execute such
projects, as well as great insight in deep learning, which throughout the project has proved
very beneficial.
Mikkel N. Schmidt, Associate Professor, Supervisor
For great supervision, and deep and meaningful insight in the fields explored, leading to
the product we’re proud to present.
Johnny Birch, Team Leader (Data science, Automation and software), External Super-
visor
For providing the opportunity and motivating the project with the foresight of the many
use cases, in which this system could be applied. And especially for bridging the chemi-
cal and mathematical gap, with great explanations of the chemistry, and the way to apply
computational tools to them.
William Haarder, Data Scientist, External Supervisor
For general help with IT related issues, and especially for constructive and insightful dis-
cussion about the modeling process.
Joan Malmstrøm, Principal Scientist, External NMR Expert
For explaining the data, along with relating all our findings to the physical phenomenon
that causes it. As well as feedback through out the process regarding the classification
done.
Novo Nordisk
For providing the data, along with the hardware needed to perform the modeling.
iv
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Resumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Nuclear magnetic resonance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
State-of-the-art study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Our approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Theory
10
2.1
Neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2
Detecting outliers with VAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.3
Savitzky-Golay smoothing filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3
Data
21
3.1
Data sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Quantitative exploration of the data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.3
Discriminative classifier
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.4
Preliminary conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Modeling
32
4.1
Software used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2
Training the models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3
Evaluation of models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.4
Variational Auto-Encoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.5
Convolutional Variational Auto-Encoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.6
Variance normalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.7
Smoothing the data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5
Results
40
5.1
The general NMR model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.2
Models specialized for the data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6
Discussion
44
6.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6.2
Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7
Conclusion
48
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
Bibliography
49
A Results
51
A.1 VAE 1 hidden layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.2 VAE 2 hidden layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.3 CVAE 1 convolutional hidden layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
v
==PAGE:8==
A.4 CVAE 2 convolutional hidden layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
A.5 Savizky-Golay VAE 1 hidden layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
A.6 Savizky-Golay VAE 2 hidden layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
A.7 Savizky-Golay CVAE 2 hidden layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
A.8 Savizky-Golay 2 hidden layers, with reference material removed. . . . . . . 122
A.9 Models on raw, full dimensional data set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
vi
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In pharmaceutical production there are very strict requirements to the production proce-
dure. This is to ensure that the medicine we buy is of high quality, and it is well doc-
umented, how it affects the body. For this reason pharmaceutical companies test all
the raw material they receive for production to ensure they are making exactly the same
medicine every time. But it is not easy to look at a white power, and from that determine
exactly what chemical compound you are dealing with, which is why a common technique
used in the industry is Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy. A NMR-scan
observes the spin of some particles in the nuclei of the atoms. From this information about
the spin, it is possible to determine the atomic composition of the molecule.
It is resource intensive to have researchers analyze the results of each scan. It would
be preferred to have an algorithm to analyze exactly which material has been scanned.
This is not an easy task to undertake, and in practice, not what the researchers are doing.
When researchers are analyzing scans, they know what the scan should look like, and
they use this knowledge to determine if the scanned material is the desired material. A
automation of this task would save the researchers time, which could be used for other
tasks.
Since the requirements for the pharmaceutical companies are so strict, the algorithm de-
veloped for determining the usability of a material must be quite robust.
Developing an algorithm, or a model to recognize a specific molecule could be done, just
by checking if it has the expected features, and no other features than that. This approach
is suboptimal, since it requires vast domain knowledge to define these features, and even
missing just one of the unexpected features, might give wrong results. A much better so-
lution is to have an algorithm that learn the features of a material by looking at examples
of this material, and using these learned features to determine whether the material can
be used or not.
This paper is the a documentation of the authors journey through deep generative mod-
els.
In this paper we’ll look at Variational Autoencoders (VAE), with Feed Forward Neural Net-
works, and Convolutional Neural Network, to perform classification on NMR spectra. We
are also looking at different preprocessing algorithms and dimensionality reduction algo-
rithms to improve the model.
1.1
Nuclear magnetic resonance
A NMR setup is shown in Figure 1.1, the key part is the super conducting magnet. With this
magnet it’s possible to analyze the magnetic properties of the molecule. These magnets
are usually around 10 to 15 T.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: A NMR scanning setup 1https://www.jeol.co.jp
All particles have a so called spin, this spin induces a small magnetic field around each
particle. By applying a strong magnetic field on a particles, you can make the particle align
with that field, which is exactly what the NMR machine is doing. In reality all the particles
will not align perfectly with the applied magnetic field, but the net magnetic field of the
particles will point in the direction of the applied field, this is called the relaxed state. A
radio wave is now blasted at the particles (Different frequencies are chosen to hit specific
particles, in this case chosen to hit protons), which knocks the particles out of balance.
Their magnetic field can now be read as they sway back to their relaxed state. This yields
a wave, where the frequencies are dependent on the structure of the molecule.
A NMR scan can show what the structure of a molecule is, and what atoms it is composed
of. The scan consists of a wave, as can be seen in Figure 1.2, where the frequencies for
each atom appears. The way to extract information from this wave, is to do a Fourier
transformation, which will extract the frequencies that compose the wave, as can be seen
in Figure 1.3. The phase shift used in the transformation, is actually something scientists
to this day adjust by hand[1]. The aim of the phase shifting is to compensate for the angle
of the atoms, as they are scanned, to make comparisons possible. Once this is done the
spectrum is going to look like the one shown in Figure 1.4.
NMR is a very powerful and ”easy to use” tool when dealing with simple molecules, but as
soon as the molecular structure becomes complicated, so does the analysis. It might be
the case that the only difference between 2 molecules are a few atoms, which will make
the spectra very similar. In fact the global differences in the scans, will be much more
visible, than the small discrepancies, that actually differentiate the spectra. These global
differences can be cause by many different sources. Such as adding an extra CH2 to a
carbon chain.
2
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:11==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
time
1e4
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8
Response
1e5
Raw NMR-spectrum
(a) The full NMR-scan raw wave.
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
time
1e2
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8
Response
1e5
Zoomed in raw NMR-spectrum
(b) A zoomed in version of the raw NMR-scan, zoomed in on the x-axis in the time interval (75,300)
Figure 1.2: A raw NMR scan. Note how there are wave in a wide range of frequencies,
giving the macro changes visible in (a), but also the very small variations in the wave seen
in (b).
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
3
==PAGE:12==
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
ppm
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
Response
1e8
Fourier transformed NMR-spectrum
(a) The full NMR-scan after a Fourier transform.
2.00
2.05
2.10
2.15
ppm
−2
0
2
4
6
8
Response
1e7
Zoomed in Fourier transformed NMR-spectrum
(b) A zoomed in version of the Fourier transformed NMR-scan, zoomed in on the x-axis in the ppm interval
(1,1.18)
Figure 1.3
4
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:13==
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
ppm
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Response
1e6
Phase shifted Fourier transformed NMR-spectrum
(a) The full spectrum
1.975
2.000
2.025
2.050
2.075
2.100
2.125
2.150
2.175
ppm
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Response
1e6
Zoomed in phase shifted Fourier transformed NMR-spectrum
(b) A zoomed in version of the spectrum, zoomed in on the x-axis in the ppm interval (2,2.15)
Figure 1.4
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
5
==PAGE:14==
1.2
State-of-the-art study
Spectroscopy analysis is a quite well researched area, with whole books written about
it - even many years ago [2, 3]. One of the mayor problems to solve in spectroscopy
analysis, is classification of the spectra, which have been solved in many different ways.
There are several companies, that provide software for NMR analysis, usually requiring
vast domain knowledge. This has been used the quantify scans in a quite automated
way[4]. There are a lot of information in NMR scans, therefore there are many different
goals to reach with an analysis, which is also obvious when looking at the literature. NMR
has existed a long time, and the authors interest lies in the field of deep leaning, which is
therefore where the focus will lie. Deep learning has been used plentiful on spectral data
already[5–12], with some impressive results among them.
The other area of interest for this report is generative modeling, since it suits the problem
at hand very well. Several of the mentioned deep learning papers are using generative
models[5–8, 12].
1.2.1
Classical statistics
The first step of data analysis is always to make sure the data has as much available
information as possible. [13] explores this area with different data manipulations and their
impact on predictive modeling. They tested the impact of spectral binding and targeted
profiling on multivariate statistical methods provided by: SIMPCA-P+ 11.0 from Umetrics
Inc. Permutations.
With great domain knowledge it is possible to quantitatively determine the contents of a
NMR scan. This was done by [14], do extract some features from a NMR scan. A Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) was then applied to the features, which led to data that could
be discriminated very well. This requires vast domain knowledge, and even some way to
quantitatively analyze the spectra, which unfortunately is not applicable for this project.
The problem at hand, is to compare NMR scans to a normal state, to essentially decide,
whether the spectrum belongs to the same class, as the data in the normal state. This
could e.g. be done by comparing the spectrum with spectra known to belong to the right
class.
Comparing two spectra is not a hard task to perform, and can be done with quite simple
statistical methods. [15] used different types of correlation to compare spectra, and from
that decide if the spectra was of the same class. They had a quite small data set, and
focused among other things on the computational speed of the method, which obviously
requires the method to perform well from the beginning. In this project, the correlation
unfortunately can not be used to discriminate the classes.
In this case, differences in the spectra might be hugely important, or in other cases have
little to no influence on whether the spectra belongs to the same class. To solve this prob-
lem, machine learning seems like an obvious solution, since this is exactly the problem
that supervised learning methods excels at.
1.2.2
Machine learning
Machine learning has had many uses in NMR analysis. [16] used unsupervised com-
ponent analysis to extract the useful information from NMR scans, which in the future
could be used to quantify the scan. They managed to describe the data with very few
components, meaning that automatic quantification might not be out of reach. They only
6
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:15==
tested it on very small molecules, meaning that their analysis unfortunately is unlikely to
be applicable for this project.
Conventionally NMR spectroscopy usually deals with a Fourier transform free induction
decay (FID), and the analysis takes place on the more human readable format. [17] has
proposed an alternative to the Fourier transform, using a probabilistic generative model.
This way, instead of needing vast domain knowledge to quantify the scans, the model
can output a probability of the concentration of the composition of the molecule. This
approach is quite interesting for this project, since it is robust at low signal-to-noise ratios,
and should be able to tell the difference in the data set. However, since this project is
focused on deep learning, this approach was not pursued.
1.2.3
Deep learning
A variation of the problem at hand has already been solved using deep learning by J. Liu,
et al. [10]. They used several advanced deep learning techniques to solve their problem,
including convolutional neural networks, one-shot learning, and Siamese neural networks.
They were limited by a rather small amount of data, which is why they reformulated the
problem as a binary classification (Same/different class), and chose to go with one-shot
learning. The problem with this technique, it the assumption of a single sample being
used as the definitive true sample. This sample could be chosen/generated in multiple
ways, and might perform well, but the structure of this data set often shifts the spectrum
a little, or it has some drift, which is conjectured to cause bad predictions in a one-to-one
comparison.
The seaming simple task of ”peak picking”, is to identify the peaks in a spectrum, which
is something most NMR software can do to a certain degree already. NMRNet [18] is a
neural network, that does this automated peak picking very well. Using a convolutional
neural network (CNN), they were able to locate the peaks. This approach is of great
interest, since the peaks are a way of discriminating spectra. NMRNet uses 2D NMR
scans, while this project only uses 1D scans, never the less the idea of using CNNs for
local spacial awareness is great, and will be explored in this project.
1.2.4
Probabilistic approaches
Another way to solve this problem is using probability. This practice goes back many
years, and there are examples that not only give the probability of a certain scan, but
even can compare with a data base of pure reference scans, and give the composition of
what has been scanned[19]. This can of course be simplified, to give just the probability
of the measurement, given the reference. This was an optimization of the state-of-the-
art techniques in 1976, and seems to have been left behind by the researches in favor
for more computationally heavy methods. This approach is again a comparison of new
observations with a reference, which gives the same problems as some of the classical
statistical approaches.
1.2.5
Generative models
Not all current researchers are using deep learning. A study using NMR data generated
from scanning wine conducted in 2019 by Gougeon[14], used both supervised and un-
supervised statistical methods to classify whether a wine was from the french Bordeaux
area. This is similar to the problem at hand, in that it is a binary classification, trying to
predict ”french or not”, instead of ”Normal state or not”. This approach is also know from
generative models, that aims to learn the distribution of data, and from that can decide
whether a new observation is likely to stem from that distribution, which can of course also
be done with deep learning[5, 7, 8], and have shown to give great results in other areas
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
7
==PAGE:16==
than NMR spectroscopy. The 3 above mentioned papers all solve variations of the prob-
lem at hand to a varying degree, but have vastly different limitations, and data sets. This
project will try to combine their way of thinking with the area of NMR spectroscopy. This
is going to require a whole array of new considerations, to the deep generative modeling
already explored in the literature.
1.3
Problem statement
All the accepted observations are spanning a space, which will be called the ”normal
state”, The goal thereby is to classify, whether a new observation lies within this space.
The problem to be solved can be summed up to ”Does this material differ to much from the
expected material?”. In the domain of deep generative models, this can be reformulated
to: ”Is the model able to reconstruct the scan of the material, as well as it can recreate a
scan from the ’normal state’?”, measured in the best score defined later in section 2.2.
The goal is to reach a model, that can correctly predict that all scans of ”not normal state”,
and predict some of the ”normal state” scans as so. This way the work required to check all
scans by hand will be reduced. i.e. The goal is to reach as many true positive prediction,
while keeping the type I errors (False positive) at 0.
1.4
Our approach
There are many ways to approach this problem, the naive way would be to compare the
new observation, with all know observations. There are many ways of comparing single
observations, the ones of special interest are twin models (Twin SVM [9], and Siamese
neural networks [9–11]). This approach will, however, not be a good solution for the long
term, since it will require a huge number of comparisons. A better solution might be to
approach the problem as an anomaly detection problem. With this approach a ”normal
state” will be defined, and every new observation will then only have to be compared to the
”normal state”. One deep learning approach to anomaly detection build on the foundation
of generative models, and is called Variational Autoencoders (VAE)[5–8]. A VAE tries to
estimate the distribution of the data, from which it is possible to asses, whether a new
observation is likely to stem from that distribution. This is the approach we want to follow.
We want to explore multiple architectures, ranging from very simple, to as complex as
data limitations will allow us. We will also try different preprocessing of data, to see if the
results can be improved this way.
Plenty of research already exists about deep learning in NMR, but the main focus is usu-
ally exact classification of the NMR spectrum [20–22]. This is not of interest for us, since
we expect that anomaly detection will give better performance for this specific problem.
This is because most of the classification approaches uses a data base of know spectra,
which is not of interest to us. We expect the anomaly detection approach to do better, due
to it’s very specific use. We are only interested in classifying one material, and therefore
expect to be able to obtain a better accuracy.
We will try to approach the modeling taking into account that the models will be used for
pharmaceutical purposes. This means that Type-I errors (False Positives) are extremely
bad. If the model rejects a material, it will be analyzed by hand, which means the decision
will be made by experts, and if the scan was supposed to be accepted, it will be so at this
stage. If on the other hand, the model incorrectly accepts a material, and the material
becomes part of a production, it could have serious, maybe even fatal consequences.
8
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:17==
The weighting between type I and type II errors, will therefore be central in the decision
making process.
The data consists of mainly the desired material, and a material that is very close to it,
making them very hard to discriminate. We want to train a classical classifier, to asses
the viability of discriminating the classes. This will provide us with a upper bound on what
performance we can expect from a generative model.
Generative models seems like an obvious choice for this problem, due to the fact, that the
data it will be classifying in the future is unknown. By defining a normal state, it does not
matter what future data is presented for the model, it should always reject data that is not
within the normal state. It requires vast domain knowledge to define a generative model
that knows exactly which features to weight high, and which to ignore. These features
will have to be learned. Since a generative model aims to model the distribution of data,
a good model makes as few assumptions about the distribution of the data as possible.
This is one area where deep generative models have shown to perform great, since they
can approximate pretty much any distribution, i.e. there is no assumptions about the
distribution of the data. There are 2 dominant deep generative models: Variational auto-
encoders (VAE) and Generative adversarial networks (GAN). Of these VAE is the simpler
approach, and since a simple model is often preferred, this is the one we chose to work
with. It should also be noted that GANs suffer from so called ”mode collapse”[23], which
might cause problems for this specific data set, due to some variance in the peak locations.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
9
==PAGE:18==
2
Theory
The aim of this chapter is to give the reader the necessary foundation to understand the
modeling, and provide general understanding, which is required to understand much of
the decision making in this project. The section is not meant to serve as a recipe to follow
if the reader should wish to implement any of the concepts them selves, but give a general
understanding of the mechanism at play.
Note that a basic understanding of machine learning, and latent variable modeling is as-
sumed through out this section.
2.1
Neural networks
In recent years, deep learning has had a surge of progress. This is mainly attributed to
the computational power, finally catching up to the theory, which was well established
years ago. Deep learning is a part of machine learning, that is based on the use of Neural
Networks (NN).
Neural networks are inspired by how the brain functions, consisting of a network of so
called neurons, that are connected to other neurons. In the brain a neuron has some
inputs, and some outputs. If enough power is delivered to a neurons inputs, it will fire it’s
outputs. This idea is used to model Neural Networks, by tuning the connection strength
between the neurons.
2.1.1
Feed Forward Neural Networks
A Feed Forward Neural Network (FFNN) is the most basic Neural Network. It is build up
from a number of layers, an input layer, d hidden layers, and an output layer. Each layer
is connected to the next layer by weights. Each node from a layer has a weight to each
node in the next layer, which will be used to calculate the activation for the next layer.
This is much easier to envision when looking at Figure 2.1, where the green nodes are
the input, the orange nodes are a hidden layer - There could be multiple of these, and the
red nodes are the output.
Note, that in each hidden layer, there are 2 variables, this is due the the activation function.
The activation function is the non-linarity of the FFNN, without the activation function,
the whole model would be linear, and could essentially be reduced to a single matrix
multiplication. Multiple different activation functions are common, the most popular are the
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU), or some sigmoid function, for the understanding of FFNNs,
however, the choice of activation function is not important. The blue nodes in Figure 2.1
are the bias nodes, these will be explained later on.
Forward propagation
To calculate the y-values from Figure 2.1, forward propagation is used, which is straight
forward. To calculate the first node in the first hidden layer h(1)
1
in Figure 2.1, one must
simply sum the input vector x, multiplied by the weight for each node,
h(1)
1
=
n
∑
i=0
w(1)
1i xi.
10
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.1: A basic Feed Forward Neural Network, x is the input vector W are the weight
matrices, z are the activations, and y is the output. The biases are marked as blue nodes.
This is the same for every node in the hidden layer, so the entire hidden layer can be
calculated as
h(1)
j
=
n
∑
i=0
w(1)
ji xi.
The activation function is then applied to each node. since the exact choice of activation
function is not important right now, lets just call it f(·), this will allow for the calculation of
the activations z, by simply applying f(·) to h,
z(1)
j
= f(h(1)
j ) = f
( n
∑
i=0
w(1)
ji xi
)
.
The z(1) values are now the inputs for the next hidden layer - if there are more, or else for
the output calculation. This again generalizes nicely to multiple hidden layers, where the
next hidden layer would be calculated as
z(2)
j
= f(h(2)
j )
= f
( n
∑
i=0
w(2)
ji z(1)
i
)
= f
( n
∑
i=0
w(2)
ji f
( n
∑
l=0
w(1)
il xl
)
i
)
.
(2.1)
To get the outputs, the same procedure is followed, except the use of the activation func-
tion. It is very common to want a transformed version of the output, however, and this
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
11
==PAGE:20==
transformation can be applied to the output. An example of this could be to apply a soft-
max function, so that the output could be interpreted as probabilities.
A bias is added to every layer, including the input layer, which is simply a node with the
value 1. This is to enable the FFNN to model more functions, imagine modeling the
function f(x) = x + 5. In this case it would be nice, if the ′ + 5′ part could just be learned
and remembered by the model. This is exactly what the bias can do. In this case the bias
would (As will always be the case) be 1, and the weight should approach 5, as the model
trains. If the bias is unnecessary, the weight to the bias node will simply go to 0, and the
model will ignore the bias.
Training a FFNN
The parameters being trained in a FFNN are the values in the weight matrices. There are
of course many hyper parameters to tune, like number of hidden layers, sizes of hidden
layers, and which activation functions to use, but the only parameters the model gets
to tune are the weights. The weights are updated by an iterative algorithm, known as
gradient decent, which is a common optimization algorithm for minimizing functions. The
question then stands, which function should be minimized? This should of course be
some error function, also sometimes called the loss function. The error function is simply
some measure of how well the model predicted the right output, a common choice is e.g.
the squared loss,
E(w) = ∥y −t∥2
2,
where y is the output of the model using parameters w, and t are the true values, that the
model is trying to predict.
Gradient decent is a basic algorithm. The gradient is a vector that points in the direction
of the steepest increase in the value of a function, taking a step the other direction, will
therefore decrease the function. This means that once the gradient is found, the rest is
easy. The problem, however, is how to find the gradient. as seen in Equation 2.1, the
model is nested, and quite complicated, when viewed in it’s full form, therefore it is nice
to be able to split the gradient calculation into several terms, this is done using the chain
rule for differentiation. The chain rules states the following pattern, that will be applied
multiple times:
∂f(w)
∂w
= ∂f(w)
∂g(w)
∂g(w)
∂w
The gradient for each hidden layer needs to be found separately, but are dependent on
the layer after itself - therefore the name back propagation. So firstly the gradient of the
last layer L can be calculated as
∂E(w)
∂w(L)
ji
=
K
∑
k=1
∂E(w)
∂a(L)
k
∂a(L)
k
∂w(L)
ji
,
where E(w) is the error function for a model with parameters w, and a(L)
k
= ∑
i w(L)
ki z(L−1)
i
.
This generalizes to the other layers like
∂E(w)
∂w(L−1)
ji
=
K
∑
k=1
∂E(w)
∂a(L)
k
∂a(L)
k
∂a(L−1)
j
∂a(L−1)
j
∂w(L−1)
ji
,
and this continues for each layer.
12
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:21==
Activation functions
The activation function is the non-linear part of a FFNN, the role of which is enable the
modeling of non-linear functions. The activation function is used on all the hidden layers,
and can be different for each layer, if so desired, the most common activation functions are
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) and a sigmoid function, e.g. tanh. The choice of activation
functions are hyper parameters, and choosing them can be a rather complex process, but
generally ReLU is fast computationally, so if that is a priority, it is a good choice, if on the
other hand it is prefered to have values bound (e.g. between 0 and 1) some sort of Sigmoid
function might be the best choice. Both come with advantages, and disadvantages.
2.1.2
Auto-Encoders
Autos is the greek word for ”self”, which is also the basis of an auto-encoder(AE). an AE
is a neural network, that instead of predicting a certain output, the model tries to predict
the input as the output, and is thus a unsupervised method. This can be practical for a
number of reason, but the main advantage of an AE is that you can learn some more
advanced features about the data, by compressing the data into a smaller dimensional
space in a bottle neck as one of the hidden layers. Advanced features can be many
things, the hope is that some kind of pattern will appear. As a simple example, imaging a
data set, consisting of vectors with length 3, each data point is a numerical progression,
starting with x1, and the rest of the data point is dependent on x1 and some constant c.
Then x2 = c + x1, and x3 = 2c + x1. An example could be the vector [3, 5, 7]T . A network
that could possibly learn these features can be seen in Figure 2.2. This network has 2
hidden neurons, which can store the 2 variables, the input is dependent on, namely x1
and c. Using this network c, a otherwise latent variable now becomes visible. This is
a very simple example, a much more common example is to classify handwritten digits
(With the very famous MNIST data set). In a network designed for handwritten digits,
the information about which digit is being input can be stored in just 10 nodes, add a few
nodes for describing the styling of the digit, and the image is suddenly in a much lower
dimensional space, with almost the same information stored.
Most AEs use a bottleneck layer in the middle, where the complex features are stored,
The part of the network before this layer is called the encoder, and the layers after the
bottleneck are called the decoder, as can be seen in Figure 2.3. The idea here is that
you encode the information into the complex features, you could then hand this data to
someone else, and if they have a decoder, they can retrieve the original data - or at least
an approximation of the original data.
Since AEs are simply special cases of FFNNs, with a certain architecture, all the training
and decision making surrounding AEs follow the same principals as for FFNNs.
2.1.3
Variational Auto-Encoders
Variational Auto-Encoders (VAE) is a way to turn a NN into a generative model. A gener-
ative model, is a model that learns the distribution of the data, with 2 primary uses. The
first use, is what has given the name to this way of modeling: Generating data. Once the
distribution of the data is know (Or well approximated) it is not that difficult to draw new
samples from this distribution, effectively generating new data without doing the experi-
ments. Another use of generative models, is anomaly detection by judging how likely it is
that a new observation stems from the same distribution, as the data trained on.
VAEs are the latest and greatest in the area of generative models, since they combat most
of the compromises generative modeling previously has faced [6].
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.2: A small example of an Auto Encoder. Notice that the input and the output has
the exact same size, such that the input data can be used as the ground truth for training.
Note also the bias has been set to 1, as it is the weight connecting it to the next layer that
decides the amount the bias should contribute.
Figure 2.3: A sketch of the general concept of an Auto-Encoder. The first part of an
Auto-Encoder is called the encoder, that latter part is called the decoder.
14
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:23==
On the surface VAEs look very similar to traditional AEs, as they both have a bottleneck,
and they both compare input with output. However the bottleneck layer is very different,
yielding a model that is fundamentally different.
The objective function
VAEs are a maximum likelihood estimation method, meaning that the model tries to max-
imize the probability, that the model fits the data, or in other words, the probability that
the data stems from the model. The formulation of maximum likelihood, that will be used
further on is
P(X) =
∫
P(X|z; θ)P(z)dz,
where P(X) is the probability of the data, z are the latent variables, and θ is the model
parameters. This means that P(X|z; θ) is the probability of the data being generated from
the model, with the underlying latent variables z. In practice P(X|z) is very small, and
thereby contributes almost nothing [6]. This means that the model can predict P(X), sim-
ply by sampling from z, therefore, the goal of the training really is to find a new function
Q(z|X), which will give a distribution of z, that have high probability to generate X. That
means that Q(z|X) really approximates EP(z|X), and the question is, how well does it
approximate? To answer this, the Kullback-Leibler divergence is used, which is really an
error function for how much information is lost when approximating EP(z|X) with Q(z|X).
The Kullback-Leibler divergence looks like:
D[Q(z)∥P(z|X)] = E[log(Q(z)) −log(P(z))].
(2.2)
Since P(z|X) is not tractable, this is hard to work with. Therefore, by introducing Bayes
rules on Equation 2.2, and collecting some of the terms, a much more tractable equation
appears:
D[Q(z)∥P(z|X)] = E[log(Q(z)) −log(P(z|X))]
= E[log(Q(z)) −log(P(X|z) −log(P(z))] + log(P(X))
= E[−log(P(X|z) + D[Q(z)∥P(z)]] + log(P(X)).
This then leads to
log(P(X)) −D[Q(z)∥P(z|X)] = E[log(P(X|z) −D[Q(z)∥P(z)]].
Since X is fixed, it doesn’t matter if Q(z) is really dependent on X. Which allows for a
final objective function that looks like:
log(P(X)) −D[Q(z|X)∥P(z|X)] = E[log(P(X|z) −D[Q(z|X)∥P(z)]].
(2.3)
Equation 2.3 is now a tractable function, that can be maximized. The left hand side of
Equation 2.3’s first term log(P(X)) is the quantity that need to be as large as possible,
while the other term goes to zero, as Q(z) estimates P(z|X) better.
This objective function can be optimized with Stochastic Gradient Decent (SGD), that
does, however, require a specific function chosen for Q. The most common choice is
to choose Q(z|X) = N(z|µ(X, Θ), Σ(X, Θ))[6]. Note that both µ(X, Θ) and Σ(X, Θ) are
dependent on the model i.e. the parameters, which will be implicit from here on out, and
the Θ will be deprecated. This choice now means that:
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
15
==PAGE:24==
D[Q(z|X)∥P(z|X)] = D[N(µ(X), Σ(X))∥N(0, I)]
(2.4)
= 1
2
(
tr(Σ(X)) + (µ(X))⊤(µ(X)) −k −log det(Σ(X))
)
(2.5)
Where k is the number of dimensions in the Gaussian distribution.
This generates a new problem. When using SGD it is currently not possible to perform
the back propagation, since it needs to do a sampling - i.e. a non-differentiable opera-
tion. The sampling is needed to find E[log(P(X|z)], but since this is not possible, creative
thinking is needed. To get around this, the network needs to learn how to not deal with
the sampling, this is done by learning a transformation that transform a N(0, I) into the
desired N(µ(X), Σ(X)). The operations to do this is done with the following trick: Sample
from N(0, I), multiply by Σ(X) and add µ(X). This means that the network can perform
the back propagation, since the whole network is now differentiable. This is called the
”Reparameterization Trick”.
Collecting all of this leads to a final equation, which gradient will be the basis of the back
propagation:
E [E [log P (X|z)] −D[Q(z|X)∥P(z)]]
(2.6)
where z = µ(X) + Σ1/2(X)ε in the first term, where ε ∼N(0, I).
2.1.4
Convolutional Neural Networks
A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), is another architecture-scheme used for NNs.
The core architectural difference, is that a CNN finds local information, by only connect-
ing nearby neurons to each other. In Figure 2.4 a such network can be seen. Notice how
sparse the connections are between the input and the hidden layer. This is the core archi-
tectural feature of a CNN, along with the stacked neurons in the hidden layer. This design
decision also greatly reduces the number of parameters the network needs to learn, mak-
ing it a faster network to train.
This architecture works, by training filters (Or kernels). A filter is a feature-recognizer,
meaning that if a certain pattern is present, the filter will output a high value. The filter is
applied to the whole image, at different points, which results in a vector with information
about which parts of the image contains which features. Since there usually are more than
one feature to recognize, multiple filters are trained and applied in each hidden layer.
The way these filters work in practice is by having shared weights in the layer. This means
that only very few weights will actually have to be trained, as can be seen in Figure 2.5, in
which each color is a unique value in the filter. That means that the hidden layer will have
the same transformation applied to all of it’s neurons, just with different inputs, yielding
this encoding of where a certain pattern exists. Each filter is in practice simply stacked
within the layer.
When training the network, the calculations are pretty much the same, except the gradient
will have a lot of 0s between all the neurons with no communication. In practice, these
are skipped, for computational efficiency, and yielding the same result. There are multiple
techniques that might improve the performance of a CNN, for example pooling. However,
this is outside the scope of this report.
16
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.4: An example of a Convolutional Neural Network. Notice how sparse the con-
nections are from the input layer to the hidden layer, where each neuron is only connected
to closest hidden layer neurons. The hidden layer consists of a stack of layers, all with
the same inputs, but with shared weights.
Figure 2.5: A visualization of how the weight sharing works. The blue arrows represent
the first filter, with each shade of blue being a trained value. Likewise the red arrows
represent the second filter, with each shade being a unique shared weight. In the hidden
layer the yellow and orange are results of different kernels.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
17
==PAGE:26==
This local awareness in the network, will allow it to spot patterns, no matter where they
are, but still retain the information about the placement. This could be an amazing tool
for NMR data, since it can generalize the idea of a peak, and even - with a larger filter,
find the classic symmetrical peak patterns, as seen in Figure 1.4b. It is possible to chain
CNN, where the second layer will learn patterns in the first layer, and so on.
2.2
Detecting outliers with VAE
When a VAE has been trained on a certain kind of data, it should only be able to generate
that kind of data, when a sample is decoded from the latent distribution. This means that a
data point that does not stem from the same distribution, as the data the VAE was trained
on, should yield a bad reconstruction. One way to design a VAE, as done by [7] is to have
the VAE output a distribution itself, and simply finding the probability of the input point
stemming from that distribution, they named this value the ”Reconstruction probability”.
Jinwon & Sungzoon, modeled a normal distribution for continues data, and a Bernoulli
distribution for binary data.
It is also possible to design a VAE to only output a data point, which should look as much
like the input as possible. This data point can be considered the mean of a normal dis-
tribution, which allows for the same reconstruction probability as proposed by Jinwon &
Sungzoon[7], but this time, calculated with fixed variance, leaving the interpretation a little
less obvious. This is, essentially how the model is training, calculating the gradient from
the mean squared error (MSE). If this technique is used a threshold will have to be set, to
evaluate whether a data point stems from the same distribution as the normal state.
It should be noted, that Jinwon & Sungzoon[7], are inconsistent in their use of ”Recon-
struction probability”, as they define it in several different ways, and in the fact that it is
not actually a probability, but an estimation of one.
There are other ways of evaluating the reconstruction of the input. Since there might
be a lot of variance in the data, the MSE might not weight the smaller differences high,
even though they might be the deciding factor. Therefore it might be relevant to look at
the relative error from the input to the output, as it may show relevant differences better.
There are then multiple ways to interpret this output, it could be done simply using a MSE,
or since it might only be in specific dimensions it is relevant, the max relative error, or a
quantile of the errors, could yield good results.
This can be summed up to two different reconstruction scores for a reconstruction, in
these equations x is the input vector, and y is the reconstruction:
MSE = 1
n
∑
n
(yn −xn)2
(2.7)
Alternatively, to make extreme values less potent, the root mean squared error (RMSE)
can be used:
RMSE =
√
1
n
∑
n
(yn −xn)2
(2.8)
The other reconstruction score, is the max relative error (MRE):
MRE = max
(|xn −yn|
|yn|
)
(2.9)
18
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:27==
Note that the MRE is calculated relative to the output. This is chosen because in a recon-
struction, the peak would be missing, if the VAE is not trained to recreate it. This way the
signal is strongest where the VAE failed to reconstruct a peak.
Once a score has been calculated for a reconstruction, a threshold is learned from a
validation data set, that can then be used to decide whether the input is from the same
distribution, as the data the VAE was trained on.
2.2.1
The intuitive understanding
So how does all of this come together to useful generative model? To get an intuitive
understanding, let’s first follow a sample that travel through an already trained network,
which can be done in a few steps, that are also shown in Figure 2.6:
1. The data X goes through the encoder, which reduces the dimensionality to the latent
space, and yields a distribution N(µ(X), Σ(X)).
• The network usually has some hidden layers that have learned to find important
features in the data, based on training data.
• The last operations in the encoder are two parallel FFNN, that are trained to
give vectors with the mean, and the variance of a multivariate Gaussian distri-
bution.
• For robustness and stability, the network actually finds log(σ), but this is a sim-
ple transformation, that can be reversed when needed.
2. a number of points (L) are sampled from N(µ(X), Σ(X)).
• In reality points are sampled from N(0, I), and then transformed using the
reparametrization trick: N(µ(X), Σ(X)) = µ(X) + Σ(X) · N(0, I)
3. The sampled points are now decoded to output to points Y1, Y2, ..., YL. The decoder
tries to recreate the original input data X, from the sampled latent space.
• Each Y is an estimate to the mean of the input data. So the goal now is to
see how likely it is that X stems from this estimated distributed. (Note all these
distributions are assumed to have equal variance, therefore only the mean
matters.)
4. The RMSE is then calculated between each Yl and and X, this is averaged, and will
serve as the similarity measure.
5. The RMSE is now compared to a threshold, if the RMSE is below the threshold, X
is classified to follow the same distribution as the training data.
So the only thing left to intuitively understand is the training process of the network. The
network is only trained on the data, that constitutes the ’normal state’. This means that the
network will be good at reconstructing similar data points, but bad at reconstructing points
that lie outside the normal state, which is how the model can be used for anomaly detec-
tion. Equation 2.6 is the equation that the training minimizes, it consists of 2 terms. The
first term E[log(P(X|z)] = MSE( ˆX, X) is the term training the output ˆX to look as similar
to the input X as possible. The second term D[Q(z|X)∥P(z)] = D[Q(z|X)∥N(0, I)] is the
term dragging the latent space towards a Gaussian distribution.
The training is done using SGD, meaning that the gradient is not the true gradient, since
it is generated from a sampled point, to even this out, the gradient is averaged across the
batch, to give ensure stability for the gradient.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.6: Caption
2.3
Savitzky-Golay smoothing filter
The Savitzky-Golay filter (SG filter) was invented in the 60’s by Savitzky and Golay, for
smoothing a signal, yielded by a physical continuous experiment[24]. It has since then
been used for multiple different applications, and their original paper has been cited over
10,000 times.
The SG filter is commonly used in areas like signal processing[25]. It is used for smoothing
data, usually to reduce noise. The filter works as a least squares polynomial regression
to fit the data.
For each data point (excluding the ends) a number of points are chosen around that point,
using only this window of the data, a polynomial regression is carried out, and the value at
the original point gets updated with the value gathered from the polynomial. This should
smoothen the curve, whilst keeping the general trend of the data intact.
The SG filter requires two hyper parameters, namely the degree of the polynomial, and
the size of the window. These must be chosen to best suit the data.
The application of the SG filter really is updating xi in the following way:
1. Fit a polynomial fi(z) = Least squares fit on {xi−w, xi+w}, where x is the data vector,
and w = ⌊window size
2
⌋
2. update xi = f(xi) (xi is the mid point of the polynomial fit, assuming equidistant
x-data)
20
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:29==
3
Data
This chapter aims to guide the reader through the data used, and how it was prepro-
cessed, to be better suited for the modeling process. After this chapter the reader should
have a basic understanding of how NMR scans look like, as well as what challenges that
can arise, when dealing with such data.
The first step to the modeling, is to get a good understanding of the data. Two data sets
were used, the first data set is a real life data set, which also serves as the motivation for
this project. The other data set is a open data set, which will be used for visualizations,
since the first data set is not publicly available.
3.1
Data sets
As mentioned, two data sets has been used throughout this project, to give the reader a
better understanding of these data sets, a quantitative descriptions of these data sets are
provided in this section.
3.1.1
Real data from Novo Nordisk
The data has been collected and labeled by hand by the following process:
• Input material is collected.
• A reference is found from the last set of accepted observations.
• Each input material is measured.
• The measurements are Fourier transformed.
• A visual comparison of the each input material is done against the reference. This
comparison uses domain knowledge to decide which discrepancies are allowed,
and which are critical.
– Each input material is either rejected or accepted, from the comparison.
There is a total of 168 data points, which are each accumulated mean values from 16
scans, to better the signal-to-noise-ratio. Each data point consists of:
• A measured free induction decay (FID) vector consisting of 32768 values. A such
scan can be seen in Figure 1.2.
• A processed Fourier transformed, and phase shifted vector, which consists of 65536
values. A such vector can be seen in Figure 1.4
• An acceptance/rejection flag1.
• The parameters used by the machine when performing the measurement.
The 168 consists of 132 different samples, some samples are scanned twice, because
there either was a mistake in the first scan, or because there was a need for duplicate
determination for that scan. Only the last scan of each material will be used, to avoid bias
from the same sample being in the data twice, and to disregard failed scans. Of those
132:
1There is not an actual flag in the data, but the file structure allowed for determining this, and add a boolean
value to the data.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
21
==PAGE:30==
• 102 scans are the scans of the desired material, that should be accepted.
• 6 scans of a very different material, that should definitely be rejected.
• 24 scans of a material very similar to the desired one. These are hard to differentiate,
and should be rejected.
3.1.2
Data Manipulation on Novo Nordisk data set
The two data sets did require some different manipulations, but the by far most interesting
case was the data gathered at Novo Nordisk. Currently their workflow is to do the Fourier
transformation and phase shift from the FID (As seen in Figure 1.2) by hand. The pro-
grams they use to do this, does have some automation that could do this for them, but it is
still a manual process to get the program to do so, and is also often corrected by hand. A
obvious manipulation is therefore the do this transformation automatically, so the models
can work solely with the FID as input, as that is the collected data.
Automatic Fourier transform and Phase shift
We implemented an Automatic phase shifter, but it’s not tested on any other molecule. So
while it is functional, on Novo Nordisk’s data, it is unknown if it generalizes to all molecules.
It was based on the ACME algorithm [26].
Dimensionality reduction
The data is of a very high dimension (65536) This is because it is of quite high resolution,
meaning that a lot of the points have very similar data, that does not contribute with rele-
vant information.
The advantage of lowering the dimensionality, is that the data becomes more manage-
able, and models will take shorter time to train. The disadvantage of reducing the dimen-
sionality, is that despite looking very similar, there might some loss of information.
Two different methods to reduce dimensionality was used.
• Naive method: With a window size and stride of 4, keep the value that has the
maximum distance from the previous window. And remove all the points with lower
ppm than 0. This was done to keep the peeks and valleys in the NMR spectra.
• Max Pooling: With a given window size and stride, keep the maximum value in
the window. This method was used on data that had been smoothed with the SG
method.
The Naive method reduced the data set from 65536 points to 13242, but did nothing to
reduce the noise, it almost enhanced the noise, since the points were chosen to not be
similar. It did however reconstruct very nicely where there were peaks/valleys.
The Max Pooling method was also good at reducing the data set, without loosing critical
information, but did not manage to fit the valleys very nice.
As shown in Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.2, the signal is less noisy when applying this algo-
rithm, it is also less sensitive to small movement on the x axis, since there is pooling. It
does however also remove the top of the peaks of the signal, when smoothing with the
Savitzky-Golay filter, and when the max pooling is applied the valleys gets less extreme,
leading to both peaks and valleys being less distinct.
In Figure 3.3 the signal is reduced in dimensionality while keeping the noise and signal as
intact as possible. Since it reduces the signal frequency resolution, it also removes small
22
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.1: Comparison of a raw signal and a Savitzky Golay filtered signal.
Figure 3.2: Comparison of a Savitzky Golay filtered signal, and after a MaxPool dimen-
sionality reduction is applied.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.3: Comparing a raw signal and a Naive dimensionality reduction of factor 4
movement on the x-axis, this method manages to keep the information about the extreme
values of the peaks and valleys, but also keeps, and maybe even exaggerates the noise.
Normalization
Two different normalizations were tested on the data set:
• Standard: Divide every sample with a constant, the constant is the maximum value
in the training set. This was done mainly to keep the modeling software functional,
by not having extremely high values.
• Variance Normalization: Calculate the variance of each dimension in the training
set, and divide every sample with this vector. This was done to enhance features
that aren’t present in the training set, but also enhanced the noise by a lot.
3.1.3
Open data set
The open data set is gathered from the Biological Magnetic Resonance Data Bank2, we
focus on metabolomics, which are scans of small molecules. The data set contains 967
scans. These scans included a FID, as well as a Fourier transform and phased shifted
spectrum. Since the data set is open source, it is done by multiple different NMR setups,
and there are not enough scans of each molecule to build models on them. This data set
was used to generate plots for this report. Since the open data set is made by different
people at different locations, and has been gathered over a long period of time, the data
set isn’t consistent in dimensionality and scan frequency.
The ppm range is also affected, some of the scan only go up to 10.6 ppm and down to
-0.9 ppm, while some scans include data up to 15 ppm and down to -5.6
3.1.4
Data Manipulation on the open data set
The open data is a collection of scans from many different sources, which means they
have very little in common.
2http://www.bmrb.wisc.edu
24
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:33==
Table 3.1: Quantitative overview of the open data set
Table 3.2: Distribution of dimensionality in
the open data set.
Dimensionality
#Observations
16384
1
32768
608
65536
357
131072
1
Table 3.3:
Distribution of sampling fre-
quency
Frequency
#Observations
400.13 MHz
234
499.84 MHz
576
500.07 MHz
1
600.13 MHz
83
700.13 MHz
73
To standardize the NMR-scannings the following was done.
• Max and Min ppm values were chosen, so every scanning had values in the interval.
• A vector of size n evenly spaced values between the Max and Min values was gen-
erated.
• Max pooling was done with a variable window-size based on the ppm-values in the
previous vector.
Originally this data set was intended to show how classical classification (SVM) would
not be able to handle unseen data, while the generative model would be able to handles
these observations. Sadly the different structures in data, made it a very daunting task to
implement this, therefore the open data set ended up, mainly being used for visualizations
in this report, to ensure no proprietary data would be shown.
3.2
Quantitative exploration of the data set
To get a firm grasp of the data, first step is to explore the data. The first step to take is to
plot the data, and see if there are any relevant findings already from this.
3.2.1
Exploring plot
Simply plotting the spectra is a great way to get a feel for the data3. At this point it should
already be clear, how a single observation looks like, but not how they compare to each
other. Throughout all the plots in this section, if nothing else is mentioned, green lines rep-
resent the desired material ”True samples”, and the red lines represent all other materials
”False samples”.
Global variance
First let’s explore the previously discussed global variance in the data. In Figure 3.4 is
an example of how this variance might look like, note that this is after all the manual
adjustments needed, and this variance is unavoidable. To the human eye, it is quite easy
to see that these spectra is the same shape, but simple mathematical operations will not
do any good here, since the data is so steep. The naive way to compare spectra is to just
take the difference, sadly, this will not work as can be seen in Figure 3.5, that just a small
shift, will give massive differences. This also removes the possibility to calculate mean
squared errors, since they will be even more sensitive to these differences.
It should be noted, that in the data set, way more extreme shift are present, and are still
within the tolerances visually decided by the researches at Novo Nordisk[1].
3Plots are recreated, from the open data set, to show the same conclusions as the Novo Nordisk data
set. Therefore only the mentioned conclusions should be drawn from each figure. Note also the ppm range
in these plots are arbitrarily chosen.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
25
==PAGE:34==
1.975
2.000
2.025
2.050
2.075
2.100
2.125
2.150
2.175
ppm
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Response
1e6
Example of global variance between NMR-Spectra
Figure 3.4: A synthetic example of how global variance looks like in the data set. This
example is generated to look like real examples, by manipulating a single scan.
1.975
2.000
2.025
2.050
2.075
2.100
2.125
2.150
2.175
ppm
0
2
4
6
8
Response
1e5
Difference of slightly shifted spectra
Figure 3.5: The difference from a small shift in a synthetic example. Note that the differ-
ence is as high as 2
3 of the max height seen in Figure 3.4, which is used to synthesize this
example.
26
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:35==
1.975
2.000
2.025
2.050
2.075
2.100
2.125
2.150
2.175
ppm
0
1
2
3
4
5
Response
1e6
Example of global variance between NMR-Spectra
Figure 3.6: A synthetic example of the differences of scale seen in the Novo Nordisk data
set.
The variance is not only present as a shift, there are also huge differences in the response
of similar scans, as can be seen illustrated in Figure 3.6. The reason for this height
difference is, the amount of molecules in each scan isn’t consistent. The relative integral
under each group is used to calculate the amount of similar protons that contribute the
same frequency to the NMR scan.
Local variance
The global variance should for the most part be ignored, since the same scan can vary
quite a bit, as shown in subsubsection 3.2.1, but the differences that should be picked
up, can be quite minute. The real differences to look for, is really the peaks, or even the
integral of the peaks. This is where the characteristics of the molecules exists. The local
differences are - as the name suggests - only visible, if you look at a sufficiently small
interval, as can clearly be seen in Figure 3.7. These local differences would be easy to
find, if the global differences were not present, but since the global differences are so big,
methods that can handle this variance will be best suited for this task.
These local differences are caused by actual physical differences in the molecules. The
molecules could be composed of the exact same atoms, but if a side group is bound to a
slightly different place on the molecule, the changes made to the NMR-spectrum can be
as small as these, or they could make it completely unrecognizable. If a molecule is even
just folded in a different way, the NMR spectrum might look significantly different.
Correlation between points
A way to get a feel for how similar the points are to each other, is to look at the correlation
between the points. A complete matrix with the correlation between all the data points can
be seen in Figure 3.8. Notice especially the black lines, that are the 6 scans that are far
from the desired material. Other than that, the the only observations worth noting are the
first 22. These are all scans of the desired material, but for some reason sticks out. From
looking at the correlation plot, it would seem that these scans are actually more different
from the rest of the desired materials, than most of the not desired materials. This might
be something to consider later on down the line. Asking the experts about the physical
difference in the observations, there were nothing significantly physical differences about
the molecules, that would set them apart[1]. The low correlation is due to a small shift of
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
27
==PAGE:36==
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
ppm
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Response
1e6
Local variance example
(a) A whole (simple) NMR spectrum plotted, from this scale it is not possible to see the
difference in the red and the green curve.
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
ppm
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Response
1e6
Local variance example, with little zoom
(b) A slightly zoomed version, here it becomes possible to see a slight difference, but
there is still no way of determining the what the actual difference is.
1.94
1.96
1.98
2.00
2.02
2.04
2.06
2.08
ppm
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Response
1e5
Local variance example, with great zoom
(c) A greatly zoomed in view of the spectrum, here it is clearly visible, that there are 1
more green peak, and that they are shifted right.
Figure 3.7: An illustration showing the scale of differences that actually matters when
determining exactly which molecule has been scanned. Note that these illustrations are
edited to show a point, and might not be possible in a real scan.
28
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.8: Correlation plot of the Novo Nordisk data, notice the divide in correlations.
The first 22 samples correlate well with each other, but not any other scans, while the rest
correlate well with each other. The notable exception are the dark bands, which are the
scans of materials very far from the desired material.
the peaks on the ppm axis, which is within the tolerance of the experts opinion. This can
be caused by multiple sources, from a change in machines, suppliers, procedure, and so
on.
3.2.2
Principal Component Analysis
A rather naive attempt to differentiate the data, was to do a Principal Component Analysis
(PCA), which reduces the dimensions of the data, and maximizes the variance between
the new dimensions. This allows for exploring the data in very few dimensions, in the
hopes of finding patterns. This was a success to some degree, it was clear that the very
different samples were far away from the desired materials, however, the materials that
only differed in a few atoms, were completely bundled up, and no matter the dimensions
explored there was no way of differentiating these scans from the desired ones.4
This is to be expected, since the global variance is so much greater than the differences
that actually matters. It did not matter whether the PCA was trained on all the data, only
4The actual PCA plots, can not be shown, since they contain data owned by Novo Nordisk.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.9: Test data predicted by a SVM. It is possible just barely to do a perfect discrim-
ination between the desired and not desired data. The threshold chosen is 0.72.
the desired and the ”close to desired”-scans, or just the desired scans, there was no
change in the human ability to differentiate the scans.
3.3
Discriminative classifier
The classical way to do classification is using discriminative models, such as a Support
Vector Machine (SVM). A discriminative classifier, will not perform well with unseen types
of data, like a scan of a new material, and is therefore not suited for this application. A
discriminative classifier can, however, give a upper bound for the performance that can be
expected. Since it will train on the both desired and not desired materials, it can pinpoint
the exact features, that best discriminate the data. To get this upper bound a SVM was
trained, and tested. Due to the splits made in the data set, there are no samples in the
training data, that is not desired, therefore the SVM is trained on both the training data
and the validation data. It is therefore not possible to get a generalization error, but since
the purpose simply is to see how well data can be discriminated, the error on the test data
set will do. Figure 3.9 shows the predictions for the test set, and it is possible to choose
a threshold that perfectly divides the data. This means that the data indeed does contain
the required information to discriminate the data. The model might have overfitted a little,
and the test data got lucky. Of the 79 vectors used to train the SVM 63, was chosen as
support vectors. This is not necessarily a bad thing, but it is something to keep in the back
of the head. The high number of support vectors are because of the high dimensionality
of the data.
3.4
Preliminary conclusion
The SVM results shows that it is possible to discriminate the data, i.e. the data does
contain defining features, that separate both classes. The challenge for the generative
models are, that they do not know which features to find, since they do not have the ”not
30
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:39==
desired” data to compare with, they only have the variance of the ”desired” data.
Even with the SVM the margin between classes are very narrow, which means that the
classes are indeed very hard to discriminate. The SVM used quite a lot of support vectors
because of the high dimensional data it has to describe. With these results in mind it is
not expected to get perfect results with the generative models.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
31
==PAGE:40==
4
Modeling
The aim of this chapter is to give the reader an overview of the modeling process, the
thoughts that went into the design of the models, and decisions made throughout the mod-
eling. After this chapter the reader should be able to recreate the models used throughout
this project.
4.1
Software used
The models were implemented in Python[27], using PyTorch[28] for the Neural Networks.
For general purpose analysis SciPy and NumPy[29] were used. The implementation is
written from scratch, but took inspiration in work by S. Chandel[30]. All plots are made in
Python using Matplotlib[31]. All illustrations of Neural Networks were made in Pages.
4.2
Training the models
Since the data is limited, every data point will be used multiple times. All the models are
trained using the same training scheme, which is a 3 step process. first step only uses
30 training points, this is to speed up the initial training time, since it is assumed that the
gradient in the beginning will be pretty steep, even with fewer data points. The first step
lasts for 60 epochs, with a learning rate of 10−3. The next part of the training now uses
all 70 training points, for 80 epochs, with a learning rate of 10−4. The last of the training
uses all the data, for 60 epochs, with a learning rate of 10−5. After this amount of training,
it seemed like the models was very close to convergence, as can be seen in Figure 4.1
4.3
Evaluation of models
To evaluate the models, there needs to be a measure of how well a input point fits the
trained distribution. Several score functions was presented in section 2.2, and both of
these will be used, to determine which works the best. The idea is, that the model will not
be able to recreate the input, if it does not stem from the same distribution, as the desired
data, that the model was trained on.
The scores will be evaluated on the validation data, from which it is possible to find a
threshold, that discriminate the data, based on their reconstruction score. This threshold
can now be tested on the test data set, to estimate the generalization error for that model,
with that threshold. The results will be presented in a confusion matrix, to show the pre-
diction accuracy, with the distinction between type I and type II errors. Further more a
ROC curve will be presented, to get an idea of the robustness of the model, along with
the relevant reconstruction error plot on the test data set.
4.4
Variational Auto-Encoder
For the first attempt to model the data, a simple VAE was used. Multiple VAE designs
were used, with varying number of hidden layers, and sizes of hidden layers. To get an
idea of the realm of the hyper parameters, first a full search of every combination of a few
parameters were trained, and evaluated, such that there was a foundation from which
to optimize from. Note that a few more architectures were tried out, but were either too
small and gave nonsensical results, or too complex, and thereby not viable because of
32
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.1: An example of the training error.
The dashed black line represents the
changes in the training steps. The models tries to minimize the sum of the two terms
(The purple line), which is why the blue and red lines are not as stable. For most of the
last training step (Epoch 140+), the models seems to be converged.
the training time. There are a lot of parameters due to the large input dimensionality. The
Models evaluated was every combination of:
• Latent distribution dimension
– 5,10,20,50
• One or two hidden layers
– With two hidden layers, their size were kept the same, to reduce the search
space
• Hidden layer size(s)
– 200,500,1000
This gave quite a few models, The best performing models were the most complex mod-
els, with large hidden layer(s), and a large dimensionality for the latent distribution. The
models did perform quite good, as can be seen in Figure 4.2. The problem is, that there
is not that many test points, so the results are not super reliable.
As can be seen in Figure 4.2a, there is a single type I error, which is hugely important
in this modeling. If the threshold was moved down to the lowest not desired point, most
of the desired data points would also be classified wrongly. It is therefore the aim of
the optimization to increase the distance between the classes, and reduce the variance
within each class. Note that the points 26,27,28 (Which are the samples far from the de-
sired material) have an error so high, that they could not be shown in the same plot in
Figure 4.2c.
The concern with the VAE is that would not be able to catch the patterns of the peaks
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
33
==PAGE:42==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure 4.2: Results for the VAE with one hidden layer of size 1000, (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
locally, therefore the next step is to design a VAE with this in mind, thereby introducing
the CVAE. The results for all the hyper parameters tried for the VAE can be found in
Appendix A.1, and Appendix A.2
34
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:43==
4.5
Convolutional Variational Auto-Encoder
The CVAE should solve some of the problems with the global variance. Several different
architectures were tried out, starting with the simplest possible: Just one convolutional
and a fully connected layer before the mean and variance were calculated. But as with
the regular VAEs a little search space of hyper parameters was explored, building upon
the knowledge gain in the first trials. The models trained were:
• Latent distribution dimension
– 5
• One or two hidden convolutional layers
– The layers had identical number of filters and kernel size.
• Hidden fully connected layer size(s) after the convolutional layer(s)
– 1000
Sadly this did not improve the performance of the models. Figure 4.3 shows some of
the results yielded by the CVAE models, and as can clearly be seen, the CVAE failed to
discriminate the desired points, from the not desired ones.
Since the data was already low in dimension, no stride/pooling was applied to the CVAE.
And since the models performed so poorly, this path will not be continued.
When a great leap in performance is reached in the modeling, a few CVAEs might be
trained, to see if the found optimizations will benefit the CVAEs. The results for the com-
plete search can be found in Appendix A.3 and A.4.
4.6
Variance normalization
By normalizing the data with the variance, some differences became very obvious for the
human eye. But similarly the noise becomes very dominant, and hides the actual signal.
This might be okay, since the actual signal is not important, only the differences.
The models generally performed quite poor, because even though the important differ-
ences stood out a lot in the reconstruction, the models were not able to reconstruct the
noise, yielding bad results. To remedy this a constant was added to the variance during
the normalization. This will reduce the impact of the noise, whilst keeping the signal mostly
intact. The RMSE difference is still invisible, but the MRE clearly discriminate the data
a lot better. The comparison between the addition to the variance, and the two different
measures can be seen in Figure 4.4.
Looking at Figure 4.4d this model looks to be very promising. This result certainly fulfills
most of the criteria for a model to perform well setup for this project. The problem with this
model is the robustness. The aim of the model is to compare that every peak is an exact
match to what is expected. By dividing with the variance, the peaks that are missing in
the expected data, will not be divided by very much, thereby enhancing these peaks. The
problem with this approach is, that if a peak is missing in the input, compared to the ex-
pected, the normalization will not do anything to reveal this. This all sums up to the model
being sensitive to new unexpected peaks, but not sensitive to missing peaks, which is an
equally important measure. Trying to input an empty data point (a zero-vector) will actu-
ally yield a MRE below the threshold, since there are no unexpected peaks. This could
be mitigated, by also calculating the MRE, that is calculated relative to the input, instead
of the output.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
35
==PAGE:44==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure 4.3: Results for the CVAE with 3 hidden layers, two convolutional with 16 filters,
of size 9, and a fully connected layer of size 1000, (a) is the confusion matrix for the test
data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
4.7
Smoothing the data
Instead of the dimensionality reduction applied thus far, a Savitzky-Golay filter (SG filter)
could be applied. This should have the advantage of reducing noise in contrast to enhanc-
ing it, but might also lose some information about the extreme values of the peaks/valleys,
since the points will always lie in the middle of the window, which might not correlate with
the peaks/valleys. The initial hyper parameters for the SG filters were: window size =
17, polynomial degree = 3. In addition, some extra dimensionality reduction was applied
using a max pooling of size 9.
After applying the smoothing and pooling, the models were tried both with and without
variance normalization.
36
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:45==
(a) The RMSE for the model using data that has
been variance normalized.
(b) The MRE for the model using data that has
been variance normalized.
(c) The RMSE for the model using data that has
been variance normalized, with a constant added
to the variance.
(d) The MRE for the model using data that has
been variance normalized, with a constant added
to the variance.
Figure 4.4: The Root mean squared error (RMSE) and maximum relative error (MRE) for
the VAE with 2 hidden layers of size 1000, and with a 20 dimensional latent distribution.
(a) and (b) used regular variance normalized data, while (c) and (d) added a constant to
the variance, to increase the signal to noise ratio. Notice how well (d) discriminates the
data, with the added constant, and MRE as the evaluation score.
Since the data is now 7281 dimensional, it might once again make sense to explore lower
latent dimensions once again. This means that the hyper parameters tried for the initial
VAEs on the data was:
• Latent distribution dimensionality
– 5,10,20,50
• One or two hidden layers
– With two hidden layers, their size were kept the same, to reduce the search
space.
• Hidden layer sizes
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
37
==PAGE:46==
– 500,1000
• With and without variance normalization
– The variance normalization was tried both with and without the constant added
to the variance.
These models performed very well, in that the RMSE measure can discriminate the data
in these models, giving a much more robust reconstruction error measure. The full results
from the full search space can be found in Appendix A.6, and A.5. An example of how well
these models performed can be seen in Figure 4.5. As can be seen in Figure 4.5c, this
model performed great! all the ”not desired” points were classified as so, and even with
a comfortable margin. There are, however some type II errors, in the first 4 points, which
is consistent with the validation set, as seen in Figure 4.5b. This is due to the difference
in data present back in subsubsection 3.2.1.
This data was also tried on different CVAEs, this did not perform as well as the regular
VAEs. The results can be found in Appendix A.7, .
38
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:47==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure 4.5: The performance for the VAE with 2 hidden layers of size 500, and a latent
distribution dimensionality of 5. The model used data smoothed by Savitzky-Golay filter,
and reduced in dimensionality with a max pooling. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test
data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
39
==PAGE:48==
5
Results
This chapter will give an in depth overview of the best performing models. All the models
were trained on just the scans of the desired materials. The training data consists of 70
randomly selected scans of the desired material, and both the test and validation data con-
sists of each 16 desired scans, 12 close to desired scans, and 3 far from desired scans.
This is a very small amount of data, which will have a impact of the resolution of the results.
5.1
The general NMR model
Several models fulfilled all the requirements to be a success. They were all able to cor-
rectly classify the ”not desired” data, and thereby avoid type I errors all together, with just
a few type II errors. The best models was yielded by smoothing the data first, thereby in-
creasing the signal to noise ratio. The test set gives an approximation of the generalization
error for the models, but since they all classified very similarly, the actual classification er-
ror is insignificant. Instead the measure that makes the most sense is actually how certain
the model is in it’s discrimination, which can be read from the margin between the classes
in the RMSE plots. The only points that does not get classified correctly are points from
the first 22 data points received. Those points are indeed quite different from the rest of
the desired points as explained in subsubsection 3.2.1. This means that the models are
actually performing perfect, both on the validation set and the test set, as will be explained
in subsection 6.1.1. The best performing model was a 2 layered VAE, with both hidden
layers of size 500, and a latent distribution dimensionality of 5, which is the one depicted
in Figure 4.5, where the confusion matrix shows the exact result the project set out to
reach, with no type I errors and low type II error rate. The ROC curve tells the same story
for the validation set as the RMSE plot shows for the test data, that only a few desired
points are classified wrongly.
Since the model makes a recreation, it is possible to compare the input point to the output
of the model, and from that determine where the reconstruction was not able to perform
well. Since the differences are so different in their response, this should be expressed
as a relative error. Pin pointing this enables experts to precisely figure out what is wrong
with the scan, and make an informed decision about the significance of the difference.
Figure 5.1 shows a synthetic example, of what those plots look like. The green bar under
the spectrum is an indication of the relative reconstruction error, where red means the
reconstruction is bad. Notice that one peak has a green bar underneath it, meaning that
this particular peak would be present in the normal state, that the model trained on. The
other peak, however, has a red marking, meaning that the peak was not present in the
normal state, and thus, the model could not reconstruct that peak. Finally, there is a red
marking in the middle of nowhere. This means that the there should be a peak present
according to the normal state.
5.1.1
Modeling directly on the data
To gauge the performance of the improvements, a model was trained on the data set
with the full dimensionality, which took significantly longer to train. The performance was
actually worse than the low dimensional data as can be seen in Figure 5.2, suggesting
that no significant loss of information took place. The best performing models with the full
dimensional data, actually had a larger latent dimensionality, which also resulted in the
40
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.1: A synthetic example of how the local relative error can shown. The bar at the
bottom indicated the relative reconstruction error at that point.
model being able to correctly learn the distribution of the first 22 data points, described in
subsubsection 3.2.1. The model did not achieve the great division like the dimensionality
reduced model. The complete set of results for the models using the full dimension can
be seen in Appendix A.9
5.2
Models specialized for the data set
There are several insights brought to our attention by the researchers at Novo Nordisk,
allowing for specialized alterations in the modeling for this exact purpose. First of all, mul-
tiple peaks in the data are reference materials, that should be disregarded by the model,
and secondly all of the scans that are to be classified as ”not desired” lack a specific ref-
erence material. Because of the model actually being able to discriminate well on this
specific reference peak, it turned out to be quite significant in the models. A naive ap-
proach to make the models independent of this peak, would be to simply remove it. If this
was done physically it might actually impact the rest of the scan, and is therefore not a
robust way of generally handling the reference materials, but it gives a general idea of the
performance that the model can obtain, without this very significant peak, that the model
possibly should have ignored.
Armed with this insight, some models were trained without any reference materials, in-
stead of the general problem originally trying to fulfill. This is done by setting the values
to 0 where reference materials are showing up. The results for this model is shown in
Figure 5.3, the model is still able to split the undesired from the desired. But it isn’t as
good as the general model where the reference materials weren’t removed, as seen in
Figure 4.5.
As can be seen in Figure 5.3, the model actually perform quite decently on the test set.
The ROC curve in Figure 5.3b tells quite a different story. In the validation set, the classes
were clearly a bit more mixed.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
41
==PAGE:50==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure 5.2: Results for the VAE with one hidden layer of size 500, and a latent dimension
of 50, trained on the raw data set. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the
ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
42
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:51==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure 5.3: The performance for the VAE with 2 hidden layers of size 500, and a latent
distribution dimensionality of 5, where a reference material has been removed from the
dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation
data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
43
==PAGE:52==
6
Discussion
This chapter should give the reader amble opportunity to reflect over the results, as well as
challenges met along the way. The aim is to discuss the results and the models as objec-
tive as possible, as well as giving some pointers towards what could improve the models,
or discuss which alternatives there exists. After reading this chapter, the reader should
be well inform about the decisions made with the results, and have a logical reasoning for
the conclusions drawn throughout this project.
6.1
Data
NMR data is generally quite nice to work with. one dimensional, numerical data generally
does not require too much manipulation before hand. The manipulation that was done to
the data, namely applying the Fourier transformation and the phase shift was easy to vali-
date, since there was hand corrected versions of these already in the data set. NMR data
is generally quite high dimensional, which is great! There is a lot of correlation between
adjacent data points, allowing for reducing the dimensionality quite a lot naively, and still
retaining most of the information.
The data quality was generally high, with no missing values in the data set, and all of the
necessary meta data, included for every data point worked with in this project.
6.1.1
The Novo Nordisk data set
Unfortunately the amount of data provided by Novo Nordisk was quite limited, consisting
of only 168 scans, of which more than 20 %, was unusable, as explained in subsec-
tion 3.1.1. The limited amount of data provided did impact the modeling. Not necessarily
as expected, as the models were able to train pretty well, by training on the same scans
multiple times. The biggest limitation from the amount of data was, the resolution of the
results. A classic way to split data into multiple sets, is to split it 3-ways, namely a training
set, a validation set, and a test set. Common ratios for these are: 60-80 % train, 10-20
% validation, and 10-20 % test[32]. the problem with this is that there are only 6 scans in
the data set, that is far from the desired material, and 24 scans that are not the desired
material. This is remedied a lot by the fact, that the generative models only needs to train
on the desired materials, allowing for a 50/50 split of not desired materials, in each of
the validation and test sets. This does, however, still mean that the resolution for very
different scans only are 3 in each set, yielding less than desirable trust in the results. The
close to desirable materials does a little better with 12 in each set. Of course a resolution
of 12 data points is not great, but it does give a more trustworthy estimate.
It turned out, that the data set contained a lot of observations originally intended for qual-
itative analysis of the materials i.e. analysis of the level of contamination in the material.
To do this analysis, a known quantity of a know substance has to be added, such that the
peaks integrals can be compared. This substance is thereby only present if the obser-
vation was intended for qualitative analysis, which is not the case for the data the model
should predict on. This added substance turned out to be present in 90 % of the samples
of the desired materials. The only desired materials, that did not contain this reference
material was within the first 22 observations i.e. the ones that don’t correlate well with the
rest of the data set.
The added substance should only result in a peak at one place in the spectrum, thus not
44
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:53==
interfering with the rest of the spectrum. With the data not being exactly what the model
is actually supposed to predict on this leaves two options, either leave the data as is, and
develop a general model that works generally on spectral data, or remove the peak to
mimic the data, that the models are supposed to predict on. This brings up the question
of how to remove a peak. If the substance wasn’t added to the sample, the peak would
be missing, but there would still be noise. In this project it was chosen to set it to zero
where the peaks were removed, on all samples, even when the peak wasn’t present, so
the interval would have no influence on the model. Another possibility would had been to
remove the range from the data set, which would end up reducing the dimensionality.
6.1.2
Applying the open data set
The open data set had a few problems, that were not foreseen. First of all, the data con-
tained unique scans, meaning there no way of training a generative model, since there
were no similar scans, to train the variance from. A such model would be extremely over
fitted to that one point.
Using scans from this data set, as test and validation data points sadly was not feasible
either, since the resolution of the scans were quite different from the Novo Nordisk data
set, meaning that the references would not match up as expected, and the size of the
input vector would not fit the models trained.
The main purpose of the open data set therefore became visualization and general un-
derstanding of the technology.
6.2
Models
The discussion of modeling will be separated into the same two parts as the results. This
is due to the fact, that the specialized model has some very different limitations and ap-
plications. It makes more sense to treat these models completely separate.
6.2.1
The general models
The models found seems to perform great. They have eliminated type I errors, and cap-
tures most of the samples belonging to the normal state. One must, however, still keep
in mind that the accuracy found for the models are bare estimations of the generalization
error, and with this little data, it does not seem feasible to divide the data further.
In Figure 4.5 the model correctly classified all the not desired materials, which was the
aim of the project. The confusion matrix seen in Figure 4.5a shows that about 80 % of the
data points classified as ”not desired”, are indeed in this class. Upon consultation with
experts [1], many of these points will eventually have to be included in the normal state,
but since they are currently not accepted, the model predicted exactly as it should.
Most of the models failed to get good predictions for the first 22 points in the data set (With
3 of these values in the validation set, and 4 in the test set). There is something physi-
cally different about these samples, and since there were such a low amount of them, the
models never got the chance to properly learn the intricacies of these samples. They look
as different to the model, as the samples that are very close the the desired material. It
should be possible to allow these data points in the normal state, it would simply require
some handling of unbalanced data, such as sampling (Since the topic of generative mod-
els are already at play, SMOTE oversampling by generating new data of the small class,
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
45
==PAGE:54==
could be an obvious solution), or weighting the error function to account for the unbalance.
When the system is to be implemented in real life, the flagged scans would need to be
checked by a scientist, to determine what the difference means physically, and whether
that means the material should be discarded. When enough flagged data has been col-
lected, that should physically be accepted, the model can be retrained with this data in the
data set, again some handling of unbalanced data might be necessary, but this should
allow to augment the model to include these data tendencies in the normal state.
The main reason that generative modeling was chosen, was to ensure that new unseen
data, would for sure be rejected. In the hopes of getting an unbiased estimate for the
generalization error, some more data was made accessible, that was collected during the
modeling process. This data used a different internal standard (i.e. different reference
material), than what the model was trained on, and also included a scan of a previously
unseen raw material. All of these points were rejected by the model, which again is exactly
the desired behavior. The model is currently trained on a very narrow range of data, and
it is not known exactly, how the sensitivity of the model would be affected by augmenting
the normal state.
If this model is to be implemented, some broader validation of the results would have to
be carried out - especially for the pharmaceutical industry, where misclassification of the
raw materials could have fatal consequences. For this reason, it might also be better to
train multiple models, one for each internal standard, for each material, since the normal
state in that case would be kept ”tight”.
CNNs
The CNNs were introduced to get more local spacial awareness in the models. This could
help the models by acting as a peak(/valley) detection, but unfortunately performed quite
poorly. This was noticed early on, and the CNNs actually took significantly longer to train.
Since they performed poorly, and required more computational resources, these were
discontinued quite early on in the process. The hyper parameters therefore never got
tuned nearly as much as for the FFNNs, and thus they might actually be able to perform
better than the results found in this project.
As the model performance was increased, especially when more data manipulation led to
increased performance, a few CNNs were trained, just to see if they some how benefited
more from the changes. It was never the case, that significant improvements were made
for CNNs. The results for the CNNs are available in Appendix A.3, A.4, and A.7.
6.2.2
The specialized models
The general model performed great on the data as given, and solves the problem as it
was stated. The data set is a mixture of scans done for identification of molecules (As this
project tries to achieve) and qualitative analysis, determining the purity of the materials.
Simply removing this peak should be all that is needed to transform the data to a scan
used in identification. The problem with this approach is, that suddenly the data set is
being manipulated specifically for the problem, thus the model will not generalize to other
spectra. The results for the models on this version of the data set did not perform as well
as the models on the full data set. This implies that the reference material added was a
good predictor.
Since one reference material was removed, there is no reason to keep the others. There
46
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:55==
are essentially 4 signals, that can be ignored. The first is the peak used for qualitative
analysis, as discussed earlier, the second is a peak used to define 0 ppm for the spectrum,
the third is residue from the solvent, and the fourth is the water contained in the solvent.
These are the materials that the model should ignore[1]. This actually also yielded decent
results. The margin in Figure 5.3 (removed reference materials peaks) is not as large as
in Figure 4.5 (best generalized model). But the model was still able to discriminate the
points very well. To ensure no type I errors appear, a more conservative way to chose
the threshold might be necessary. In general it would be better to train the model on
the actual data it will encounter instead of mimicking data to look like it, and if the model
were trained/tested on data that it will actually encounter, it might perform slightly different.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
47
==PAGE:56==
7
Conclusion
We managed to create a model that could discriminate the data very well. Problems with
the data set, like not truly having the data, the model should learn, and few points for
validation/testing, means that the credibility of the models are not the greatest, but the es-
timations of the generalization error proved to give very good models, that gave no type I
errors and only 19 % type II errors, that was caused by a different physical phenomena,
and we therefore argue, that these errors are to be expected, with the data set provided.
We found that the best performing model was a VAE, with a quite small latent dimension-
ality. This does make sense, considering the data. The peaks always appear at the same
place, and are proportionally similar in height.
7.1
Future work
There are several paths forward for this project. First of all, a proper data set, with the
data the model would actually train/predict on is vital for the use of this model in a phar-
maceutical production line.
Secondly, the models Could be tuned further. To limit the amount of models to train we
never tried for than 2 hidden layers in the VAEs, and those to layers were always of the
same size, and the only activation function tried was ReLU. These limitations could be
removed to possibly improve model performance.
Thirdly, the idea of including convolutional layers could be revisited, with more computa-
tional resources to tune them.
Further more, there exists a lot of regularizations for neural networks, that can help make
the model robust.
Finally, trying the model architecture on other types of spectral data would be interesting,
to see if the models really generalizes as well as we hope.
48
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Johnny Birch, Joan Malmstrøm, and William Haarder. Personal interviews with re-
searchers at Novo Nordisk. 2020.
[2]
P.O. Hansen, B. Jonson, and A. Richter. “Applications of statistical nuclear physics
to nuclear spectroscopy”. In: Nuclear Physics A 518.1-2 (Nov. 1990), pp. 13–34.
ISSN: 03759474. DOI: 10.1016/0375-9474(90)90532-Q. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/037594749090532Q.
[3]
Peter Pelican, Michal Ceppan, and Marek Liska. Applications of numerical methods
in molecular spectroscopy. 1994. ISBN: 0-8493-7322-0.
[4]
Paul Guerry, Viet Dung Duong, and Torsten Herrmann. “CASD-NMR 2: Robust and
accurate unsupervised analysis of raw NOESY spectra and protein structure deter-
mination with UNIO”. In: Journal of Biomolecular NMR 62.4 (2015), pp. 473–480.
ISSN: 15735001. DOI: 10.1007/s10858-015-9934-7.
[5]
Chunkai Zhang and Yingyang Chen. “Time Series Anomaly Detection with Varia-
tional Autoencoders”. In: 2 (2019). URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.01702.
[6]
Carl Doersch. “Tutorial on Variational Autoencoders”. In: (2016), pp. 1–23. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.05908.
[7]
An Jinwon and Cho Sungzoon. “Variational Autoencoder based Anomaly Detection
using Reconstruction Probability”. In: (2015).
[8]
Yifan Guo et al. “Multidimensional Time Series Anomaly Detection: A GRU-based
Gaussian Mixture Variational Autoencoder Approach”. In: Asian Conference on Ma-
chine Learning 95.2001 (2018), pp. 97–112.
[9]
Jayadeva et al. “Twin Neural Networks for the classification of large unbalanced
datasets”. In: Neurocomputing 343 (2019), pp. 34–49. ISSN: 18728286. DOI: 10.
1016/j.neucom.2018.07.089. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2018.07.089.
[10]
Jinchao Liu et al. “Dynamic spectrum matching with one-shot learning”. In: Chemo-
metrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 184.December 2018 (2019), pp. 175–
181. ISSN: 18733239. DOI: 10.1016/j.chemolab.2018.12.005. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemolab.2018.12.005.
[11]
Morgan Paull and Stanford Bioengineering. “A Cellular Similarity Metric Induced by
Siamese Convolutional Neural Networks”. In: Standford (2016), pp. 1–6.
[12]
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. “Auto-encoding variational bayes”. In: 2nd
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2014 - Conference
Track Proceedings Ml (2014), pp. 1–14.
[13]
Chang David. “Leveraging Latent Information in Nmr Spectra”. In: Pacific Sympo-
sium on Biocomputing 126 (2007), pp. 115–126.
[14]
L. Gougeon et al. “1H NMR metabolomics applied to Bordeaux red wines”. In: Food
Chemistry (2019). ISSN: 18737072. DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2019.125257.
[15]
K. Veselkov et al. “Statistical Tools for Molecular Covariance Spectroscopy”. In: En-
cyclopedia of Spectroscopy and Spectrometry. 2017. ISBN: 9780128032244. DOI:
10.1016/B978-0-12-409547-2.12113-4.
[16]
Jorge Costa Pereira, Ivana Jarak, and Rui Albuquerque Carvalho. “Resolving NMR
signals of short-chain fatty acid mixtures using unsupervised component analysis”.
In: Magnetic Resonance in Chemistry 55.10 (2017), pp. 936–943. ISSN: 1097458X.
DOI: 10.1002/mrc.4606.
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
49
==PAGE:58==
[17]
Andrew Gordon Wilson et al. “Bayesian Inference for NMR Spectroscopy with Ap-
plications to Chemical Quantification”. In: 1992 (2014), pp. 1–26. URL: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1402.3580.
[18]
Piotr Klukowski et al. “NMRNet: A deep learning approach to automated peak pick-
ing of protein NMR spectra”. In: Bioinformatics (2018). ISSN: 14602059. DOI: 10.
1093/bioinformatics/bty134.
[19]
Gail M. Pesyna et al. “Probability Based Matching System Using a Large Collection
of Reference Mass Spectra”. In: Analytical Chemistry 48.9 (1976), pp. 1362–1368.
ISSN: 15206882. DOI: 10.1021/ac50003a026.
[20]
J. Meiler, R. Meusinger, and M. Will. “Fast determination of 13C NMR chemical shifts
using artificial neural networks”. In: Journal of Chemical Information and Computer
Sciences 40.5 (2000), pp. 1169–1176. ISSN: 00952338. DOI: 10.1021/ci000021c.
[21]
V. Kvasniĉka. “An application of neural networks in chemistry. Prediction of13C
NMR chemical shifts”. In: Journal of Mathematical Chemistry 6.1 (1991), pp. 63–76.
ISSN: 15728897. DOI: 10.1007/BF01192574.
[22]
Jens Meiler et al. “Using neural networks for 13C NMR chemical shift prediction-
comparison with traditional methods”. In: Journal of Magnetic Resonance 157.2
(2002), pp. 242–252. ISSN: 10907807. DOI: 10.1006/jmre.2002.2599.
[23]
Zinan Lin et al. “PacGan: The power of two samples in generative adversarial net-
works”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2018-Decem.NeurIPS
(2018), pp. 1498–1507. ISSN: 10495258.
[24]
Abraham Savitzky and Marcel J.E. Golay. “Smoothing and Differentiation of Data
by Simplified Least Squares Procedures”. In: Analytical Chemistry 36.8 (1964),
pp. 1627–1639. ISSN: 15206882. DOI: 10.1021/ac60214a047.
[25]
Ronald W Schafer. “What Is a Savitzky-Golay Filter? [Lecture Notes]”. In: July (2011),
pp. 111–117.
[26]
Li Chen et al. “An efficient algorithm for automatic phase correction of NMR spectra
based on entropy minimization”. In: Journal of Magnetic Resonance 158.1-2 (2002),
pp. 164–168. ISSN: 10907807. DOI: 10.1016/S1090-7807(02)00069-1.
[27]
Guido Van Rossum and Fred L. Drake. Python 3 Reference Manual. Scotts Valley,
CA: CreateSpace, 2009. ISBN: 1441412697.
[28]
Adam Paszke et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learn-
ing Library”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32. Ed. by H.
Wallach et al. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019, pp. 8024–8035. URL: http://papers.
neurips.cc/paper/9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-
library.pdf.
[29]
Pauli Virtanen et al. “SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing
in Python”. In: Nature Methods 17 (2020), pp. 261–272. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
[30]
Shubham Chandel. pytorch-vae. https://github.com/sksq96/pytorch-vae. May 2018.
[31]
J. D. Hunter. “Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment”. In: Computing in Science &
Engineering 9.3 (2007), pp. 90–95. DOI: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55.
[32]
Rachel Draelos. glassboxmedicine. Sept. 2019. URL: https : / / glassboxmedicine .
com/2019/09/15/best-use-of-train-val-test-splits-with-tips-for-medical-data/.
50
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:59==
A
Results
A.1
VAE 1 hidden layer
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.1: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and one hidden layer of size
1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix
for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test
points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
51
==PAGE:60==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.2: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and one hidden layer of size
1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing, and variance normalization.
(a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data,
(c) is the RMSE for all test points
52
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:61==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.3: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and one hidden layer of size
200, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix
for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test
points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
53
==PAGE:62==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.4: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and one hidden layer of size
500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix
for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test
points
54
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:63==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.5: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and one hidden layer of size
500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing, and variance normalization.
(a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data,
(c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
55
==PAGE:64==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.6: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and one hidden layer of size
1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix
for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test
points
56
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:65==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.7: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and one hidden layer of size
1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing, and variance normalization.
(a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data,
(c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
57
==PAGE:66==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.8: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and one hidden layer of size
200, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix
for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test
points
58
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:67==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.9: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and one hidden layer of size
500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix
for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test
points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
59
==PAGE:68==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.10: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and one hidden layer of size
500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing, and variance normalization.
(a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data,
(c) is the RMSE for all test points
60
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:69==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.11: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and one hidden layer of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
61
==PAGE:70==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.12: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and one hidden layer of size
1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing, and variance normalization.
(a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data,
(c) is the RMSE for all test points
62
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:71==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.13: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and one hidden layer of
size 200, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
63
==PAGE:72==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.14: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and one hidden layer of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
64
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:73==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.15: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and one hidden layer of size
500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing, and variance normalization.
(a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data,
(c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
65
==PAGE:74==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.16: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and one hidden layer of size
1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix
for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test
points
66
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:75==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.17: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and one hidden layer of size
200, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix
for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test
points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
67
==PAGE:76==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.18: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and one hidden layer of size
500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix
for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test
points
68
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:77==
A.2
VAE 2 hidden layers
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.19: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and two hidden layers of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
69
==PAGE:78==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.20: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and two hidden layers of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing, and variance normal-
ization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation
data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
70
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:79==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.21: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and two hidden layers of
size 200, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
71
==PAGE:80==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.22: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and two hidden layers of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
72
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:81==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.23: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and two hidden layers of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing, and variance normal-
ization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation
data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
73
==PAGE:82==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.24: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and two hidden layers of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
74
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:83==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.25: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and two hidden layers of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing, and variance normal-
ization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation
data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
75
==PAGE:84==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.26: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and two hidden layers of
size 200, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
76
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:85==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.27: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and two hidden layers of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
77
==PAGE:86==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.28: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and two hidden layers of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing, and variance normal-
ization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation
data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
78
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:87==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.29: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and two hidden layers of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
79
==PAGE:88==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.30: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and two hidden layers of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing, and variance normal-
ization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation
data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
80
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:89==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.31: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and two hidden layers of
size 200, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
81
==PAGE:90==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.32: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and two hidden layers of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
82
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:91==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.33: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and two hidden layers of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing, and variance normal-
ization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation
data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
83
==PAGE:92==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.34: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and two hidden layers of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
84
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:93==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.35: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and two hidden layers of
size 200, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
85
==PAGE:94==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.36: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and two hidden layers of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion
matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for
all test points
86
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:95==
A.3
CVAE 1 convolutional hidden layer
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.37: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5, one convolution layer, con-
sisting of 16 kernels and a kernelsize of 9, and one hidden layer of size K9, this is on the
dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
87
==PAGE:96==
A.4
CVAE 2 convolutional hidden layers
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.38: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5, two convolution layer, con-
sisting of 16 kernels and a kernelsize of 9, and one hidden layer of size 1000, this is on the
dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
88
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:97==
A.5
Savizky-Golay VAE 1 hidden layer
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.39: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and one hidden layer of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
89
==PAGE:98==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.40: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and one hidden layer of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
90
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:99==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.41: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and one hidden layer of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window pre-
processing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
91
==PAGE:100==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.42: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and one hidden layer of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window pre-
processing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b)
is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
92
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:101==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.43: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and one hidden layer of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
93
==PAGE:102==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.44: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and one hidden layer of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
94
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:103==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.45: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and one hidden layer of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window pre-
processing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
95
==PAGE:104==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.46: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and one hidden layer of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window pre-
processing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b)
is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
96
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:105==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.47: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and one hidden layer of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
97
==PAGE:106==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.48: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and one hidden layer of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
98
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:107==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.49: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and one hidden layer of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window pre-
processing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
99
==PAGE:108==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.50: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and one hidden layer of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window pre-
processing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b)
is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
100
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:109==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.51: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and one hidden layer of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
101
==PAGE:110==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.52: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and one hidden layer of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
102
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:111==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.53: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and one hidden layer of size
500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window prepro-
cessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation
data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
103
==PAGE:112==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.54: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and one hidden layer of size
500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window prepro-
cessing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is
the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
104
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:113==
A.6
Savizky-Golay VAE 2 hidden layers
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.55: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and two hidden layers
of size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
105
==PAGE:114==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.56: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and two hidden layers
of size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
106
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:115==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.57: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and two hidden layers
of size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
107
==PAGE:116==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.58: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and two hidden layers
of size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
108
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:117==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.59: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and two hidden layers
of size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
109
==PAGE:118==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.60: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and two hidden layers
of size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
110
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:119==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.61: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and two hidden layers
of size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
111
==PAGE:120==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.62: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and two hidden layers
of size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
112
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:121==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.63: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and two hidden layers
of size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
113
==PAGE:122==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.64: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and two hidden layers
of size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
114
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:123==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.65: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and two hidden layers
of size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
115
==PAGE:124==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.66: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and two hidden layers
of size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
116
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:125==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.67: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and two hidden layers of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the
validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
117
==PAGE:126==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.68: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and two hidden layers of
size 1000, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window
preprocessing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data,
(b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
118
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:127==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.69: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and two hidden layers of size
500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window prepro-
cessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation
data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
119
==PAGE:128==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.70: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and two hidden layers of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window pre-
processing, with variance normalization. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b)
is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
120
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:129==
A.7
Savizky-Golay CVAE 2 hidden layers
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.71: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20, two convolution layer,
consisting of 16 kernels and a kernelsize of 9, and two hidden layer of size 500, this is
on the dataset with the Naive data preprocessing. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test
data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
121
==PAGE:130==
A.8
Savizky-Golay 2 hidden layers, with reference material
removed.
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.72: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 2 and two hidden layers of
size 100, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window pre-
processing. With all reference material removed. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test
data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
122
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:131==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.73: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 3 and two hidden layers of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window pre-
processing. With all reference material removed. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test
data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
123
==PAGE:132==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.74: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 5 and two hidden layers of
size 500, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window pre-
processing. With all reference material removed. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test
data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
124
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:133==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.75: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 7 and two hidden layers of
size 800, this is on the dataset with the Savitzky-Golay filter + Max Pooling window pre-
processing. With all reference material removed. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test
data, (b) is the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
125
==PAGE:134==
A.9
Models on raw, full dimensional data set
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.76: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and one hidden layer of
size 1000, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is
the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
126
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:135==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.77: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and one hidden layer of
size 2000, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is
the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
127
==PAGE:136==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.78: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and one hidden layer of
size 500, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the
ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
128
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:137==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.79: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and one hidden layer of
size 1000, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is
the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
129
==PAGE:138==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.80: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and one hidden layer of
size 2000, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is
the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
130
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:139==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.81: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and one hidden layer of
size 500, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the
ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
131
==PAGE:140==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.82: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and one hidden layer of
size 1000, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is
the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
132
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:141==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.83: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and one hidden layer of
size 2000, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is
the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
133
==PAGE:142==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.84: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 50 and one hidden layer of
size 500, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the
ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
134
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:143==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.85: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and two hidden layers of
size 1000, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is
the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
135
==PAGE:144==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.86: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and two hidden layers of
size 2000, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is
the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
136
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:145==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.87: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 10 and two hidden layers of
size 500, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the
ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
137
==PAGE:146==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.88: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and two hidden layers of
size 1000, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is
the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
138
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:147==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.89: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and two hidden layers of
size 2000, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is
the ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
139
==PAGE:148==
(a) The confusion matrix on the test data, this
should estimate the generalized accuracy of the
model.
(b) The ROC curve, showing how well the valida-
tion data could be discriminated.
(c) The RMSE plot on the test data
Figure A.90: Results for the VAE with latent dimensionality 20 and two hidden layers of
size 500, this is on the raw dataset. (a) is the confusion matrix for the test data, (b) is the
ROC curve on the validation data, (c) is the RMSE for all test points
140
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
==PAGE:149==
A deep learning approach to NMR analysis
141
==PAGE:150==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
