==PAGE:1==
Systems Genomics Methods to Detect
eQTLs and Genes Influencing Pain
Response in Migraine Patients
Mikkel Ammentorp Storm (s143846)
Master of Science in Engineering
2019-2020
==PAGE:2==
Systems Genomics Methods to Detect eQTLs and Genes Influencing Pain
Response in Migraine Patients
Report written by:
Mikkel Ammentorp Storm (s143846)
Advisors:
Lisette Kogelman
Thomas Hansen
Haja Kadarmideen
Danish Headache Center
Valdemar Hansens Vej
Glostrup hospital
2600 Glostrup
Project period:
2nd September 2019 to 28th of September 2020
ECTS:
35
Education:
Master of Science (M.Sc)
Field:
Bioinformatics and systems biology
ii
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Pain can have a great impact on life quality and is both expensive to treat and expensive
in regards to loss of work efficiency. As such it is important to study pain and pain treat-
ments. As an alternative to the difficult top down analysis of the complex pain matrix, a
genome wise association studies (GWAS) can be performed. This is computationally sim-
ple and fast using expressive quantitative trait loci (eQTL) methods, but GWAS studies
entail large costs in sampling.
To lower the costs of GWASs, small sample intervention studies can be tested. These offer
a baseline for correction and can be used to map changes in gene expression. This is a
good way to limit the genes studied and remove noise. Currently there are no eQLT tools
or publications on intervention eQTL studies. As it is novel the field has to be explored
before a meaningful analysis can be performed. To achieve this, the capability of existing
methods to analyze intervention studies is tested. A novel linear model specifically for
intervention studies is proposed, tested and compared to existing tools. The goal is to
utilize the full potential of the intervention studies.
An interesting way to analyze intervention studies is a linear model with an interaction
term between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) and the base line expression. The
interaction term corrects for baseline measures that cancel out the eQTL effect. The
tested solution has the potential to find relevant genes, but produces a high false posi-
tive rate that needs correction. Therefor MatrixEQTL with linear model is currently the
best fit for small samples, even though it does not use the full potential of the interven-
tion studies. It is recommended for samples below 25 subjects to filter the minor allele
frequency (MAF) at minimum 30% and missing genotypes at max 10%.
iii
==PAGE:4==
iv
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction to pain and genome studies
1
1.1
Aims of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Materials and methods for transcriptome collection and analysis
7
2.1
Blood sampling and RNA sequencing for transcriptome mapping . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Paired-end Illumina sequencing of RNA strands . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Sequencing quality control and sequence filtering
. . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.3
Sequence mapping to transcriptome using Kallisto algorithm . . . .
10
2.2
Transcriptome and genome preprocessing for analysis . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Power simulation to optimize genotype and transcriptome filtering .
12
2.2.2
Method and parameters for genotype and transcriptome filtering
.
14
2.2.3
Normalization of transcriptome expression levels . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.4
Transformation between file formats for GWAS analysis. . . . . . .
16
2.3
Tools and models for eQLT analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.1
MatrixEQTL tool presentation and parameter setup
. . . . . . . .
17
2.3.2
FastQTL tool presentation and parameter setup . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.3
Experimental linear model with interaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.4
Model evaluation and comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
Snakemake as pipeline tool for bioinformatic analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5
Summary of materials and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
Results of eQTL predictions, model fitness and simulations of filtering.
23
3.1
Filtering of genotypes and gene gxpressions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.1
Simulated optimal minor allele frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.2
The effect of dominant alleles on power simulations
. . . . . . . .
25
3.1.3
Optimal sample size simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.4
Impact of filtering on multiple testing rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
v
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
3.2
eQTL predcition and model to data fitness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.1
Linear models eQTL predictions and assumption compliance . . . .
28
3.2.2
ANOVA models eQTL predictions and assumption compliance . . .
30
3.2.3
Similarities between ANOVA and Linear models . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2.4
Cross models eQTL predictions and assumption compliance
. . . .
34
3.2.5
Interaction models eQTL predictions and assumption compliance .
36
3.3
Summary of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4
Discussion of model performance and proposed improvements
41
4.1
Unapplied tools for eQLT analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Studies involving paired tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Linear models data fit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
ANOVA models data misfit and p-value skew
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.5
Similarities between ANOVA and Linear models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.6
Cross models data fitness and multiple testing vulnerability
. . . . . . . .
45
4.7
Interaction models data fitness and skewed p-values . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.8
Possible future works and ideas for improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Concussion of method evaluation and data preparation
49
Bibliography
i
Appendix
vii
5.1
Read sliced data into R
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
5.2
MatrixEQTL analysis code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
x
5.3
Correcting p-value from fastQTL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xii
5.4
Interaction model code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
vi
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to pain and genome
studies
Pain has tremendous impact on society and it difficult to understand using traditional
methods. It is affecting both personal well being and the economy. This illustrates the
importance of studying pain and how it can improve lives, general health and the economy.
As pain is a highly individual experience, the genetic differences between people might
have an impact on the effect of similar stimuli. This section will introduce some history of
genetic studies and how improving these can yield a great benefits. Expressive quantitative
trait loci (eQTL) will be presented as a method for qualifying the genomic effects gene
expression. Finally the aim of this thesis will be defined and the boundaries of the work
specified.
Up to 20% of the population is affected by pain at any time and around 19% of the
population suffers from chronic pain [1, 2]. Pain in a physiological sense is an unpleasant
sensation, usually connected with potential or actual tissue damage. It is a motivation
for withdrawal from, or avoidance of, the pain source. The pain response is triggered in
specialised sensory neurons known as nociceptors. Nociceptors react to specific stimuli,
such as thermal, mechanical or chemical reactions on the effected tissue. Nociceptors
signal the central nervous system (CNS), where the pain signal is processed and a response
is calculated [1, 2, 3].
Pain has tremendous human and economic costs. In USA the cost of treating chronic and
persistent pain was an estimated $560 to $635 billion in 2010. The Swedish healthcare
system spend an average €2650 annually per patient with chronic pain [3].
Aside from the direct cost of symptom treating pain, there is also a loss in work efficiency
and quality of free time. Pain outbreaks lead to an average 4.5 sick days semiannually for
workers with chronic pain [4]. With an average of more than 80 pain outbreaks per person
1
==PAGE:8==
semiannually, the patient works through the pain more often than not. This results in
lowered performance during pain outbreaks, which is hard to quantify. In regards to work
performance, it has been estimated that an additional 12 full days of work lost, or around
15% loss in efficiency [4]. In Sweden the average loss in workforce productivity per patient
is €6429 annually [4].
Independently of country and health care system it is currently very expensive to treat
pain, as it is often life long symptom treatment. The existing treatments are inadequate
as the loss in work efficiency is still great [3].
Even more damming to the patient is the loss in quality of life. The actual health related
quality of life (HRQoL) loss due to pain can be difficult to quantify. Even mild pain,
which is rated 1-3 out of 10 can significantly reduce the HRQoL. It has such an impact,
that subjects from a representative group of USA’s chronic pain patients on average were
willing to give up 23% of their life expectancy to live without the pain [5].
Historically pain has been treated with opium from the opium poppy, salicylic acid from
willow bark and other natural remedies. Some of these have been refined or chemically
synthesized, to produce modern pain killers such as morphine, codeine and acetylsalicylic
acid. Aside from these an array of anti-inflammatory, antidepressant or epilepsy medicine
which also have pain killing effects have been developed. These drugs either only have
limited effects, or they have severe side affects such as lethargic behavior and addiction
[6, 7, 8].
Aside from medical intervention the patient is also able to regulate their well-being with
a healthy lifestyle including exercise [9]. It is a benefit to the body in general and can
often help with pain in a way that is not fully understood. Other mental exercises such
as writing a pain journal and meditation can also help cooping with the pain [9]. The
effect of these methods are highly individual.
A few people can be helped with source treatments such as ergotherapy, physiotherapy or
surgical intervention, but these options are limited to the few conditions where the source
is known and to a degree recoverable.
This illustrates the value in treating pain and developing new treatments. Most treatments
are general purpose symptom treatments, meaning that the effectiveness will vary. The
lack of understanding of pain and its treatments leads to much trial and error, resulting
in people being in pain longer or indefinitely. To better help, a deeper understanding
of pain on an individual level is needed. Understanding the genetic component of pain,
through genome and transcriptome analysis, may reveal a solution.
Unlike other sensory modalities such as sight, hearing and smell, the processing of pain
2
==PAGE:9==
is distributed across many different and varying regions of the brain. The severity of the
pain experience can be thought of as a pain matrix between noceceptive nerve input and
cognitive state of the subject [10]. Given the complexity of analysing pain perception
from the perspective of the brain, the studies until now have mostly focused on genes
involved in the peripheral nervous system signaling of pain [2].
This work focuses on the genetic expression effect of nociceptive pain, more specifically
cold thermal pain, as this is inflicted while doing cold pressor tests [11].
A cold pressor test is a low tech solution to inflict non-damaging noceceptive pain in a
standardized way. Ice and water is mixed, to achieve 0°C, before the subjects hand is
submerged in the ice bath for up to 10 min. If the pain gets too intense, the test subject
is allowed to remove the hand before the time is up. Traditionally this test is conducted
while measuring blood pressure and heart rate to get a phenotype response to the induced
pain. The subject is also asked to rate the pain experienced, often on a scale of 1 to 10.
In this thesis the traditional measures have been replaced with mRNA sequencing [11].
Generally genetic studies are performed on a single sample from individual subjects, some
times in comparison to a genetically identical twin.
Recently some studies have ven-
tured into multi tissue experiments, where the same subjects is sampled multiple times
in different tissues, to map tissue specific genes or increase power [12, 13].
Expressive quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) are loci of varying sizes controlling a fraction of
a genes expression level. They are an important unit for analyzing the genomics effect on
fine tuning expression levels. In this work only single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
are considered. eQTLs situated close to the gene they impact, usually within 1 million
bases (Mb), are defined as cis-acting. These are more likely to be found due to biological
effects and the statistical power of fewer tests. eQTLs placed more than 5Mb from their
gene of action, or on other chromosomes, are considered trans-acting. Many are placed
in non coding regions, and are thought to impact transcription [14].
The total measured expression of specific RNA in the transcriptome comes down to the
rate of production and degradation of the RNA strand. The binding affinity and speed
of the RNA-polymerase are central factors in the production rate of RNA strands. The
binding affinity can be affected by the nucleotides in and around the gene in an array
of different ways; binding of primers, transcription factors, repressors and activators or
direct affinity in the polymerase binding site [15, 16]. Aside from this, the nucleotides
affect the folding of the DNA, opening or closing it for transcription. The exact strand
of RNA transcribed can affect the stability of the RNA without affecting the function it
serves.
3
==PAGE:10==
trans-acting eQTLs can only act on the balances in indirect ways. This can be via other
RNA strands marking the effected gene for degradation, or affecting the function or
concentration of proteins responsible for transcription or DNA folding [16].
eQTLs are to some extent tissue specific [17], which can lead to large variation in noted
eQTLs depending on the sampled tissue. In this work, the focus is only on cis-acting
eQTLs affecting whole blood RNA expression.
At the time of writing there no exist tools specifically for eQTL intervention studies exist,
so this work will elaborate on tools for single observations. Existing paired analysis tools
are considered and the possibility of a tool specifically for intervention studies is presented.
Quality control of genome and transcriptome data is important when working with ge-
nomic data and especially eQTLs. Sequencing DNA or RNA is inherently error prone
due to limitations in the techniques used, and the importance of accuracy across vast
amounts of data.
Larger sequencing depth can be used to correct for random errors
across the genome or transcriptome, as random errors will not reappear in multiple se-
quencings of the same sequence. Further more it is essential to determine the quality of
the data as systematic errors from a sequencing tool cannot be corrected for. These can
appear as nucleotide favoring, low or quickly declining certainty, short reads, unexpected
duplications or over represented sequences [18].
When performing genome wide association studies (GWAS) using single transcriptome
samples from different individuals, there is a lot of noise that is not corrected for or
controlled. This is due to people living very individual lives making lifestyle factor un-
controllable. This results in less power to find eQTLs. At the same time the studies are
limited to constantly expressed phenotypes. Thus, regular eQLTs studies able to give a
baseline for how humans work on a transcriptomic level, and where we differ. It gives
no knowledge on genes that are only used on specific occasions, as these factors are left
random. With intervention studies the before and after samples are able to remove noise
and signals from many household genes. It is possible to correct both for household genes
and many random effects of lifestyle when taking two samples timed close together. This
correction has the benefit of being specific for each individual. An intervention setup
makes it possible to find genes that are activated in response to the stimuli, and only
these.
Collecting samples from subjects, preparing and shipping for sequencing is a costly and
time consuming task.
It also requires finding and approving many volunteers.
This
process is heavy in man hours as it often includes interviewing the volunteers to have
some corresponding phenotype data. All these tasks make it difficult to build large data
4
==PAGE:11==
1.1. AIMS OF THE THESIS
sets, emphasizing the relevance of efficient small study analysis.
1.1
Aims of the thesis
This thesis aims to compare existing methods for analysis of intervention eQLT studies,
as well as proposing a novel model specifically for intervention studies. The work is based
on a relatively small sample of 24 individuals, so there is a distinct focus on methods that
increase the power of small samples. Given the small sample size, optimal filtering of the
samples and possible approaches to analyzing intervention studies are explored. Finally
the statistical results are related to biological effects of pain.
The scope is limited to testing tools that are implemented as ready to use software or
scripts, as there is not enough time to implement theorized models. The work are based
on literature studies of meta analyses and tool comparisons to further sort out well suited
tools.
5
==PAGE:12==
1.1. AIMS OF THE THESIS
6
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Materials and methods for
transcriptome collection and
analysis
This section introduces the process of data collection from blood samples of migraine pa-
tients, including explanations of how RNA was extracted and sequenced. Quality control
and expression quantification was then used to produce the data set utilized throughout
this work.
The steps of filtering and preparing the data for eQTL analysis is then explained. The
statistical models and tools used for finding eQTL are presented.
Next the methods
for analysing and comparing the models usefulness is introduced. Finally Snakemake is
presented as a pipeline tool for this analysis.
2.1
Blood sampling and RNA sequencing for tran-
scriptome mapping
Data from the 2019 migraine study by L. Kogelman is used for this analysis [19]. In the
study blod was extracted from the test subject before and one hour after a cold pressor
test was performed. After blood extraction, the blood was transferred to PAXgene Blood
RNA Tubes. The RNA was washed, filtered and eluded using the PAXgene Blood RNA
kit [20]. The samples were shipped to deCODE Genetic (Reykjavik, Iceland), for sequenc-
ing. Sequencing was performed using the second generation sequencing machine Illumina
Novaseq, resulting in 125 base pairs long paired-end reads [19]. The raw sequences were
quality controlled using Next generation sequencing (NGS) quality control (QC) Toolkit
7
==PAGE:14==
2.1. BLOOD SAMPLING AND RNA SEQUENCING FOR TRANSCRIPTOME MAPPING
[18]. After low quality filtering with NGS QC Toolkit default settings, the samples had
between 96.71% and 98.44% high-quality reads. The pseudoaligner Kallisto v0.42.5 [21]
processed and quantified sequences from the filtered fastq files, using the human reference
transcriptome (Release 28) based on the GRCh38.p12. 69.16% (SD = 0.04) of the filtered
high-quality reads mapped to the transcriptome.
2.1.1
Paired-end Illumina sequencing of RNA strands
In preparing for Illumina sequencing, the RNA sequences are broken down into strands
of a specific length, depending on the desired distance between paired reads. Adapters
as seen in Fig. 2.1 containing sequencing primers and regions complementary to the flow
cell oligos, are added to the ends of the RNA fragments. The adapters also contain index
sequences for tracking sequences in the flow cell.
Read 1
{
P5
Adapter
{
P7
Adapter
DNA
Insert
Read 1
Primer
Index 1 (i7) Read
Read 1
Primer
i5 Index
i7 Index
Read 2
Read 2
Primer
Index 2 (i5) Read
i7 Index
i5 Index
Primer (Grafted P5)
i5 Index
Chemistry-Only
Cycles
Figure 2.1: The adapters consist of a primer for replication, an index to recognize
the adaptor, which can be used to separate samples on the same flow cell. Finally,
there is a binding site that is used to bind to the primers attached to the flow cell for
cluster generation.
After adaptor annealing, the sequences are transferred to the flow cells for cluster genera-
tion, as illustrated in Fig. 2.2. The amount of sequences that can be read from a flow cell
is dependent on how many unique clones can be dispersed randomly across the flow cell to
form clone clusters. The complementary adapter region on the RNA strands binds to the
oligos on the flow cell. The RNA is then up-formed using a version of polymerise chain
reaction (PCR) called bridge amplification, using the oligos on the flow cell as primers.
This result in clonal clusters that are tethered to the surface of the cell.
8
==PAGE:15==
2.1. BLOOD SAMPLING AND RNA SEQUENCING FOR TRANSCRIPTOME MAPPING
A primer matching the sequencing primer binding site is annealed to the forward strands.
Fluorescence marked nucleotides are added, one at a time. When excited these nucleotides
emit light in distinct colours that are recorded and used for base calling. All clones from
a cluster are read together, which makes the signal strong and limits the possibility of
errors [22].
The process is repeated until the desired read length is met, often 50-300 bases [23]. The
strands are then replicated using the opposite oligo and the sequencing process repeated
to make read clusters. The forward and backward reads are paired which can be used in
the data analysis [22].
Fragments
Add adaptors
Attach to flowcell
Bind to primer
PCR extension
Dissociation
A
T
C
G...
A
T
C
G
Cluster formation
Sequencing
Signal scanning
Figure 2.2: Flow diagram of Illumina Novaseq sequencing. The fragments extended
with adaptors, partly to be able to attach to the flow cell. The opposite adaptor binds
to primers on the flow cell forming a bridge, making it possible to extend the primer
and replicate the strand using PCR. The two strands are then disassociated. The
binding to disassociation steps are repeated to create clusters. Finally the sequence
is replicated by adding green/red or in the case of guanine uncolored single bases. At
each addition of bases a picture of the flow cell is taken. The different colors in the
same position over time can be combined to read the sequence.
9
==PAGE:16==
2.1. BLOOD SAMPLING AND RNA SEQUENCING FOR TRANSCRIPTOME MAPPING
The Illumina Novaseq is optimized for faster sequencing by only using two colors (red and
green). The colors indicate each of the nucelanic bases as follows [23]:
• A: Green and Red
• T: Red
• C: Green
• G: No color
The lack of color can create a problem with longer stretches of guanine, as these clusters
are dark for multiple frames in the sequencing, thus increasing guanine error rate [23].
2.1.2
Sequencing quality control and sequence filtering
In preparing high-throughput sequencing it is impossible to control the quality of the
reads manually or through any single metric. NGS QC Toolkit can be used to get a broad
analysis of the quality of sequences [18]. It checks that the average quality per base is high,
signifying that there is low noise in the light signals. The distribution of full-sequence
average-quality is graphed, to make sure that a broad array of sequences are read the
right way. It measures the average ATCG contents on each position across all sequences,
to ensure that there is no fault in any of the bases used for replication. The distribution
of GC-counts for the sequences can be used as a quick check against the GC-count of the
organism and to check for faults with the no-color G reads. Finally, duplication level and
adapter content is used to check if the adapters have been successfully removed, or that
some sequences have been read wrongfully many times [18].
2.1.3
Sequence mapping to transcriptome using Kallisto algorithm
Kallisto is a fast and accurate algorithm for RNA quantification [21]. It utilizes pseu-
doalignment based on a de Bruijn graph of the transcriptome. K-mers from the target
sequence are matched against the hash table of k-mers in the de Bruijn graph. Matches
are automatically extended from matching k-mer to next branching of the graph, decreas-
ing the total number of searches in the hash table. At the branch point Kallisto ensures
that the match-up is still valid and uses the next k-mer to determine which contig to
follow. When all the sequences have been matched to contigs a likelihood function is used
to quantify the expression levels in the transcriptome [21].
10
==PAGE:17==
2.1. BLOOD SAMPLING AND RNA SEQUENCING FOR TRANSCRIPTOME MAPPING
De Bruijn Graph for fast pseudoalignment
De Bruijn Graphs are based on k-mers, which is a term for a sequence of nucleotides that
is a set number (k) long. The k-mers are formed by breaking contigs into all possible
sections of length k as shown in Fig. 2.3a. To create the de Bruijn graph, the k-mers
are used as nodes which connect with directional edges to the subsequent k-mer nodes
as seen in Fig. 2.3b. This ensures that each k-mer will only appear once in the graph.
When the same k-mer appear multiple times, either in the same or different contigs, the
same node is used to represent all. The path of each contig through the graph is saved.
When finished, a complex net representing the contigs has been created, layered over in
the k-mers that match, and separating when the contigs diverge. This can be expanded
to cover both longer and multiple contigs as in the case of a genome or transcriptome.
The k-mers are turned into a hash table to make searching through them faster.
When checking sequences against the Brujin graph, k-mers are plucked from the sequence,
looked up in the hash table and pointed to a specific node in the graph. If a sequence
k-mer does not match any k-mer in the graph hash table, it is left out as this is probably
indicative of a sequencing error. Matching multiple k-mers to the graph makes it possible
to narrow down which contig match the path of the sequence through the de Bruijn graph.
By not forcing full matches it is possible to get around problems with sequencing errors
and small mutations. The goal is to narrow down possible match points between the
contigs forming the de Bruijn graph and the sequence. After the pseudoalignment, more
precise tools can be used to improve full or partial alignments [21, 24].
A Short read to k-mers (k=4)
B Hamiltonian de Bruijn graph
A A A G G C G T T G A G G T T
A A A G
A A G G
A G G C
G G C G
G C G T
C G T T
G T T G
T T G A
T G A G
G A G G
A G G T
G G T T
AAAG
AAGG
AGGT
TGAG
TTGA
GGCG
GCGT
AGGC
CGTT
GTTT
GGTT
GTTG
GAGG
Figure 2.3: (a) A contig is transformed into 4-mers to prepare for building a de Bruijn
graph. (b) shows the de Bruijn graph build from the contig in (a). The 4-mers are
used as nodes connected by edges showing which k-mers follow in the contig. This can
create a lot of overlap in the graph, when the same k-mer apear multiple times, which
in the end makes it faster to pseudoalign to. Illustration inspired by Bray et al. [24].
11
==PAGE:18==
2.2.
TRANSCRIPTOME AND GENOME PREPROCESSING FOR ANALYSIS
2.2
Transcriptome and genome preprocessing for
analysis
This section describes the steps taken to prepare the data for optimal analysis. First,
the levels for filtering are chosen. In this case limits is based on the simulations giving
an acceptable amount of power. For this a simple bootstrap simulation is applied. The
filtering is according to minor allele frequency (MAF) and the presence of alleles in the
samples, as well as for linkage disequilibrium (LD). It can also be effective to filter for
specific genes or SNPs. Furthermore, the data is normalized, for comparison between
samples. Finally, some transformation steps are necessary to fit the data into the different
models.
2.2.1
Power simulation to optimize genotype and transcriptome fil-
tering
Normal bootstrap simulation based on sample size
When bootstrap simulating, a model is chosen to represent the data distribution. A set
of random numbers are then picked according to the model distribution as a data set.
The parameter of interest, such as mean, median, standard deviation or p-value, is then
calculated. This step is repeated many times, resulting in a distribution of the parameter
of interest as seen in Fig. 2.4. Finally cutoffs or significance intervals can be taken directly
from the distribution.
12
==PAGE:19==
2.2.
TRANSCRIPTOME AND GENOME PREPROCESSING FOR ANALYSIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1e-04
1e-03
1e-02
1e-01
1e+00
P-value
density
Power Boootstrap Simulation
Figure 2.4: Power simulation. A p-value is calculated multiple times for a hypothesis
test with the same background model. This results in a distribution of p-values in green.
When using these p-values to calculate power a significance cutoff is chosen, here 0.05
shown in red. The percentage of p-values below the cutoff is an approximation of power
for the simulated setup. There is some margin of error, but more simulations increase
certainty.
A normal distribution is chosen to simulate the expression level distribution between
samples. The sample size is set to 24 which is the sample size of this study. The variance
has been assumed constant and set to 1 to simplify calculation. This makes it possible to
simulate the power for effect sizes, that are a ratio of the standard deviation in an easy
way. The effect size is varied from 0.05 to 2 to test a broad range of effect sizes, similar
to the 0.25 to 1.5 range used by Huang et al. [25]. The additional effect of having two
minor alleles is tested by multiplying the mean of one minor allele with a set number. For
this ratio, numbers between 1 and 2 are used. This is to simulate the scenarios from no
additional effect, to a direct linear effect. Each iteration divides the minor allele fraction
of the sample size between the two groups randomly. The simulations are run from a
MAF of 0.01 to 0.9.
13
==PAGE:20==
2.2.
TRANSCRIPTOME AND GENOME PREPROCESSING FOR ANALYSIS
The gene expression might also be affected by dominant genes with no additive effect.
This will alter the power of the analysis setup. Combining minor alleles in one group with
both one and two chromosomes, allows for testing the influence dominant genotypes have
on the power. Simulations comparing the linear model on both binary and normal SNP
notation can be performed by fitting the same model to both data sets. One with two
minor allele groups and one combining minor alleles in one group.
2.2.2
Method and parameters for genotype and transcriptome filter-
ing
The SNPs can be filtered in many different ways. For this work it is kept simple, focusing
on filtering for MAF and missing alleles. These filterers are important for maintaining a
certain amount of power in the tests. The false discovery rate correction factor is lowered
by decreasing the use of multiple testing attempts on pairs that have low power. First
the MAF is used to filter the data. It is set to 10% for comparison, and 30% based on
simulations for small samples. This translates to that 3 or 8 of the 24 subjects must have
the minor allele respectively. Previous studies have used MAFs ranging from 1% up to
40% according to Huang et al [25].
Similarly, it is important that most individuals have allele, otherwise the sample size
shrinks. To keep the sample size large the maximum frequency of missing allele calls is
set to 10%, meaning that if more than 2 subjects miss the allele call, the SNP is not tested.
The filter is also tested with 0% missing for comparison. These filterers are applied using
pLink under the --maf and --geno parameters. pLink is run with the --snps-only and
--recode12 or --recode vcf flags.
It is also important to consider linkage disequilibrium (LD). This is the principle of loci
being correlated by selection pressure, genetic recombination or population and mating
structures [26]. For a cis-acting eQTL study the LDs of SNPs in close proximity are the
most important, as one significant eQTL often will make other SNPs in close proximity
seem significantly related to the gene as well. To correct for this, only the most significant
SNP-gene pair for each gene is used in this work.
To lessen the need for multiple testing correction the SNPs can be filtered based on LD.
There are many methods for doing this, ranging from correlation clustering to methods
based on LD maps of the genome [27]. Exploring these methods in depth falls outside the
scope of this project.
The RNA data is sorted so that at least 90% of the subjects have the transcript expressed
14
==PAGE:21==
2.2.
TRANSCRIPTOME AND GENOME PREPROCESSING FOR ANALYSIS
in some level different from 0 using R programming. This is to ensure a certain sample
size and increase power. Further more, the RNA can be sorted depending on the previous
knowledge of the transcript. This includes sorting for protein coding, nervous system
relation or pain relation in this specific case.
2.2.3
Normalization of transcriptome expression levels
Normalization is important because the sequencing depth will vary between sequencing
of different samples. This is a result off the randomness that is native to the sequencing
process. It can be exacerbated by errors when preparing samples, it is impossible to avoid
entirely. More reads are created from longer sequences due solely to size, this is possible
to correct for as well if required. The composition of different RNA fragments can impact
the sequencing depth in a skewed fashion. This can be due to RNA fragments that make
up a lot of the total RNA expression in one sample, and not that much in another. Of
these, sequencing depth and RNA composition are the most important as only the same
genes are compared between samples.
Using DEseq2’s median of ratios method, makes is possible to correct for sequencing depth
and RNA composition without over correction because of a few genes highly differential
expressions [28]. This method creates a pseudo reference sample with the geometric mean
across all samples as the expression of each gene. Using this reference, it is possible to
calculate an expression-to-reference ratio, for each gene in each sample. The median of
these ratios is then used as the correction factor for each sample. The median is used, as
opposed to mean due to its resistant to extreme values [29].
To prepare the quantitative expression data for analysis it is normalized. It is loaded into R
from Kallisto formatted files using the tximport package. After the import into R the data
is easy to filter and channel into DEseq2. The data is transformed to DESeqData format
with design ”~1”, so it is possible to normalize using DEseq2’s counts function. Thus
the measurements become comparable between samples, and more importantly makes it
possible to compare before and after the intervention. The normalized counts before the
cold pressor test are then subtracted from the counts after. These differences in counts
are used as single observations in the different eQTL tools.
15
==PAGE:22==
2.3. TOOLS AND MODELS FOR EQLT ANALYSIS
2.2.4
Transformation between file formats for GWAS analysis.
The different tools for GWAS analysis have different standard input formats, therefore
it is vital to efficiently transform between the data formats. The expression data is first
transformed from Kallisto output to a regular tab separated file using R tximport.
During this step the counts are also normalized using the DEseq2 package. For FastQTL
the expression data has to be in .bed format [30], which is transformed using a short
custom Python script.
For the genome data the most efficient way of transformation is pLink. pLink has the
added benefit of filtering the data in the same step. pLink is used to transform the data
to .vcf and .raw formats for different inputs.
2.3
Tools and models for eQLT analysis
This section will go through the different eQTL analysis methods used.
Focus is on
how the analysis is executed and which parameters are been used. Finally, methods for
evaluating and comparing the different models is presented.
Linear model and assumptions
The linear models are based on a simple linear regression, assuming additive effect of the
allele. This is using the formula;
Diffi = β0 + β1 · SNPi + β2 · Agei + ϵi,
i = 1, .., 24
Where ”Diff” is the gene expression difference. ”SNP” is the SNP value 0, 1 or 2 indicating
wild type, one or two minor alleles respectively. ”Age” is the covariate age. The β values
are the regression estimates for the model and ϵ is the normally distributed error with
mean 0. Using a linear model brings the following assumptions:
• Linearity
• Homoscedasticity
• Independence
• Normality
Cross models difference from simple linear model
The Cross model analyses the interaction between the eQTLs and a covariate. This is
16
==PAGE:23==
2.3. TOOLS AND MODELS FOR EQLT ANALYSIS
done with an interaction term between the SNP and a covariate of choice. Since this is
also a linear model the same model assumptions apply. It could be interesting to look at
this covariance, but without any previous knowledge of which covariate interacts it might
lead to large scale multiple testing due to the multitude of covariates.
ANOVA model and assumptions
The ANOVA models are used to investigate both recessive and dominant effects. This
is achievied by comparing each group to the others, giving a signal if just one group
is significantly different.
ANOVA models assume homoscedasticity, independence and
normality.
2.3.1
MatrixEQTL tool presentation and parameter setup
One of the fastest ready to use tools for eQTL mapping is the MatrixEQTL package for
R - CRAN [31].
It is specifically developed for genome wide analysis in that it uses
matrix calculations for computationally intensive analysis steps to increase speed.
It
also mitigates RAM limitations by reading and analyzing the data in chunks, which is
uncommon for R [31].
The main analysis is based on representing the data with a general linear model to enable
easy matrix calculations.
It decreases the calculation steps to the test statistic, and
uses a limit on the test statistic to avoid calculating all p-values if possible. The matrix
calculation can, with some modifications, also be used for ANOVA and Cross calculations
[32].
When running MatrixEQTL the subtracted normalized expression levels are read into R
from the normalization tximport files. The data is read into a SlicedData format with
slices of 10000 as seen in Appendix 5.1. This makes it possible to handle the matrix
calculations in chunks without saving it all to the RAM. The expression data is used as
the gene matrix in Matrix_eQTL_main as seen in Appendix 5.2.
The genotypes are read in from the .raw formats produced by pLink, using the SlicedData
format from the MatrixEQTL package. This is used as the SNP matrix in Matrix_eQTL_main.
To test the full range of MatrixEQTL, the three models Linear, ANOVA and Cross are
tested. This is only done for cis-acting eQTLs, by setting pvOutputThreshold to zero,
even though MatrixEQTL is capable of finding both cis- and trans-acting eQTLs. The
limitation to cis-acting eQTLS is due to the constrictions of the project and low power
due to small sample size. To determine if the multiple testing could be decreased, without
17
==PAGE:24==
2.3. TOOLS AND MODELS FOR EQLT ANALYSIS
loosing possibly significant SNP-gene pairs, the tests are run with both 1e6 and 5e4 cis-
distance.
These numbers are chosen based on Pickrell et al.
reporting that 90% of
significant eQTLs are within 15 thousand bases (kb) [33]. Veyrieras et al. reported that
95% of significant pairs are within 20 kb and most are found within 50 kb [34]. The age of
the subjects is used as the covariate, while the unity matrix is used as covariance matrix.
min.pv.by.genesnp is set to false to not save the min p-value for each SNP and Gene,
as it is irellevant. noFDRsaveMemory is set to false as the false discovery rate (FDR) is
used as multiple test correction.
2.3.2
FastQTL tool presentation and parameter setup
FastQTL makes linear regression with or without covariates [30]. Using a matrix system
similarly to MatrixEQTL, the significance of the correlation between genotype and pheno-
type is calculated. It can correct for the multiple correlated variants tested via different
permutation schemes.
The primary scheme is direct permutation in a fixed number of permutations across the
whole genome. This scheme is limited due to the many permutations needed to make
good estimates of low p-values, which becomes unfeasible across the whole genome. It is
difficult to estimate p-values below 10−3.
The second scheme is adaptive permutation based on the significance of the association
while keeping a viable computational load. This means that few, usually around 100,
permutations are used on insignificant SNP-gene pairs, while many more can be focused
on the significant ones. This results in good estimates down to p-values of around 10−5.
The third and final scheme to estimate at all significance levels is based on a beta distribu-
tion model. This method uses a set amount of permutations to establish the distribution
of the p-values. Then using a log-likelihood function, the parameters of the beta distribu-
tion are maximized. The maximum likelihood from the given beta distribution will then
be used as the adjusted p-value for each pair.
Ultimately one of these permutation steps are used to correct for multiple genotypes that
are tested against the same phenotype (RNA from the transcriptome).
To correct for the multiple phenotypes tested against the same genotype, some level of
multiple testing correction of the adjusted p-values is needed. The recommended correc-
tion is Storey and Tibshirani (ST) false discovery rate (FDR) correction, but it is possible
to apply a correction of the users choosing since the adjusted p-values are the output from
18
==PAGE:25==
2.3. TOOLS AND MODELS FOR EQLT ANALYSIS
FastQTL [30]. In this work FDR correction is used for consistency, and the code can be
found in Appendix 5.3
For FastQTL the input genotype file need to be in vcf.gz format and the expression quanity
file in bed.gz format. These are applied under the --vcf and --bed flags, respectively.
Permutations are set to the recommended 1000 permutations.
The data is split into
chromosomes so the calculations can be done in parallel. The results are then read into R
for multiple testing correction. This is done using the p.adjust function with FDR setting.
2.3.3
Experimental linear model with interaction
The method of subtracting the before and after values does not utilize the full potential
of the data. To fully utilize the information a linear model with an interaction step is
tested. It is hypothesized that the outlier before levels might throw off the regression.
To test the effect of the starting level of the gene expression, the regression is based on
a linear model with an interaction variable between SNP and the gene expression level.
This is to correct for individuals that already have extreme expression levels, and thus
can not regulate the gene much further.
One way to utilize this paired linearity of the study is with the following interaction model:
Afteri = β0 + β1 · SNPi + β2 · SNPi · Beforei + β3 · Agei + ϵi, i = 1, .., 24
”After” is the expression after cold pressor intervention, ”SNP” is the 0, 1 or 2 grouping
regarding the number of minor alleles the subject has. ”Before” is the expression level
before the intervention and ”Age” is the age of the subject. The β values are the estimated
regression factors and ϵ is the normally distributed error with mean 0.
The interaction between SNP and the before value will remove noise from individuals
where the starting expression is close to the ending expression. If the before expression is
close to one extreme the intervention might not have as large an effect as in other subjects.
The model is set up using the build in lm function in R and can be seen in Appendix
5.4. It is a fast way to write code, but way too slow to be feasible in a normal analysis
pipeline.
19
==PAGE:26==
2.4. SNAKEMAKE AS PIPELINE TOOL FOR BIOINFORMATIC ANALYSIS.
2.3.4
Model evaluation and comparison
The models fitness for analyzing the data is evaluated based on model assumptions and
distribution of p-values produced. The values and residuals of the most significant gene-
SNP pairs are evaluated in order to determine fitness with model assumptions.
For
ANOVA models it is also interesting to investigate the distribution of data points within
the three SNP groups.
The model fitness for most significant gene-SNP pairs give an indication of whether the
positive results can be trusted, or if they are more likely false positives. It is practically
impossible to find the false negatives, so analysis of the residuals of the insignificant pairs
will not be conducted.
It is expected that most pairs tested are negative and thus produce random p-values.
Given random p-values it is expected that the p-value distribution is uniform. Divergence
from this raise bias concerns for the model [35, 36].
As the models detect different signals, they are impossible to compare directly.
The
Cross model is used to detect significant interactions between SNP and a covariate, which
distinguishes it from the other models. The ANOVA and linear models both detect direct
SNP effects, so comparing their p-values relatively is of interest. The linear interaction
model is tested against the p-values from the simple linear model, as this is the significance
of the same parameter in nested models.
2.4
Snakemake as pipeline tool for bioinformatic
analysis.
To tie all the different pipeline steps together, and make it easy to run with small variances,
a Snakemake pipeline is created for the analysis [37].
Snakemake is a Python based
pipeline tool developed for bioinformatic analyzes. It is able to run and queue jobs in the
right order on a cluster computer like the Danish Computerome. The built-in mechanism
ensures no earlier files in the pipeline have been changed and discoverers the steps needed
to produce the wished output. This makes it efficient and avoids double work, both for
the user and the computer. The automated pipeline is depicted in Fig. 2.5. It is seen
how the Genotype data is first filtered and reformated. Then the sample order in these
files are used to make the same order in the phenotype files containing expression levels.
20
==PAGE:27==
2.4. SNAKEMAKE AS PIPELINE TOOL FOR BIOINFORMATIC ANALYSIS.
These two file types are piped into the analysis tools. The output can then be analyzed
using plots and summary statistics.
plink
plink_raw
t_raw
plink_vcf
bgizp_vcf
phenotype
counts_bed
phenotype2
fastQTL
fastQTL_p
matrixEQTL_anova
matrixEQTL_cross
matrixEQTL_lin
Plots and visualization
Figure 2.5: pLink is first used to MAF filter the SNPs (genotypes), the .raw file
is then transposed. The order of the samples from this is used to reorder the gene
expression (phenptype) files. These are in the same step filtered and transformed to
be close to normally distributed. The SNP and gene expression files are then ready
for MatrixEQTL analysis. On the other branch pLink is used to create a .vcf file of
SNPs and bgzip it. This combined with a bed gene expression file is used to fastQLT
analyze the data. Afterwards the p-values are FDR corrected. Finally the data can
be analyzed and plotted.
21
==PAGE:28==
2.5. SUMMARY OF MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.5
Summary of materials and methods
The data analyzed in this study was produced by L. Kogelman [19] using PAXgene Blood
RNA kit and Illumina novaseq sequenced. The sequences are quality controlled and fil-
tered using NGS QC Toolkit. The resulting RNA reads were mapped to the transcriptome
using Kallisto, producing the expression data used for eQTL analysis.
Bootstrap simulation is introduced in general and the setup for power analysis in this work
presented. The optimal MAF and missing allele thresholds produced by the simulations
are used to filter the data with pLink. The importance of normalization of the expression
levels is discussed and performed using DESeq2 in R programming. The specific need for
format transformation to fileformats used by MatrixEQTL and FastQTL is also introduced.
The statistical models used for eQTL analysis are introduced with model assumptions and
limitations. MatrixEQTL and FastQTL are discussed and the novel Interaction model for
intervention eQTL studies is presented. Finally the evaluation methods based on residual
analysis and p-value distribution are introduced.
This whole analysis is implemented using the pipeline tool Snakemake.
22
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Results of eQTL predictions, model
fitness and simulations of
filtering.
This section will present the results of the simulations to optimize filtering in the prepro-
cessing. This includes MAF and missing allele filters. The effect of the filtering based
on different MAF, missing allele, cis-distance and transcript type on the multiple testing
degree is presented.
The results of the Linear, ANOVA, Cross and Interaction models is presented.
This
includes residual analysis, p-value distribution and extracting the most significant gene-
SNP pairs.
3.1
Filtering of genotypes and gene gxpressions
It is important to have the right settings for the filtering. This step lowers the multiple
testing correction needed, leading lower FDR correction. It is especially important to
optimize filtering for an analysis of a data set with this few samples.
23
==PAGE:30==
3.1. FILTERING OF GENOTYPES AND GENE GXPRESSIONS
3.1.1
Simulated optimal minor allele frequency
Fig. 3.1a has a spike in power from a minor allele frequency of 0.2 (20%), when simulating
with doubling effect size for homozygote minor allele (HMA). The power increases again
to 0.3 (30%) and is stable from there. A doubling in effect size cannot always be assumed
to be the case. Power for a more conservative 20% additional effect size is graphed in Fig.
3.1b. From this it is that the power optimum starts from 30% MAF.
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.01
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
Minor allele frequency (MAF)
Power of hypothesis test
Effect size
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.5
2
Power for additive effect; 100% increase
(a) Power calculation for linear model 100%
additional effect size for HMA.
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.01
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
Minor allele frequency (MAF)
Power of hypothesis test
Effect size
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.5
2
Power for additive effect; 20% increase
(b) Power calculation for linear model 20%
additional effect size for HMA.
Figure 3.1: These figures show the power level given a MAF for a linear model. The
different graphs correspond to different effect sizes relative to the standard deviation.
The horizontal line cuts the graph off at 0.8 (80%) power. When the HMA effect is
100% additional effect size as seen in (a), the power is stable and high after 0.2 MAF.
With 20% addition in effect size, as seen in (b), the stability is after 0.3 MAF.
24
==PAGE:31==
3.1. FILTERING OF GENOTYPES AND GENE GXPRESSIONS
3.1.2
The effect of dominant alleles on power simulations
Fig. 3.2a does not show any consistent performance difference between dominant and
linear effect tests. Comparing the two group systems with an additional 20% effect size
in Fig. 3.2b, normal MAF grouping has consistently higher power.
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.01
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
Minor allele frequency (MAF)
Power of hypothesis test
Effect size
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.5
2
Diploide
0
1
Mono and diploide test with no added effect size
(a) Power plot assuming no additional ef-
fect size for HMA. This is the same as a
dominant effect.
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.01
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
Minor allele frequency (MAF)
Power of hypothesis test
Effect size
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.5
2
Diploide
0
1
Mono and diploide test with 20% added effect size
(b) Power plot assuming 20% additional ef-
fect size for HMA.
Figure 3.2: These figures show the power level given a MAF for a linear model. The
different colored graphs correspond to different effect sizes relative to the standard
deviation. The solid lines are for a linear model with all minor alleles in one group,
the doted is the normal with two minor allele groups. The graphs in (a) with a simple
dominant effect show no superior model. (b) with a slight linear additional effect size
for HMA show, the normal two group minor allele model is superior.
25
==PAGE:32==
3.1. FILTERING OF GENOTYPES AND GENE GXPRESSIONS
3.1.3
Optimal sample size simulation
Fig. 3.3a show that the power steadily decreasing with decreasing sample size. The loss
in power is not big from 24 to 22 samples, but it declines steeply with smaller sample
sizes. The same trend is seen in Fig. 3.3b where the additional effect size for homozygote
minor (HMA) allele is 20%.
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
14
16
18
20
22
24
Sample size
Power of hypothesis test
Effect size
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.5
2
Mono and diploide test with 100% added effect size
(a) Power plot assuming 100% additional
effect size for HMA.
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
14
16
18
20
22
24
Sample size
Power of hypothesis test
Effect size
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
1.5
2
Mono and diploide test with no added effect size
(b) Power plot assuming 20% additional ef-
fect size for HMA.
Figure 3.3: These figures show the power level given sample size and a MAF of 30%
and for a linear model. The different colored graphs correspond to different effect sizes
relative to the standard deviation. Both graphs show a decrease with lower sample
size. Optimally the sample size should be 24. The decrease in power to a sample size
of 22 is small.
26
==PAGE:33==
3.1. FILTERING OF GENOTYPES AND GENE GXPRESSIONS
3.1.4
Impact of filtering on multiple testing rate
The cis-distance has a large effect on the number of gene-SNP pairs that are tested. This
makes it important to use the smallest possible cis-distance without loosing matches, as
unnecessarily large cis-distances increase the need for multiple testing corrections.
In
contrast having it too small can exclude interesting findings. As seen in Table 3.1 the
cis-distance impacts the number of pairs tested drastically. It also impacts the SNP count
indirectly because some SNPs are spaced so they are not within cis-distance of any gene.
The MAF filter impacts the SNP count, thus decreasing the possible pairs to test. When
using a missing filter of 0% a lot of pairs are removed, including most of the significant
pairs. Filtering the transcripts to only include proteins result in less pairs tested, but
leaves many of the significant pairs.
MAF
Missing
cis
Transcripts
# Genes
# SNP
# Pairs
10%
10%
5e4
All
82861
331906
2313353
10%
10%
1e6
All
81459
484072
30877039
30%
10%
5e4
All
78011
150531
1050503
30%
10%
1e6
All
82829
218818
14114462
30%
10%
5e4
Only protein
34174
259298
1027382
30%
10%
1e6
Only protein
34468
458760
13033646
30%
0%
5e4
All
56315
131072
730730
30%
0%
1e6
All
59887
210630
9933923
Table 3.1: Table over the different filters and their effects on the gene, SNP and Pair
count. MAF is the minimal percentage of minor alleles. Missing is the max number
of missing genotypes or expression of RNA. The cis-distance is the max distance
between a gene and the SNP. Finally there is the count off genes, SNPs and pairs
considered in each analysis.
27
==PAGE:34==
3.2. EQTL PREDCITION AND MODEL TO DATA FITNESS
3.2
eQTL predcition and model to data fitness
This section will present the results of the different models and the model fitness for the
data. P-values produced and residual analysis in accordance with model assumptions are
presented.
3.2.1
Linear models eQTL predictions and assumption compliance
Fig. 3.4 and 3.5 represent the residuals from the two most significant gene-SNP pairs
from the linear models. There is no clear trend in Fig. 3.4a and 3.5a, and the variance
seems constant. Fig. 3.4b and 3.5b both show a normal distribution with a single outlier.
So the residuals indicate a good fit of the model.
(a) Residual vs fitted values
(b) Residual quantile quantile
Figure 3.4: Residual analysis of the most significant gene-eQTL pair for linear models.
(a) has no indication of differing variance or a trend in the residual size. Aside from
the outlier in top right corner the residuals follow a normal distribution nicely. So
the residuals indicate a good fit of the model.
28
==PAGE:35==
3.2. EQTL PREDCITION AND MODEL TO DATA FITNESS
(a) Residual vs fitted values
(b) Residual quantile quantile
Figure 3.5: Residual analysis of the second most significant gene-eQTL pair for linear
models. Fig. (a) has no indication of differing variance or a trend in the residual
size. Aside from the outlier in the bottom left corner the residuals follow a normal
distribution nicely. So the residuals indicate a good fit of the model.
(a) P-value distribution for linear models.
(b) P-value uniform QQ-plot for linear
models
Figure 3.6: Distribution analysis of the p-value distribution of linear model. The plots
indicate that the p-value is uniformly distributed.
FastQTL and MatrixEQTL produce the same nominal p-values, so the main difference is in
the FDR correction. Neither of the linear models produce significant pairs after correction.
29
==PAGE:36==
3.2. EQTL PREDCITION AND MODEL TO DATA FITNESS
The most significant pair for these models is between transcript ENST00000616243.1 and
SNP rs200215. This transcript is from the gene NRN1 that is translated into Neuritin.
Neuritin promotes neurite outgrowth and neural plasticity in the brain [38].
Given the two plots in Fig. 3.6 it is evident that the p-value distribution is uniform as
expected.
3.2.2
ANOVA models eQTL predictions and assumption compliance
Figures 3.7 and 3.8 show the homozygote 2-group has outlier differences representing the
whole group. This is representative for at least the 30 most significant genes. The QQ
plots on Fig. 3.7b and 3.8b indicate a general normal trend, only obscured by the outliers.
(a) Boxplot of the expression levels and dif-
ference between them
(b) Quantile quantile plot for difference in
expression.
Figure 3.7: Analysis of model assumptions for most significant gene-SNP pair with
ANOVA model. From (a) it is clear that the variance is not constant between the
groups, as group 2 consist of a single outlier. (b) shows that the expression levels are
quite normal, except for the outlier.
30
==PAGE:37==
3.2. EQTL PREDCITION AND MODEL TO DATA FITNESS
(a) Boxplot of the expression levels and dif-
ference between them
(b) Quantile quantile plot for difference in
expression.
Figure 3.8: Analysis of model assumptions for second most significant gene-SNP pair
with ANOVA model. From (a) it is clear that the variance is not constant between
the groups, as group 2 consist of a single outlier. (b) shows the expression levels are
quite normal, except for the outlier.
The p-value distribution of the ANOVA model on Fig. 3.9 show a clear divergence from
uniform distribution.
(a) Histogram of the p-values produced by
ANOVA
(b) Uniform QQ-plot of the p-values pro-
duced by ANOVA
Figure 3.9: ANOVA model p-value distribution. The plots (a) and (b) show a clear
divergence from uniform distribution. The divergence is towards higher p-values.
31
==PAGE:38==
3.2. EQTL PREDCITION AND MODEL TO DATA FITNESS
Fig. 3.10 illustrates the distance between the SNPs and genes for the 107 unique genes
with a FDR below 0.01. This is clearly uniform and shows no enrichment of SNPs near
the gene.
Figure 3.10: Histogram of the SNP distance, in base pairs, from gene of effect. 0 is
within the gene, while negative values are upstream and positive are downstream of
the gene. There is no clear enrichment around the gene, which would be expected for
true positives.
The most significant gene found by the ANOVA model is DCC-interacting protein 13-
beta APPL2 which plays a role in cold-induced adaptive thermogenesis by activating
ventromedial hypothalamus [39]. With the misfit of the model assumptions it might be a
false positive.
32
==PAGE:39==
3.2. EQTL PREDCITION AND MODEL TO DATA FITNESS
3.2.3
Similarities between ANOVA and Linear models
Fig. 3.11 depicts a curved trend between the p-value produced by the linear and ANOVA
models. These plots show the correlation between the p-values from ANOVA and linear
models in normal and log 10 scale axis. The plots are colored according to the SNP MAF,
and show that it has no clear impact on the output.
(a)
P-values
produced
by
Linear
and
ANOVA model compared.
This is a ran-
dom subset of the p-values.
(b)
P-values
produced
by
Linear
and
ANOVA model compared on log10 scale.
Figure 3.11: A comparison of the p-values produced by the Linear and ANOVA
MatrixEQTL models. (a) and (b) clearly shows a curved trend where ANOVA catches
most of the same information that the Linear model also does.
When combining both minor allele groups in one group all the ANOVA significant FDR
results disappear. These models produced p-values with the clear curved trend on Fig.
3.12. It shows that all the p-values lay on the same curved line, indicating that the models
are essentially finding the same signals in this case. The similarity between Fig. 3.12 a
and b shows that the covariates have no impact on the p-value correlation trend.
33
==PAGE:40==
3.2. EQTL PREDCITION AND MODEL TO DATA FITNESS
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
P−value ANOVA Model
P−value Linear Model
P−value comparison matrixEQTL Linear and Anova
(a) ANOVA and Linear model p-value com-
parison with test data and SNPs set to
homo-zygote.
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
P−value ANOVA Model
P−value Linear Model
P−value comparison matrixEQTL Linear and Anova
(b) ANOVA and Linear model p-value com-
parison with test data, SNPs set to homo-
zygote and no covariates.
Figure 3.12: Both plot show that the models yield near identical results, aside from
the slightly higher p-values produced by the ANOVA model.
3.2.4
Cross models eQTL predictions and assumption compliance
When using age as covariate for the Cross model the residuals do not comply with the
model assumptions, as seen in Fig. 3.13 and Fig. 3.14. There are decreasing trends in
Fig. 3.13a and Fig. 3.14a. Fig. 3.13b and Fig. 3.14b shows a normal distribution of the
residuals.
34
==PAGE:41==
3.2. EQTL PREDCITION AND MODEL TO DATA FITNESS
(a) Residual and fitted value scatter plot
showing a downward trend.
(b) Quantile quantile plot for the Cross
model residuals.
The distribution looks
close to normal execpt for one outlier.
Figure 3.13: Residual analysis for the most significant gene-SNP pair produced by the
Cross model. These plots indicate a divergence from the linearity given the declining
trend in plot (a).
(a) Residual and fitted value scatter plot
showing a downward trend.
(b) Quantile quantile plot for the Cross
model residuals.
The distribution looks
close to normal execpt for one outlier.
Figure 3.14: Residual analysis for the second most significant gene-SNP pair produced
by the Cross model. These plots indicate a divergence from the linearity given the
declining trend in plot a.
35
==PAGE:42==
3.2. EQTL PREDCITION AND MODEL TO DATA FITNESS
The most significant gene is the Zinc finger and SCAN domain-containing protein 26
(ZSCAN26). This might be a false positive due to the misfit of the model assumptions.
The p-value distribution is quite close to uniform, with a slight skew toward lower values
as seen in Fig. 3.15. The peak at zero is caused by all eQTLs within the genes are set to
a distance of 0.
(a) Histogram of the p-values produced by
the Cross model
(b) Uniform QQ-plot of the p-values pro-
duced by the Cross model
Figure 3.15: Close to uniform distribution of p-values produce by the Cross model.
3.2.5
Interaction models eQTL predictions and assumption compli-
ance
When using the interaction model the significant SNPs seem distributed evenly around
the gene as seen in Fig. 3.16, indicating random eQTLs.
36
==PAGE:43==
3.2. EQTL PREDCITION AND MODEL TO DATA FITNESS
Figure 3.16: Plot of the p-value gene-SNP distance distribution produced by the in-
teraction model. There is no clear enrichment in eQLTs close to the gene. The peak
at zero is caused by all eQTLs within the genes are set to a distance of 0.
The residuals from the interaction model seen in in Fig. 3.17 and 3.18 are random and
normal.
(a) Scatter plot of fitted and residual values
for interaction model.
(b) QQ plot of residuals from the interac-
tion model.
Figure 3.17: Residual analysis for the most significant pair found by the interaction
model. (a) show a random scatter with constant variance. The residuals seem normal
as seen in (b).
37
==PAGE:44==
3.2. EQTL PREDCITION AND MODEL TO DATA FITNESS
(a) Scatter plot of fitted and residual values
for interaction model.
(b) QQ plot of residuals from the interac-
tion model.
Figure 3.18: Residual analysis for the second most significant pair found by the
interaction model. (a) show a random scatter with constant variance. The residuals
seem normal as seen in (b).
The SNP p-value interaction does not correlate with the p-value from the linear model as
seen in Fig. 3.19.
(a) Scatter of the p-values produced by the
Linear MatrixEQTL and Interaction models.
No clear trend is visible.
(b) Log scale scatter of the p-values pro-
duced by the Linear MatrixEQTL and Inter-
action models. No clear trend is visible.
Figure 3.19: These figures compare the p-values for the SNP effect produced by the
linear and interaction models. They show no clear correlation.
The most significant gene-SNP pair is with the gene transcript ENST00000360844.6 that
is transcriped to gene Sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin 14 (SIGLEC14). Sailic acids is used
38
==PAGE:45==
3.3. SUMMARY OF RESULTS
in neural transmission and synaptogenesis in the brain [40].
Given the divergence from uniform distribution seen in Fig. 3.20 the model has significant
problems with false positives.
(a) Histogram of the p-values produced by
the interaction model
(b) Uniform QQ-plot of the p-values pro-
duced by the interaction model
Figure 3.20: The plots show a divergence from uniform distribution. The divergence
is to lower p-values which indicates a concerning increase in false positive rates.
3.3
Summary of results
The optimal power for small sample studies is simulated to be at minimum 30% MAF. No
missing alleles is optimal, but to avoid missing significant eQTLs using max 10% missing
alleles keeps the power high.
Given the lack of a clearly defined enrichment of cis-acting eQTLs around the genes found
by ANOVA and Interaction model, it is difficult to define a good cis-distance. It is shown
that making the cis-distance shorter decrease the FDR correction factor significantly.
The Linear model fits the data set well and produces a uniform p-value distribution as
expected for mostly non-significant tests. This modes does not have enough power, in a
sample of 24 subjects, to find results significant results after FDR correction. The most
significant gene-SNP pair involves the gene NRN1 that is translated into Neuritin which
promotes neurite outgrowth and neural plasticity in the brain.
39
==PAGE:46==
3.3. SUMMARY OF RESULTS
The ANOVA model does not fit the data well and the analysis is disturbed by outliers.
This is combined with a p-value distribution that is skewed toward high p-values. The
most significant gene-SNP pair is with the gene DCC-interacting protein 13-beta APPL2
which plays a role in cold-induced adaptive thermogenesis.
The Cross model does not fit the data well when cross correlating with age. The p-value
distribution is uniform indicating random p-values. The most significant gene found by
this model is Zinc finger and SCAN domain-containing protein 26 (ZSCAN26).
The Interaction model fit the data well but the p-vlaue distribution is skewed toward
low p-values. This indicate an false positive enrichment after FDR correction. The most
significant gene found by this model is Sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin 14 (SIGLEC14)
which is used in neural transmission and synaptogenesis.
40
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4
Discussion of model performance
and proposed improvements
In the following assembly of other tools within the QTL field, that were considered for
this thesis will be discussed. This includes a short presentation and reasoning for not
using the tools in this study. Existing methods for paired eQTL analysis are considered
and their difference from intervention studies discussed.
The performance of the statistical models will be evaluated based on the p-values produced
and the residuals of the most significant pairs. The setup for analyzing the residuals is
based on the most significant pairs. This will make it possible to distinguish clear false
positives. False negatives that do not fit the model assumptions will need a different
model to get significant results, so no residual analysis of these is needed. This is an
efficient way to evaluate the tools, without missing the most important mistakes of the
models. Finally the most significant gene-SNP pairs are considered in relation the pain
intervention.
4.1
Unapplied tools for eQLT analysis
This section presents an assembly of other tools within the QTL field, that were considered
for this thesis. The models behind the tools will be presented and evaluated.
R/qtl is a R-package tool for QLT analysis, but has the R/eqtl wrapper for eQTL analysis
[41]. It is quite a bit slower that MatrixEQTL, but still scales well for eQLT analysis.
Hidden Markov models are used to deal with missing and erroneous genotyping, and is
good when working with experimental crosses. Due to the high computational time and
41
==PAGE:48==
4.1. UNAPPLIED TOOLS FOR EQLT ANALYSIS
no manual cis-distance input, this tool has not been explored further [31, 41].
eMap is an eQTL mapping tool based on linear regression [42]. It uses a multiparameter
additive model with backwards selection, to cover both additive and dominant alleles. It
is good at catching the dominant effects as well as these diverge from the linear effect of
additive alleles. This more complex model uses more degrees of freedom making it best
suited for data sets with more subjects. At the same time this tool is many times slower
that MatrixEQTL, making it less fitting as a primary analysis tool [31, 42].
snpmatrix uses Cochran-Armitage test which is a modification of the chi squared test that
is often used for categorical data. The order of the categorical parameter is inferred, thus
improving power. It is expected to get similar results, as from a correlation analysis as
done in MatrixEQTL. At the same time this model is not nearly as fast as MatrixEQTL or
FastQTL, making it not as interesting to use as it does not add any new benefits [43, 31].
Merlin is a pedigree analysis tool for QTL with an array of other functionalities. It utilizes
a sparse tree structure to map gene flow within pedigrees. Likelihood ratios are then used
to identify significant gene-SNP pairs. This is an interesting approach, but as the data
does not have any pedigree information, it will not fit into this model [31, 44].
Qxpak.5 is a tool for various statistical genetic analysis, one of which is QTL analysis
[31]. Interestingly it utilizes mixed effect models with a likelihood maximization. This
has not been tested as it scales badly for eQTL analysis. It is also based on a unique
input format not shared with other tools making it difficult to fit into a standard analysis
pipeline [31].
FastMap uses an interesting approach to test for combined effects of different SNPs [31].
It builds a subset summation tree of strain distribution patterns (SDP) to quickly calcu-
late the covariance in each SNP-set - transcript pair. From there it is a simple ANOVA
test. The calculations are optimized to a computational time level only a factor 10 from
matrixETQTL [31]. As the test of multiple SNPs interaction with the expression level is
outside the scope, this tool has not been tested [45, 31].
42
==PAGE:49==
4.2. STUDIES INVOLVING PAIRED TESTS
4.2
Studies involving paired tests
As the subject data of this project is paired it is interesting to investigate other studies
analyzing paired data. The two types of studies that have been considered are multi-tissue
data and twin data analysis. Twin studies of identical twins can be seen as paired, since
both twins have the same genotype. This does not give the same possibility of subtracting
one sample from an other, as is the case with intervention studies. Multi-tissue studies
are grouped with the same genotype, often across more than two samples.
The twin studies considered in this thesis look for eQTLs with similar effects in both
twins. Twins are used to remove the environmental factors affecting the gene expression,
as well as the interactions between multiple SNPs. In essence they search for similar
expression profiles between two individuals with exactly the same genes. Twin studies
increase power by ensuring that there are more participants with the same genotype and
to remove noise. As Twin studies are trying to remove effects from external stimuli to
only focus on the genetic part of expression regulation, the method is not applicable to
intervention studies with outside stimuli such as cold pressor test. Thus this approach
will not be appropriate for the intervention study, as it is trying to find eQTLs effected
by the pain stimuli [13, 46].
The purpose of multi-tissue samples is to track differences and similarities in the effect of
eQTLs across tissues. This is often done by searching for tissues where the eQTLs have
similar effects. This approach gives higher power, as more samples can be used in the
study. This approach is not useful for paired studies, since they are only searching for
samples with differential expression. Information given by a before and after would be
omitted sample in intervention studies [47, 13].
4.3
Linear models data fit
The assumptions for the linear model are assessed to be met by, at least, the most sig-
nificant pairs. The independence assumption is fulfilled by obtaining each sample from a
different person. There is no trend in the residuals in Fig. 3.4a and Fig. 3.5a, indicating
that the linear assumption fits the data well. The variance in residuals is constant and
normally distributed as can be seen in Fig. 3.4 and Fig. 3.5.
The p-values produced by the linear models are uniformly distributed as can be seen in
Fig. 3.6. Which is expected when most of the tests are random. The analysis shows that
43
==PAGE:50==
4.4. ANOVA MODELS DATA MISFIT AND P-VALUE SKEW
linear models fits the data well. The models produce no significant results indicating that
data sets below 24 samples lack the necessary power for linear models.
The most significant gene found by the model is Neuritin as mentioned in Section 3.2.1.
As Neuritin promotes neural plasticity it is clearly related to the nervous system. It is
reasonable that this gene is related to pain sensation making it a promising candidate for
future investiation.
4.4
ANOVA models data misfit and p-value skew
There appears to be challenges with the assumptions of the ANOVA model when analyzing
the most significant pairs. Fig. 3.7a and Fig. 3.8a do not have equal variance between the
different groups. This is mainly because one group only consists of a single observation.
Given that at least the 30 most significant pairs have similar trends indicates that the
significance of this model is outlier driven. It might indicate an inflated false positive rate.
It is probably due to the small sample size, that allows many genotypes to have groups
containing only a single observation.
Fig. 3.9 show a distribution that is clearly not uniform. As it is skewed towards higher
p-values it does not indicate an increase in false positive rate, but might increase the
false negative rate. This is a challange, but not as alarming as the positive results can
be reliable. In general this model requires larger sample sizes to work, as this can both
correct false negatives and fill the genotype groups with more than a single observation.
To further emphasise that the ANOVA model mostly produces false positives, the distance
between gene and SNPs, of FDR significant pairs, is uniform as seen in Fig. 3.9. This
figure shows an uniform distribution of SNPs from -1e6 to 1e6 positions relative to the
gene. If many of the eQLTs are real, an increased frequency would be expected close to
the gene, as eQLTs from a biological perspective are more likely to be found here.
The most significant gene found by the model is DCC-interacting protein 13-beta APPL2
which seems to be cold related. Due to the misfit of the model this result might be a false
positive, but it can make sense with the biological function.
44
==PAGE:51==
4.5. SIMILARITIES BETWEEN ANOVA AND LINEAR MODELS
4.5
Similarities between ANOVA and Linear mod-
els
As ANOVA and Linear models are quite similar it is interesting to compare the p-values
they produce. This can indicate whether one can replace the other, or if they can be used
along side each other. The linear model is searching for additive signals, but as shown
in Section 3.1.2 it is also able to detect dominant effects to some extent. The ANOVA
model is intended to detect dominant and recessive effects. Fig. 3.11 shows the ANOVA
model detecting many of the same pairs as the linear model, which support the overlap
in purpose.
The two models are essentially the same when only looking at one combined minor allele
group, as illustrated by the perfect curves in Fig. 3.12. In biological terms this setup
is analyzing only dominant effects. IT show that the ANOVA model does not find any
dominant effects as no FDR significant results appear. This, combined with the outlier
driven false positives for recessive eQTLS discussed in Section 4.4, indicate that the power
is too low for the ANOVA model. It also indicates that a linear model might be more
suitable for finding dominant effects when working with small samples.
4.6
Cross models data fitness and multiple testing
vulnerability
The Cross model indicates some challenges with the model assumptions. Fig. 3.13 and
3.14 show a linear sloped trend indicating a challenge with the linearity of the model.
This can origin from a bad choice of covariate to cross correlate with, or a more general
mismatch of the model. Otherwise the residuals seem normal and, aside from the outlier,
the homoscedasticity is achieved. This model does not find any significant pairs after
FDR correction, which might be due to the mismatch of the model and quite likely the
low power.
As this model is searching for the interaction between a covariate and the SNP, the p-
values do not correlate with the p-values from the other models. They are not comparable
and the model can not be combined with the other models in a meaningful way.
The Cross model is of interest if previous experiments indicates a clear covariate depen-
dence. Without this testing cross relations with multiple covariates will lead to astronom-
45
==PAGE:52==
4.7. INTERACTION MODELS DATA FITNESS AND SKEWED P-VALUES
ical FDR correction factors or possible p-hacking (undisclosed multiple testing without
correction that lead to inflated significance levels).
4.7
Interaction models data fitness and skewed p-
values
Fig. 3.17 and Fig. 3.18 show nice residual match for Interaction model assumptions,
given the most significant pairs. The residuals are normally distributed with no clear
divergence from linearity or homoscedasticity. The p-values produced are uniform as seen
in Fig. 3.20 showing a clear skew towards lower p-values. This indicates a false positive
challenge that has to be addressed. It might be possible to correct by tweaking the model
setup. The source of the skew has to be explored by analyzing the results of the current
setup in further detail.
The uniformity in distance from the gene as seen in Fig. 3.16 is an additional challenge.
It indicates that a majority of the pairs are false positives. It is expected that SNPs closer
to, rather than further from, the gene are more likely to impact the expression of that
gene. This might be possible to solve with a larger sample size, that can decrease the
likelihood of significant trends appearing at random.
Fig. 3.19 show no correlation between the SNP effect p-value produced by the interaction
and base linear models. This implies that the MatrixEQTL model can not be used to limit
the testing with the interaction model. With no existing tool that can be used to limit
the processing time for the interaction model, there is a clear need for a computationally
optimized version of the interaction model.
The most significant gene found by the Interaction model is Sialic acid-binding Ig-like
lectin 14 (SIGLEC14). This is a plausible true positive, as it is related to neural trans-
mission and synaptogenesis in the brain. This finding has to be replicated to confirm the
validity.
46
==PAGE:53==
4.8. POSSIBLE FUTURE WORKS AND IDEAS FOR IMPROVEMENTS
4.8
Possible future works and ideas for improve-
ments
MatrixEQTL and FastQTL are the fastest tools for eQTL analysis. They fit the data and
the statistical models included in these tools cover most of the implemented methods for
eQTL analysis. So it is recommended to utilize one of these for future works.
Given the relative success of the Interaction model it is interesting to study it further for
paired eQTL analysis. This would first of all include making a computationally effective
version, possibly by matrix calculation. It is vital to optimize, as the implementation of
the model in this thesis is very ineffective and no existing fast model correlates well with
it. Testing the model on simulated data will make it possible to estimate the accuracy
and precision of the model. It might also show flaws in the model that can indicate how
the high false positive rate can be lowered.
Neuritin and Sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin 14 are both related to the nervous system,
so it is interesting to further study these pathways in relation to pain. Pain has a high
impact on memory creation which makes sence with these proteins as they are related to
neuron plasticity. If similar results can be found in different data sets, it becomes likely
that there is actually some effect off the eQTL.
ANOVA models should not be used for future works with small samples due to the large
impact outliers have on the results. It is also unlikely that Cross models will be viable to
use in small sample studies as there is not high enough power to test multiple covariates
and find the best one.
The Linear model is a good fit for the data and ready to use for future analysis. The
model did not produce any significant results in this study, so higher power is probably
needed. Optimally it will be with minimum 30% MAF and maximum 10% missing allele
filters.
47
==PAGE:54==
4.8. POSSIBLE FUTURE WORKS AND IDEAS FOR IMPROVEMENTS
48
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Concussion of method evaluation
and data preparation
The linear model fits the data well when using the difference in expression as dependent
factor. Due to the low power and high multiple testing correction no significant eQTLs
are found using this model. Even though the linear model is for finding linear trends, it
also has relatively high power for finding dominant effects in small samples.
The ANOVA model does not work well with the small sample size. Minor allele groups
with only one observation produce significant results based on outliers. This inflates the
FDR even with the skew toward higher p-values. The ANOVA model is a poor model
when working with samples that are small enough to have many genotypes with single
observation allele groups.
The Cross model shows some divergence from linearity using age as cross affecting co-
variate. This model is only meaningful with a prior knowledge of interaction between
gene expression and a specific covariate. Given the limited use of this model it is not the
primary recommendation for small sample eQTL analysis.
The novel Interaction model fit the data well and uses the full potential of an intervention
study. This model produce significant results, even after FDR correction. The model has
a clear skew toward lower p-values resulting in an inflated false positive rate. This needs
to be addressed before the model can be used as a general tool.
Due to the many layers of multiple testing with the different models, the eQTLS found in
this thesis cannot be trusted in isolation. This thesis is focused on find the best possible
way to analyze small sample intervention eQTL data.
49
==PAGE:56==
When working with small sample sizes it is recommended to sort the data as much as
possible, to lower multiple testing correction. This of course has to be done in accordance
with the data analyzed. With samples below 24 observations a MAF limit of minimum
30% should be used. This of course varies with the exact size of the sample. Missing filter
of 10% is appropriate to keep the power high, without loosing many eQTLs.
In conclusion the linear model is currently the best fit for small sample intervention
studies. The Interaction model shows promise, but has some challenges to solve before it
can be used as a general tool. It is recommended to filter the MAF at minimum 30% and
missing genotypes at max 10%. It is also important to filter based on LD, and limit the
transcriptome to elements relevant for the study, for example only protein coding RNA.
50
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1]
Harald Breivik et al. “Survey of chronic pain in Europe: Prevalence, impact on daily
life, and treatment”. In: European Journal of Pain 10.4 (2006), pp. 287–287. issn:
10903801. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpain.2005.06.009. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/16095934http://doi.wiley.com/10.1016/j.ejpain.2005.
06.009.
[2]
Tom Foulkes and John N Wood. “Pain genes.” In: PLoS genetics 4.7 (2008), e1000086.
issn: 1553-7404. doi: 10 . 1371 / journal . pgen . 1000086. url: http : / / www .
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18654615http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/
articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC2432024.
[3]
Patrick Richard Darrell J. Gaskin and Joseph Walburn. Neuroimaging of Pain. Ed.
by Luca Saba. Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 1–17. isbn: 9783319480442
and 9783319480466. doi: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 48046 - 6 _ 1. url: http : / /
production.datastore.cvt.dk/filestore?oid=595ccd445010df732980923b&
targetid=595ccd445010df732980923d.
[4]
Fiona M Blyth et al. “Chronic pain, work performance and litigation”. In: Pain
103.1 (2003), pp. 41–47. issn: 0304-3959. doi: 10.1016/S0304-3959(02)00380-
9. url: http : / / content . wkhealth . com / linkback / openurl ? sid = WKPTLP :
landingpage&an=00006396-200305000-00006.
[5]
Sarah Wetherington et al. “Pain quality of life as measured by utilities”. In: Pain
Medicine (United States) 15.5 (2014), pp. 865–870. issn: 15264637. doi: 10.1111/
pme.12405.
[6]
Daniel Krashin, Andrea Trescot, and Natalia Murinova. “Opioids and Pain Treat-
ment”. In: Natural Products. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013,
pp. 1367–1382. isbn: 9783642221446. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-22144-6_45. url:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-22144-6_45.
i
==PAGE:58==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[7]
A. B. Niculescu et al. “Towards precision medicine for pain: diagnostic biomarkers
and repurposed drugs”. In: Molecular Psychiatry 24.4 (2019), pp. 501–522. issn:
1359-4184. doi: 10.1038/s41380-018-0345-5. url: http://www.nature.com/
articles/s41380-018-0345-5.
[8]
Gigtforeningen. Smertestillende medicin mod gigt. url: https://www.gigtforeningen.
dk/viden-om-gigt/behandlingsmuligheder/medicin/smertestillende-medicin/
(visited on 03/31/2020).
[9]
Gigtforeningen. Behandling af kroniske smerter – typer af smertebehandling. url:
https://www.gigtforeningen.dk/viden-om-gigt/behandlingsmuligheder/
smertebehandling/ (visited on 03/31/2020).
[10]
Irene Tracey and Patrick W. Mantyh. “The Cerebral Signature for Pain Percep-
tion and Its Modulation”. In: Neuron 55.3 (2007), pp. 377–391. issn: 08966273.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.07.012. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/17678852https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0896627307005338.
[11]
Edgar A. Hines and George E. Brown. “The cold pressor test for measuring the
reactibility of the blood pressure: Data concerning 571 normal and hypertensive
subjects”. In: American Heart Journal 11.1 (1936), pp. 1–9. issn: 0002-8703. doi:
10.1016/S0002-8703(36)90370-8. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/abs/pii/S0002870336903708.
[12]
Jae Hoon Sul et al. “Effectively Identifying eQTLs from Multiple Tissues by Com-
bining Mixed Model and Meta-analytic Approaches”. In: PLoS Genetics 9.6 (2013).
Ed. by Nicholas J. Schork, e1003491. issn: 1553-7404. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pgen.1003491. url: https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1003491.
[13]
Elin Grundberg et al. “Mapping cis-and trans-regulatory effects across multiple
tissues in twins”. In: Nature Genetics 44.10 (2012), pp. 1084–1089. issn: 10614036.
doi: 10.1038/ng.2394.
[14]
Alexandra C. Nica and Emmanouil T. Dermitzakis. Expression quantitative trait
loci: Present and future. 2013. doi: 10 . 1098 / rstb . 2012 . 0362. url: /pmc /
articles/PMC3682727/?report=abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC3682727/.
[15]
David Sadava et al. Life The Science of Biology. Ed. by Inc Sinauer Associates.
10th ed. Sunderland, 2014, p. 1442. isbn: 978-1-4292-9864-3.
ii
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[16]
HARVEY LODISH et al. Molecular Cell Biology. Ed. by Nandini Ahuja and Abigail
Fagan. 8th ed. New York: Katherine Ahr Parker, 2016, p. 1278. isbn: 978-1-4641-
8339-3.
[17]
Jennifer Zou et al. “Leveraging allelic imbalance to refine fine-mapping for eQTL
studies.” In: PLoS genetics 15.12 (2019), e1008481. issn: 1553-7404. doi: 10.1371/
journal . pgen . 1008481. url: http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / pubmed /
31834882http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=
PMC6952111.
[18]
Ravi K Patel and Mukesh Jain. “NGS QC Toolkit: A Toolkit for Quality Control
of Next Generation Sequencing Data”. In: PLOS ONE 7.2 (2012), pp. 1–7. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0030619. url: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0030619.
[19]
Lisette J.A. Kogelman et al. “Comparing migraine with and without aura to healthy
controls using RNA sequencing”. In: Cephalalgia 0.0 (2019), pp. 1–10. issn: 14682982.
doi: 10.1177/0333102419851812.
[20]
PAXgene. PAXgene Blood RNA Kit IVD - QIAGEN Online Shop. url: https:
// www. qiagen .com/us/products/diagnostics- and- clinical- research/
clinical-sample-processing/paxgene-blood-rna-kit-ivd/#productdetails
(visited on 10/07/2019).
[21]
Jang-il Sohn and Jin-Wu Nam. “The present and future of de novo whole-genome
assembly”. In: Briefings in Bioinformatics 19.1 (2016), bbw096. doi: 10.1093/bib/
bbw096. url: https://academic.oup.com/bib/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/
bib/bbw096.
[22]
Illumina. Illumina Sequencing by Synthesis - YouTube. url: https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=fCd6B5HRaZ8 (visited on 10/09/2019).
[23]
Illumina. “NovaSeq 6000 Sequencing System”. In: 770-2016-025-H 4.February (2016),
pp. 1–4. url: https://www.illumina.com/content/dam/illumina-marketing/
documents / products / datasheets / novaseq - 6000 - system - specification -
sheet-770-2016-025.pdf.
[24]
Nicolas L Bray et al. “Near-optimal probabilistic RNA-seq quantification”. In: Na-
ture Biotechnology 34 (2016), p. 525. url: https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.
3519http://10.0.4.14/nbt.3519https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.
3519#supplementary-information.
iii
==PAGE:60==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[25]
Qin Qin Huang et al. “Power, false discovery rate and Winner’s Curse in eQTL
studies.” In: Nucleic acids research 46.22 (2018), e133. issn: 1362-4962. doi: 10.
1093/nar/gky780. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30189032http:
//www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC6294523.
[26]
Montgomery Slatkin. Linkage disequilibrium - Understanding the evolutionary past
and mapping the medical future. 2008. doi: 10.1038/nrg2361. url: /pmc/articles/
PMC5124487/?report=abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC5124487/.
[27]
Azra Kurbasic and Ola Hössjer. “A general method for linkage disequilibrium correc-
tion for multipoint linkage and association”. In: Genetic Epidemiology 32.7 (2008),
pp. 647–657. issn: 07410395. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20339. url: https://pubmed.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18481794/.
[28]
S. Love, M.I., Huber, W., Anders. “Moderated estimation of fold change and dis-
persion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2”. In: Genome Biology (2014).
[29]
Simon Anders and Wolfgang Huber. “Differential expression analysis for sequence
count data”. In: Genome Biology 11.10 (2010), R106. issn: 1474-760X. doi: 10.
1186/gb-2010-11-10-r106. url: https://genomebiology.biomedcentral.
com/articles/10.1186/gb-2010-11-10-r106.
[30]
Halit Ongen et al. “Fast and efficient QTL mapper for thousands of molecular phe-
notypes”. In: Bioinformatics 32.10 (2016), pp. 1479–1485. issn: 1367-4803. doi: 10.
1093/bioinformatics/btv722. url: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/
article-lookup/doi/10.1093/bioinformatics/btv722.
[31]
Fred A Wright, Andrey A Shabalin, and Ivan Rusyn. “Computational tools for
discovery and interpretation of expression quantitative trait loci.” In: Pharmacoge-
nomics 13.3 (2012), pp. 343–52. issn: 1744-8042. doi: 10.2217/pgs.11.185. url:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22304583http://www.pubmedcentral.
nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC3295835.
[32]
Andrey A Shabalin. “Matrix eQTL: ultra fast eQTL analysis via large matrix oper-
ations.” In: Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 28.10 (2012), pp. 1353–8. issn: 1367-
4811. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bts163. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/22492648http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.
fcgi?artid=PMC3348564.
[33]
Joseph K. Pickrell et al. “Understanding mechanisms underlying human gene ex-
pression variation with RNA sequencing”. In: Nature 464.7289 (2010), pp. 768–772.
issn: 00280836. doi: 10.1038/nature08872.
iv
==PAGE:61==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[34]
Jean Baptiste Veyrieras et al. “High-resolution mapping of expression-QTLs yields
insight into human gene regulation”. In: PLoS Genetics 4.10 (2008). issn: 15537390.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000214.
[35]
Duncan J Murdoch, Yu-Ling Tsai, and James Adcock. “P -Values are Random
Variables”. In: The American Statistician 62.3 (2008), pp. 242–245. issn: 0003-1305.
doi: 10.1198/000313008X332421. url: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/
10.1198/000313008X332421.
[36]
Aaron A Klammer, Christopher Y Park, and William Stafford Noble. “Statistical
calibration of the SEQUEST XCorr function.” In: Journal of proteome research
8.4 (2009), pp. 2106–13. issn: 1535-3893. doi: 10.1021/pr8011107. url: http:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19275164http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.
gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC2807930.
[37]
Rahmann S. Köster J. “Snakemake – a scalable bioinformatics workflow engine”. In:
Bioinformatics (2012).
[38]
Jin jing Yao et al. Functions and the related signaling pathways of the neurotrophic
factor neuritin. 2018. doi: 10.1038/aps.2017.197. url: www.chinaphar.com.
[39]
Uniprot. APPL2 - DCC-interacting protein 13-beta - Homo sapiens (Human) -
APPL2 gene and protein. url: https://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/Q8NEU8
(visited on 07/23/2020).
[40]
Ajit Varki. Sialic acids in human health and disease. 2008. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.
2008.06.002. url: /pmc/articles/PMC2553044/?report=abstracthttps://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2553044/.
[41]
K. W. Broman et al. “R/qtl: QTL mapping in experimental crosses”. In: Bioinfor-
matics 19.7 (2003), pp. 889–890. issn: 1367-4803. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/
btg112. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12724300https://
academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/bioinformatics/
btg112.
[42]
Wei Sun. “eQTL Analysis by Linear Model”. In: (2009), pp. 1–7.
[43]
David Clayton and Hin Tak Leung. “An R package for analysis of whole-genome
association studies”. In: Human Heredity 64.1 (2007), pp. 45–51. issn: 00015652.
doi: 10.1159/000101422.
[44]
Gonçalo R. Abecasis et al. “Merlin—rapid analysis of dense genetic maps using
sparse gene flow trees”. In: Nature Genetics 30.1 (2002), pp. 97–101. issn: 1061-
4036. doi: 10.1038/ng786. url: http://www.nature.com/articles/ng786z.
v
==PAGE:62==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[45]
Daniel M. Gatti et al. “FastMap: Fast eQTL mapping in homozygous popula-
tions”. In: Bioinformatics 25.4 (2009), pp. 482–489. issn: 1460-2059. doi: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/btn648. url: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/
article-lookup/doi/10.1093/bioinformatics/btn648.
[46]
Zhaoyu Yin et al. “Fast eQTL Analysis for Twin Studies.” In: Genetic epidemiology
39.5 (2015), pp. 357–65. issn: 1098-2272. doi: 10.1002/gepi.21900. url: http:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25865703http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.
gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC4469571.
[47]
Gen Li et al. “An Empirical Bayes Approach for Multiple Tissue eQTL Analysis”.
In: (2013). arXiv: 1311.2948. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1311.2948.
vi
==PAGE:63==
Appendix
5.1
Read sliced data into R
Code for reading data into R in sliced data matrix format. This is a method used by
matrixEQTL to conserve RAM.
1
2 #!/usr/bin/env Rscript
3 library(snpStats)
4 library(DESeq2)
5 library(MatrixEQTL)
6
7 if ( F ){
8
# read the snp data
9
snp = read.plink( bed = "snp.bed",
10
bim = "snp.bim",
11
fam = "snp.fam")
12
load("txi.RData")
13 }
14
15 # snps and location
16 snps_location_file_name = paste0(gen_data_dir, "snp_pos.txt")
17
18 # expression count and location
19 gene_location_file_name = paste0(gen_data_dir, "gene_pos.txt");
20
vii
==PAGE:64==
5.1. READ SLICED DATA INTO R
21 # covariates file
22 errorCovariance = numeric()
23
24
25
26 # read snp data in
27 snps = SlicedData$new()
28 # change delimiter
29 snps$fileDelimiter = " "
30 # there are two rows of ids
31 snps$fileSkipRows = 2
32 # read in larger slices
33 snps$fileSliceSize = 10000
34 snps$LoadFile( SNP_file_name )
35
36 # positions
37 snpspos = read.table(snps_location_file_name , header = F,
stringsAsFactors = FALSE , sep = " ")
38
39 genepos = read.table(gene_location_file_name , header = F,
stringsAsFactors = FALSE , sep = " ")
40
41
42 # read gene data in
43 gene = SlicedData$new()
44 # change delimiter
45 gene$fileDelimiter = " "
46 # read in larger slices
47 gene$fileSliceSize = 10000
48 gene$LoadFile( expression_file_name )
49
50 # read covariates
51 cvrt = SlicedData$new()
52 # change delimiter
53 cvrt$fileDelimiter = " "
54 # read in larger slices
viii
==PAGE:65==
5.1. READ SLICED DATA INTO R
55 cvrt$fileSliceSize = 10000
56 cvrt$LoadFile( covariates_file_name )
ix
==PAGE:66==
5.2. MATRIXEQTL ANALYSIS CODE
5.2
MatrixEQTL analysis code
1 #!/usr/bin/env Rscript
2 library(MatrixEQTL)
3
4 # get args
5 args = commandArgs(trailingOnly=TRUE)
6
7 # define input parameters
8 SNP_file_name = args[1]
9 expression_file_name = args[2]
10 covariates_file_name = args[3]
11 output_file_name_cis = args[4]
12 cisDist = args[5]
13 model = args[6]
14 output_file_name_single = args[7]
15
16 # set dirs
17 gen_data_dir = "/data/projects/people/mamsto/data/"
18 script_dir = "/data/projects/people/mamsto/scripts/"
19
20 # load data
21 source(paste0(script_dir, "02_read_slicedData.R"))
22
23 # set parameters for matrix EQTL
24 if (model == "modelLINEAR"){
25
useModel = modelLINEAR; # modelANOVA or modelLINEAR or
modelLINEAR_CROSS
26 }
27 if (model == "modelANOVA"){
28
useModel = modelANOVA
29 }
30 if (model == "modelLINEAR_CROSS"){
31
useModel = modelLINEAR_CROSS
32 }
33
x
==PAGE:67==
5.2. MATRIXEQTL ANALYSIS CODE
34 pvOutputThreshold_tra = 0
35 pvOutputThreshold_cis = 1
36
37 # Output file name
38 output_file_name_tra = ""
39
40 # run analysis
41 me = Matrix_eQTL_main(
42
snps = snps ,
43
gene = gene ,
44
cvrt = cvrt ,
45
output_file_name = output_file_name_tra,
46
pvOutputThreshold = pvOutputThreshold_tra,
47
useModel = useModel ,
48
errorCovariance = errorCovariance ,
49
verbose = TRUE ,
50
output_file_name.cis = output_file_name_cis,
51
pvOutputThreshold.cis = pvOutputThreshold_cis,
52
snpspos = snpspos ,
53
genepos = genepos ,
54
cisDist = as.numeric(cisDist),
55
pvalue.hist = TRUE ,
56
min.pv.by.genesnp = FALSE ,
57
noFDRsaveMemory = FALSE)
xi
==PAGE:68==
5.3. CORRECTING P-VALUE FROM FASTQTL
5.3
Correcting p-value from fastQTL
1
2 #!/usr/bin/env Rscript
3 library(qvalue)
4 args = c( "/data/projects/people/mamsto/results/linear_
comparison/fastQTL_cis5e4.tab", "/data/projects/people/
mamsto/results/linear_comparison/fastQTL_cis5e4_pval.tab")
5 args = commandArgs(trailingOnly=TRUE)
6
7 # open file
8 d = read.table(args[1], head=F, stringsAsFactors=F)
9 d = d[complete.cases(d), ]
10
11 # rename
12 colnames(d) = c("pid", "nvar", "shape1", "shape2", "dummy", "
sid", "dist", "npval", "slope", "ppval", "bpval")
13 #plot(d$ppval, d$bpval, xlab="Direct method", ylab="Beta
approximation", main="Check plot")
14 #abline(0, 1, col="red")
15
16 # correct p value
17 #d$bonferroni = p.adjust(d$bpval, method="bonferroni")
18 d$fdr = p.adjust(d$bpval , method="fdr")
19
20 d = d[order(d$fdr),]
21
22 write.table(d, file = args[2], quote = F, sep = "\t", row.names
= F)
xii
==PAGE:69==
5.4. INTERACTION MODEL CODE
5.4
Interaction model code
1
2 #!/usr/bin/env Rscript
3 library(tidyverse)
4 library(gtools)
5 library(ggplot2)
6 library(reshape2)
7 args_int = c("/data/projects/people/mamsto/data/maf01_geno01/
snp_transpose.raw",
8
"/data/projects/people/mamsto/data/maf01_geno01/txi_
norm_counts.txt",
9
"/data/projects/people/mamsto/data/maf01_geno01/
covariates_subt_numeric.txt",
10
"/data/projects/people/mamsto/results/maf01_geno01/
matrixEQTL_cis1e6_LINEAR.txt",
11
"/data/projects/people/mamsto/results/maf01_geno01/
interaction_cis1e6.txt")
12 args = c("1")
13
14 args = commandArgs(trailingOnly=TRUE)
15
16 # read in snp, expression , covaection values and pair
17 snp = read.table(args_int[1], header=T, row.names = 1, skip =
1)
18 expr = read.table(args_int[2], header=T)
19 cova = read.table(args_int[3], header=T)
20 cova = data.frame( age = t(cova), sample = colnames(cova))
21 names(cova)[1] = "age"
22
23
24 # read the pair data in efficiently
25 run = as.integer( args[1] )
26 size = 100000
27 min = (size * (run -1) + 1)
28 max =
(size * (run))
xiii
==PAGE:70==
5.4. INTERACTION MODEL CODE
29
30 # read
31 pair_orig = read.table(args_int[4], skip = min,
32
nrow = size)
33 # add names
34 names( pair_orig ) = c("SNP", "gene", "beta", "F.test", "p.
value", "FDR")
35 pair = pair_orig
36
37 # make interaction test
38 i = 1
39 start = grepl("_start", colnames(expr))
40 end = grepl("_end", colnames(expr))
41 start_names = str_remove( colnames(expr)[start], "_start" )
42 end_names = str_remove( colnames(expr)[end], "_end" )
43
44 #loop trough all pairs
45 result = data.frame()
46
47 for (i in 1:nrow(pair)){
48
#exttract values
49
SNP = data.frame( snp = t( snp[pair$SNP[i] == rownames(snp),]
),
50
sample = colnames(snp))
51
names(SNP)[1] = "snp"
52
START = data.frame( st = t( expr[pair$gene[i]== rownames(expr
),
53
start] ),
54
sample = start_names )
55
names(START)[1] = "st"
56
END = data.frame( en = t( expr[pair$gene[i]== rownames(expr),
57
end] ),
58
sample = end_names )
59
names(END)[1] = "en"
60
61
# pair up the data
xiv
==PAGE:71==
5.4. INTERACTION MODEL CODE
62
data = inner_join(SNP, START , by = "sample")
63
data = inner_join(data, END, by = "sample")
64
data = inner_join(data, cova , by = "sample")
65
data$diff = data$en - data$st
66
67
fit = summary( lm( en ~ snp + snp:st
+ age ,data = data))
68
#
new_pval = fit$coefficients[2,4]
69
#
fit = summary( lm( diff ~ snp + age, data = data))
70
snp_pval =
fit$coefficients[2,4]
71
statistic = fit$coefficients[2,3]
72
beta = fit$coefficients[2,1]
73
interaction_pval = fit$coefficients[4,4]
74
gamma = fit$coefficients[4,1]
75
result = rbind(result , cbind(beta, statistic ,
76
snp_pval , gamma,
77
interaction_pval))
78 }
79
80 # add gene and snp
81 SNP = pair$SNP
82 gene = pair$gene
83 result = cbind(SNP, gene , result)
84
85 write.table(result , file = paste0("interaction_", run, ".txt"),
86
quote = F, row.names = F)
87
88
89 # plot result
90 plot_data = cbind( result , old_pval = pair$p.value)
91
92 ggplot( plot_data , aes(x = snp_pval , y=old_pval))+
93
geom_point() +
94
scale_x_log10()+
95
scale_y_log10()+
96
geom_abline(intercept = 0, slope = 1)
97
xv
==PAGE:72==
5.4. INTERACTION MODEL CODE
98 ggplot( plot_data , aes(x = interaction_pval , y=old_pval))+
99
geom_point() +
100
scale_x_log10()+
101
scale_y_log10()+
102
geom_abline(intercept = 0, slope = 1)
103
104 ggplot( plot_data , aes(x = interaction_pval , y=snp_pval))+
105
geom_point() +
106
scale_x_log10()+
107
scale_y_log10()+
108
geom_abline(intercept = 0, slope = 1)
xvi
