==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
BioDigital Architecture System
Nikolai Skorpe Aasprong, s182710
July 10, 2020
Kongens Lyngby
==PAGE:2==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
Leading up to this thesis I have had three semesters at DTU Architectural Engineering,
where multidisciplinary design has been a dominant concept in most of my courses. I
came to DTU from a background in structural engineering, wanting to learn more about
architectural design and design processes in general.
As a result of having two special courses in Agile Building Design, I found an interest
in parametric design using Grasshopper and web-based communication using Speckle in
Grasshopper. During a course in Advanced Building Design I got hands on experience
on a multidisciplinary project. This increased my awareness about the need for more
flexible and simple design systems.
The thesis has been supervised by the following:
Main Supervisor:
Tim Pat McGinley
Associate Professor
Technical University of Denmark
This thesis was prepared at the department of Civil Engineering at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Masters degree in
Civil Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 10, 2020
Nikolai
Skorpe
Aasprong,
s182710
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Thank you Tim Pat McGinley, for all the guidance throughout the project, and for the
introduction to agile building design.
Thank you, Simon M. Laporte for joining me in case study 2 - Agile E20
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
This thesis focuses on developing an alternative design framework in response to the
increasing complexity in building design projects. The complexity is thought to arrive
from constant technological development and accumulation of design knowledge. This
results in new, specialized design software and design disciplines. Improved integration
and feedback in early stages might better accommodate the increased complexity than
traditional design systems do. Agile building design principles emphasize integration,
and is therefore embedded in this research. Self-organizing principles from biology might
support faster modelling, and thus faster feedback, and are also embedded in this re-
search. The thesis identifies weaknesses in traditional BIM design approaches, and the
complementary benefits of agile and bio. The development of the new framework is based
on two case studies from Agile Building Design courses at DTU, as well as identifying
useful information for early stage design and analogies from building design to develop-
mental biology. An alternative design system is finally proposed, and it includes three
central topics; Agile, Assumptions and Biology. The framework also entails interfaces
between these three topics.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Table of contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
Table of contents
vii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Increasing complexity in building projects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Potential of early stage design improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Reducing late design changes through earlier integration and feedback . .
2
1.4
Exploring the solution space of ”successful” designs with Biology . . . . .
3
1.5
Untangling the web of requirements, constraints and design solutions with
Agile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Merging agile design principles with biological principles
. . . . . . . . .
5
2
Background
7
2.1
Towards an agile biodigital architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Current progress in agile building design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Gaps in early stage design towards better integration . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Concepts from biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.5
Computational approaches to self-organizing building models . . . . . . .
31
2.6
Solution objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3
Methodology
37
3.1
Design Science Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4
Design & Development
39
4.1
Agile E19
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Agile F20
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.3
Identifying agile design assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
==PAGE:10==
viii
Table of contents
4.4
Connecting disciplines from LOD 0 to LOD 200 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.5
Biological analogies to building design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.6
A self-organizing model as state of play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5
Demonstration
63
5.1
The BioDigital Design System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Evaluation
65
6.1
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Conclusion & Communication
67
7.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Bibliography
69
A Aygün’s method for building element design
73
B Paradigm of morphogenetic engineering
75
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
1.1
The MacLeamy curve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1
Stages of the agile biodigital design process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
The biomimetic design process [10] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Illustration of the agile benefits of working with decoupled systems
. . . . .
10
2.4
Three iterations of the agile segments of building design
. . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Tinbergen’s four questions with equivalent agile segments . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Information through project phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.7
Design stratey for energy and environmental building concepts . . . . . . . .
17
2.8
Design concepts that are meaningful to both architecture and MEP . . . . .
18
2.9
Three ”successful” solutions for getting past a wall
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.10 Asymmetrical, radially symmetrical and bilaterally symmetrical examples
from nature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.11 Levels of organization in biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.12 Differentiation of embryonic stem cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.13 Three examples of morphogen gradients, taken from the wing development
of the Drosophila, i.e. ”fruit fly” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.14 Geometries generated by a rule-based CA design process . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.15 Description of the rule based design process used by Cero9 . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.16 Illustrations from chapters on Constructing in Morphogenetic Engineering
.
33
2.17 Illustrations from chapters on Coalescing in Morphogenetic Engineering . . .
34
2.18 Illustrations from chapters on Developing in Morphogenetic Engineering . . .
34
2.19 Illustrations from chapters on Generating in Morphogenetic Engineering
. .
34
4.1
Agile E19 - System Outputs (The far right picture is without walls for visi-
bility purposes) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2
Visualization of accumulated chemo-attractors after simulation . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Grid overlay (on the left) used to rationalize differentiated areas into usable
spaces (on the left) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Final output of the Design Bio System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.5
Visual example of LOD guiding the next LOD for a reinforced concrete beam
51
4.6
Design developing from assumptions to decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.7
Categorization of design assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.8
Three types design changes in the biodigital model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.1
Illustration of the framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Figures
A.1 Aygün’s Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
B.1 Paradigm of morphogenetic engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
==PAGE:13==
List of Tables
2.1
Framework for structural integration with architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Top factors that cause uncertainty
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Stakeholders’ ranking of causes for uncertainty (Top three causes are high-
lighted in each stakeholder column) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4
Performance requirement entities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.5
Hierarchical description of building objects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1
Outputs of design systems ”Space 1” and ”Space 2” . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Outputs of design systems ”Structure 1” and ”Structure 2” . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.3
Outputs of design systems ”MEP 1” and ”MEP 2”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
Inferred inputs of design systems ”Space 1” and ”Space 2” . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.5
Inferred inputs of design systems ”Structure 1” and ”Structure 2” . . . . . .
44
4.6
Inferred inputs of design systems ”MEP 1” and ”MEP 2” . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.7
Inputs and outputs of the Design Bio System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.8
Definitions of DiKon definitions of a reinforced concrete beam . . . . . . . .
51
4.9
Analogy between anatomical and building hierarchies . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.10 MEP related hierarchical analogy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.11 Structure related hierarchical analogy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.12 Architecture related hierarchical analogy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.13 These intentions are, to some extent, present in all building design projects .
60
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Increasing complexity in building projects
Building design projects reach increasing levels of complexity as new technologies emerge.
Innovative software and big data leads to comprehensive building information models
that describe buildings in more detail than ever before.
This allows stakeholders in
building projects to make better decisions about design and economy, and give them
more oversight of the current state of the building project, whether it be in design, con-
struction or operation.
The ability to describe buildings in greater detail also entails modelling buildings in
greater detail. The modelling tasks that previously were done by a few, are now be-
ing distributed among more people with narrower specializations. This allows building
design teams to effectively meet new demands in the AEC industry today through op-
timization. Higher demands are being made towards e.g. sustainability, flexibility, and
psychological effects on users. Meeting these demands requires a complex understanding
of the building design, as they represent a more holistic, or even abstract, description
of the building than e.g. energy consumption or cost demands, which are more easily
quantifiable.
1.2
Potential of early stage design improvements
Integrated design approaches are considered to be the key to meeting all kinds of new de-
mands in the AEC industry. Integrated design takes a more holistic approach to design,
and seeks to design a single entity, rather than an architectural design with structural
elements and MEP systems added to it. It seeks to create a symbiotic relationship be-
tween elements of different disciplines, meaning that at least one discipline benefits from
the relationship.
In order to realize any integrated design approaches, it is necessary to have a platform
at which design coordination can take place. Building Information Models (BIM) are
currently being used for this purpose. BIM centralize all the information about a build-
ing so that it can be visualized, evaluated and communicated to relevant stakeholders
through different stages in a building project. BIM have matured the most in the later
design stages, the stages that deal with documentation and evaluation of building ele-
ments. This can be owed to the increasing technological capacity to store data, which
==PAGE:16==
2
1 Introduction
in turn supports evaluation through data analysis.
A challenge with BIM is that modelling tasks must be completed in order for the design
to be evaluated. This means that BIM can only support integration at a certain design
maturity level.
As the famous Mac Leamy curve, figure 1.1, illustrates that design
changes cost the least whilst having the larges impact in early design stages.
This
stresses the importance of early decisions, and BIM has the potential to support these
decisions.
Figure 1.1: The MacLeamy curve
1.3
Reducing late design changes through earlier
integration and feedback
As mentioned, BIM requires a design to be at a certain maturity level in order to be
useful for multi-disciplinary integration. This leaves disciplines to themselves in the very
first stages of design. All though they are part of the same design team, exposed to the
same client requirements, they face different design problems. These problems are most
likely solved using different tools, have different constraints and require different back-
ground information. The variations in tools, constraints and background information is
essentially what makes having multiple disciplines very useful and effective.
However, ”too many cooks spoil the broth”, and multi-disciplinary design projects see
this often when there is a lack of integration. The disciplinary design solutions do not co-
exist very well at first, and are subjected to desultory modifications due to time pressure.
Hence, there is a strong need for better integration to avoid late design changes that
are mere consequences of incompatible disciplinary designs. Earlier integration aligns
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Exploring the solution space of ”successful” designs with Biology
3
disciplines and make them less prone to incompatibility, resulting in fewer late design
changes.
A large part of integration is about the feedback that disciplines give and receive. Feed-
back communicates the compatibility of different disciplinary design solutions. Compat-
ibility in this sense is the degree of ease that the disciplinary solutions can be combined.
In order to find more compatible designs, and ultimately identify the most compatible
solutions, it is necessary to explore more options. Without having fully explored the
solution space, the most compatible combination of design solutions is not likely to be
found.
1.4
Exploring the solution space of ”successful” designs
with Biology
There is an immense number of design variations that can meet the requirements for a
given building project. These can be deemed ”successful” designs. The goal of many
design projects is to find a design that not only meets the requirements, but exceeds
them, in order to gain a competitive advantage in the industry. The search for more
sustainable, more cost-effective and more innovative designs is how the AEC industry
evolves. However, in the time frame of a building design project, the design team is
limited to exploring a small amount of the possibilities.
In order to explore more designs within the time frame of a building project, it is nec-
essary to automate the design process to a certain extent. An approach to automating
design is by applying self-organizing principles to building design. Morphogenetic engi-
neering is an emerging field of research that investigates modelling and implementation
of ”self-architecturing” complex systems, [1]. In developmental biology, complex organ-
isms can develop from a single fertilized cell, and plants can grow from a single seed. All
the genetic information is present in DNA from the start of development. This controls
the growth process, how the organism reacts to environmental influences and the result-
ing anatomy of the organism. This is interesting from a building design perspective since
the buildings DNA could act as a tool for manipulating/exploring design options. Tak-
ing inspiration from developmental biology introduces a more integrative logic, because
all information about the building is considered at the initial stage, stored in the DNA.
This forces early stage design decisions about interactions between discipline solutions,
and has the potential of yielding more integrated solutions.
Being able to identify the DNA of buildings, and also simulating building development
with the help of computation, are the two main challenges of this alternative approach.
Realizing this alternative approach to building design requires an understanding of de-
velopmental biology that makes it possible to translate knowledge and definitions from
biology to buildings. It also requires a new format of the design process that better
==PAGE:18==
4
1 Introduction
supports the modelling and modification of complex, self-organizing systems.
Applying biology to building design has previously been done is various ways. Biomimet-
ics is one such approach. It generally tries to identify mechanical and functional rules
from nature, understand the underlying principles, perform an abstraction from the
biological model and provide a technical implementation [2]. It is a very general de-
scriptions that can be applied to all kinds of technological problems. An example of
biomimetic design is the attempt to identify new structural forms that distribute loads
more effectively, based on the plate morphology of the sea urchin. The researchers were
able to create a plywood structure that enclosed 200 m3 of space with only 2 m3 of ma-
terial. This was achieved by using a plate assembly with no bending moment transfer
in the joints [2]. Another example is the way that termites take advantage of natural
laws of physics to maintain constant temperature inside their moulds through day and
night. This was used cleverly by the architect Mick Pearce in the design of a 7 story
building in Zimbabwe, which removed the need for expensive ventilation systems [3].
A third example of biomimetics is the application of whale-fin-inspired rotor blades on
wind turbines that improve aerodynamic performance [4].
Implementing self-organizing behavior in building design can be thought of as a form
of biomimetics, in the way that it applies principles from nature to a technical problem.
However, self-organization has an extra layer of complexity because researchers still
don’t understand the underlying mechanisms in many instances of self-organizing emer-
gent structures. This leads to a knowledge gap between biomimetic design approaches
and the application of self-organizing principles in building design.
1.5
Untangling the web of requirements, constraints
and design solutions with Agile
Agile means being reactive to changes; being prepared for anything. The term “agile
design” is most commonly used in terms of project management, where the focus lies
on physical design collaboration. However, applying agile design to the digital realm
creates new opportunities for structuring design processes.
Building design project management is traditionally predictive, meaning that project
requirements and constraints are considered fixed. This allows project managers to have
a consistent reference for design performance evaluations. A multidisciplinary building
design project is built up of a network of dynamic requirements and constraints. First
of all; clients can change their mind. This happens often, and is the main cause of
project uncertainty according to designers [5]. Secondly; architects and structural engi-
neers might constrain each other in different ways than structural engineers and MEP
engineers. Essentially, each design solution produces different constraints on the rest
==PAGE:19==
1.6 Merging agile design principles with biological principles
5
of the design. Hence, as design solutions are explored and tested, the constraints and
requirements from disciplines change dynamically. This suggests that the assumption
of fixed requirements is not the most logical approach to building design. Adaptive, as
opposed to predictive, project management supports variability in design requirements
and constraints. Software engineers have incorporated adaptive methods, which lead to
the concept of Agile software design. This type of design process focuses on ”responding
to change over following a plan” [6], among other agile principles. Introducing agile
principles to building design can potentially aid the design process in coping with the
dynamic landscape of requirements and constraints.
The current way of designing buildings is often termed a waterfall process, and as the
name suggests, going back to change earlier design decisions takes much time and energy
from designers. Essentially, a waterfall design development is organised into sequential
design steps where each step has specific deliveries, and relies on previous steps. Hence,
the waterfall process requires things to be done in a certain order to work successfully.
This rarely happens in the AEC because requirements can change continuously, and it
becomes unclear which discipline has the most critical connection to different elements
of the design. This leads to an unpredictable process of different disciplines repeating
design steps, hence a certain order of design steps is difficult to predict. Uncertainty in
the responsibility of design decisions ultimately leads to disciplines spending valuable
time waiting for other disciplines, or disciplines making assumptions in order to progress.
It is important to let designers keep their creative freedom by allowing the use of differ-
ent tools and processes to come up with solutions. Thus it is important to have a good
method for the different design solutions to be interpreted and combined in a digital en-
vironment. The current way to combine many disciplinary models is to overlay them in
a central model, but this leaves the models unconnected until they are designed, which
may introduce hidden errors that cause problems later in the design process. A different
approach would be trying to keep information in disciplinary models connected at all
times, resulting in integration from end to end of the design project.
1.6
Merging agile design principles with biological
principles
The aim of this thesis is to construct a design framework that supports both agile de-
sign principles and modelling through self-organizing principles. Current developments
in agile building design will be investigated, with a focus on identifying analogies to
developmental biology.
Fundamental concepts of developmental biology will also be
investigated, with a focus on identifying the developmental process in analogy to self-
organizing building design.
==PAGE:20==
6
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Background
2.1
Towards an agile biodigital architecture
2.1.1
A biomimetic building design process
A process has been suggested by (McGinley et. al, 2017), that organizes the design
process to include both agile design and biological principles [7]. It seeks to utilize the
adaptability to change, which agile principles support, to explore a larger solution space,
which biomimetics support. The authors present a model for design and analysis of
architecture, that consists of the following design stages.
Figure 2.1: Stages of the agile biodigital design process
Step (1) in this process tries to organize information about the design in a feature matrix
that can be translated into a computational system. The feature matrix includes infor-
mation about architectural elements, spatial entities and relationships. Step (2) takes
this feature matrix and creates ’pseudo’ design genes that act as rules of creation for
the features in the feature matrix. Step (3) models the architectural phenotype using
self-organizing modelling techniques. Step (4) applies modifications by either changing
design criteria, or by interacting with the phenotype in a virtual environment which
==PAGE:22==
8
2 Background
subsequently leads to a modification of the feature matrix or genes.
The method was tested on a South Australian House typology in a case study where five
workshops developed artifacts related to one or more of the stages in figure 2.1. The
largest challenge during the workshop was found to be the creation of a shared compu-
tational representation of the project. The final representation was a particle system
rendered in real-time as a series of boxes. An important finding in the case study was
the validation of comparing genetics to architectural typology. The authors suggest fur-
ther investigation of the basic analogy between architectural design and developmental
biology. And in order to achieve multi-disciplinary integration with the implementation
of biomimetics, there is a need to also validate other design disciplines in analogy to
developmental biology.
The feature matrix in Step (1) of the process was deemed successful in the use to gen-
erate a dynamic representation of the typology of the South Australian House. Further
investigation of this feature matrix for other typologies, or even a generalized version, is
of interest.
In terms of biology, the authors suggests further research in novel concepts such as niche
construction theory and epigenetics, as well as increasing the number of features and
genes under consideration, and testing a four-dimensional mapping from genotype to
phenotype that includes time. Finally the authors suggest to incorporate environmental
influences, such as climate and culture.
2.1.2
Genotype vs. Phenotype
An idea that has been transferred from biology to architecture is genotypes and phe-
notypes. In biology, a genotype is the biological template, growth recipe and the core
in all natural organisms. The phenotype is then the expression of the genotype, as a
consequence of growth and environmental influences.
Phenotypes in architecture are the buildings we inhabit, whereas genotypes in architec-
ture are less familiar. In order to learn more about architectural genotypes, (McGinley
et. al, 2016) suggests the following:
”... if we know the phenotype (presuming that we take this to be an architectural typol-
ogy) and we imagine that we could encode the influence of the environment, the bit left
over must be the genotype.” [8]
The environmental influences on a building design might not just be its geographical
location’s climate and culture, but also the ideas and design decisions of the building
design team. These ideas and decisions occur in the design process (similar to growth
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Current progress in agile building design
9
in biology), and manifest themselves in the architectural phenotype.
2.1.3
Biomimetic design methods
There are two approaches to biomimetic design, a ”bottom-up” approach, and a ”top-
down” approach [9]. The bottom-up approach starts by asking a question about biology,
which then leads to a biological ”push” design process. The top-down approach starts
by asking a question about engineering sciences, which then leads to a biological ”pull”
design process. Trying to model buildings with inspiration from biology shows strong
tendencies of being a top-down approach to biomimetics.
Figure 2.2: The biomimetic design process [10]
2.2
Current progress in agile building design
The agile manifesto, which originates from software engineering, sets the foundation for
developments in agile building design, and consists of these four priorities [6] :
• Individuals and interactions over processes and tools
• Working software over comprehensive documentation
• Customer collaboration over contract negotiation
• Responding to change over following a plan
A framework is proposed in ongiong work by (McGinley et al., 2020) that focus on de-
coupling of different systems in the design process, see figure 2.3. This essentially makes
each system less dependent on others for information, hence prolonging the adaptivity
to changing design requirements. After an iterative process, the current segmentation
==PAGE:24==
10
2 Background
of the design process can be seen in figure 2.4.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the agile benefits of working with decoupled systems
The agile building design process would be segmented into Target, Design, Material and
Build, thus taking the focus away from disciplines and towards building processes. This is
done in order to get decoupled segments, that can run in parallel. Parallel design has the
potential of being flexible about material choices and construction methods for longer,
which increases chances of optimal solutions. The target segment coordinates design re-
quirements, the design segment supports the creation of building topology, the material
segment supports materializing different design solutions, and the build segment sup-
ports considerations about buildability of different design solutions. Additionally, there
is an Analysis segment which acts as the engine of the system, giving feedback through
state of play to the other systems. This kind of segmentation supports integration of
disciplines, since it has removed systematic segregation of disciplines and replaced it
with segments that are continuously relevant to all disciplines.
The analysis of systems acts as an interface between the other four systems, and gives
designers the current state of play. State of play, as described by (Holland, 2002), is
what currently exists within a system, and all possible proceeding actions that are con-
sidered legal. The legality of actions is determined by the rules of the system. In a
system such as a chess game, where this term is taken from, the state of play includes
the position of the pieces, all possible legal chess moves and sequences of moves. In a
building design system, the state of play can include the current design solution and
possible next steps that conform with design requirements.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Current progress in agile building design
11
Figure 2.4: Three iterations of the agile segments of building design
This kind of segmentation supports integration of disciplines, since it has removed sys-
tematic segregation of disciplines.
2.2.1
Tinbergen’s four questions of biology applied to buildings
Tinbergen separates explanations of biological behavior into four categories [11].
• Ontogeny - How does the trait develop in individuals?
- How does the building element develop?
• Phylogeny - What is the traits evolutionary history?
- Why did the building element develop?
• Mechanism - What is the structure of the trait?
- What is the structure of the building element?
• Function - How have trait variations influenced fitness?
- Which variations in the building elements structure influenced fitness?
The benefit of this separations is that each category can be investigated independently.
In building design, where design systems are interdependent, it would be highly benefi-
cial to be able to investigate each system independently. In order to categorize buildings,
in the same way as behavioural explanations in biology, it is necessary to look further
into the definitions of these four categories, and also identify their place within the agile
framework.
==PAGE:26==
12
2 Background
Figure 2.5: Tinbergen’s four questions with equivalent agile segments
Arguably, ontogeny in buildings can be represented as the process of form-giving, i.e
the design and construction. Phylogeny can then be represented by the target, or re-
quirements, and its design solutions. Mechanism is more related to the physical form
and structure of a building, so this can be represented by materials and construction.
Lastly, function can be represented by the target and the materials systems. Figure
2.5 illustrates how design systems can be represented through different biological lenses.
From there, it can be seen that interfaces between the agile segments can be describe
analogously to Tinbergens four questions.
2.2.2
Introducing assumptions
The ongoing work by (McGinley et. al, 2020) proposes using assumptions in early de-
sign to help progress design, and start optimization. The assumptions should contain
useful information to the design systems, about rules of interaction between building
systems or building elements. A common problem in design projects is trade-offs, where
there is no obvious correct balance between design aspects. Trade-offs occur when a set
of design aspects results in Pareto efficiency, i.e. that an improvement of one aspect
leads to a worsening of another. There is no way to automate this type of optimization,
unless all design aspects are modelled together, for which multi-objective optimization
algorithms could be applied. The agile framework seeks to decouple systems, and to
have multiple systems run in parallel rather than modelling aspects together. Hence, an
alternative method for overcoming trade-offs is to assume where the middle ground lies,
and communicate this to the different design systems.
There is a need to identify trade-offs in building design in order to make good assump-
tions.
The value of each assumption is of less importance, since it now exists as a
parameter value in the design system. Ultimately, assumptions have the potential of
doing two things. First of all, to provide guidance to design systems that are stuck in
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Gaps in early stage design towards better integration
13
uncertainty. Second, to act as descriptive elements of the building design. The collection
of assumptions on a project essentially describe how things have been prioritized in the
design. The amount of possible trade-off situations in building design is indefinite, and
it depends on the nature of every project. This implies a need for a clear search-method
for assumptions, a methodical approach or a framework for assumptions.
Identifying good assumptions in early design can also contribute to the definition of a
building model that is analogous to developmental biology. Especially since assumptions
describe the different priorities in the design, which could be compared to how gene
regulation works in biology. The next chapter looks at current gaps in early stage design
towards better integration, in order to identify the most useful areas for implementing
assumptions, as well as what they could be.
2.3
Gaps in early stage design towards better
integration
In early stage design, when disciplines begin to identify the client requirements that
their solutions need to satisfy, integration is of most importance. This can be based
on the MacLeamy curve, saying that early efforts have the greatest impact. It is at
this stage the disciplines can truly start informing each other without being too deep
into their own design processes. However, there is very little to base the information
flow between disciplines on, in early design. The available information might only be
client requirements and an architectural design vision, see figure 2.6. In order to design
sustainable buildings at lower costs, it is necessary to define as many requirements as
possible early on in the process. This helps create clear and useful design guidelines so
that the process can move forward. One paper mentions the importance of defining the
following requirements as early as possible: ”Room and building functional, environmen-
tal, and spatial performance, comfort practices, energy requirements, and so forth should
be addressed, as well as concerns on building use, heating, cooling, lighting, ventilation,
water, waste, site works, and materials. ” [12]. The paper also states that early design
assessments mainly has to be based on assumptions due to lack of available information.
This chapter tries to identify the basis upon which a framework for design assumptions
could be made.
==PAGE:28==
14
2 Background
Figure 2.6: Information through project phases
2.3.1
Structural integration with architecture
When trying to integrate structure with architecture, it can either be done by expos-
ing, concealing or celebrating the structure in the architectural design [13]. Exposing
structure has the benefits of simplifying the design effort, by taking away the need for
materials to conceal structural elements. In some cases though, concealing the structure
is practical in terms of fire-protection, or just to support more free-form architectural
designs. The last approach, being the most symbiotic of the three, is to celebrate struc-
ture by making structural elements into architectural design features. Shell or membrane
structures express this type of integration by effectively distributing forces through archi-
tectural shapes. Celebrating structure is not restricted to shells and membranes though,
as any deliberate, or highlighted, exposure of structural elements is part of the architec-
tural design.
There is no clear way of integrating structure with architecture, since its success depends
on many variables. The following framework has identified different characteristics of
structural integration with architecture. The characteristics essentially describes inte-
gration in terms of Working together, Physical articulation of structure and Wholeness
[14]. Working together is about the people in the collaboration process, and putting
an emphasis on openness to both sharing and receiving novel ideas. Working together
also means to be engaged, and being committed to the vision of the project. Physi-
cal articulation of structure is about intentional use of structural elements in design,
structural characteristics and structural aesthetics. This part of integration see many
benefits in using digital tools for simulation and visual exploration of designs. The last
aspect of integration, being wholeness, is about the design process and how priorities to-
wards building technology and architecture are balanced. Essentially this means a shift
towards more optimized structures at the cost of liberal architecture, i.e. architecture
has slightly less power over the overall design. The end goal for wholeness in a design
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Gaps in early stage design towards better integration
15
is that the combination of building elements provide greater value than the sum of its
parts. Table 2.1 contains a full view of the framework.
==PAGE:30==
16
2 Background
Working together
Openness
Willingness to receive and
investigate design ideas
Bringing suggestions forward
Working through multiple
solutions
Engagement
Commitment to the
architectural vision
Team member actions
Iterations
Communication
Free exhchange of ideas among
all team members
Communication environment
that is perceived as safe
Physical
articulation
of structure
Intentionality
Focus on design of exposed
structure
Structural behavior
Inclusion of pysical structural
properties in architectural design
Acheiving architectural
goals
Use structural engineering to
aid architectural intent
Aesthetics
Appearance of exposed structure
Expressive and refined inclusion
of system
Detailing
Working structural connections to
unify structure and architecture
Wholeness
Design methodology
Considering technology in
conjunction with architecture
Contributing interactions
Combine systems to a unified
design with improved performance
Aspiration
Level of expertise in design skill
Quality of project thought
Optimizing vs. integration
Table 2.1: Framework for structural integration with architecture
2.3.2
MEP integration with architecture
Integration of MEP solutions with architecture supports more sustainable building de-
sign. Integrated solutions can be more energy efficient than non-integrated solutions
because the architectural design becomes dedicated to reducing the demand for energy.
This is analogous to celebrating structure when integrating structural engineering and
architecture. Integrated solutions can also be more economically efficient because MEP
solutions do not have to combat the architectural design since design requirements are
less likely to be contradicting. An example of contradicting requirements is the addi-
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Gaps in early stage design towards better integration
17
tional heating/cooling energy required in buildings with larger glazing-to-facade ratios,
which often becomes an important design trade-off in building projects.
In order to pin-point some of the potential intersections between MEP design and ar-
chitectural design the framework of energy and environmental design will be used [15].
This framework structures the MEP design process in a way that can more easily be
combined with architectural design. A hierarchy of sustainable design strategies are
presented in figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Design stratey for energy and environmental building concepts
These categories, especially ”Reduce Energy Demands”, can be used as an interface be-
tween MEP and architecture. It can create a platform where architecture can provides
solutions that supports MEP engineers’ greatest sustainability goal.
Demand reduc-
tion strategies include: Thermal insulation, air tightness, buffering, reduction of heat
and contaminant loads, building form, zoning, demand control, efficient air distribution,
solar shading etc. By looking at zoning for instance, this can help to inform the archi-
tectural design about how to organize spaces. Building form is also directly translatable
to architectural terms, namelu buidling envelope design. The framework includes a set
of design steps that are organized after different indoor climate concepts, see figure 2.8
==PAGE:32==
18
2 Background
Figure 2.8: Design concepts that are meaningful to both architecture and MEP
Utilizing climatic design principles also have the potential of supporting MEP and ar-
chitecture integration.
Especially in terms of how architecture reacts to its climatic
changes. Climatic design seeks to take advantage of the forces of nature to achieve sus-
tainable solutions. The climate is defined according to outdoor temperatures relative
to desired indoor temperatures. The climate can either be overheated, i.e. summer, or
underheated, i.e. winter. For an overheated climate, there are principles for resisting
heat gain and promoting heat loss. For an underheated climate, there are principles for
promoting heat gain and resisting heat loss. Different design principles are also sorted
according to conduction, convection, radiation and evaporation.
2.3.3
Uncertainty in collaboration
In building design projects, there are multiple stakeholders that all have different per-
spectives on, and intentions for, the project. Trying to collaborate across perspectives
and intentions is always a challenge in building design. The aforementioned stakeholder
differences can cause uncertainty, which generally has a negative impact on design col-
laboration.
According to McGraw Hill Construction [5], different stakeholders in a building project
can be held accountable for different causes for uncertainty. They have defined seven
factors that generate the most uncertainty. These factors have then been mapped to
an accountable stakeholder, namely owners, architects or contractors, in the building
project, see see table 2.2.
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Gaps in early stage design towards better integration
19
Cause for Uncertainty
Accountable Stakeholder
Accelerated schedule
Owner
Owner-driven design changes
Owner
Design errors
Architect
Design omissions
Architect
Construction coordination issues
Contractor
Contractor-caused delays
Contractor
Unforeseen site conditions
Neutral
Table 2.2: Top factors that cause uncertainty
Interestingly, when looking at the different stakeholders’ ranking of the different causes,
it becomes apparent that they tend to blame each other, see table 2.3. One thing they
all agree on is that unforeseen site conditions are causing uncertainty. Apart from that,
owners blame the architects, architects blame the owners, and contractors blame both
owners and architects. This is understandable in the sense that building projects are
streamlined from owner to architect to contractor, or in familiar terms a waterfall process.
Decisions start with the owner, become interpreted and designed upon by architects, and
finally built by contractors. Since the typical hierarchy of design has the architect on
top, the owner tends to hold them responsible for the majority of the project outcome.
Stakeholder perception of impact
Cause for Uncertainty
Owner
Architect
Contractor
Accelerated schedule
5 (tie)
2
3
Owner-driven design changes
5 (tie)
1
4
Design errors
2 (tie)
6
5
Design omissions
2 (tie)
7
2
Construction coordination issues
7
5
7
Contractor-caused delays
4
4
6
Unforeseen site conditions
1
3
1
Table 2.3: Stakeholders’ ranking of causes for uncertainty (Top three causes are highlighted
in each stakeholder column)
In order to remove blame between stakeholders, it is necessary to spread the responsibil-
ity more evenly, involving stakeholders in in all areas both in the time domain, and the
design domain of the project. Essentially this means bringing the contractor in at an
earlier stage, whilst also giving them greater influence in the design. However, one of the
main benefits of siloing responsibilities with different stakeholders is to create efficiency.
This needs to be maintained when trying to reorganize the building design process.
A paper about how to deal with design uncertainty [16] suggests that when designers
have a clear understanding of how to proceed, they enter a routine situation, where their
behavior is based on skill or predetermined rules. When designers don’t find it obvious
==PAGE:34==
20
2 Background
how to proceed, they enter a non-routine situation, where they behavior is based on
available knowledge about that situation. It is in the non-routine situations that uncer-
tainty is high, and they have identified three sources of uncertainty in these situations;
uncertainty related to individuals, social context or tasks. Individual uncertainty comes
from lack of experience or competence, while social context uncertainty comes from lack
of information exchange and task uncertainty comes from lack of understanding of the
status or complexity of a task.
The study [16] identified several responses to non-routine situations, and the responses
that are related to collaboration are presented below.
• Involving stakeholders - Trying to reduce the cognitive gap between stakeholders
of different backgrounds.
• Framing of problem - Specifying a clear, common frame of reference for all parties
involved in the situation to base decisions on.
• Multi-disciplinarity - Gain a better understanding by collecting knowledge from
other disciplines when a problem is complex and has a multifaceted nature.
2.3.4
Time consuming process of exploring designs
Digital tools are great for producing, sharing and storing content efficiently. And their
potential is constantly increasing along side technological development. Building Infor-
mation Modelling has grown increasingly more complex over the years, starting with
digital descriptions of building designs to incorporating detailed information about con-
struction phases and life-cycle [17]. The BIM handbook [18] states some advantages for
design when using BIM, most of which are related to visualizing and quantifying the
design. Better visualizations and quantity take-offs will certainly enhance the design
process, but only after a design has been created. This is a paradox that lies within
traditional BIM approaches. It results in a design process where all design options need
to be explicitly modelled in order to be evaluated through BIM. This has the potential
of becoming extremely time consuming when designers want to explore an infinite space
of ”successful” design solutions, see figure 2.9.
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Gaps in early stage design towards better integration
21
Figure 2.9: Three ”successful” solutions for getting past a wall
The idea of there being an infinite amount of ”successful” design solutions, created by
different combinations of disciplinary solutions, infers that there is an infinite amount
of trade-off scenarios in collaboration. Assuming that trade-off scenarios introduce chal-
lenges to the design process implies that there will be new challenges for each design
option that is being evaluated. Hence, there is a strong need for both automating mod-
elling tasks and collaboration tasks in order to explore design options more effectively.
BIM in Current and Future Practice [19] states that: ”The streamlined process should
also incorporate a new human-computer cooperation system to enable the exploration of
the maximum design space for optimization based on available resources. New system
interfaces that improve interoperability among parametric modeling, BIM, and simula-
tion are also needed to facilitate the optimization process. ”
Hence, digital tools have improvement potential in collaborative design where little in-
formation and only low-detail models are available, i.e. in early design stages. It would
be beneficial to produce computationally light visualizations that can give quick visual
feedback on design changes, unlike 3D models in Revit and other dense modelling soft-
ware.
2.3.5
Interfaces influence collaboration effectiveness
(Pogorelskiy et. al, 2018) states that there is a common issue of compatibility between
design software in BIM. This expresses the need for some sort of ”Model Manager” that
interprets and combines models of different native formats [20].
Current BIM tools, such as Autodesk Revit, has limited parametric capabilities. Al-
though relationships between objects in Revit can be described parametrically, objects
can just as easily be model without any defined relationship other building elements.
This creates a demand for additional parametric modelling tools such as Grasshopper
where everything is generated from a rule based logic. Grasshopper allows designers to
construct a design in any way they want by constructing the relationships and rules that
==PAGE:36==
22
2 Background
dictate geometry. Thins kind of software better supports coherent modelling.
There is a strong need for a better interface between BIM and parametric models, be-
cause they currently only work separately. As soon as a parametric model is loaded into
BIM software, it looses much of its parametric properties.
2.3.6
Managing changes in the design process
(Shourangiz et al., 2011) looks at the flexibility of BIM towards design change, and pin-
points some areas of improvement [21]. The concluding paragraph of the paper sums up
the researchers findings, based on a survey answered by architects, engineers and project
managers.
”BIM is efficient in adopting and promoting changes in the model, however, it suffers
from certain shortcomings, such as the inability to produce a comparable design change
deviation report, the unreliability of bidirectional links between external analysis software
and BIM tools, not having a powerful user interface and lacking enough artificial intelli-
gence to analyze and offer alternatives to design.”
This paper additionally mentions a clear strength of BIM; the ability to run clash-
detection on multi-disciplinary models.
Following up with the lacking capability to
detect the origins of clashes. BIM clashes can either be Hard clashes i.e. direct inter-
sections between elements, Soft clashes i.e. tolerance intersections, or Schedule-based
clashes i.e. workflow/timeline conflicts between disciplines [22]. Detecting the origins to
any of these types of clashes requires knowledge about the history of decision making
related to the elements in the clash. A non-productive reason for detecting clash origins
is to find the responsible stakeholder. A more productive reason is to develop a method
for predicting clashes, and consequently preventing clashes. Being specific about the in-
tentions of different discipline designs, from the beginning, might help predicting design
clashes.
Design change management in BIM is not so much about making changes to a digital
model, but rather about getting clear and meaningful feedback about those changes
e.g. feedback about potential clashes. The paper recommends the following actions to
enhance BIM tools towards design change functionality;
• Better integrated representation of sensed information and as-designed information
• Developing finer geometric reasoning mechanism
• Spatial query approach for better deviation
• Probing approaches for automatically generating other forms of change orders
based on an object-oriented model
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Gaps in early stage design towards better integration
23
Although the recommended actions are non-specific, in terms of how to successfully ex-
ecute those actions, they give a direction for future works. (Juszczyk et al., 2016), [23],
builds on the first paper and gives the following status on design change documentation
in BIM;
”Currently, successive revisions of models usually do not highlight the alterations of infor-
mation, component attributes or relations between the components caused by the changes
made to the model.”
Along with integrated representation of information, geometric reasoning, spatial queries
and automatic generation of change orders [21], it is necessary to keep track of design
changes and relations between model components [23]. The second paper proposes an
ontology for design changes, which comprise of six classes;
• Type
• Changed attributes of the altered component
• Dependencies between the components
• Level of change effect on other components
• Timing (stage of the project when the change occurs)
• Impact on cost and schedule
Utilizing such an ontology in BIM would certainly provide a useful structure for doc-
umenting design changes in a way that lets designers track the origin of clashes, or
compare changes in terms of cost and schedule. However, it is not practical to imple-
ment this ontology in traditional BIM due to the lacking focus on relationships between
elements. Currently, it is hard to predict the level of change effect on other components,
as well as the impact on cost and schedule. This is because it requires the whole BIM
model to adjust to the change and be recalculated in terms of cost and schedule. This
implies that additional changes need to be made to the model in order for it not to be
a ”broken” model. For example, if the column thickness of some column is increased,
it might become just too big to be accepted in the architectural design, which means
that the architectural design also must be modified because of the change of column
dimensions.
The second paper also mentions expectations for what new native BIM tools should be
able to do;
• Compare two or more revisions of the model in the IFC format
• Visualize (highlight) the changes made to the components of the model
==PAGE:38==
24
2 Background
• Differentiate the visualization of changes in terms of modification, addition and
deletion of the component
• Highlight the changes made to the attributes of the model components
• Utilize the information about the changes in the cost and time analyses of the
project
• Inform the user about the changes in a clear and understandable way.
2.3.7
Siloed Optimization
As a result of increasing specialization with the AEC industry, resulting in more dis-
ciplines, collaboration has become more complex.
Disciplines have branched from a
single discipline ”Master Builder” to HVAC-, electrical-, plumbing-, civil engineers, fire-
protection consultants, interior architects and landscape architects among others. Ide-
ally, this branching of disciplines should lead to an increased amount of building elements
being optimized. However, the reality of current practice is that buildings designed with
siloed optimization, more often than not [24], end up exceeding budget limits. This then
results in a trimming process where seemingly excessive building elements are down-
graded to meet budget requirements. Consequently, certain elements of the design no
longer satisfies the initial expectations from the client.
The problem of siloed optimization is that the focus is drawn away from integration
by focusing intensively on building elements in isolation.
As a result, the different
optimization strategies require very different information about the building. Energy
performance optimization is for example not interested in geometric detailing to the
same degree as architects and contractors, but is more interested in material properties
such as thermal conductivity and light reflectance. Excessive geometrical detail can in
fact be destructive to the energy optimization process, making them orders of magnitude
more computationally expensive with relatively low performance improvements [25].
2.3.8
Building element design
The point of looking at building element design is to identify how different disciplines
can be co-designing building elements. Even though this, without the aid of digital
collaboration tools, will reduce the efficiency of a building project, it is useful to clarify
the process of how interdisciplinary optimization would work. With the support from
digital collaboration tools, interdisciplinary optimization would be able to replace siloed
optimization and ultimately result in more sustainable buildings. At least, integrated
element design could help to identifiy assumptions for the agile framework.
Three different methods of building element design have been investigated, in terms of
their application and useability [26]. One method was found particularly interesting
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Gaps in early stage design towards better integration
25
for this thesis because of its reliance on a global parametric conceptual model. This
method is also aiming to widen the search for new ideas, by providing a framework for
concrete comparisons of different element solutions. The method is called “Generation
and Evaluation of Alternatives for Building Elements” (Aygün, 2003). A flow chart of
the stages in the method is appended, see appendix A.
The method revolves around creating a global parametric conceptual model that sup-
ports the manipulation of building elements [27]. Multiple elements are the generated
and compared. The conceptual model is subdivided into three sub-models presented
below.
1. Performance requirements
2. Design constraints
3. Building objects
The first model describes performance requirements in terms of life cycle, participants,
or domain. Table 2.4 lists the contents of the different performance requirement entities.
Performance requirement entities
Description
Life-cycle phases
Manufacture, construction, occupancy
including repair and maintenance,
refurbishment, demolition
and recycle.
Participants
Investor, designer, contractor, user and
community
Domains
Safety, health, comfort, utility, ecology,
aesthetics and cost
Table 2.4: Performance requirement entities
Organizing performance requirements as presented above supports integrated optimiza-
tion, as multiple discipline/”participants” interest can be incorporated in the design.
The second model represents constraints. They are defined by external or internal fac-
tors, and can be either global or local constraints. The most important, or influential,
constrains are found to be related to site, climate, surrounds and legislation.
The third model describes all building elements in a hierarchical way, see table 2.5.
==PAGE:40==
26
2 Background
Hierarchical level
Description
1. Building
E.g. residential, office, hospital
2. Space
E.g. living, working, sleeping
3. Elements
3.1. Functional elements
E.g. floor, wall, roof
3.2. Structural systems
3.3. Service systems
E.g. mechanical, electrical
4. Components
E.g. finish, insulation, waterproofing, core
Table 2.5: Hierarchical description of building objects
This way of organizing information about building elements ensures that the rules, or
requirements applied to the upper levels in the hierarchy also apply to the lower levels.
The flow chart of Aygün’s model illustrates four phases for building element design. The
first phase is about identifying deign inputs, the second about whole building concep-
tual design, the third is about generating building element variations based on different
component combinations and the final phase is about evaluation of different alternatives.
This process describes the whole design process for building elements.
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Concepts from biology
27
2.4
Concepts from biology
2.4.1
Consistency of symmetry in nature
An important feature seen in natural organisms is symmetry, i.e. an ordered repetition
of parts in the organism [28]. The most common form of symmetry is bilateral symmetry,
which the majority of animals inhibit.
Figure 2.10: Asymmetrical, radially symmetrical and bilaterally symmetrical examples from
nature
The reason behind symmetry in nature is thought to be a physical reaction to environ-
mental forces, [29]. Bilateral symmetry is deemed to be the optimal property for directed
movement of animals, such as walking, flying and swimming. The movement process
is best carried out with the use of bilaterally ordered appendages combined with body
twists and turns.
”Bilateral symmetry is a major enigma in biology. This symmetry is generated by setting
up an anteroposterior (AP) and a dorsoventral (DV) polarity axis during gastrulation.
The general mechanism behind the determination of these axes in most animals is the
action of two perpendicularly diffusing morphogen gradients” [29]
A reason for considering symmetry when trying to find analogies to building design is
because of how significant symmetry is during biological development. A key difference
between buildings and animals is that buildings don’t move, which might imply that they
do not need bilateral symmetry. It is necessary to identify if building development needs
symmetry analogously to biological development, and also what type of symmetries.
2.4.2
Cells as fundamental building blocks
In order to identify biological analogies to building design, it is necessary to look at
the fundamental building blocks of biology, i.e. cells. Cells form tissue, which forms
organs, which forms organ systems, which finally form organisms, see figure 2.11. This
==PAGE:42==
28
2 Background
hierarchical structure, allows investigation of biological analogies at different levels of
detail.
Figure 2.11: Levels of organization in biology
Without going into too much detail in the field of biology, it is important to identify
different cell types. This can allow for a better understanding of the creation of advanced
anatomies from simple building blocks, thus leading to knowledge about useful analogies
to building design. It might also provide a useful categorization of cells, as to where in a
biological system they belong. There are approximately 200 types of cells in the human
body [30]. All cells start as stem cells before becoming specialized cells.
2.4.3
Germ layers as initial guidelines
During early embryogenesis, the process from fertilized egg to developing embryo, cell
organize themselves in germs layers. In human embryogenesis, the cells form three germ
layers called ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm. These three layers contain cells with
different responsibilities and purposes. Simply speaking, the ectoderm cells form the
outer layer of the embryo, the mesoderm cells form the middle layer of the embryo and
the endoderm cells form the inner layer of the embryo. However, the layers only exist
in early embryonic development, and thus only guide early cell development.
When a fertilized egg begins cell division, it quickly forms a cluster of embryonic stem
cells.
When the germ layers are formed, the embryonic stem cells differentiate into
different tissue-specific stem cells in the different germ layers, see figure 2.12.
==PAGE:43==
2.4 Concepts from biology
29
Figure 2.12: Differentiation of embryonic stem cells
2.4.4
Gene regulation as a plan for cell-life
The way that biological organisms self-organize is through gene regulation. This process
controls which genes are expressed in every cell in an organism, which in turn determines
the specialization and behavior of the cells [31]. Gene regulation happens automatically
as cells react with signalling molecules. These signalling molecules can either be pro-
duced by a cell, its surrounding cells, or come from the environment that an organism
exists in. This process is extremely complex, and is far from being fully understood by
scientists.
However, being aware of the mechanisms of gene regulation might provide a framework
for how to set up an agent-based building development model. It might clarify the types
of rules that agents should follow.
2.4.5
Feedback loops through gene regulation in cells
A property of any biological organism is that its reaches homeostasis when fully devel-
oped. This is achieved through feedback loops that respond to changes in the local
environment, trying to regain the ”default” level [32]. There are positive and negative
feedback loops, where the former are considered unstable and the latter are considered
stable.
In a building design perspective, it can be said that a design should always be stable
with regards to requirements, and thus the concept of feedback loops could be a useful
contribution to design change management. When design changes are applied, a mecha-
==PAGE:44==
30
2 Background
nism can be triggered and evaluate the criticality of the change. Similar to biology, the
”default” level should be stored somewhere in the design genes.
2.4.6
Morphogens as growth directors
Morphogens are signalling molecules [33] of which the concentration determines the lo-
cal cell behavior in an organism. During early embryonic development, developmental
axis such as the AP-axis are formed. The axis is manifested as a gradient of signalling,
i.e. a morphogen gradient, see figure 2.13. The AP axis in particular can be found in
all biological organisms that display bilateral symmetry, and dictates the direction of
nutrition to run through the organism.
Morphogens are present during all stages of development, and their control mechanisms
are not fully understood by scientists. However, morphogens as a concept is interesting
for self-organization of building designs, since they control cell behavior, and thus can
act as a tool to achieve specific outcomes through the influence of agents.
Figure 2.13: Three examples of morphogen gradients, taken from the wing development of
the Drosophila, i.e. ”fruit fly”
This paper, [34], suggests that there are three types of morphogens; growth morphogens,
populational morphogens and topological morphogens. These have very specific and sep-
arated responsibilities. The growth morphogens signal that there is a need for growth or
expansion. The populational morphogens signal interaction rules. And the topological
morphogens signal the activity of the other two morphogens.
It is important to identify how the three types of morphogens work, both individually
and together in unity. Since morphogens, from a biological perspective, are gradients
of signalling molecules with specific source positions, the three types of building mor-
phogens will be of the same nature. Thus it is necessary to identify the source positions
and gradients from a building perspective.
==PAGE:45==
2.5 Computational approaches to self-organizing building models
31
2.5
Computational approaches to self-organizing
building models
2.5.1
Generative Design Tools
As described perfectly in this article, [35], generative design tools from large building
design software companies are not the solution to optimization of building designs. The
author compares generative design efforts to the efforts, from a teachers perspective,
of grading a hundred papers versus writing one personally. This illustrates his point
about generative design introducing a different kind of effort than normally found in
building design projects. Instead of gradually, and iteratively, reaching a final design
proposal, generative design skips the iterations and gives an overload of final designs for
designers to evaluate. As food for thought, at least, this point about generative design
is important when considering how digital tools are going to be used in the future design
practice.
2.5.2
Parametric Design Tools
Many design methods, including generative design, rely on parametric design tools. Para-
metric design can be characterized by the following keywords; abstract thinking, math-
ematical thinking and algorithmic thinking [36]. Abstract thinking allows designers to
create flexible models that work in more than one specific scenario. Mathematical think-
ing allows designers to combine parameters in multiple ways, and create a wide range of
designs. Algorithmic thinking allows designers to create a hierarchy of design decisions,
essentially controlling the relationships between design elements.
A major benefit of parametric design is the ability to make changes to a design while
maintaining the relationships between building elements. This useful for maintaining
design intent and avoiding spatial clashes of geometries.
If the parametric model is
created thoroughly enough, it will be able to handle changes without creating clashes.
There are two issues with parametric models though.
The first issue is that model
integration, i.e. combining models in BIM, does not automatically create a relationship
between the models, thus they have the potential to clash. Thus there is a need for better
integration between parametric modelling and BIM [37]. Another issue is the effort it
takes to create a parametric model. In addition to being clear about what the design
should be, parametric models require clarity about how the models should behave when
being changed. Although there is an increasing interest of parametric modelling in the
industry, it requires designers to obtain an additional skillset in parametric modelling.
Due to the fact that parametric modelling requires thorough consideration of the design,
in terms of structuring the model, it might be useful to look at other approaches for
quicker modelling in early stages.
==PAGE:46==
32
2 Background
2.5.3
Cellular automata
Cellular automata can act as a computational design approach that requires a relatively
simple set of inputs, while produce complex geometries. Although the development of
a generic CA-model that can be applied to various projects is somewhere in the future,
the a Spanish design team, Cero9, attempted to use CA in the design of a high-density
multi-use building complex in Japan [38], see figures 2.14 and 2.15.
Figure 2.14: Geometries generated by a rule-based CA design process
Figure 2.15: Description of the rule based design process used by Cero9
In order for CA to become more appropriate for architectural design, the paper [38]
suggests the following actions:
”the introduction of human intervention, atypical or dynamically changing definitions of
neighbourhoods, variance or omissions in the sequence of automaton execution as well
as automata arrangements beyond simple grids and more complex and dynamic cellular
geometries”
Cellular automata has also been attempted in structural optimization, through setting
up a genetic algorithm for a truss design problem [39]. In both the architectural case,
and the structural case, CA is used for generative design. The architectural approach
used CA to visually explore design options, while the structural approach used CA to
==PAGE:47==
2.5 Computational approaches to self-organizing building models
33
generate options, which were then evaluated based on predetermined design goals.
Another team of structural engineers applied a technique coined Morphogenic Evolu-
tionary Design in the generation of structural wind bracing topologies in a tall building
[40].
2.5.4
Morphogenetic Engineering
Morphogenetic engineering is a field that sits between biological and artificial systems.
It seeks to make a connection between self-organized artificial systems and biological
systems showing architecture. The aim of this field is to establish a knowledge transfer
between the two types of systems in order to model, simulate and control the behavior
of self-organizing systems in general. For this thesis, the potential benefits of morpho-
genetic engineering are related to finding answers about constructing a self-organizing
building design model. In addition to retrieving knowledge about cell-to-cell interactions
from biology, morphogenetic engineering investigates ways of controlling the result of
these interactions.
A book on morphogenetic engineering [1] divides research into categories of various levels
of complexity. The first category, Constructing, talks about creating patterns/forma-
tion using only a small number of mobile agents. This is useful for gaining a deeper
understanding of cell-to-cell behavior, see fig 2.16 for illustrations.
The fourth and last category, Generating, talks about how agents can change their
rules, or procedures, which can result in adapting architectures. This is useful from a
building design perspective, when design changes are necessary, see 2.19 for illustrations.
Figure 2.16: Illustrations from chapters on Constructing in Morphogenetic Engineering
The second category, Coalescing, talks about creating clusters of a great number of
agents, whose contours can form different shapes. In a building design perspective this
can be useful for controlling geometrical properties of the design, see 2.17 for illustrations.
==PAGE:48==
34
2 Background
Figure 2.17: Illustrations from chapters on Coalescing in Morphogenetic Engineering
The third category, Developing, talks about a system of agents that grows, and originates
from one single agent, similar to biological development. This can help to identify the
necessary developmental steps for achieving a self-organizing building design, see 2.18
for illustrations.
Figure 2.18: Illustrations from chapters on Developing in Morphogenetic Engineering
The fourth and last category, Generating, talks about how agents can change their rules,
or procedures, which can result in adapting architectures. This is useful from a building
design perspective, when design changes are necessary, see 2.19 for illustrations.
Figure 2.19: Illustrations from chapters on Generating in Morphogenetic Engineering
==PAGE:49==
2.6 Solution objectives
35
2.5.5
Agent-based modelling
Agent based modelling might be the right approach to modelling building development
that self-organizes. Agents, which could represent cells, people, particles, etc., are able to
move around in a virtual environment and interact with each other. The agents change
states and communicate with other agents, as well as sensing their local environment
[41]. This can result in more freedom in modelling, compared to cellular automata, but
also in a more complex dynamical model.
”‘Models are only good if they’re easier to handle and learn about than what they model,
and if they really do accurately map the relations we’re interested in.” [41]
In order to apply an agent-based modelling technique to building design development,
it has to assure that designers can design without having to translate design intentions
into simple agent rule sets. Similarly, designers should not have to experience the actual
agent-based simulation, but only the relevant features of the result. Hence, allowing
them to focus on their actual task.
2.6
Solution objectives
This thesis proposes the exploration of an alternative framework that combines agile
principles with self-organization. In line with the design science research methodology,
the following chapter represents the development of that framework. The development
is being addressed through considering the following solution objectives.
2.6.1
Utilize design assumptions for better and faster integration
Through previous work on agile building design, the benefit of assumptions have been
identified. They have the potential of filling in information gaps in early design. The
development of an alternative framework must ensure the support of using assumptions.
It is also necessary to create an ontology for assumptions, to support integration of
design disciplines.
2.6.2
Support the need for a model manager, or interface
between BIM and design tools
Research suggests the need for a better interface between parametric design tools and
BIM. It is argued that models loose their agility when put into a building information
model. Hence, there is a need for a design framework that maintains the benefits of
BIM, while also maintaining the benefits of flexible design tools.
==PAGE:50==
36
2 Background
2.6.3
Support a more integrative approach to building element
design
Previous design projects, there has been a clear disciplinary link to building elements,
meaning that one discipline typically models one element. Without properly coordinat-
ing multiple discipline designs, through clash-detection and collaboration, it is difficult to
achieve functioning multi-disciplinary designs. This thesis proposes an exploration of a
multi-disciplinary approach to building element design, to ensure that building elements
are considered from the necessary disciplinary perspectives.
2.6.4
Apply useful analogies for fundamental units of
development
The alternative design framework must draw parallels between fundamental units of
biology and buildings in order to implement biological self-organization principles suc-
cessfully.
2.6.5
Include feedback processes from biology that supports early
feedback
BIM need a better design change management framework. Previous methods mostly
rely on the ability of BIM evaluate dense building models in late design. There is a
need for faster evaluations and feedback, which could be be based on feedback loops in
biology.
2.6.6
Support designers in design tasks, without distractions from
biology
Design models are useful for generating and communicating ideas, and must be as free
from distractions as possible. Hence, when designers are solving a building design prob-
lem. They must not be bothered by visualization of growth, or morphogen gradients,
unless it is useful for the problem at hand.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
3.1
Design Science Research Methodology
”Architects work closely with engineers, clients, suppliers, and public authorities. Man-
aging the information flow among these participants may not be much of a problem in
small offices. But the larger architectural offices face serious management-related prob-
lems in the design process because of the lack of an efficient information system.” [42]
The flow of information, and the actual information generated at particular stages of
design, can be improved by improving the building design information system. The im-
provements need to be according to the solution objectives in from the previous chapter.
An appropriate research methodology for achieving an improved information system in
building design is the Design Science Research Methodology (DSRM). Design science
investigates methods for reaching design goals, as opposed to natural science which
investigates fundamental truths. The design science research methodology (DSRM) is
therefore appropriate for this thesis. The methodology follows these six steps:
1. Identify problem motivation
2. Define objectives of a solution
3. Design Development
4. Demonstration
5. Evaluation
6. Communication
3.1.1
Identify problem motivation
The problems and motivations behind this research is described in the introduction.
As a short recap, this thesis explores the possibilities of an alternative design system
in improving the integration between disciplines by applying more focus to building
elements and their relationships. Additionally it seeks to identify analogies to biology
that are useful to modelling self-organizing architecture. This to solve a problem of late
design changes with a negative influence of project cost and time.
==PAGE:52==
38
3 Methodology
3.1.2
Define objectives of a solution
All the solution objectives are described in the background chapter of this thesis. They
are briefly repeated in the list below.
• Utilize design assumptions for better and faster integration
• Support the need for a model manager, or interface between BIM and design tools
• Support a more integrative approach to building element design
• Apply useful analogies for fundamental units of development
• Include feedback processes from biology that supports early feedback
• Support designers in design tasks, without distractions from biology
3.1.3
Design & development
The development of this building design information system will base itself on case
studies, and synthesis of existing knowledge into a new design system framework. Two
case studies are used to identify the functionality of different agile prototypes.
3.1.4
Demonstration
A diagrammatic representation of the developed design framework will be demonstrated.
The framework consist of six elements, being three central topics as well as the three in-
terfaces between those topics. The framework is presented in a holistic manner, meaning
that it combines the six elements into a full design cycle.
3.1.5
Evaluation
The development and demonstration efforts are evaluated against the solution objectives
identified earlier in the thesis. The framework is evaluated as a whole, and the different
elements are then evaluated individually.
3.1.6
Communication
The final chapter concludes the thesis with respect to the initial problem, and summa-
rizes the development of the framework. Finally, future work is discussed based on the
evaluation and conclusion of the thesis.
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 4
Design & Development
4.1
Agile E19
The case study of Agile E19 investigates the first of two Agile Building Design Courses
at DTU. More specifically, the case study looks at the system information that was
used in the course. The agile course was the first attempt to create a more agile design
framework, relying on parametric models in Grasshopper, connected through a web-
based plugin called Speckle. The framework consisted of six design systems, categorized
according to disciplines. Despite having disciplinary models, that potentially introduce
siloed optimization tendencies, this course focused mainly on the interconnection of the
different systems. This drew focus away from siloed optimization towards systems in-
tegration. Each system were responsible for providing useful information to another
system.
4.1.1
Systems
In Agile E19, the building design process was divided into the following categories:
• Space 1 - Responsible for creating building envelope and floor divisions.
• Space 2 - Responsible for creating floor plans based on activities.
• Structure 1 - Responsible for adapting the structural system to the architectural
design.
• Structure 2 - Responsible for creating optimal structural dimensions according to
the given loads and structural system.
• MEP 1 - Responsible for creating ventilation system routing for activity specific
indoor climates.
• MEP 2 - Responsible for creating window configurations that take daylight and
heat gains into consideration.
In addition to these, there was an Information Management system to coordinate the
flow of information. However, it is not included in this study because it doesn’t produce
the geometrical types of outputs that the other systems do. The main idea for Agile
==PAGE:54==
40
4 Design & Development
E19 was to have information propagate through a series of connected design systems
that ultimately lead to a complete building design.
Unfortunately, system inputs were not documented during the course, hence the only
available information for this case study is their outputs, which were stored on the course
website through the Speckle plugin. Hence, a large part of this case study focuses on
inferring the inputs from the outputs, i.e. understanding what information was necessary
to generate certain outputs.
4.1.2
Outputs and processes
The six design systems outputted unique geometries, and were combined to form the
full building design, as shown in Figure 4.1. An important element in the course was
to ensure that the amount of duplicate work was minimized, which comes from the
agile design principles [43]. This was achieved to some extent, but there were still some
duplicate geometries that were difficult to avoid.
Figure 4.1: Agile E19 - System Outputs (The far right picture is without walls for visibility
purposes)
4.1.2.1
Space
Space 1 and Space 2 were design systems that made sure that the functional building
requirements were met. Essentially, this was achieved by providing sufficient space for
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Agile E19
41
all building activities, while maintaining appropriate connectivity between the spaces,
and between spaces and environment.
Space 1
Space 2
Building envelope as Brep
Zones as Breps
Floors as Breps
Activities
Ceilings as Breps
Feedback as design status
Buidling footprint as Brep
Facade walls as Breps
Number of floors
Total floor area
Building height
Site boundary as polyline
Feedback as design status
Table 4.1: Outputs of design systems ”Space 1” and ”Space 2”
Space 1 created a geometry, within the building site boundary, and populated it with
floor plates and ceiling plates. The walls, floor- and ceiling plates had no thickness,
thus there were only lines and surfaces in that model. Finally the system outputted a
status which informed the other systems that it had completed its task. The point of
having each system send out a status message was to be clear about which elements
of the system were working and which weren’t, based on the agile principle of working
software [43].
Space 2 created zones for different activities within the building envelope. Zones were
separated by internal partition walls represented as surfaces. This system gave a status
report in the same way as Space 1, but it additionally gave feedback to Space 1 about
the quality of its output. Typically, this would be useful when the size of the building
envelope is not adequate to support all the activities that Space 2 required.
4.1.2.2
Structure
Structure 1 and Structure 2 made sure that the structural requirements were met and
focused on adapting to the architectural topology if possible.
==PAGE:56==
42
4 Design & Development
Structure 1
Structure 2
Slabs as surfaces
Slab thickness
Columns as lines
Slabs as Breps
U-spanning beams as lines
Beam cross-section area
V-spanning beams as lines
Beams as Breps
Feedback as design status
Column cross-section area
Columns as Breps
Feedback as design status
Table 4.2: Outputs of design systems ”Structure 1” and ”Structure 2”
Structure 1 created a structural grid layout, within the building envelope from Space 1,
that also adapted to the zones from Space 2. Slabs were represented as surfaces, while
beams and columns are represented as lines. The system reported about the completion
of its task, and gave feedback to Space 2 in case the zone divisions led to a very irregular
structural grid.
Structure 2 found the appropriate dimension for columns, beams and slabs through
an iterative structural design process. The outputs from the system were restricted to
prefabricated concrete elements for complexity reduction purposes. Thus, the structural
element dimensions were taken from a list of available options from a manufacturer. The
system gave feedback with regards to the structural utilization of the elements.
4.1.2.3
MEP
MEP 1 and MEP 2 provided daylight and ventilation configurations by the use of a
vertical ventilation shaft, pipe routing and window placements on the building facade.
E.g. the MEP systems made sure that indoor environment requirements were met.
MEP 1
MEP 2
MEP installations as % of building volume
Windows as Breps
Suspended ceilings as Breps
Feedback as design status
Ventilation shafts as Breps
Ducts as Breps
Table 4.3: Outputs of design systems ”MEP 1” and ”MEP 2”
MEP 1 created suspended ceilings, ventilation shafts and ducts, based on the building
geometry, zones and activities provided from Space 1 and Space 2.
MEP 2 created windows based on building envelope. Since daylight maximization and
overheating minimization are contradictory design goals, MEP 2 use Pareto optimization
to find the golden middle ground between the two. The feedback informed other systems
about the process of placing the windows, being either ”default” or based on a simulation.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Agile E19
43
The default option was included to provide an output even when the simulation software
was unavailable, or took too long.
4.1.3
Inferred system inputs
In order to identify possible inputs, each output are going to be discussed in terms of
how they might have been generated. This should ultimately uncover one possible set
of inputs per output of the various systems. It is important to emphasize that there
might be more ways to generate the same output, by using another of inputs. The
findings in this case study will therefore mainly function as a starting point for research.
The inputs inferred here will be considered valid information that is useful in early stage
design. Later, these inputs will be evaluated in terms of how they can be used to generate
design assumptions.
4.1.3.1
Space
The building footprint can be generated by creating an offset of the building site bound-
ary. In the output from Space 1 it is seen that this offset was zero, and the building
footprint occupied the entire building site. The height can be taken as maximum allow-
able height at that particular site, and the floor to floor height can be directly inputted
as an assumption/variable.
Zones configuration and zone divisions can be created by using the area requirements
for each activity and the desired connectivity between activities. However, connectivity
needs to be described more specifically before it can be used as an input. The meaning
of the word in this sense is the relationships, either space-space or space-environment.
Space-space describes which spaces are in close proximity, and which are far apart.
Space-environment describes which spaces are close to either windows, balconies or en-
trance/exits, i.e. interacting strongest with the environment. Connectivity directs the
flow of people inside the building, as well the flow in and out of the building. One way of
achieving appropriate connectivity is to create an ordered list, for each zone, containing
connection ”strength” to other zones. This way, it would be possible to generate zone
divisions that take connectivity into account.
Space 1
Space 2
Site boundary
Zone areas
Boundary offset
Connections
Max. height
F2F height
Table 4.4: Inferred inputs of design systems ”Space 1” and ”Space 2”
==PAGE:58==
44
4 Design & Development
4.1.3.2
Structure
Applying a structural system to an existing collection of zone ”boxes” can simply be
done by placing the structural elements at the intersection between zones. However, a
structural system needs a certain regularity to transfer loads safely and efficiently down
to the foundation. Hence, either the zone configurations must be sufficiently regular, or
the structural system needs to interfere with the zone configurations. Thus, an input
for Structure 1 can be the the degree of alignment with the zone configurations, ranging
from completely aligned, to completely regular.
Beam- and slab spans must be limited to a length that is structurally and economi-
cally feasible. This length depends both structural conditions such as applied loads,
and economical conditions such as budget. Hence, another input for Structure 1 can be
maximum allowable spans. The spans could be different for slabs and beams, as they
are different structural elements, but nevertheless they tend to span the same lengths
for proper load transfer.
In order to design slabs, columns and beams it is necessary to know the structural
material and the loads that are applied to the elements. Additionally, slabs transfer
loads differently if they are one way, or two way slabs. Similarly, loads are transferred
differently depending on the support conditions of the structural elements.
Structure 1
Structure 2
Degree of alignment
Structural material
Max. span
Applied loads
Zone config. (Space 2)
Slab span type
Degree of regularity
Support conditions
Layout (Structure 1)
Table 4.5: Inferred inputs of design systems ”Structure 1” and ”Structure 2”
4.1.3.3
MEP
In order to properly dimension ventilation ducts is necessary to know the size of zones
and the zone activities. It is also necessary to know the number of people in each zone.
In order to create a well organized duct routing system, it is necessary to know the
position of all the zones as well.
Window placement is based on the need for daylight at the different locations on the
facade, as well as the available sunlight at those locations. Window sizes and locations
are then restricted by the maximum allowable solar heat gain in the design. The allow-
able heat gain can either be customized to each individual zone, or it can be an overall
restriction. Hence, need for daylight, available sunlight and maximum allowable solar
heat gains should be inputs for MEP 2.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Agile F20
45
MEP 1
MEP 2
Size of zones (Space 2)
Need for daylight
Zone activities (Space 2)
Available sunlight
Zone population
Max. heat gains
Table 4.6: Inferred inputs of design systems ”MEP 1” and ”MEP 2”
4.1.4
Discussion
One issue with these inputs is that the systems depend on each others output. This
introduces the problem that we initially tried to avoid by working in parallel based on
assumptions. The goal for the system inputs is to support parallel work to the highest
degree possible. However, it was seen that a lot of useful design work came from the
six systems. This indicates a potential for further investigation of the inferred system
inputs as valuable early design information.
4.2
Agile F20
The case study of Agile F20 was conducted in parallel with the creation of this thesis,
as a part of the second Agile Building Design Course at DTU. As opposed to Agile E19
organizing systems in an automated waterfall process, Agile F20 attempted to arrange
design systems in a more parallel design process. The participants chose a segment in
the agile framework, and came up with a system in the form of a Grasshopper-script,
that would benefit the early design stages. One of the groups that focused on the design
segment, attempted to implement biological growth principles to floor plan design.
The Design Bio System tried to mimic biology in order to “grow” a floor plan design.
More specifically it used the behavior of a type of slime in the growth process. Floor
plan design was chosen over other building element because of its central role in build-
ing design, and its great influences on other design elements. The slime behavior was
modelled using a plugin to Grasshopper called Physarealm [44]. This plugin allowed the
system to automatically generate a design based on the self-developing nature of the
slime. The growth of the slime happened through birth and death of slime particles,
which was controlled by a set of variables that the designer can adjust. An important
note is that the slime growth couldn’t be directly controlled, leaving a gap between the
designers intentions and the simulation result. Hence, the main purpose of the system
was to exploit the self-developing properties of slime to explore automatically generated
floor plan options in early stage building design.
In early stage design, most of the design information comes from requirements. Hence,
the system only used information that is typically known from the beginning of a project,
being the building site geometry and the number of users that the building should sup-
==PAGE:60==
46
4 Design & Development
port.
Based on the information listed above the system was able to generate a floor plan that
was divided according to the attractiveness of space. Attractiveness of space can be
defined according to different projects, either by distance from entrance (supporting a
separation between private and public space), or by orientation (supporting site specific
considerations). The attractiveness parameters were deemed as design assumptions, and
worked as internal variables in the script. See table 4.7 for an overview of system inputs,
outputs and assumptions.
Inputs
Outputs
Assumptions
Construction platform boundary
High attraction spaces/
High priority indoor spaces
Attractiveness according to
distance from entrance
Number of users
Low attraction spaces/
Low priority indoor spaces
Attractiveness according to
orientation
Non attractive spaces/
Outdoor spaces
Outer walls
Inner walls
Table 4.7: Inputs and outputs of the Design Bio System
4.2.1
Components of the Design Bio System
Input - A standardized speckle receiver that retrieved desired information from the
target system.
Surface Generation - Non-standard geometries were rationalized in a way that the
simulation could understand.
Food/Emitter - Food as points are generated based on the selected attraction bias
(Distance from entrance, West facing, North facing, All of the above). The entrance
point was generated in the center of the geometry, and was used as the agent emitter in
the simulation.
Simulation/Analysis - The simulation took the inputs from the two previous steps,
and was manually run for the desired amount of iterations, by resetting a boolean
toggle and starting/ending a timer. It typically converged after 40 iterations. A chemo-
attractor output was interpreted as vertical lines on the simulation grid, with the length
of the line representing the attractiveness.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Agile F20
47
Figure 4.2: Visualization of accumulated chemo-attractors after simulation
Space Requirements - Based on the space requirements and assumptions for densi-
ties, the needed space and required number of floors was calculated. This was then
interpreted as percentages of the area for outside area, high attraction area and low
attraction area.
Space Differentiation - The results of the simulation were compared with the area
percentages, sorting all the points into the three categories.
Space Discretization - A grid was constructed over the boundary, and the number of
points for each category were counted in each cell. The category with the most points
in a cell, ”won” that cell, discretizing the layout.
Figure 4.3: Grid overlay (on the left) used to rationalize differentiated areas into usable
spaces (on the left)
Geometry Creation - The lines of the layout were checked for intersection with the
outside area and with the site boundaries to separate inside and outside. A geometry
based algorithm for subdividing the high attraction spaces into the required amount of
units was applied. The geometry was then extruded to walls and copied for each required
level.
Output - A standardized speckle sender that communicated the floor plan design to
other systems.
==PAGE:62==
48
4 Design & Development
Figure 4.4: Final output of the Design Bio System
4.2.2
Limits and potentials of the Design Bio System
The system was able to generate a floor plan layout with the use of self-organizing prin-
ciples and based on very little information. However, the floor plan generation always
assumes identical floors on all levels. The fact that a design was made purely on the ba-
sis of attractive areas on the site, which in turn was strongly correlated to the placement
of food/emitters on site, made placement of food crucial for good results. There is a fu-
ture potential to implement other parameters that might also be useful for determining
space allocation on site. The script, being a prototype, was quite computationally heavy
and did not always result in rational floor plans. This limitation might be overcome by
continued work on the script, potentially also a deviation from using the Physarealm
plugin towards using a reconstructed script specified to floor plan design. Finally, there
is a potential of finding better settings for the simulation. This can be achieved through
an iterative process of trial and error.
Based on the findings in this case study, it becomes evident that controllable self-
organizing systems are difficult to achieve. It is interesting to look at other self-organizing
systems for inspiration.
Agent-based modelling can quickly become computationally
heavy, and the number of agents should therefor be carefully considered.
4.3
Identifying agile design assumptions
A large part of design errors, usually discovered late in the design process, have roots
in early design. When there is little available information to work with, it is difficult to
produce accurate/certain/feasible outputs for designers. As building design traditionally
works, the architects are the lead designers and can develop designs independently from
other disciplines. However, the industry is moving in a direction of integrated design in
order to reach better, more optimized solutions. This requires the architect to depend
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Identifying agile design assumptions
49
more on other disciplines such as structural engineers and MEP engineers from the be-
ginning.
In the early stages, when the architect is doing the programming and conceptual massing,
it is valuable to get feedback from structural engineers and MEP engineers on the initial
architectural design concept. The following sections will investigate the feedback that is
most useful for the different disciplines in early design stages. The feedback is based on
typical trade-off situations between the different disciplines.
4.3.1
Architecture related design feedback
From structural engineers
Structural engineers tend to want a well laid-out, symmetrical structural grid. This
leads structural engineers to give feedback on the building envelope geometry and the
floor plan layout. Because having a uniform structural grid almost certainly yields a
more efficient structural system, it is highly beneficial to let the design be influenced in
this area to some extent. Therefore, the first feedback interface is created.
”Envelope and floor plan vs. structural grid uniformity.”
From MEP engineers
MEP engineers are interested in the locations and sizes of spaces in order to design
routing systems. There is also a need for placing technical equipment within the ar-
chitectural design, which must be provided to the architect as feedback. Additionally,
MEP engineers evaluate the building envelope in terms of VolumeToSurface ratio and
AreaToPerimieter ratios [45]. These are indicators that can be used in early design to
say something about the possibility for heat gains and losses in the building.
”Topology vs. routing system and early design indicators”
4.3.2
Structural related design feedback
From MEP engineers
MEP engineers are interested in the dimension an position of structural elements, in
order to fit routing systems accordingly. They type of feedback MEP engineers would
give to structural engineers would therefore be related to the position and dimensions
of structural elements. Asking if the routing should go through or around the element
in question.
”Structural system vs. routing system”
==PAGE:64==
50
4 Design & Development
From Architects
Architects are interested in having an aesthetically pleasing design, which might lead to
questions about structural element shapes, sizes and visibility. It will also be of interest
for the architect to give feedback on the type of structural system being used, bearing
walls vs. columns and beams for example.
”Structural elements vs. aesthetic goals”
4.3.3
MEP related design feedback
From Architects
Architects might have an interest in locations where MEP systems are accessed for ser-
viceability, as well as the dimensions and locations of the systems. Lighting is probably
the building feature that is most important in the interface between MEP and Architects.
Architects want daylight and views, while MEP engineers want to minimize energy on
artificial light as well as minimizing cooling loads from large windows. Essentially, it is
MEPs best interest to find the optimal window size and location, but the architects will
have feedback based on aesthetics.
”Daylight and cooling loads vs. views and aesthetics”
From structural engineers
Structural engineers will be interested in the locations and sizes of ducts, in order to
avoid collisions.. They will also be interested in the placement of heavy technical instal-
lations, which might have substantial impact on the structural system design.
”Technical equipment vs. structural system”
4.3.4
Bridging the gap from zero to LOD 200
LOD 200 is the lowest level of detail provided by DiKon, and it provides generic geome-
tries of building elements with associated properties such as type name, height, width
and length [46]. LOD is a facilitator for holistic optimization because it allows designers
to communicate about problems in different levels of abstraction. It lets them sort out
excessive information by collaborating at a lower level of detail, which is highly beneficial
for teams with multiple knowledge-bases. Due to the need for earlier integration in the
AEC industry, this chapter proposes additional levels of detail to support designers in
even earlier.
LOD 200 yields a generic building model where the outlines and locations of building el-
ements are presented, accompanied by element type names. Designers, being architects
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Identifying agile design assumptions
51
and engineers, make educated guesses based on target requirements to reach LOD 200.
Early stage design workflow is here, frankly referred to as educated guessing. The word
”educated” refers to the knowledge and experience of the designers in making design
decisions, and the word ”guessing” refers to the inevitable uncertainty of what is the
optimal building design for a client, especially in early stages. LOD 0 and LOD 100 will
provide two additional steps from target requirements to LOD 200, which provides a
stronger basis for the aforementioned educated guesses.
In order to define LOD 0 and LOD 100, it is necessary to identify which elements are
driving the location and geometry of building elements. LOD describes the maturity of
a building and its elements. It describes the framework for design decisions in the next
LOD, meaning that LOD 300 is a specification of LOD 200, and LOD 200 is a guideline
for LOD 300. This is evident in DiKon’s representation of LOD, see figure 4.5 and table
4.8 for comparisons of visuals and definitions of LOD 200 to LOD 400 for a reinforced
concrete beam. Other examples can be found in DiKons publication.
Figure 4.5: Visual example of LOD guiding the next LOD for a reinforced concrete beam
LOD 200
LOD 300
LOD 325
LOD 400
Beams modelled as
generic objects in
maximum outer
dimensions,
divided into
expected types.
Beams modelled
incl. major
openings for
building services.
Beams modelled in
production-ready
lengths, including
corbels, and with
openings for
building services.
Beams modelled in
production length with
corbels, openings for
building services, joints,
reinforcing incl. laps,
mounting points, bevels,
inserts and cast-in plates.
Table 4.8: Definitions of DiKon definitions of a reinforced concrete beam
==PAGE:66==
52
4 Design & Development
4.3.5
Assumptions in terms of LOD
In order to start designing from zero information, it is necessary to make assumptions.
This section will focus on identifying the necessary assumptions for designers to start
from zero.
Imagine a timeline of the building project, where the design starts at LOD 0, goes
through LOD 100 and ends up at LOD 200. LOD 200 describes basic geometric shapes,
which is the ending stage of research for this thesis.
Each LOD on the timeline is populated with design decisions, gradually reducing the
design solution space into a specified design. However, it is necessary to artificially make
these design decisions right away for designers to start from zero. The artificially gener-
ated design decisions are going to be presented as assumptions.
The aim of any design project is essentially to transform all assumptions into factually
based design decisions, see figure 4.6 .
Figure 4.6: Design developing from assumptions to decisions
LOD’s can be seen as a hierarchy of design decisions, where decisions in a high LOD
builds on decisions in a low LOD. The nature of the assumptions will therefore be sorted
according to LOD, so that one assumption guides the next.
4.3.6
LOD 0
The architectural design process typically start with creating a area program, describing
the desired areas and functions in the building. However, some physical aspects of the
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Identifying agile design assumptions
53
building, like potential placements on site, are usually also found in this stage. The
structural design usually starts with soil investigations and environmental load investi-
gations. Similar to the architectural programming, which lists areas that the building
will facilitate, structural design at this stage lists many of the external loads that the
building will facilitate. MEP design starts with an investigation of the site, surroundings
and climate, in order to identify opportunities for good indoor climate design. Sun path
is a key element in early stage MEP design.
This level of development can be generalized into contextual information. Everything
that describes the context of which a building is in, can be considered contextual infor-
mation. Listed below are some types of information that fall into the category of LOD
0 assumptions.
• Building site.
• Nearby buildings.
• Building regulations.
• Soil conditions.
• Wind loads.
• Snow loads.
• Sun paths.
• Infrastructure – car, bike, heating, cooling, waste…
• Client requirements.
• User/functions.
• Building type.
4.3.7
LOD 100
The architectural design is typically born through conceptual massing. This gives an
idea of the building envelope as well as the distribution of volumes on the site. The
structural design tries to create a grid layout for the structural system, which allows it
to support the environmental loads and fit with the conceptual mass from the architec-
tural design. MEP design at this stage tries to chose climatic strategies that fit with the
conceptual mass from the architectural design and the environment.
The description of LOD 100 can be generalized into contextual interactions. The inter-
actions between the building systems and the environment falls into this LOD. Listed
below are some types of information that fall into the category of LOD 100 assumptions.
==PAGE:68==
54
4 Design & Development
• Private/public spaces.
• Entrances.
• Window placements – view and daylight source.
• Space adjacency’s.
• Levels.
• Lateral load bracing.
• Vertical load bracing.
4.3.8
LOD 200
The architectural design at this stage includes floor plans and basic geometries for walls,
floors, doors and windows. The geometries are bounding boxes that show the ”maxi-
mum” size of the elements, ref DIKON.
The structural design now includes bounding boxes representing ”maximum” dimensions
of structural elements. It should also be some form of refitting the structural grid to the
floor plan at this stage.
DIKON provides the following generalized description of this LOD:
”LOD 200 DK defines building parts modelled as generic objects and their associated
properties. All information is defined at the ’assumed’ level” [46]. Listed below are some
elements that fall into the category of LOD 200 assumptions.
• Building envelope.
• Structural elements.
• Walls.
• Floors.
• Roofs.
• Doors.
• Windows.
• Furniture.
• Ducts.
• Technical installations.
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Connecting disciplines from LOD 0 to LOD 200
55
4.3.9
Relationship between LOD and FBS
Based on the LOD’s that have been presented above, this section tries to link them to
an existing design ontology, namely the ”FBS-ontology” by John Gero [47]. In short,
the ontology consists of three design constructs that are deemed fundamental in all de-
sign works. The three constructs are Function, Behavior and Structure. Function, talks
about ”what the artifact is for”, while Behavior talks about ”what the artifact does” and
Structure talks about ”what the artifact is”. This section draws a parallel from LOD 0
to Function, from LOD 100 to Behavior and from LOD 200 to Structure.
LOD 0 includes contextual information about the design problem, similar to the state-
ment: ”what the artifact is for”.
When Gero talks about function, he provides an
example of a dwellings function, being ”Provide safety, provide comfort, provide afford-
ability”. Hence, function talks about why an artifact is being designed. Similarly, LOD
0 contains information about the context the artifact is designed in.
LOD 100 includes interactions between the artifact and the context, similar to the
statement: ”what the artifact does”. As for function, Gero presents an example of the
behavior of a dwelling, being ”Strength, weight, heat absorption, cost”. Behavior talks
about features an artifacts has, similar to LOD 100.
LOD 200 includes the basic geometries of a building design, similar to the statement:
”what the artifact is”. However, LOD’s up to the highest LOD represent what the build-
ing ”is”, but only LOD 200 is considered in this thesis for the sake of simplifying the
concept of early design. Gero’s example of the structure of a dwelling is as follows: ”Ge-
ometrically interconnected walls, floors, roof, windows, doors, pipes, electrical systems”.
4.4
Connecting disciplines from LOD 0 to LOD 200
As mentioned, LOD and the FBS-ontology describe different types of design informa-
tion. This section looks at how design assumptions can be categorized accordingly, to
aid collaboration between architecture, structure and MEP at different LOD’s. Figure
4.7 illustrates the categorization, and the different ”types” of assumptions are colored
red.
==PAGE:70==
56
4 Design & Development
Figure 4.7: Categorization of design assumptions
The assumptions describe something at a particular interface between disciplines, and
can also can be deemed trade-off situations. All though difficult to identify all relevant
design assumptions in the scope of this thesis, a few examples can be seen in the following
list.
1. An interface between what the structural system is for and what the MEP
system is for
”Resisting wind - cross-ventilation”
2. An interface between what the MEP system is for and what the Architectural
system is for
”Resist overheating - maximizing views”
3. An interface between what the structural system is for and what the architec-
tural system is for
”Structurally support space - provide functional space”
4. An interface between what the structural system does and what the MEP sys-
tem does
”Lateral-, bending-, and torsional resistance - facade wind pressure dif-
ference”
5. An interface between what the MEP system does and what the Architectural
system does
”Cooling supply, heat removal, heat absorption - glazing area”
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Connecting disciplines from LOD 0 to LOD 200
57
6. An interface between what the structural system does and what the architec-
tural system does
”Vertical structural support - void volume, void geometry”
7. An interface between what the structural system is and what the MEP system
is
”Core, shear wall, bracing element - envelope shape”
8. An interface between what the MEP system is and what the Architectural
system is
”Ventilation inlet, outlet, thermal mass - window”
9. An interface between what the structural system is and what the architectural
system is
”Slabs, beams, columns, walls - voids”
This framework for assumptions creates interfaces between disciplinary design inten-
tion that ultimately boil down to building elements. Hence, it becomes an approach
to integrative element design, that takes disciplinary design intentions and creates rela-
tionships between them. It also becomes a way for designers of different backgrounds
to communicate what they intend to do, and they become aware of the implications
they might have on other disciplines. This assumes that a sufficient amount of assump-
tions have been identified, which requires further use and development of the framework.
4.4.1
Zero design - a common starting point
Assumptions have been identified to aid designers in communicating design intentions.
Assumptions are about collaboration, with regards to properties of various design so-
lutions.
However, due to the indefinite amount of variations in building design, as-
sumptions cannot cover all aspects of any building design. Rather, a framework for
assumptions was proposed. This allows for a systematic generation of assumptions for
different building designs. These assumptions can then be reused over different projects.
Since there is no initial set of design assumptions, there is no clear starting point for
the design process. This leads to the idea of a zero design. Based on the key elements
of building design in chapter 2, the zero design contains the most fundamental set of
assumptions. The zero design acts as a common starting point for all design projects,
which could be a fundamental piece in an integrative design logic. It would support
designers to think in a procedural manner, meaning that it would help them identify the
necessary developmental steps from zero design to final design, through the application
of assumption and real design work. Without zero design, designers might start in differ-
ent ways, which is inconsistent and reduces the possibility for improving the integrative
design process.
==PAGE:72==
58
4 Design & Development
The zero design fits into the agile design system, which consists of Target, Design, Mate-
rial, Construction and Analysis. These five segments need to be able to retrieve useful
information from the zero design in order to start optimizing.
Essentially, the zero design is the first step of design. Using the analogy of a digital
design engine, it outputs the zero design without the need for any fuel. The target
segment supplies client requirements as guidelines for the design. The analysis segment
compares the current design to the guidelines from the target segment.
The design
segment continuously evolves the zero design based on the target guidelines.
4.5
Biological analogies to building design
4.5.1
Anatomical organization vs. building organization
This section proposes an analogy to biological levels of organization in order to properly
draw parallels from biological concepts to building design. Table 4.9 presents a compari-
son between anatomical hierarchies and building hierarchies, suggesting that they can be
considered equivalent in their respective domains. The analogy taken from Aygün’s hi-
erarchical element design model, which first categorizes building type (similar to type of
animal), then spaces (organ systems), then elements (organs), then components (tissue)
and finally material (cells).
Anatomical structure
Building structure
Cell
Material
Tissue
Component
Organ
Element
Organ system
Space
Complete anatomy
Complete building
Table 4.9: Analogy between anatomical and building hierarchies
This analogy ensures a consistent frame of reference when talking about how buildings
can be modelled using self-organizing principles from biology. Although the analogy is
yet to be tested, it can arguably be validated as follows.
Cells are fundamental units in biology, and they initially have a universal state, before
specializing. Material units are fundamental element of design, and the essentially form
an entire building. Material is also initially unspecified, before specific material proper-
ties are chosen as a response to requirements.
In the same way that there are different types of tissue in biology, generally epithelial
tissue, connective tissue, muscle tissue and nervous tissue [48], there are different compo-
nents in buildings that are parts of larger structures. Examples of building components
==PAGE:73==
4.5 Biological analogies to building design
59
are finishing layers on walls and floors, the core components of structural elements and
turning vanes within ventilation ducts.
Organs in biology are elements that are cognitively comprehensible in the whole perspec-
tive, as opposed to all kinds of various tissues and cells. Similarly, building elements
such as ventilation ducts, structural beams or an office space.
Spaces need to be redefined in order to be analogous to organ systems. Instead of being
“hallway space”, “office space”, it needs to be something like “transportation system” or
“activity system”. This is so that structural systems and MEP systems can be separate
space types with similar weight to architectural systems, since they also physically take
up space.
In tables 4.10, 4.11 and 4.12 are three arbitrary examples of the proposed analogy.
Fibroblasts
Galvanized steel
Connective tissue
Turning vanes
Arteries
Ducts
Circulatory system
Ventilation system
Table 4.10: MEP related hierarchical analogy
Muscle cell
S235 structural steel
Muscle tissue
Core (main)
Skeletal muscle
Beams
Muscular system
Structural system
Table 4.11: Structure related hierarchical analogy
Hepatocytes
Oak
Epithelial tissue
Finishes
Liver
Entrance hall
Digestive system
Functional system
Table 4.12: Architecture related hierarchical analogy
4.5.2
Morphogens as design intent
When trying to identify morphogens in building design, it can be useful to look at it
analogously. If morphogens generally are triggers of cell activity, and act as a driving
force for growth and development, it might be possible to draw a parallel to design intent.
Design intent controls the direction of the design process, as design decisions continu-
ously accumulate into the final product. In parametric modelling practice, design intent
==PAGE:74==
60
4 Design & Development
plays a significant role in the usefulness of the model, essentially making sure that the
model is flexible in the right ways.
”There is a need to draw a distinction between being able to use particular parametric
modelling tools and being able to model products in parametric modelling systems by
applying these tools appropriately. This is to do with design intent. ” [49].
Design intent is different for all building design projects, and it depends on the priorities
that are being made. This thesis categorizes design intent into eight categories, see table
4.13, according to design objectives from the Whole Building Design Guide [50]:
Design Intentions
Description
Accessible
Supporting users, independently of functional ability
Aesthetics
Coherent architectural expression
Cost-effective
Same benefits as alternative solutions, at a lower cost
Functional/operational
Supporting purpose and intended use-cases
Historic preservation
Retaining history of buildings, sites and districts
Productive
Creating an environment for concentration, learning,
communication and collaboration
Secure/safe
Minimizing the risk of harm or danger to occupants
Sustainable
Simultaniously supporting ”People”, ”Planet” and
”Pocketbook”
Table 4.13: These intentions are, to some extent, present in all building design projects
Based on WBDG’s depiction of office buildings [51], this section tries to describe different
design intentions and how they might become the basis for morphogens. The majority
of the volume of an office building is normally dedicated to working spaces. Working
spaces all the spaces that employees use in performing their work. The two main types
of working spaces are offices and conference rooms, of which there are several types.
These have three types of associated design considerations. The first type is sufficient
daylight, fresh air, electricity, acoustic dampening, etc. These considerations influence
other building elements that work spaces must be connected to, e.g. facade for daylight,
ventilation system for fresh air, electrical system for electricity and soft finish materi-
als for acoustic dampening. Meanwhile, there are other design considerations, type 2,
such as floor plan flexibility, opportunities for interactions and intuitive maneuvering
between spaces, that have a more vague connection to other building elements. These
considerations are more about the organisation, or layout, of the work spaces. Lastly
there is a third type of design considerations that relate to tenant needs such as growth
demands and potentials, tenant group sizes and technical/electrical equipment demands.
These considerations generally dictate the size of work spaces.
In an attempt to identify morphogens, the considerations mentioned above can be di-
rectly mapped to the three types of morphogens that were identified earlier; population
==PAGE:75==
4.6 A self-organizing model as state of play
61
morphogens, topological morphogens and growth morphogens. Type 1 design consider-
ations that describe connections to other building elements are population morphogens.
Type 2 design considerations that describe the layout, or organization, of a space are
topological morphogens. Type 3 design considerations that describe spatial requirements
are growth morphogens.
4.6
A self-organizing model as state of play
This section proposes an agent-based modelling approach, where agents represent differ-
ent material units, in analogy to cells in biology. This approach needs rules for material
to become components, rules for components to become elements and rules for elements
to become building systems.
In line with the previously proposed agile framework, the self-organizing model is in this
thesis proposed as a means to provide state of play. This entails that the other systems,
Target, Design, Material and Build provide information to the model.
4.6.1
Agile segments output as design genes
The agents are given a set of behavioral rules, which can be called design genes, that
dictate how they react to different external influences. These genes are essentially the
driving-forces for self-organization, and should therefore be based on information that
describes the desired end-goal. The target segment contains information about the ex-
pectations for the self-organized model, which need to guide the evaluation of the final
model rather than instructing the agents.
The design segment contains information
about strategies to meet the expectations in the target segment. Hence, this informa-
tion should be transformed into morphogens, which guide the development of agents.
The material segment contains information about cost, sustainability, life-span etc. of
material choices. It also contains the specification of materials for different building ele-
ments. This information should become design genes, so that the agents can know their
material state based on which elements they are part of. The build segment contains
information about constructability, which could be used as balancing morphogens to the
morphogens from the target segment.
4.6.2
Methods of design change
A benefit of ”growing” a design in an agent based environment is the possibility of mak-
ing changes at different stages of development. 1) Changing design genes and get a
new building that ”best” accommodates the specified change. The first way of making
design changes requires a strong definition of how DNA results in specific typologies.
==PAGE:76==
62
4 Design & Development
Only then is it possible to use DNA as a tool for making specific changes to the final
design. However, until there is a strong definition, it can still be possible to model the
most fundamental features of a building, e.g. the building has a set of spaces that are
connected, it has a structural system that supports the spaces, it has a MEP system
that supports necessary circulation of electricity, air and water, and it has a facade that
separates it from the external environment.
2) Apply change/forces during growth, and thereby make the design adapt while de-
veloping, resulting in a different looking phenotype. The second way of making design
changes requires knowledge about the actual growth process, and how a physical (or
digital) force can affect the growth process in different way.
3) Apply changes to the fully grown design, which results in phenotype resisting change
substantially more than if change is applied during growth or to DNA. The third way
of making design changes requires knowledge about the feedback loops that every living
organism has in order to maintain homeostasis.
Essentially, these provide three different design tools, which could be used in three
different stages of design. Applying changes to DNA is useful in the very early design
stages, for design exploration. Applying changes during growth is useful when some
design work has been made, and it is difficult to go back on design decisions. Applying
changes to the phenotype is useful when there is a need to make alterations after a lot
of design work has been done, and it is important to get feedback on the implications of
a change.
Figure 4.8: Three types design changes in the biodigital model
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Demonstration
5.1
The BioDigital Design System
The BioDigital Design framework tries to combine agile design principles with self-
organization principles from biology. It introduces assumptions as a means for early
integration. There is a clear benefit of introducing assumptions to building design, as
they provide a collaborative design basis early in the design phase. The framework is
structured in a way that maintains discipline perspectives, which makes it useful in the
integration of disciplines. The assumptions framework, presented in chapter 4, supports
designers in their collaboration by translating conflicting design intentions into critical
building elements.
Figure 5.1 illustrates how the different topics of this thesis are connected. The figure
also illustrates the different topics position in the design cycle. The topics are as follows:
1. Integrative information about the design
2. Translation of building design aims to the bio digital model
3. Self-organizing building modelling framework
4. State of play during agile design
5. Holistic, integrative design optimization
6. Support of parallel development through temporary information
Step one of the framework is intended for initiation of the design process. This entails
the establishment of client requirements, site investigations etc., and furthermore an
establishments of various design intentions. These intentions will, through the assump-
tions framework, start a collaborative process about building element properties. Step
two is translating the various design into design genes. These genes comprise information
from all the agile segments, Target, Design, Material and Build. Step three and four is
related to the actual self-organizing model, which gives an output based on design genes.
The design genes are behavioral rules for the ”material units” that are the agents of the
model. The output gets evaluated with respect to target requirements, and state of play
is reported to relevant segments. Step five is about the use of agile principles in design.
Step six is about how assumptions fit within the agile framework.
==PAGE:78==
64
5 Demonstration
Figure 5.1: Illustration of the framework
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
6.1
Evaluation
6.1.1
Utilize design assumptions for better and faster integration?
An ontology for assumption was created, based on the perceived gaps in early design
integration. The ontology, which takes conflicting design intentions and directs them
towards focused building element, needs to be validated by the industry and tested.
A potential benefit of having these assumptions is more shared design intentions in all
aspects of a building design. The assumptions that were presented in chapter 4 illustrate
the functionality of the ontology, but there is a need to investigate both the versatility
and the usefulness of the ontology. The versatility relates to how many use-cases the
ontology can support.
The usefulness relates to the degree of satisfaction designers
experience when using it in collaboration.
6.1.2
Support the need for a model manager, or interface
between BIM and design tools?
A biological self-organization model was applied to the Analysis segment of the agile
framework. This model takes input from all the other segments, and thus acts as ”Model
Manager” in the agile system. However, since the framework haven’t yet been validated,
it can’t be said that it successfully supports multiple models and design tools, as a model
manager should.
6.1.3
Support a more integrative approach to building element
design
The ontology for assumptions supports a more integrative consideration of building
elements in design. It also makes sure that detection of conflicting design intentions
leads to a concrete point of solution through the use of assumptions.
6.1.4
Apply useful analogies for fundamental units of development
An analogy about fundamental units in biology and buildings has been made, and it
creates a frame of reference for developing self-organizing building models. However, the
==PAGE:80==
66
6 Evaluation
analogy cannot yet be tested, because there is no method for modelling self-organization
as of now.
6.1.5
Include feedback processes from biology that supports early
feedback
Biological feedback loops might prove useful for designers to get feedback on desired
design changes. There is no self-organizing model as of now, but an attempt was made
however to describe how changes could be applied to the biological model in order to
get various feedback.
6.1.6
Support designers in design tasks, without distractions from
biology
Due to the lack of a self-organizing model, it is difficult to determine whether it distracts
designers or not. Interfaces from design to biology have been identified however, through
assumptions as design genes and design intent as morphogens.
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion &
Communication
7.1
Conclusion
In the search for better buildings, this thesis proposes a design framework that merges
three main topics that were found central to improving design.
These topics were
Assumptions, Agile and Biomimetics.
The framework of assumptions was developed
through this thesis, while the agile framework and the biomimetics framework were al-
ready existing. An attempt was made to merge these framework into a BioDigital Design
System, in order to tackle the increasing complexity in building design projects.
It was found that the three frameworks can support each other in various ways, which
is promising for future work. Assumptions help with parallel development in the agile
framework, biology can both result in faster modelling, while also being a part of the
Analysis segment in the agile framework. It was found to be of little use to identify
biological analogies without being able to test them. The biological analogies were nec-
essary, however, to complete the framework, which now can be broken down into six
different sections, and improved upon in individually in future work.
7.2
Future work
An important element for future work is the actual construction of a prototype, that
allows for testing and validation of the framework and the modelling approach. This
could be done through a case study of a building project, similar to the Agile E20 case
study in this thesis.
A further investigation of analogies from biology to building design is suggested. The
current analogies are related to important developmental concepts, but there might be
more effective analogies available. Identifying a proper analogy from gene regulation in
biology might help solving the problem of developing a computational self-organizing
model.
==PAGE:82==
68
7 Conclusion & Communication
Building on work from Morphogenetic Engineering might reveal other developmental
concepts in analogy to computation. Expertise in agent based modelling is also necessary
for future work, in order to identify a more tangible concept of self-organization than
this thesis provides.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[1]
R. Doursat, H. Sayama, and O. Michel, “Morphogenetic engineering: Reconcil-
ing self-organization and architecture,” in Morphogenetic engineering, pp. 1–24,
Springer, 2012.
[2]
R. L. Magna, M. Gabler, S. Reichert, T. Schwinn, F. Waimer, A. Menges, and
J. Knippers, “From nature to fabrication: biomimetic design principles for the
production of complex spatial structures,” International Journal of Space Structures,
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 27–39, 2013.
[3]
B. 3.8, “Case example: Sustainable building secrets of termites,” 2020.
[4]
M. T. Review, “Whale-inspired wind turbine,” 2020.
[5]
M. GRAW-HILL, “Managing uncertainty and expectations in building design and
construction,” 2014.
[6]
A. Alliance, “The agile manifesto,” 2020.
[7]
P. Gruber, T. McGinley, and M. Muehlbauer, “Towards an agile biodigital archi-
tecture: Supporting a dynamic evolutionary and developmental view of architec-
ture,” in Interdisciplinary Expansions in Engineering and Design With the Power
of Biomimicry, IntechOpen, 2017.
[8]
J. C. Tim McGinley, “Suburban mutations: Towards the multi-dimensional appro-
priation of science in architecture,” Conference: ASA 2016, 2016.
[9]
O. Speck, D. Speck, R. Horn, J. Gantner, and K. P. Sedlbauer, “Biomimetic bio-
inspired biomorph sustainable? an attempt to classify and clarify biology-derived
technical developments,” Bioinspiration & biomimetics, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 011004,
2017.
[10] Y. H. Cohen and Y. Reich, “The biomimicry design process: Characteristics, stages
and main challenge,” in Biomimetic Design Method for Innovation and Sustainabil-
ity, pp. 19–29, Springer, 2016.
[11] R. M. Nesse, “Tinbergen’s four questions: Two proximate, two evolutionary,” Evo-
lution, Medicine, and Public Health, vol. 2019, no. 1, pp. 2–2, 2019.
==PAGE:84==
70
Bibliography
[12] L. Bragança, S. M. Vieira, and J. B. Andrade, “Early stage design decisions: the
way to achieve sustainable buildings at lower costs,” The scientific world journal,
vol. 2014, 2014.
[13] F. D. Ching, B. S. Onouye, and D. Zuberbuhler, Building Structures Illustrated:
Patterns, Systems, and Design. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[14] M. S. Uihlein, “Characteristics of structural and architectural integration as iden-
tified by us architectural practitioners,” Journal of Architectural and Planning Re-
search, pp. 258–270, 2015.
[15] P. Heiselberg, “Integrated building design,” December 2007.
[16] J. Daalhuizen, P. Badke-Schaub, and S. M. Batill, “Dealing with uncertainty in
design practice: issues for designer-centered methodology,” in DS 58-9: Proceedings
of ICED 09, the 17th International Conference on Engineering Design, Vol. 9,
Human Behavior in Design, Palo Alto, CA, USA, 24.-27.08. 2009, 2009.
[17] A. A. Latiffi, J. Brahim, and M. S. Fathi, “The development of building information
modeling (bim) definition,” in Applied mechanics and materials, vol. 567, pp. 625–
630, Trans Tech Publ, 2014.
[18] R. Sacks, C. Eastman, G. Lee, and P. Teicholz, BIM handbook: a guide to building
information modeling for owners, designers, engineers, contractors, and facility
managers. John Wiley & Sons, 2018.
[19] K. Kensek and D. Noble, Building information modeling: BIM in current and future
practice. John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
[20] S. Pogorelskiy and D. Alava, “Building information modelling: Present realities
and future possibilities,” Műszaki és Menedzsment Tudományi Közlemények, vol. 3,
no. 4, pp. 377–394, 2018.
[21] E. Shourangiz, M. I. Mohamad, M. S. Hassanabadi, S. Banihashemi, M. Bakhtiari,
and M. Torabi, “Flexibility of bim towards design change,” in 2nd International
Conference on Construction and Project Management, IPEDR, vol. 15, p. 2011,
2011.
[22] H. S. Keyuri Patel, “3 types of bim clash detection,” 2020.
[23] M. Juszczyk, A. Tomana, and M. Bartoszek, “Current issues of bim-based design
change management, analysis and visualization,” Procedia engineering, vol. 164,
pp. 518–525, 2016.
[24] B. Reed et al., The integrative design guide to green building: Redefining the practice
of sustainability, vol. 43. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
[25] A. K. Athienitis and W. O’Brien, Modeling, design, and optimization of net-zero
energy buildings. Wiley Online Library, 2015.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
71
[26] H. N. Genc and M. C. Altun, “Analysis of building element design methods,” in
AEI 2011: Building Integration Solutions, pp. 490–498, 2011.
[27] M. Aygun, “Generation and evaluation of alternatives for building elements,” Build-
ing and environment, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 707–712, 2003.
[28] E. Britannica, “Symmetry, biology,” 2020.
[29] G. Holló, “Demystification of animal symmetry: symmetry is a response to mechan-
ical forces,” Biology direct, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2017.
[30] R. Baxter, “Types of cells in the human body,” 2020.
[31] D. M. Bodine, “Types of cells in the human body,” 2020.
[32] O. Services, “Feedback loops,” 2020.
[33] T. Tabata and Y. Takei, “Morphogens, their identification and regulation,” Devel-
opment, vol. 131, no. 4, pp. 703–712, 2004.
[34] T. McGinley, “Morphogenesis,” 2005.
[35] D. Davis, “Generative design is doomed to fail.”
[36] R. Oxman and N. Gu, “Theories and models of parametric design thinking,” 2015.
[37] S. Boeykens, “Bridging building information modeling and parametric design,”
eWork and eBusiness in Architecture, Engineering and Construction:
ECPPM
2012, p. 453, 2012.
[38] C. M. Herr and T. Kvan, “Using cellular automata to generate high-density building
form,” in Computer aided architectural design futures 2005, pp. 249–258, Springer,
2005.
[39] V. Barmpoutis and G. F. Dargush, “A compact self-organizing cellular automata-
based genetic algorithm,” arXiv preprint arXiv:0711.2478, 2007.
[40] R. Kicinger, T. Arciszewski, and K. De Jong, “Morphogenic evolutionary design:
cellular automata representations in topological structural design,” in Adaptive com-
puting in design and manufacture VI, pp. 25–38, Springer, 2004.
[41] M. J. Berryman and S. D. Angus, “Tutorials on agent-based modelling with netlogo
and network analysis with pajek,” in Complex physical, biophysical and Econophys-
ical systems, pp. 351–375, World Scientific, 2010.
[42] A. Kanoglu and D. Arditi, “A computer-based information system for architectural
design offices,” Construction Innovation, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 15–29, 2001.
[43] A. Alliance, “12 principles behind the agile manifesto,” 2020.
==PAGE:86==
72
Bibliography
[44] M. Yidong, “Physarealm,” 2020.
[45] A. Bhatia, “The mep design of building services,” December 2020.
[46] B. DiKon, “Specification of building parts for selected building parts in building
and landscape models,” 20018.
[47] J. S. Gero and U. Kannengiesser, “The function-behaviour-structure ontology of
design,” in An anthology of theories and models of design, pp. 263–283, Springer,
2014.
[48] R. University, “Types of tissues.”
[49] A. Rynne and W. Gaughran, “Cognitive modeling strategies for optimum design
intent in parametric modeling,” Computers in Education Journal, vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 55–68, 2008.
[50] N. I. of Building Sciences, “Design objectives,” 2020.
[51] N. I. of Building Sciences, “Office,” 2020.
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX A
Aygün’s method for
building element design
==PAGE:88==
74
A Aygün’s method for building element design
Figure A.1: Aygün’s Method
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX B
Paradigm of
morphogenetic
engineering
==PAGE:90==
76
B Paradigm of morphogenetic engineering
Figure B.1: Paradigm of morphogenetic engineering
==PAGE:91==
==PAGE:92==
