==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS  
A study introducing a workflow to explore the design of elastic 
gridshells including structural implications of active bending.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Olivia BONJOUR 
DTU - Department of Civil Engineering 
Architectural Engineering Master’s Thesis 
Supervisors: Tim McGinley, Philippe Hannequart 
Period: February 2020 – July 2020 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
1 / 64 
ABSTRACT 
Elastic gridshell structures are formed from the bending of an initially flat grid into a curved shape that 
acquires the strength of a shell. They are architecturally, structurally and constructively interesting and 
would gain to be further developed. Research has shown that their design is complex, both for the 
shape and for the structural analysis, but that advances in computational design are creating 
opportunities. This work aims to support elastic gridshell exploration in early design stages including 
the structural implications of active bending. It is guided by the following question: How can the design 
process of elastic gridshell be facilitated by the possibilities given by digital design?  
Based on available resources, a study of the active bending modelling using digital tools was 
conducted. It was then integrated in an agile and parametric framework, that was created in order to 
allow the design and analysis of gridshell structures. After validating the proposition and applying it to 
a case, it was concluded that it is appropriate for early stage design of gridshells but in order to 
conclude on buildability, further studies are required.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
2 / 64 
ACKNOLEDGMENT 
I would first like to thank Philippe Hannequart and Tim McGinley who supervised my work. Each in 
their own way gave me precious advice and were there when I wasn’t sure of where my research was 
leading me. Discussing my work with them was always a pleasure and very enriching.  
I would also like to thank all the collaborators of Arcora for integrating me in the life of the company 
and more specifically the team of structural engineers for their availability to answer my questions.  
Finally, I must express my gratitude to my family and friends who provided unconditional support and 
encouragement through the process of researching and writing this thesis.   
This accomplishment would not have been possible without them. Thank you. 
 
==PAGE:5==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
3 / 64 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
 
ABSTRACT ...........................................................................................................................................................1 
ACKNOLEDGMENT .............................................................................................................................................2 
1 
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................................4 
2 
LITERATURE REVIEW ..................................................................................................................................6 
2.1 
GRIDSHELL DESIGN SPECIFICITIES ..................................................................................................6 
2.1.1 
Understanding gridshell structures ...................................................................................................6 
2.1.2 
Modelling bending .......................................................................................................................... 11 
2.1.3 
Designing the shape ...................................................................................................................... 15 
2.2 
BUILT GRIDSHELLS AND THEIR DESIGN ....................................................................................... 18 
2.2.1 
Appearance of gridshells: Manneheim ........................................................................................... 19 
2.2.2 
Renewal of gridshell constructions ................................................................................................ 19 
2.2.3 
State of the art ................................................................................................................................ 21 
2.3 
CONCLUSION ...................................................................................................................................... 22 
3 
METHODOLOGY ........................................................................................................................................ 24 
3.1 
CONTEXT ............................................................................................................................................. 24 
3.2 
METHODS ............................................................................................................................................ 25 
3.2.1 
Active bending modelling options .................................................................................................. 25 
3.2.2 
Proposing a design process ........................................................................................................... 27 
3.2.3 
Testing on study cases .................................................................................................................. 30 
4 
DESIGN DEVELOPMENT .......................................................................................................................... 32 
4.1 
A SIMPLE CASE TO COMPARE MODELLING APPROCHES.......................................................... 32 
4.1.1 
Elastica theory ................................................................................................................................ 32 
4.1.2 
Problem setting .............................................................................................................................. 33 
4.1.3 
Study cases .................................................................................................................................... 34 
4.1.4 
Results ........................................................................................................................................... 35 
4.1.5 
Applying to gridshells ..................................................................................................................... 38 
4.2 
A TOOL ASSISTING EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF GRIDSHELLS .................................................... 40 
4.2.1 
Implementation of the proposed framework ................................................................................... 40 
4.2.2 
Comparing the tool with a reference .............................................................................................. 44 
4.2.3 
Using the tool on a case ................................................................................................................. 46 
4.2.4 
Discussion and perspective ........................................................................................................... 51 
5 
CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................................................ 53 
6 
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................................ 54 
7 
APPENDIX .................................................................................................................................................. 56 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
4 / 64 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The trend in the AEC industry, driven by the urgency to reduce consumption of natural resources, is 
to design and build efficient structures. The recent and still ongoing digitalisation of the industry 
reshuffles the cards allowing greater possibilities of design exploration in early stages of a project. It 
facilitates collaboration between disciplines. Being able to play with parameters and have instant 
feedback is made possible by a reduced computational time enabled by more powerful hardware. 
More design analysis can be conducted and automated or optimised. With more design options and 
defined objectives, it is possible to hope creating more efficient designs and construction.  
The traditional workflow is being disrupted and a new way of thinking and working is necessary. The 
computational and collaboration effort must be made earlier in the design stages which gives a greater 
ability to impact costs, as it can be visualised in the MacLeamy diagram (Davis, 2011).  
 
Figure 1 : MacLeamy curve 
 
It is in this context that the design process of elastic gridshells is explored. This structural system 
implies large deformations that require the support of digital tools and a close collaboration between 
the architectural and structural designers. Gridshell structures have great potentials, however they are 
not very widespread. As its structural properties are achieved by its geometrical shape, their design 
process is very specific, and a lot of parameters come into play. Only a few gridshell structures have 
been built and they were designed using different methods which limits the feedback on constructive 
details. If gridshell structures can be popularised, first their design process should be understood and 
developed. This thesis was therefore driven by the following question: How can the design process of 
gridshell be facilitated by the possibilities given by digital design? 
For the company Arcora, as structural and envelope designers, gridshell structures are an opportunity. 
It is for them a challenge to design and build a transparent canopy on a gridshell structure. Different 
==PAGE:7==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
5 / 64 
materials can be used as a transparent cover such as glass, thin glass, structural glass or ETFE each 
with specific properties and interaction with the gridshell structure. To achieve that goal, it is first 
important to understand and analyse the behaviour of gridshells and control precisely the range and 
sources of displacements and imprecisions. The modelling of the structural behaviour of the gridshell 
needs to be the most accurate possible both before and after loading in order to conclude on the 
possible material of the cover. Their interest also lies in the influence of the different design parameters 
on these constructive aspects.  
Therefore, the aim of this master thesis is to support gridshell exploration in early design stages 
including the structural implications of active bending. The ambition is to gain better insight of the 
design options of gridshells by modelling its structural behaviour. With the company Arcora, we have 
taken on the challenge of creating a workflow to design gridshells that allows to rapidly obtain fast and 
interesting feedback loops to support design decisions. Working with an agile and parametric process 
facilitates the exploration of different options and allows to analyse their impact on constructive 
constraints.   
In order to respond to this aim, the objectives are: 
- 
Objective 1: Choose an accurate and appropriate way to model active bending in a gridshell 
- 
Objective 2: Create an agile form finding method to shape a gridshell  
- 
Objective 3: Validate the structural behaviour of the modelled gridshells 
- 
Objective 4: Use and examine the developed tools on a case   
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
6 / 64 
2 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
2.1 
GRIDSHELL DESIGN SPECIFICITIES 
 
This section will give a first approach to gridshells giving an overview of their design, modelling and 
constructive specificities. It will point out why gridshells raise such interest and why their design are 
complex. It will be the basis to then develop a method and a solution to address the stated objectives.  
 
2.1.1 
Understanding gridshell structures 
 
Opportunities and challenges 
A gridshell (or elastic gridshell) is a very efficient structural construction that allows to create double 
curved shapes from an initially flat grid (Harris, Design of timber gridded shell structures, 2011). Some 
will argue that the name gridshell doesn’t necessarily imply the shaping process of its elements using 
their elastic properties, however in this paper the use of gridshell always refers to a deformed grid.  
 
Figure 2 : Defining gridshells 
The grid is built flat on the ground with two directions of elements with a constant step between them. 
The connections between the two directions of the grid are at first free to rotate. The grid can then be 
erected and bent into the desired 3D shape. It is then braced to gain stiffness. Having initially straight 
elements and using this technique specific to elastic gridshells, makes construction, assembly and 
transportation far more accessible for irregular and doubly curved shapes.  
However, as large deformations are at stake, complex procedures need to be developed to predict 
and analyse the behaviour of the structure (Otto, 1995). Moreover, even if active bending facilitates 
the erection process, it is a source of uncertainty in the structural analysis.   
Gridshells can cover large spans without any other support than at its perimeter. They are therefore 
very adapted to free form and lightweight architecture. A few gridshells have been erected in the last 
century (see section 2.2) but there is a great lack of experience in this field which is still very research 
based. They also represent an opportunity and a challenge to occupy curved spaces. The table below 
presents an overview of the advantage and drawbacks of a gridshell. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
7 / 64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Structural concept 
The specificity of gridshell structures is that they are very effective structures (Adriaenssens, Block, 
Veenendaal, & William, 2014). The combined action of the bending and the membrane behaviour of 
shells limits the solicitations of the elements and transfers the loads to the supports. The shell 
behaviour of a gridshell can be understood with an analogy with the strength of hen eggs.  
 
Figure 4 : Shell behaviour of a hen’s egg 
The assumption of shell theory is that only normal stress and in-plane shear stresses are developed 
in an element and are uniformly distributed along the cross section. In a gridshell, the element is 
discretised, and the loads are transferred locally in the grid directions. The difference is illustrated in  
Figure 5 below.  
 
 
Figure 3 : SWOT of gridshell structures 

Construction process 

Low material consumption 

Architectural quality 

Active bending modeling 

Precision of bent elements 

Creep  

Lack of exeperience 

Lack of tools 

Complex structural system 

Large spans 

Curved spaces 

Innovative system 
STRENGTH 
OPPORTUNITIES 
THREATS 
WEAKNESS 
==PAGE:10==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
8 / 64 
 
Figure 5 : Shell elements (left) and gridshell element (right) 
When considering elastic gridshells, active bending is also introduced in the elements. Active bending 
structures can be defined from a structural point of view as constrained statically indeterminate 
structures with residual bending stress (Lienhard, Bending-Active structures, 2014). The curved shape 
of the gridshell is obtained from initially straight elements. An instability is introduced to shape the 
elements which creates a bending stress that can be identified as a prestress that is maintained by 
the supports. In addition to the construction advantage it represents, it also improves the structural 
behaviour of a gridshell. However, modelling and calculating its structural behaviour is a challenge.  
 
Material 
The characteristics that are sought for the materials used in gridshells are:    
• 
A high elastic limit strain in order to be able to bend the element and obtain a curved shape.  
• 
A high enough Young modulus to confer to the gridshell its final stiffness after bracing. 
When comparing different structural materials in active bent structures, the adequate ratio has been 
estimated at  
𝜎𝑀,𝑅𝑑
𝐸
> 2,5  (with 𝜎𝑀,𝑅𝑑 in MPa and E in GPa) and for elastic kinetic systems the 
admissible ratio is 
𝜎𝑀,𝑅𝑑
𝐸
> 10 to consider fatigue control (Lienhard, A Review on Structures where 
Bending is used as a Self-Formation Process, 2013). The results are presented in the Ashby diagram 
below.  
==PAGE:11==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
9 / 64 
 
Figure 6 : Ashby's diagram with comparison of materials for bending-active structures 
 
As expected, composite materials are the materials with the most adapted mechanical properties for 
gridshells. Some types of wood can also be used if elastic kinetic is disregarded. However, other 
properties should be evaluated such as the creep or the environmental impact of the material and of 
a whole structure using the different structural materials. A test was conducted to use natural fiber 
composites in a gridshell structure however it was concluded that they aren’t developed enough yet  
(Gengnagel, Hernandez, & Bäumer, 2013). In order to limit the effect of creep it is advised to stay far 
from the elastic limit of the material. For example, even if GFRP are not well known especially 
considering creep, it is recommended by various sources to limit the internal stress between 30% and 
60% (Douthe, 2007).  
It is seen that gridshells structures are not limited in the material choice especially when composite 
are considered as their structural properties cover a very wide range.  
 
==PAGE:12==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
10 / 64 
Cover and connections 
A bracing system needs to put in place in order to create diagonal shear stiffness. Strengthening is 
needed to block the rotation between the two grid directions and so that the shape is maintained even 
after having removed the shaping forces. Different solutions can be considered such as rigid joints, 
diagonal cross ties, rigid cross bracing or cladding acting as membrane.  
 
Figure 7 : Types of strengthening 
 
As mentioned previously, an advantage of elastic gridshell structures is that they facilitate assembly. 
The connections can be done on the ground and are all similar. However, they still represent a 
challenge in the design and construction process. The main types of connections are:  
• 
Between two grid directions 
• 
Between the bracing system and the grid 
• 
To the support 
• 
Between elements that need to be joined to increase in length  
• 
Between the cover and the structure 
In his work Frederic Tayeb presents the study of different connections used for the Solidays pavilion 
designed by the Navier laboratory (Tayeb, 2016). 
 
 
 
Figure 8 : Connection details of the Solidays pavillion 
==PAGE:13==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
11 / 64 
As mentioned in the introduction, covering with glass panels is a challenge and with the development 
of structural thin glass, the panels could be used as a bracing system. However, for now only 
application on non-elastic gridshells exist (Schlaich & Schober, 2018). The recent work of Xavier 
Tellier shows the possibilities of rationalisation of developable surface in order to obtain planar panels 
(Tellier, 2019).  
 
Erection process  
An undeniable advantage of elastic gridshells is its erection process. First, the grid is built flat on the 
ground which facilitates the production of connections, and then as the elements are bent in the 
second time. The primary work is done on straight and continuous elements which reduces the 
fabrication tolerance. 
There are two possibilities to erect an elastic gridshell. It can or be lifted from several points and then 
bent into the desired shaped, or, temporary supports can be used to erect the gridshell. In both cases, 
the self-weight of the structure helps the bending process. 
 
 
Figure 9 : Illustration of different erection process of gridshells 
As an example, for the Weald and Downland gridshell (left), a system of adjustable jacks was used. 
And for the temporary Cathedral of Creteil, two cranes lifted respectively the two domes of the gridshell 
in several points. Of course, the weight and the dimension of the structure influences the choice of the 
erection process.  
However, the more control points there is the further away from the natural shape the gridshell gets. 
It can create local curvature and greater curvatures than the calculated ones for the final gridshell can 
be reached (Hernandez E. L., 2012).   
 
2.1.2 
Modelling bending 
 
Beam theory 
In order to study the mechanical behaviour of a beam, several assumptions are made in order to 
simplify the problem while still being accurate. The most common model of a beam is the Euler-
Bernouilli beam that includes the following assumptions: 
==PAGE:14==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
12 / 64 
• 
The beam is initially straight and has a constant cross-section.  
• 
The beam is made of homogeneous material and has a longitudinal plane of symmetry.  
• 
Resultant of the applied loads lies in the plane of symmetry.  
• 
The geometry of the overall member is such that bending not buckling is the primary 
cause of failure.  
• 
Elastic limit is not reached to use a linear material law (Hooke’s law) 
• 
Plane cross - sections remain plane before and after bending.  
Because of the large deformations of bending-active structures, the structural calculations generally 
must be performed geometrically non-linear (nonlinear relationship of external forces and deflection). 
In the case of active bending, bending is the main failure mechanism of the beam. A given beam can 
only be bent to a certain limit before it breaks. Indeed, tension and compression can be neglected in 
front of bending therefore curvature is considered to be dimensioning for active bent structure such as 
elastic gridshells (DuPeloux, Baverel, Caron, & Tayeb, 2015).  
By using Euler’s beam theory, the link between the curvature and the stress along the cross section 
of a beam can be explicated as presented below.  
 
 
Figure 10 : Bending stress calculation of a curved beam 
 
The maximum bending stress is reached in the outer fiber which are at the radius r of the edge of a 
circular beam. By using the formula presented in Figure 10, the maximum stress is: 
==PAGE:15==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
13 / 64 
𝜎𝑚= 𝐸𝑟1
𝑅 
The bending moment is defined as: 
𝑀= 𝜎𝑚𝐼 
 
Therefore, the maximum curvature or minimum radius of a beam can be defined as:  
𝑅𝑚= 𝐸𝑟
𝜎𝑚
 
It is noticed that it depends on the materials property and the sections height. Slender beam or highly 
elastic material can reach higher curvatures. Therefore, a gridshell is limited in its curvature by the 
material used and the size of the grid elements. In order, to limit the stress in the grid elements, a low 
cross-sectional height with a large width is convenient. However, a deep cross section increases the 
stiffness of the structure and therefore its ability to resist external loading. There is an inherent 
contradiction between high stiffness and high allowable curvature. Active-bending members are 
therefore extremely sensitive to buckling. Usually, the required stiffness is mainly reached through the 
stiffening elements and not the cross sections or by using double laths especially when timber is used.  
 
Calculating bending 
The Finite Element Method is a widely used method to analyse structures. The principle of the method 
is to discretise continuous elements and apply the principle of virtual work to numerically solve partial 
differential equations. The principle of virtual work states that the sum of work done by external forces 
𝑓 applied on a system must be balanced by the sum of internal work in an arbitrary (but small) virtual 
displacement 𝑑 . By introducing the stiffness matrix 𝐾, the governing equation is:   
𝐾𝑑= 𝑓. 
The matrix equations are then solved using integration schemes. The method is adapted for static or 
quasi static problems. Active bending implies small strains and large displacement which means 
geometrical non-linearity. It is usually difficult to perform using FEM as it becomes computationally 
expensive.  
Instead of computing the global stiffness matrix, it was proposed to use only local stiffness. Two 
different approaches have been proposed by Sigrid Adriaenssens, first the spline theory and then the 
co-rational beam theory. The spline theory is a simpler way to conduct structural analysis on active 
bent elements. It consists in approximating curved shapes into straight and symmetrical elements. 
Moments are approximated on segments from the shear force resultant at the start and end nodes. It 
therefore becomes a 3 degrees of freedom concept which cannot deal with torsion but allows to 
conduct quantitative simulations.  
==PAGE:16==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
14 / 64 
 
Figure 11 : Bending moment in for 3DOF beam 
 
In order to complete the spline method for modelling bending, the co-rational formulation, which 
includes 6 degrees of freedom was developed. 
 
The main idea behind the co-rotational approach is to separate the motion of the element into a rigid 
motion and a purely deformational part (Senatore & Piker, 2015). Each node has an attached frame 
associated to its rigid body motion, including translation and rotation.  
 
Figure 12 : 6DOF beam element 
Figure 13 : Co-rotationnel beam kinematics 
==PAGE:17==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
15 / 64 
 
The deformation is measured with respect to these co-rotated frames. For sufficiently small sized 
element, the hypothesis of small strains is valid even for large displacements and rotations and the 
linear calculation of the stiffness matrix can be used. Its accuracy has been proven and makes it a 
model of choice to model active bending (Senatore & Piker, 2015).  
 
2.1.3 
Designing the shape  
 
The main design challenge when working with gridshell structures is their form which depends on its 
structural design. The maxim “form follows structure”, readapted from the functionalist approach of 
architecture, illustrates this reversed process. Even if a first intuition can help to design the form, the 
following questions remain: What shape can it be? what shape should it be? what shape will it be? 
And how to create it? 
There are two different approaches to address these questions with two different starting points and 
their corresponding methods: 
• 
Starting from and initially flat grid and using physical modelling or dynamic relaxation  
• 
Starting from an architectural shape and using the compass method or the draping 
method 
The limitation when starting from and initially flat grid is to define its contour and the support 
displacement. It is adapted to specific cases for example a square grid supported near its vertices that 
are displaced toward its centre. The structural properties are applied to the initially flat grid which is 
then shaped into the final gridshell geometry acquiring its free form. On the contrary, when starting 
with the architectural shape the proposed methods do not consider structural behaviour and are purely 
geometrical. They concentrate on mapping the shape with a grid that is flattenable.  
 
Physical modelling 
Physical modelling was the method of choice before the recent progress of computational calculations. 
The most adapted way to perform form-finding with a physical model is to base it on hanging chains. 
Indeed, it ensures that its inverted shape create a path with only compression. This method was first 
developed by Antonio Gaudi for the Sagrada Familia and then latter used again for Mannheim 
Multihalle by Frei Otto. Funicular structures are appropriate where the dominant load is vertical. This 
is often the case with long span (Mannheim) or heavy (Sagrada Familia) structures. 
 
==PAGE:18==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
16 / 64 
 
Figure 14 : Hanging chain model of the Sagrada Familia (left) and of Mannheim Multhalle (right) 
It is also a great way to build up intuition and understand the behaviour of gridshells. Moreover, it 
allows to measure the challenges construction represent, for example when building the connections. 
It is therefore always interesting to use physical modelling when designing complexe structures 
especially in the early stages of the design.  
 
Chebytchev net or compass method  
The goal of the compass method is to create a grid that can shape a 3D curved surface and be 
developed on a 2D plane.  It was developed by Frei Otto in 1974 at first using only an actual compass 
and later on the algorithm has been developed.  
First, two intersecting curves are laid down on the surface which defines a starting point and an 
orientation. The size of the mesh, corresponding to the radius of the compass, is chosen. The grid is 
then set up step by step by defining the knots of the grid at the intersection of the circles. The figure 
below presents a 2D example. The method works the same way for a 3D surface.  
 
 
Figure 15 : 2D example of the compass method 
 
The grid shape is determined by the two curves chosen to guide the generation of the mesh and by 
the compass radius. The figure below presents two different results to mesh the same surface with 
different starting point and grid directions. 
==PAGE:19==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
17 / 64 
 
Figure 16 : Results of compass method with different parameters 
In here work, Lina Bouhaya used generative algorithm to optimise, in terms of strains in the gridshell, 
the mesh generation by the compass method (Bouhaya, 2010). Another research used a non-linear 
variational method to optimise some grid parameters. It used weighted penalising energies and 
allowed the grid to not stay on the reference surface (Hernandez, Sechelmann, Rorig, & Gengnagel, 
2012).  
This method is purely geometric and does not consider the physical rigidity of the grid elements. The 
material and sections of the elements needs to be added and a form-finding method needs to be 
processed to have the actual geometry of the gridshell and perform a structural analysis; however, the 
difference in geometry is relatively small.  
 
Dynamic relaxation 
With the development of numerical calculation capacities, a mathematical approach to predict the 
shape of large deformed structures became possible.  The dynamic relaxation algorithm is the most 
commonly used to solve this nonlinear problem. It is an iterative process to find the equilibrium position 
of the structure using dissipation of energy (Douthe, 2007). It has been developed by Chris Williams 
et Michael Barnes for the Mannheim gridshell project. 
The principle of the algorithm is quite simple but requires a lot of iterations. First, the system is 
discretised in several nodes where the mass is concentrated, and the nodes are linked together with 
a certain stiffness. The position of the node as each step is determined from its position at the previous 
step using the equations of motions and minimising the residual elastic energy.  
For example, a node 𝑖 is considered with its associated acceleration 𝐴𝑖 and mass 𝑚𝑖 and the remaining 
actions are noted 𝑅𝑖. The time step considered is ∆𝑡 . 
From the Newton’s law of motion and two centred integrations:  
𝑚𝑖𝑨𝑖(𝑡) = 𝑹𝑖(𝑡) 
𝑽𝑖(𝑡+ ∆𝑡
2 ) = 𝑽𝑖(𝑡−∆𝑡
2 ) + ∆𝑡
𝑚𝑖
∙𝑹𝑖(𝑡) 
𝑿𝑖(𝑡+ ∆𝑡) = 𝑿𝑖(𝑡) + ∆𝑡∙𝑽𝑖(𝑡+ ∆𝑡
2 ) 
By combining the previous equation and considering that at an instant t the velocity is the mean of the 
velocity half a step before and half a step after, it can be written:  
==PAGE:20==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
18 / 64 
𝑽𝑖(∆𝑡
2 ) = ∆𝑡
2𝑚𝑖
∙𝑹𝑖(0) 
𝑿𝑖(∆𝑡) = 𝑿𝑖(0) + ∆𝑡∙𝑽𝑖(∆𝑡
2 ) 
The position of a node can therefore be calculated from its previous position and the remaining 
stresses. By repeating this set of operations, the remaining stress will converge until it reaches a set 
threshold where the nodes are at equilibrium. Different methods have been developed to calculate the 
remaining stresses, but they won’t be detailed in this paper.  
The accuracy of this model compared to reality has been proved at several occasions, namely by Cyril 
Douthe using a large-scale prototype gridshell in composite materials. (Douthe, 2007).  
The relations between the different nodes can be defined in different ways according to what needs 
to be modelled. It can be purely physical with no modelling of realistic behaviour or it can implement 
the spline or co-rotational beam theory and therefore be used to calculate the shape of active bent 
beams. 
By using the dynamic relaxation algorithm but without structural properties it also possible to define 
the grid that must shape a 3D form. It is called the draping method and is illustrated in Figure 17..  
 
Figure 17 : Draping method 
First, a large flat grid is created with constant length between its nodes. Then vertical forces are 
applied for it to fall around and cover the 3D shape. By trimming the edges, a grid can be obtained.  
However, as no structural properties are included so actual shape of the gridshell needs to be 
analysed later 
 
 
2.2 
BUILT GRIDSHELLS AND THEIR DESIGN 
 
By looking at built gridshells and analysing their design process, this section aims give a better 
understanding of the evolution of gridshell design and the used method to model their structural 
behaviour. An overview can be found in APPENDIX A.  
==PAGE:21==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
19 / 64 
 
2.2.1 
Appearance of gridshells: Manneheim 
 
Frei Otto is a German architect pioneer in free-form and ecological constructions. He was inspired by 
his surrounding environment and used experimental models for his projects. By studying vaults and 
shell structures and using catenary models he developed the concept and the theory around gridshells 
(Otto, 1995).  
Eventually, he built the first and largest gridshell in the world: the Mannheim Multihalle in 1975. The 
design concept focused on "a light, airy construction to harmonize with the landscape of flowers, trees 
and artificial hills” and was low budget compared to buildings of the same volume (Mannheim, 2020). 
It consists of two shells that are connected via a canopied walkway. During the early design hundreds 
of scale models were used with a focus on the perimeter ring. A timber lattice structure was used and 
shaped on site using temporary supporting structures.  
Funicular structures are appropriate where the dominant load is self-weight. This is often the case with 
long span (e.g. Mannheim) or heavy (e.g. Sagrada Familia) structures. 
 
Figure 18 : Mannheim Multihalle 
 
 
2.2.2 
Renewal of gridshell constructions 
 
Weald and Downland Museum 
Building the Weald and Downland gridshell was the opportunity to use local wood and traditional 
carpenter techniques from the rural south of England. The challenge of the project was to cover a 
large span and height which justified the use of a gridshell. The shape is inspired of a sinusoidal plan 
and elevation to create geometrical stiffness but limited in its curvature. 
Physical modelling proved invaluable throughout the design and construction of the gridshell. Good 
physical representations were essential to enable effective discussion of concepts illustrate several 
engineering principles (Harris & Royon, 2008). Then, a dynamic relaxation algorithm was specially 
==PAGE:22==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
20 / 64 
written for the purpose by Chris Williams. Finally, commercial finite element software was used as an 
independent check.  
When the lowering of the gridshell was complete, further adjustment was required to bring it into its 
ﬁnal shape. Both valleys coincided with the theoretical shape remarkably well. 
The gable end detail also had to be considered. The approach of the laths was too shallow for the 
existing gable end arch. This suggested that more height and volume was required in the outer domes 
to capture the correct angle of approach for the gable end arch. 
 
Figure 19 : Interieur view of the Weald and Downland gridshell 
 
Savill Garden Building 
The gridshell roof of the Savill building has a sinusoidal shape with three main domes which was 
optimised by the engineer designers of Buro Happold. Starting from a clear desired shape, it was 
refined with a close collaboration between architects and engineers to meet the aesthetic aspirations 
and practical constraints. Unlike the Weald and Downland, a double layer of lath was used. In order 
to transfer horizontal shear between parallel layers and give the properties of a deeper section, timber 
shear blocks were positioned between the lath layers and fixed with screws. The roof isn’t directly 
supported on the ground as the other projects, it is connected to steel pods to create an open view on 
the gardens. As it can be seen on the picture below, a specificity of the Savill Garden gridshell is that 
it is braced by its plywood covering. 
 
==PAGE:23==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
21 / 64 
 
Figure 20 : View of the exposed roof structure of the Savill building 
  
The equal length grid was defined using the Compass or Chebychev net method  presented in section 
2.1.3.  
In order to exactly fit the designed shape the height of the roof had to be adjusted at 200 points across 
the plan during construction (Harris & Royon, 2008).  
 
 
2.2.3 
State of the art 
 
Prototyping/ temporary  
Gridshell structure attracts a lot of engineers for research as they are very interesting structures and 
still not familiar. Many universities have helped their development namely through building prototypes. 
For example, the prototype Toledo 2.0 developed by the Faculty of Architecture of the University of 
Naples (D'Amico, Pugnale, Zhang, & Colabella, 2015). The startup Quaternion has also developed a 
project called “Ekilaya” to install temporary gridshells during events and present their design process 
in a video (Quaternion, 2020). However, these recent projects are limited in scale and in lifespan.  
 
Emerging Composite 
A new approach to gridshell structures was allowed by the development of composite materials. When 
formed using pultrusion method, this material acquires the ideal properties for gridshell structures (see 
section 0). Lately, researchers of the Navier laboratory from the Ecole des Pont et Chaussées (ENPC) 
explored the possibility of building gridshells using composites. The design process and challenges 
are studied and presented in several publications. They were able to build some prototypes and two 
temporary structures: the temporary Creteil Cathedral and a pavilion at the Solidays festival. Both 
were shaped with two main domes connected to one another. They are covered with a membrane. 
==PAGE:24==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
22 / 64 
 
Figure 21 : Temporary cathedral of Creteil (left) and Solidays pavilion (right) 
Other interesting projects using composite beams are under development. For example, Urban 
canopee which uses gridshell structures to support a vegetalised canopy, or Shelt’Air which developed 
an easily deployable shelter. One was born from the research of ENPC and the other from ITKE 
universities.  
 
 
Figure 22: Urban canopee project (left) and Shelt’Air project (right) 
  
2.3 
CONCLUSION 
 
Gridshell structures have been an active research subject during the last century and even more 
recently with the development of digital tools and the desire to improve structural efficiency. They bring 
together innovating architects and structural experts and, eventually, qualified manufacturers always 
keeping in mind construction challenges when designing shape. However, it is understood that 
modelling the structural behaviour of these projects and carrying out adapted form-finding are still 
challenging. A lot of design parameters come into play and tends to complexify the design process; 
Significant progress has been made throughout the different small or large scale built structures each 
time overcoming specific challenges. A considerable part of the research focuses on timber elastic 
gridshells, but the development of composite materials gives new opportunities.  
The recurring themes of the research of gridshell structures are the modelling of active bending, the 
design and optimisation of the grid, the study of structural behaviour and of the failure mechanisms, 
the design of connections and the validation through prototyping. Different approaches are proposed, 
and none are contradictory.  
==PAGE:25==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
23 / 64 
From the perspective of the industry, and more specifically the engineering company Arcora, gridshells 
present interesting opportunities however a lack of experience and accessibility is a real brake to the 
democratisation of gridshell design.  
Following this literature review, this master thesis will focus on the approach designers can have to 
the design process of gridshell structures. The objective of the work conducted during this master 
thesis, is to explore the design of elastic gridshells including structural implication of active bending. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:26==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
24 / 64 
3 
METHODOLOGY 
 
To address the stated objectives, the most important challenge was to define a methodology. The 
methodology developed and proposed to Arcora was based on the available tools and the commonly 
defined purposes. It constantly evolved and was built up throughout the project according to the 
accomplished steps. 
 
3.1 
CONTEXT 
 
One advantage of working in computational design is that the workflow of a project allows more 
iterations and optimisations. It is important to point out that a solution is optimised only according to a 
specific set of weighted criteria that are not necessarily technical. The general framework presented 
in the figure below was proposed for non-elastic gridshells but is also adapted for elastic gridshells 
(Pagnacco, Masera, Weilandt, & Baldassini, 2019). In this thesis the focus will lie in the relationship 
between geometry and structure and their respective inputs and does not focus on their numerical 
optimisation.   
 
Figure 23 : Computational design workflow focus 
The role of designers lies in this central element: “Choices and weighting of the inputs” and the role of 
computational tools is to assist these choices. The necessity of feedback is even more essential for 
gridshell structures as the experience on the subject is weak especially in the industry.  
FOCUS 
==PAGE:27==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
25 / 64 
It is therefore appreciated to work with an interactive interface which allows to tune parameters and 
receive instant visual feedback. The Rhino+Grasshopper environment is adapted for this type of study 
and analysis. In addition, useful plug-ins are available to assist the design exploration and the 
structural analysis.  
In this thesis working with a parametric and agile approach has not optimisation as a primary objective. 
It is used to explore the range of possibilities and build an idea of the consequences of changing 
certain parameters. The developed methodology ensured a very agile design.  
Gridshell projects are usually not very constrained by requirements and very open to evolution of the 
design. If requirements exist, they can be seen as inputs and objectives of the process. The other 
parameters should be deducted from theses inputs or free to be changed along the design progress. 
The goal is therefore to create a workflow that gives a great freedom to explore the design of gridshells 
including structural behaviour and analysis.  
The initial point of a design process is essential. An intuition of an adapted shape for gridshells 
combined with some architectural requirements is often the start of a project. A grid can then be 
defined and the gridshell shaped once the structural properties have been applied. Many parameters 
can be changed to respond to design objectives. The structural analysis can also be conducted in 
order to give feedback.  
The work has been organized to start from a very general approach getting more specific and detailed 
through the progress. Therefore, the problems are first simplified for better understanding before 
complexifying them getting closer to reality. The different challenges of gridshells design were first 
identified and then studied separately and then combined. The first challenge being to understand 
how to model accurately active bent structures and then create a workflow for the design of a gridshell. 
As it was mentioned previously, a lot of research work exist on the design of elastic gridshells. It is 
therefore an opportunity to use the available resources as references to compare with the results of 
this work. Moreover, working in collaboration with Arcora, allowed to test the proposed approach on 
their projects and be enriched with their constructive perspective an experience.  
 
 
3.2 
METHODS 
 
The approach taken to address the aim of this thesis is first to choose how to model active bending 
using the theory presented in section 2.1.2 and the available tools to work in a parametric context. 
Then, a design process will be elaborated integrating the chosen method and assisting the design 
choices of a gridshell. Finally, it will be applied and tested on different types of cases to conclude on 
is use.  
 
3.2.1 
Active bending modelling options  
 
The first step to consider when designing a gridshell is to understand and model active bending. The 
approach taken to model bending is to first work with a simple elastica and then to consider its 
==PAGE:28==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
26 / 64 
application to gridshell tacking into account connections and more complex geometries. This study 
will address Objective 1 by comparing different modelling options for active bending in order to 
integrate them in the design process of gridshells. Given the context and the available tools that 
implement different beam theories and calculation algorithms it was decided to focus on the use of the 
plugins Kangaroo+K2Engineering and Karamba.  
Kangaroo is a Grasshopper plug-in developed by Daniel Picker. It was created as a live physics engine 
for design modelling allowing to set various types of physical “goals” that acts on points. A very 
performant dynamic relaxation solver computes the actions of these goals on the points. Cecile 
Brandt-Olsen developed an associated plugin which includes customised Kangaroo2 grasshopper 
components with the scope of calibrating a number of goals with regard to structural properties 
(Brandt-Olsen, 2016). It first used the spline theory and then was developed a beam element using 
the co-rotational beam theory. It is very adapted for form finding but even if surface, line and point 
loads can be calculated and applied it is not ideal for structural analysis and post-processing. 
On the other hand, Karamba is the Grasshopper plug-in of choice that allows to conduct FEM 
structural analysis in this parametric environment. However, it is not adapted for large deformation 
analysis (Lienhard, Bending-Active structures, 2014). Indeed, the component that allows to find form 
in large displacement doesn’t return section forces. Work is in progress to integrate components that 
allow to calculate geometrical non-linearities such as the dynamic relaxation algorithm. Having 
discussed with the Karamba team, the best way to model active bending is still to apply on the final 
shape the stresses created from the shaping process as an initial strain with the following component:  
 
Figure 24 : Karamba component to apply initial strain 
 
A benchmark study comparing spline theory with K2Engineering, FEM analysis with SOFiSTIK and 
isogeometric modelling using Kiwi3D was conducted by a team of researchers (Bauer, et al., 2018). 
It concludes that SOFiSTIK is not ideally suited for a parametric approach of design. Using Kiwi3D to 
simplify discretisation for FEM analysis could be an adapted alternative however not yet ready. They 
point out the unparallel stability of algorithm and the freedom it offers.  
The study will therefore test these plug-ins for the modelling of an active bent elastica keeping in mind 
their application two gridshell structures. This will help understand active bending as well as 
quantifying its accuracy. 
 
==PAGE:29==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
27 / 64 
3.2.2 
Proposing a design process 
 
Considering the presented context and the possibilities of modelling active bending, a design process 
for early stage design of gridshells is developed. The different design challenges are identified and a 
justified proposition to deal with them in an agile and parametric workflow is defined. This will address 
objective 2 as the aim is to be able to shape a gridshell structure from an initial architectural shape. 
The steps of the design process can be visualised in figure Figure 25 and are detailed below.  
 
The shape 
When designing a gridshell there is often an aimed shape, usually thought by the architect. This shape 
is not necessarily the natural form a gridshell can take. Depending on the project it will have to respond 
to several requirements on for example the maximum height, the total volume, or the surface area.  
As presented in the section 2.1.1 gridshells are adapted for doubly curved surface. However, 
elastically bending elements is not without constrains. Indeed, for a given cross section a maximum 
curvature is defined as the maximum curvature which reaches the limit strength of the element and 
will therefore break. The relation between cross section and maximum curvature is presented below      
(DuPeloux, Baverel, Caron, & Tayeb, 2015). 
𝜎= 𝜎𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝+ 𝜎𝑏𝑒𝑛𝑑≅𝜎𝑏𝑒𝑛𝑑= 𝑀
𝐼
𝑣
= 𝐸
𝑣
𝑅𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒
 
Therefore, when designing this relation needs to be kept in mind. According to the material used, the 
maximum allowed curvature will vary. For example, built gridshells in wood reach lower curvature than 
the ones in composite material (Section 2.2). Other constructive constrains can be considered when 
designing the shape such as planarity which is one focus of Xavier Tellier’s work (Tellier, 2019)  
In order to build up intuition some information of feedback on the shape is given. For example, it is 
possible to compute the area with a height above a certain limit, the volume of the shape, the surface 
Figure 25 : Steps of the proposed design proces 
==PAGE:30==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
28 / 64 
to cover, the gaussian curvature graph… In addition, if a specific material is defined, a maximum 
cross-section can be defined bases on the maximum curvature of the inputted shape.  
 
The grid 
The next step of the design process is to define flattenable grid from the inputted surface. Even though 
the compass method is purely geometric, it can be adapted to any type of surface and is a method of 
choice when working on an agile workflow.  As presented in section 2.1.3, the following three 
parameters need to be chosen  
• 
The starting point (relevant for asymmetric shapes)   
• 
The grid size 
• 
The orientation of grid on the surface 
Choosing the parameters of the grid represent a real challenge and the objective it must fulfil can be 
defined in different ways. For example, the aim can be to limit the difference between the input shape 
and the natural shape the grid takes, or to minimise the maximum or mean stress in the structure. The 
idea of the proposed design process is to make informed design decision and this subject will be 
tackled in section 4.2.3.  
The grid size will mainly depend on the structural analysis of the structure and a trade-off exist with 
the material and cross sections of elements. However, at this step, as the structural properties of the 
elements aren’t yet specified, the choice can be informed by the maximum curvature the orientation 
creates. Indeed, it was explained in section 2.1.2 that for a given curvature a corresponding maximum 
section is calculated.  
 
The elements 
Now that the grid is defined from an aimed shape, structural properties need to be applied in order to 
conduct form finding. A gridshell is composed of three different structural elements:  
• 
The beams  
• 
The connections 
• 
The cross bracing 
The beams are defined along the flat grid previously created. It is important to make sure that the 
continuity of each beams is preserved and not divided at each intersection.  As the beams will 
undertake large deformations and as the available software can only deal with straight elements, it is 
necessary to discretise the beams. An inherent trade off needs to be balanced when discretising for 
computational analysis. Increasing the level of discretisation will increase the precision but also 
increase the computational time. The methodology used here, is have the level of discretisation as a 
parameter that is adapted according to the objective of the simulation.  
To create the connections an offset between the two grid directions is defined as a parameter and a 
joint element is inserted at each intersection. The simplest way to ensure that the joint allows free 
rotations between the two grid directions is to define a bar element. However, some other constrains 
==PAGE:31==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
29 / 64 
could be added to limit certain movement depending on the actual design of the joint. It is also an 
option to not model the joint elements in order to reduce computation time.  
The challenge of the definition of the cross-bracing is that their dimension depends on the final shape 
of the structure. As the cross-bracing acts only after the shaping process they are defined in a second 
time. Different techniques were presented previously, but here only cable and rigid cross bracing are 
considered as they are the most common.  
Then, the adapted material and cross sections should be applied. In this work the elements are 
considered to be composite with hollow circular cross sections however these parameters can be 
changed. Using the Euler-Bernoulli beam theory, the cross section will first be defined according to 
the maximum curvature of the designed shape. Indeed, the prestress due to active bending plays an 
important role in the dimensioning of elements which is why it is a good a first assumption (Douthe, 
2007). However, the choice of the cross section has an impact on the final shape of the gridshell and 
several iterations are needed optimise the cross section especially after having applied loading. A first 
updated of the cross section can be done once the natural (opposed to the geometrical) shape of the 
gridshell is computed and another update can be done according to the results of the structural 
analysis. This optimisation can be systemised and developing a method has been the subject of 
research work  (D'Amico, Zhang, Shepherd, & Williams, 2015).   
 
The shaping process 
The shaping process can be conducted from the flat grid and the structural elements with their 
associated properties. In order to compute the result of the shaping process a dynamic relaxation 
algorithm is used. Depending on how the algorithm has been set up different input parameters can be 
chosen and will influence the convergence of the algorithm. The most important input parameter being 
the convergence threshold which sets the distance from which the solution is considered to have 
converged. To reduce the computation time, it is possible to increase this threshold.  
The approach of the shaping process is to position the supports as defined by the compass method 
and let the grid take its “naturel” shape. This ensure that the contour of the base of the initial shape 
will not be changed however the curvature of the shape will adapt. An upward load is also necessary 
to engage this shaping process. As erection of the gridshell is not studied here, the load is virtual and 
exist to facilitate the shaping process. Once the final shape is reached, this virtual load is retrieved.  
This shaping process is essential to understand the behaviour of gridshells and the challenge their 
erection can represent. At this stage it is possible to randomly select a certain number of support and 
include some displacement from their targeted position which represents errors and imperfections 
during construction. The impact on the general shape can then be analysed. 
  
The bracing system 
Once the structure is shaped into its final form it needs to be braced. This will block the rotation 
between the two-grid direction so that the structure acquires its rigidity. For that, cables or bars can 
be defined in one or two diagonals of each grid element. However, as their length depend on the final 
form of the gridshell they can only be defined once the shaping process is done. The length is 
==PAGE:32==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
30 / 64 
measured two opposite nodes of a grid mesh at the level of the interior grid (in the case were the offset 
between the two grid direction is modelled).  
 
The analysis 
To conduct structural analysis loading needs to be applied. The Eurocodes are used as a basis for 
the load definition and combination even though the requirements are not adapted to gridshell 
structures especially with composite materials.  
The following loads are considered:  
• 
Self-weight: elements, cover, connections 
• 
Snow load: projection on horizontal surface 
 
The visualisation 
Finally, it is proposed to use the Rhino interface to visualise the results of the analysis as well as 
interesting data. This visual feedback aims to provide guidance to the designers and assist the design 
process.  
Here is a none exhaustive list of the available feedbacks:  
• 
Curvature of surface and max cross section 
• 
Area of the cover and on the ground 
• 
Number of supports 
• 
Material quantity 
• 
Distance between compass grid and “natural” grid  
• 
Maximum moment before and after loading 
• 
Maximum displacement  
• 
Reaction at the supports 
 
3.2.3 
Testing on study cases 
 
Once the proposed design process is implemented it is two important tests need to be conducted:  
- 
Compare the implemented structural model of a gridshell with a reference (Objective 3) 
- 
Explore the early design of a gridshell using the developed tool (Objective 4)  
The first step can be addressed by comparing results of a gridshell design that was created by using 
the process proposed in this work with an available reference. However, a lot of information is needed 
for the comparison to be relevant such as the geometry, the material properties, the considered 
loads…The best reference available was the analysis of a dome gridshell int Lina Bouhaya’s paper 
(Bouhaya, 2010). The goal of this test is to validate the general behaviour of the design gridshell.  
Then in order to explore the challenges of the early stages of a gridshell design it was chosen to have 
a study case. The idea was to base the design on a project of a glass canopy the company Arcora 
==PAGE:33==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
31 / 64 
had to design on one of their projects. It was chosen as the span and shape was uncommon and that 
having a light structure was a requirement of the client. The goal was therefore to verify that the 
developed tool is adapted to explore gridshell design and analyse the impact of different parameters 
on the general behaviour. In addition, a physical model was built with the aim of being didactic and to 
gain a better understanding of how to integrate construction challenges in the early stage design.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
32 / 64 
4 
DESIGN DEVELOPMENT  
 
4.1 
A SIMPLE CASE TO COMPARE MODELLING APPROCHES 
 
This section presents the study of different methods to model an active bending single beam which is 
in that case called an elastica. The different methods will be compared having in mind their application 
to a gridshell structure. It was chosen to first study a simple elastica in order to create different models 
of active bending beams as accurate as possible and understand its behaviour and the sources of 
error. The particularities of the different models can therefore be pointed out. 
 
4.1.1 
Elastica theory 
 
The geometry of a curve described by a beam’s elastic deformation is called an elastica, a name 
coming from Euler’s works. It is the shape a beam element takes when it is compressed from two 
edge after it has buckled. The understanding that the Elastica is a curve that generates a minimum of 
potential bending energy in a constrained system describes best the inseparable interdependency of 
mechanical behaviour and form present in all bending-active structures (Lienhard, Bending-Active 
structures, 2014). To set up the problem a beam of initial length 𝑙 under compression, with a moment 
of inertia 𝐼 and a Young modulus 𝐸 is considered. If a is the distance between the two supports and α 
the angle the beam makes at the supports, the following result can be demonstrated (Douthe, 2007).  
 
 
Figure 26 : Schematic graph of the elastica problem 
 
𝑎
𝑙= 2
𝐽(sin𝛼
2)
𝐼(sin𝛼
2)    with  𝐽(sin
𝛼
2) = ∫√1 −sin²
𝛼
2 sin²φ 𝑑𝜑
𝜋
2
0
 
This theoretical result is used to evaluate the accuracy of numerical solvers. In his work, Cyril Douthe 
studied extensively this result depending on different setups of the algorithm.  
 
==PAGE:35==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
33 / 64 
 
Figure 27 : Elastica geometry for different ends angles 
From this theoretical shape it is possible to evaluate the curvature and then calculate the stress as 
presented in 2.1.2.  
 
4.1.2 
Problem setting  
 
To begin the study of an active bent beam, the geometry of a beam needs to be created. It requires a 
starting point, a direction and a length. However, in order to analyse large displacements, the beam 
needs to be discretised and therefore divided into several segments. The required information to 
define the beam are presented in the picture below. The starting point and the unit vector are inputs 
whereas the length and the division size are parameters as they can have in impact on future results. 
The resulting initial geometry is therefore a straight line divided in several segments limited by nodes.  
 
Figure 28 : Starting point of the problem 
Once the geometry is defined structural properties are applied. First the segments are converted into 
beam elements. Then, the cross section and material is chosen. In this example, a circular cross 
section is studied with its diameter as a parameter. The material properties can be applied manually, 
or the material can be chosen from a library, here wood will be used. Then the supports are created 
and the end points of the beam. They are hinges with the out of plane rotation blocked.   
From this initial geometry with specific structural properties, the bending will be modelled. 
   
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
34 / 64 
4.1.3 
Study cases  
 
Objective: mathematical reference 
As presented above, the elastica has a mathematical geometrical solution that can be determined 
from different sets of inputs. Will McElwain came up with a grasshopper component that computes the 
exact shape of an elastica. The component is presented below, and a detail description of the script 
is made available in a Grasshopper forum (McElwain, 2014). 
 
Figure 29 : Compass method grasshopper component 
As the shape doesn’t depend on the material nor on the cross section, it can be computed from the 
position of the displaced supports (PtA and PtB) and the initial length (Len). The plan (Pln) in which 
the elastica will bend also needs to be defined.  
The curvature of the elastica can be evaluated at any position along the curve. By assigning a material 
and a cross section, the bending stress due to curvature is calculated and as follows: 
𝑀(𝑥) = 𝐸𝐼
𝑅(𝑥) 
with R and M the radius and the moment at the x abscise along the curve. The calculated results are 
presented in the following section and will be used as a reference to validate or not the other models.  
 
Objective: Validate and compare the dynamic relaxation algorithms of Kangaroo and Karamba 
based flat beam geometry 
This study case models the problem of the elastica from an initially undeformed beam using different 
dynamic relaxation algorithm. To bend the previously defined beam, a prescribed displacement is 
applied to both the supports and the result is calculated using the dynamic relaxation algorithm 
presented in section 2.1.3.  
In order to have the beam bent and not only compressed an initial eccentricity needs to be applied. It 
was chosen to apply small upward line-load. Creating an imperfection locally could also have been a 
solution but it creates singularities which are avoided with a uniform load.  
Two different Grasshopper plug ins, Karamba and Kangaroo2, which propose a dynamic relaxation 
algorithm were used to compute the results. Not enough information is available to compare the two 
different ways the algorithms are implemented. However, it is important to consider that the initial 
==PAGE:37==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
35 / 64 
imperfection can be taken out in the Kangaroo calculation once the bending has been iniated. As it 
not possible in Karamba, the results include the effect of this small initial loading. A comparison and 
analysis are presented in the following section.  
 
Objective: Validate active bending model based on final beam geometry  
The objective of this case study is to apply the stresses created by active bending as an internal load 
based on the predetermined curvature of an elastica. It is made possible with the Karamba component 
presented earlier.  
In this case the geometry is obtained using the theoretical elastica model. The output curve from the 
mathematical calculation is divided into segments and the beam elements are defined. Then the 
curvature is evaluated at a point corresponding to the middle of each division or beam element. The 
different curvatures are then applied to its corresponding beam element as an initial strain. A standard 
Karamba analysis is done and the results can be viewed and analysed. 
In that way, the dynamic relaxation algorithm is not necessary. It also allows us to add other loadings 
in different load cases and conduct an analysis using Karamba, which wasn’t possible in the first study 
case where an initial upward load was applied.   
However, to model the active bending of a gridshell, no theoretical geometry can be used as an input. 
The form-finding can be computed using the dynamic relaxation algorithm and the output geometry 
can be used as input to the Karamba model. As thegog output geometry of kangaroo is a polyline it is 
necessary to interpolate its vertices in order to then evaluate its local curvature.  The advantage of 
that process, if it is validated, is that the structural analysis under loading can be conducted using the 
finite element method. The results of this method are presented in the following section.  
 
4.1.4 
Results 
 
First general comments on the results and the influence of several modelling parameters are 
presented. Then the geometry and stresses obtained with the two different dynamic relaxation 
algorithms, and of the finite element analysis using two different inputs will be compared to the 
mathematical curve of an elastica from the first study case. 
To facilitate the analysis the following naming is defined: 
▪ 
Study case 1: Mathematical elastica used as reference 
▪ 
Study case 2: Kangaroo dynamic relaxation calculation based on flat element 
▪ 
Study case 3: Karamba dynamic relaxation calculation based on flat element 
▪ 
Study case 4: Karamba calculation based on the final geometry calculated 
mathematically and used as the input for initial strain in the beams. 
▪ 
Study case 5: Karamba calculation based on the final geometry calculated from 
the Kangaroo form-finding used as the input for initial strain in the beams. 
 
==PAGE:38==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
36 / 64 
The deformed shaped for different span reduction are observed in each study case before being 
compared for precisely for one specific spanning.  
 
Figure 30:Elastica shape for different spaning (Study case 1) 
 
As the DR algorithm is an iterative process, a threshold is set from which it is considered to have 
converged. By reducing the threshold and therefore increasing the number of iterations a more 
accurate solution can be obtained.  
It was also observed that in some cases, the Karamba calculation wasn’t giving correct results., for 
example, when the small upward load applied to initiate the bending was too small no results were 
viewed. Other parameters of the algorithm need to be tuned to prevent unwanted results.  
As it could be expected, the higher the small upward load applied to initiate the bending is, the larger 
is the difference with accurate curve. However, as mentioned earlier, the Kangaroo model can cancel 
this artificial load.  
It is also important to note that in the kangaroo model, the supports are defined with a certain strength 
and if they aren’t strong enough, they will move. It is necessary to set a high enough strength in order 
to have neglectable displacement of the supports.  
The models of the elastica have a first approximation as the modelled beam is not continuous but 
divided in segments. This deviation can be minimised by reducing the division size, the trade-off 
being that it increases calculation cost. 
 
Figure 31 : Elastica curve(black) and the models (red) with 6 divisions (left) and with 14 division (right) 
 
==PAGE:39==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
37 / 64 
The results are then compared for a specific case with the chosen parameters:  
▪ 
Initial length: 15m 
▪ 
Span: 11m 
▪ 
Cross-section: circular of diameter 5cm 
▪ 
E modulus : 10500 MPa 
▪ 
Division size : 0.2 m 
The distance between the computed geometries of each study case and the study case 1 is evaluated 
along the beam and can be find in the table presented in APPENDIX B. As the results are symmetrical 
only half of the beam is analysed. The maximum distance is presented in the table below and used to 
conclude. 
 
Study case 2 
Study case 3 
Study case 4 
Study case 5 
Max distance to ref / 
Study case 1  (cm) 
0.298 
0.045 
0.014 
0.268 
Table 1: Maximum distance with the elastica of Study case 1 
The analysis of these result can first validate the different methods. The resulting distances are 
neglectable and can be explained by the chosen discretisation. For the dynamic relaxation cases, 
having an accurate geometry depends a lot on the set converging threshold and therefore on the 
computation time. It can be adapted to the precision required for the study. Moreover, study case 3 is 
influenced by the small upward load of 0.01kN/m, but it can be concluded that the impact on the 
geometry is neglectable. Even though the result of Study case 3 is satisfying, a great instability of the 
algorithm was experiences. Indeed, for specific spanning the buckling was in the other direction or 
didn’t take place and the beam was only compressed. Stresses will then be analysed to evaluate the 
different methods 
By comparing the internal stresses in the beam elements, the accuracy of the different models can be 
evaluated. It is important to make sure that the same values are compared, and it was chosen to 
compare the bending stress at the middle of each beam element.  
The mathematical model was used as a reference and the stresses were computed using the formulas 
from the elastica theory. It was then possible to define an error rate of the other models which are 
presented in APPENDIX B. The table below presents the values and error rate of the maximum 
bending stress which is in the middle of the beam.  
 
 
Table 2 : Maximum bending stress and relative difference with study case 1 
 
Again, the analysis of these result can validate the different methods. The error rates of Study case 3 
which is a little higher can be interpreted as the effect of a small initial upward load that cannot be 
cancelled.  
 
Study case 1 
Study case 2 
Study case 3 
Study case 4 
Study case 5 
73.60 
73.6 
0% 
74.43 
1% 
73.58 
0% 
73.52 
0% 
==PAGE:40==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
38 / 64 
4.1.5 
Applying to gridshells 
 
Now that different modelling methods have been put in place and analysed, it necessary to verify their 
ability to be applied to gridshells. Therefore, the work consisted in introducing a connection between 
two active bent beams and introducing torsion that doesn’t appear in the elastica model. Different tests 
were performed on simple cases and more complex designs in order to choose the most appropriate 
modelling method.  
The first test was to simply create a scissor connection both using Karamba and K2Engineering. Even 
though, perfect dynamic connections are not realistic they are adapted for this study. The test was 
performed by offsetting two beam elements and then creating a small bar with free rotation at its ends. 
Then, displacements were imposed and the geometry as well as the resulting moments were 
analysed. In order to have a perfect connection, the beams were expected to stay straight without any 
internal stresses. Using a bar elements worked perfectly when with K2Engineering but not with 
Karamba as it can be seen in Figure 32.  
 
Figure 32 : Scissor connection with bar element using Karamba. 
 
The solution was to use the spring component as it is presented in the Karamba example files. The 
same test was repeated but with this time introducing active bending in the two intersecting beam and 
then inducing the rotation using the methods developed for the elastica. The final step was to apply 
the method on a gridshell in order to conclude. 
The instabilities that were noticed when using the Karamba dynamic relaxation algorithm were even 
more frequent when the model became more complex. After having tried to tune the different 
parameters and having discussed with other users, it was decided to exclude this method as the 
instability couldn’t be overcome.  
The idea was then to use the method of study case 5 in order to perform the form finding using 
Kangaroo and then conduct the structural analysis on the final shape, using Karamba. Indeed, 
Karamba is more powerful and adapted for post-processing. However, when applying this process on 
other cases than the elastica, the displacement computed by Karamba when applying the initial strain 
==PAGE:41==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
39 / 64 
was of a few centimetres for spans of around 10m. The details of this study can be found in APPENDIX 
C .  
At first it was assumed that the applied prestress was not correct. However, the moment distribution 
due to this prestress is coherent.  
 
Figure 33 : Moment distribution due to initial stress 
 
When contacting Karamba developers they confirmed that the method was the most adapted to model 
active bending but agreed it was not always accurate and did not advise using it. Moreover, when 
looking at displacements it is seen that they are asymmetrical.  
 
Figure 34 : Displacement visualisation due to initial stress 
 
Even though the range of displacement could be acceptable, less than 1/100 ratio, without further 
understanding of its causes, it was decided to abandon this method. 
Finally, it was decided to develop the structural analysis using Kangaroo and the proposed 
components of K2Engineering. It will give a greater freedom of interaction and customisation of the 
design and the analysis. 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
40 / 64 
4.2 
A TOOL ASSISTING EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF GRIDSHELLS 
 
This section will present the tool that was developed during this thesis with the objective of proving 
that the chosen methodology is an adapted way to assist the design of a gridshell in its early stages. 
The results of its use on a validation case and on a use case are presented and then points of 
discussion and perspective are listed.  
 
4.2.1 
Implementation of the proposed framework 
 
The proposed framework shows one way of assisting the design process of a gridshell. As it wasn’t 
built for one specific project, another objective was to make it as agile and parametric as possible for 
it to adapt to any cases. One way to achieve that was to divide the process in several independent 
steps so that each could be implemented independently. It in general a good habit to have when 
working on scripts as it helps to identify errors. A serie of parameters are defined and come into play 
at different steps of the design process and their influence will be detailed. The parameters are listed 
below:  
• 
Material 
• 
Cross section 
• 
Grid size 
• 
Grid orientation 
• 
Starting point of compass method  
• 
Offset of two grid directions 
• 
Discretisation 
 
In order to so simplify the identification of the role of the components the following colour coding was 
put in place with inputs and outputs for each “box” representing a clear step: 
 
The starting point is the shape inputted as the aimed form for the gridshell. Different methods were 
used to create these surfaces. For example, the two surfaces on the left were create from an initial 
flat mesh which was blown into the desired shape. The blob surface was created from hanging chain 
curves that were then patched into a surface and the dome is the revolution of a parabola.  
Figure 35 : Used color coding for script 
==PAGE:43==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
41 / 64 
 
Figure 36 : Example surfaces 
 
The corresponding grid is then defined using the compass method. Alan Rynne developed a 
grasshopper component that he made available on Github (Rynne, 2020). As he points out, building 
the grid with a real compass in a scale model as Frei Ott did, didn’t result in the same precision and 
rapidity. It was used in this tool. He describes his code algorithmically as follows:  
“Given any freeform surface, a point on that surface and a desired grid size; 
1. Draw 2 curves on the surface that intersect on the point:  
2. Find the points in each curve that are equidistant to each other; 
3. Using the same compass distance, find the points between the axis’ in a procedural 
manner until you cannot obtain any more points in the surface.” 
Therefore, three parameters need to be chosen: the starting point, the orientation of the two curves 
and the grid size.  
The grid size is defined by a parameter and should be chosen relatively to the dimension of the shape. 
It also defines the local buckling length. It can be refined and optimised once the structural analysis is 
completed and  
The starting influences the construction of the grid, especially on irregular surfaces, as it can be seen 
on Figure 37. In order to limit the elongation of the formed diamond, it is advised to place it centred on 
the surface; however, it can be changed to respond to other requirements 
 
Figure 37 : Compass method with different starting point on blob surface 
 
==PAGE:44==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
42 / 64 
The orientation of the grid is defined with a rotation angle as a parameter. It has a great influence on 
the design of the grid and, more specifically, on the global and local curvature. For example, with a 
rectangular mesh:  
Figure 38 : Top view of rectangle cushion with different grid orientation 
 
A trimming is also put in place as to limit the grid created by the compass method. The base contour 
and plane of the initial shape are used as trimming area.  
The next step is to flatten the grid as it is made possible from the properties of the Chebyshev net 
designed with the compass method. It is done by applying geometrical constraints to the grid and 
using the Kangaroo solver to compute the result. The lines of the two directions are forced to be 
aligned along two perpendicular directions. This process is helped by having a repulsive force between 
the end points of one curve. In addition, a constrain is applied on the length of the elements. Two 
steps are needed: in the first step the constraint on the element length has a low relative weight in 
order to allow displacement. In the second step, a high relative weight is associated with this 
constraint, compared to the other constraints, in order for it to recover its initial length. At this point a 
verification is conducted in order to ensure that the grid is indeed flat and that the elements have the 
correct length.  
This flat grid is then manipulated for it to acquire the properties of a gridshell. To begin with, the grid 
lines are defined as beam elements with its chosen cross section and material. Then, one layer needs 
to be offset and the lines that will support the joint elements are created at each intersection of the two 
grid directions. As mentioned above, the offset distance is a parameter that has to be chosen taking 
into account the cross section of the elements and the designed connections. From theses 
intersections it is also necessary to define diagonal lines that will be used to define the cross-bracing 
elements once the gridshell is shaped.  
The shaping process is guided by the displacement of supports that are defined at each end of a 
beam. The target point of the displacement is the corresponding end point from the grid created with 
the compass method, and the supports are progressively displaced along that line, as it can be seen 
in figure Figure 39. Two options were implemented to progressively displace the supports.  It can or 
be controlled by a slider or it can be automated by a loop which regularly (time can be set) increases 
the displacement until it reaches its final position.  
==PAGE:45==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
43 / 64 
 
Figure 39 : Displacement of supports 
Once the grid is formed, the cross bracing can be put in place. It is possible to select only one or both 
directions of diagonal lines of each complete cell of the grid that were previously defined. Then, the 
corresponding structural properties of the chosen cross bracing system are applied. As default, cables 
are inputted as a cross bracing system. 
When applying loads, it important to note that Kangaroo2 can only consider point loads. Therefore, to 
apply linear and surface loads, the equivalent load on each point needs to be determined. To simplify 
these calculations a mesh associated with the deforming grid is created. Once the desired state is 
reached, and therefore the associated mesh corresponds to the cover surface, it is taken back as an 
input of loading process. It then possible to easily define surface loads from the Vornoi areas of the 
mesh and line loads from the length of segment meeting at one node. Some loads, for example self-
weight, can be applied before the cross bracing is put in place.   
Stress and strains can be obtained from K2Engineering output of the beam elements.  
 
Figure 40 : BeamOutput K2Engineering component 
 
Finally, it is possible to gather and visualize information about the structure. Here is a none exhaustive 
list of the available feedbacks:  
• 
Curvature of surface and max cross section 
• 
Area of the cover and on the ground 
• 
Material quantity 
• 
Distance between compass grid and “natural” grid  
• 
Maximum moment before and after loading 
• 
Maximum displacement  
==PAGE:46==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
44 / 64 
4.2.2 
Comparing the tool with a reference 
 
This study aims to compare the structural behaviour on a designed gridshell modelled with the 
developed tool with the structural result of another model. It consists in implementing the same 
structure as the one presented by Lina Bouhaya in her thesis and comparing the available results 
(Bouhaya, 2010). This case was chosen as it gave the most precise details on the geometry and 
design parameters of the structure.  
The properties of the grid beams are:  
- 
Cross-section: tube, outer diameter 42 mm, inner diameter 35 mm  
- 
Material: GFRP, E= 27 GPa 
 
The grid is initially formed by 18 beams separated by 1,2 m and covers a sphere of 7m radius trimmed 
at 4m from the top (see Figure 41). 
  
 
The draping method, presented in section 2.1.3, is used to define the grid, which is then trimmed and 
flattened. It can then be shaped and braced with a third direction of tubes before loads are applied.  
 
 
Figure 41 : Geometry definition of the dome and associated grid 
==PAGE:47==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
45 / 64 
 
 
Figure 42 : Steps of the gridshell design 
  
The considered loads are presented in the table below. As permanent loads, the self-weight is 
considered and as variables loads only symmetric snow load was applied as it was the only 
comparable loading.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finally, the displacements and stresses can be computed and compared between the developed 
model and the reference. When comparing the displacement along the z axis to under snow load it 
can be analysed that the distribution on the dome is similar but that the range of displacement is higher 
than the reference results. It is assumed that the difference comes from the small modelling 
differences as the magnitude of the values is still coherent.  
Loads 
Value 
Self-weight: 
 
- 
structure 
0.84 kg / ml 
- 
connections 
1 kg / connection  
- 
cover 
1 kg /m² 
 
 
Snow load 
45 kg/m²  
Table 3 : Considered loads and corresponding values 
Figure 43 : Displacement graph along z-axis with reference (left) 
==PAGE:48==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
46 / 64 
 
 
The failure of the structure is assessed by evaluating the maximum allowed stress in the elements 
under loading. According to the previous work on the considered composite tube, it is recommended 
to have less than 275 MPa in short term and 140 MPa in long term (Douthe, 2007). With the used 
material and cross section, the reference dome has maximal stresses ranging from -16,632 MPa to 
3,44 MPa and the stress obitaine from the model range from -22,34MPa to +5,41.  
 
4.2.3 
Using the tool on a case  
 
The presented tool was used on a specific case with two different objectives which are: 
• 
Conducting a pre dimensioning of a structure to assess its capacity to withstand the load of 
a glassed canopy in order to compare the structure with the more standard actual design; 
• 
Assisting the design of a physical model.  
The project on which the study is based is a confidential project from the company Arcora, therefore 
only the minimum required elements are communicated in this work. The structure under study is 
designed to cover an atrium of a polygon shape with a maximum spanning of close to 40 m; 
 
Figure 44 : Shape and span of the polygone 
In order to explore the design of a gridshell based on that perimeter several design iterations were 
conducted. For each iteration the general structural behaviour of the gridshell was assessed by looking 
at the local displacement and moments in the structure.  
 
Physical model  
To build the physical model several design choices had to be taken. To begin with it was decided to 
create the model at a scale of 1:50 for it to be visually attractive and facilitate construction. With the 
==PAGE:49==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
47 / 64 
same objectives in mind the grid size was set at 4m (or 8cm in the model) which also limited the 
number of connections to 57. Pictures can be found in APPENDIX E.  
For the material different options were considered: plastic, beech or linden which were what was easily 
available. However, plastic not available in quantity and beech was less elastic so linden was finally 
chosen. The cross section was chosen as the highest that could achieve the desired curvature with 
reasonable prestress forces.  
It was then important to create a system for the supports that would allow to easily shape the gridshell 
and resist the forces of the active bent elements. For that the perimeter was digitally cut in a thick 
foam board and the position of the supports were referenced.  
Finally, many different connection systems were considered, and it was decided to use nylon thread 
as it was discrete and allowed the two grid directions to rotate freely. No system was put in place to 
block translation along the grid elements which required to replace the connections after the shaping 
process in order to achieve the correct shape.  
 
 
Design iterations 
First the shape of the project had to be analysed and adapted to gridshell structures. For that, the 
gaussian curvature of the shape was mapped and the aim was to minimise the negative curvatures 
(in green on Figure 46). In order to design an adapted shape based on the chosen project the 
perimeter and the maximum height of the canopy were used. The fist iteration of design was to use 
Kangaroo2 to create a pressurized surface until it reached the desired height. However, this method 
created negative curvature close to the angles of the perimeter as it can be seen in Figure 46. 
Therefore, to increase curvature around the perimeter the second method was to create catenary 
curves that intersected at the desired height and then patch the surface. With this fixed height, this 
second iteration was chosen as satisfying even though it is considered that adding height would allow 
to increase the curvature around the edge and avoid all negative curvature.  
Figure 45: Physical model of polygone canope 
==PAGE:50==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
48 / 64 
 
Figure 46 : Gaussian curvature graph of the original, the pressured and the catenary based shape (left to right) 
When building the physical model, it was notices that it was more difficult to shape the zones with low 
gaussian curvature. Indeed, as the support system used the outer pressure of the bent elements to 
be fixed, when the curvature was too low, this pressure was not high enough to easily fix the supports.  
From the defined shape the compass method can be applied to define the grid. The grid size is at first 
arbitrarily set to be 2m. The starting point and orientation of the grid can be defined with two different 
approach. The first one, used for the physical model, was to choose those parameters so that the 
beam elements were not parallel to the edges and that they intersected with the edge as 
perpendicularly as possible. This was conducted only with visual assessment. The second method is 
to use an evolutionary optimisation solver in order to optimise these parameters according to different 
fitness values. As optimisation is not the purpose of the work only the grid orientation was optimised 
to maximise the curvature of the grid on the surface using Galapagos. Indeed, as the curvature of the 
designed shape is not a dimensioning parameter it can be increased so that it increases the effect od 
active bending. It shows the potential of integrating optimisation tools in the design process. The 
starting point of the compass method was center of the surface.  
 
Figure 47 : Grid definition of the polygone canope 
 
As the designed shape of the gridshell has a low maximum curvature it is reachable even for very 
large cross sections. The curvature will not be dimensioning for the elements. It was arbitrarily decided 
to use tubes with an outer diameter of 70mm and a thickness of 10mm.  Indeed, as it can be seen in 
==PAGE:51==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
49 / 64 
the figure below, the developed tool compares the curvature allowed with the chosen cross section 
with the maximum curvature of the model. It is then up to the designer to choose were to correct the 
design or by changing the curvature of the model, or by changing the cross section. In this case the 
cross section was adapted. 
 
 
Figure 48 : Comparing curvatures  
 
The next step of the design exploration was to analyse the grid size. For this first dimensioning only 
self-weight including beams with their chosen cross-section, an estimation of the weight of 
connections and the surface load of standard glass as well as snow load according to the Eurocodes 
were considered. Their values are presented in Table 4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The structural behaviour of the gridshell was first analysed without loading. The moment distribution 
is displayed in the graph of Figure 49. It is observed that close the edge some of the moment are low 
and even negative. This is due to the curvature of the initial shape and is not adapted for gridshell 
structures.  
Loads 
Value 
Self-weight: 
 
- 
structure 
1,42 kg / ml 
- 
connections 
1,5 kg / connection  
- 
cover 
2,5 kg /m² 
 
 
Snow load 
45 kg/m²  
Table 4 : Loading on the polygone canope 
==PAGE:52==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
50 / 64 
 
Figure 49 : Moment distribution in shaped polygone canope 
 
When loading the gridshell, the structure collapse first around the edges. The grid size was reduced, 
and the cross section increased within the limit of realistic design (a grid step 0.5m and a section of 
10 cm diameter) and collapse still took place. It is therefore concluded that the shape is not adapted 
for active bending and needs to be redesigned. This is a limitation of the chosen approach to design 
the grid from a 3D shape and not design the shape from a formed predesigned flat grid. The initial 
geometry could be redesigned with a different perimeter and height.  
Finally, it was chosen to study the impact of imprecision of supports. When working with tolerance it 
is common to analyse the effect of the worst-case scenario. However, in the case of irregular shapes 
and of gridshells, the worst case is not clearly defined. Therefore, different scenarios were modelled 
such as alternating the position of one out of two supports or having them follow a sinusoidal curve as 
presented in Figure 50.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
It was observed in each case that the maximum displacement of the structure was proportional the 
imposed displacement at the supports. However, normal stresses in the elements increased especially 
in the case were one out of two supports were displaced.  
The use of the developed tool, both for the design of a physical model and for an application case, 
was very beneficial to its improvement and to the understanding of early design challenges of gridshell 
Figure 50 : Support displacement 
==PAGE:53==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
51 / 64 
structures. It has proven that it could be used for several type of studies which can be very useful in 
early stage design of gridshells.  
 
4.2.4 
Discussion and perspective 
 
The proposed tool and its application on different cases allows to conclude on the objectives it 
satisfies, the limitations it faced, the improvements it could benefit from and the possibilities of future 
works. 
Objectives satisfied:  
▪ 
Understanding the design challenges of gridshells 
▪ 
Building up some knowledge on the subject 
▪ 
Analysing a shape and its adequation to gridshell structures 
▪ 
Creating parametric workflow to design the grid from a 3D shape and its corresponding 
flattened geometry 
▪ 
Define structural elements of a gridshell and conduct form-finding 
▪ 
Apply surface, linear and point load after having braced gridshell 
▪ 
Analyse displacement and stresses of the designed gridshell 
▪ 
Validating the structural modelling of active bending 
▪ 
Understand the influence of design parameters on structural behaviour 
 
Limitations:  
▪ 
Eurocodes not adapted to doubly curved surfaces 
▪ 
Knowledge of the behaviour of elastic materials under prestress  
▪ 
No feedback on the accuracy of the model 
▪ 
Compass method not adapted if no work on the form is performed  
▪ 
Available research is not usable for an actual design project 
▪ 
Application only for early stage design and understanding of behaviour but another 
method is needed for building an actual gridshell 
 
Points to improve: 
▪ 
Understanding active bending using initial strain based on geometry 
▪ 
Speed and interactivity of the tool 
▪ 
Identify the failure mechanism and dimensioning action 
▪ 
Defining design and optimisation goals  
▪ 
Scaling according to project dimensions 
 
Future work:  
▪ 
Work on the form and its optimisation 
▪ 
Analyse a specific project using FEM commercial software (detail design stage) 
▪ 
Conduct systematic studies of the influence of different parameters and optimisation 
==PAGE:54==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
52 / 64 
▪ 
Study general buckling using non-linear analysis 
▪ 
Asses the precision of the modelled gridshells 
▪ 
Analyse the opportunities and challenges of different cover materials  
▪ 
Include rationalisation of design in order to facilitate fabrication  
 
From the above points, it can be said that the proposed tool is a first step to assist the early stage 
design of gridshell structures. However, there is room for a lot of evolutions which Arcora is considering 
to continue working on.  
 
==PAGE:55==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
53 / 64 
5 
CONCLUSION 
 
The design of elastic gridshells is both appealing and challenging. Indeed, these structures are 
architecturally and structurally complex and efficient. Digital tools have become widely developed to 
assist their design process. By introducing an agile workflow integrating the results of active bending 
studies, a step forward has been made in the apprehension of gridshells.  
Within the context of this work, different approaches to model active bending were considered; first 
using the elastica as a reference, and then, including the complexity of gridshells. It can be concluded 
that the available algorithms and tools are very useful to perform form-finding of gridshells even if they 
make some modelling approximations. However, the early design stage would benefit from the 
development of these models to improve computation time and accuracy, and there is a positive 
expectation from current research and development on this subject.  
The design industry needs to have a good understanding and appropriate tools to facilitate the design 
process of gridshells and therefore integrate them in their design propositions. The proposed workflow 
is built to be able to adapt to any design choices from the initial shape to any parameters of the grid 
or load considerations. It therefore allows a great freedom of exploration of the behaviour of gridshells. 
By testing the developed tool, some primary conclusions and knowledge could be established on the 
structural behaviour of gridshells.  
The collaboration with Arcora created the possibility to integrate my work in a larger perspective of 
developing their competence in gridshells. It also helped keeping in mind the reality of design process 
in the industry and of constructive challenges that need to be included in the early stage design. 
It was also very interesting for me to spend my time to fully assimilate this subject using the available 
documentation. I also appreciated to call upon and develop my skills in geometry, in structure and in 
computation. I am curious to follow up on the future development of gridshell design and construction.  
For now, when it is said that gridshells are efficient structures, it does not consider the design process. 
Progress is necessary in order to simplify their design and democratise their construction. But for me, 
it is the role of designers to solve and simplify complex designs. It is at least what I will be aiming for.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
54 / 64 
6 REFERENCES 
 
Adriaenssens, S., Block, P., Veenendaal, D., & William, C. (2014). Shell Structures for Architecture: Form 
Finding and Optimization. London: Taylor & Francis - Routledge. 
Bauer, A., Langst, P., Lamagna, r., Lienhard, J., Piker, D., Quinn, G., . . . Bletzinger, K.-U. (2018). Exploring 
Software Approaches for the Design and Simulation of Bending Active Systems. International 
Association for Shell and Spatial Structures . 
Bouhaya, L. (2010). Optimisation structurelle des gridshells. Champ-sur-marne: Université Paris Est. 
Brandt-Olsen, C. (2016). Calibrated Modelling of Form-Active Structures . Copenhagen: Danish Technical 
University (DTU). 
D'Amico, B., Pugnale, A., Zhang, H., & Colabella, S. (2015). Timber gridshells: Numerical simulation, design 
and construction of a full scale structure. Structures. 
D'Amico, B., Zhang, H., Shepherd, P., & Williams, C. (2015). Optimisation of cross-section of actively bent 
grid shells with strength and geometric compatibility constraints. Computers & Structures, 154-163. 
Davis, D. (2011, 09 15). The MacLeamy Curve. Récupéré sur D: https://www.danieldavis.com/macleamy/ 
Douthe, C. (2007). Etude de structures élancées précontraintes en matériaux composites, application à la 
conception de gridshells. Marne la vallée: Ecole des Ponts Paris Tech. 
Du Peloux, L. (2017). Modeling of bending-torsion couplings in active-bending structures. Application to the 
design of elastic gridshells. Marne la Vallée: Université Paris-Est, Ecole des Ponts Paris Tech. 
DuPeloux, L., Baverel, O., Caron, J.-F., & Tayeb, F. (2015). From shape to shell: a design tool to materialize 
freeform shapes using gridshell structures. Creative Commons attribution. 
Gengnagel, C., Hernandez, E. L., & Bäumer, R. (2013). Natural-fibre-reinforced plastics in actively bent 
structures. Construction Materials. 
Harris, R. (2011). Design of timber gridded shell structures. Bath: Institution of Civil Engineers - Structures and 
Buildings. 
Harris, R., & Royon, J. (2008). The Savill Garden Gridshell Design and Construction . London: SBCA. 
Hernandez, E. L. (2012). Influence of Constructive Aspects on the Geometry and Performance of elastic 
Gridshells. Berlin: Department of Architecture, University of the Arts. 
Hernandez, E., Sechelmann, S., Rorig, T., & Gengnagel, C. (2012). Topology optimisation of regular and 
irregular elastic gridshells by means of a non-linear variational method. Advances in architectural 
geometry, 147-160. 
Lienhard, J. (2013, Décembre). A Review on Structures where Bending is used as a Self-Formation Process. 
International Journal of Space Structures. 
Lienhard, J. (2014). Bending-Active structures. Stuttgart: Itke Universität Stuttgart Forschungsberichte. 
Malek, S. (2012). The Effect of Geometry and Topology on the Mechanics of Gridshells. MIT. 
Mannheim, A. D. (2020, 02 20). Mannheim-Multihalle. Retrieved from Mannheim-Multihalle: https://mannheim-
multihalle.de/en/homepage/ 
McElwain, W. (2014, February 26). A script for elastic bending (aka the elastic curve). Récupéré sur 
Grasshopper Algorithmic modelling for Rhino: https://www.grasshopper3d.com/forum/topics/a-script-
for-elastic-bending-aka-the-elastica-curve 
Otto, F. (1995). Finding-Form. Munich: Axel Menges. 
Pagnacco, T., Masera, G., Weilandt, A., & Baldassini, N. (2019). A framework for the optimisation of glazed 
gridshells in the early design stage under structural and energy-based criteria. Milan: IOP Conference 
Series: Earth and Environmental Science. 
==PAGE:57==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
55 / 64 
Quaternion. (2020, March 12). At last a memorable ready-to-assemble structure! Récupéré sur Ekilaya, 
architecure prête à sublimer: https://en.ekilaya.com/ 
Richard, H., John, R., Olivier, K., & Stephen, J. (2003). Design and construction of the Downland Gridshell. 
Building Research & Information, 427-454. 
Rynne, A. (2020, Februrary 18). Chebychev net grasshopper component. Récupéré sur Rynne: 
https://rynne.es/projects/2017-12-chebyshevnet 
Schaur, H. a. (1974). IL10 - Gitterschalen - Grid Shells. Stuttgart: Institute for Lightweight Structures. 
Schlaich, J. (1996). Glass-Covered Gridshells. Structural Engineering International, 88-90. 
Schlaich, J., & Schober, H. (2018). Glass-covered Gridshells. Structural Engineering International, 88-90. 
Senatore, G., & Piker, D. (2015). Interactive real-time physics: An intuitive approach to form-finding and 
structural analysis for design and education. Computer-aided design, 32-41. 
Tayeb, F. (2016). Simulation numérique du comportement mécanique non linéaire de gridshells composés de 
poutres élancées en matériaux composites et de sections quelconques. Paris: École Nationale des 
Ponts et Chaussées. 
Tellier, X. (2019). Fabrication-aware design of architectural envelopes using surfaces with planar curvature 
lines. Barcelona: IASS Annual Symposium 2019 – Form and Forces. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
56 / 64 
7 
APPENDIX 
APPENDIX A : Built gridshell overview 
Creteil 
Savill Building 
Weald and 
Downland museum 
Japan pavilion in 
Hannover 
Mannheim 
Multihalle 
Project 
2012 
2006 
2002 
2000 
1975 
Year 
29 x 17 x 15 
90 x 25 x 8 
50 x 12 x 10 
72 x35x15.5 
80 x 60 x 20 
Dimensions 
GFRP 
Larch 
Oak 
Cardboard 
tubes 
Pruche 
(Hemlock) 
Material 
1 m 
1 m 
0.5 to 1 m 
1 m 
0.5 m 
Grid size 
GFRP Tubes 
Plyood 
membrane 
Green oak 
Polyester 
Twin cable of 
6mm every 6th 
node 
Bracing 
PVC membrane 
Plywood panels 
aluminium   weather 
coating and oak top 
cladding 
Clamped secondary 
frame. Etanchéité + 
isolation + polywood 
+polycarbonate 
Paper membrane 
PVC  membrane 
Cover 
TESS 
Buro Happold 
Buro Happold 
Buro Happold 
Frei Otto 
Structural 
designer 
==PAGE:59==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
57 / 64 
 
APPENDIX B : Elastica study results 
 
Displacement : 
Evaluating 
parameter 
Study case 2 
Study case 3 
Study case 4 
Study case 5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0.297671 
0.045019 
0.000421 
0.002145 
2 
0.295635 
0.045019 
0.000868 
0.0205 
3 
0.295495 
0.04493 
0.001244 
0.05144 
4 
0.289352 
0.04493 
0.001529 
0.082223 
5 
0.28918 
0.044819 
0.001815 
0.110914 
6 
0.278878 
0.044819 
0.002152 
0.137529 
7 
0.27885 
0.044559 
0.002493 
0.16159 
8 
0.276092 
0.044559 
0.002799 
0.182803 
9 
0.275066 
0.044324 
0.003111 
0.200888 
10 
0.273008 
0.044324 
0.003444 
0.21561 
11 
0.269888 
0.043913 
0.003748 
0.226769 
12 
0.265908 
0.043913 
0.004012 
0.23422 
13 
0.264836 
0.043531 
0.004237 
0.237882 
14 
0.264242 
0.043531 
0.004422 
0.237748 
15 
0.260578 
0.043 
0.004569 
0.233869 
16 
0.254967 
0.043 
0.004696 
0.22635 
17 
0.250927 
0.042434 
0.004825 
0.215375 
18 
0.250337 
0.042434 
0.004943 
0.201218 
19 
0.247427 
0.04183 
0.005042 
0.184246 
20 
0.2474 
0.04183 
0.005126 
0.16497 
21 
0.247242 
0.041033 
0.005199 
0.144111 
22 
0.245689 
0.041033 
0.005258 
0.122756 
23 
0.245689 
0.040414 
0.005307 
0.102661 
24 
0.240454 
0.040414 
0.005362 
0.086758 
25 
0.239912 
0.039323 
0.005411 
0.07924 
26 
0.237111 
0.039323 
0.005445 
0.083167 
27 
0.230043 
0.038763 
0.005473 
0.097073 
28 
0.228592 
0.038763 
0.005511 
0.116807 
29 
0.227035 
0.037303 
0.005568 
0.138927 
30 
0.224848 
0.037303 
0.005649 
0.161297 
31 
0.223407 
0.036889 
0.005758 
0.182596 
32 
0.222728 
0.036889 
0.005896 
0.201955 
33 
0.213775 
0.034973 
0.006066 
0.21876 
34 
0.209272 
0.034973 
0.006277 
0.232549 
==PAGE:60==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
58 / 64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
0.209212 
0.034807 
0.006535 
0.242972 
36 
0.204351 
0.034807 
0.006843 
0.249777 
37 
0.20226 
0.032531 
0.007192 
0.252801 
Evaluating 
parameter 
Study 
case 1  
Study case 2 
Study case 3 
Study case 4 
Study case 5 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
0,014363 
0,042828 
0,071298 
0,099776 
0,128253 
0,156437 
0,184458 
0,212302 
0,240032 
0,267341 
0,294398 
0,321133 
0,347487 
0,373416 
0,398882 
0,423851 
0,448252 
0,471969 
0,495098 
0,517447 
0,539073 
0,559798 
0,579712 
0,598633 
0,616523 
0,633382 
0,64914 
0,663733 
0,677104 
0,689203 
0,699985 
0,709412 
0,717451 
0,014 
0,0425 
0,071 
0,0995 
0,128 
0,156 
0,184 
0,2115 
0,239 
0,2665 
0,2935 
0,3205 
0,347 
0,3725 
0,398 
0,423 
0,447 
0,471 
0,4945 
0,517 
0,5385 
0,559 
0,579 
0,598 
0,6165 
0,633 
0,649 
0,664 
0,6775 
0,6895 
0,7 
0,7095 
0,718 
3% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0,015063 
0,043127 
0,071082 
0,098921 
0,126635 
0,154215 
0,181646 
0,208913 
0,235997 
0,262876 
0,289526 
0,315917 
0,342017 
0,367789 
0,393195 
0,41819 
0,442725 
0,46675 
0,49021 
0,513044 
0,535192 
0,556588 
0,577166 
0,596856 
0,615589 
0,633293 
0,649899 
0,665338 
0,679541 
0,692445 
0,703988 
0,714116 
0,722776 
5% 
1% 
0% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
2% 
2% 
2% 
% 
2% 
2% 
2%
 
 
2% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
1% 
1% 
0,014289 
0,042854 
0,071377 
0,099828 
0,128178 
0,156398 
0,184456 
0,21232 
0,239955 
0,267327 
0,294398 
0,321129 
0,347479 
0,373405 
0,398862 
0,423803 
0,448178 
0,471938 
0,495029 
0,517398 
0,538989 
0,559747 
0,579614 
0,598534 
0,616451 
0,633308 
0,649051 
0,663626 
0,676985 
0,689078 
0,699861 
0,709293 
0,717339 
1% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0,014298 
0,04289 
0,071453 
0,099948 
0,128341 
0,156601 
0,184697 
0,212596 
0,240263 
0,22 
0,294755 
0,321504 
0,347866 
0,373798 
0,399254 
0,424188 
0,448549 
0,472287 
0,49535 
0,517683 
0,539231 
0,55994 
0,579752 
0,598612 
0,616464 
0,633254 
0,648927 
0,663434 
0,676724 
0,688751 
0,699472 
0,708849 
0,716845 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
==PAGE:61==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
59 / 64 
 
 
APPENDIX C : Initial stress analysis 
 
Form 
Span (mm) 
Displacement (mm) 
Ratio 
Dome 
12650 
55.8  
4.4/1000 
Polygone 
41700 
36.0 
8.6/1000 
Rectangle 
10000 
35.6 
3.6/1000 
Blob 
10000 
42.4 
4.2/1000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
0,724075 
0,729261 
0,732992 
0,735256 
0,736044 
 
0,7245 
0,7295 
0,7335 
0,7355 
0,736 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0,729925 
0,735525 
0,739547 
0,7496 
0,742778 
1% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
0,723967 
0,729149 
0,732867 
0,7350 
0,735849 
0% 
0% 
0% 
% 
0% 
0,72343 
0,728579 
0,732272 
0,734494 
0,735236 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
==PAGE:62==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
60 / 64 
APPENDIX D : Grasshopper definition 
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
61 / 64 
APPENDIX E : Physical model fabrication 
 
First test 
 
Material: plastique interlayer 
Width of elements : 1 cm 
Gride size: 5 cm 
Connections : old nails 
Supports: gravel 
 
 
.  
 
Second test 
 
Material: Linden  
Cross-section : 4mm 
Gride size: 8 cm 
Connections: Nylon knot 
Supports: outer ring in foam board 
 
==PAGE:64==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
62 / 64 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
EARLY STAGE DESIGN OF ELASTIC GRIDSHELLS 
  
63 / 64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
End of document 
