==PAGE:1==
CO2 Capture by Absorption -
Vapor-Liquid Equilibrium
Measurement and Modeling
Master project
July 17, 2020
Sebastian Borgquist
s153302
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This report was made as a master project as part of the chemical and biochemical engineer-
ing line at Denmark’s technical university. The report was produced with the cooperation
of associate professor Kaj Thomsen and PhD student Lucas Farias Falcchi Corrˆea.
In this report a density model has been developed for a series of mixtures containing
water, ammonia, potassium carbonate, MDEA and carbon dioxide. This has been done
by ﬁtting parameters to known density data, in order to ﬁnd contribution parameters for
each of the diﬀerent species in the mixture.
From the density data it was possible to ﬁnd the liquid and gas phase size and composition
for a series of virtual experiments at diﬀerent temperatures and carbon injection levels.
It was found, that the fraction of the carbon in the system, that can be absorbed by the
liquid phase, decreases as the temperature is increased and as the amount of carbon in
the system is increased. Furthermore it was found, that the amount of ammonia in the
liquid phase increases the amount of carbon captured noticeably.
Finally, it was examined whether a bubblepoint calculation is a suitable replacement for a
full ﬂash calculation for the conditions in these virtual experiments. It was found, that a
bubblepoint calculation can only be used at low temperatures and at low amounts of car-
bon injection. Furthermore, it was found that the accuracy of the bubblepoint calculation
goes up drastically as the liquid volume in the vessel is increased.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
0.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1
Theory
2
1.1
Currently used carbon capture technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Liquids for use in Carbon Capture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Density model
7
2.1
Parameters for NH4+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Parameters for NH3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Parameters for NH2COO- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
MDEA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Parameters for MDEAH+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Density of Mixtures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Virtual experiments
18
3.1
ISOcap 9 - K2CO3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.1
Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Liquid Volume
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.3
Fraction of carbon in liquid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.4
Gas phase composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.5
Liquid phase composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
ISOcap9 - MDEA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.1
Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.2
Liquid Volume
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.3
Fraction of carbon in liquid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Gas phase composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.1
Liquid phase composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
ISOcap11 - K2CO3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.1
Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.2
Liquid Volume
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.3
Fraction of carbon in liquid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.5
Gas phase composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
1
==PAGE:4==
3.5.1
Liquid phase composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.6
ISOcap11 - MDEA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.6.1
Pressure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.6.2
Liquid Volume
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.6.3
Fraction of carbon in liquid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.7
Gas phase composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.7.1
Liquid phase composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Discussion subjects
45
4.1
Bubble point calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.1
ISOcap9 K2CO3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.2
ISOcap9 MDEA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.3
ISOcap11 K2CO3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.1.4
ISOcap11 MDEA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2
Further studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Conclusion
59
==PAGE:5==
0.1
Introduction
Since the focus on human caused climate change has increased in recent years solutions
are being continuously sought after in many diﬀerent ﬁelds of science. Currently carbon
emissions from the electricity and industrial sectors, especially from the burning of fossil
fuels, contribute a major part of the anthropomorphic climate change seen [1].
Since it seems unlikely that fossil fuels can be phased out in the near future, alternative
ways of mitigating the carbon released by burning fossil fuels must be found, while society
transitions from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources.
One attractive way to mitigate the eﬀect of burning fossil fuels on the climate is to employ
carbon capture, which as the name implies is to capture the carbon released in the burning
of fossil fuels. The carbon gases can hereafter be stored, typically by pumping the gas
underground into suitable deposits [2]. There are multiple diﬀerent methods of carbon
capture depending on where in the process the capture takes place and which medium
the carbon will be absorbed in [1]. This report will focus on liquid absorption where the
carbon, CO2 in this case, is chemically absorbed in a liquid. The main issue with this
method is usually not the absorption of the CO2 itself, but rather the regeneration of
the liquid where the CO2 is removed in order for it to be compressed and stored. This
regeneration is very energy intensive and therefore quite expensive, since it happens at
high temperatures.
Because of this energy cost, the amount of carbon capture facilities currently in operation
is quite low, despite the apparent potential of the technology. Currently less than 20
large scale carbon capture facilities are in operation, and although several others are in
diﬀerent stages of planning and development, the energy cost remains a major hurdle for
the technology [3].
In this report the vapour-liquid equilibrium data for the absorption liquid will be found
at diﬀerent and CO2 concentrations.
For the liquid to be suitable for use in carbon
absorption the temperature at which the CO2 is released from the liquid should be low
in order to reduce the heat required to regenerate the liquid. This being said, the liquid
should also have a high capacity for CO2 at somewhat high temperatures in order to be
able to capture carbon present in ﬂue gas from combustion facilities.
Initially, it was intended for these data to be found experimentally, but due to the outbreak
of Covid-19 it was not possible to access the experimental equipment. Instead a series
of virtual experiments will be done, which can later be used as a starting point for the
experimental work.
1
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Theory
The purpose of this chapter is to give an introduction to the subject of this report, as
well as explaining why the subject is relevant in a larger context. A brief overview of the
technologies currently employed in the carbon capture industry will be given. Furthermore
the governing principles involved in carbon capture will be explained.
1.1
Currently used carbon capture technologies
Currently three diﬀerent absorption carbon capture methods are used industrially. These
are post-combustion capture, pre-combustion capture and the oxy-fuel process [4].
In the Post-combustion capture process, the CO2 in the exhaust gas from a factory is
absorbed by, typically, using an amine absorption agent. The CO2 is absorbed by the
liquid agent and can then be desorbed later in order to obtain high purity CO2. As
mentioned in the introduction, this process is rather energy intensive, since the liquid
absorber needs to be heated up in order to desorb the CO2. This energy cost will lower
the energy eﬃciency of a power plant by approximately 20% [5]. This report will focus
on a liquid to be used for post-combustion carbon capture, which is the most mature of
the carbon capture absorption technologies.
For pre-combustion carbon absorption, a gasiﬁed fuel is reformed into CO2 and H2 after
which the CO2 can be separated from the H2 either by absorption, adsorption or by
using a membrane [4]. The pre-combustion process is slightly less eﬃcient than the post-
combustion process and will lower the thermal eﬃciency of a power plant by approximately
30%. It is however, also slightly cheaper than the post-combustion process in both energy
cost and initial setup cost [5].
In the oxy-fuel process the combustion of the fuel is carried out with pure oxygen instead
of air, in order to ensure that the combustion products consists almost exclusively of CO2
and water. The water can then be condensed and the CO2 can be recycled in order to
ensure a high purity exhaust stream of CO2 [4]. This process is slightly more eﬀective
than the post-combustion process, but is also slightly more energy intensive, due to the
2
==PAGE:7==
air separation required in order to obtain pure oxygen for the combustion [5].
A schematic of the three diﬀerent absorption processes can be seen in ﬁgure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Schematic for diﬀerent carbon absorption technologies [4]
1.2
Liquids for use in Carbon Capture
When choosing a liquid for use in post-combustion carbon capture, the liquids ability to
absorb the CO2 is naturally vital. There are two diﬀerent forms of liquid absorption that
can be used: physical absorption where the gas diﬀuses into some bulk liquid but retains
its original chemistry, and chemical absorption where the gas reacts with some component
in the bulk liquid during the absorption [6]. For this project the absorption in question is
a chemical absorption, which can be seen in the reactions shown later in this section. For
chemical absorption the dynamics get quite complex, since both diﬀusion and reaction
takes place simultaneously. However, since this project only concerns equilibrium vapour
liquid data, the kinetics of the system will not be investigated and the modelling of the
system is therefore simpliﬁed signiﬁcantly.
The equilibrium between the vapour and liquid phases of the system is heavily dependant
on the physical properties present in the system, namely temperature and pressure, which
are the parameters that will be varied in the experimental approach in this report. Gen-
erally a higher pressure will lead to more gas being dissolved in the liquid, while a high
temperature will lead to an increased vapour pressure of the gas and therefore lessen the
absorption. It is the energy cost attributed to the heating of the absorber liquid when it
undergoes regeneration that is generally the highest cost of carbon capture [1]. Ideally a
3
==PAGE:8==
liquid for use in carbon capture should capture a lot of carbon at low temperature and
then have a sharp drop oﬀin amount of carbon captured as the temperature rises. In
this way it is possible to minimise the amount of energy required to heat the liquid up in
order to desorb the carbon.
For this report, the liquid that will be used for absorption is a mixture of water, potassium
carbonate, ammonia and MDEA. The structure of these molecules can be seen in ﬁgure
1.2.
Figure 1.2: A) potassium carbonate, B) ammonia, C) MDEA
Of the components seen in ﬁgure 1.2 the ammonia is the primary absorber of the carbon
[7]. The use of chilled ammonia for carbon absorption is well known, and is one of the
technologies currently being considered as an alternative to commercially used amines
such as MEA, since ammonia has a lower cost of regeneration and does not suﬀer from
degradation [8][9].
The potassium carbonate is being considered in combination with
chilled ammonia and also captures the CO2 by reacting with it to form potassium bicar-
bonate which is soluble in water. Furthermore the addition of salt lowers the ammonia
vapour pressure by up to an order of magnitude. This is helpful in avoiding ammonia
slip, which is harmful to the environment and will therefore need to be removed from the
exhaust, which will increase operation costs [10].
The MDEA that is added to the solution will be protonated by the water, which will cre-
ate hydroxid ions, that can react with the CO2 to form bicarbonate and will thus capture
additional CO2.
The concentrations of these components are measured in molality which is deﬁned as
amounts of moles per kg of water. For this project two diﬀerent mixtures of these com-
ponents will be investigated: iso-capacity 9 and iso-capacity 11. iso-capacity is deﬁned
as the sum of the molalities of potassium, ammonia and MDEA, which can be written in
4
==PAGE:9==
the following way [8].
iso −capacity = nNH3 + nK2CO3 + nMDEA
mH2O
(1.1)
It is here assumed that the potassium carbonate fully dissociates in the solution, which
is likely a reasonable assumption. Since the each mole of ammonia, potassium carbonate
or MDEA can react and capture one mole of CO2, this also means that the iso-capacity
9 system can capture 9 moles of CO2 per kg of water, while the iso-capacity 11 system
can capture 11 moles of CO2 per kg of water.
In this report four diﬀerent solutions will be examined for possible use for carbon capture.
For the ﬁnal application only two solutions are considered, but in order to simplify the
system, each of these solutions have been split into two.
The molality of each of the components for the solutions examined in this report can be
seen in table 1.1.
Table 1.1: molality of components used in solutions investigated in this report
NH3
K2CO3
MDEA
Iso-capacity 9 K2CO3
5
2
0
Iso-capacity 9 MDEA
5
0
2
Iso-capacity 11 K2CO3
7
2
0
Iso-capacity 11 MDEA
7
0
2
Several reactions will take place in the solution, during the absorption process. First oﬀ
all are the equilibria between the liquid and vapour phases of CO2, ammonia, water and
MDEA[7]:
CO2(g) −−⇀
↽−−CO2(aq)
(1.2)
NH3(g) −−⇀
↽−−NH3(aq)
(1.3)
H2O(g) −−⇀
↽−−H2O(l)
(1.4)
MDEA(g) −−⇀
↽−−MDEA(aq)
(1.5)
Of these reactions the equilibrium involving CO2 and ammonia are of the most interest.
Naturally the equilibrium between the CO2 in the liquid and vapour phase of the system
will directly inﬂuence its feasibility in carbon capture. furthermore the vapour liquid
equilibrium of ammonia will have large consequences for the technology’s feasibility, since
the ammonia will have to be removed from the gas phase, due to environmental concerns.
It is expected that the amount of MDEA in the vapour phase will be rather small compared
to the other components, since its boiling point is 520 Kelvin, which is much higher than
any of the other species in the mixture [11].
5
==PAGE:10==
Besides the vapour-liquid equilibria, several reactions take place in the solution [7]:
NH3(aq) + H2O(l) −−⇀
↽−−NH +
4
+ OH−
(1.6)
CO2(aq) + H2O(l) −−⇀
↽−−HCO −
3
+ H+
(1.7)
HCO −
3
−−⇀
↽−−CO 2−
3
+ H+
(1.8)
H2O(l) −−⇀
↽−−OH−+ H+
(1.9)
NH3(aq) + HCO −
3
−−⇀
↽−−NH2COO−+ H2O(l)
(1.10)
MDEA + H2O −−⇀
↽−−MDEAH+ + OH−
(1.11)
K2CO3 −−⇀
↽−−2 K+ + CO 2−
3
(1.12)
CO2 + H2O + CO 2−
3
−−⇀
↽−−2 HCO −
3
(1.13)
Based on initial calculations it is found that the absorbed CO2 will likely be evenly split
between carbonate and bicarbonate or carbamate. Finally it is possible for several solids
to be formed by reactions in the liquid:
NH +
4
+ HCO −
3
−−⇀
↽−−NH4HCO3(s)
(1.14)
NH +
4
+ NH2COO−−−⇀
↽−−NH2COONH4(s)
(1.15)
2 NH+ + CO 2−
3
+ H2O −−⇀
↽−−(NH4)2CO3 · H2O(s)
(1.16)
H2O(l) −−⇀
↽−−H2O(s)
(1.17)
4 NH +
4
+ CO 2−
3
+ 2 HCO −
3
−−⇀
↽−−(NH4)2CO3 · 2NH4HCO3(s)
(1.18)
Due to the creation of solids in these reactions, it is possible that a precipitate will
form, which may cause problems due to clogging of heat exchangers or other equipment.
Based on preliminary calculations for the parameters used in the experimental work for
this report it is not believed that any precipitate will form, but it should be considered
regardless, since the formation of solids is not desired in the experiments.
Besides these it is possible that a variety of salts such as KOH could form and it is also
possible that ice could form due to the high pressure in the equipment [8]. However it is
likely that these species will only form in low concentrations and they are therefore not
considered initially.
Furthermore it is possible that the liquid will split up into multiple phases during the
reactions. This may be beneﬁcial, since it may become possible to separate the phases
and thereby lessen the cost of regeneration by only regenerating the carbon rich phase
instead of the entire volume [12].
It may be possible to separate a precipitate from
the liquid as well, which will also lower the amount of energy needed for regeneration
drastically.
6
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Density model
It is necessary to know the density of the liquid at diﬀerent CO2 loading and at diﬀerent
temperatures in order to calculate the volume of the liquid and gas phases of the system.
Since it was not possible to measure the density of the mixture experimentally, the density
will instead be modelled in order to get a reasonable estimate of the actual density. The
model used for calculating the density was found in the book ”Electrolyte Solutions:
Thermodynamics, Crystallization, Separation methods” by Kaj Thomsen [13]. Here the
density is calculated based on contributions from each of the compounds to the density
of pure water. This is done with the following equation:
nV = nwV 0
w +
X
i
niVφ,i
(2.1)
Where nw is the the amount of moles of water in the mixture, V 0
w is the standard molar
volume of water at 1 bar of pressure and at the temperature of the mixture, ni is the
amount of moles of compound i and Vφ,i is a molar volume of the species calculated for
each compound individually. For the pressures considered in this project, liquids can be
considered to be in compressible, meaning that the molar volume of water, and therefore
the density of the mixture, does not depend on the pressure in the cell. The factor Vφ,i is
calculated for compound i with the following equation:
Vφ,i = V ∗
φ,i + ki ·
√
I
(2.2)
Where I is the ionic strength of the solution calculated as:
I = 1
2
X
i
biz2
i
(2.3)
Here bi is the molality of ion i and zi is the charge of the ion.
These equations are a modiﬁcation of the Masson equation by using Young’s rule. Ac-
cording to the Masson equation the volume of an electrolyte, with a single salt dissolved,
7
==PAGE:12==
is linearly proportional to the molality of the salt in the solution when the solution is
dilute [14]:
φv,s = V ∗
φ,s + k ·
p
bs
(2.4)
This equation can also be used for single ions, but does not work when multiple ions are
present in the liquid. This error is corrected by using Young’s rule which states that the
molar volume of two salts can be calculated by the following mixing rule:
φv = bs1φv,s1 + bs2φv,s2
bs1 + bs2
(2.5)
When this equation is combined with equation 2.4 and written for ions instead of for
salts, equation 2.4 is rewritten into equation 2.2, which can be used to calculate the molar
volume of an ion in a multi component solution with multiple ions.
The parameters V ∗
φ,i, which is the molar volume of the compound, and ki in equation 2.2
can be calculated with the following equations:
V ∗
φ,i = V ∗
φ,i,T=298.15K + v2i(t −25) + v3i(t −25)2
(2.6)
ki = ki1 + k2i(t −25) + k3i(t −25)2
(2.7)
The parameters in both of these equations are ﬁtted from experimental data, that can be
found for each of the components in the mixture.
The advantage of this method is that the density of the complete system does not need
to be measured, since the contribution of each of the compounds is additive. The value
of the parameter V ∗
φ,i,T=298.15K theoretically corresponds to the standard molar volume of
the ion at 25 degrees Celsius. However, since it is diﬃcult to measure this value experi-
mentally this parameter will also be ﬁtted based on experimental data in order to ensure
a better ﬁt.
The ﬁtting parameters for several of the ions in the system are already known and there-
fore only the values for NH+
4 , NH3, MDEA, MDEAH+ and NH2COO−need to be
ﬁtted. As ammonia and MDEA are not ions the second part of equation disappears,
since these compounds do not interact with ions and are therefore not inﬂuenced by the
ionic strength of the mixture. Since this term of the equation also corrects for the excess
volume created by mixing the compounds, the excess volume is not calculated when when
using the equation for non ionic compunds. As will be seen later in this chapter, this will
cause an inaccuracy when using the equation for non ionic compounds.
Since this method calculates the density of the liquid based on a simple contribution from
each of the compounds in the solution it disregards the excess volume, that may be formed
when multiple compounds are mixed. This is a reasonable assumption for the ions, since
the excess volume of these is close to 0 [15], but it might cause some error because of the
addition of non ionic compounds such as ammonia and MDEA.
8
==PAGE:13==
2.1
Parameters for NH4+
Calcualtions for determining the ammonium ion parameters can be seen in the appended
excel sheet ”NH4+”.
The ﬁtting parameters for the ammonium ion was found based on density data for
(NH4)2SO4 and NH4Cl both of which were assumed to completely dissociate in wa-
ter.
Since the parameters for SO2−
4
and Cl−were already known the parameters of
the ammonium ion could be found by minimising the error between the density cal-
culated with equation 2.1 and the actual density found from multiple diﬀerent sources
[16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25].
This calculation was done using the excel problem solver to iteratively calculate the den-
sity for diﬀerent sets of parameters. The squared residual between the calculated and
experimentally measured density was then calculated for each iteration in order to ﬁnd
the optimal set of parameters. The Excel spreadsheet for these calculations have been
appended.
The ﬁtting parameters for SO2−
4
and Cl−, as well as the parameters found for the ammo-
nium ion, can be seen in table 2.1
Table 2.1: Fitting parameters for equation 2.6 and 2.7 for SO2−
4 ,Cl−and NH+
4
V ∗
φ,i,T=298.15K
v2i
v3i
ki1
ki2
ki3
SO2−
4
2.557E+01
-4.484E-03
-1.527E-03
6.497E-01
2.981E-02
-5.129E-04
Cl−
2.003E+01
-5.746E-03
-2.545E-07
2.087E-01
1.792E-02
-6.599E-04
NH+
4
1.598E+01
8.274E-02
-1.036E-03
6.858E-01
-3.511E-02
8.769E-04
As a test for the validity of these data, the value of the standard molar volume of ammo-
nium achieved here is compared to values found in literature, since these should be close.
The values for this parameter can be found to be either 18.2 or 17.9 depending on the
sources [13, 26]. Since these values are in the same range as the 15.98 achieved by ﬁtting,
it is determined that the value achieved is reasonable and can be used for this project.
The ﬁt achieved with these parameters can be seen compared to some experimental data
for the density of both (NH4)2SO4 and NH4Cl in ﬁgure 2.1.
9
==PAGE:14==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: Comparison between the density calculated with equation 2.1 and experimentally
measured density for a) NH4Cl and b) (NH4)2SO4
It is seen that the model used ﬁts the experimental data rather well, although a discrep-
ancy is seen for high NH+
4 molalites. It was found that the average deviation between
experimental and calculated density was 0.09% which corresponds to less than 1 g/cm3.
If the value for the standard molar volume of the ammonium ion was changed to 18.2 as
seen in the literature this error rose to be approximately 0.1%.
In order to lower the amount of computational power needed for calculating the param-
eters in equation 2.6 and 2.7 it might be desired to remove the last term of these two
equations. It was found that by setting either vi3 or ki3 to zero and reﬁtting the rest of
the parameters, the mean deviation rose to approximately 0.1% or 0.15% respectively,
which is still quite low.
For the rest of this project the original ﬁt found in table 2.1 is used for calculations.
2.2
Parameters for NH3
Calculations used for determining the ammonia parameters can be seen in the appended
excel sheet ”NH3”.
Similarly to the process for the ammonium ion the parameters for the dissolved ammonia
were calculated based on experimental data found in the literature [27]. The parameters
found by ﬁtting the v parameters seen in equation 2.6 against the experimental data can
be seen in table 2.2. The k parameters are not ﬁtted, since NH3 has no ionic interactions
with the other compounds.
Table 2.2: Fitting parameters for ammonia
V ∗
φ,i,T=298.15K
v2i
v3i
NH3
2.404E+01
3.719E-02
-1.264E-05
10
==PAGE:15==
The molar volume of ammonia in inﬁnite dilution has been found experimentally to be
24.85 [28], which is very close to the result achieved for this ﬁtting. The parameters found
in table 2.2 were therefore determined to be valid.
The ﬁt achieved by using these parameters can be seen in ﬁgure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Density of the ammonia solution found experimentally [27] and by the model seen
in equation 2.1.
It is seen that the model ﬁts the experimental data quite well.
The mean deviation
between the measured and calculated density for the ammonia solution was found to be
0.25%, which is rather low.
Finally it was found that a removal of the vi3 parameter changes the mean deviation by
less than 0.001 and this parameter can therefore be deemed insigniﬁcant in the modelling
of the density.
2.3
Parameters for NH2COO-
The calculations for determining the carbamate parameters can be seen in the appended
excel sheet ”NH2COO-”.
The parameters for the NH2COO−ion was found based on data for a mixture of ammonia
and CO2 [29]. Since this mixture consists of both ammonia, ammonium and carbamate,
it was necessary to ﬁnd the parameters for both the ammonia and ammonium before
ﬁtting this data.
Since it is initially unknown how much of the ammonia and carbon react to form car-
bamate, the amount of carbamate in the solution needs to be calculated for each of the
composition. This was done by using the extended UNIQUAC equation, as can be seen
11
==PAGE:16==
in the appended excel sheet.
The parameters found for the carbamate ion can be seen in table
Table 2.3: Density ﬁtting parameters found for the carbamate ion
V ∗
φ,i,T=298.15K
v2i
v3i
ki1
ki2
ki3
N
3.036E+01
9.277E-02
-1.311E-03
-2.515E+00
-1.925E-02
2.584E-04
By using this ﬁt the mean deviation between the experimental and calculated density
is found to be 0.15%, which is well within the acceptable range for the purposes of this
project.
By changing either the vi3 or ki3 parameter to 0 and recalculating the other parameters,
the mean deviation remains practically unchanged, meaning that these parameters can
be omitted.
2.4
MDEA
The calculations done for determining the MDEA parameters can be seen in the appended
excel sheet ”MDEA”.
The parameters for MDEA were found based on a mixture of only water and MDEA
[30]. The amount of MDEA that will react with water was found by using the extended
UNIQUAC equation. Since the amount of MDEA that formed MDEAH+ when mixed
with the water was found to be very small, it was disregarded initially in order to determine
the parameteres for MDEA. Similarly to ammonia the second term in equation 2 was
disregarded, since MDEA does not interact with ions in the mixture.
The parameters found for MDEA can be seen in table
Table 2.4: Parameters found for MDEA
V ∗
φ,i,T=298.15K
v2i
v3i
MDEA
1.112E+02
8.996E-02
1.635E-04
The molar volume of MDEA can be calculated based on the molar mass and density to be
114.8 moles/L, which is close to the 111.2 gained by the ﬁtting. It should be noted that
this is the molar volume for the pure liquid state of MDEA, which may be diﬀerent than
the molar volume of the species in an aqueous solution. However, since the purpose of
this comparison is only to check if the order of magnitude is reasonable, it is determined
that this possible deviation should not have any inﬂuence on the conclusion of the results
validity.
A comparison between the measured and calculated density, based on the parameters seen
in table 2.4, can be seen in ﬁgure
12
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: Density of the MDEA solution found experimentally [30] and by the model seen in
equation 2.1.
In comparison to the ﬁts seen for the other compounds, the deviation between measured
and calculated values are seen to be rather large for MDEA. This is caused by the excess
volume formed when mixing MDEA and water, which the model used here does not taken
into account, since the term, which corrects for this for ions, is removed from the equation
for non ionic compounds. Because of this the mean deviation between the measured and
modelled density is found to be 0.69% which is much larger than for the other compounds.
This deviation only changes marginally when recalculating the parameters after setting
V3i to zero, which means that this parameter can saﬂey be omitted from the equation.
2.5
Parameters for MDEAH+
Calculations for the determination of the MDEAH+ parameters can be seen in the ap-
pended excel sheet ”MDEAH+”.
The last set of parameters that need to be found are for the MDEAH+ ion. Experimental
data was found for a mixture of water, CO2 and MDEA [31, 30]. When CO2 is added
to the water-MDEA system some of the MDEA dissociates, which is why the parame-
ters for pure MDEA needed to be found before calculating the MDEA+ ion parameters.
The amount of MDEAH+ that is formed by the reaction is calculated by the extended
UNIQUAC equation similarly to the process done by carbamate. The calculations can be
seen in the appended excel sheet.
The parameters found for the MDEA+ ion can be seen in table
13
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.5: Density parameters found for the MDEAH+ ion.
V ∗
φ,i,T=298.15K
v2i
v3i
ki1
ki2
ki3
MDEAH+
1.031E+02
-1.001E-01
-5.629E-05
1.366E-01
6.301E-02
8.700E-04
It was not possible to ﬁnd experimental data for the standard molar volume for the
MDEAH+ ion, but it should be in the same order of magnitude as the one found for
MDEA, which the parameter in table 2.5 is seen to be.
The density calculated with these parameters compared to the experimentally measured
density can be seen in ﬁgure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Density of the MDEAH+ solution found experimentally [31] and by the model seen
in equation 2.1. The data are shown as a function of temperature for a MDEA weight fraction
of 0.5 and a carbon loading between 0.05 and 0.25.
The ﬁt is seen to be quite good and the mean deviation can be calculated to be 0.37%,
which is rather high compared to some of the ﬁts seen earlier, but still acceptable for the
purposes of this project.
When removing the vi3 parameter, the mean deviation does not change meaningfully,
while it changes to 0.58% when removing the ki3 parameter. This suggests that the vi3
parameters has little to no eﬀect on the modelling and can therefore be removed in order
to increase computational speed.
14
==PAGE:19==
2.6
Density of Mixtures
The calculations done for determining the ﬁnal density of the mixtures can be seen in the
appended excel sheet ”Density of systems”.
besides the compounds examined in this chapter several other compounds are also present
in the system. The density parameters for these compounds are already known and can
be seen in table 2.6.
Table 2.6: Parameters for addition compounds present in the mixtures examined in the systems.
V ∗
φ,i,T=298.15K
v2i
v3i
ki1
ki2
ki3
CO2
3.295E+01
2.685E-0.2
5.9947E-05
O2
3.320E+01
N2
3.570E+01
K+
7.707E+00
8.978E-02
-1.233E-03
1.208E+00
-3.771E-02
1.002E-03
OH−
-1.629E+00
-5.426E-02
2.616E-04
1.680E+00
3.375E-02
-7.432E-04
CO32−
-3.032E-04
5.975E-02
-2.934E-03
3.4007E+00
9.693E-03
1.173E-04
HCO−
3
2.616E+01
1.113E-01
-1.351E-03
2.759E+00
-6.409E-02
2.732E-04
Since all the parameters for the compounds in the mixtures are now known it is possible
to model the density for the systems seen in table 1.1, by using equation 2.1 to 2.7. The
modelled density can be seen in ﬁgure 2.5.
15
==PAGE:20==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2.5: Density of the mixtures seen in table 1.1 at diﬀerent temperatures as a function of
carbon loading.
Since the liquid density of the mixture is not dependent on the pressure, the pressure was
varied in order to ﬁnd the density for a larger range of temperature and CO2 loadings.
Since the density equation does not account for the formation of solids or gasses, it was
necessary to gradually increase the pressure for higher CO2 loadings in order to ensure
that all compounds in the system stay in liquid form, for the results seen in ﬁgure 2.5 the
pressure was varied between 1 and 170 bars.
At some amount of carbon loading it may no longer be possible to obtain a state, were
neither solids or gasses where formed, in which case the calculation was stopped. It is seen
in ﬁgure 2.5, that it was possible to obtain a higher carbon loading at high temperatures,
which is caused by the decrease of solid formations. Furthermore it is seen that no results
were obtained at a high temperature and no CO2 for the systems containing potassium
carbonate. This was caused by the formation of a second ammonia rich liquid phase,
which the density model does not take into account.
It is seen that the density generally lowers with increased temperature and rises as the
amount of carbon in the mixture is increased, which is expected. Furthermore it is seen
that the density for the system including potassium carbonate is generally much higher
than the systems containing MDEA.
16
==PAGE:21==
Finally it is seen that no density is found at a carbon content of 0 in the systems containing
potassium carbonate at a high temperature. This is caused by a second liquid phase
forming under these conditions. Since the density model used can only be used for systems
with one liquid phase, these results were discarded.
For the simulations done in the rest of this project the density will need to be calculated
and updated for each calculation loop in order to be able to calculate the liquid and gas
volume in the vessel as the pressure and temperature changes.
17
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3
Virtual experiments
Now that the density of the liquid can be calculated for diﬀerent compositions and tem-
peratures it is possible to ﬁnd the equilibrium state of the vessel at diﬀerent conditions.
This is done by ﬁrst calculating the density for each of the solutions seen in table 1.1 at 25
degrees Celsius and at atmospheric pressure. When this density is known it is possible to
calculate the amount of moles of the solution, that is needed in order to ﬁll up a speciﬁc
amount of the vessels volume. The total volume of the vessel including pipes has been
measured to be 300 mL, of which 20 mL is dead volume. Since the properties of the
system should be examined for multiple diﬀerent initial liquid volumes, it was decided to
ﬁll the vessel with 200, 230 and 260 mL of liquid. The amount of liquid needed for these
volumes was calculated by using the density calculations seen in the previous section.
When the amount of moles of the solution, that is poured in the vessel initially, has been
determined, it is possible to calculate the pressure inside the vessel. This is done by
iteratively changing the pressure and thereafter calculating the amount of moles of each
species in the liquid phase, the liquid density, the amount of moles of each species in the
gas phase and the gas phase density. Similarly to the calculations done when ﬁnding the
density parameters, this is done by using the extended UNIQUAC equation. When the
density and composition of each phase is known, the volume of the phases can be calcu-
lated simply by dividing the mass of the phase by the density of the phase. The total
volume of both the gas and liquid phase should naturally be equal to the total volume of
the vessel, so the pressure is changed until squared residual between the sum of the liquid
and gas phase volumes and the total volume is close to 0.
This iteration process might need to be done by hand, since the changes in volume are
changes very rapidly close to the equilibrium point. If the initial guessed pressure is too
low, the volume of the phases will be several orders of magnitude larger than the volume
of the vessel, in which case an automatic solver will take large steps in order to close in on
the correct pressure. However, if the pressure is too high, no gasses will be formed and,
since the liquid is not compressible, further changes in pressure will result in no change
in the density of the liquid. In order to make up for this diﬃculty, the initial guess needs
18
==PAGE:23==
to be extremely close to the actual pressure, in which case the excel solver will be able
to minimise the error properly. For the results seen in this chapter an error below 0.1
mL was accepted for the results. The calculations have been done in excel and have been
appended to this report.
This calculation of the pressure is done for temperatures ranging from 20 to 120 degrees
Celsius, and for multiple diﬀerent temperatures and moles of carbon injected into the
system. The carbon was injected in steps of 0.05 times the amount of NH3, MDEA and
K2CO3 per step. Since this is a simulation of a real system, there are several technical
limitations of the system. First of all, no solids should be formed in the system, since the
inﬂuence of these on the system can not be measured with the equipment and will there-
fore destroy the validity of the simulation. Furthermore the pressure in the vessel should
not exceed 30 bars in order for the equipment to function properly. Finally, although the
vessel used in the experiments has a total volume of 300 mL, the amount of liquid in the
system should not be larger than 270 mL. This is because the dead volume in the pipes
of the equipment is 20 mL. In addition to these 20 mL it is desired to have at least 10 mL
of gas above the liquid in the vessel in order to ensure that no liquid makes it into the
measurement equippment, since this will disturb the pressure measurements. A picture
of the equipment simulated in this report can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Equipment simulated in this report. A) main vessel, B) heating equipment, C)
pressure measurement equipment, D) Mass ﬂow controllers, E) heating bath
19
==PAGE:24==
Originally it was intended to measure the composition of the phases experimentally. This
would be done by using the opposite approach from the simulations done in this report.
First the vessel would be ﬁlled with a known amount of liquid with a known composition.
Afterwards a known amount of CO2 would be injected into the system after which the
pressure in the vessel could be measured. From the measured pressure, the total compo-
sition in the vessel alongside equilibrium data for the reactions taking place in the liquid
phase, it would then be possible to calculate the composition in the liquid and gas phase
of the system.
3.1
ISOcap 9 - K2CO3
The ﬁrst system to be tested is the ISOcap 9 system containing potassium carbonate.
As mentioned earlier this is done for 3 diﬀerent amounts of liquid initially ﬁlled in the
system.All calculations and results for both an initial volume of 200, 230 and 260 mL
can be seen in the appended excel sheet ”ISOcap9 K2CO3 Calculations”, this sheet also
includes data for all diﬀerent species found in the liquid mixture.
3.1.1
Pressure
The pressure in the vessel was determined for an initial liquid volume of 200 mL, 230 mL
and 260 mL in the vessel for diﬀerent temperatures and at CO2 amounts ranging from 0
to equal to the sum of ammonia and potassium carbonate. The results for the pressure
in the vessel at diﬀerent conditions can be seen in ﬁgure 3.2.
20
==PAGE:25==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.2: Pressure calculated for an initial liquid volume of a) 200 mL, b) 230 mL, c) 260 mL
for multiple diﬀerent temperatures and carbon amount.
It is seen, that the pressure in the system increases as the temperature is increased, which
is naturally expected. This increase in the pressure as a function of the temperature is
exponential and therefore increases faster and faster as the temperature is increased. Fur-
thermore the pressure increases at a higher initial liquid volume, which is to be expected,
since there is less room for the gas phase in the vessel.
It is seen that the simulations are terminated at diﬀerent points dependent on the temper-
ature of the system. For the low temperature simulations, the system is terminated, once
solid begins to form, due to the increase in the amount of carbon in the system. For the
higher temperatures, no solid is formed for the conditions examined in these simulations.
Instead the simulations were terminated, once the pressure exceeded 30 bars, since this
is the maximum, that the equipment can handle.
it is noted that the pressure, initially decreases slightly, when CO2 is added to the system.
Initially, a lot of the ammonia in the system goes to the gas phase, causing the pressure
to rise. Once some amount of carbon has been added, the amount of NH3 in the gas
phase decreases as more carbon reacts with it to form carbamate. When even more CO2
is added to the system the pressure begins to increase once again as the amount of CO2
in the gas phase increases.
21
==PAGE:26==
3.1.2
Liquid Volume
As mentioned earlier, the amount of liquid in the system needs to be below 270 mL in
order for the measurements to be valid. The liquid volume in the system for the diﬀerent
initial liquid volumes can be seen in ﬁgure 3.3.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.3: Liquid volume calculated for an intial liquid volume of a) 200 mL, b) 230 mL, c)
260 mL for multiple diﬀerent temperatures and carbon amount.
It is seen that the liquid volume increases with an increase in temperature, which is nat-
ural. Furthermore it is seen that the liquid volume increases as the amount of carbon in
the system is increased. This is expected, as more carbon will be absorbed in the liquid.
Since the liquid is not compressible at the pressures examined is this report, it is not
inﬂuenced by the increased pressure caused by the amount of CO2 in the gas phase. It is
seen for the conditions speciﬁed in this simulation, that the liquid volume is well below
the accepted maximum of 270 mL for both an initial volume of 200 and 230 mL. However,
for an initial volume of 260 mL the total liquid volume may exceed 270 mL as the amount
of CO2 in the system increases, except at a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius. For a
temperature above 80 degrees Celsius, the liquid volume exceeds 270 mL even without
injecting any carbon into the system. Since a liquid volume above 270 mL might make
measurements of the pressure inaccurate, these conditions should be avoided when doing
experimental work.
22
==PAGE:27==
3.1.3
Fraction of carbon in liquid
Furthermore it is desired to note how much of the injected CO2 is absorbed in the liquid
phase, since this will determine the solutions use as a carbon absorber. The amount
of carbon, absorbed by the liquid phase, compared to the total amount of carbon in
the system can be seen in ﬁgure 3.4. It should be noted that the amount of carbon in
the system also includes carbon from the potassium carbonate initially dissolved in the
solution, since it is not possible to distinguish where the carbon comes from.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.4: Fraction of total carbon in the system, that is absorbed in the liquid phase calculated
for an intial liquid volume of a) 200 mL, b) 230 mL, c) 260 mL for multiple diﬀerent temperatures
and carbon amount.
As expected, the amount of carbon absorbed by the liquid phase decreases as a function
of the amount of carbon injected into the system. At low amounts of carbon, basically all
of the carbon is absorbed into the liquid phase. It is seen that it is not possible to remove
more than a small fraction of the carbon from the liquid phase at low temperatures, since
solids begin to form at relatively low amounts of carbon in the system, which means that
the experiment has to be terminated. At higher temperatures is possible to remove up
to approximately 7% of the carbon from the liquid phase at an initial volume of 200 mL
dependent on the amount of total carbon in the system. The amount of carbon that is
found in the liquid phase naturally increases as the initial liquid volume is increased, since
there is less room for the gas phase as well as a higher pressure. It is thus only possible
to remove slightly more than 1% of the carbon in the liquid at an initial liquid volume of
23
==PAGE:28==
270 mL as seen in ﬁgure 3.4c.
3.1.4
Gas phase composition
Finally the composition of the gas phase is examined. Furthermore it is examined whether
a bubble point calculation of the gas phase composition based on the composition of the
ﬁrst bubble will coincide with a full ﬂash calculation done for the system. It is desired
to know if a bubble point calculation can be done instead of a ﬂash calculation, since
this will signiﬁcantly lower the computational time needed for further simulations of the
system.
The gas phase molar fraction was found for CO2, H2O and NH3. MDEA might also be
found in trace amounts in the gas phase, but these amounts are so low as to be insigniﬁcant
and they are therefore not included in the calculations. The gas phase composition, for
the diﬀerent temperatures and carbon injections, can be seen for each of the species in
ﬁgure
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.5: gas phase molar fractions calculated by both bubble point and ﬂash calculations for
a) CO2 b) H2O and c) NH3.
24
==PAGE:29==
When examining the gas phase composition it is seen that the amount of CO2 in the
gas phase increases with an increase in temperature and with an increase in total carbon
present in the system. This is expected, since these are the same results seen in ﬁgure
3.4. As amount of carbon in the system is increased the amount of moles of CO2 in the
gas phase increases exponentially, which means that the gas phase molar fraction of CO2
approaches 1.
It is seen that the molar fraction of water in the gas phase initially increases and there-
after decreases rapidly. In actuality the amount of moles of water in the gas phase is
approximately constant for each isotherm, but the molar fraction changes depending on
the amount of CO2 and ammonia in the gas phase.
Finally it is seen that the amount of ammonia in the gas phase decreases, when carbon
is added to the system. This was also seen the pressure graph seen in ﬁgure 3.2. Since
initially only a small amount of the ammonia can be absorbed by the water, most of the
ammonia is found in the gas phase. As more carbon is added to the system, the ammonia
reacts to form carbamate and is thus more easily absorbed in the liquid phase of the
system. While the molar fraction of ammonia in the gas phase decreases as a function of
temperature, the absolute amount of moles in the gas phase actually increases. The lower
molar fraction is caused by the larger amount of water in the gas phase.
It is examined that the bubble point calculations ﬁt quite well with the ﬂash calculations
done for the system. At low temperatures the diﬀerence between the calculations is neg-
ligible no matter the amount of carbon added to the system. At high temperatures, the
bubble point calculations ﬁt quite well at low amounts of carbon, but a discrepancy is
found at high temperatures and large amount of carbon injected into the system. This
diﬀerence between bubble point and ﬂash calculation is still rather small and may be
negligible depending on the purpose of the simulation.
Since the results for 230 and 260 mL initial volume are quite similar to the ones shown
in ﬁgure 3.5, they are not shown here, but can be seen in the appended excel sheet. One
major diﬀerence is that the accuracy of the bubblepoint calculation goes up drastically
as the initial liquid volume is increased.
3.1.5
Liquid phase composition
In order to get the full set of VLE data it is also necessary to ﬁnd the composition of the
liquid phase of the system. For the ﬂash calculation this is a simple process, since these
data are calculated simultaneously with the gas phase composition. Calculating the liquid
phase composition based on the bubblepoint composition is more complicated, since the
bubble point calculation only gives a composition of the gas phase and not a size.
In order to calculate the composition of the liquid phase based on the bubblepoint com-
position, the density of the bubble point gas phase is calculated by using the ﬂash module
25
==PAGE:30==
at a pressure slightly below the bubble point pressure. When this is done the composition
of the liquid phase can be calculated from the amount of moles in the gas phase sub-
tracted from the total amount of moles in the vessel. The size of the gas phase is altered
iteratively in order to make the total volume of the liquid and gas phase equal 300 mL.
The results for the liquid phase composition for an initial volume of 200 mL can be seen
in ﬁgure 3.6.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.6: liquid phase molar fractions calculated by both bubble point and ﬂash calculations
for each of the diﬀerent main components in the ISOcap9 K2CO3 system for an initial volume
of 200 mL.
In order to better show the amount of carbon and nitrogen contained in the liquid phase,
ﬁgure 3.6a and 3.6c shows the sum of the molar fractions of all compounds in the liquid
containing carbon and nitrogen respectively. This means that the carbon molar fraction
shown in ﬁgure 3.6 is the sum of aqueous CO2, carbonate, bicarbonate and carbamate,
while the nitrogen molar fraction is the sum of aqueous ammonia, ammonium and car-
bamate in the liquid phase. Molar fractions for each of the diﬀerent species in the liquid
phase can be seen in the appended excel ﬁle.
Several diﬀerent things are seen from ﬁgure 3.6. First of all it is seen that the amount
of carbon contained in the liquid phase increases linearly as a function of total carbon in
26
==PAGE:31==
the system for most of the experiment. As expected from ﬁgure 3.4 the amount of carbon
that is contained in the liquid phase is larger for low temperatures, where the line is seen
to be linear for almost the entire experiment. For higher temperatures the curve begins
to ﬂatten earlier during the experiment, which means that some of the carbon is released
to the gas phase of the system.
The molar fraction of water is seen to decrease almost linearly as the experiment pro-
gresses. This is caused by the water reacting with ammonia to form ammonium and
hydroxid ions, which then react with CO2 to form bicarbonate. It is seen that the molar
fraction of water increases slightly when the experiment is ﬁrst started. This is caused
by a reduction in the amount of carbonate and ammonia in the system as they react to
form other components upon the introduction of CO2.
The amount of nitrogen in the liquid phase is seen to initially increase slightly before
decreasing. The initial increase in nitrogen concentration is caused by nitrogen being ab-
sorbed by the gas phase to react with the added CO2 to form carbamate. The subsequent
reduction in nitrogen molar fraction is simply caused by the increase of carbon in the
system, while the amount of nitrogen remains the same. Overall the change in nitrogen
molar fraction in the liquid phase is seen to be very small, since only a small amount of
ammonia is found in the gas phase at any stage of the experiment.
Similarly to the results seen in ﬁgure 3.5, it is seen that the composition calculated from
the bubblepoint composition ﬁts well at low temperatures and carbon amounts, but be-
gins to show signiﬁcant deviations at higher temperatures, as the amount of carbon in
the system is increased. For the carbon and water molar fraction the bubblepoint calcu-
lation predicts a higher molar fraction than the ﬂash calculation, while the bubblepoint
calculation predicts a lower molar fraction for the nitrogen.
The results for an initial liquid volume of 230 and 260 mL are similar to the results for 200
mL and can be seen in the appended excel sheet. It is generally seen that more carbon
is absorbed by the liquid phase as the initial liquid volume goes up, which can also be
seen in ﬁgure 3.4. Furthermore it is seen that the bubblepoint calculation becomes more
accurate as the amount of liquid in the vessel goes up.
27
==PAGE:32==
3.2
ISOcap9 - MDEA
The second system is the ISOcap 9 system containing MDEA. Similarly to earlier this is
done for 3 diﬀerent amounts of liquid initially ﬁlled in the system. All calculations and
results for both an initial volume of 200, 230 and 260 mL can be seen in the appended
excel sheet ”ISOcap9 MDEA Calculations”, this sheet also includes data for all diﬀerent
species found in the liquid mixture.
3.2.1
Pressure
The pressure in the vessel for an initial liquid volume of 200 mL, 230 mL and 260 mL in
the vessel for diﬀerent temperatures can be seen in ﬁgure 3.7.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.7: Pressure calculated for an intial liquid volume of a) 200 mL, b) 230 mL, c) 260 mL
for multiple diﬀerent temperatures and carbon amount.
Similar to the results seen for the system with potassium carbonate, it is seen that he
pressure increases exponentially as more carbon is introduced to the system. Compared
to the system with potassium carbonate, the pressure is generally quite a bit lower for this
system, and the amount of carbon that can be injected into the system, before reaching
30 bar is therefore increased.
besides rising exponentially as a function of injected carbon, the pressure also rises as a
28
==PAGE:33==
function of the temperature in the system, which is to be expected.
Although less pronounced than in the the system containing potassium carbonate, the
pressure does fall initially as carbon is introduced to the system, due to ammonia reaction
with CO2 to form carbamate.
3.2.2
Liquid Volume
The liquid volume of the system can be seen in ﬁgure 3.8.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.8: Liquid volume calculated for an initial liquid volume of a) 200 mL, b) 230 mL, c)
260 mL for multiple diﬀerent temperatures and carbon amount.
These results are quite diﬀerent from the ones seen for the system containing potassium
carbonate. Instead of rising as more carbon is introduced to the system, the volume of
the liquid initially falls and then slowly starts to increase once again. Over the range of
the simulation the liquid volume remains almost unchanged from the initial volume from
before CO2 is injected.
The fall in volume can be explained by the MDEAH+ ion having a negative apparant
volume at higher temperatures as seen in table 2.5.
Since the volume only exceeds 270 mL for an initial volume of 260 mL at 100 and 120
degrees Celsius, it should be possible to carry out the other experiments without fear of
the liquid causing inaccuracies in the measurements.
29
==PAGE:34==
3.2.3
Fraction of carbon in liquid
The fraction of the carbon in the system, that can be found in the liquid phase has been
calculated and can be seen in ﬁgure 3.9.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.9: Fraction of total carbon in the system, that is absorbed in the liquid phase calculated
for an intial liquid volume of a) 200 mL, b) 230 mL, c) 260 mL for multiple diﬀerent temperatures
and carbon amount.
Similarly to the results seen for the system containing potassium carbonate, the amount
of carbon released to the gas phase is seen to increase as the temperature and total carbon
increases, which is to be expected.
When comparing the fraction of carbon contained in the liquid phase for this system to
the one containing potassium carbonate, it is seen that the amount in the liquid phase is
considerably smaller for this system, meaning that it binds less strongly to the CO2.
Similarly to the system containing potassium carbonate, it is seen that the fraction of
the carbon contained in the liquid phase is close to 1 at low temperatures, but then falls
quite rapidly as the temperature is increased.
As expected it is seen that the fraction of carbon in the liquid phase increases as the
initial liquid volume increases, since the gas phase is smaller, this is similar to the results
seen for the ISOcap9 system containing potassium carbonate as seen in ﬁgure 3.4.
30
==PAGE:35==
3.3
Gas phase composition
The gas phase composition has been calculated based both on a full ﬂash calculation and
on a bubblepoint calculation. The results for an initial volume of 200 mL can be seen in
ﬁgure 3.10.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.10: gas phase molar fractions calculated by both bubble point and ﬂash calculations
for a) CO2 b) H2O c) NH3 and d) MDEA.
The results for the gas phase composition are seen to be quite similar to the ones seen for
the potassium carbonate system in ﬁgure 3.5. The fraction of CO2 increases towards zero
as the total amount of carbon in the system is increased, while the fraction of ammonia
decreases as more of the ammonia reacts with CO2 to form carbamate. The fraction of
water initially increases, as the amount of ammonia in the gas phase goes down, and then
decreases as the amount of CO2 in the gas phase rises. The amount of MDEA in the
gas phase is seen to be close to zero in all cases, which is to be expected due to MDEAs
signiﬁcantly higher boiling point compared to the other components in the system. It is
seen that the amount of MDEA initially rises as CO2 is introduced to the system, but due
to the low numbers, this could also be caused by a numerical error in the calculations.
As expected, the fraction of CO2 in the gas phase rises as the temperature increases, since
31
==PAGE:36==
this causes more CO2 to be released from the liquid phase. It is similarly seen that the
fraction of ammonia in the gas phase is lowered as the temperature increases, which is
caused by the increased amount of water.
The results for an initial liquid volume of 230 and 260 mL are very similar to the ones
seen in ﬁgure 3.10, but the bubblepoint calculation is once again seen to have an increased
accuracy as the initial liquid volume is increased.
3.3.1
Liquid phase composition
Similarly to the system containing potassium carbonate, the liquid phase composition has
been calculated by using both a full ﬂash calculation and a bubble point calculation. The
results can be seen in ﬁgure 3.11 for an initial volume of 200 mL.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.11: liquid phase molar fractions calculated by both bubble point and ﬂash calculations
for each of the diﬀerent main components in the ISOcap9 MDEA system for an initial volume
of 200 mL.
Generally the results seen for the system containing MDEA are quite similar to the re-
sults seen for the system containing potassium carbonate as seen in ﬁgure 3.6. Similarly
to ﬁgure 3.6 the molar fractions of all components containing carbon and nitrogen have
32
==PAGE:37==
been added together to increase the clarity of the plot. Furthermore the molar fractions
of MDEA and MDEAH+ have also been added together in ﬁgure 3.11d to better show
the amount of MDEA contained in the liquid phase. The molar fractions for all species
in the liquid phase can be seen in the appended excel sheet.
Similarly to the results for the ISOcap9 system containing potassium carbonate, it is seen
that the molar fraction of carbon rises linearly as more carbon is added to the system,
but begins to ﬂatten at higher temperatures, once a certain amount of carbon is added.
The molar fraction of water is seen to fall during the experiment, which is caused by the
water reacting with MDEA to form MDEAH+ and hydroxid, which then reacts with CO2
to form bicarbonate. The molar fraction of water is slightly lower at higher temperatures,
which is caused by the higher amount of water in the gas phase.
The molar fraction of nitrogen and MDEA is seen to be approximately constant during
the experiment. As seen in ﬁgure 3.10, the molar fraction of nitrogen in the gas phase falls
towards zero during the experiment, which causes the molar fraction of nitrogen in the
liquid phase to rise slightly. Only trace amounts of MDEA are ever found in the gas phase
of the system, and the amount of MDEA in the liquid phase is therefore approximately
constant. When observing the system on a per species level, it is seen that the molar
fraction of MDEA goes down during the experiment, while the amount of MDEAH+ goes
up. As mentioned earlier, this is caused by MDEA reacting with water to form hydroxid,
which then reacts with CO2 to form bicarbonate.
Similaerely to the results seen in ﬁgure 3.6 it is seen that the bubblepoint calculation ﬁts
the ﬂash calculation well for low temperatures and low amounts of carbon injected into
the system. At higher temperatures and later in the experiment the bubblepoint calcula-
tion underestimates the molar fraction of carbon in the system, while overestimating the
fraction of water and nitrogen.
The molar fractions seen in ﬁgure 3.11 are practically identical to the ones seen for an
initial volume of 230 or 260 mL for the ﬂash calculation. At higher amounts of initial liq-
uid volume the bubblepoint calculation ﬁts signiﬁcantly better with the ﬂash calculation.
The molar fractions calculated for 230 and 260 mL of initial liquid volume can be seen in
the appended excel sheet.
33
==PAGE:38==
3.4
ISOcap11 - K2CO3
The third system to be tested is the Isocap11 system containing potassium carbonate. All
calculations and results for both an initial volume of 200, 230 and 260 mL can be seen in
the appended excel sheet ”ISOcap11 K2CO3 Calculations”, this sheet also includes data
for all diﬀerent species found in the liquid mixture.
3.4.1
Pressure
The pressure calculated for a full ﬂash calculation can be seen in ﬁgure 3.12 for all three
diﬀerent initial liquid amounts.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.12: Pressure calculated for an intial liquid volume of a) 200 mL, b) 230 mL, c) 260 mL
for multiple diﬀerent temperatures and carbon amount.
The pressure curves seen in ﬁgure 3.2 are seen to be very similar to the ones seen for the
ISOcap9 system in ﬁgure 3.2, which is not surprising, since the only diﬀerence between the
systems is an increase in the amount of ammonia. It should be noted, that the experiments
must be terminated slightly earlier for the ISOcap11 system, since solids begin to form
earlier, and the pressure is generally slightly higher, due to the increase in ammonia.
34
==PAGE:39==
Similarly to the ISOcap9 system, it is seen that the pressure initially decreases slightly as
ammonia in the gas phase is absorbed. As the experiment continues the pressure increases
exponentially. Furthermore it is seen that the pressure increases with the temperature,
which is to be expected.
3.4.2
Liquid Volume
The liquid volume calculated for all three initial volume levels can be seen in ﬁgure 3.13.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.13: Liquid volume calculated for an initial liquid volume of a) 200 mL, b) 230 mL, c)
260 mL for multiple diﬀerent temperatures and carbon amount.
Once again the results are very similar to the ones seen for the ISOcap9 system in ﬁgure
3.3. Generally the liquid volume is found to be slightly higher for the ISOcap11 system,
due to the increased amount of ammonia in the system. For a high initial liquid volume
and at equal too or above 40 degrees Celsius, it may not be possible to continue the
experiment after a certain amount of CO2 has been injected, since the liquid volume will
increase to above the accepted 270 mL. At above 100 degrees Celsius the volume is too
high during the entire experiment. It is seen that the liquid volume decreases slightly
at some temperatures, once a certain amount of CO2 has been injected. This is caused
35
==PAGE:40==
by the increasing amounts of ions, which may cause the overall volume of the liquid to
decrease.
3.4.3
Fraction of carbon in liquid
The fraction of the total carbon in the system that is contained in the liquid phase for
the ISOcap11 system containing potassium carbonate can be seen in ﬁgure 3.14.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.14: Fraction of total carbon in the system, that is absorbed in the liquid phase calculated
for an intial liquid volume of a) 200 mL, b) 230 mL, c) 260 mL for multiple diﬀerent temperatures
and carbon amount.
Similarly to the results for the ISOcap9 system seen in ﬁgure 3.4, the fraction of carbon
captured by the liquid phase is seen to decrease as the total amount of carbon increases
and as the temperature is increased. It is seen that the ISOcap11 system retains slightly
more carbon in the liquid phase than the ISOcap9 system, which is not suprising, since
the ISOcap11 system has an extra 2 mol/kg water of ammonia molecules to capture the
carbon.
36
==PAGE:41==
3.5
Gas phase composition
The gas phase composition for the ISOcap11 system containing potassium carbonate has
been calculated with both a bulepoint calculation and a full ﬂash calculation. The results
of these calculations can be seen in ﬁgure 3.15. This ﬁgure only shows the composition of
the system at an initial liquid volume of 200 mL. The results for the system at an initial
volume of 230 mL and 260 mL can be seen in the appended excel ﬁle ”ISOcap11 K2CO3
Calculations”.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.15: gas phase molar fractions calculated by both bubble point and ﬂash calculations
for a) CO2 b) H2O and c) NH3
The results for the ISOcap11 system is seen to be practically identical to the ones seen
for the ISOcap9 system in ﬁgure 3.5. One minor diﬀerence is a slight decrease in water
molar fraction, which is caused by a similar increase in ammonia molar fraction due to
the increased amount of ammonia in the system.
The relationship between molar fractions and carbon amount is seen to be the same as
for the ISOcap9 system and the diﬀerence between bubblepoint and ﬂash calculation is
also practically identical.
The molarr fraction found for an initial volume of 230 or 260 mL are very similar to
the ones seen in ﬁgure 3.15, but the diﬀerence between ﬂash calculation and bubblepoint
37
==PAGE:42==
calculation is lowered signiﬁcantly.
3.5.1
Liquid phase composition
Similarly to the gas phase composition, the liquid phase composition has been calculated
by using both a bubblepoint and ﬂash calculation. The results for an initial liquid volume
of 200 mL can be seen in ﬁgure 3.16 while the results for an initial volume of 230 mL and
260 mL can be seen in the appended excel sheet ”ISOcap11 K2CO3 Calculations”.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.16: liquid phase molar fractions calculated by both bubble point and ﬂash calculations
for each of the diﬀerent main components in the ISOcap11 K2CO3 system for an initial volume
of 200 mL.
Similarly to the results for the gas phase composition, these results are seen to be almost
identical to the results seen for the ISOcap9 system in ﬁgure 3.6. The one diﬀerence is a
slight increase in carbon molar fraction, a slight decrease in water molar fraction and a
signiﬁcant increase in nitrogen molar fraction.
These changes are to be expected, since the higher amount of ammonia causes an increased
amount of carbon absorbed by the liquid as seen in ﬁgure 3.14. The slight decrease in
water molar fraction is caused by the increase in the amount of nitrogen and carbon molar
fraction.
38
==PAGE:43==
3.6
ISOcap11 - MDEA
The ﬁnal system to be tested is the ISOcap11 system containing MDEA. All calculations
and results for both an initial volume of 200, 230 and 260 mL can be seen in the appended
excel sheet ”ISOcap11 MDEA Calculations”, this sheet also includes data for all diﬀerent
species found in the liquid mixture.
3.6.1
Pressure
The pressure calculated by a full ﬂash calculation for the ISOcap11 system containing
MDEA can be seen in ﬁgure 3.17.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.17: Pressure calculated for an intial liquid volume of a) 200 mL, b) 230 mL, c) 260 mL
for multiple diﬀerent temperatures and carbon amount.
It is seen that the pressure increases exponentially as the experiment progresses and as a
function of the temperature, which is the same as what was seen for the ISOcap9 system
39
==PAGE:44==
in ﬁgure 3.7. Generally the pressure is seen to be slighly lower for the ISOcap11 system
than for the ISOcap9 system. This is caused by the higher amount of ammonia in the
system, which means that the liquid phase can absorb more carbon, thus lowering the
amount of molecules in the gas phase. Compared to the ISOcap9 system the experiment
has to be terminated slighly earlier for the ISOcap11 system, since solids form earlier due
to increased amount of ammonia.
3.6.2
Liquid Volume
The liquid volume calculated by a ﬂash calculation can be seen in ﬁgure 3.18.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.18: Liquid volume calculated for an initial liquid volume of a) 200 mL, b) 230 mL, c)
260 mL for multiple diﬀerent temperatures and carbon amount.
The relationship between liquid volume and temperature and carbon amount is seen to
be practically identical to the one seen for the ISOcap9 system in ﬁgure 3.8. The liquid
volume is seen to be slightly higher for the ISOcap11 system, due to the increased amount
of ammonia, which also causes the dip in volume to be slightly bigger, due to an increased
amount of ions. Generally both of these diﬀerences are quite small though.
It is seen that the experiment can not be done at an initial volume of 260 mL and a
40
==PAGE:45==
temperature equal to oor above 100 degrees Celsius, since the liquid volume will rise
above the acceptable 270 mL.
3.6.3
Fraction of carbon in liquid
The fraction of the carbon in the system, that can be found in the liquid phase has been
calculated and can be seen in ﬁgure 3.19.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.19: Fraction of total carbon in the system, that is absorbed in the liquid phase calculated
for an intial liquid volume of a) 200 mL, b) 230 mL, c) 260 mL for multiple diﬀerent temperatures
and carbon amount.
The relationship of the fraction of carbon in the liquid is seen to be identical to the ones
seen for the ISOcap9 system in ﬁgure 3.9. A signiﬁcant increase in the amount of carbon
that is captured by the liquid is seen for the ISOcap11 system when compared to the
ISOcap9 system. This is to be expected, since the amount of ammonia in the liquid has
been increased signiﬁcantly.
41
==PAGE:46==
3.7
Gas phase composition
The gas phase composition calculated both with a full ﬂash calculation as well as for a
bubblepoint calculation can be seen in ﬁgure 3.10 for an initial liquid volume of 200 mL.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.20: gas phase molar fractions calculated by both bubble point and ﬂash calculations
for a) CO2 b) H2O c) NH3 and d) MDEA.
This gas phase composition is practically identical to the one seen for the ISOcap9 system
in ﬁgure 3.10, which is to be expected. The only signiﬁcant diﬀerence is a slight decrease
in the water molar fraction and a corresponding increase in the ammonia molar fraction.
Both of these diﬀerences are caused by the increase in ammonia. The molar fraction
for MDEA remains approximately the same as for the ISOcap9 system, but remains
insigniﬁcant.
Finally it is seen that the diﬀerence in composition calculated by ﬂash calculation and
bubblepoint calculation remains practically identical to the ones seen for the ISOcap9
system.
The gas phase molar fractions for an initial volume of 230 and 260 mL are identical to
the ones for 200 mL for the ﬂash calculation. For the bubblepoint calculation it is seen
that the diﬀerence between Flash and bubblepoint composition is lowered as the initial
42
==PAGE:47==
liquid volume is increased.
3.7.1
Liquid phase composition
Lastly, the liquid phase composition has been calculated using both a ﬂash calculation
and a bubblepoint calculation. The results for an initial volume of 200 mL can be seen
in ﬁgure 3.21.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.21: liquid phase molar fractions calculated by both bubble point and ﬂash calculations
for each of the diﬀerent main components in the ISOcap11 MDEA system for an initial volume
of 200 mL.
These liquid phase compositions show the same behaviour as a function of carbon amount
and temperature as the ones that can be seen for the ISOcap9 system in ﬁgure 3.11.
The one diﬀerence between the two systems is an increase in carbon and nitrogen molar
fraction and a corresponding decrease in water and MDEA molar fraction. These changes
are caused by the increase in ammonia in the system, which causes the liquid to absorb
more carbon as seen in ﬁgure 3.19.
Similarly to the gas phase volume the molar fractions are practically identical for an initial
volume of 200, 230 and 260 mL. The only diﬀerence between the diﬀerent initial volumes
43
==PAGE:48==
is that the amount of carbon captured by the liquid increases at higher volumes, which
causes the carbon molar fraction to be higher later in the experiment. Furthermore the
bubblepoint calculation is found to ﬁt signiﬁcantly better with the ﬂash calculation as the
initial liquid volume is increased.
44
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4
Discussion subjects
4.1
Bubble point calculations
As mentioned in the previous chapter it is desired to know when a bubble point calculation
can be used instead of a full ﬂash calculation. For the later experimental work it will
signiﬁcantly lower the workload if the pressure inside the vessel can be assumed to be the
bubblepoint pressure, since this will simplify the calculations needed. In order to examine
this the percentage error between the composition in both gas and liquid phases of each
of the systems has been found.
4.1.1
ISOcap9 K2CO3
All calculations and results for both an initial volume of 200, 230 and 260 mL can be seen
in the appended excel sheet ”ISOcap9 K2CO3 Calculations”, included here is also data
all diﬀerent species found in the liquid mixture.
A percentage error between bubblepoint and ﬂash calculation for the ISOcap9 system
with potassium carbonate can be seen in ﬁgure 4.1
45
==PAGE:50==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.1: Error between molar fractions calculated by bubble point calculation and for a full
ﬂash calculation for a) CO2 b) H2O and c) NH3 for an initial volume of 200 mL.
It is seen that the bubble point calculation and ﬂash calculation generally rises as the
amount of carbon in the system increases, which in turn causes the pressure of the system
to rise.
However, for the case of CO2, as seen in ﬁgure 4.1a, the error initially rises before reaching
a maximum and then falling. Since this is a percentage error, this maximum is caused
by the low amount of carbon initially in the gas phase, which will increase the eﬀect of
small errors between the calculations. It is seen that the error for CO2 initially spikes
before going down to zero again. Since the amount of CO2 in the gas phase at this point
in the experiment is very close to zero, this spike is likely caused by numerical errors in
the calculations.
The percentage error for the CO2 in the gas phase of the system is seen to be below 1
percent for the entire experiment up 60 degrees Celsius. At higher temperatures the error
increases up to a maximum of 5 percent at 120 degrees Celsius, which is still rather small,
but might not be acceptable depending on the purpose of the experiment.
For the water and ammonia in the gas phase, as seen in ﬁgure 4.1b and 4.1c respectively,
the error is much larger, although still quite small at temperatures between 20 and 40
degrees Celsius. The much larger error is caused by the lower amount of compound in
the gas phase, which will increase any errors in the calculation.
For a higher initial volume of liquid, the errors for the diﬀerent components, will decrease,
46
==PAGE:51==
since the total volume of gas is lower, which brings the gas phase composition closer to
the bubblepoint composition. The behaviour of the error as a function of carbon and
temperature is the same as the one seen in ﬁgure 4.1 for both an initial volume of 230 mL
and 260 mL.
Besides the error for the gas phase composition, the error for the liquid phase has also
been calculated and can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2. 3.6.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.2: Percentage errors for the liquid phase composition for an initial volume of 200 mL
It is seen that the error in the liquid phase composition increases exponentially, for all
the compounds in the system, as the amount of carbon in the system is increased. The
error is found to be far higher when considering carbon, as can be seen in ﬁgure 4.2a.
This can be explained by carbon being the primary compound in the gas phase and by
the generally low carbon molar fraction, which will increase the eﬀect of any errors.
Similarly to the results seen for the gas phase the error is also seen to be larger at
higher temperatures. At temperatures between 20 and 40 degrees Celsius, the error is
seen to be approximately zero for all components for the entire experiment, which means
that a bubblepoint calculation can easily be used instead of a ﬂash calculation for these
temperatures. For higher temperatures, a bubblepoint calculation will be viable for part
of the experiment, but a full ﬂash calculation should be done at higher amounts of carbon
47
==PAGE:52==
in order to ensure that the results are accurate.
Similarly to the gas phase composition, the error in the liquid phase composition lowers
as the initial liquid volume is increased. Graphs for the errors at an initial liquid volume
of 230 mL and 260 mL can be seen in the appended excel sheet.
When doing the experiment the easiest way to observe the systems deviation from the
bubblepoint will be to compare the pressure measured in the vessel with the bubblepoint
pressure. The percent wise diﬀerence between bubblepoint pressure and actual pressure
can be seen in ﬁgure 4.3
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.3: Percentage diﬀerence between calculated bubblepoint pressure and pressure calcu-
lated with a full ﬂash calculation for an initial volume of a) 200 mL b) 230 mL and d) 260
mL
It is seen that the diﬀerence in pressure increases exponentially as the amount of carbon in
the system is increased and rises faster when the temperature is increased. This ﬁts well
with the exponential increase in error seen in ﬁgure 4.1 and 4.2. Furthermore it is seen
that the diﬀerence in pressure becomes signiﬁcantly lower, the higher the liquid volume
becomes, which ﬁts well with the fact that the error in molar fraction also is lowered at
higher initial liquid volume.
48
==PAGE:53==
4.1.2
ISOcap9 MDEA
All calculations and results for both an initial volume of 200, 230 and 260 mL can be seen
in the appended excel sheet ”ISOcap9 MDEA Calculations”, included here is also data
all diﬀerent species found in the liquid mixture.
The percentwise error in gas phase composition can be seen for an initial volume of 200
mL for the ISOcap9 system containing MDEA in ﬁgure 4.4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.4: Error between molar fractions calculated by bubble point calculation and for a full
ﬂash calculation for a) CO2 b) H2O c) NH3 and d) MDEA for an initial volume of 200 mL.
Similarly to the case for the system containing potassium carbonate, the error is seen to
increase quickly for water and ammonia as the amount of carbon in the system is increased
and as the temperature rises and the pressure therefore increases. The error for these two
components becomes very large at higher temperatures and CO2 amounts. In the case
of ammonia this is further increased, due to the fact that the amount of ammonia in the
gas phase is very low at higher carbon amounts.
The error seen for CO2 in ﬁgure 4.4a is quite interesting, since it initially increases and
then decreases as the amount of CO2 is increased. This is likely caused by the total
amount of CO2 in the gas phase increasing later in the experiment, which will reduce the
49
==PAGE:54==
eﬀect of numerical errors.
The percent wise error in the amount of MDEA, as seen in ﬁgure 4.4d, in the gas phase
is seen to be quite large for all cases, but since the amount of MDEA in the gas phase is
so small, this error is of little interest and may be considerably inﬂuenced by numerical
errors in the calculations.
It is generally seen that the error is below one percent between 20 and 40 degrees Celsius
for all compounds, which should mean that a bubblepoint calculation is suﬃcient at these
temperatures. At higher temperatures a ﬂash calculation should be used as the amount
of carbon in the system increases, although a bubblepoint calculation will be suﬃcient at
low CO2 injection levels.
The error in the liquid phase composition can be seen in ﬁgure 4.5.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.5: Percentage errors for the liquid phase composition for an initial volume of 200 mL
for the ISOcap9 system containing MDEA.
Similarly to the case for the system containing potasssium carbonate, it is seen that the
error increases exponentially as the amount of carbon introduced to the system is in-
creased. It is also seen that the error increases faster at higher temperatures.
The results for the errors for an initial volume of 230 and 260 mL show a similar rela-
tionship with regards to temperature and carbon amount as the ones seen in ﬁgure 4.4
50
==PAGE:55==
and 4.5, although the error generally decreases as the amount of liquid in the system is
increased. The errors for these systems can be seen in the appended excel sheet.
Finally the diﬀerence in pressure between the bubblepoint and ﬂash calculation can be
seen in ﬁgure 4.6.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.6: Percentage diﬀerence between calculated bubblepoint pressure and pressure calcu-
lated with a full ﬂash calculation for an initial volume of a) 200 mL b) 230 mL and d) 260
mL
Similarly to the results seen for the system containing potassium carbonate, it is seen that
the diﬀerence in pressure increases exponentially as the amount of carbon is increased and
further increases as the temperature is increased. It is further seen that the diﬀerence
lowers drastically at higher initial liquid volumes, which explains why the error in liquid
and gas phase molar fractions goes down as the liquid volume increases.
4.1.3
ISOcap11 K2CO3
All calculations and results for both an initial volume of 200, 230 and 260 mL can be seen
in the appended excel sheet ”ISOcap11 K2CO3 Calculations”, included here is also data
all diﬀerent species found in the liquid mixture.
51
==PAGE:56==
The percentage diﬀerence between gas phase composition for the ISOcap11 system con-
taining potassium carbonate can be seen in ﬁgure 4.7 for an initial volume of 200 mL.
The calculations as well as the results for an initial volume of 230 mL and 260 mL can
be seen in the appended excel sheet ”ISOcap11 K2CO3 Calculations”.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.7: Error between molar fractions calculated by bubble point calculation and for a full
ﬂash calculation for a) CO2 b) H2O and c) NH3 for an initial volume of 200 mL.
The error for the ISOcap11 system is seen to be very similar to the results for the ISOcap9
system seen in ﬁgure 4.1, although the diﬀerences are generally slighly lower.
The results for the diﬀerence in liquid phase composition can be seen in ﬁgure 4.8 for an
initial liquid volume of 200 mL and can once again be seen for an initial volume of 230
mL and 260 mL in the appended excel sheet ”ISOcap11 K2CO3 Calculations”.
52
==PAGE:57==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.8: Percentage errors for the liquid phase composition for an initial volume of 200 mL
The diﬀerences seen in ﬁgure 4.8 are seen to be almost identical to the ones seen in ﬁgure
4.2 for the ISOcap9 system.
Generally the diﬀerences between ﬂash and bubblepoint
calculations are seen to be slightly higher for the ISOcap11 system, but these diﬀerences
are so low that they might be caused largely be numerical errors in the calculations.
For an inital volume of of 230 mL and 260 mL the diﬀerence between ﬂash calculated
composition and bubblepoint composition goes down drastically, while the behaviour as
a function of temperature and carbon amount remains the same.
Finally the diﬀerence in bubblepoint pressure and actual pressure calculated by ﬂash
calculation can be seen for all three diﬀerent liquid levels in ﬁgure 4.9.
53
==PAGE:58==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.9: Percentage diﬀerence between calculated bubblepoint pressure and pressure calcu-
lated with a full ﬂash calculation for an initial volume of a) 200 mL b) 230 mL and d) 260
mL
As expected the pressure diﬀerence increases as the amount of carbon in the system
increases and as the temperature of the system is increased. Furthermore it is seen that
the diﬀerence goes drastically down as the amount of initial liquid volume is increased.
Finally it is seen that the pressure diﬀerences seen for the ISOcap11 system are very
similar to the ones seen for the ISOcap9 system in ﬁgure 4.3, which explains why the
diﬀerences in gas and liquid composition are also very similar.
4.1.4
ISOcap11 MDEA
All calculations and results for both an initial volume of 200, 230 and 260 mL can be seen
in the appended excel sheet ”ISOcap11 MDEA Calculations”, included here is also data
all diﬀerent species found in the liquid mixture.
The percent wise diﬀerence in gas phase composition between a full ﬂash calculation adn
a bubblepoint calculation can be seen in ﬁgure 4.10 for an initial volume of 200 mL.
54
==PAGE:59==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.10: Error between molar fractions calculated by bubble point calculation and for a full
ﬂash calculation for a) CO2 b) H2O c) NH3 and d) MDEA for an initial volume of 200 mL.
The relationship between the amount of carbon in the system and the error of the gas
phase composition is seen to be practically identical to the one for the ISOcap9 system
seen in ﬁgure 4.4.
LAter in the experiment the diﬀerence in molar fraction for ammonia and water is seen
to be slightly higher than the ones found for the ISOcap9 system, but since the amount
of these components in the gas phase is rather small some part of this may be caused
by numerical inaccuracies. It is similarly seen that the percentage diﬀerence in MDEA is
slightly lower than the one seen for the ISOcap9 system, but since only trace amounts of
MDEA exist in the gas phase this diﬀerence might be caused by numerical errors. For an
initial volume of 230 and 260 mL, the relationship between diﬀerence and temperature
and amount of carbon is the same as for 200 mL, although the diﬀerence is decreased due
to the smaller gas phase.
The percentage diﬀerence between liquid phase composition calculated by a bubblepoint
calculation and a full ﬂash calculation can be seen in ﬁgure 4.11 for an initial liquid volume
of 200 mL.
55
==PAGE:60==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.11: Percentage errors for the liquid phase composition for an initial volume of 200 mL
for the ISOcap11 system containing MDEA.
It is seen that the diﬀerence in molar fraction is generally slightly lower for the ISOcap11
system compared to the ISOcap9 system seen in ﬁgure 4.5. This is likely caused by the
slightly smaller gas phase and corresponding lowered pressure. Besides this the relation-
ship between diﬀerence and temperature and carbon amount is similar to the one for the
ISOcap9 system. For the systems with an initial liquid volume of 230 and 260 mL this
relationship is the same although the diﬀerence between ﬂash and bubblepoint calculation
is lowered as the liquid volume is increased.
Lastly, the diﬀerence between bubblepoint pressure and pressure calculated from the ﬂash
calculation can be seen in ﬁgure 4.12 for both an initial volume of 200, 230 and 260 mL.
56
==PAGE:61==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.12: Percentage diﬀerence between calculated bubblepoint pressure and pressure cal-
culated with a full ﬂash calculation for an initial volume of a) 200 mL b) 230 mL and d) 260
mL
The diﬀerence in pressure is seen to be slightly higher than the ones seen for the ISOcap9
system in ﬁgure 4.6, although the pressure is also slightly lower, which will increase the
eﬀect of any numerical errors. Similarly to the pressure diﬀerences seen earlier, it is seen
that the pressure diﬀerence increases exponentially as a function of carbon in the system.
Furthermore it is seen that the pressure diﬀerence increases faster as the temperature is
increased. Finally it is seen that the diﬀerence is lowered signiﬁcantly as the amount of
liquid in the vessel is increased.
4.2
Further studies
Besides the equilibrium data, there are a variety of other factors, which inﬂuences the
liquids viability as a carbon capture agent.
First of all the kinetics of the system should be examined, since these determine the
speed of the reactions and therefore the speed of the carbon capture and release. While
the deviation from equilibrium is the driving force of chemical reactions, the data obtained
in this report can not be used to determine the speed of the system. The kinetics of the
57
==PAGE:62==
system should therefore be determined experimentally.
Furthermore the stability of the liquid should be determined in an oxidative and high
temperature environment, since this will play a large role in the economic viability of
the technology. If the system is not stable enough the liquid will need to be replaced
frequently in order, which will carry a signiﬁcant economic cost.
58
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
In order to determine their viability as a carbon capture agent, vapour-liquid equilibrium
data have been examined for four diﬀerent mixtures of ammonia, potassium carbonate
and MDEA.
A density model was developed based on contributions for each compound in the mix-
ture, since this was needed for the calculation of vapour-liquid data. As expected it was
found, that the density of all four mixtures increases as the amount of CO2 in the system
increases, although the increase is not linear due to the reactions taking place inside the
mixtures. Furthermore it was found that the density decreases as a function of tempera-
ture, which is also to be expected.
When the density model was known, it was possible to calculate the size of the vapour
and liquid phases of the system as well as their composition. This was done for a tem-
perature interval of 20 to 120 degrees Celsius and for pressures below 30 bars. It was
generally found, that a higher temperature and higher amount of total carbon leads to a
higher fraction of the carbon being released to the gas phase. Furthermore it was found
that an increase in the initial liquid volume leads to a decrease in the amount of carbon
released. Finally it was found that an increase in the amount of ammonia in the liquid
phase increases the amount of carbon that can be captured, which is unsurprising.
Lastly it was examined whether it was possible to substitute the use of a full ﬂash calcu-
lation with a simple bubblepoint calculation for the experiments. It was found that the
bubblepoint calculation generally works well at low temperatures and at low amounts of
CO2 injected into the system, which means that a bubblepoint calculation can be used.
At higher temperatures and CO2 amounts the deviation between ﬂash calculation and
bubblepoint calculation rises signiﬁcantly and a bubblepoint calculation no longer gives a
correct result. It was found that the viable range for a bubblepoint calculation increases
as the amount of liquid volume in the vessel rises.
59
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
[1] R. Stuart Haszeldine. Carbon capture and storage: how green can black be? Science,
325(5948):1647–1652, 2009.
[2] Matthew E. Boot-Handford, Juan C. Abanades, Edward J. Anthony, Martin J. Blunt,
Stefano Brandani, Niall Mac Dowell, Jos´e R. Fern´andez, Maria Chiara Ferrari, Robert
Gross, Jason P. Hallett, R. Stuart Haszeldine, Philip Heptonstall, Anders Lyngfelt,
Zen Makuch, Enzo Mangano, Richard T.J. Porter, Mohamed Pourkashanian, Gary T.
Rochelle, Nilay Shah, Joseph G. Yao, and Paul S. Fennell.
Carbon capture and
storage update. Energy and Environmental Science, 7(1):130–189, 2014.
[3] Global CCS Institute. https://co2re.co/FacilityData. Online. Accessed: July 17,
2020.
[4] J. C.M. Pires, F. G. Martins, M. C.M. Alvim-Ferraz, and M. Sim˜oes. Recent develop-
ments on carbon capture and storage: An overview. Chemical Engineering Research
and Design, 89(9):1446–1460, 2011.
[5] Dennis Y. C. Leung, Giorgio Caramanna, and M. Mercedes Maroto-Valer.
An
overview of current status of carbon dioxide capture and storage technologies. Re-
newable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 39:426–443, 2014.
[6] Nikos C H Karayiannis and Manuel Laso. Absorption, pages 1–115. American Cancer
Society, 2018.
[7] Victor Camille Alfred Darde, Willy J. M. van Well, Erling Halfdan Stenby, and Kaj
Thomsen. Modeling of carbon dioxide absorption by aqueous ammonia solutions
using the extended uniquac model. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research,
49(24):12663–12674, 2010.
[8] Stefano Lillia, Davide Bonalumi, Philip L. Fosbøl, Kaj Thomsen, Indira Jayaweera,
and Gianluca Valenti. Thermodynamic and kinetic properties of nh3-k2co3-co2-h2o
system for carbon capture applications. International Journal of Greenhouse Gas
Control, 85:121–131, 2019.
60
==PAGE:65==
[9] I. Jayaweera, P. Jayaweera, Y. Yamasaki, and R. Elmore. Mixed salt solutions for
co2 capture. Absorption-based Post-combustion Capture of Carbon Dioxide, pages
167–200, 2016.
[10] Indira Jayaweera, Palitha Jayaweera, Regina Elmore, Jianer Bao, and Srinivas
Bhamidi. Update on mixed-salt technology development for co2 capture from post-
combustion power stations. Energy Procedia, 63:640–650, 2014.
[11] National Institute of Standards and Technology.
https://webbook.nist.gov/
chemistry/. Online. Accessed: July 17, 2020.
[12] Meher G. Sanku and Helena Svensson.
Modelling the precipitating non-aqueous
co2 capture system amp-nmp, using the unsymmetric electrolyte nrtl. International
Journal of Greenhouse Gas Control, 89:20–32, 2019.
[13] Kaj Thomsen. Electrolyte Solutions: Thermodynamics, Crystallization, Separation
methods. 2009.
[14] Søren Gregers Christensen and Kaj Thomsen. Representation of Volumetric Data of
Electrolyte Solutions at Varying Concentrations and Temperatures. 2004.
[15] T. F. Young and Martin B. Smith. Thermodynamic properties of mixtures of elec-
trolytes in aqueous solutions. The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 58(9):716–724,
1954.
[16] D. E. Goldsack and A. A. Franchetto.
The viscosity of concentrated electrolyte
solutions. iii. a mixture law. Electrochimica Acta, 22(11):1287–94, 1287–1294, 1977.
[17] W Herz. The internal friction of salt solutions. Zeitschrift Fur Anorganische Chemie,
89(3/4):393–396, 1914.
[18] T. Isono. Densities, viscosities, and electrolytic conductivities of concentrated aque-
ous solutions of 31 solutes in the temperature range 15-55 c and empirical equations
for the relative viscosity. Reports of the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research,
61(2):53–79, 53–79, 1985.
[19] T ISONO. Density, viscosity, and electrolytic conductivity of concentrated aqueous-
electrolyte solutions at several temperatures - alkaline-earth chlorides, lacl3, na2so4,
nano3, nabr, kno3, kbr, and cd(no3)2. Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data,
29(1):45–52, 1984.
[20] M. Kaminsky. Experimental investigations of the concentration and temperature
dependence of the viscosity of aqueous solutions of strong electrolytes. i. potassium
iodide, ammonium chloride, and sodium sulphate solutions. Z. Physik. Chem. N. F.,
5:154–191, 1955.
61
==PAGE:66==
[21] F. J. Millero, G. K. Ward, and P. V. Chetirkin. Relative sound velocities of sea salts
at 25c. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 61(6):1492–8, 1492–1498, 1977.
[22] M. A. Motin. Temperature and concentration dependence of apparent molar volumes
and viscosities of nacl, nh4cl, cucl2, cuso4, and mgso4 in pure water and water +
urea mixtures. Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data, 49(1):94–98, 2004.
[23] John G. Albright, John P. Mitchell, and Donald G. Miller. Interdiﬀusion coeﬃcients,
densities, and refractive indices of ammonium chloride + water and ammonium sul-
fate + water at 25.degree.c. Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data, 39(1):195–
200, 1994.
[24] J. N. Pearce and G. G. Pumplin. The apparent and partial molal volumes of am-
monium chloride and of cupric sulfate in aqueous solution at 25.
Journal of the
American Chemical Society, 59(7):1221–1222, 1937.
[25] T. I. Chertkov, B. A.and Pekareva.
Density and viscosity of aqueous (nh4)2so3,
nh4hso3, and (nh4)2so4 solutions. J. Appl. Chem., pages 135–xx, 1961.
[26] Alain Roux, Goolam M. Musbally, G´erald Perron, Jacques E. Desnoyers, Prem Paul
Singh, Earl M. Woolley, and Loren G. Hepler. Apparent molal heat capacities and
volumes of aqueous electrolytes at 25c: Naclo3, naclo4, nano3, nabro3, naio3, kclo3,
kbro3, kio3, nh4no3, nh4cl, and nh4clo4. Canadian Journal of Chemistry, 56(1):24–
28, 1978.
[27] Daniel Salavera, Simona Libotean, Kashinath R. Patil, Xavier Esteve, and Alberto
Coronas. Densities and heat capacities of the ammonia + water + naoh and ammonia
+ water + koh solutions. Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data, 51(3):1020–
1025, 2006.
[28] RH Stokes. The apparent molar volumes of aqueous ammonia, ammonium chloride,
aniline and anilinium chloride at 25c and the volume changes on ionization. Australian
Journal of Chemistry, 28(10):2109, 1975.
[29] Marcin Stec, Tomasz Spietz, Tadeusz Chwo la, Adam Tatarczuk, and Aleksander
Kr´otki. Simple method for determining co2 loading of partially carbonated aqueous
ammonia solutions using ph and density measurements. International Journal of
Greenhouse Gas Control, 87:80–88, 2019.
[30] Jingyi Han, Jing Jin, Dag A. Eimer, and Morten C. Melaaen.
Density of water
(1) + diethanolamine (2) + co 2 (3) and water (1) + n-methyldiethanolamine (2)
+ co 2 (3) from (298.15 to 423.15) k. Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data,
57(6):1843–1850, 2012.
62
==PAGE:67==
[31] Sanoja A. Jayarathna, Deshaka A. Kottage, Dag A. Eimer, and Morten C. Melaaen.
Densities of partially carbonated aqueous diethanolamine and methyldiethanolamine
solutions. Journal of Chemical and Engineering Data, 57(11):2975–2984, 2012.
63
