==PAGE:1==
Master thesis in Sustainable Energy, Energy Conversion and Storage
HT-PEMFC Performance
and Operation
during the Break-in
Miriam Mazzeo
Collaboration: Danish Power Systems
Technical University of Denmark, July2020
==PAGE:2==
Supervisors:
Søren Primdahl, VP Development, Danish Power Systems
Prof. Quingfeng Li, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Hans-Aage Hjuler, CEO, Danish Power Systems
Prof. Jens Oluf Jensen, Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
DTU Energy
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 340
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This work aims at better understanding the activation process of phosphoric
acid doped PBI-based MEA. Three experiment were carried out in order to
investigate the inﬂuence of three main controlling parameters on MEA acti-
vation: compression ratio applied during MEA assembly, water rate fed in
reformate fuel (RH) and high temperature (superior to standard tempera-
ture of operation). Performance and impedance were recorded and analyzed.
The ﬁrst test aimed to analyse the inﬂuence of MEA compression dur-
ing hot-press on the activation performance. The activation period for each
tested MEA lasted approximately 120-140 hours, regardless diﬀerent manu-
facturing conditions. No evident correlation between compression ratio and
MEA activation performance was found, however, it’s not to be excluded.
Performance seems primarily correlated to the membrane doping level rather
than to the compression ratio
In the second test, the eﬀect of diﬀerent reformate humidiﬁcation rates
(HR) on MEA activation performance has been analysed. The activation
period lasted approximately 150 hours regardless diﬀerent humidiﬁcation
conditions, however slower activation is seen for MEAs tested at low water
content. Best MEA performance is obtained at high water ﬂow rate (9.15
ml/h). Overall MEAs tested at higher HR show better performances. The
ohmic Resistance trend over time showed proton conductivity increase posi-
tively correlated to HR increase, as described in literature. Results suggest
the possibility to reduce activation time by studying and controlling the
water dynamics inside the FC.
The third test focuses on the eﬀect of a high temperature step, for the
ﬁrst 23 test hours (after start-up procedure at 160◦), on MEA activation.
Very short activation time was obtained, approximately 50-80 hours, stabi-
lizing fuel cell performance to a very reproducible baseline level. The proce-
dure appears to be one of the most promising for a rapid MEA activation.
MEAs tested with T-step show very low resistance values, suggesting much
higher membrane proton conductivity as compared to standard condition.
==PAGE:4==
Preface and
Acknowledgements
This thesis is submitted to The Faculty of Engineering at DTU, Denmark.
The department of Energy Conversion and Storage and the cooperation of
Danish Power system is gratefully acknowledged.
First and foremost I would like to honor Danish Power System for giving
me the opportunity of this cooperation, providing me of all the resources,
the knowledge and the training needed to perform the tests. This includes
personnel time, raw materials, equipment, oﬃce space, training on MEA
manufacturing and assembly, food provisions and endless support.
I oﬀer my deepest gratitude to my supervisor Søren Primdahl for the un-
derstanding, patient guidance and encouragement, the relaxed atmosphere
during every discussion, the thoughtful comments and recommendations on
this dissertation, and for sharing his brilliant insight into the HT-PEM world
making this an inspiring experience for me.
I would like to express my deep respect and gratitude for Hans Aage
Hjuler, CEO of DPS, for choosing me for this project, for sharing expertise,
valuable guidance, patience and support in overcoming numerous obstacles,
moreover, for being always caring and for his evergreen sense of humor.
A special thanks goes to the rest of my thesis committee: Prof. Qingfeng
Li and Prof. Jens Oluf Jensen for their insightful comments and feedback
on the ﬁnal draft.
This work in many ways represents a collaborative eﬀort and would not
have been feasible without the assistance of Hector Rodrigo García, engineer
at DPS R&D. I am very grateful to him for training me in the manufacturing,
assembly and testing of the MEA, for introducing me to the lab environment,
for assisting me during each experiment, setting up test rigs and measure-
ment equipment, for all the knowledge transfer, for the technical support,
==PAGE:5==
Preface and Acknowledgements
iii
for ﬁxing my mistakes, for his detailed critics and for always being available.
I would have been lost without his precious support. I also thank Silvia
Martinez Alfaro, engineer at DPS R&D, for ﬁrstly tutoring me with the
measurement equipment, for introducing me to the impedance spectroscopy,
for the support in the laboratory whenever needed, for the useful insights
and our funny lunch talks.
I thank all the remaining members of DPS, for taking part to my pre-
sentations and sharing useful feedbacks, for providing a comfortable oﬃce
atmosphere, and for the lovely cake breaks. I especially thank Nedjeljko
Seselj for the help with logistics, the support with OriginLab, the interest-
ing discussions and useful advises. I further thank Kobra Azizi for her help
and support in the lab. Lastly, a special thank to Mette Munk and Maja
Renner Weichel, who always enlighten my day at DPS.
To conclude, I cannot forget to thank my family and friends for all the
unconditional support in this very intense academic year.
Kongens Lyngby, 17th July 2020
Signature
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
AC
Alternating current
BoL
Beginning of life
CL
Catalyst layer
DC
Direct current
DPS
Danish Power Systems ®
EIS
Electrode Impedance Spectroscopy
EoL
End of life
FC
Fuel Cell
GDL
Gas diﬀusion layer
HR
Humidiﬁcation rate
HT-PEMFC High temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell
I
Current
MEA
Membrane Electrode Assembly
MPL
Microporous layer
OCV
Open Circuit Voltage
P
Compression
PA
Phosphoric acid
PBI
Polybenzimidazole
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
v
PEM
Polymer electrolyte membrane
STD
Standard Conditions
T
Temperature
TPB
Three-phase boundary
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface and Acknowledgements
ii
Abbreviations
iv
Contents
vi
Introduction and Motivation
1
I
Theoretical concepts
4
1
Problem Formulation
5
2
Phosphoric acid doped PBI HT-PEMFC
6
2.1
Fuel cell technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Electrochemical Reaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Open circuit voltage and cell performance
. . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4
Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Activation
18
3.1
Temperature Inﬂuence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Water Inﬂuence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Current density Inﬂuence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
==PAGE:9==
Contents
vii
II
Experimental techniques and results
26
4
Methodology
27
4.1
Durability Curve
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
EIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Experimental Setup
32
5.1
Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Assembly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Flow plates resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Test Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Experimental Design
38
7
Experiment N.1: Hot-press conditions Influence
41
7.1
Experimental Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2
Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.2.1
Activation Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.2.2
Activation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.3
Main observations and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8
Experiment N.2: Water Influence
51
8.1
Experimental Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8.2
Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.2.1
Activation Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
8.2.2
Activation Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8.2.3
Impedance Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
8.3
Main observations and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
9
Experiment N.3: Temperature Influence
58
9.1
Experimental Section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
9.2
Test Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
9.2.1
Activation Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
9.2.2
Activation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
9.2.3
Impedance Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
9.3
Main observations and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
10 Repeatability and Accuracy
66
==PAGE:10==
Contents
viii
Conclusion
72
Appendices
76
Appendix A
MEA Documentation
77
Appendix B Start-up procedure
80
Appendix C EIS Spectra
83
Bibliography
86
==PAGE:11==
Introduction and
Motivation
Fossil fuels still contribute by 2/3 to the total energy produced nowadays.
Increasing population combined along with increasing amount of energy con-
sumed per person led to the energy demand rocketing within the last years
and this value is predicted to rise further, due to progress in developing
countries. The depletion of fossil fuels deposits within the foreseeable future
appears inevitable with our current consumption rate. Another aspect is
the enormous amounts of greenhouse gasses released into the atmosphere by
fossil fuel usage, which is leading already to sudden climate changes. This
events puts an enormous pressure on our civilization to break the depen-
dency on carbonaceous fuels, switching the energy production to renewable
energy. This energy resources are, however, non-constant and not always
usable in their form or location, in plus diﬃcult to store. In order to make
the renewable energy sources viable, employing hydrogen for energy delivery
may be a great solution. Energy in form of electricity, produced by wind
turbines, solar cells and hydropower plants, can be converted into chemical
energy by splitting water into its constituents. Thus, energy surplus can be
stored as hydrogen by means of electrolysis, and released afterwards revert-
ing the process with fuel cells: recombining hydrogen and oxygen into water
and releasing the stored chemical energy in the form of electricity and heat.
Description
High temperature polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells
(HT-PEMFC) are energy conversion devices which directly convert chemical
energy into electrical energy through electrochemical reaction of hydrogen
and oxygen. They are a sustainable form of energy, presenting low environ-
mental issues: main by-product consist in water and heat. This technology
employs hydrogen as ’alternative’ fuel and diﬀers from the well-developed
fuel cell technology - typically operating at 80 ◦C - working at a temperature
==PAGE:12==
Introduction and Motivation
2
range from 100 to 200 ◦C. High temperature PEM fuel cells have been an
active ﬁeld of research and development over more than two decades, and
are rewarded as one of the most promising and improving technology among
all the others FC classiﬁcations.
Advantages
High Temperature PEM-FC present many advantages as
compared to LT PEM-FCs.
First of all, performance is improved since
less voltage is lost at a higher operating temperature, thanks to faster re-
action rates. With HT-FCs, there is better heat utilization: the produced
waste heat is of higher quality and has the potential to be reused in co-
generation and district heating systems.
Additionally, the thermal man-
agement in therms of cooling is easier due to higher temperature diﬀerence
with the surroundings. Besides that, several issues faced by low-temperature
PEM are eliminated thanks to the simpliﬁed (or not present) water manage-
ment system since water is only present in state of vapour inside the cell at
temperature higher than 120 ◦C.
An other main advantage is the higher tolerance to fuel impurities (CO
in particular) of the platinum catalyst (carbon monoxide adsorbs strongly
to platinum surfaces blocking the access of hydrogen).
This makes HT-
FC more suitable for operation with carbon containing fuels, compared to
LT-FCs, where operation with reformed fuels causes serious catalyst poison-
ing. The use of pure hydrogen, on the other hand, has become one of the
main obstacles in many PEMFC applications because of the high production
costs, limited infrastructures, issues related to safety, reactivity, storage and
handling. Using low-cost hydrogen generated from the steam reforming of
natural gas, the partial oxidation of hydrocarbons and also the gasiﬁcation of
coal, would promote a faster commercialization of PEMFC technology. This
can be well accomplished with HT-PEMFCs, where high temperature op-
eration allows to achieve high current densities with fast methanol/ethanol
consumption at the catalyst-electrolyte interface, reducing poisoning and
degradation processes [1].
The main component that makes it possible to operate at higher tem-
peratures is the polybenzimidazole (PBI) membrane doped with phosphoric
acid (PA) as electrolyte, which presents good operation at temperatures up
to 200 ◦C and high proton conductivity even at high PA concentrations
and low water activity (nearly anhydrous conductivity). Proton conductiv-
==PAGE:13==
Introduction and Motivation
3
ity depends on PA distribution and concentration rather than water as in
LT-PEM fuel cells, allowing an easier control of airﬂow, humidity and stack
temperature.
Economically speaking, doing away with CO puriﬁcation, water manage-
ment, and extensive coolers allows for a simpler and possibly cheaper system
architecture (The power of simplicity., Serenergy).
Challenges
The main challenges that are center of focus of the ongoing
research in HT-PEMFC are here listed.
• Activation time reduction: time required for the HT-PEM voltage to
reach stability, currently accounting for around 200 h [2].
• Durability extension: degradation is fast, each unit lasts only around
1 year 1 [3].
• System design optimization: phosphoric acid doped PBI membrane
are one of the most studied components in the system, objects of
research are for instance membrane doping level, catalyst type, oper-
ating conditions and so on.
Applications
Some main application of HT-PEMFC are related to alter-
native fuel vehicles, demand peak shaving in integrated systems combining
diﬀerent renewable energy sources, grid independent operating conditions.
Hydrogen reformer is a promising candidate for future alternative fuels,
energy surplus may be easily employed in its production, furthermore, it
may be easily stored and reused to produce energy later on, when most
needed.
1Duration of 8000 h was reported operating a PA-doped PBI HT-FC at 8.4 A with
stoichiometry: λH2 = 1.3, λAir = 2.5. Reformate fuel= 1.4% CO, 22.3% CO2, 69.3%
H2, 6.9% H2O. The cell duration is measured between BoL and EoL. EoL is deﬁned
when the voltage reaches 10% decay in respect to BoL.
==PAGE:14==
Part I
Theoretical concepts
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Problem Formulation
This M.Sc. project aims to examine the activation behavior and ﬁnd the
controlling parameters, when testing Dapozol® 5x5 cm2 MEAs with both
uniform production parameters and deliberate variations in a one cell test
equipment.
For MEA activation performance it’s intended the voltage trend evolu-
tion from BoL till stable performance operation, when the voltage variation
are lower than a deﬁned threshold.
When real application and commer-
cialization of high temperature PEMFC is intended, aspects such as activa-
tion strategies and durability must be considered. The activation behaviour
it is currently not repeatable and predictable, therefore it must be either
minimized or controlled to allow stack manufacturers to guarantee uniform
performance, without extensive (and very costly) electrochemical activation
testing for every cell/stack. Numerous works were made in order to study
the stability of high temperature fuel cells, namely concerning polymer mem-
brane degradation, leaching of doping acid and loss of catalyst activity, but
information about activation protocols is scarce.
In this work, diﬀerent strategies are tested with the ﬁnal objective of
shortening MEA activation time without performance reduction, hence en-
suring stable and reproducible performance. To rule out the most rapid
start-up procedure, all the controlling parameters assumed to have inﬂu-
ence on the activation behavior need to be taken into account. Some main
control parameters are further selected and validated in details through tests
conducting in laboratory.
The study further includes consideration on measurement accuracy, data
analysis, calibration, process control, quality control and electrochemical
testing.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2
Phosphoric acid doped
PBI HT-PEMFC
2.1
Fuel cell technology
A fuel cell is an electrochemical device which converts chemical energy into
electrical power, using a fuel (hydrogen,methanol, ethanol..) and an oxidiz-
ing agent (oxygen), through redox reactions at relatively high temperature,
providing a sustainable and low-pollution electrical power generation tech-
nology.
FCs provide clean energy with low pollution, diﬀerent designs and cat-
egories exist based on type of fuel and electrolyte. FCs can be grouped
in 2 categories, low temperature and high temperature. The low tempera-
ture category includes alkaline fuel cells (AFCs), PEM fuel cells and direct
methanol fuel cells (DMFC) which is also a PEMFC. Molten carbonate fuel
cells (MCFC), solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC), and PEM fuel cells such as
phosphoric acid fuel cells (PAFC) belong to the family of high temperature
fuel cells. With the exception of DMFC, the fuel cells are named accordingly
to the electrolyte, which is considered a key component of a fuel cell. FCs
using liquid fuels can be categorised as direct or indirect FCs depending on
whether the fuel directly participates in the reaction or is ﬁrst split into H2 to
reacts at the anode. Diﬀerent FC technologies with potential application are
summarized in Figure 2.1. In this work we focus on PA PEM FCs, which are
fed with a liquid mixture of hydrogen and other gasses ("reformate"), at the
anode and with air at the cathode. A polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM)
works as electrolyte and proton exchange and is composed by Polybenzimi-
dazole (PBI), proton transport polymeric material, doped with phosphoric
acid (PA).
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Electrochemical Reaction
7
Figure 2.1. Scheme of representative FC systems: AFC, MCFC, PEMFC, DMFC,
PAFC, and SOFC. The fuel oxidation occurs at the anode while oxygen is reduced
to water at the cathode. Ionic species involved in the reactions of diﬀerent FC
technologies is noted as the electrolyte. [4]
2.2
Electrochemical Reaction
At the anode hydrogen is oxidized, therefore split into electrons e−and
H+ ions/protons following the oxidation reaction 2.2, HOR. At the cath-
ode, oxygen reacts with electrons of the cathodic electrode, platinum based,
and H+ ions conducted by the electrolyte (PA) through the polymeric PBI-
membrane, producing water as described in the reduction reaction 2.2, ORR.
Analogous cathode and anode reactions in the MEA (membrane electrode
assembly) are:
Anode: HOR
2H2 −→4H+ + 4e−
(2.1)
Cathode: ORR
O2 + 4H+ + 4e−−→2H2O
(2.2)
Overall cell reaction
2H2 + O2 −→2H2O + Heat
(2.3)
The ﬂow of ionic charge through the electrolyte must be balanced by the
ﬂow of electronic charge through an outside circuit, and it is this balance
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Electrochemical Reaction
8
Figure 2.2. Left: electrode reactions and charge ﬂow for fuel cell with an acid
electrolyte. Note that although the negative electrons ﬂow from the anode to
cathode, the conventional positive current ﬂows from cathode to anode. [5] Right:
Schematic of PEM electrochemical cells (PEMECs) [Blue World Technologies
ApS].
that produces electrical power [6].
Typically, the catalyst for HT-PEMFC consists of platinum carbon sup-
ported and a binder material such as phosphoric acid-doped PBI: the binder
facilitates proton conduction between electrolyte membrane Pt active sites,
whereas the carbon support enhances Pt dispersion through the catalyst
layer and electronic conductivity [3]. The rate of the oxygen reduction re-
action is much slower than that of the hydrogen oxidation reaction (the
exchangecurrent density for hydrogen oxidation is three orders of magni-
tude higher than that for oxygen reduction), for this reason, the platinum
loading in the catalyst layer on the air electrode (cathode) is much higher
than that in the layer on the fuel electrode (anode). In order for an MEA
to function, the following conditions must be met [7]:
1. due to electrode overpotentials the reactions can occur only at low
rates, typically <2V.
2. Each electron liberated at the anode ﬁnd its way to the cathode in or-
der to recombine in accordance with Reactions 2.2 through a suﬃcient
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Electrochemical Reaction
9
electron-conductive path, connecting and cathode catalyst particles.
Protons are transported by proton-conductive paths from the anode
catalyst, through the membrane, to the cathode catalyst.
3. Reactants should be supplied continuously to the anode catalyst site,
while products such as O2 and H2, need to be removed continuously
from anode and cathode respectively.
Figure 2.3. Schematic overview of the three phase boundary (TPB): A thin layer
of electrolyte polymer adheres to the catalyst metal particles promoting the three-
phase contact between electrolyte, reactant gas (hydrogen at the anode and oxy-
gen at the cathode) and the catalyst surface. Platinum particles, represented as
small white spheres, are deposited on carbon support particles, in black [7].
The electrochemical activity strongly depends on the three dimensional
interfaces where catalyst, ionomer and reactants convene to meet all the
above conditions, those sites are called three phase boundaries/junctions
(TPBs) [7]. Number of TPBs and logistics of proton-, electron-, reagent-
and product- transport determine the rate and eﬃciency of the redox. A
schematic representation of the TPB is shown in Figure 2.3.
Reaction will only proceed slowly unless the catalyst type and load is op-
timized for each electrode, temperature is raised and electrochemically active
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Open circuit voltage and cell performance
10
surface area (ECSA) is increased. FC performance is usually expressed in
current per cm2, electrode active area in fact, is an important parameter:
the performance of the cell is aﬀected because of various degradation mech-
anisms occurring during operation - like membrane thinning, phosphoric
acid leaching, electrode carbon support corrosion - cause the loss of electro-
chemically active surface area (ECSA) of platinum catalyst due to platinum
particle agglomeration [8]. One solution to increase the electrode active area
consists in increasing the electrode porosity, in order to obtain a surface area
two to three orders of magnitude greater than the geometric area.
2.3
Open circuit voltage and cell
performance
OCV
It can be said that chemical energies of the hydrogen, oxygen and
water are involved in the output energy of a fuelcell. The problem is that
chemical energy can be deﬁned in diﬀerent waysterms such as enthalpy,
exergy and Gibbs free energy. The last is fundamentally important and can
be deﬁned as the energy (or thermodynamic work) liberated or absorbed in a
reversible process at constant pressure and constant temperature. Thus, the
Gibbs free energy can be used to estimate the thermodynamically viability
of a reaction. In a fuel cell, the change in Gibbs free energy of formation
∆Gf generates the electrical energy, in correlation with temperature and
state (liquid or gas). This change is the diﬀerence between the Gibbs free
energy of formation of the products and reactants:
∆Gf = ∆Gf(products) −∆Gf(reactants)
(2.4)
For the hydrogen fuel cell, two electrons (2NA) pass trough the external
circuit for each water molecule produced and each hydrogen molecule used.
Given that each electron carries a unit negative charge (e), the correspond-
ing charge, in coulombs (C), that ﬂows is: −2Nae−= −2F, where F is the
Faraday constant or the charge on 1 mol of electrons. If V is the voltage
of the fuel cell, then the electrical work (J) expended in moving this charge
round the circuit is: W = charge · voltage = 2FV If the system is ther-
modynamically reversible (i.e., it has no energy losses), then the electrical
work will equal the Gibbs free energy released by the fuelcell reaction ∆Gf,
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Open circuit voltage and cell performance
11
therefore the reversible voltage:
V r = −∆Gf
2F
(2.5)
∆Gf(200◦C, total red-ox) [2.2] = 22.04[kJ/mol]
(2.6)
V r =
22.04[kJ]
2 · 96485[C/mol] = 1.14[V ]
(2.7)
1.14V is the the maximum voltage that each cell can theoretically reach
at a given temperature and partial pressure of reactants and products, it’s
also called reversible voltage (Vr) or open circuit voltage (OCV)’ (voltage
across the terminals of the cell when there is no net current ﬂow).
The pressure, temperature and concentration of the reactants inﬂuence
the change in Gibbs free energy, and thus the output cell voltage. This
is expressed in the Nernst equation, which can take many forms, For an
hydrogen fuel cell we have:
∆Gf = ∆G◦
f −RT ln

aH2 · a1/2
O2
aH2O


(2.8)
Vr = V ◦
r −RT
2F ln

aH2 · a1/2
O2
aH2O


(2.9)
aH2 = PH2
P ◦
aO2 = PO2
P ◦
aH2O = PH2O
P ◦
(2.10)
PH2 = αP
PO2 = βP
PH2O = δP
(2.11)
Vr = V ◦
r −RT
2F ln

αH2 · β1/2
O2
δH2O
· P


(2.12)
where ∆G◦
f = change in molar Gibbs free energy of formation at standard
pressure; a = ’activity’ of the product, a =
P
P ◦in case of gases behaving as
ideal gases; P = gas partial pressure; P◦= standard pressure ( 100 kPa);
α, β, δ are constants that depend on the molar masses and concentrations
of H2,O2,H2O respectively; T = operating temperature; R = gas constant.
Nernst equation gives a quantitative indication of the variables’ relative im-
portance on fuel cell performance. The equation shows positive correlation
of output voltage with operating temperature and logarithmic correlation
with system pressure and with reactants and products activities and partial
pressures, in particular the hydrogen one.
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Open circuit voltage and cell performance
12
Figure 2.4. Polarization curve for a fuel cell utilizing synthetic reformate/air
(λRef/λAir = 1.5/2) after a 1000 h ageing test at constant load.
MEA type:
Dapozol®-G5. Synthetic reformate composition: 78% H2, 22% CO2. T = 160 ◦C,
p = 1 atm, ﬁve fold serpentine ﬂow ﬁelds, contact pressure = 0.75 MPa. [3]
Eﬃciency
Considering the thermodynamic eﬃciency of a FC, as the con-
version eﬃciency of fuel into useful electrical output, despite heat engines,
this is not limited by the Carnot eﬃciency.
ηmax = Wmax
∆H = ∆G
∆H = 1 −T∆S
∆H
(2.13)
where Wmax is the maximum work delivered, and T∆S is the heat ex-
changed with the surroundings due to ’irreversibilities’. The ∆H is usually
larger in magnitude than ∆G, thus the theoretic thermic eﬃciency of a
fuel cell is around 90%, higher than the heat engines’ one. This eﬃciency
theoretical limit slightly decline with the operating temperature of the FC,
in practise although, voltage losses are so low that the output FC voltage
results higher at higher temperatures.
A better eﬃciency measure for FC takes in account the maximum voltage
able to be drawn from a cell. Considering the enthalpy of formation of H2
(the heating value) as the maximum energy convertible into electricity, and
assuming no irreversibilities, the reversible voltage would be calculated using
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Open circuit voltage and cell performance
13
∆H as Wmax and the eﬃciency of the cell calculated as following:
V r = −∆hf
2F
(2.14)
ηcell = Vcell
1.48V 100%
(∆hf = HHV )
(2.15)
However not all the fuel can be used, therefore the eﬃciency measure should
take into account a fuel utilization coeﬃcient µf and rewritten as:
µf = fuel mass reacted in cell
fuel mass input to cell
(2.16)
ηcell = µf
Vcell
1.48V 100%
(HHV )
(2.17)
In practise, when a fuel cell is in use, the operational voltage results less
than the standard cell voltage, Vr◦.
Vr◦in fact assumes no irreversibil-
ities and pure hydrogen - oxygen supplied at standard pressure, but in
operando many voltage losses occur which result into a characteristic po-
larization curve, as shown in Figure 2.5. The voltage versus current density
performance shows a typical polarization curve from an HT-PEMFC based
on phosphoric acid-doped polybenzimidazole (PBI) electrolyte polymer at
160◦C and normal air pressure is presented in Fig. 2.5. The characteristic
curve shape is the result of four major irreversibilities (losses):
1. Activation losses: at low current densities the voltage losses are associ-
ated with the activation energy barrier that must be overcome in the
cathode and anode electrodes to drive the chemical reactions and with
internal currents and fuel crossover, thus they are function of electrode
properties, temperature, and pressure conditions [3].
2. Ohmic losses: at intermediate current density range, voltage losses
are according to the Ohms law, and associated with limited polymer
membrane proton conductivity electronic resistance generated in elec-
trodes, wires, and the various interconnections. Ohmic drop is also
function of current density and its cycling due to water production
that enhances the proton conductivity of the electrolyte [3].
3. Masstransport losses: at high current density, voltage losses are caused
by fast changes in concentration of the reactants at the surface of the
electrodes. Concentration polarization is inﬂuenced by structure of
the electrodes, fuel cell temperature, pressure, and ﬂow rates of the
reactants [3].
==PAGE:24==
2.4 Components
14
2.4
Components
A single-cell of HT-PEMFC comprises one membrane electrode assembly
(MEA), which consists in a ionic conductor electrolyte medium, usually it’s
a thin solid polymeric membrane doped with a liquid electrolyte (acid, al-
kali or fused salt) sandwiched by ﬁrst catalyst layers (CL), microporous
layer (MPL), carbon gas diﬀusion layers (GDL) and last kapton gaskets.
The MEA is mounted into the test house between two Teﬂon insulator gas-
ket sheets, in contact with two graphite bipolar plates. Two copper-type
current-collectors are located at the two ends of the cell and are connected
by stainless steel endplate assemblies . A schematic diagram of the cross-
sectional components of a single-cell HT-PEMFC is shown in Fig. 2.5. The
components are divided into two sides, an anode and a cathode side, sepa-
rated by the MEA with a PBI-membrane [9].
Figure 2.5. Single High Temperature PEM fuel cell schematic. [10]
MEA
The Membrane Electrode Assembly is ’the heart’ of a fuel cell, in
fact here the reaction happens, it consists of a solid sheet of electrolyte doped
polymer bound on both sides to sheets of catalysed porous electrodes. The
negative|electrolyte|positive assembly is thus one item, is very thin and is
commonly referred to as the membraneelectrode assembly(MEA). A MEA of
an acid HT-PEMFC is mainly composed by an acid-doped proton exchange
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Components
15
membrane sandwiched between two diﬀerent catalyst layers (CLs), and the
gas diﬀusion layers (GDLs). Typically, these components are fabricated indi-
vidually and then pressed together at high temperatures and pressures. An
ideal MEA would allow all active catalyst sites in the CL to be accessible to
the reactant (H2 and O2), protons, and electrons and would facilitate the ef-
fective removal of produced water from the CL and GDL; Main components
of the MEA are as following:
• Membrane: protonexchange membrane, it’s usually a polymeric ma-
terial containing mobile H+ ions. The membrane separates the two
half cell reactions and in order to function must be chemically and
thermally stable in a red-ox high temperature environment, ionically
conductive, gas tight and electrical insulating.
• Electrodes: the electrodes is constituted by a triplepoint electrocat-
alyst (fabricated such as the electrocatalyst, the electrolyte and the
fuel come into simultaneous contact), dispersed on an electronically
conducting material. Mainly two layers can be distinguished, the cat-
alyst layer and the gas diﬀusion layer, in case of acid electrolytes also
a microporous layer may be included in between.
– CL: The catalyst layer is also rewarded as the "active electrode",
it’s usually around 10 µm thick and coated on the GDLs, its
principal characteristics have to include gas permeability, elec-
tron conductivity and thermal stability. The catalyst consists in
nanoparticles of platinum metal deposited on the surface of ﬁnely
divided carbon particles of larger size that function as a substrate.
Anode and cathode are similarly designed and both employ Plat-
inum as catalyst - the metal with the greatest catalytic activity
for both electrode reactions. Main diﬀerence is the Pt-loading,
usually much higher on the air electrode (cathode) as the rate of
the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is much slower than that
of the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR).
– MPL (not always present): The microporous layer is a very thin
(microporous) hydrophobic layer (10 µm) of carbon black between
the GDL and the catalyst layer to avoid GDL soaking with phos-
phoric acid (and degradation of GDL). The layer consists princi-
pally of carbon black with a 1040 wt.% loading of PTFE.
==PAGE:26==
2.4 Components
16
– GDL is made of porous electron-conductive material, usually car-
bon ﬁbres, in the form of paper or thin fabric/cloth, with 100400
µm thickness. It provides a porous structure where reactant and
product gases can diﬀuse trough the catalysts, it also function as
electrical connection between the carbonsupported catalyst and
the bipolar plate (currentcollectors), lastly it carries away reac-
tion products, such as water, from the electrolyte surface towards
the exhaust and is a structural support to the catalyst layer.
• Electrolyte: It’s a proton conductive medium. In case of a nonﬂuori-
nated hydrocarbon polymer membrane as PBI membranes, the proton
conductivity is very low but can be easily enhanced by doping with
strong acids (free H+) to form a singlephase polymer electrolyte with
high conductivity. In this case the proton conduction is essentially
through acid rather than through water as conventional.
• Gaskets: They consist in polymeric seals used to keep the gases con-
ﬁned into the MEA active area and prevent liquid electrolyte seepage.
PBI Membrane
Polybenzimidazole membranes have very low inherent
proton conductivity, but they become the most eﬀective membrane for HT-
PEMFCs when doped in acid [4,30], to form a singlephase polymer elec-
trolyte with high conductivity. Phosphoric acid has been found to be most
stable and costeﬀective for this purpose, exhibiting good thermal and me-
chanical stability, low gas permeability and low electroosmotic drag of wa-
ter. PA doped PBI membranes maintain their good electrical and mechan-
ical properties without extra humidiﬁcation up to temperatures as high
as 200◦C. Polybenzimidazole (PBI) is an hydrocarbon polymer, nonﬂuori-
nated, nonsulfonated, heatresistant, the commercially available is a poly[2,2’-
(mphenylene)-5,5’-bibenzimidazole] with the acronyms m-PBI and poly(2,5-
benzimidazole), AB-PBI (see Fig. 2.6). The polymers contain a basic imi-
dazole functionality that allows the uptake of the acid protic electrolyte by
adsorption processes, which is responsible, and required, for the proton con-
duction. High proton conductivity is enhanced by the formation of dynamic
hydrogen bonding networks, in which protons can readily transfer by hydro-
gen bond breaking and forming processes [3]. Those processes are known
as Grotthus-type hopping mechanism, a proton jump mechanism, whereby
a proton is add to a water molecule forming temporarily a hydronium ion
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Components
17
Figure 2.6. Structure of the repeating units of m-PBI and AB-PBI (left). Tentative
interactions of phosphoric acid with m-PBI (two repeating units are depicted +
5.5 H3PO4 molecules per repeating unit). The imidazole groups are protonated,
thus the dihydrogenphosphate anions are subject to strong coulombic interactions.
Additional phosphoric acid molecules are interacting only through H bonds (right).
[3]
(H3O+) causing the hop of an other proton, from the same H3O+ to the next
molecule [11].
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3
Activation
The activation time of a fuel cell is the initial period of operation needed
to reach stable performance, ensuring reproducibility and comparability of
results [12].
The processes taking place during the activation of an HT-
PEMFC are not well known, however the main contribution is attributed
to the PA nonuniform distribution within the membrane electrode assembly
after manufacturing. During activation, performance is expected to improve
as a result of uniform redistribution of phosphoric acid along with increased
catalyst activity by impurity removal and enhanced membrane conductivity.
Galbiati at al. [13], analysed three diﬀerent procedures (T=160◦C, I=
0.2A/cm2), one involving daily startup and shutdown (steady state condi-
tions for 8 h a day), a procedure without interruption at reference steady
state conditions and the same procedure with 1 h direct exposure of the
MEA to the atmosphere. The continuous activation method was found to
draw the highest performance with total activation time of 100 h. The non-
continuous activation requires a shorter time, around 50 h, but lead to a
lower ﬁnal voltage, suggesting accelerated degradation processes.The initial
exposure of the MEA to the atmosphere, on the other hand, altered the
initial acid distribution and lead to a longer activation time of 200 h.
Bonaventura et al. [14] employed diﬀerent characterization techniques
like polarization curves, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and
cyclic voltammetry (CV) in order to study the processes taking place dur-
ing galvanostatic and potential cycling activation procedures. Galvanostatic
activation took place at 0.02 A/cm2 for 48 h and 160 ◦C whereas potential
cycling activation consisted in performing 25 polarization curves for approx-
imately 53 h, between cycles the cell was at OCV. For approximately the
same activation time the galvanostatic procedure originated a MEA with a
higher performance. It was concluded that MEA performance is enhanced
by the increase in catalyst activity and the decrease in ohmic resistance.
Tingelof and Ihonen [2] investigated diﬀerent activation strategies:
==PAGE:29==
3 Activation
19
1. Galvanostatic activation: 100-h constant current start-up at relatively
low current of 0.2 A/cm2. As a result, MEA performance was increased
noticeably (voltage increase is approximately 2025 mV over 100 h at
160◦C), suggested phenomena involved are humidiﬁcation of the mem-
brane, removal of impurities from the catalyst, ripening of the catalyst
and redistribution of the electrolyte during operation.
2. Potential cycling break-in: polarization curves were performed from 0
to 0.8 A/cm2 for 300 s per current step, at 160◦C. Results showed that
potential cycling does not increase the performance of a PBI fuel cell,
actually causes small decrease in performance.
3. High-temperature galvanostatic break-in: the cell was operated 1 h af-
ter being warmed to 160◦C, thereafter it was increased to 200◦CC for
18 h, followed by performance relaxation. The high inﬂuence of tem-
perature on MEA performance, only 48 h after the high-temperature
step performance remains stable.
To sum up, investigating PBI HT-PEMFC activation is a challenging task.
Literature ﬁndings can be synthesised as following:
• Non-continuous activation mode gives shorter activation time but
lower ﬁnal voltage
• MEA exposure to atmosphere prior break-in is not beneﬁcial for acti-
vation
• Galvanostatic activation draws high performances
• Potential cycling activation does not improve performance, sometimes
is not beneﬁcial
• High-temperature galvanostatic activation is a promising rapid acti-
vation procedure
The most promising procedure seen in literature appears to be one-day
galvanostatic operation at 2000◦C followed by two days of relaxation at
1600◦CC.
==PAGE:30==
3.1 Temperature Influence
20
3.1
Temperature Influence
As already mentioned above, increasing the temperature of a PBI fuel cell for
limited time during start-up may decrease the cell activation time. Bonaven-
tura et al. Ref. [2] studied MEAs performance with polarization curves at
diﬀerent times: with high temperature activation performance stability is
reached only after 3 days. As can be seen from the polarization curves 3.1,
the catalytic activity increased after 18 h of high-temperature activation,
while the ionic conductivity of the membrane decreased.
Figure 3.1. Polarization curves at diﬀerent times before and after high-temperature
break-in. Cell temperature at 160◦C, pressure ambient, air and hydrogen stoi-
chiometries 2/1.2. [2]
This results could serve as inspiration for a new experiment design em-
ploying the proposed activation procedure and further optimizing it by test-
ing diﬀerent temperature steps and current densities. A deeper understand-
ing of the physical processes involved may be obtained with electrochemi-
cal impedance spectroscopy during activation time as suggested by Ref. [2].
Testing of diﬀerent temperature and current levels may be performed to
optimise this procedure, along with EIS and CV measurements, to better
understand the physical processes taking place. EIS can be used
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Water Influence
21
3.2
Water Influence
In literature mass transport issues are observed to be inﬂuenced by the re-
distribution of acid in the presence of H2O humidiﬁcation of the fuel. It’s
hard to ﬁnd the PA/water trade-oﬀ, in Ref. [15], conﬂicting eﬀects are de-
scribed: adding water to the reformate gases improves ohmic resistance and
increases the protonic conductivity of electrolyte at the anode but, in pres-
ence of excess water, the cathode degrades by PA removal, the catalyst may
get ’ﬂooded’ by the acid and the outlet of the cell may be blocked resulting
in rapidly deteriorating performance due to low H2 partial pressures. Looks
like during the start-up period, when the acid is present all over the MEA
non-uniformly, water plays an important role showing tendency to drag the
acid away. Thus, many studies have suggested to have a start-up in anhy-
drous conditions to make sure the acid reaches the catalyst layer from the
membrane.
It may be useful, but also controversial, investigating strategies to control
the water content inside the FC system: water, always in form of water vapor,
is present in small quantity in the membrane, adsorbed during acid doping
(doped with 85% PA); major part it gets produced at the cathode side by
redaction reaction; an other part is appositely injected at the anode side to
recreate humidiﬁcation conditions of the reformate gasses.
Principal concern would be avoiding the presence of water excess, which
is negatively reported in literature. Thomas at al. [12] mentions the possi-
bility of the acid getting squeezed out during assembly by presence of excess
water and getting lost instead of redistributed, with consequent ﬂooding of
the catalyst layer and blocking of the reaction sites.
Thus, it appears reasonable investigating the inﬂuence of water content
on PA redistribution in the FC, testing the fuel cell with diﬀerent RH of the
reformate gasses (feed-in water), diﬀerent MEA drying process and diﬀerent
water production rates on the cathode site (modifying λ).
3.3
Current density Influence
As known from literature [13] [14], the acid redistribution is one major pro-
cess responsible for the MEA activation, acid movement was reported as
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Current density Influence
22
function of current density [16]. Thus, activation under diﬀerent current
conditions was investigated [14] [12]: Thomas et al. [12] tested 6 cells, per-
forming current cycling at diﬀerent time periods following start-up, with the
objective of enhancing fast acid redistribution and draw peak performance
in a shortest time.
The experiment showed very similar voltage proﬁles among the diﬀer-
ently tested cells and no particular trend among the resistances measured
at diﬀerent frequencies (EIS), therefore, not much insight into the break-in
process taking place could be obtained. The long term durability test didn’t
show long term degradation processes, thus it may be inferred that absence
of activation time prior current cycling may lead to similar performances,
but more testing is needed to verify this.
On the other hand, acid ﬂooding was reported for a higher current den-
sities, ∼0.8 A cm2 [16], and the load cycling test was carried out at current
densities between 0.2 A cm2 and 0.6 A cm2 with 5 min at each current den-
sity. In order to see any result, it might help pushing the condition to the
extreme, cycling between 0.2 and 0.8 for longer times, in the hour range.
Considering Eberhardt et al. [17] investigation, the dynamic re-distribution
of PA under load cycling operation was analysed imaging HT-PEM fuel cell
with X-Ray tomographic microscopy.
Results of the tests quantiﬁed the
migration of PA from the cathode to anode at high current density and in
opposite direction at low current density. They attributed the phenomenon
to electrochemical pumping, resulting from the non-zero transport number
of hydrogen phosphate anions, which drags the electrolyte from the cathode
to anode [12]. Thus, phosphoric acid movements seem to be enhanced by
current density.
PA migration. In Ref [16], migration was observed to be fast under high
current density and slow at low current density, moreover, PA migration is
observed ﬂooding the anode gas diﬀusion layer at high current densities (0.8
A\cm2). In Fig 3.2, EIS spectra for the positive current step (0.20.8 Acm2,
ﬂooding) and the negative current step (de-ﬂooding) are shown. During
ﬂooding, the change in the low frequency resistance over time is attributed
to (hydrogen) mass transport issues due to acid migrating towards the anode
at high current density (Figure 3.2a, 0.8 Acm2). For the de-ﬂooding case
(0.2 Acm2), the trend is inverted. The low frequency impedance increase at
high current density was attributed to the phosphoric acid saturation in the
anode GDL [17].
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Current density Influence
23
Figure 3.2. Impedance spectra comparison carried out in 2 min intervals, a) during
ﬂooding (0.8 Acm2) and, b) during de-ﬂooding (0.2 Acm2). All experiments were
performed with pure O2 at the cathode and 10% hydrogen in nitrogen.
PA ﬂooding. Current density inﬂuences the water vapor balance in the
cell and consequently inﬂuences the ion mobility, in particular the transport
number of protons in the membrane, as reported in Eberhardt et al. [17].
In the paper, Synchrotron based X-ray tomographic microscopy (XTM) was
used for imaging and quantifying the redistribution of phosphoric acid under
dynamic load conditions. Electrolyte redistribution within the fuel cell com-
ponents was imaged revealing extensive migration of PA from cathode to
anode under high current density operation. The phenomena was reported
as ﬂooding since the PA permeates the anode gas diﬀusion layer (GDL) and
ﬂow ﬁeld channels. The phenomena was mainly attributed to negatively
charged hydrogen phosphate anions carrying part of the ionic current after
the detection of current-driven electrolyte movement by XTM. It was demon-
strated that the migration and consequently gas diﬀusion layer ﬂooding of the
anode is a relatively fast process, reaching steady state in the GDL after two
hours and in the ﬂow ﬁeld after about four hours. The process seems not
to be completely reversible with unconnected droplets of PA remaining in the
ﬂow ﬁeld after returning to low current density. Furthermore, diﬀusion of
PA, back from the GDL into the membrane and electrodes is a slower process
and no steady state was reached after 8 hours. [17] Fig. 3.3 [left] shows a
comparison of horizontal gray-scale slices of anode GDL x-ray images, taken
at diﬀerent time during activation and current density, when slow cycling
protocol was applied. A time resolved volumetric quantiﬁcation of the PA
in GDL and ﬂow ﬁeld channels is given on the right. When the current is
==PAGE:34==
3.3 Current density Influence
24
Figure 3.3. Left: horizontal slices of the anode GDL in the slow cycling experiment
as a function of time (bright grey: PA, light grey: carbon ﬁbers, dark grey: empty
pores). Right: volume of PA per active area in the GDL, ﬂow ﬁeld and total as
a function of time in the slow cycling experiment (the dashed lines act as a guide
for the eye).
increased from 0.2 to 0.8 Acm−2, an almost immediate ﬂow of PA into the
anode GDL can be observed (Figure 3.3, t2), and the inset in Figure 3.3 on
the right. PA saturation in the GDL increases until it reaches a steady-state
after approximately 3 hours at 0.8 A cm−2 (Figure 3.3, t3). After 4 h at high
current density also the PA in the ﬂow ﬁeld reaches a steady state. At this
point one of the three parallel ﬂow ﬁeld channels is just about to be ﬁlled
with electrolyte. After 4 hours the current density is decreased back to 0.2
Acm−2 and a sudden drop in GDL saturation can be observed along with a
decrease of PA volume in the ﬂow ﬁeld, followed by a slow and continuous
decrease of electrolyte volume in the GDL, until the end of the low current
cycle after 12 h. Interestingly, the condition before the current step is not
completely reached due to disconnected PA droplets sticking to the walls of
the ﬂow ﬁeld, unable to diﬀuse back to the porous layers.
In order to understand if this PA migration may be beneﬁcial, promoting
a faster redistribution of PA between membrane and CLs, and thus, a faster
activation, some test may be carried out at similar, but not so extreme,
conditions. One experimental procedure might be, for stance, testing MEA
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Current density Influence
25
activation performing a current step up, from 0.4 to 0.7/0.8 A/cm2.
==PAGE:36==
Part II
Experimental
techniques and results
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
HT-PEMFC diagnosis and characterisation can be carried with some stan-
dard electrochemical techniques here listed:
• Polarization Curve
• Cyclic Voltammetry
• Durability Curve / Ageing Test
• Electrochemical Impedance spectroscopy (EIS)
The polarization curve, or I-V curve, previously described in chapter 2,
provides information about the performance.
It is performed by feeding
the fuel cell with reactant gases, closing the electrical circuit with a resistor
(fuel cell connected to a load), changing the current density to which the
FC is subjected and recording the generated voltage. Thus, the polarization
curve relates fuel cell voltage and current and gives insight on the inﬂuence
of several factors (such as electrolyte membrane, GDL, micro-porous layer
(MPL), catalyst layer (CL), bipolar plates (BPPs) ﬂow ﬁeld design, operat-
ing temperature, pressure, and reactant ﬂow rates) on cell performance and
losses.
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) is a method where the potential is cycled, be-
tween 0 OCV and 0.5 V, linearly with time, the potential scan is reversed
once potential limits are reached [3]. It is commonly used to diagnose the
electrochemical activity of the catalyst spread on top of the electrodes.
Durability curve and EIS are the main characterization techniques used
in this work, as considered the most helpful to identify the diﬀerent mecha-
nisms and processes taking place during FC activation.
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Durability Curve
28
4.1
Durability Curve
With durability or ageing test, we refer to the curve obtained by recording
the FC voltage output over time in galvanostatic operation mode. In order to
investigate the MEA activation time, lasting usually around 150 test hours,
the MEAs were tested for 5 - 7 days maximum and the produced voltage
over time was recorded and analysed. In Fig.4.1,an example of durability
curve is shown, belonging to a MEA tested in section 8.1.
Figure 4.1. Cell voltage during galvanostatic activation of a Dapozol MEA. Cell
temperature at 160 řC, current density of 0.4 A/cm2, pressure ambient, *Stoi-
chiometry: λH2 = 1.3, λAir = 2.5. Reformate fuel = 10.35% H2O, 1.35% CO,
21.5% CO2, 66.9% H2. Data from experiment 2, section 8.1
Figure 4.2. Durability curve, dips removed and substitutes buy linear ﬁt. Data
from experiment 2, section 8.1
As can be observed, the signal present many dips and noise, this is usually
due to instabilities of the setup and instrumentation, a quick ﬁx would be
to eliminate the dibs and linearly interpolate the missing data, as shown in
Fig.4.2.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Durability Curve
29
In order to remove the noise, signal smoothing need to be performed.
The easiest way is to employing a ﬁlter: SavitzkyGolay ﬁlter is a digital
ﬁlter that can be applied to smoothing the data increasing precision without
distorting the signal tendency. The smoothed curve is shown in Fig.4.2 Last,
Figure 4.3. Durability curve smoothed using SavitzkyGolay ﬁlter (100 window
point). Data from experiment 2, section 8.1
the activation behavior needs to be analysed in order to ﬁnd out the total
activation time that the curves employs to reach "stability" and the growth
rate at which is reached. We use the term "stability" in the same way as
"stable conditions", which we here deﬁne as the time in which the measured
voltage presents variations smaller than ±0.1 mV/h.
In order to model
the curve growth rate during activation, an easy solution is to use linear ﬁt
analysis: splitting the curve in segments and performing linear interpolation
on each segments. As can be observed in Fig.4.4, the green MEA was ﬁtted
Figure 4.4. Durability curves and linear ﬁt analysis over the activation time-frame
(150 - 200 h). Data from experiment 2, section 8.1
using linear interpolation twice, interpolating the curve with two segments
along the activation time (around 200 h), the ﬁrst segment present a faster
growth than the second. The blue MEA was ﬁtted using just one line for
==PAGE:40==
4.2 EIS
30
simplicity. Linear interpolation is overall a quite good method to study the
MEA activation behaviour: the curve slope can be easily estimated and used
for comparison of diﬀerent MEAs activation behaviours, moreover, the total
activation time employed can be estimated in a more precise way.
4.2
EIS
Impedance spectroscopy is based on an electrical measurement applicable to
studies of electrochemical kinetics and determination of electronic or ionic
conduction mechanism. The technique is very useful as can be employed to
understand the diﬀerent mechanisms occurring within the fuel cell and to
quantify the changes occurring. it’s a noninvasive technique, therefore it has
been widely used to monitor the rate of degradation without interfering with
the fuel cell operation. EIS spectra are usually represented in the Nyquist
plot (Figure4.5), where the imaginary and real parts of the impedance are
shown on ordinates and abscissa respectively. In the plot shown in ﬁgure4.5,
Figure 4.5. On the left: Nyquist plot for HT-PEMFC operating with MEAs from
diﬀerent suppliers at 0.2 A/cm2, T = 160 řC, p = 1 atm, contact pressure =
0.75 MPa [3]. On the right: Example of impedance spectrum equivalent electrical
circuit. Reproduced with permission of Elsevier [3].
three regions can be distinguished for high, medium, and low frequency
ranges:
• RΩ, the high frequency interception of the impedance spectra with
the real axis of Ohmic Resistance, represents the sum of the mem-
brane resistance to conduction of protons and electrons, in addiction,
==PAGE:41==
4.2 EIS
31
the resistance between wires and contact interfaces as BBP/GDL and
GDL/CL [3].
• RHF, the high frequency loop or 45ř branch, is attributed in literature
to the anode charge transfer resistance which is related to hydrogen
oxidation reaction (HOR) activation losses, but its meaning is still an
open question due to lack of conﬁdence [3].
• RIF, the intermediate frequency loop is usually associated to the cath-
ode charge transfer resistance, related to oxygen reduction reaction
activation losses. The loop is much bigger than high frequency one as
ORR is the limiting reaction in the FC [3].
• RLF, the low frequency range loop, is attributed to gas diﬀusion limita-
tions in the GDL, however, In case of the FC operated with synthetic
reformate and air appears just to be the result of oscillations in reac-
tant concentrations along the gas channels [3].
Equivalent electrical circuits are often used to ﬁt models representing
the electrical behavior of the fuel cell using diﬀerent networks of resistors,
capacitors, inductors, and others [3]. EIS is a good monitoring tool for the
activation of HTPEM fuel cells. In this work it has been employed in or-
der to quantify stability and characterize MEA processes during activation.
Multiple EIS spectra were recorded for each tested MEA over time and cor-
rected subtracting the ﬂow plate resistance. In the following experiments,
only the Ohmic Resistance was analysed, its value were extracted from each
EIS spectrum considering the positive value with the minimum positive ab-
scissa (Re(Z)), which in the Nyquist plot corresponds to the ﬁrst positive
value on the left of the graph. Thereafter the ohmic resistance measure-
ments where plotted over time to analyse the trend of the proton-electron
conductivity resistance over the activation period.
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 5
Experimental Setup
The experiments were performed in an in-house test station, main equip-
ment used is shown in Fig5.1. The test bench, arranged by DPS, hosts four
commercial Electrochem single cells or ’test houses’, each one equipped with
one Dapozol®® MEA. Cell temperature is controlled by electric heaters and
reactants are supplied by gas inlet tubes and syringe pump (for the water).
The test house has a three-channel end plate at the anode for inlet water, in-
let reformate, outlet excess fuel, and a two-channel end plate at the cathode
for inlet air and outlet excess air and product water.
Figure 5.1. Schematic representation of the in-house single cell test bench. [18]
The set-up is controlled using a program written in LabView, electro-
chemical tests were performed with BioLogic electrochemical workstation
coupled with a potentiostat (SP-50/150, Bio-Logic). The FC control PC is
used to set test conditions (current, gas ﬂows, temperature..) and to record
the monitored system variables in a time-series text ﬁle.
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Manufacturing
33
A H&H modular DC electronic load is employed to set the fuel cell
current in galvanostatic operation and to record real time fuel cell voltage
and current. Stoichiometry was assured with mass ﬂow controllers (Vögtlin
Instruments GmbH ), while temperature is kept constant by a PID controller
(CAL 3300) 1 connected to a k type thermocouple, inserted in the cathode
ﬂow plate. Cell temperature, output voltages, current density, anode ﬂow
and cathode ﬂow are set and recorded by the Labview program into a text
ﬁle, also EIS spectra are produced and recorded into a text ﬁle by EC-Lab
software. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in this conﬁguration is
performed by using a modular DC electronic load, by superimposing to the
DC current a sinusoidal AC signal and measuring the linear AC voltage
response of the electrochemical system. The impedance is computed as the
ratio of the Fourier transform (Fast Fourier Transform algorithm) of the
voltage signal to the current signal.
The cell is kept at a regulated temperature of 160◦C, and at atmospheric
pressure, fed with pumped room air (cathode) and wet reformate (anode).
The reformate is a mixture of gasses with stoichiometries of 1.3 for H2 and
2.5 for air, and composition: 1.4%CO, 22.3%CO2, 69.3%H2, 6.9%H2O.
5.1
Manufacturing
The MEAs used in this tests is Dapozol® 5x5cm2 with around 560µm total
thickness and 25cm2 active area. The cathode catalyst is carbon supported
PtCo with a Pt loading of 1.02 mgPt/cm2, the anode catalyst is carbon sup-
ported Pt2 with a loading of 0.9 mg/cm2. The PBI membrane (Dapozol®),
∼70µm thick, was doped with around 12 mol of phosphoric acid per mol of
PBI, sandwiched between two electrodes with an active area of 21cm2. The
electrodes (Dapozol®) were fabricated applying a catalyst layer to the gas
diﬀusion layer with slot die coating technology, an heat treatment was per-
formed afterwards at 220◦C for 2 h. The MEA was prepared compressing at
high temperature the PA-doped PBI membrane between the catalyst coated
electrodes, adding a polymeric edge reinforcement (Kapton, 50µm). The
compression ratio was controlled using two aluminium plates ’hard-stops’,
200 µm thick, when placing the MEA in the hot-press machine.
1a data acquisition board equipped with cold junction compensation circuit, RS
==PAGE:44==
5.2 Assembly
34
Figure 5.2. Photograph of the main test setup components.[Taken with permission
of DPS. Egeskovvej 6C, DK-3490 Kvistgaard, 2020.]
5.2
Assembly
The test house is assembled according to DPS internal procedure, the dif-
ferent layers are sandwiched in the order illustrated in Fig.5.3. The central
part of the fuel cell corresponds to the MEA, the other components comes
in mirrored pairs. The aluminum 196/cm2 end plates (1) is coated with a di-
electric to prevent short-circuit and is used to clamp the assembly together,
to serve as a manifold for the reactant gas and to heat the cell with cylindri-
cal electric heating elements. The current collector plate (2) is isolated from
the end plate by a Viton Gasket (3) and provides electrical connection be-
tween the electrodes (composing the MEA (10)) and the electric load along
with the voltmeter. A conduction enhancer (4) is mounted between collec-
tor plates and electrodes, it consists of a ﬂexible graphite paper (Papyex®)
designed to optimise the mechanical and electrical connection between the
bipolar plates (5) and the current collector (2).
The MEA is sandwiched between 64 cm2 graphite ﬂow plates (5) provided
with low channels of 1 mm depth. PTFE gaskets (6), 250 µm thick, are
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Flow plates resistance
35
Figure 5.3. Exploded and stacked view of Fuel Cell Test Unit [DPS]
employed in order to keep the MEA gas tight. The ﬂow plates are themselves
embedded into 196 cm2 gas inlet aluminium plates, provided with current
collector layers on the inner face. The test house is sealed applying a torque
of around 2-2.7 Nm on the 8 clamping bolts, the pressure distribution over
the MEA and gaskets is tested afterwards using a pressure meter (Digitron).
5.3
Flow plates resistance
The cell potential diﬀers from its equilibrium potential during operation
due to irreversible losses caused by activation, concentration and ohmic re-
sistances. Among all these resistances, ohmic resistance is dominant under
the normal fuel cell operation conditions, and resides occurs as contact resis-
tance at each interface inside the fuel cell, the highest resistance resides at
the interface between bipolar plates and the GDLs of the MEA. Results by
literature showed that contact resistances in HT-PEMFC depends mainly
on clamping pressure, gas pressure, current density, temperature, and sur-
==PAGE:46==
5.4 Test Procedure
36
face treatments. The contact resistance of each sets of bipolar plates were
Figure 5.4. Schematic of resistance measurement experimental setups [DPS]
measured before the durability test, using an impedance setup and a stan-
dard test house assembled as shown in Fig.5.4 The cell was assembled as
usual but using a Papiex® ﬂexible graphite sheet in place of the MEA to
emulate the contact surface between GDLs and bipolar plates, the cell was
clumped with standard pressure (2 Nm). The measured resistance from this
setup includes the bulk resistances of two bipolar plates, contact resistances
between gold plates (current collectors) and BPPs. The contact resistance
was recorded using a DC milli-ohmmeter with a resolution of 0.1, repeating
the measurement 3 time (reassembling the cell every time) and averaging
the three results.
5.4
Test Procedure
Having manufactured PBI doped MEAs, the test proceeds follows these
main steps:
1. Flow plates resistance measurement
2. Test cell assembly and mounting onto the test bench
3. Start-up procedure [Appendix 2]
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Test Procedure
37
4. Observation of the voltage evolution over time, until stable perfor-
mance is reached 2 (’Activation Test’).
5. Analysis of the Ohmic resistance trend over time by performing EIS
each 24-50 test hours
The tests were all conducted at atmospheric pressure, with stoichiometry
of 2.5 for air and 1.3 for hydrogen and with hydrogen ﬂow of 250 ml/min,
air ﬂow of 380 ml/min and 6.9% relative humidity in inlet gases. The MEA
was activated, ﬁrst following the start-up procedure described in Appendix
B, afterwards, running the test in galvanostatic mode at constant 0.2 A/cm2
load for around 300 h in total and 160 ◦C.
2condition deﬁned in this work at: ∆V < 0.1mV/h
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 6
Experimental Design
As the FC activation behaviour depends on various parameters, the large
number of experimental factors to consider remains the major obstacle to un-
derstand the mechanisms behind the FC activation. The aim of the present
investigation is to model the experimental conditions using full factorial
experimental design.
Full factorial design was used to study the inﬂuence of diﬀerent exper-
imental factors on the activation time and behaviour. After a preliminary
investigation, three main experimental variables were chosen:
• U1: operating temperature in the ﬁrst start-up hours
• U2: anodic water feed rate / reformate humidiﬁcation
• U3: operational current in the ﬁrst start-up hours (galvanostatic op-
eration)
Table 6.1. Experimental ﬁeld.
Factors
U1 (Current Density)
(A/cm2)
U2 (Cell Temperature)
(◦C)
U3 (Relative Humidity)
(%)
1
0,6
200
0,1035
std
0,4
160
0,069
-1
0,2
-
0,0345
All this variable have an inﬂuence on the PA redistribution and activa-
tion mechanism, and are interconnected with each other. In Table 6.1, the
experimental variables are shown with three lever of variation chosen: stan-
dard value (STD), higher value (+1) and lower value (-1). Temperature just
has to levels of variation. Other two ’indirect’ experimental variables were
considered:
==PAGE:49==
6 Experimental Design
39
• U4: hot-press compression ratio during assembly
• U5: PA doping level
Table 6.2. Experimental matrix: 1 factor at a time
Experiment
n◦
Experimental Design
Experimental Matrix
I (A/cm2)
T (◦C)
RH (%)
X1
X2
X3
U1
U2
U3
0
std
std
std
0.4
160
6.90%
1
1
std
std
0.6
160
6.90%
2
-1
std
std
0.2
160
6.90%
3
std
1
std
0.4
200
6.90%
5
std
std
1
0.4
160
10.35%
6
std
std
-1
0.4
160
3.45%
In Table6.2 6 experiment are designed changing just one variable at a
time, with experiment "0" refer to a test run at standard conditions, no
variable change, used as reference for result comparison. In Table6.3, eight
experiments are designed changing two factors for each test, just one of the
variable is kept at standard conditions.
Table 6.3. Experimental matrix: 2 factors at a time
Experiment
n◦
Experimental Design
Experimental Matrix
I (A/cm2)
T (◦C)
RH (%)
X1
X2
X3
U1
U2
U3
0
std
std
std
0.4
160
6.90%
1
1
1
std
0.6
200
6.90%
2
-1
1
std
0.2
200
6.90%
3
1
std
1
0.6
160
10.35%
4
1
std
-1
0.6
160
3.45%
5
-1
std
1
0.2
160
10.35%
6
-1
std
-1
0.2
160
3.45%
7
std
1
1
0.4
200
10.35%
8
std
1
-1
0.4
200
3.45%
==PAGE:50==
6 Experimental Design
40
Table 6.4. Experimental matrix: 3 factors at a time
Experiment
n◦
Experimental Design
Experimental Matrix
I (A/cm2)
T (◦C)
RH (%)
X1
X2
X3
U1
U2
U3
0
std
std
std
0,4
160
6,90%
1
1
1
-1
0,6
200
10,35%
2
-1
1
1
0,2
200
3,45%
The last 2 test, shown in Table??, are designed changing all variables at
the same time, in other words no variable is kept at standard conditions. The
total number of experiments to carry out in order to ﬁnd out any relation
existing among the three chosen variables, is theoretically 16. Due to luck
of time and resources just 7 experiment were performed, as shown in Fig.??,
changing just one variable at a time and comparing result with a reference
MEA tested in standard conditions (experiment 0). Two experiments were
designed changing water and temperature test condition, one experiment
was designed changing manufacturing conditions, in particular changing the
MEA compression during the hot-pressed
Table 6.5. Experiments performed, 1 factor at a time
Executed
Experiment
n◦
Experimental Design
Experimental Matrix
P (%)
T (◦C)
RH (%)
X1
X2
X3
U1
U2
U3
0
std
std
std
-0,48
160
6,90%
1
1
std
std
-0,66
160
6,90%
4
-1
std
std
-0,37
160
6,90%
5
std
std
1
-0,48
160
10,35%
6
std
std
-1
-0,48
160
3,45%
7
std
1
std
-0,48
200
6,90%
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7
Experiment N.1:
Hot-press conditions
Influence
7.1
Experimental Section
This test has the main objective of studying the inﬂuence of hot-press condi-
tions on MEA performance, in other words the aim is to research any relation
between compression ratio, which the MEA has been subjected to during
manufacturing, and FC activation behaviour and performance when stable
conditions are reached. In addition, the eﬀect of phosphoric acid membrane
doping level on performance was simultaneously investigated and tested at
diﬀerent compression ratios.
A new batch of identical Dapozol® MEAs were manufactured using PA-
doped and wiped-oﬀPBI-membranes (25 cm2 membrane, 21 cm2 active
area, doping level of 11.6). Diﬀerently thick Aluminum hard-stop plates
were employed during the last manufacturing step, which consists in the
utilization of an "hot-press"-machine to compress the MEA assembly at high
temperature. To sum up, the MEAs manufactured can be divided in three
groups basing on the diﬀerent hot-press conditions used:
1. Two MEAs compressed at standard conditions, in order to compare
results: couple of standard Aluminum Hard-Stops plates, of ∼200 µm
thickness (100 µm each), were employed during hot-pressing, with an
estimated compression ratio of ∼48%.
2. Two MEAs compressed with couple of Aluminum-foil Hard-Stops, of
∼80 µm (40 µm each) thickness, estimated to compress the membrane
==PAGE:52==
7.1 Experimental Section
42
assembly of ∼37% as compared to the initial thickness.
3. Two MEAs compressed with a couple of standard Al-Hard-Stops and
a couple of Al-foil hard-stops on top, with ∼280 µm thickness in total
and estimated compression ratio of ∼65%.
Each membrane was weighted prior MEA manufacturing, the MEA thick-
ness was measured (8 measurements per each MEA) prior assembly in order
to estimate the eﬀect of compression, Eq7.1. It is assumed that changes
in membrane weight are due to diﬀerent amount of phosphoric acid being
absorbed by the PBI membrane during doping and not to either more or
less PBI material amount. Basing on the membrane weight the MEAs has
been grouped in two ulterior categories: low PA content for MEAs with rela-
tively low membrane weights, high PA content for MEAs with relatively high
membrane weights. Membrane weights, hard stop thicknesses and estimated
MEA compression ratios are listed in Table7.1.
Table 7.1. Measurements of membrane weight and hard stop total thickness, es-
timation of MEA compression ratio, Eq.7.1, applied during MEA assembly. All
MEAs tested are PA-doped wiped oﬀDapozol® MEAs, 21 cm2 active area.
MEA ID
Membrane
Weight1
Phosphoric
Acid Content
Hard-Stops
Thickness
Estimated MEA
Compression Ratio
MEA049
810 mg
Low
40 µm
48%
MEA050
838 mg
High
40 µm
48%
MEA051
840 mg
High
STD (100 µm)
65%
MEA052
820 mg
Low
STD (100 µm)
65%
MEA053
835 mg
High
140 µm
37%
MEA054
814 mg
Low
140 m
37%
Mean = 826 mg
SD =±13
==PAGE:53==
7.2 Test Results
43
7.2
Test Results
The distribution of MEA thicknesses, measurements after assembly, is shown
in Fig.7.1 for each tested MEA, the mean and standard deviation for each
series of measurements is shown in the bar chart Fig.7.2.
Figure 7.1. Distribution of MEA thickness measurements, grouped and coloured
diﬀerently in accord with the compression ratio used to manufacture the MEA.
Figure 7.2. MEA thickness averages and standard deviations, for 65%, 48% and
37% compression ratio. Light Blue: MEA with low PA content. Blue: MEA with
high PA content. *8 thickness measurements performed for each MEA, using the
micro-meter.
Looking at the data shown above, it’s hard too see any relevant corre-
lation between hot-press compression ratio and MEA resulting thickness,
meaning that either compression insigniﬁcantly aﬀects MEA thickness after
==PAGE:54==
7.2 Test Results
44
the hot-press, either this eﬀect is hard to recognise due to the elastic nature
of the GDL (material with spring-like characteristic) which regains partially
its initial shape after compression. An issue could be related the hard-stops
thickness, which might need to vary more in order to show any inﬂuence on
MEA performance.
Regarding graphs 7.1 and 7.2 some consideration can be done as follow-
ing:
• In the box-plot (Fig.7.1), the MEAs with lower compression ratio show
a wider spread distribution of thicknesses as compared to the more
compressed ones, with maximum value at 598 µm and minimum one
at 513 µm; all the boxes lays in almost the same range of values,
540
565 µm, exception for MEA053 whose box outdistances from
the others, with 575 µm median.
The compression ratio has been
estimated using the following equation and data listed in Appendix,
assuming unchanged membrane thickness:
MEAcompression = tf −t0
t0
(7.1)
t0 = tPBImembrane + tAnode + tCathode
(7.2)
tf = tPBImembrane + tKapton + tAlHardStops
(7.3)
Where t0 and tf are the initial and ﬁnal MEA thickness respectively,
tPBImembrane, tAnode, tCathode, tKapton are the thicknesses of MEA’s com-
ponents (membrane, cathodic and anodic electrodes, Kapton gaskets),
tAlHardStops is the thickness of the hard-stop plates used for MEA com-
pression.
• The bar chart (Fig.7.2) shows very little correlation between average
MEA thickness and corresponding compression ratio, thus no trend
can be inferred between MEA ﬁnal thickness and compression ratio
used. Its interesting to notice that higher thickness variation is seen
when low compression ratio is applied: at higher compression the ﬁnal
MEA thickness appears more controlled, with values conﬁned between
557 559 µm.
==PAGE:55==
7.2 Test Results
45
7.2.1
Activation Test
The MEA activation curves are represented for each group in Figure 7.3.
Each MEA was tested following the same start-up procedure (Appendix),
each test house was leak tested and each test was performed at equal hu-
midiﬁcation, temperature and reformate composition conditions (Appendix).
The output voltage for each MEA tested over time is shown in Figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3. Durability curves tested for MEAs with diﬀerent compression ratios.
*Stoichiometry: λH2 = 1.3, λAir = 2.5. Reformate fuel= 1.4% CO, 22.3% CO2,
69.3% H2, 6.9% H2O. Active area: 21 cm2.
In Figure 7.3, the activation curves for three groups of MEAs are dis-
played: in red MEA052 is tested with 65% compression rate, in violet and
black MEA049 and MEA050 are tested at 48% compression ratio (standard
conditions), in green and blue MEA053 and MEA054 are tested at 37% com-
pression ratio. Reproducible results are obtained for the groups of MEAs
tested at 37% and at STD compression, showing positive activation behav-
ior.
In all the groups, few rapid voltage ﬂuctuations can be observed with
negligible eﬀect on cell performance. Usually this noise is due to the water
setup, especially the well visible voltage dips might be caused by air bubbles
in the water line: a voltage drops of around 10 mV is expected to be caused
by absence of water in the reformate. The activation curve is deﬁned as the
MEA durability curve running between cell start-up and the time in which
performance "stability" is reached, in other words the time in which voltage
changes are lower than ±0.1mV/h.
==PAGE:56==
7.2 Test Results
46
In Fig. 7.3, MEA051 was not shown because of test failure and very
low MEA performance (∼0.2V ). The reason for this behavior is not well
understood, the low acid doping of the membrane might be the problem,
the membrane weight in fact was around 810 mg, the lowest value among
the other tested membranes. However, fatalities of the setup are not to be
excluded. MEA052, over-compressed in the same way as MEA051, shows
good performance and a quite linear and smooth curve as compared to
the other MEAs.
The curve slightly diﬀer in activation behaviour: it’s
characterised by unusually low voltage growth rate since start-up and a
not well understood voltage ’step-up’ at around 100 test hours, followed by
performance increase and stable conditions rapidly reached with a proﬁle
similar to MEA053.
7.2.2
Activation Analysis
For this experiment, it is reasonable to divide the activation curve in two
segments, based on their voltage rate variation. First segment was taken be-
tween start-up time (after start-up procedure) and around 70-80 test hours,
characterized by a faster slope with voltage rate growth of ∼0.7mv/h. Sec-
ond segment was taken between 60 test hours and voltage stability, reached
approx. after 100 120 hours, this appears almost ﬂat, with voltage growth
rate of around 0.2- 0.1 mv/h.
In Table 8.2, the slopes are calculated for each segment and shown for
each group of MEA tested. Despite MEA051 failure, whose slope was not
calculated, positive activation trend is observed in all the groups following
a linear outline and total activation time of 120 140 test hours.
MEA050 tested at standard condition shows the best performance in this
test, with ∼0.62V at stability. The worst MEA in terms of performance is
MEA054, whose voltage accounts for ∼0.5V at start-up and reaches stability
after around 135h at ∼0.57V.
The over-compressed MEA052 shows a slightly diﬀerent trend from the
other curves, the ﬁrst and the second segment of the activation seem to
have a quite similar slope, around 0.2 mV/h, at around 95 h a voltage
increase occur shifting up the curve at an higher voltage level. Due to the
particularity of this curve outline, it is decided to linearly interpolate the
curve on the overall activation period, the result growth rate accounts for
∼0.57mV/h.
==PAGE:57==
7.2 Test Results
47
Table 7.2. Calculated slope from linear ﬁt analysis performed at each segment that
constitutes the totality of the MEA activation period.
MEA ID
Voltage Growth Rate (linear interpolation)
Compression:
STD
Segment 1
Fitted Slope
From start-up
Segment 2
Fitted Slope
Till Stability
Total Activation
Time
(hours)
MEA049
0.7 mV/h (0 - 55 h)
0.2 mV/h
120 h
MEA050
0.7 mV/h (0 - 70 h)
0.1 mV/h
140 h
Compression:
65%
Total Slope
Fitted Slope
Start-up till stability
Total Activation
Time
(hours)
MEA051
NA (failure)
25 h
MEA052
0.57 mV/h
140 h
Compression:
37%
Segment 1
Fitted Slope
From start-up
Segment 2
Fitted Slope
Till Stability
Total Activation
Time
(hours)
MEA053
0.6 mV/h (0 - 60 h)
0.2 mV/h
140 h
MEA054
0.74 mV/h (0 - 60 h)
0.16 mV/h
135 h
Figure 7.4. Linear polynomial interpolations for each MEA activation curve, two
diﬀerent ﬁts for ﬁrst segment and second segment of total activation time (only
one segment for interpolation of MEA052 activation curve, MEA051 omitted).
*curve interpolation was performed using linear ﬁt analysis.
Comparing the results from linear ﬁt analysis, displayed in Table 8.2 and
Figure 7.4, no striking diﬀerences can be seen among the overall activation
proﬁles, MEA049 appears to be the fastest one with 0.43mV/h growth rate
==PAGE:58==
7.2 Test Results
48
on average.
==PAGE:59==
7.3 Main observations and Conclusions
49
Figure 7.5. Voltage values reached by each MEA at stable conditions (after more
than 150 test hours) against corresponding membrane weight, indicator of a low-
er/higher membrane acid content.
Interesting to notice that MEAs with low acid content, MEA051 and
MEA054, showed high penalties on the voltage output as compared to the
MEAs tested with higher acid content, however not with MEAs manufac-
tured with standard compression. In graph 7.5, the voltage output reached
by each MEA at stability is plotted against membrane weight (after dop-
ing), the red line shows a growing trend of voltage output towards higher
membrane weights. Observing MEA051 failure and054 performance, it is
possible to conclude that, regardless of the compression ratio used, good
performance is easily reachable with higher acid membrane doping.
7.3
Main observations and Conclusions
• The activation period for each tested MEA last approximately 120-
140 hours, regardless which hot-press condition was employed. The
durability curve outlines and growth rates are overall very similar,
performance seems primarily correlated to the membrane doping level
rather than to the compression ratio. However, it could be observed a
slightly diﬀerent activation trend for the over-compressed MEA, which
present lower growth rate overall the activation time, as compared to
the other tested MEAs, and a voltage increase after 50 test hours
due to unknown reasons. Unfortunately, the replicate MEA, for the
over-compression experiment, had a failure and no voltage could be
drawn, thus, would be useful to perform an other experiment with over-
==PAGE:60==
7.3 Main observations and Conclusions
50
compressed MEAs to analyse and compare the activation behavior,
and gather repeatable results.
• Best MEA performance is obtained at standard hot-press compres-
sion ratio (∼48%) combined with low acid doping level: MEA050
achieved the highest performance, reaching ∼630mV at stability at
operational current of 0.4A/cm2.
Also over-compressed and under-
compressed MEAs reach voltages above 600 mV, suggesting that the
compression ratio change chosen doesn’t have visible impact on perfor-
mance. The worst performance is shown by MEA054, manufactured
with low compression ratio and low doping level, intuitively the last
would be responsible for the low performance, as can be also inferred
being the cause for MEA051 failure. The results suggest that high acid
levels help in achieving good performances, but this relation should be
further investigated by performing more tests.
• In order to infer eventual correlations between compression ratio and
MEA performance and activation, more tests should be carried out.
This test could be repeated with increased acid doping, to gain higher
performance, and more extremes hot-press compression ratios: e.g.
not compressed MEAs vs 90% over-compressed MEAs.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 8
Experiment N.2:
Water Influence
8.1
Experimental Section
Main objective of this test is studying the eﬀect of diﬀerent reformate humid-
iﬁcation rates on MEA activation and performance. According to literature,
phosphoric acid redistribution is strictly correlated to water movements in
the fuel cell systems, and activation time is expected to depend primar-
ily on PA redistribution towards the electrode active sites, thus, this test
aims to investigate eventual correlations between diﬀerent water conditions,
achieved by changing the reformate water content, and total time employed
by the MEA to activate.
Six Dapozol®MEAs, 21 cm2 active area, were manufactured using PA-
doped and wiped-oﬀPBI-membranes (11.8 mol/PBImol of doping). The
MEAs tested may be divided in three categories:
1. Two MEAs tested at 9.15 ml/h water (10.35% of the reformate ﬂow)
2. Two MEAs tested at 3.05 ml/h water (3.45% of the reformate ﬂow)
3. One MEA tested in standard water conditions at 6.1 ml/h water (6.9%
of the reformate ﬂow)
The tested membranes with respectively water ﬂows are listed in Table
8.1.
==PAGE:62==
8.2 Test Results
52
Table 8.1. MEAs, 25 cm2 membrane, 21 cm2 active area, tested at diﬀerent humid-
iﬁcation condition of the reformate. MEA071 was tested in standard conditions
for comparison.
MEA ID
Water Flow
Reformate HR
STD Comparison
MEA064
9.15 ml/h
10.35%
+50%
MEA065
9.1 ml/h
10.38%
+50%
MEA066
3.05 ml/h
3.45%
-50%
MEA067
3.05 ml/h
3.45%
-50%
MEA071
6.1 ml/h
6.9%
STD
8.2
Test Results
8.2.1
Activation Test
The activation curves during the hours of transit towards stable performance
for all the MEAs tested are represented in Figure 8.1. The output voltage
overtime was recorded for around six days (250 h) after cell start-up. All
the MEAs were tested following the start-up protocol described in Appendix
(during the ﬁrst test hour) and the leak test onto the test house.
In Figure
8.1, the durability curves for three groups of MEAs are displayed: MEA064
and MEA065 are tested with 9% water of the reformate stream, correspond-
ing to an increase of 50% of the standard humidiﬁcation level (Table8.1);
MEA066 and MEA067 are tested at 3% water content; MEA071 is tested
at standard conditions, 6.9% water, for results comparison. Reproducible
results are obtained for all the groups, the durability curves show overall
positive activation behavior reaching voltage higher than 600 mV at stabil-
ity. Few rapid voltage ﬂuctuations can be observed in all the curves with
negligible eﬀect on cell performance. Voltage dips might be caused by air
bubbles in the water line, however between 75 hour and 150 test hour the
voltage for MEA64 and MEA65 experience a decrease of around 7-10 mV,
these is due to absence of water in the reformate and it’s usually cased by
fatalities in the water feed: in those hours the water ﬂow was not active and
as a consequence we see a stable voltage drop of around 7-10 mV.
==PAGE:63==
8.2 Test Results
53
Figure 8.1. Durability curves for diﬀerent reformate humidiﬁcation rates.
In
black, the MEA tested with standard humidiﬁcation conditions and used as ref-
erence.*Stoichiometry: λH2 = 1.3, λAir = 2.5. Reformate ﬂow rate: STD =
1.4% CO, 22.3% CO2, 69.3% H2, 6.9% H2O; Reformate ﬂow rate at 3.45% (-50%
STD) water: 1.54% CO, 23% CO2, 71.69% H2; Reformate ﬂow rate at 10.35%
(+50% STD) water: 1.35% CO, 21.5% CO2, 66.9% H2. Temperature: 160ΘcircC.
Current: 8.4 A. Active area: 21 cm2.
Figure 8.2. Linear interpolation performed on each durability curve between start-
up and stable condition, two diﬀerent ﬁt analysis for ﬁrst and second segment
of total activation time, for MEA067 and MEA066.
*curve interpolation was
performed using linear ﬁt analysis.
MEA064 shows the highest performance (∼0.65 V), the signal appears
very noisy all over the test duration and remarkably in the last hours. Signal
noise may be attributed to the test setup that in presence of water shows
some instability. The second highest performance is reached by MEA065,
∼0.645 V, tested at high water content as MEA064. MEA071 shows very
similar performance to MEA064, however a slightly lover voltage at stable
conditions. Slightly lower voltage output is reached by the two MEA tested
==PAGE:64==
8.2 Test Results
54
at 3% water, MEA066 and MEA067, reaching around ∼0.638 V at stability.
8.2.2
Activation Analysis
In Table 8.2, the voltage growth rates were estimated for each durability
curve, performing linear interpolation between start-up time (ﬁrst test hour)
and time in which stable condition are reached, in other words ﬁtting a
straight line on the curve over the "activation" period. More than one seg-
ment was used to approximate the curves where necessary, so that two
growth rate were calculated in some cases, related to two diﬀerent time pe-
riods. A positive activation curve is observed in all the groups following a
linear trend and activation time of 120 150 test hours. In this experiment,
Table 8.2. Calculated slopes from linear ﬁt analysis performed at each segment
that constitutes the totality of the MEA activation period.
MEA ID
Voltage Growth Rate (linear interpolation)
HR: 9%
Fitted Slope
between start-up and stable conditions
Total Activation
Time
MEA064
0.26 mV/h
150 h
MEA065
0.27 mV/h
150 h
HR: 3%
Fitted Slope
between start-up and stable conditions
Total Activation
Time
MEA066
0.56 mV/h (0 - 91 h); 0.14 mV/h
148 h
MEA067
0.4 mV/h (0 - 112 h); 0.1 mV/h
224 h
HR: STD
Fitted Slope
between start-up and stable conditions
Total Activation
Time
MEA071
0.42 mV/h
117 h
it’s assumed a single linear interpolation segment over the MEA activation
time in case of MEA 064 and 065, for simplicity, since many voltage ﬂuctu-
ations make it diﬃcult to approximate the curves. For MEAs tested with
3% water, two segments were ﬁtted to the durability curve: one running be-
tween the ﬁrst test hour and around 90-110 test hours, characterised by high
growth rate, the second running until the time in which the MEA reaches
voltage stability, characterised by almost ﬂat outline (very small growth
rate). The MEAs tested show similar total activation time, around 150 h,
==PAGE:65==
8.2 Test Results
55
MEAs tested with lower water content however show show slightly longer
activation times, 150 h and 225 h.
Comparing the results from linear ﬁt analysis, displayed in Table 8.2
and Figure 7.4, at ﬁrst sight MEA071 appears to be the fastest one, with
0.42mV/h total growth rate and total activation time of 117h. Fast activa-
tion time can be seen also in the MEAs tested with high. Also the activation
proﬁle is slightly diﬀerent between the two groups, for 9% water MEAs just
one interpolation line is enough to explain the activation even though the
growth rate, around 0.3 mV/h, is lesser than the one of the other MEA
group in the ﬁrst hours of activation.
Figure 8.3. Voltage values reached by the tested MEAs at stable conditions (after
more than 150h) vs corresponding reformate water content.
In graph 8.3, the voltage output reached by each MEA at stability is
plotted against the water ﬂow rate (ml/h) set for each test, in red a ﬁtted
linear trend-line modelling the relation between water ﬂow rate and voltage
output.
Giving a ﬁrst look at graph 8.3, on the right the MEAs tested
with 50% higher water content show higher voltage than the MEAs tested
with 50% lower water content, while the voltage of MEA071 appears in
the middle. Observing the trend line, it may be conclude that a positive
correlation exist between performance and water ﬂow rate: MEAs tested
with low water content reached low voltage output, around 2 mV lower than
in STD conditions, while MEAs tested with high water content shows high
voltage outputs, around 3 mV higher than in STD conditions.
==PAGE:66==
8.3 Main observations and Conclusions
56
8.2.3
Impedance Spectroscopy
(a)
(b)
Figure 8.4. (a)Fitted values of the intermediate frequency resistance vs. time. (b)
Measurement carried out without reformate humidiﬁcation (closing the water feed
10 min previous measurement). EIS spectra are displayed
The experiment shows a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the activation
behaviour of diﬀerently tested MEAs. This diﬀerence can be better studied
and characterised with the analysis of the ohmic resistance development over
time, Figure 9.3. The ohmic resistance for the MEAs tested at 3% water,
as expected, decreases rapidly during the initial test hours and levels out
after around 75 test hours. From this we may infer that the important part
of the activation is completed after around 50 hours, this is more clearly
observable in Figure 9.3b, where measurement were taken switching oﬀthe
water ﬂow, therefore with low signal noise.
For the MEAs tested with high water content, the ohmic resistance shows
lower values than those corresponding to the other MEAs, moreover, no
signiﬁcant decrease can be seen throughout the activation time-frame. The
reference MEA shows a trend similar to the MEAs tested at high water: the
pick showed in Fig 9.3a is considered an outlier, probably a mistake related
to the measurement setup, it is also not shown in Fig9.3b.
8.3
Main observations and Conclusions
• The activation period last approximately 150 hours regardless of dif-
ferent humidiﬁcation rates employed. However, the activation time
seems to be longer for MEAs tested at lower water content.
==PAGE:67==
8.3 Main observations and Conclusions
57
• Best MEA performance is obtained at high water ﬂow rates (9.15
ml/h), by MEA064 with output voltage of ∼65 V. Overall the MEA
group tested with higher reformate humidiﬁcation show better perfor-
mances, while the MEA group with lower reformate humidiﬁcation
show lower performances, as compared to the MEA tested in standard
conditions. it may be inferred positive correlation between reformate
humidiﬁcation and Voltage output.
• Looking at the ohmic Resistance trend over time, it diﬀers signiﬁcantly
between the two MEA groups: MEAs tested with 3% water show
signiﬁcant decay of resistance over time, suggesting that activation
processes are taking place in the initial test hours; MEAs tested with
9% water show a lower ohmic resistance and not signiﬁcant decay over
time. One possibility might be that no signiﬁcant activation process
takes place after the ﬁrst test hour in presence of high HR, therefore,
there might be potential for a reduction of the activation with further
study and optimization of the water dynamics inside the cell.
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 9
Experiment N.3:
Temperature Influence
9.1
Experimental Section
Main objective of this test was studying the eﬀect of a high temperature
step in the ﬁrst 23 hours after cell start-up procedure on the activation time
and performance of Dapozol® MEAs. According to literature [2], the perfor-
mance of MEAs is highly dependent on the temperature at which the cells
had been subjected prior reaching stable voltage conditions, and it’s argued
that this is due to dehydration of the membrane and water movements en-
hancing phosphoric acid redistribution. There are reasons to believe that
increasing the temperature of a PBI fuel cell for a limited period of time
could be used as a rapid activation procedure in galvanostatic mode avoid-
ing high cell degradation. the test was conducted exposing the test house
to a temperature of 200◦C during ﬁrst day of activation.
Three MEAs Dapozol® of 21 cm2 active area were manufactured using
PA-doped and wiped-oﬀPBI-membranes (11.8 mol/PBImol of doping). Two
MEAs were tested, changing test procedure, while one MEA was tested at
standard conditions and use as a reference for results comparison. To sum
up, three MEAs were tested as following:
1. Two MEAs (068 and 069) tested at high temperature step, 200 ◦C, for
23 h and subjected to total current of 8.4 A (0.4 A/cm2), after start-up
procedure (as described in Appendix).
2. One MEA tested at standard conditions: no temperature step, sub-
jected to temperature of 160◦C since start-up and total current of 8.4
A.
==PAGE:69==
9.2 Test Results
59
The tested MEAs with corresponding activation conditions are listed in Ta-
ble 9.1a.
Table 9.1. Dapozol® MEAs, 25 cm2 membrane, 21 cm2 active area, tested using
high temperature step, at 200 ◦C, in the ﬁrst test day. MEA071 was tested in
standard conditions for comparison.
MEA ID
Temperature Step (23h)
Operating Temperature
MEA066
200 ◦C
160 ◦C
MEA067
200 ◦C
160 ◦C
MEA071
NA
160 ◦C
9.2
Test Results
9.2.1
Activation Test
The output voltage over test hours for the three tested MEAs was recorded
for around six days (250 h) after cell start-up. The "durability curves" are
represented in Figure 9.1: for all the MEAs it was followed the start-up
protocol described in Appendix (during the ﬁrst test hour) and test house
leak proof was performed.
In Figure 9.1a, the output voltage over test hours for the two MEAs
tested with temperature step are displayed. The two tested MEAs show
similar voltage proﬁle over time. In the ﬁrst 10 hours, the voltage increases
rapidly until reaching a plateau, this increase is due to the temperature
to which the cell was subjected, much higher as compared to the standard
value (200 ◦C). The voltage reached by the MEAs when stable conditions
are reached, shows high, values approaching 0.7 V, this is because high
temperatures increase the electrochemical reactions kinetic and the tolerance
towards impurity as CO [2].
The orange curve, Figure 9.1a, shows the temperature proﬁle: following
the standard start-up procedure, the test house was heated up until 160 ◦C
for the ﬁrst couple of hours, afterwards the temperature was set up to 200
◦C and after the 23 hour of test was set back to 160 ◦C, as in standard
operation conditions.
==PAGE:70==
9.2 Test Results
60
(a) Durability curves for MEA068 and MEA069, tested with temperature step
(200◦C) in the ﬁrst day after test start-up. After 23 test hours the temperature
was set at standard conditions, 160◦C. In orange, the recorded temperature proﬁle.
(b) In black, durability curve of MEA071 tested in standard conditions (160◦C),
without temperature step. In orange, the recorded temperature proﬁle.
Figure 9.1. Stoichiometry: λH2 = 1.3, λAir = 2.5. Reformate fuel= 1.4% CO,
22.3% CO2, 69.3% H2, 6.9% H2O. Active area: 21 cm2.
When the temperature is set back to 160 ◦C, a drastic decrease in per-
formance is registered, the voltage drops of around 50 mV. A mild growth
can still be seen in the curve outline but stability is reached already after 50
test hours, the reference MEA takes around 120h to reach stable voltage.
MEA069 shows the highest performance, of around 0.67V, when stable
==PAGE:71==
9.2 Test Results
61
conditions are reached, for unknown reasons the curve show unusual steady
drop between 23 and 50 test hours, around 15mV less as compared to the
rest of the curve. This behavior may possibly be attributed to a failure
in the water feed.
MEA068 also show good performance at stability of
approximately 0.65V, slightly higher than the reference MEA-071, reaching
around 0.64V.
9.2.2
Activation analysis
Figure 9.2. Linear polynomial interpolations for each MEA durability curve in
order to model the curve growth rates during activation. Two diﬀerent ﬁts for
MEA068, ﬁrst segment was interpolated between 24 and 80 test hours, the second
one between 80 and 120 test hours. *the growth rate of the voltage curves was
modelled using linear ﬁt analysis.
Figure 9.2 shows the linear ﬁt analysis for the durability curves recorded
during the time of MEA activation. Linear ﬁt was performed on some seg-
ments of the output voltage to model it’s growth rate overall the test hours,
in order to compare the activation rapidity of the diﬀerent MEAs and to
understand when stable condition are reached - voltage is considered stable
whan the change is lesser than 0.1 mV/h. Table 9.2 shows the slopes for
each interpolation performed on the voltage curves and the estimated total
hours of activation of each MEA. All the MEAs have positive voltage growth
following a linear trend and reaching stability within a range of 50 - 120 test
hours.
For MEA069 the linear ﬁt was performed after 50 h, due to the unex-
pected voltage drop between 24 and 50 test hours that made it diﬃcult
==PAGE:72==
9.2 Test Results
62
Table 9.2. Calculated slopes from linear ﬁt analysis performed at each segment
that constitutes the totality of the MEA activation period.
MEA ID
Voltage Growth Rate (linear interpolation)
Start-up:
T step
Fitted Voltage Slope
between start-up and stable conditions
Total Activation
time
MEA068
0.16 mV/h (24-80 h); 0.04 mV/h (80-120 h)
80 h
MEA069
0.07 mV/h (50-140 h)
50 h
Start-up:
STD
Fitted Voltage Slope
between start-up and stable conditions
Total Activation
time
MEA071
0.42 mV/h
100 h
to approximate the curve in those hours. Both the MEAs tested show ex-
tremely high voltage growth in the ﬁrst 10 hours, around 7-8 mV/h, value
never experienced at lower temperatures. After this fast growth the voltage
appears to keep increasing with smaller growth rates and reaching rapidly
stable conditions: MEA069 already after 50 hours show voltage growth rate
smaller than 0.1 mV/h (∼0.07 mV/h); MEA068 shows very small growth
rate just after the voltage drop due to temperature change (after 23 test
hours) and reaches stable conditions after around 80 test hours. The MEAs
tested with high temperature step show a much shorter total activation time,
around 50-80 h, almost 1/3 of the activation times experienced with MEAs
run with the standard procedure.
Referring to MEA071, activated with
steady standard temperature of 160◦C (no temperature step), the MEA
shows a totally diﬀerent activation behavior: the curve presents a steady
growth throughout the ﬁrst 100 test hours with slope of 0.4 mV/h, therefore
longer activation time and higher growth rate as compared to the MEAs
tested with temperature step. This test suggests that exposing the MEA
at high temperatures for limited time period has an high inﬂuence on the
MEA activation time, nonetheless a positive eﬀect on MEA performance,
there are reasons to believe that high temperature step may be used as
start-up procedures to reduce signiﬁcantly cell activation times.
All the
data here discussed are displayed in table 8.2.
==PAGE:73==
9.2 Test Results
63
9.2.3
Impedance Spectroscopy
The experiment shows a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in activation behaviour be-
tween the MEAs tested with temperature step and the one tested with stan-
dard procedure. This diﬀerence is well observed in the voltage development
over time, as already discussed above, however, ulterior knowledge, about
the diﬀerent processes creating this divergent behaviour, can be harvested
by performing electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and observing
the ohmic resistance development over time.
(a)
(b)
Figure 9.3. Fitted values of the ohmic resistance vs.
time.
(b) Measurement
carried out switching oﬀthe water inlet for 10 min, previous conducting EIS
measurement.
Figure ?? and ?? display the EIS, in the so called Nyquist plots, for each
tested MEA. The impedance measurements were taken at a distance of one
or two days between each other, until the end of the test, usually around 5
days or one week maximum, each measurement was repeated at "dry con-
ditions" (by switching oﬀthe water feed for 10 min prior measurement) in
order to have a less noisy and clear representation.
MEAs068 and MEA069 show overall lower ohmic resistance values over
time, around 10-40 mΩ, as compared to the reference MEA071, this may be
related to diﬀerence in performances: as it can be noticed the MEA with
higher performance (MEA069) also posses the lowest ohmic resistance. Af-
ter 18 test hours, the two MEAs (068 and 069) show a lower resistance value
as compared to the ﬁrst hour, during which the cell temperature was still
low, between room temperature and 160◦C. This drop in resistance might
be considered a positive eﬀect induced by the high temperature, probably
related to the enhancement of membrane proton conductivity. As the Ohmic
==PAGE:74==
9.3 Main observations and Conclusions
64
resistance is reported by literature to represent mainly the proton conduc-
tion resistance of the membrane, we would expect this to decrease over time
during the activation period. In accord with this expectation, after 50 test
hours, the resistance gently start decreasing till around 200 test hours, for
both the tested MEAs. During the last test hours, the resistance appears
growing slightly, this increase, however, might be due to random ﬂuctuations.
Same trend is overall observable in Fig.9.3b, where EIS measurements were
taken at "dry" conditions, therefore with higher accuracy. In this plot, some
data points are missing due to failure of the measurement setup. The resis-
tance trend, in this case, doesn’t show remarkable increase towards the end
of the test, as it does in graph 9.3a. The trend is overall stable, decreasing
over time for MEA068 and ﬂuctuating between 10-20 mΩfor MEA069, thus,
in line with the expectations.
The reference MEA shows values of resistance a litter higher than the
other two MEAs but similar trend, the pick showed at 24 test hours is
considered as an outlier, as veriﬁed by Fig.9.3b where no unusual value is
shown at the same x-coordinate.
9.3
Main observations and Conclusions
• The activation period for MEAs tested with a temperature step lasted
approximately 50 hours. The activation proﬁle shows completely dif-
ferent behavior as compared to test in standard conditions and may
suggest that high temperatures not only provide higher output volt-
ages but also much faster activation performances. High temperature,
on the other hand, is found in literature to have high negative eﬀect
on the long term durability test, provoking faster MEA degradation.
This test showed that a temperature step-up, for a limited time pe-
riod, doesn’t cause high membrane degradation and have beneﬁcial
inﬂuence on MEA performance, reducing the activation time of ∼60%.
• Best MEA performance is obtained with the ’temperature step’ - ac-
tivation, in particular by MEA069 reaching ∼670 mV, followed by
MEA068 reaching ∼640 mV. It can be inferred positive correlation
between high temperature steps and Voltage output at stability, the
==PAGE:75==
9.3 Main observations and Conclusions
65
temperature change may be beneﬁcial for the PA redistribution and
the activation of active catalyst sites, solution also proposed by litera-
ture [2].
• Looking at the Areal Ohmic Resistance over time, no signiﬁcant diﬀer-
ence in trends can be seen among the MEAs. MEA068 and MEA069
show lower resistance values over time than MEA071, this may suggest
that temperature step is a positive inﬂuence on the cell performance.
All MEAs show a mild resistance decay over time, suggesting that no
signiﬁcant activation processes take place in the MEA during activa-
tion, and thus they may be ready for use with little or no break-in.
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 10
Repeatability and
Accuracy
The analysis here conducted aims to investigate the repeatability of the
experiments and the accuracy of the measuring system, in order to discrimi-
nate whether a given change is produced by an experimental factor or is just
part of the intrinsic variability of the system. For this analysis the MEA
performance recorded during durability tests and the ﬂow plates resistance
performed before the tests on each test house are analysed.
For each ﬂow plate resistance measurement, a minimum of 3 repetitions
were performed to conﬁrm repeatability and accuracy of the measurement.
For each test, 3 repetition minimum were performed, employing MEAs man-
ufactured in identical procedures and tested in identical conditions. Bad
data are rejected and the uncertainty of the remaining measurements are
evaluated using the sample standard deviation of the measurements with a
95% conﬁdence interval.
To ensure certainty of measurements, values variant randomly without
any deliberate bias, It should be analysed if the technique and instrumenta-
tion used aﬀect the results obtained.
The analysis is only qualitative, since there are not enough number of
data to gain statistically signiﬁcant results.
Uncertainty.
Once a sample of repeated measurements has been pro-
duced, the standard deviation of the population is computed from the stan-
dard error of the mean and doubled, in order to have the half-width of a 95
percent conﬁdence interval. Hence, the standard uncertainty is determined
by dividing the standard deviation by the mean, as shown in Table10.1. In
Table10.1, on the left are shown 5 repeated measurements of the ﬂow plates
resistance of the same test house, the test house was reassembled every time
==PAGE:77==
10 Repeatability and Accuracy
67
with replacement of same Papyex for each run. The measurement shows re-
peatability since the calculated uncertainty is ±2.4%<5%. On the right of
Table10.1, performances recorded at diﬀerent test hours for 7 identical MEAs
- tested, assembled and manufactured in assumed identical conditions - are
displayed. The measurements show repeatability since the calculated un-
certainties for voltage measurements taken at diﬀerent test times are lower
than 5%, therefore the measurement is certain with CI of 95% assuming
normal distribution.
Table 10.1. Uncertainty computed for 5 repeated measurements of the ﬂow plate
resistance of test rack 7 - test house 2 and for the performance of 7 identical
MEAs tested in identical conditions in 2 diﬀerent test racks.
R (Ω)
Performance [V]
24 h
Performance [V]
48 h
run 1
2,41E-03
MEA013
0,632
0,631
run 2
2,41E-03
MEA014
0,621
0,619
run 3
2,43E-03
MEA015
0,635
0,631
run 4
2,39E-03
MEA016
0,614
0,615
run 5
2,47E-03
MEA017
0,593
0,599
µ
2,42E-03
MEA018
0,609
0,611
2 x σ
5,71E-05
MEA019
0,621
0,626
Uncertainty
±2,4%
µ
0,6178
0,6188
2 x σ
0,0286
0,0233
Uncertainty
±4,6%
±3,8%
Repeatability.
To ensure repeatability of the measurements, we could
perform some statistical tests to investigate weather the measurements ob-
tained, assuming identical test conditions, are normally distributed or weather
the technique and instrumentation used aﬀect the results obtained. One sim-
ple and fast way to accomplish this is to perform a "Skew" test on the data,
to quantiﬁed on which extent to which a given data distribution varies from
a normal distribution, with skew value of zero. Looking at the data skewness
the following conclusions can be made: with skewness between -0.5 and 0.5,
the data are fairly symmetrical; between -1 and -0.5 (negatively skewed) or
between 0.5 and 1 (positively skewed) the data are moderately skewed; less
than -1 or greater than 1, the data are highly skewed.
==PAGE:78==
10 Repeatability and Accuracy
68
Table 10.2. Descriptive statistics for each group of measurements, with equal test
conditions, procedure and equipment.
Statistics
TR2 - 24 h
[mV]
TR7 - 24 h
[mV]
TR2 - 48 h
[mV]
TR7 - 48 h
[mV]
R
[mΩ]
Mean
620,250
614,667
620,000
617,333
2,421
Standard Error
9,569
3,480
7,550
4,485
0,013
Median
626,500
614,000
625,000
615,000
2,413
Standard Deviation
19
6
15,100
7,767
0,029
Sample Variance
0,366
0,036
0,228
0,060
0,001
Skewness
-1,465
0,492
-1,278
1,230
1,150
Count
4
3
4
3
5
Table 10.3. Descriptive statistics for MEA performance measurements across two
diﬀerent test setup.
Statistics
24 h
[mV]
48 h
[mV]
Mean
617,8571
618,8571
Standard Error
5,4003
4,4101
Median
621,0000
619,0000
Standard Deviation
14
11
Sample Variance
0,2041
0,1361
Skewness
-0,655
-0,650
Count
7
7
As can be observed in table 10.2, the standard deviation is very low
for all the groups, a little bit higher for the measurement performed on
TR2. Fist indication of data normally distributed is given by the diﬀerence
between mean and median: in all the sample there is very little diﬀerence
between these two values, hence there is reason to believe the data present
normal distribution. However, looking at the skew values, almost all the
samples show value higher than 1 or lower than -1, indicating scarce data
symmetry. Only measurements on TR7 presents data fairly symmetrical
(skew value between -0.5 and 0.5).
These result may be not so relevant
since the number of samples is very low or it may inferred biased data,
possibly due to errors associated with individual technical performance or
with measurement equipment. On the other hand, performing a statistical
==PAGE:79==
10 Repeatability and Accuracy
69
analysis on the seven MEAs without distinguishing between diﬀerent test
racks but just between the time in which the measurement was performed,
more symmetrical results are obtained. The skewness is between -0.5 and -1,
therefore the measurement show a distribution moderately negative skewed,
the data appear more similar across diﬀerent test setups than within the
same, this is maybe due to the higher number of observation provided.
Reproducibility.
In order to ensure the repeatability of the durability
test, MEA voltage measurements are performed at diﬀerent days on the
same samples. From this data is not clear if the performance is stable or
still growing, however performing a t-Test might be a solution to ﬁnd it out.
A t-test looks at the t-distribution values and the degrees of freedom to deter-
mine if the diﬀerence between two datasets’ mean is statistically signiﬁcant.
The p-value express the probability that the variation of the measurements
occurred by chance, if p value of is lower than 0.05, it indicate statistical
diﬀerence between the two samples studied with 95% conﬁdence interval.
The two-tailed test determines whether the mean of two groups of data falls
in the same range of values while the the one-tailed test whether one group
presents mean values higher or lower than the population mean. Looking
Table 10.4. t-Test comparing two samples: ﬁrst MEA output voltages on diﬀerent
test racks (TR), assuming equal variance; on the right comparing measurements
performed on the same MEAs in diﬀerent days.
Assuming equal variance
Paired data
t-Test
Two samples
Performance [24 h]
TR2 vs TR7
Performance [48 h]
TR2 vs TR7
Performance [all MEAs]
24 h vs 48 h
P(T<=t) one-tail
0,3265
0,3971
0,2479
P(T<=t) two-tail
0,6531
0,7942
0,4959
at table 10.4, the p value appears high for both the groups compared across
diﬀerent setups, indicating no signiﬁcant diﬀerent between measurements
performed on MEAs tested on diﬀerent test racks. The value is smaller com-
paring measurements across diﬀerent days but not statistically signiﬁcant
diﬀerence can be inferred, therefore this may indicate that the diﬀerent in
measurements is due to random ﬂuctuation or equipment calibration errors,
and not due to a physical phenomena. The one tailed test, on the other
==PAGE:80==
10 Repeatability and Accuracy
70
hand, indicates that there is around 75% chance that one of the two sam-
ples present values higher than the others for comparison of measurements
taken on diﬀerent days, but still itťs probability lower than 95% therefore
not statistically signiﬁcant.
Accuracy [19].
Some errors, for example those associated with the equip-
ment in terms of accuracies, e.g. the accuracy of controlling / measuring
current, voltage, mass ﬂows, can be quantiﬁed and measures of the variance
can be derived. Other errors can be assessed, but not necessarily quantiﬁed:
for instance, the electrode active area, the PA quantity wiped oﬀthe mem-
brane during manufacturing, the position of the papyex during the ohmic
resistance measurement, the clamping pressure applied to the test house,
membrane doping level and so on. Errors associated with individual tech-
Table 10.5. Accuracy of setup equipment.
Instrument
Model
Accuracy
Temperature PID Controller
CAL 3300
±0.25% ±1◦C
Pressure Meter
Digitron
±0.2% ±1 digit
Mass Flow Meters/Controllers
Vögtlin Instruments
± 1.0 %
Multi-range Electronic Load
ZS Series, Höcherl & Hackl
± 0.1 % (Voltage)
±0.2 % (Current)
Programmable Syringe Pumps
New Era Pump Systems, Inc.
±1%
Potentiostat/Galvanostat
SP-50/150, Bio-Logic
<0.1%
± 1% (Impedance)
nical performance on a day cannot be quantiﬁed. Some analytical errors
associated with assembly/manufacturing procedure are probably less signif-
icant than others, but how do you know which these are if the errors cannot
be quantiﬁed? Assessing the uncertainty from the bottom-up requires a full
evaluation of all potential sources of error for each and every stage of the
test procedure. Considering the instrumentation accuracies, listed in Table
10.5, the total setup error propagate to around 2%, which gives around ±
11.5 mV of variance due to instrumentation on the MEA output voltage
measurement and ± 0.024 mΩfor the resistance. Calculating the diﬀerence
between setup error and standard deviations for the 7 MEAs performances
measurements, a "residual error" is calculated as shown in Fig. 10.6. This
==PAGE:81==
10 Repeatability and Accuracy
71
error may be attributed to the uncertainties associated with the manufac-
turing and assembly procedures, on the other hand itťs a very small value
for the analysed sample. To asses this residual error, more repeatability
tests might be performed to investigate uncertainties related ﬁrstly to the
membrane acid content, secondly to other manufacturing parameters, such
as layer misalignment, clamping pressure and cutting of electrode surfaces.
Table 10.6. Setup error and "residual error" calculation for performance measure-
ment of 7 MEAs tested at identical conditions executed on two consecutive days.
Performance [mV]
24 h
Performance [mV]
48 h
Setup Error (Voltage) [1,85%]
11,174
11,211
Measured Standard Deviation
14
11
Residual Error
3,114
0,457
==PAGE:82==
Conclusions/Outlook
In this work, three experiment were carried out in order to investigate the in-
ﬂuence of three main variables on MEA activation behaviour and to develop
a faster MEA activation strategies.
First, an experimental matrix was designed to explore all the possible
experiment combination needed to rule out inﬂuence and interplay of the
chosen controlling parameters on the studied phenomena.
Afterwards, three main controlling parameters were chosen for conduct-
ing practical experimental work: compression ratio applied during MEA
assembly, water rate fed in reformate fuel (RH) and high temperature (su-
perior to the operational temperature). Performance and impedance were
recorded and analyzed.
Compression Test.
In the ﬁrst test, the inﬂuence of MEA compression
during hot-press on the activation performance was investigated. 6 MEAs
were tested: 2 compressed at around 50% lower compression ratio (∼37%),
2 at around 50% higher compression ratio (∼65%) and 2 at standard con-
ditions (∼48% compression) for comparison. Between each MEA, tested
at a certain compression ratio, one was manufactured with little more acid
content than the other (around of 3%-4% of diﬀerence). Measurements of
MEA thickness, after hot-pressing, didn’t show any statistical diﬀerence.
Activation period for each tested MEA lasted approximately 120-140 hours,
regardless diﬀerent manufacturing conditions. The durability curve outlines
and growth rates are overall very similar, performance seems primarily cor-
related to the membrane doping level rather than to the compression ratio.
Best MEA performance is obtained at standard hot-press compression ratio
(∼48%) combined with low acid doping level.
No evident correlation between compression ratio and MEA activation
performance was found, however, it’s not to be excluded. Performing further
tests with hot-press conditions taken to the extreme, e.g. not compressed
==PAGE:83==
Conclusion
73
MEAs vs 90% over-compressed MEAs, might be a solution. The results
might suggest better performances in the MEAs with little higher PA con-
tent, but this relation should be further investigated performing more tests
to ensure repeatability of results.
Water Test.
In the second test, the eﬀect of diﬀerent reformate humidi-
ﬁcation rates (HR) on MEA activation performance has been analysed. Six
MEAs were tested: 2 MEAs tested at 50% higher HR, around 9.15 ml/h
water (10.35% of reformate ﬂow), 2 MEAs tested at 50% lower HR, around
3.05 ml/h water (3.45% of reformate ﬂow), 1 MEA tested at standard HR,
6.1 ml/h water (6.9% of the reformate ﬂow). The activation period lasted
approximately 150 hours regardless diﬀerent humidiﬁcation conditions, how-
ever slower activation is seen for MEAs tested at low water content. Best
MEA performance is obtained at high water ﬂow rate (9.15 ml/h), overall
the MEAs tested at higher HR show better performances.
The ohmic Resistance trend over time diﬀers signiﬁcantly: MEAs at
3% water rate show signiﬁcant decay of ohmic resistance over time, MEAs
tested with 9% water rate show lower ohmic resistance and not signiﬁcant
decay over time. The results are in line with literature, It is well estab-
lished that proton conductivity of HT-PEMFCs increases with the relative
humidity [20] [21] [22] [14]. Boaventura et al. [14] also observed an ohmic
resistance decrease in presence of water, and provided two main explanation
for the phenomena. Firstly, some conclusions are deduced analysing the pro-
ton transfer processes happening in the MEA. PBI polymer acts as a frame
that immobilizes phosphoric acid through hydrogen bonds. Proton conduc-
tivity happens through Grotthuss proton transfer mechanism, thus, when
water is increased (high humidity levels), more hydrogen bonds are available
for protons to jump between water and phosphoric acid and between water-
imino groups of PBI, promoting faster proton transfer. Besides that, relative
humidity aﬀects the free water contained by the electrolyte such that the
viscosity of the polymer is decreased, making it more conductive and facili-
tating oxygen transport within the cathode [23]. Moreover, water presence
in general facilitates the redistribution of PA between the electrodes and
membrane, thus serving as electrolyte for proton conduction [14]. Other
consideration may be inferred, considering the chemistry of PA. Absence
of water promotes acid dehydration: 2H3PO4 = H4P2O7 + H2O. Low HR
push the equilibrium towards the left, producing more Pyrophosphoric acid
==PAGE:84==
Conclusion
74
(H4P2O7), which is much more viscous and less conductive than PA.
Results suggest the possibility to reduce activation time by studying and
controlling the water dynamics inside the FC. Further experiments might
be performed to ﬁnd out the optimal water management to accomplish that:
modifying the reformate HR simultaneously to other parameters (such as
temperature of current density), controlling the water contained in the mem-
brane/PA and also controlling the water content on the cathode side, by
humidifying the air ﬂow or tailoring the water production modifying the
stoichiometry (lamda).
In light of this facts, it might be interesting to investigate the joint
inﬂuence of relative humidity and temperature on activation, since both
this two parameter play an important role on the equilibrium of pyro- and
ortho- PA.
Temperature Test.
In the third test, the eﬀect of 200◦C temperature
during the ﬁrst 23 test hours (after start-up procedure at 160◦C) on the
activation performance, has been analysed. Extraordinarily rapid activation
is obtained, approximately 50-80 hours, stabilizing fuel cell performance to
a very reproducible baseline level.The activation proﬁle presents completely
diﬀerent trend as compared to the one of MEA tested in standard conditions.
It’s well known from literature that an extended period of time at high
temperature lead to a signiﬁcant performance loss and degradation processes
in HT-PEMFCs. However, operation at high temperature, only for a limited
period of time, has been observed to not have severe consequences on MEA
[2].
It actually can be considered one of the most promising activation
procedure: not only higher output voltages are reached but also much faster
activation times (around 50-80 h). The Areal Ohmic Resistance over time
doesn’t show signiﬁcant diﬀerence among the MEAs. MEAs tested with T-
step show very low resistance values, suggesting a higher membrane proton
conductivity than in MEAs tested at standard condition.
Tingelof at al. [2] claimed that temperature raise is beneﬁcial for the
PA redistribution and the activation of active catalyst sites. Some of the
main processes promoted by high temperature, include increased catalytic
activity [2], improved tolerance to CO due to the decrease in CO adsorp-
tion on catalyst surface, improved electrochemical reaction rates and the
increase of CO electro-oxidation into CO2 [11].
The temperature depen-
dence of the conductivity can be described by the Arrhenius equation [11]:
==PAGE:85==
Conclusion
75
σ · T = σ0exp(−Ea
RT ) 1. Therefore, membrane resistance decreases with the
temperature.
Other processes are related to PA chemistry: both orthophosphoric and
pyrophosphoric acids are much less viscous and more conductive and mobile
at higher temperatures, contributing therefore to the proton conductivity
increase.
The proposed break-in method could possibly be further optimized by
testing diﬀerent temperature steps, current levels and humidiﬁcation rates,
performing EIS and CV for a deeper understanding of the physical processes
involved.
1where s, s0, Ea, R and T are the membrane conductivity (Scm−1), pre-exponential
factor (SK−1cm−1), proton conducting activation energy (Jmol−1), gas constant
(JK−1mol−1) and temperature (K), respectively
==PAGE:86==
Appendices
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX A
MEA Documentation
Diﬀerences between standard materials and methods and those being cur-
rently evaluated are presented in Table:
Table A.1. Diﬀerences between current experimental and standard materials and
methods
Materials
Standard
Membrane (thickness)
Danish Power Systems
PBI (42µm)
Anode
Dapozol E300
Cathode
Dapozol E300
Edge Reinforcement
Kapton (50 µm)
Material Preparation,
MEA Assembly,
Heat-treatment process
Standard E300
Pressing method
Hot pressing tools
Pressing conditions (T,P,t)
(100◦C, 1ton,3 min)
Heat treatment process
220 ◦C, 2 h
==PAGE:88==
Appendix A MEA Documentation
78
Table A.2. Average thickness of layers, composing a standard Dapozol® MEA.
MEA Dapozol®
Components Estimated Thickness (µm)
Doped PBI membrane
70
Polymeric Kapton Gasket (2x)
100
Anode (catalyst Pt2)
350
Cathode (catalyst PtCo)
290
Al-Hard-Stops (2x)
200
Table A.3. MEAs manufacturing speciﬁcation
MEA
ID
Anode
Catalyst
Type
Pt
loading
(mg/cm2)
Cathode
Catalyst
Type
Pt
loading
(mg/cm2)
Doping
Level
(molPA/molPBI)
Active
Area
(cm2)
050
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.6
21
049
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.6
21
051
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.6
21
052
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.6
21
053
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.6
21
054
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.6
21
064
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.5
21
065
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.5
21
066
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.5
21
067
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.5
21
068
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.5
21
069
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.5
21
071
Pt/C
0.9
PtCo/C
1.02
11.8
21
==PAGE:89==
Appendix A MEA Documentation
79
Table A.4. Flow Plates Resistance usend for correction of MEA output voltage
and EIS spectra.
MEA ID
Flow Plates R(Z)e
[Ω]
MEA049
3.32E-03
MEA050
6.69E-03
MEA051
5.67E-03
MEA052
3.32E-03
MEA053
6.69E-03
MEA054
5.67E-03
MEA064
6.69E-03
MEA065
7.38E-03
MEA066
6.69E-03
MEA067
5.67E-03
MEA068
7.38E-03
MEA069
6.69E-03
MEA071
5.38E-03
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX B
Start-up procedure
All the tests will be carried out following the current start up procedures
with additional settings described in the tables below. Start-up procedure:
1. Fuel cell Disassembly: Make sure test house is clean and DRY from
last experiment (or dry out with pressurized air and/or particle-free
cloth)
2. Fuel cell Assembly: Assemble MEA in test-house with 2 x 150 µm
PTFE gaskets, tighten to standard compression (2Nm on 8 bolts).
3. Leakage Test: Check cell-house leak rate (not including feed lines ≤
3mBar/sec at 100 mBar), if not in the limit put small over-pressure
on the bolts, if still not, reassemble the cell (remember to connect well
the pressure meter to the cell!)
4. Test rack connection: Connect test-house to the rack EXCEPT RE-
FORMATE feed line red tube (in case the MFC is not 100% leak-free)
5. Water Test:
(a) Check water capillary tube is not blocked
(b) Start Water Flow: check water is present all the way to capil-
lary - open the water ﬂow directing the black switches upward -
(not while connected to test-house!) and observe water drops are
ﬂowing out of the tube
(c) Stop Water Flow: close water valves turning them upward
(d) Connect Water Tube: Tight the water capillary tube to the test
house.
6. Labview Start: Verify computer link through Labview to load, MFC
mass ﬂow control, T-controls
==PAGE:91==
Appendix B Start-up procedure
81
(a) Insert Password
(b) Create text ﬁles with MEA ID name (press RUN afterwards)
7. Data Recording (10s): Start data collection in the ﬁle with MEA ID,
set sample interval 10 seconds. Press save now (you can look at the
txt ﬁle to be sure date are being recorded).
8. Temperature Set (120◦C):
(a) Remember insulation material around the test house,
(b) Set Temperature 120◦C: set T manually with * bottom (on the
left)
(c) Start T: Turn manually T-Switches to ON. No ﬂow, no current,
no water, current switch connected (black levels are down)!
(d) Wait until T=120◦C (takes 10-12 min)
9. Reformate, Flows and Water: As soon as MEA temperature reach 120
◦C +/-3 ◦C (10-12 min)
(a) Connect Reformate Tube: connect the reformate feed line (red
tube)
(b) Set Flows: set ﬂows to (1.3/2.5 stoich @ 0.4 A/cm2) i.
250
mL/min reformate anode ﬂow ii. 380 mL/min air cathode ﬂow
(c) Start Water: turn down manually black water switches
(d) Wait 1 min at 120◦C, no current
10. OCV Check, Current Set (1 A), Temperature Set (160 ◦C): 1min after
reaching T = 120◦C
(a) Check OCV being above 900 mV measuring the voltage between
the ﬂow plates with voltammeter (will drift with unstable T) or
checking the voltage in Labview
(b) Set Current 1 A: Immediately set 1 A (0.05 A/cm2), until T =
160◦C
(c) Start Current: current switches on the TR are turned down (ON)
(d) Set Temperature 160◦C: raise Temperature manually to 160 ◦C
(e) Wait until T = 160◦C for 5-7 min
==PAGE:92==
Appendix B Start-up procedure
82
11. Wait 10min at 160◦C.
12. Current Set (8.4 A): 10 min after temperature reach 160 ◦C +/- 2 ◦C
set current to 8.4 A (0.4 A/cm2). This point deﬁnes start of durability
testing
13. Data Recording (60s): Switch to 60 sec data sampling
==PAGE:93==
APPENDIX C
EIS Spectra
Figure C.1.
==PAGE:94==
Appendix C EIS Spectra
84
Figure C.2.
==PAGE:95==
Appendix C EIS Spectra
85
Figure C.3.
Figure C.4.
==PAGE:96==
Bibliography
[1]
R. Rosli, A. Sulong, W. Daud, M. Zulkiﬂey, T. Husaini, M. Rosli, E. Ma-
jlan, and M. Haque, “A review of high-temperature proton exchange
membrane fuel cell (ht-pemfc) system,” International Journal of Hy-
drogen Energy, vol. 42, no. 14, pp. 9293–9314, 2017.
[2]
T. Tingelöf and J. K. Ihonen, “A rapid break-in procedure for pbi
fuel cells,” International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, vol. 34, no. 15,
pp. 6452–6456, 2009.
[3]
Q. Li, D. Aili, H. A. Hjuler, and J. O. Jensen, “High temperature poly-
mer electrolyte membrane fuel cells,” Springer Switzerland, pp. 387–425,
2016.
[4]
N. Seselj, “Chemical production of graphene catalysts for electrochem-
ical energy conversion,” 2017.
[5]
A. L. Dicks and D. A. Rand, Fuel cell systems explained. John Wiley
& Sons, 2018.
[6]
B. Pollet, A. Franco, H. Su, H. Liang, and S. Pasupathi, “Proton
exchange membrane fuel cells,” in Compendium of Hydrogen Energy,
pp. 3–56, Elsevier, 2016.
[7]
B. Bladergroen, H. Su, S. Pasupathi, and V. Linkov, Overview of mem-
brane electrode assembly preparation methods for solid polymer elec-
trolyte electrolyzer. InTech, 2012.
[8]
V. Bandlamudi, P. Bujlo, C. Sita, and S. Pasupathi, “Study on electrode
carbon corrosion of high temperature proton exchange membrane fuel
cell,” Materials Today: Proceedings, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 10602–10610,
2018.
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
87
[9]
R. Rosli, A. B. Sulong, W. R. W. Daud, M. A. Zulkiﬂey, M. I. Rosli,
E. Majlan, M. Haque, and N. Radzuan, “The design and development
of an ht-pemfc test cell and test station,” International Journal of Hy-
drogen Energy, vol. 44, no. 58, pp. 30763–30771, 2019.
[10] K.-L. Hsueh, “Fuel cell (02-4) fuel cell type - components of a single
cell.”
[11] S. S. Araya, F. Zhou, V. Liso, S. L. Sahlin, J. R. Vang, S. Thomas,
X. Gao, C. Jeppesen, and S. K. Kær, “A comprehensive review of
pbi-based high temperature pem fuel cells,” International Journal of
Hydrogen Energy, vol. 41, no. 46, pp. 21310–21344, 2016.
[12] S. Thomas, S. S. Araya, J. R. Vang, and S. K. Kær, “Investigating
diﬀerent break-in procedures for reformed methanol high temperature
proton exchange membrane fuel cells,” International Journal of Hydro-
gen Energy, vol. 43, no. 31, pp. 14691–14700, 2018.
[13] S. Galbiati, A. Baricci, A. Casalegno, G. Carcassola, and R. Marchesi,
“On the activation of polybenzimidazole-based membrane electrode as-
semblies doped with phosphoric acid,” International journal of hydrogen
energy, vol. 37, no. 19, pp. 14475–14481, 2012.
[14] M. Boaventura and A. Mendes, “Activation procedures characterization
of mea based on phosphoric acid doped pbi membranes,” International
Journal of Hydrogen Energy, vol. 35, no. 20, pp. 11649–11660, 2010.
[15] C. Zhang, W. Zhou, L. Zhang, S. H. Chan, and Y. Wang, “An experi-
mental study on anode water management in high temperature pem fuel
cell,” international journal of hydrogen energy, vol. 40, no. 13, pp. 4666–
4672, 2015.
[16] S. H. Eberhardt, F. Marone, M. Stampanoni, F. Büchi, and T. J.
Schmidt, “Quantifying phosphoric acid in high-temperature polymer
electrolyte fuel cell components by x-ray tomographic microscopy,”
Journal of synchrotron radiation, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1319–1326, 2014.
[17] S. H. Eberhardt, M. Toulec, F. Marone, M. Stampanoni, F. Büchi, and
T. J. Schmidt, “Dynamic operation of ht-pefc: in-operando imaging of
phosphoric acid proﬁles and (re) distribution,” Journal of the Electro-
chemical Society, vol. 162, no. 3, p. F310, 2015.
==PAGE:98==
Bibliography
88
[18] J. R. Vang, HTPEM Fuel Cell Impedance: Mechanistic Modelling and
Experimental Characterisation. Department of Energy Technology, Aal-
borg University, 2014.
[19] B. Jarvis, Statistical aspects of the microbiological examination of foods.
Academic Press, 2016.
[20] J. A. Asensio and P. Gómez-Romero, “Recent developments on proton
conduc-ting poly (2, 5-benzimidazole)(abpbi) membranes for high tem-
perature poly-mer electrolyte membrane fuel cells,” Fuel Cells, vol. 5,
no. 3, pp. 336–343, 2005.
[21] Y.-L. Ma, J. Wainright, M. Litt, and R. Savinell, “Conductivity of pbi
membranes for high-temperature polymer electrolyte fuel cells,” Jour-
nal of the Electrochemical Society, vol. 151, no. 1, p. A8, 2003.
[22] K. Scott, S. Pilditch, and M. Mamlouk, “Modelling and experimental
validation of a high temperature polymer electrolyte fuel cell,” Journal
of Applied Electrochemistry, vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 1245–1259, 2007.
[23] J. Wainright, J.-T. Wang, D. Weng, R. Savinell, and M. Litt, “Acid-
doped polybenzimidazoles: a new polymer electrolyte,” Journal of the
electrochemical society, vol. 142, no. 7, p. L121, 1995.
