==PAGE:1==
Masters
Master thesis in Solar Energy Engineering
Modelling and validation of a DC coupled
battery energy storage system for residen-
tial PV applications
Author: Pratikshya Prusty
Student no.: s181432
==PAGE:2==
Thesis supervisors:
Sune Thorsteinsson
DTU, supervisor
Dr. Sergiu Spataru
DTU, supervisor
Adrian Alejo Santamaria Lancia
DTU, co-supervisor
Peter Behrensdorff Poulsen
DTU, co-supervisor
Gunnar Rohde
Nerve Smart Systems
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Frederiksborgvej 399,
4000 Roskilde, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Collaboration between NSS and Denmark Technical University led to the hybrid PV-
battery energy storage system setup at Risø. In order to further analyse the setup,
performance models were made for the system components: PV array, hybrid inverter
and battery energy storage system.
Literature review was performed on existing
models. For PV array one-diode model was implemented, for hybrid inverter part,
load curve model and Sandia inverter model was implemented, for battery storage,
general energy storage model was implemented. Parameters for each specific model
was found based on available data and conditional requirements. The model outputs
were validated with measured data and mean relative error (MRE) was found to
check the accuracy of the models. The MRE for PV array was in the range of 4%
to 8.5%. The MRE for hybrid inverter was in the range of 1.49% to 3%. Validation
was not performed for the battery as the chosen model didn’t capture neither the
losses nor the dynamic behaviour of the battery. Instead case studied were made to
see the input and output behaviour of the battery. Finally, conclusion was drawn to
this thesis project and suggestions for improvement and future course of action were
given.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement
I cannot express enough thanks and gratefulness to my supervisors for their contin-
uous support, suggestions and feedback. I would like to offer sincere appreciation to
especially Sergiu Spataru and Sune Thorsteinsson for a steep learning opportunity
and for bearing with my unripe programming skills.
My utmost gratitude and appreciation is also extended to my brother-in-law for
sharing his knowledge and expertise in the programming world. I owe you another
tennis racquet.
To my nephew, for making me laugh during times of stress and
frustration. Also, to my partner for his unwavering support, love and helping me edit
this document.
Finally, to my family and friends for their encouragement, valuable words, emo-
tional and mental support.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
PV
Photovoltaic
RE
Renewable energy
DK
Denmark
DE
Germany
TSO
Transmission system operator
FIP
Feed-in-premium
BESS
Battery energy storage system
BMS
Battery management system
NSS
Nerve smart system
CC
Charge controller
MPPT
Maximum power point tracker
EMS
Energy management system
ILR
inverter load clipping
PV-BESS
Photovoltaic-battery energy storage system
AC
Alternating current
DC
Direct current
SOC
State of charge
NOCT
Nominal operating cell temperature
MBE
Mean bias error
SAM
System advisory model
Voc
Open circuit voltage
==PAGE:8==
vi
Abbreviations
Isc
Short circuit current
MPP
Maximum power point
Vmp
Voltage at maximum point
Pmp
Power at maximum point
Imp
Current at maximum point
MRE
Mean relative error
ANN
Artificial neural network
POA
Plane of array
OC
Open circuit
SC
Short circuit
RE
Renewable energy
SOH
state of health
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgement
iii
Abbreviations
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Grid-tied PV-BESS topologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Project objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Project limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
State of the art
11
3
Experimental setup
19
4
Modelling of the Photovoltaic Array
21
4.1
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Method for parameterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Modeling of the Hybrid Inverter
31
5.1
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Method for parameterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.1
PV to Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.2
Other flow of energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Modelling of the Battery Energy Storage System
45
6.1
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Method for parameterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.3
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7
Conclusion
53
8
Appendix
57
8.1
Fact sheet:technology neutral tender 2019 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background and motivation
Denmark had a target of 30% share of renewable energy of gross final energy consump-
tion for 2020, but the target was surpassed in the year 2015 and 36.1% of renewable
energy share was reported for the year 2018 [1]. From renewable energy shares, wind
energy accounted for more than half of the energy requirement and solar energy con-
tributed less than 5%. See Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1. RE based electricity generation in
DK for year 2017 [2]
It has been seen that the success
story of implementation of PV in Den-
mark is heavily influenced by the legis-
lation and political initiatives around it.
Produced energy is heavily taxed.
In
fact, 2/3 of the retail price of electric-
ity goes towards various governmental
taxes [3]. To avoid the taxes, PV pro-
sumers started to maximise their own en-
ergy consumption. Naturally, this was
politically unacceptable and initiatives
were undertaken to control PV produc-
tion since 2013. As a result, after 2012-
the year of ’PV boom’ eventually saw a
decline in PV production capacity in the country as seen in figure Figure 1.2.
Considering the fold of events with lowering of variable FIP over the years, open
agreement on cross border auction between Denmark and Germany for PV power
plants. There was a visible increase of installed capacity in the year 2018 [4], leading
to a drastic decline in rooftop installments but emergence of utility scale. Both the
fall and rise of different PV installations is clearly governed by the danish policies.
Nonetheless, considering the technology neutral tender of 2019, the offered price pre-
mium of wind and PV are quite similar ranging from 1øre/KWh to 1.84øre/KWh
(Appendix A8).
This implies, Denmark is slowly moving towards a technol-
ogy neutral tender in terms of price premium and will probably let the mar-
ket determine the future course of RE technologies.
This indeed puts PV
in competition with other RE technologies, but with the expectation that PV
electricity will become even cheaper in the future, gives a higher advantage.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.2. Year by year production comparison of PV energy in DK [3]
Additionally, considering the estimated installation capacity trend of 7GW by
2040, availability of 1.5 million hectares of land unsuitable for agriculture [5],
possession of PV module and inverter production capacity [7] thus reducing cost,
electricity generation by solar PV remains a highly lucrative option in Denmark.
Figure 1.3.
Maximising
self
consumption
through using BESS [6]
Denmark receives an average of 1500-
1900 hours of annual sunshine [8] which
is quiet less compared to other Euro-
pean countries(Spain:2524, Greece:2771,
Germany:1600, France:2500 hours [9]).
Also, intermittency of solar energy along
with energy fluctuations leading to in-
stability in the grid, curtailment of ex-
cess energy, unmanageable flow of en-
ergy to and from the grid leading to
added costs on electricity bill in case
of high demand and low supply, power
quality issues, drop in utilization fac-
tor due to idle state of PV system dur-
ing night insists on a more flexible solu-
tion.
A solution that maximises the potential
of solar energy with available technology-
a battery energy storage system.
The
two main advantages of using a bat-
tery system with PV is to increase self
consumption, hence reducing the depen-
dency to purchase electricity from grid
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Background and motivation
3
and thus saving money and reducing strain on distribution grid. Principally, when
there is excess of PV energy that has fulfilled the building or grid requirements, it
charges the battery. The battery starts discharging when PV energy falls short. Some-
times, the battery also charges from the grid. This usually happens during off-peak
hours or when the price of electricity is low. See figure 1.3.
Figure 1.4. Comparison of grid connected BESS
Study conducted by Weniger et al.
regarding sizing of residential PV sys-
tems, also shows that combination of
PV+battery will be the most econom-
ical solution in long term [10].
The
most common type of grid integrated
batteries are lead-acid, NaS, NiCd, Li-
ion, NiMH, redox flow. Figure 1.4 gives
a brief comparison between the different
battery technologies that are typically
used with a grid tied solar energy sys-
tem available in the market summarised
from [11], [12], [13].
Out of these, Li-
ion batteries are usually the best option
for solar battery system [14].
Battery
packs are usually accompanied by their
own monitoring and management system. Consequently, many researches have been
conducted in improving the performance in terms of cell balancing and energy man-
agement.
However, most of the researches were conducted on a fixed cell topology. Traditional
battery system present two major drawbacks. First, due to its fixed topology of cells
connected in series/parallel, it fails to adapt to the dynamic behaviour of the cell
requirement. Second, limitation on the operation cycle of battery pack that is domi-
nated by ’weak cell’. The weak cell will be charging or discharging faster than others
caused by cell unbalance and variable SOC levels.
To tackle the problem of wasted energy and wasted capacity, a flexible cell topology
configuration was needed. This was achieved by using power switches around cell and
adjusting real time connectivity.
Comprehensive surveys on reconfigurable battery is mostly based on hardware archi-
tecture and battery management systems [ [15], [16]] and such highly reconfigurable
battery system that enhances the operational performance has been the focus in re-
cent years. One major key player in the danish reconfigurable battery storage system
is a start-up company called as ’Nerve smart system’.
Existing PV-BESS solution uses bulky power electronic devices such as converters
that operate on high switching frequencies incurring substantial losses in the system.
With NSS, the need for DC/DC power converters can be omitted, as it does the
work of DC/DC converter with lower frequency active switching around the cell thus
enabling a high efficiency in the system.
The reconfigurable battery system is shown in figure Figure 1.5. A collaboration be-
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
100%
50%
75%
100%
0%
controllable
switch
Figure 1.5. A simple reconfigurable battery design
tween NSS and Denmark Technical University has facilitated the ongoing project and
this thesis is a small contribution to it.
All solar battery system works on the same basic principle. Solar irradiance is con-
verted to DC power by the solar panels. The DC power can either be used to charge
a battery in case of excess energy or can be sent to the inverter that will convert it
to AC power.
Grid tied hybrid systems can be arranged in 3 main layouts. Of particular inter-
est from these configuration is Hybrid PV-battery energy system and DC coupled
PV-NSS energy system as there is a in-progress setup at DTU Risø campus.
1. Hybrid PV-battery energy system - DC coupled directly to hybrid inverter
2. DC coupled PV-battery energy system - battery is connected on DC side. The
battery can also be reconfigurable
3. AC coupled PV-battery energy system - battery is connected on AC side
1.2
Grid-tied PV-BESS topologies
Hybrid PV-battery energy storage system
Figure 1.6 represents the schematic diagram of the system. The PV array produce
DC power which is sent to a hybrid bidirectional inverter. It has 2 DC inputs. One
port of the inverter is connected to receive the DC power from PV array, while the
other port is connected to a Li-ion battery energy storage system. This setup makes
possible for the inverter to receive power from both PV array and the battery. Mod-
ern hybrid inverters mostly comes with a high voltage maximum power point tracker
and a battery inverter/ charger within it [17].
Hybrid inverters are often called
multi mode inverters as it can simultaneously manage power from both solar and the
battery bank. It can charge the battery either through solar power or grid power
depending on the energy management algorithm implemented. The excess energy is
exported to the grid. Hybrid systems are deemed to be promising in areas with no
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Grid-tied PV-BESS topologies
5
Grid
Solar generation
EMS
Battery
 Hybrid Inverter
MPPT 
CC
Figure 1.6. Schematic diagram of hybrid PV-battery energy storage system
transmission lines and in islands [18], [19], therefore, its applications can be found
in both smart grid and micro grid. Many researches are conducted on optimisation
technique for sizing, accurate component selection and cost evaluation for PV-battery
hybrid system [20], [21], [22]. Few of the optimization technique for hybrid system
sizing are genetic algorithm [23], particle swarm optimization [24], simulated anneal-
ing [25], using software tools like HOMER [26], Hybrid2 [27]. Few of the optimization
indicators used for cost optimization are net present value, annualized cost, PV elec-
tricity cost,life cycle cost. Loss of power supply probability, loss of load probability,
system performance level are few of the reliability indicators. The advantages and
disadvantages of this system are listed below:
• Advantages
– Can be used both on grid and standalone mode, suitable during grid faults
or maintenance
– Growing number of hybrid inverters
– Multi-mode operation, shows backup power capabilities in the event of grid
disturbance [28]
• Disadvantages
– Very expensive
– Can have slightly lower efficiency due to conversion from DC-DC-AC
– Needs to have a hybrid inverter
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
DC coupled PV-battery energy system
Figure 1.7. Schematic diagram of a)DC coupled PV-battery energy storage system b) DC
coupled PV-NSS energy storage system
Figure 1.7a) represents the schematic diagram of the system and Figure 1.7b)
represents DC coupled PV-NSS system. The PV array produce DC power which
is either sent to the battery first(depending on charge controller) or converted into
AC power and exported to the grid. The battery bank is charged and discharged
through a charge controller. These systems are more suitable for large scale energy
storage where importance of power quality is paramount [29]. Several researches are
conducted on optimization strategies mostly based on direct self consumption & fixed
SOC limit to reduce battery ageing [30], integration and coupling of both DC and AC
systems [31] and new improved strategies like enhancement of battery life to increase
efficiency of the system [32]. The advantages and disadvantages of the system are
listed below:
• Advantages
– Needs one set of inverter, that need not be hybrid
– PV+ BESS share common inverter- reduced cost
– Higher efficiency than both AC and hybrid system [33]
– Can capture clipped energy from increased ILR [34]
• Disadvantages
– Introduces many variables in both design & operation [35]
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Grid-tied PV-BESS topologies
7
– Combined output of PV + battery is limited by inverter size [35]
– Optimal dispatch of battery is vital due to shared architecture
Additionally, apart from the advantages of the NSS system mentioned in Section 1.1,
the challenges of reconfigurable systems lie in safety, optimal utilization, lack of unified
framework for simulation of reconfigurable battery systems [15].
AC coupled PV-battery energy system
Grid
Solar generation
EMS
Battery
 PV Inverter
MPPT 
CC
 ESS Inverter
Figure 1.8. Schematic diagram of AC coupled PV-battery energy storage system
Figure 1.8 represents the schematic diagram of the system. Unlike other systems,
this system requires two separate inverters to operate. The PV array is connected
to DC/AC converter equipped with MPPT tracker. The battery is connected to a
bi-directional converter to the load. Consumers and generators are coupled indepen-
dently and equitably to the common AC side and power of DC is limited by rated
power inverter [36]. Power to the grid can be dispatched both at the same time or
independently. Applications of such systems are found in the operation of island grids
and smooth PV integration options like roof integration or shadowing facilities [37],
water pumping and disinfection [38]. Latest research trend on this system is found
in the addition of ’AC batteries’. AC batteries merges the converter, BMS, and the
cells all in one unit. Tesla Powerwall 2, SonnenBatterie, Enphase Energy are few
manufacturers of the AC batteries. The advantages and disadvantages of this system
are listed below:
==PAGE:18==
8
1 Introduction
• Advantages
– Independent inverter for PV & battery, it can separately provide energy
during times of failure
– Components are largely independent, easier to retrofit, finance, upgrade
and install [35]
– Slightly better reliability performance than DC coupled [39]
• Disadvantages
– Increased ILR results in increased clipping [34]
– lower efficiency due to DC/AC conversion [40]
– Lower reliability based on battery inverter [40]
As previously mentioned, the lab based setup on Hybrid PV-battery energy stor-
age system and PV-NSS system needs experimentation and analysis on the system.
But, before analysing the configurations, experimental researchers usually implement
mathematical models as an analysis tool. This can be used to predict and validate
outcome under certain conditions and observe how close or far the predicted values
are from measured values. It can also be used for performing sensitivity analysis to
check the measure of influence of factors on the predicted outcome.
This study is conducted at Risø PV system lab with an aim to establish simple per-
formance models for each individual components of a PV-battery hybrid system: PV
array, hybrid inverter and battery storage. The models are simulated in MATLAB.
A validation of each implemented model is performed by comparing data from simu-
lation with measurements, acquired from the lab setup at Risø. Therefore the main
research question of my study is: How to parametrise the performance models for the
individual elements in the PV-battery hybrid system ?.
1.3
Project objectives
To answer my main research question, the following steps were required to perform.
1. Distinguishing between the existing performance models in terms of application,
advantages and limitations for PV array, hybrid inverter and battery storage
2. Recognising the relevant performance model and its parameters based on avail-
able data and conditions needed to model them
3. Comparing the accuracy of the model performance based on proximity to mea-
sured data acquired from the lab setup
4. Comparing between the performance models in cases where more than one
model has been applied to see which one has higher accuracy
==PAGE:19==
1.4 Project limitations
9
1.4
Project limitations
Limitations in the project were due to :
1. The project duration was under 6 months. Due to time constraint, models could
only be made as individual components of the system and not as a whole system
2. The reconfigurable battery used in the NSS system could not be modelled due
to lack of lab setup with other system components at DTU, Risø
1.5
Outline
This section briefs about the rest of the structure in the thesis. Chapter 2 describes
and compares between the existing performance models available for modelling solar
array, inverter and battery storage. Chapter 3 presents the experimental lab setup for
PV-battery hybrid system at Risø. Chapter 4,Chapter 5,Chapter 6 describes about
PV modelling, inverter modelling and battery modelling. Each of these chapters are
subdivided into 3 main parts.
The first part,’Theory’ gives a background on the
specific performance model implemented for the individual component. The second
part, ’Method for parameterisation’, deals with the procedure that was followed to
identify the parameters used in the model. Based on the simulation results obtained
from the model, third part ’Validation’ presents comparison between simulated result
and measured data. Finally, Chapter 7 summarises the main findings and possibility
of future course of action.
==PAGE:20==
10
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
State of the art
The aim of this chapter is to articulate on the existing modelling methods used to
model solar cell/module/array, inverter and battery.
Specify the advantages and
limitations of the methods used and provide information on the current research
trends on modelling of these components.
Modelling of solar cell
In order to find the DC output power, IV curve needs to be simulated. In order to
simulate IV curve, parameters of PV cell needs to be determined. Determination
of PV cell parameters are mainly based on either electrical model or mathematical
model. Two widely researched electrical models of solar cell are one-diode equivalent
circuit model and two-diode equivalent circuit model. The one diode model is also
called as 5 parameter model and is described using modified Shockley equation.
I = Iph −Io

exp(q(V + IRs)
aKT
) −1

−V + IRs
Rsh
(2.1)
The one diode model circuit diagram is given in Figure 4.1. The mathematical equa-
tions governing the one diode model is given in equations (4.1) to (4.4).
The 5
parameters in the model are photo current(Iph), reverse saturation current(Io), series
resistance(Rs), shunt resistance(Rsh) and diode ideality factor(a).
The one diode
model is simple and efficient. But it assumes that there is no recombination loss in
the depletion region. In reality, solar cells exhibit substantial loss due to recombina-
tion especially during low voltages [41]. This is overcome by using two diode model.
The two diode model uses 7 parameters instead of 5. The 7 parameters are Iph,Io1,
Io2, Rs, Rsh, a1, a2. It is represented by :
I = Iph−Io1

exp(q(V + IRs)
a1KT1
) −1

−Io2

exp(q(V + IRs)
a2KT2
) −1

−V + IRs
Rsh
(2.2)
Though the two diode model is more accurate than one diode model, increased num-
ber of unknown parameters adds to the computational time due to complexity in the
model.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 State of the art
Many researchers have tried to improve one diode and two diode models by includ-
ing additional parameters. For instance, one diode model with capacitance. Simscape
matlab PV-cell model parameterises uses information on data sheet and is based on
one diode model [42]. But, imprecision is seen when compared to experimental result
as explained by [43] and the reason stated is due to lack of voltage change coefficient.
Therefore, [43] proposes voltage change coefficient to temperature and inclusion of
junction capacitance in the model. The values of Rs, Rsh and pn junction capacitance
are found experimentally under various shading conditions and other parameters are
derived from data sheet. The capacitance is given by :
Cj = δtIca
δV
(2.3)
where, Cj is the capacitance of the panel, Ica is the flow of mean current during
transient through the capacitor,δV is voltage difference on the terminals. The IV
curve is then compared with experimental data and simscape model. The proposed
model IV curve closely follows the one from experimental. However, verification on
model performance was lacking and computational time was more.
[44] proposes a simple two diode model that reduces computational time and uses
only 4 parameters by neglecting series and shunt resistance. As a result, equation
(2.2) reduces to :
I = Iph −Io1

exp( q(V )
a1KT1
) −1

−Io2

exp( q(V )
a2KT2
) −1

(2.4)
The ideality factor are calculated using iterative methods. It is found that IV charac-
teristics curve converges with measured data from data sheet at different irradiation
levels. However, the model didn’t seem to perform well during low levels of solar
insolation.
Apart from 1-diode and 2-diode model, there are several other models too. Few of
which are briefly described.
Sandia PV array performance model(SAPM) is an empirical model that defines 5
points on the IV curve:Isc, Voc and MPP and two additional points at
V oc
2
and
V oc+V mp
2
. The equations describe the electrical performance of the modules and are
defined in [45]. These 5 point create the basic shape of the IV curve and can be
used to estimate IV curves where operating voltage requirement is other than Vmpp.
There are 10 main parameters for the model: beam irradiance on POA (Eb), diffuse
irradiance on POA (Ed), reference solar irradiance(Eo), cell temperature(Tc), refer-
ence cell temperature(To), fraction of diffuse light used by module(fd), normalized
temperature coefficient for short circuit current(αIsc), normalized temperature coeffi-
cient for maximum power current(αImpp), number of cells in series (Ns), performance
coefficients (C) that are based on regression analysis. The model takes into account
most of the factors that may affect the IV curve and provides promising result when
compared with field tests. Limitation arises due to its requirement for experimental
determination of the large number of parameters and lack of data from the usual
==PAGE:23==
2 State of the art
13
manufacturing data sheet. Sandia database itself provides information for only 120
modules [46].
PV watts model is a simple model that is used in system advisory model(SAM). It
has two primary inputs: effective irradiance and PV cell temperature. Depending
on level of irradiance, maximum power is calculated by relating to these inputs. Pv
watts is recommended for rack mount system with crystalline silicon modules [47].
The parameters for loss factor model(LFM) can be extracted from outdoor IV curve
measurement. 6 normalised, independent parameters are found describing each IV
curve and fitting coefficients for module temperature and spectral mismatch [48]. The
calculated parameters can then be used to find Vmp and Imp as described in [49].
The main advantages of this model are its realistic estimation of power and inclusion
of degradation and seasonal variation that can be observed using the model. This is
especially valuable to detect and analyse strange performance patterns. Infact, [50]
makes outdoor performance evaluation of 3 models, SAPM, single diode model and
LFM and found that LFM gave lowest bias errors. Limitation in the model can be
found in the lack of IV curve data that can affect few parameter estimation.
The parameters of the mentioned models can be determined analytically using series
of formulations from either data sheet or IV curve information, using optimization
methods and artificial intelligence.
[51] compares five different analytical models for parameter extraction using one diode
model. Usually, the models have 5 equations and 5 unknowns(Iph,a,Io,Rs,Rsh). All
the models required three known points from IV curve(OC, SC, MPP) that were
usually available from data sheet. Few of the models required measurement of slope
of IV curve, slope at MPP needing graphical representation while others required
thermal drift coefficient that are usually not available in the data sheet. The models
differed based on their physical and mathematical assumptions and proximity of first
guess value to real value determined the convergence accuracy. Parameter extraction
using optimisation method are usually probabilistic population based taking inspira-
tion from nature and showcasing high accuracy [52]. Few of the optimisation method
are artificial bee colony(ABC), differential evolution(DE), particle swarm optimisa-
tion(PSO), pattern search method(PS). We will discuss only two: ABC and PSO.
ABC is inspired by behaviour of honey bees in search of honey. It has 3 essential
components: employed and unemployed foraging bees, and food sources. Employed
and unemployed foraging bees search for food sources (solution to the problem). The
problem is first converted to find the best parameter that will minimise the objective
function.
The bees then randomly find initial solutions and move towards better
solution with neighbour search mechanism and discarding poor solution along the
way [53]. [54] uses ABC algorithm to extract parameters for both one diode and two
diode models. RMSE index is used as accuracy measurement and lower and upper
bounds are set for (Iph,a,Io,Rs,Rsh) for one diode model and (Iph, a1, a2, Io1,Io2,
==PAGE:24==
14
2 State of the art
Rs, Rsh) for two diode model. RMSE is given by:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
t
[It,exp −It,est]2
(2.5)
Here, N represents number of data points on IV curve,It,exp and It,est represents, ith
experimental and estimated current of cell respectively. ABC optimisation method
outperformed other optimisation methods like harmony search (HS), PSO, genetic
algorithm (GA) and bacterial foraging optimisation algorithm (BFOA) when com-
parisons were made for IV characteristics. However, limitation of ABC method like
other optimisation methods lies in premature convergence and stagnation that ham-
pers the search capability and full utilisation of ABC approach. Like ABC, PSO is
inspired by the behaviour of birds in search of food. Each particle moves in a search
space in search of best optimised value. The position of each particle represents the
current best solution called as personal best and best experience by swarm called as
global best. Each particle tries to change its position in the search space by changing
its cognitive and social acceleration based on behaviour of birds flocking. [55] uses
PSO to extract parameters for both one diode and two diode models.
Objective
function is defined based on RMSE :
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
k=1
y(Ik, Vk, θ)2
(2.6)
Here, N represents number of data points on IV curve,Ik and Vk represents, kth ex-
perimental IV data,θ represents the unknown model parameters,(Iph,a,Io,Rs,Rsh) for
one diode model and (Iph, a1, a2, Io1,Io2, Rs, Rsh) for two diode model. Search
range for these parameters were given as ± 100% of synthetically and experimentally
obtained initial values. PSO method is fast, accurate and outperformed GA method
in the shape of the fitted I-V characteristics. The disadvantages include premature
convergence, getting trapped into local minimum in complex problems, difficulty in
assigning search range for initial values [56].
There has been a trend to use artificial intelligence like ANN and fuzzy logic to
model IV characteristics. These methods are especially helpful when environmental
conditions are taken into consideration. [57] reviews various ANN techniques to char-
acterise IV curve. Most of the time the model inputs are time, temperature and solar
irradiance. The advantages of ANN are reported to be :use of less number of parame-
ters, uncomplicated calculations, higher accuracy. The disadvantages mentioned are:
requirement of large amount of data to train the model which sometime might not
be available, extensive computation.
Modelling of Inverter
The output power of inverter can be modelled using:
==PAGE:25==
2 State of the art
15
• Inverter part load curve model
• Sandia inverter model
• Inverter datasheet model
• Driesse inverter model
• ANN
Inverter part load curve model uses a lookup table having efficiencies at different load
levels that represent the inverter performance at these operating range. It requires
2 parameters, DC power and DC voltage. The details of this model are explained
in the theory section of Chapter 5. The model is simple, useful in identifying the
strength and weakness of the inverter and more extensive model can be made with
the available efficiency data. [58] points the limitation of this model by suggesting to
see the impact on system performance and use mathematical model instead. Also,
the inverter efficiency provided by the manufacturer is same for the same type of
inverter, which may not be true representation of the typical inverter in use.
Sandia inverter model represents the AC power in terms of both DC power and
voltage. It can be progressively modified as more information are available. It requires
8 parameters, rated AC power, DC power at rated AC power, self consumption power
and 4 empirical coefficients. The details of this model are explained in the theory
section of Chapter 5.
The advantages of this model is the progressive nature of
modelling which increases the accuracy and but also, complexity. It can be modelled
using information on the data sheet, using field test measurements, using controlled
lab setup. In fact, inverter data sheet model is the implementation of Sandia model
with coefficients set at 0, so that model can be employed using only manufacturers
data sheet. The limitations of Sandia inverter model are: large errors were reported
[59] at low power levels with rapidly dropping efficiency. Also, the model fits in the
lower and upper limits of the power range, while most of the inverter operate at mid
range values, so accuracy may be sacrificed [58].
Driesse model expresses both power level and input voltage on inverter efficiency. It
is expressed as :
Ploss = (b0,0 +b0,1(V in−1))+(b1,0 +b1,1(V in−1)).Pin+(b2,0 +b2,1(V in−1)).Pin2
(2.7)
Pin and Vin are normalised at normalised DC power and DC voltage respectively and
b is the set of empirical parameter whose values are determined by fitting to mea-
sured data for each specific inverter model. The advantages of Driesse model are: it
calculates Ploss rather than efficiency and output power, this is especially important
at high power levels where accuracy matters the most [60]. The use of normalised
power and voltage makes parameters to lie within same range. Hence, it is easy to
compare between different inverters. Disadvantages include: model fits well at upper
part of the efficiency curve or around rated power but lower part of the efficiency
curve is not represented, this may be limiting to some applications.
==PAGE:26==
16
2 State of the art
[61] uses ANN configuration to find the AC output power of the inverter. The model
inputs were DC power from PV, radiation intensity, relative humidity and tempera-
ture measurements. The model outputs were AC power from inverter, power factor
and frequency. The study uses feed forward back propagation (FFBP) ANN and
Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) algorithm due to its simplicity and reliability. The ad-
vantages of the model are its high accuracy, ability to adapt environmental conditions
in the model. The disadvantages are dependency of output data on the type of input
data it is trained on, requirement of historical data in huge number which may not
be always available .
Modelling of Battery storage
Common battery modeling strategies are electrochemical models, equivalent circuit
model, mathematical models, black box model.
Electrochemical models are based on the internal chemistry of the battery. They are
usually based on basic physics laws like Faraday’s first law, Ohm’s law, Fick’s law
of diffusion, and the Butler–Volmer equation. The model is demonstrated using non
linear partial differential equations. Therefore, in order to find analytical solution,
the equations first needs to be converted to ordinary differential equations [62]. [63]
models galvanostatic charge and discharge behaviour of a dual lithium ion insertion
cell. The concentration of the electrolyte is given by solution theory and simulation
of lithium in active electrode is given by superposition. Electrochemical models are
highly accurate but very complex and needs deep understanding on battery internal
structure.
Equivalent circuit models are based on thevenin circuit model consisting of network
of resistors and capacitors, a voltage source. Various equivalent circuit models have
been put forward such as Rint model, RC model, improved thevenin model, PNGV
model and dual polarisation model. [64] gives detailed comparison between these mod-
els. We will briefly describe only on the first three models. Rint model uses an ideal
voltage source representing the battery open circuit voltage. Resistance and voltage
are functions of SOC,SOH and temperature. Regression analysis is performed with
load current and different SOC levels to find the parameters. The RC model has
two capacitors and three resistors. The capacitors represent surface effects of battery
and the capability of the battery to store charge chemically. Thevenin network is an
extension to Rint model by connecting parallel RC circuit in series with Rint model.
The battery parameters can be extracted by using optimisation method or experi-
mental methods like performing controlled pulse discharge tests and electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy. These models are only based on electrical characteristics of
the battery and not internal characteristics, so it does not give an efficient approxima-
tion. The advantages of such models are its linearity, simple configuration, options
for numerous modifications, widely used in SOC estimation [65] [62].
Mathematical models present major properties of the battery using specific equations.
==PAGE:27==
2 State of the art
17
For instance, Peukert’s law considers the non linear relationship between battery life-
time and rate of discharge. Refer equation (2.8). Here,L is the lifetime , a is battery
capacity, b is equal to 1 [66].
L = a
Ib
(2.8)
There are also other empirical models that represent battery terminal voltage as
a mathematical function of the SOC and the current. The three typical empirical
models are: Shepherd model, Unnewehr Universal Model and Nernst model.
• Shepherd model:
VT = V o −Riist −k1
z
(2.9)
• Unnewehr Universal Model:
VT = V o −Riist −k1z
(2.10)
• Nernst model:
VT = V o −Riist −k2ln(z) + K3ln(1 −z)
(2.11)
VT is the terminal voltage, Vo is the open circuit voltage, Ri is the internal resis-
tance, ist is the instantaneous current, K is polarisation resistance, z is SOC of the
battery. [62] reports the Nernst model to have the best accuracy while, shepherd
model is better performing during continuous discharge current.
The author also
goes on to suggest in order to increase accuracy, combination of all three models
can be used and more parameters can be added to the models. The advantages of
mathematical models are simple with low complexity allowing for real time parameter
identification. The disadvantages are its low accuracy.
The black box model is a data driven approach that describes the battery behaviour
without the need to understand the complex internal chemistry of the battery. It
relies to train on historical data to predict the relationship between the inputs, cur-
rent, SOC, temperature and the output, terminal voltage. [67] estimates SOC as state
space variable using neural network and extended kalman filter with results showing
quick convergence and good accuracy. The advantages of using data driven approach
is accuracy and no need of prior knowledge regarding battery technology. The disad-
vantages include training requires huge data requiring numerous parameters [65] and
accuracy is highly dependent on the data it was trained on.
==PAGE:28==
18
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Experimental setup
Grid
Trina Solar
TSM-DD05A.08(II)
300Wp, 18.3%
Resu10H,Type- R
400V,9.8KWh
Fronius symo
hybrid 3.0-3-S
3KW,95.2%
Data acquisition
system
UMG 604-PRO
power analyser
Figure 3.1. PV-battery energy storage system setup at Risø
To model the system components of PV-battery hybrid system, it is vital to
understand the working of the components and the system as a whole. Figure 3.1
represents the hybrid PV - battery energy storage system and DC coupled PV -
battery system setup at DTU, Risø.
The PV module comprises of 60 serially connected mono crystalline solar cells.
The PV array constitutes of 10 serially connected modules each of 300 W peak power.
That means the PV array has a total rated power of 3KW.
Followed by a connection to the Fronius hybrid inverter. The inverter uses multi
flow technology. It can have different AC and DC power flows in parallel. It has 2
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Experimental setup
input terminals for DC connections and is also equipped with a MPPT tracker. The
inverter is rated at 3KW of AC nominal output and can have a maximum of 5KW of
DC input power. The nominal voltage of the inverter is 595 V and MPP operating
range is between 150 V to 800V.
The LG Resu10H is a Li-ion battery pack and BMS. It uses lithium nickel man-
ganese cobalt oxide (NMC) as its chemistry and polymer pouch flat laminated battery
as its design. It has a capacity of 63Ah and charging and discharging voltage range
of 400-450 V and 350-430 V respectively. It also has a converter inside it. This was
validated by:
• Estimated battery voltage Vs data sheet battery voltage
Total energy of battery = 9.8KWh(From data sheet)
(3.1)
Capacity of battery = 63Ah(From data sheet)
(3.2)
Therefore, battery pack voltage = 9.8KWh
63Ah
= 155.5V
(3.3)
But, the voltage range in data sheet is mentioned to be 350 - 400V. This is only
possible if there is a boost converter in it.
• Also, switching sounds can be heard from the battery pack
If battery pack voltage is 155V and nominal cell voltage is 3.65 V [68], then estimated
number of cells in the battery is ≈43.
The power analysers are used to measure the power flow in the system . It can
measure voltage, current, power, peak, harmonics, phase and other parameters. There
are two power analysers in the system. The extra power analyser came equipped with
the hybrid inverter.
The data acquisition system is centrally located and all the system components
are connected to it. It logs all the measurement readings from these components. It
connects the wired electrical equipments together to local network for data accessibil-
ity and file sharing. Currently, it records about 87 different data from the system. To
name a few, GPOA, array voltage and current, battery voltage and current, readings
from solar module temperature sensors, line and phase voltages and current, active
and reactive components, phase and frequency.
A similar connection layout is also made for NSS system. Except, the battery is
DC coupled rather than directly connected to the hybrid inverter.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 4
Modelling of the
Photovoltaic Array
Methods mentioned in Chapter 2 were either complex, needed external information
that was not easily available or required high computation time.
An appropriate
model is the one that finds a balance between accuracy and simplicity. It should
imitate the behavior of physical solar cell without being too complex. The availability
of information from data sheet and flash test measurement were used in an easy to
implement and simple in configuration model. Therefore, one diode equivalent circuit
model was chosen and iterative method was used to simulate IV curve. This chapter
aims to provide background on one diode model, procedure to chose the parameters
and simulation and comparison of output data with measured data.
4.1
Theory
Figure 4.1. 1-diode model of solar cell
Single diode model is the most widely
used model [69]. Figure 4.1 represents
the single diode equivalent circuit model
of solar cell.
Without any solar radia-
tion, the cell is a simple p-n junction and
the current flowing through the diode is
given by shockley equation:
Id = Io

exp( qV
aKT ) −1

(4.1)
where Id is the diode current, Io is
the
saturation
current,
q
is
charge
of electron,-1.602*10−19C,V is terminal
voltage, a is ideality factor, K is Boltzmann constant,-1.38*10−23J/K, T is junction
temperature. The most simple way in which whole IV curve can be characterised
requires only 3 parameters: Iph, Io, a. When light falls on the solar cell, photovoltaic
effect takes place and photocurrent starts flowing. The output current of cell then
==PAGE:32==
22
4 Modelling of the Photovoltaic Array
becomes:
I = Iph −Id
(4.2)
Realistically, no circuit exists without losses, therefore, the series resistance,Rs is
taken into account. Rs also represents the contact loss between electrode and the sur-
face material. Now the IV curve can be characterised using 4 parameters:Iph,I0,a,Rs.
The output current is given by:
I = Iph −Io

exp(q(V + IRs)
aKT
) −1

(4.3)
To account for the unavoidable leakage current occurring between the terminals of the
solar cell, shunt resistance, Rsh is incorporated [70]. The value of Rsh is quiet high,
therefore, little to no current flows through it. Now, the IV curve can be characterised
with 5 parameters: Iph,Io,a,Rs,Rsh. The output current is given by:
I = Iph −Io

exp(q(V + IRs)
aKT
) −1

−V + IRs
Rsh
(4.4)
Parameters at real conditions
The PV module parameters are measured at STC (1000W/m2, 25◦C, AM 1.5). There-
fore, these parameters may vary when exposed to irradiation and temperature. There-
fore, adjustments were made to normalise the parameters at STC.
• Ideality factor,a:
a
astc
=
Tcell
Tcellstc
(4.5)
• Saturation current,I0:
I0
I0stc
=
 Tcell
Tcellstc
3
exp
"
1
k
 
Eg
T

T cell,stc
−Eg
T

T cell
!#
(4.6)
• Photocurrent, Iph:
Iph =
G
Gstc
[Iphstc + α(T −Tstc)]
(4.7)
• Shunt resistance, Rsh:
Rsh = Rshstc
 G
Gstc

(4.8)
• Series resistance, Rs: For simplification, many authors assume Rs is indepen-
dent from temperature and radiation. But, [71] reports logarithmic relation
of Rs with irradiance. while, deviations from measured IV characteristic was
found when variation of Rs was with temperature. Concluding that variation
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Theory
23
of I0 with temperature is enough to represent behaviour of PV module, lifting
the need to take temperature effect on Rs into consideration. Though [69] has
represented Rs as:
Rs = Rsstc −
 a
I0exp
−V oc
a

(4.9)
• Band gap energy of semiconductor,Eg:
Eg
Egstc
= 1 −0.0002677(Tcell −Tcellstc)
(4.10)
Formulation of non-linear equations
To find the 5 parameters, 5 conditions are needed. Manufacturer’s data sheet usually
provides data at key points at STC, namely, 1)open circuit point(Voc,0) 2) short cir-
cuit point(0,Isc) 3) maximum power points (Vmpp,Impp). Additionally, temperature
coefficients of Pmpp(γ), Voc(β) and Isc(α) is also provided.
• Open circuit condition,(Voc,0):
0 = Iph −I0

exp(q(V oc)
aKT ) −1

−V oc
Rsh
(4.11)
• Short circuit condition,(0,Isc):
Isc = Iph −I0

exp(q(IscRs)
aKT
) −1

−IscRs
Rsh
(4.12)
• Maximum power point condition,(Vmp,Imp):
Imp = Iph −I0

exp(q(V mp + ImpRs)
aKT
) −1

−V mp + ImpRs
Rsh
(4.13)
• Derivative of dP
dV = 0:
dP
dV

mpp
= Imp −V mp dI
dV

mpp
= 0
(4.14)
dImp
dV mp =
I0
a exp
h
V mp+ImpRs
a
i
+
1
Rsh
1 + IoRs
a exp
h
V mp+ImpRs
a
i
+
Rs
Rsh
(4.15)
• Voc temperature correction: This condition varies from author to author. [72]
develops 5th condition by finding reciprocal of slope of IV curve at short circuit
point. Whereas, the condition mentioned by [73] ensures correct prediction of
temperature coefficient of Voc by the model.
∂V
∂T ≈V oc(Tcell) −V oc(Tcellstc)
Tcell −Tcellref
(4.16)
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Modelling of the Photovoltaic Array
Equations from 4.11-4.16 can be numerically solved using iterative methods like
Newton Rhapson or Gauss-Seidel methods. Initial guess values can be found empiri-
cally, using basic guess values or by bootstrapping method as mentioned in [73]. In
this study, parameters are found either from data sheet or simulation software. Using
those parameters, IV curve is simulated. Equation (4.13) is numerically solved using
Newton rhapson method for the purpose.
4.2
Method for parameterisation
Two main steps for calculating the DC output of the PV module are :
1. Calculating the cell temperature (◦C)
2. Using the calculated cell temperature (◦C), solar irradiation (W/m2) and model
parameters to estimate module’s DC output
08:00
10:00
12:00
14:00
16:00
18:00
Mar 24, 2020   
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Temperature°C
Temperature readings
sensor1
sensor2
sensor3
sensor4
sensor5
sensor6
Ambient temperature
Figure 4.2. Comparison of temperature sensors
and ambient temperature
As mentioned in Chapter 3, the solar
arrays have 6 sensors attached to it. But,
the readings from the sensors were ques-
tionable. From Figure 4.2 it can be seen
that sensor 5 and 6 gives constant read-
ing always, even during night. Readings
from sensor 3 is very close to the ambi-
ent temperature. [74] mentions that dur-
ing night, the cell temperature drops to
same as ambient temperature and dur-
ing day the cell temperature is almost
30◦C or higher than the ambient tem-
perature. This is clearly not the case for
sensor 3.
Therefore, for further analy-
sis even though sensor 1, 2 and 4 were
taken into consideration, the cell temperature model cannot be reliably validated us-
ing these sensor readings. The sensors are widely placed in the array. Therefore,
the range(max-min) of cell module temperature for sensor 1,2 and 4 were 37.75◦C,
38.01◦C, 31.57◦C.
Cell temperature model was estimated using 2 equations given by Lasnier and
Ang(1990) [75] and Skoplaki, Boudouvis and Palyvos (2009) [76].
Lasnier and Ang(1990) :
Tc = 30.006 + 0.0175(GT −300) + 1.14(Ta −25)
(4.17)
Skoplaki, Boudouvis and Palyvos (2009):
Tc =
GT
U1 ∗Vs ∗U0 + Ta
(4.18)
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Method for parameterisation
25
where, Tc = cell temperature(◦C)
GT = Measured GPOA (W/m2)
Ta = Measured ambient temperature(◦C)
U1 = Convective heat transfer coefficient(W/m2C)
U0 = Conductive heat transfer coefficient(W/m2C)
Vs = wind speed (m/s)
From datasheet of solar module, NOCT of the module was 44◦C at 800 W/m2, Ta
= 20◦C, Vs= 1m/s. Therefore, using these values in equation (5.6), U1 = 0.003 and
when Vs = 0 m/s , U0 =33.33. Using these values the model was created and mean
bias error was found to see the average bias between estimation and measurement.
MBE is given by:
MBE = 1
n
n
X
n=1
(yi −yii)
(4.19)
Where, n = Number of elements (length of average of sensor 1, 2, 4)
yi = Sum of elements (sum of the average of sensors 1,2,4)
yii = Estimated values (cell temperature estimation using ambient temperature)
MBE(LasnierAng) = 2.2380, implying its under estimating and MBE(skoplaki) =
-6.434, implying its over estimating [77]. This study has not accounted for the MBE
found. Also, due to the placement of wind sensor in a turbulent area, wind speed is
assumed to be 1m/s for each data point for cell temperature estimation using Skoplaki.
Comparing both models against the DC output of the array, it was found that model
output estimation data using Lasnier and Ang was closer to the measured data during
higher insolation levels than model output estimation data using Skoplaki. Moreover,
a study conducted by [78] where different cell temperature models were compared
for a grid connected PV system, Lasnier and Ang model showed lower average error
of 12.51% between observed and estimated values than Skoplaki of 17.98%. Hence,
Lasnier and Ang model was chosen to calculate the cell temperature required for
further analysis.
To find the the model parameters of the PV module, namely, Rs, Rsh, a, I0, Ish two
methods were employed.
1. Using the ’User entered specifications’ feature of SAM to get the parameters
needed.
Maximum power point voltage(Vmp), maximum power point cur-
rent(Imp), open circuit voltage(Voc), short circuit current(Isc) were extracted
from the manufacturers data sheet and were entered in SAM to get the model
parameters
2. Using the extensive list of PV module data provided by SAM’s CEC module
library
The parameter values obtained from the above mentioned methods are given in Ta-
ble 4.1. It can be seen from the table that significant difference is found in Rsh. A
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Modelling of the Photovoltaic Array
low value of shunt resistance can cause huge loss by providing an alternative path for
photo current. This diversion leads to reduced effective current at the terminals of
the solar cell [79].
model parameters
Database pre-tested for TSM 300 DD05A.08(ii)
User entered specifications from data sheet
a
1.6916
1.556
IL(A)
9.739
9.779
I0(A)
5.5382e-10
7.495e-11
Rs(Ω)
0.252815
0.27843
Rsh(Ω)
934.82
294.174
Table 4.1. Comparison of model parameters obtained from SAM database and SAM user
entered specification from manufacturers data sheet
The characteristics on manufacturers data sheet is same for every panel. But, that
is often not the case. Each panel has its own electrical specification. This difference
can arise due to the non-uniformity in production of these solar panels or defects/-
damage that might have been caused during handling.
Therefore, to address this problem, each solar panel was subjected to flash test mea-
surement. The flash test measurement was done by my colleague with the help of
supervisors. The flash test measurements were conducted at three irradiance levels
1000 W/m2, 200W/m2, and 100W/m2. Voc, Isc, Pmpp, Vmpp and Impp was mea-
sured from the flash test for each solar module. Entering these parameters in SAM
database feature of ’User entered specification’, model parameters were found out.
Most of the parameter values obtained from data sheet and flash test measurements
were comparable unlike the values in SAM CEC module database. This could be due
to:
1. SAM CEC module database is the implementation of 6 parameter, one-diode
model used in the CEC New Solar Homes Partnership Calculator. Where, oper-
ational coefficients are calculated with a general purpose equation solver prone
to more errors [80]
2. CEC Performance Model with User Entered Specifications uses the same model
additionally with an improved coefficient calculator.
Improvement was sug-
gested by [73] that uses a combination of empirical regression and heuristic
methods enhancing accuracy and efficiency
Verification between the parameter values were done for parameters obtained from
data sheet and flash test for each of the module. See Figure 4.3. Maximum relative
errors are obtained for Rsh and I0. The values obtained for Rsh from flash test were
ranging from 310 Ωto 8400 Ω. They were inconsistent. While, for I0 values were
5.85e−11 to 6.75e−11.
To closely replicate the values obtained from flash test measurement, each of these
parameter values were entered in the model and optimised based on least error. In
each step, one of the parameter values were varied across the values obtained from
flash test and others were kept constant. The value of Rsh was kept constant at 294Ω
in each step.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Validation
27
-10
-5
0
Rs(%)
Rs= 0.2784 
-100
-50
0
Rsh(%)
Rsh = 294.17 
5
5.5
Iph(%)
Iph= 9.779 A
10
20
30
I0(%)
I0 = 7.495e-11 A
267/263
266/262
265/261
264/260
259/257
258/256
251/255
250/254
249/253
248/252
Module number NSS/RS
1
1.5
2
a(%)
a = 1.556
NSS
Reference system
Figure 4.3. Comparison of model parameters obtained from data sheet and flash test mea-
surement
The values of the model parameters that is used for the numerical method analysis
are shown in Table 4.2. The model employs Newton Rhapson iterative method to solve
the linear conductance at MPP. All the CEC equations are normalised at standard
rated condition. A voltage approximation is given such that it varies from V oc
2
to
V oc+V mp
2
. This range is obtained from [45] .
Model parameters
Value used in the model
a
1.5434
IL(A)
9.2734
I0(A)
6.181e-11
Rs(Ω)
0.2784
Rsh(Ω)
294
Table 4.2. Input parameter values in the model
4.3
Validation
In order to validate the modelling and simulation method for PV array, the model
output-estimated DC PV power was compared with measured DC PV power obtained
from ’NERVESmartSystem’ database. For validation, data from a sunny day-24th of
March 2020 was selected. The day profile is given in Figure 4.4. As information is
only needed for sunshine hours, data is extracted from 7am to 7pm. Data filtering
was also done based on certain filters such as :
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Modelling of the Photovoltaic Array
• GPOA > 50 W/m2, minimum threshold that gives PV output power acceptable
by the inverter
• PV output power should be greater than 3% of rated inverter power of 3000 W
• The DC voltage range should be from 150 to 800 V. This is the MPPT operating
range in the inverter
• Shading time from 9-10am and 1- 2:30pm
• Other outliers that are time and date specific , in this case for 24th March, from
3:20-4 pm
00:00
06:00
12:00
18:00
00:00
Mar 24, 2020   
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
DC PV output Power(W)
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
GPOA(W/m2)
GPOA(W/m2)
DC PV power(W)
Figure 4.4.
GPOA(W/m20)and PV output
power(W) profile for 24th March 2020
The estimated and measured DC PV
output power for both reference and NSS
system is shown in Figure 4.5.
Two
things can be observed. First, simulated
data points are higher than measured
data points. Second, the model performs
well during low insolation level. But as
GPOA increases, the performance of the
estimation decreases.
The reason for 1) could be due to simpli-
fication & assumptions that were made
for parameter estimation leading to im-
precise initial value and hence inaccurate
prediction in the model. The reason for
2) could be due to :
• Use of iterative method of analysis
• Estimation of parameters which are measured at reference condition rather than
real conditions
Validation was also performed between P-V obtained from flash test measurements
with the estimated P-V obtained from the individually extracted parameters. See
Figure 4.6. The whole P-V curve is from the flash test measurements, whereas partial
P-V curve represents the estimated data points. The triangle on the x-axis represents
the difference in maximum power point obtained from flash test and model estimation.
The relative difference in MPP was found by:
∆Pmpp(%) = (MeasuredPmpp −EstimatedPmpp)
EstimatedPmpp
(4.20)
The difference in Pmpp in % for the 10 modules are :0.0938, 0.1127, 0.0434, 0.0499,
0.1444, 0.0752, 0.1313, 0.0835, 0.1096, 0.0336. The relative difference is below 1% in-
dicating little to no difference between the measured and estimated data point.
==PAGE:39==
4.3 Validation
29
When individual module parameters are entered in the model, the simulated DC ar-
ray power was determined by adding the estimated maximum power specific to each
module. The mean relative error was found out to be 7% and was calculated using
equation (4.21).
However, this method is not valid due to module mismatch loss. Each module has its
own characteristic property, generating local maximum power. Generally, the global
maximum DC PV output power is lower than sum of the maximum available power
generated by each module [81]. But the question remains, how can we predict array
power when individual maximum power of the module is known?
Relative Error(%) = Measured DC power −simulated DC power
simulated DC power
× 100
(4.21)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
GPOA(W/m2)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
PV output power(W)
Measured and simulated power Vs GPOA: Reference system
Measured Power
simulated Power
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
GPOA(W/m2)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
PV output power(W)
Measured and simulated power Vs GPOA: NSS system
Measured Power
simulated Power
Figure 4.5. Estimated and measured DC output power of the modules in Reference system
and NSS system
Figure 4.6. Estimated and measured Power-voltage curve for NSS modules
Finally, relative error was found out between measured DC power output and
simulated DC power output assuming model parameters remain constant throughout
the modules and are equal to the values given in Table 4.2. Relative error and GPOA
is analysed against time and is shown in Figure 4.7. 11th of March was chosen for
analysis as it was a cloudy day, with increased frequency of passing clouds.
This results in sporadic pattern with few outliers in the data points. This could have
been due to shading of the irradiance sensor reflected in the GPOA measurement. As
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Modelling of the Photovoltaic Array
the chosen iterative method is dependent on past values for the step-ahead future esti-
mation,
error
in
prediction
is
unavoidable.
07:00
08:00
09:00
10:00
11:00
12:00
13:00
14:00
15:00
16:00
Mar 11, 2020   
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Relatvie error
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
GPOA(W/m2)
Relative error on 24th march for NSS system
Figure 4.7. Relative error and GPOA with vary-
ing time for a cloudy day for NSS system
Relative error was also found for dif-
ferent irradiation levels, for both sunny
and cloudy day and for both systems -
NSS & reference. See Figure 4.11. The
width of the bars represent error range
and the height of the bar represents the
number of data points within the error
range. The red fit curve represents the
normal distribution fit.
For both sunny and cloudy days, mod-
ules constituting for NSS system shows
lower MRE value of 4% and 8% respec-
tively than the reference system with 6%
and 8.5%.
This could be due to posi-
tional advantage of NSS modules like devoid of trees or other partial shading con-
ditions. Also, maintaining congruence with results shown in Figure 4.5, there is a
general trend of increase in relative error with irradiation levels. Though, the same
cannot be said about cloudy day as we see the maximum error of 14% occurs when ir-
radiance is between 400 to 600 W/m2. In general, cloudy days have higher fluctuation
in solar insolation, which could have resulted in such high errors.
Irradiance<=200 W/m2, MRE =3.054595e-02
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0
20
40
200<Irradiance<400 W/m2, MRE = 3.481032e-02
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0
50
400 <Irradiance<600 W/m2, MRE = 4.681462e-02
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0
50
100
Reference system, MRE =6.034468e-02
Irradiance>600 W/m2, MRE = 8.927022e-02
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.11
0
100
200
Error range
Number of data points
Figure 4.8. Reference system: sunny day
Irradiance<=200 W/m2, MRE =6.224034e-02
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
100
200
200<Irradiance<400 W/m2, MRE = 8.760343e-02
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0
500
400 <Irradiance<600 W/m2, MRE = 1.428138e-01
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
50
Reference system, MRE =8.556047e-02
Irradiance>600 W/m2, MRE = 7.491570e-02
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
50
100
Error range
Number of data points
Figure 4.9. Reference system: cloudy day
Irradiance<=200 W/m2, MRE =1.222284e-02
-0.02
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0
50
200 <Irradiance<400 W/m2, MRE = 2.010882e-02
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0
100
200
400 <Irradiance<600 W/m2, MRE = 2.869407e-02
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0
50
For NSS system,MRE =4.266326e-02
Irradiance>600 W/m2, MRE = 6.988908e-02
0.04
0.045
0.05
0.055
0.06
0.065
0.07
0.075
0.08
0.085
0.09
0
100
Error range
Number of data points
Figure 4.10. NSS system: sunny day
Irradiance<=200 W/m2, MRE =6.617070e-02
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
100
200
200 <Irradiance<400 W/m2, MRE = 7.772645e-02
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0
500
400 <Irradiance<600 W/m2, MRE = 1.415865e-01
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0
50
For NSS system,MRE =8.018102e-02
Irradiance>600 W/m2, MRE = 6.442964e-02
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0
50
100
Error range
Number of data points
Figure 4.11. NSS system: cloudy day
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5
Modeling of the
Hybrid Inverter
Methods to model the output AC power of inverter were reviewed in Chapter 2.
Though all of the models except ANN method were easy to implement, two methods
were preferred for modelling of the inverter in this study - inverter part load curve
model and Sandia inverter model. Continuous monitoring of the AC output of the
inverter with respect to the DC input from the PV array is vital to keep a check
on the system performance and see if there is any need for maintenance. Therefore,
the aim of this chapter is to provide background on the methods used, procedure to
find the parameters in each of these methods and finally compare the simulated AC
output from the models with the measured data.
5.1
Theory
Inverter part load curve model
The performance of the inverter can be described by this question: How does the
inverter power characteristics change when the DC power is converted to AC power?
Most of the inverter manufacturers provide only single value for peak efficiency or
CEC weighted value, but as more and more inverters are being made for solar com-
patibility, detailed inverter performance data are provided by Independent testing
laboratories [58]. The detailed inverter performance data include efficiencies at dif-
ferent load percentages. Inverter part load curve model makes use of this as a lookup
table between variable efficiency at different load percentages resulting from varying
irradiation, DC voltage or inherent inverter behaviour. This model is developed by
NREL and implemented in SAM [80]. The model uses simple linear interpolation
to estimate DC to AC conversion efficiency at DC power and DC voltage. The AC
power is given by :
Pac =
(
ηinv × Pdc,
if ηinv × Pdc ≤Pac,rated
Pac,rated,
if ηinv × Pdc > Pac,rated
If there is a condition when inverter is consistently operating at or more than max-
==PAGE:42==
32
5 Modeling of the Hybrid Inverter
imum rated power of the inverter, then the inverter saturates and may result in
reduction in output power due to power clipping.
Sandia Inverter model
Sandia inverter model is used to express Pac in terms of Pdc and optionally as Vdc
also. The model equation is :
Pac =
  Paco
A −B

−C(A −B)

× (Pdc −B) + C(Pdc −B)2
(5.1)
Model parameters are given by :
A = Pdco(1 + C1(V dc −V dco))
(5.2)
B = Pso(1 + C2(V dc −V dco))
(5.3)
C = Co(1 + C3(V dc −V dco))
(5.4)
Here,
Pac= Estimated AC power (W)
Pdc= DC power to inverter (W)
Vdc= DC input voltage (V)
Vdco= DC voltage at reference operating condition (V)
Paco= Maximum AC power rating at reference (W)
Pdco= DC power at Paco (W)
Pso= Self consumption power by inverter (W)
C0= Parameter defining curvature relationship between AC & DC power
C1= Empirical coefficient to vary Pdco with input DC voltage
C2= Empirical coefficient to vary Pso with input DC voltage
C3= Empirical coefficient to vary C0 with input DC voltage
Performance parameters can be obtained in three ways with increasing order of
accuracy.
• Manufacturers specification sheet: simple linear model that does not depend
on DC voltage and uses Paco, Pdco, Pso as parameters.
In case of lack of
specification, Pso is assumed to be 1% of rated inverter power [59]
• Field performance measurements : Day-long measurements of input DC power
and output AC true power from the inverter are taken into consideration. Ad-
ditional parameters like C0 & Vdco provides better accuracy.
• Detailed laboratory measurements: With a slightly more complex model, field
measurement’s accuracy can be improved using laboratory measurement. Mea-
surements are taken for Pdco, Pso, C0 at three voltage levels(minimum, nominal,
maximum) and coefficients C1, C2, C3 are determined using parabolic fits
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Method for parameterisation
33
5.2
Method for parameterisation
5.2.1
PV to Grid
To model the hybrid inverter’s energy flow from PV to grid, two modelling methods
were implemented :
1. Inverter part load curve model
2. Sandia inverter model
Inverter part load curve model
0
20
40
60
80
100
Pac/Pnom (%)
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Efficiency of inverter(%)
AC Efficiency curve, datasheet= 96.2%
200V
595V
800V
0
20
40
60
80
100
Pdc/Pnom (%)
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Efficiency of inverter(%)
DC Efficiency curve
200V
595V
800V
Figure 5.1. Datasheet efficiency at different operating range of the hybrid inverter
Parameterisation through inverter part load curve makes use of the efficiency that
is provided at eight different power levels and three different DC voltage levels such
that it represents whole operating range of inverters performance. For fronius symo
hybrid 3.0-3.S, the AC power levels were at 5%,10%,20%,25%,30%,50%,75%,100% of
the rated AC power and voltages(minimum, nominal, maximum) were at 200 V, 595V
and 800V. To estimate the AC power the model follows three steps:
1. It uses linear interpolation to establish relationship between load curve input
DC power and load curve DC voltage. It is represented by equation (5.6)
2. Then efficiency is parameterised using measured DC power and measured DC
voltage
3. Finally, equation (5.7) is used to estimate the output AC power
==PAGE:44==
34
5 Modeling of the Hybrid Inverter
The data sheet efficiency at different operating range of the voltage for three voltage
levels is shown in Figure 5.1. It can be seen that the inverter performs the best at
nominal voltage level of 595V and efficiency is comparatively low when it operates at
high voltage and low % of rated power. When the inverter operates at higher voltage
levels, this may lead to heating of the device. Operating at low rated power can in
turn cause instability and higher total harmonic distortion in the system [82] . It can
also been seen from the graph on right that the x-axis exceeds 100 %, indicating, the
DC input power was higher than the rated nominal power in order to operate the
inverter at 100% of the load.
z = f(x, y)
(5.5)
ηinv(%) = f(Pin(W), Vin(V ))
(5.6)
Pac = ηinv ∗Pdc
(5.7)
Sandia Inverter model
Sandia inverter model is based on the equation given in Chapter 5. For this study,
field performance measurement method was used as both measured AC, DC power
and operating voltage of the inverter was available. This gives higher accuracy than
the linear model used in manufacturers specification sheet [59]. A period of 30 days
from 1st March 2020 to 30th March 2020 was considered to include sunny days, cloudy
days and the whole voltage range of the inverter. Though the maximum voltage of
the inverter is 800 V, in reality it operates between the minimum voltage of 200 V
and nominal voltage of 595 V.
Parameters
Reference system
NSS system
King(2007)
Pso (W)
48.008
48.889
19.6
Pdco(W)
3042.383
3068.386
2731
Co (1/W)
9.95e-07
1.92e-06
-1.47e-05
Table 5.1. Inverter parameter values from measured Pac and Pdc data
The parameters needed in the model are Pdco, Pso, C0. To find the parameters
a 2nd order polynomial fit was made between measured AC power versus DC power.
Quadratic equation, where y= measured AC power and x = measured DC power was
solved. [59] suggests to use raw measured power, devoid of filters and time average.
But, as the system in our study involves a full system lab setup, extreme outlier
and equipment errors were inevitable in raw data. Therefore, to get accurate mea-
surements, few data filters were applied in the measured data. The data filters are
mentioned in Section 5.3. To find Pso, x-intercept was calculated at Pac = 0. To
find Pdco, Pac was made equal to the rated AC power of the inverter, in our case, at
Pac = 3000 W. Co is the coefficient of the x-square term of the quadratic equation.
This procedure was applied to both reference and NSS system. The values of the
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Method for parameterisation
35
parameters are given in Table 5.1. These values are comparable to the values men-
tioned in [59] which measured for 13 days and for a 2500 W inverter. The estimated
Pso is higher than that of King(2007) due to higher rating of the inverter used in
our system. Co value closer to 0 indicates a linear relationship between AC power
and DC power. Also, if an assumed value of 0 would have been considered for Co, as
the author suggested in case of lack of specifications, it would eliminate the squared
term indicating no ohmic losses. This would mean maximum efficiency is achieved at
maximum power level [58]. The coefficients, C1, C2, C3 can be calculated by perform-
ing three different parabolic fit between AC and DC power at three separate near
constant voltage levels(min. nom.,max.). As the inverter is connected to DC array
having variable voltage levels, experiments and measurements were needed to be per-
formed to fix the voltage at these 3 levels. In this study, C1, C2, C3 was assumed to
be zero due to time limitation and inaccessibility to the lab due to covid-19 pandemic.
Therefore, equation (5.1) was reduced to :
Pac =

Paco
Pdco −Pso −Co(Pdco −Pso)

× (Pdc −Pso) + Co(Pdc −Pso)2 (5.8)
Here,
Pac is the estimated AC power from sandia model,
Paco is rated inverter power = 3000W,
Pdc is the 5 minute averaged measured DC power
5.2.2
Other flow of energy
Figure 5.2. Energy flow diagram of PV-battery hybrid system
One of the DC inputs of the hybrid inverter is connected to the battery in the
system. This facilitates energy flow from different directions. Apart from PV to grid,
energy flow can also be from PV to battery, grid to battery, PV + grid to battery,
battery to grid, PV + battery to grid.
PV to battery
The sign convention of the PV to battery energy flow should be:
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Modeling of the Hybrid Inverter
Pbatt = -ve(charging)
Ppv = +ve
Pinv = +ve
Table 5.2. Sign convention of energy flow from PV to battery
04:30
05:00
05:30
06:00
06:30
07:00
07:30
08:00
Jun 01, 2020   
0
500
GPOA(W/m2)
04:30
05:00
05:30
06:00
06:30
07:00
07:30
08:00
Jun 01, 2020   
0
1000
2000
Ppv(W)
04:30
05:00
05:30
06:00
06:30
07:00
07:30
08:00
Jun 01, 2020   
0
1000
2000
Pinv(W)
Power profile
04:30
05:00
05:30
06:00
06:30
07:00
07:30
08:00
Jun 01, 2020   
-1000
-500
0
500
Pbatt(W)
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
1600
PV DC power(W)
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Efficiency(%)
Efficiency curve for PV-battery
Figure 5.3. Power profile & Efficiency curve for PV to battery energy flow
To study the energy flow from PV to battery, 1st of June 2020 was taken into
consideration. The power profile and efficiency curve for the given day is shown in
Figure 5.3. It can be seen that the time period from 5:53 am to 7:07 am, the battery
was charging and the PV power is positive. The inverter power is also positive. The
positive power value of inverter may indicate two things. First, the battery is getting
charged from PV array only. Second, power is flowing to the grid. For now, there
is only one way to know if there is a flow of power to the grid. This can be done
by looking at the power magnitude of the inverter. For this case, the inverter power
is ranging from 450 to 550 W. Whereas, when power flows from grid to battery and
battery to grid, the power magnitude is of the order 2 KW to 3 KW. Based on this
analysis, the battery is assumed to be charging only from the PV array. The mean
efficiency is calculated to be 54.86%. Further analysis on inverter power threshold
should be done to estimate the ratio of power flowing in the battery and to the grid.
ηP V tobattery(%) = Battery input power(W)
PV DC power(W)
× 100
(5.9)
Grid to battery
Pbatt = -ve(charging)
Ppv = 0
Pinv = -ve(from grid)
Table 5.3. Sign convention of energy flow from grid to battery
The sign convention of grid to battery energy flow is given in Table 5.3. To study
the energy flow from grid to battery, 16th of June 2020 was taken into consideration.
The power profile and efficiency curve for the given day is shown in Figure 5.4. It
can be seen that from 16th June 23:00 pm to 17th June 1:00 am, the battery is
getting charged from the grid. From the efficiency curve, it is seen that data points
are available only around 3000 W of AC power. This is owing to the charging of
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Method for parameterisation
37
Jun 16, 22:00
Jun 16, 23:00
Jun 17, 00:00
Jun 17, 01:00
Jun 17, 02:00
2020   
-6
-4
GPOA(W/m2)
Jun 16, 22:00
Jun 16, 23:00
Jun 17, 00:00
Jun 17, 01:00
Jun 17, 02:00
2020   
0
0.05
0.1
Ppv(W)
Jun 16, 22:00
Jun 16, 23:00
Jun 17, 00:00
Jun 17, 01:00
Jun 17, 02:00
2020   
-2000
0
2000
Pinv(W)
Power profile
Jun 16, 22:00
Jun 16, 23:00
Jun 17, 00:00
Jun 17, 01:00
Jun 17, 02:00
2020   
-2000
0
2000
Pbatt(W)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Grid power(W)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Efficiency(%)
Efficiency curve for Grid-battery
Figure 5.4. Power profile & Efficiency curve for grid to battery energy flow
the battery that has been hard coded to charge from the grid at 3000 W. To get
an efficiency curve for the whole operating range, the code needs to be changed and
accordingly battery should be charged at different operating points of AC power. The
mean efficiency at 3000 W of charging from the grid is 89.74%. The few data points
around 50 W could be due to imprecision of time considered.
PV + grid to battery
The sign convention of PV + grid to battery energy flow is given in Table 5.4.
Pbatt = -ve(charging)
Ppv = +ve
Pinv = -ve(from grid)
Table 5.4. Sign convention of energy flow from PV + grid to battery
May 26, 00:00
May 26, 12:00
May 27, 00:00
May 27, 12:00
May 28, 00:00
May 28, 12:00
May 29, 00:00
2020   
0
500
1000
GPOA(W/m2)
May 26, 00:00
May 26, 12:00
May 27, 00:00
May 27, 12:00
May 28, 00:00
May 28, 12:00
May 29, 00:00
2020   
0
2000
Ppv(W)
May 26, 00:00
May 26, 12:00
May 27, 00:00
May 27, 12:00
May 28, 00:00
May 28, 12:00
May 29, 00:00
2020   
-2000
0
2000
Pinv(W)
Power profile
May 26, 00:00
May 26, 12:00
May 27, 00:00
May 27, 12:00
May 28, 00:00
May 28, 12:00
May 29, 00:00
2020   
-2000
0
2000
Pbatt(W)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
PV + Grid power(W)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Efficiency(%)
Efficiency curve for PV + Grid-battery
Figure 5.5. Power profile & Efficiency curve for PV + grid to battery energy flow
To study the energy flow from PV + grid to battery, 26th May to 29th may 2020
was taken into consideration. The power profile and efficiency curve for the given
day is shown in Figure 5.5. Several days were taken into consideration as there are
instances when the battery is getting charged from both PV and grid. Therefore,
to capture the efficiency during these instances, few filters were applied. Like, solar
power should be greater than 50 W, the total input to the inverter(from PV + grid)
should be greater than 3% of inverter rated power, the ratio of output and input
should be equal to or less than 1. The mean efficiency was found to be 76.89%.
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Modeling of the Hybrid Inverter
Battery to grid
Pbatt = +ve(Discharging)
Ppv = 0
Pinv = +ve(to grid)
Table 5.5. Sign convention of energy flow from battery to grid
00:00
00:30
01:00
01:30
02:00
02:30
03:00
Jun 17, 2020   
-5
0
GPOA(W/m2)
00:00
00:30
01:00
01:30
02:00
02:30
03:00
Jun 17, 2020   
0
0.05
0.1
Ppv(W)
00:00
00:30
01:00
01:30
02:00
02:30
03:00
Jun 17, 2020   
-2000
0
2000
Pinv(W)
Power profile
00:00
00:30
01:00
01:30
02:00
02:30
03:00
Jun 17, 2020   
-2000
0
2000
Pbatt(W)
1600
1800
2000
2200
2400
2600
2800
3000
3200
Battery power(W)
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110
Efficiency(%)
Efficiency curve for battery - grid
Figure 5.6. Power profile & Efficiency curve for battery to grid energy flow
The sign convention of battery to grid energy flow is shown in Table 5.5.
To
study the energy flow from battery to grid, 17th June was considered. The power
profile and efficiency curve for the given period is shown in Figure 5.6. The battery
is discharging from 1 am to 2:35 am. The battery is programmed to discharge to
the grid at 3000 W. To get the efficiency for the whole operating range, the battery
should be programmed to discharge at different operating range. The mean efficiency
from battery to grid at 3000 W is found to be 99.12%, which is unrealistically high.
Sometimes, the efficiency is more than 100%. The output power is 20-60 W higher
than input power. The only logical explanation of such behaviour could be due to
noise in the system and needs further investigation to know the exact reason.
PV + Battery to grid
Pbatt = +ve(Discharging)
Ppv = +ve
Pinv = +ve(to grid)
Table 5.6. Sign convention of energy flow from PV + battery to grid
The sign convention of PV + battery to grid energy flow is shown in Table 5.6. To
study the energy flow from PV + battery to grid, 26th of June was considered. The
power profile and efficiency curve for the given period is shown in Figure 5.7. The PV
power is positive and simultaneously the battery is discharging from 4:40 am to 9:04
am. Variable data points below 500 W is due to the contribution from PV power,
while data points around 3000 W is due to battery power. The mean efficiency from
PV and battery to grid is 97.78%.
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Validation
39
04:00
05:00
06:00
07:00
08:00
09:00
10:00
May 26, 2020   
0
500
1000
GPOA(W/m2)
04:00
05:00
06:00
07:00
08:00
09:00
10:00
May 26, 2020   
0
1000
2000
Ppv(W)
04:00
05:00
06:00
07:00
08:00
09:00
10:00
May 26, 2020   
0
1000
2000
3000
Pinv(W)
Power profile
04:00
05:00
06:00
07:00
08:00
09:00
10:00
May 26, 2020   
0
1000
2000
Pbatt(W)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
PV + Battery power(W)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Efficiency(%)
Efficiency curve for PV + battery - grid
Figure 5.7. Power profile & Efficiency curve for PV + battery to grid energy flow
5.3
Validation
Inverter part load curve model
In order to validate the modelling and simulation method for hybrid inverter, the
model output- estimated AC power was compared with measured AC power of the
hybrid inverter.
Validation could only be performed for energy flow from PV to
grid due to lack of literature study to simulate other flow of hybrid inverter and
unavailability of the system. For validation, 30 days profile from 1st March 2020 to
30th March 2020 data was taken into consideration. To match the sunshine hours
and analyse energy flow from PV to grid, data was extracted from 7am to 7pm. The
data filters used are :
• GPOA > 50 W/m2, this automatically takes into account the seasonal changes
in day and night for large dataset
• Output AC power of the inverter should be greater than 0
• PV output power should be greater than 3% of rated inverter power of 3000 W
• The DC voltage range should be from 150 to 800 V, within MPPT operating
range
• Ratio of AC power and DC power should lie within 30% to 100%, removal of
extreme outliers
• 5 minute average filter to reduce any random noise
The 5 minute average filter was built using fast key lookup data structure offering
flexibility of indexing individual elements. Two lookup tables were created. One stor-
ing sum of elements and another storing number of elements within 5 minute interval
range.
Figure 5.8 shows the estimated, measured and data sheet efficiency at different stan-
dardised output power for both reference and NSS system.
The measured power
and consequently estimated power does not exceed 80% of standardised power. This
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Modeling of the Hybrid Inverter
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Standardised o/p power(Pac/Pnom)(%)
20
40
60
80
100
Inverter efficiency(%)
Reference System
Datasheet
Measured
Estimated
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Standardised o/p power(Pac/Pnom)(%)
20
40
60
80
100
Inverter efficiency(%)
NSS System
Datasheet
Measured
Estimated
Figure 5.8. Data sheet,measured and simulated efficiency curve for both system
means, the data sheet efficiency is measured for the whole inverter operating range till
nominal rate AC power of the inverter(3000W), but, in reality, the inverter operates
only 80% of nominal rated AC power( 2400W). It can also been seen that for most
of the operating range, the inverter efficiency is not constant as usually mentioned in
the data sheet. But, the inverter operates at greater than 90% of the efficiency for
most of its range.
The maximum irradiation for the month of March was around 800 W/m2. Beyond
800 W/m2 the inverter efficiency drops slowly due to increase in temperature in the
device when operating at maximum threshold. Inverter efficiency increases at lower
temperatures. In the morning and evening there is a rise and there is drop in the
afternoon. In fact, a significant efficiency drop of 2-3% is reported by [83] in the
afternoon with a 1% drop for every 12 ºC increase in temperature. But, in this study,
such drop in efficiency is difficult to see as the inverter is located indoors and more
data points are needed to compare seasonal variations.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
DC power from PV array(W)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Output Inverter AC power(W)
Reference system: DC vs AC Power
Measured Pac
Estimated Pac
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
DC power from PV array(W)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Output Inverter AC power(W)
NSS system: DC vs AC Power
Measured Pac
Estimated Pac
Figure 5.9. Estimated and measured DC power Vs AC power of the inverter
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Validation
41
Figure 5.9 shows the measured and estimated AC powers against DC powers for
the hybrid inverter for both the systems. For most part of the input DC power, the
estimation and measured data overlaps indicating high accuracy. For a closer analysis,
the mean relative error in the inverter AC power at different voltage levels is shown
in Figure 5.10. The relative error was calculated using :
Relative error(%) = Measured AC power −Simulated AC power
Simulated AC power
× 100
(5.10)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Input DC power from the PV array(W)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Relative Error(%)
Reference system,MRE: 3.113470e-02
Vdc<=200, MRE = 0.1226
200<Vdc<250,MRE = 0.1979
250<Vdc<260, MRE = 0.0251
260<Vdc<270, MRE =  0.0229
290<Vdc<300, MRE =  0.0425
300<Vdc<350, MRE = 0.0272
Vdc>300, MRE =  0.0605
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Input DC power from the PV array(W)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Relative Error(%)
NSS system,MRE =2.221492e-02
Vdc<=200, MRE =0.2669
250<Vdc<260, MRE = 0.0163
290<Vdc<300, MRE =0.0084
300<Vdc<350, MRE = 0.0194
Vdc>300, MRE = 0.0586
Figure 5.10. Mean relative error at different voltage levels for both the system
Majority of the data points lie below 6% of error and operating at 300V to 350V.
Though there are few times where errors were as high as 50-60%.
Most of these
errors occurs during the morning around 6am to 8am. This could be due to unstable
operation of inverter during the presence of low irradiation. Mean relative error is
maximum during low voltage level of operation, around 12% for reference system and
26% for NSS. The mean relative error when the operating voltage is between 300V
to 350 V gives the lowest errors of 2.7% and 1.9% for reference and NSS systems
respectively. Overall MRE for reference system is 3.1% and for NSS it was 2.21%.
Sandia Inverter model
Figure 5.11 shows the estimated, measured and data sheet efficiency at different
levels of standardised output power for both reference and NSS system. Here also,
the measured and estimated power are within 80% of standardised power( 2400W).
The inverter attains an 85% and higher efficiency when operating at only 10% of
standardised output power(300W).
Figure 5.12 shows the measured and estimated AC power versus DC power for both
the systems. Very little difference is seen when compared with Figure 5.9. Therefore,
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Modeling of the Hybrid Inverter
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Standardised o/p power(Pac/Pnom)(%)
20
40
60
80
100
Inverter efficiency(%)
Reference System
Datasheet
Measured
Estimated
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Standardised o/p power(Pac/Pnom)(%)
20
40
60
80
100
Inverter efficiency(%)
NSS System
Datasheet
Measured
Estimated
Figure 5.11. Data sheet,measured and simulated efficiency curve for both system
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
DC power from PV array(W)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Output inverter AC power(W)
Reference system: DC vs AC Power
Measured Pac
Estimated Pac
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
DC power from PV array(W)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Output inverter AC power(W)
NSS system: DC vs AC Power
Measured Pac
Estimated Pac
Figure 5.12. Estimated and measured DC power Vs AC power of the inverter
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Input DC power from PV array(W)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Relative Error(%)
Reference system,MRE: 1.577832e-02
Vdc<=200, MRE = 0.1237
200<Vdc<250,MRE = 0.1922
250<Vdc<260, MRE = 0.01745
260<Vdc<270, MRE = 0.0083
290<Vdc<300, MRE = 0.0573
300<Vdc<350, MRE = 0.0098
Vdc>300, MRE = 0.0429
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Input DC power from the PV array(W)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Relative Error(%)
NSS system,MRE: 1.495202e-02
Vdc<=200, MRE = 0.1498
250<Vdc<260, MRE =  0.0070
290<Vdc<300, MRE =0.0184
300<Vdc<350, MRE = 0.0109
Vdc>300, MRE = 0.0559
Figure 5.13. Mean relative error at different voltage levels for both the system
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Validation
43
for further analysis, mean relative error is shown at different voltage levels.
See
Figure 5.13.
Majority of data points are below 5% of error and are also operating at 300V to
250 V bracket. Lower mean relative error of 12.37% and 14.98% for reference and
NSS system respectively is observed when inverter is operating below 200 V when
compared to inverter part load curve model. This could be due to taking ’Pso’ - the
self consumption of the inverter in estimation of AC power that strongly influences
the inverter efficiency at low power levels [59].
Overall, there is a reduction in MRE when Sandia model was used compared to part
load curve model. MRE for reference system is 1.57% and for NSS it was 1.49%.
With addition of other voltage dependent characteristics like C1, C2, C3 the sandia
inverter model is expected to perform even better.
Simulation and validation could not be performed for other flow of energy for the
hybrid inverter but a brief discussion is presented on future course of action in Chap-
ter 7.
==PAGE:54==
44
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 6
Modelling of the
Battery Energy
Storage System
Methods to model battery mentioned in Chapter 2 were complicated, required prior
knowledge, demanded experimental measurements, required discharge curve(like shep-
herd model) which may not be easily available from just data sheet. Therefore, a gen-
eral energy storage model is described in this chapter. The model has been inspired
from a lecture on ’Application-Oriented Modelling of Renewable Energy Sources, Con-
version and Energy Storage Systems’ from Aalborg University and was provided by
the supervisor. This chapter aims to give a description on the general battery model,
procedure to extract the required parameters for modelling and applying test cases
to see how the model output varies when configurable inputs are changed.
6.1
Theory
The Li-ion battery is connected to the hybrid inverter. It can receive the signal to
charge or discharge from either PV or the grid. The general energy storage model is a
very simple storage model that acts as a tank of energy. It can be applied to any type
and size of battery requiring very few parameters. Energy can be sent and received to
and from the tank as needed. The model assumes no loss. It doesn’t consider factors
that may affect operating conditions like temperature effect, C rate. It doesn’t take
into account self discharge, memory effect or voltage and current dynamics.
The model inputs and outputs are described below:
• Input
– Power demand (W)- Power demand can be charging power(-ve) or discharg-
ing power(+ve). The power demand can be from a specific application. For
instance, grid power demand.
==PAGE:56==
46
6 Modelling of the Battery Energy Storage System
• Output
– Power supply (W) - power supplied by the storage system is in response
to the power demand. It can be both charging power(-ve) or discharging
power (+ve). As there is no consideration of power loss in the system,
power supply is equal to the power it demands or 0.
– SOC (%) - The state of charge that is related to energy
– Energy Throughput (Wh)- Energy that was exerted by the storage system
during charging and discharging under a certain period of simulation time.
– Energy lost (Wh) - The total energy lost in energy throughout during
charging and discharging under a certain period of simulation time.
SOCmax (%)
Pdemand
(KWh)
SOCmin (%)
Pmax (KWh)
EffRT (%)
SOCinit(%)
Emax(KWh)
Condition 1  :
Maximum power
limitation
Calculate
Effch, Effdisch
 
Calculate 
Pch, Pdisch
Calculate
SOC
Condition 2 : 
SOC range
limitation
Calculate
Ethroughput
Calculate
Elost
Psupply
(KWh)
SOC(%)
Ethroughput
(Kwh)
Elost(Kwh)
Pdemand>Pmax
Figure 6.1. Schematic block diagram of general battery model
Though the model is simplistic in nature, it can still find the change in SOC from
initial SOC level, how much energy is exerted by the storage during charging and
discharging, how much is lost from the energy exerted during charging and discharging
based on certain configurable parameters listed below:
• Pmax(KW) - Maximum power of the battery storage. It remains same during
charging and discharging
• Total storage energy (KWh) - Maximum energy content that can be stored in
the battery
• Initial SOC (%) - Initial SOC level in the battery.
If, 0% it is completely
discharged, if 100% it is fully charged
• Round trip efficiency (%) - Ratio of energy that was retrieved from the stor-
age system by energy that was put in the storage system. The charging and
discharging efficiency is assumed to be same
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Theory
47
• SOCmin - Minimum allowable SOC level.
Depends on the type of battery
technology
• SOCmax - Maximum allowable SOC level.
Depends on the type of battery
technology
A complete schematic diagram of the inputs, calculation and conditions and the
outputs is given in Figure 6.1.
It can be seen that the supply power has only 2
conditions to satisfy in order to show the power demand. It can also be seen that
the round trip efficiency, maximum energy and initial SOC are all deciding factors to
determine the final SOC. The description of the boxes between input (blue line) and
output(red line) are given below.
• Condition box
– Condition 1: Maximum power limitation - If the power demand is greater
than the maximum allowable power of the battery storage, then the power
saturates to Pmax. Otherwise, power is the power that was demanded. It
can be both positive or negative.
– Condition 2 : SOC range limitation- Psupply = 0 when, SOCmax < SOC
< SOCmin
• Calculation box
– Calculate Effch(charging efficiency) & Effdisch(discharging efficiency)
ϵCharge = ϵDischarge = √ϵRT
(6.1)
– Calculate Pch(charging power) & Pdisch(discharging power)
PCh = Pin × ϵchPDisch = Pin
ϵdisch
(6.2)
– Calculate SOC
SOC = SOCinit ±
R t
0 Pindt
Emax
(6.3)
– Calculate Ethroughput
Ethroughput =
Z t
0
Pindt
(6.4)
– Calculate Elost
Elost = (1 −
p
(ϵRT ))
Z t
0
Pindt
(6.5)
==PAGE:58==
48
6 Modelling of the Battery Energy Storage System
6.2
Method for parameterisation
Few of the values of the configurable parameters were: Pmax = 5 KW (from man-
ufacturers data sheet), Initial SOC is variable and can be set according to the user,
SOCmin = 20%,SOCmax = 90% is a preferable SOC window for Li-ion batteries as
reported by [84]. The procedure to find the total energy storage capacity and round
trip efficiency of the battery is described next.
Figure 6.2. One-hour difference in measurements due to daylight savings for 14th June 2020
To find the battery capacity, SOC measurements from SolarWeb measurements
was used.
The measurements were for 24 hours and data was measured every 5
minutes. For analysis, data from 14th June was utilized. Battery power from the
’NERVESmartSystem’ database was extracted. The data was averaged for every 5
minute. It was found that the SOC measurements and battery power measurements
had one hour difference between them. See Figure 6.2. This is due to day light savings.
Therefore, for battery measurements, one hour preceding data was considered. The
SOC and power profile is presented in Figure 6.3. The battery is charging from 12 am
to 2:35 am, there is a period of standby and then discharging from 5 am to 7:25 am
followed by long period of standby. The initial SOC changed from 15% to 89% and
then dropped back to 15%. To find the battery capacity, charging and discharging
period was analysed. To find the charging capacity, the time integral to determine the
area under the curve during charging period was calculated. Similarly, for discharging
capacity, the time integral to determine the area under the curve during discharging
period was calculated. The area is given by:
Area under curve = 1
2 × t × (yi + yi+1)
(6.6)
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Method for parameterisation
49
00:00
06:00
12:00
18:00
00:00
Jun 14, 2020   
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
Power Battery(W)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
SOC(%)
SOC and power profile of Li-ion battery on 14/06/2020
Figure 6.3. Correction in the measurement by taking daylight savings into account for 14th
June 2020
Here,
t = time period, 5 minutes
yi = battery power at ith position
yi+1 = battery power at ith +1 position
The discharging capacity was found to be 6.29 KWh and the charging capacity was
7KWh. The round trip efficiency was found to be 88% and is defined by the following
equation.
The round trip efficiency can never be 100% due to energy loss in the
storage.
ηroundtrip(%) = Energy recovered
Energy input
× 100
(6.7)
Date
Maximum SOC(%)
Minimum SOC(%)
Discharging capacity(KWh)
Charging capacity(KWh)
Round trip efficiency(%)
30-05-2020
97
11.5
8.55
-10.77
79.3
08-06-2020
97
67
3.35
-3.87
86.5
14-06-2020
89
15.5
6.2
-7
88.5
20-06-2020
89
13.5
6.05
-7.10
85.2
Table 6.1. Charge-Discharge capacity and round trip efficiency of the battery
Parameters
Values
Pmax(KW)
5
Emax (KWh)
8.81
Initial SOC(%)
Variable according to test cases
ηRT (%)
0.85
SOCmax (%)
90
SOCmin (%)
20
Table 6.2. Configurable parameter values as model input
Similarly, few more days were considered to validate the consistency of the round
trip efficiency of the battery in Figure 6.6. The SOC, charging capacity, discharging
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Modelling of the Battery Energy Storage System
capacity with time period and round trip efficiency of these days are summarised in
Table 6.1.
To find the maximum storage energy, scaling was performed for 30th May as the
battery is being charged and discharged to extreme SOC levels. Maximum storage
energy capacity (x) is estimated to be :
97% of x = discharge capacity = 8.55KWh
(6.8)
so, x = 8.81KWh
(6.9)
When compared with the usable battery energy capacity mentioned in the data
sheet(9.3 KWh), the estimated storage energy capacity is 5% less. When compared
with the total energy capacity mentioned in the data sheet (9.8 KWh), the estimated
storage energy capacity is 10% less. The configurable parameter values considered in
the model are mentioned in Table 6.2.
00:00
06:00
12:00
18:00
00:00
May 30, 2020   
-3000
-2500
-2000
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Power Battery(W)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SOC(%)
SOC and power profile of Li-ion battery on 30/05/2020
Figure 6.4. State of charge and power profile of the battery on 30th May 2020
00:00
06:00
12:00
18:00
00:00
Jun 08, 2020   
-3000
-2500
-2000
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
Power Battery (W)
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
SOC(%)
SOC and power profile of Li-ion battery on 08/06/2020
Figure 6.5. State of charge and power profile of the battery on 8th June 2020
00:00
06:00
12:00
18:00
00:00
Jun 20, 2020   
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
Power Battery (W)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
SOC(%)
SOC and power profile of Li-ion battery on 20/06/2020
Figure 6.6. State of charge and power profile of the battery on 20th June 2020
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Validation
51
6.3
Validation
Few cases were considered to see how the output reacts by changing the input param-
eters.
• Case 1:SOCinitial = 50%, Tsimulation= 0.5 hour
Pdemand(KW)
Psupply(KW)
SOCfinal(%)
Ethroughput(KWh)
Elost(KWh)
-3
3
53.92
0.375
0.029
3
3
45.38
0.375
0.029
7
5
42.3
0.625
0.048
-7
5
56.54
0.625
0.048
Table 6.3. Keeping initial value of SOC constant and varying power demand
• Case 2:Pdemand = -3KW (requesting to charge), Tsimulation= 0.5 hour
SOCinitial(%)
Psupply(KW)
SOCfinal(%)
Ethroughput(KWh)
Elost(KWh)
0
0
3.92
0
0
10
0
13.92
0
0
20
3
23.92
0.375
0.029
40
3
43.92
0.375
0.029
70
3
73.92
0.375
0.029
90
0
93.92
0
0
100
0
103.92
0
0
Table 6.4. Keeping power demand constant(charge the battery) and varying initial value of
SOC
• Case 3:Pdemand = 3KW (requesting to discharge), Tsimulation= 0.5 hour
SOCinitial(%)
Psupply(KW)
SOCfinal(%)
Ethroughput(KWh)
Elost(KWh)
0
0
-4.616
0
0
10
0
5.38
0
0
20
0
15.38
0
0
40
3
35.38
0.375
0.029
70
3
65.38
0.375
0.029
90
3
85.38
0.375
0.029
100
0
95.38
0
0
Table 6.5. Keeping power demand constant(discharge the battery) and varying initial value
of SOC
==PAGE:62==
52
6 Modelling of the Battery Energy Storage System
• Case 1: It can be seen that when the power demand is below the maximum
power, the supply power is equal to the power demand. This is a limitation of
the model as it does not consider any power loss neither the calculated round trip
efficiency. When the power demand exceeds the maximum power of the battery,
power supplied is equal to the maximum power.
In cases when the power
demand is negative, the battery is requested to charge, the SOC is increasing
from its initial value. The increase % of SOC also depends on the simulation
time and the power demand. Similar behaviour is also seen when power demand
is positive, the battery is requested to discharge, the SOC drops from initial
value. The energy throughput is increasing as the power demand is increasing.
It is not affected by the case of charging or discharging. Same behaviour is also
seen from energy lost. Sign convention is not seen in the power supply due to
the way it was modelled.
• Case 2: This is the case of only charging. The initial SOC is varied from 0%
to 100%. When the initial SOC is within the range, power supply is equal to
the power demand. The battery is not giving any output when it has its SOC
at maximum(90%).
When it goes beyond the range, the power supply is 0.
Even if the supply power is 0, the SOC is still increasing from its initial value.
SOC even goes above 100% when initial SOC is 100%(fully charged). This is
also a limitation of the model where it cannot stop the SOC from increasing if
the initial SOC is in a state of deep charge or discharge. The values of energy
throughput and energy lost is only seen when initial SOC level is within the
range.
• Case 3: This is the case of only discharge. The initial SOC is varied from 0%
to 100%. When the initial SOC is within the range, power supply is equal to
the power demand. The battery is not giving any output when it has initial
SOC at minimum(20%). When it goes beyond the range, the power supply is
0. Even if the supply power is 0, the SOC is still decreasing from its initial
value. SOC even goes below 0% when initial SOC is at 0%(fully discharged).
As, previously mentioned, this is a limitation of the model and same behaviour
is observed for energy throughput and energy lost.
As the model is basic and does not give proper estimation of the output power,
validation with measured data was not performed. To truly capture the dynamic
behaviour of the battery other advanced models should be considered.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
Collaboration between NSS and Denmark Technical University led to the hybrid PV-
battery energy storage system setup at Risø. In order to further analyse the setup,
performance models were made for the system components: PV array, hybrid inverter,
battery energy storage. Literature review was made on existing performance models
for these components focusing on applications, advantages, disadvantages. Depend-
ing on the available data and conditions needed to model them, performance models
were chosen accordingly. For PV array, it was the availability of information on data
sheet and flash test measurements.
For hybrid inverter, it was the availability of
efficiency curve at different load percentage, measured input and output power. For
battery energy storage, it was the availability of information on data sheet, measured
SOC, measured charging and discharging power.
For PV array, one-diode equivalent circuit model was chosen. Parameters were ob-
tained from both data sheet and flash test measurements using SAM simulation model.
IV curve was simulated with the chosen parameters using Newton Rhapson iterative
method. Estimated DC power was compared with measured DC power for both ref-
erence and NSS system using graphical and statistical measurement. Mean relative
error between estimated DC power and measured DC power of the PV array was
found for sunny and cloudy day scenario as well as at different irradiation levels for
both the systems. See Table 7.1 for overall MRE.
Reference system
NSS system
Sunny day
6%
4%
Cloudy day
8.5%
8%
Table 7.1. Summary of MRE found for PV array
For hybrid inverter, Inverter part load curve model and Sandia inverter model
was chosen. These models were implemented for energy flow from PV to grid. For
Inverter part load curve model, linear interpolation was used to establish relationship
between load curve input DC power and load curve DC voltage.
Then efficiency
is parameterised using measured DC power and measured DC voltage. For Sandia
inverter model, polynomial fit was performed between measured AC and DC power of
the inverter to find the parameters. Mean relative error between estimated inverter
output power and measured inverter output power was found at different voltage
levels and for a period of one month for both the systems . See Table 7.2 for overall
==PAGE:64==
54
7 Conclusion
MRE.
Efficiency curve was also found out for energy flow from PV to battery, grid to battery,
PV and grid to battery, battery to grid, PV and battery to grid. Model validation
was not performed for these energy flows as it needs further investigation on existing
models that have implemented multi energy flow of the hybrid inverter.
Reference system
NSS system
Inverter part load curve
3.1%
2.21%
Sandia Inverter model
1.57%
1.49%
Table 7.2. Summary of MRE found for hybrid inverter
For battery modelling, general energy storage system model was applied. Few of
the parameters were found from data sheet, others were found from estimating the
capacity of the battery using linear integration. The mean round trip efficiency was
found to be 85% and the estimated storage capacity was 8.81KWh. As the model
runs with simple equation and does not consider the dynamic behaviour of storage
system, validation with measured output power of the battery was not performed.
However, cases were presented to show the dependency of output of the model like
SOC level, energy throughput, energy lost when the input configurable parameters
were varied.
Future scope
The simulation models used in this study was an initial approach that leaves opportu-
nities for further development and inspection of the project. Few remarks on future
improvement are listed below.
1. PV array modelling
• Precision in cell temperature model can be improved by adapting a model
that takes wind speed, humidity, dust pattern, cloud coverage or even
aerosol index as suggested by [85] showing strong interrelation between
particulate matter in the atmosphere with solar radiation attenuation
• MBE can be accounted for by regression method and adjusting the coef-
ficients accordingly. This is of importance only with reliable temperature
sensor measurements.
• PV system parameters and characteristics relying on data sheet may not
be readily available always. Therefore, adaptive machine learning methods
based on data driven approach can be implemented. Parameter estimation
using in-field outdoor measurements should also be investigated
• There are numerous models to find the maximum power of the solar cell
or module. But, no studies could be found within the time limit of this
==PAGE:65==
7 Conclusion
55
project, that integrates individual maximum power that are derived from
individual characteristics of the module to represent PV array power. This
remains an interesting topic to explore
2. Inverter modelling
• The accuracy of Sandia Inverter model can be improved by taking voltage
dependent coefficients(C1, C2, C3)into consideration.
Measurements can
be made by disconnecting PV array and connecting a regulated power
supply module.
The voltage can be fixed at three levels of minimum,
nominal and maximum voltage. Three separate parabolic fit between AC
and DC power can be used to find Pdco, Pso, C0.
From these values,
C1, C2, C3 can be determined.
• In cases where efficiency is not available for the whole operating range,
experiments can be performed in order to achieve it
• Research on inverter performance modelling is largely based on PV to
grid energy flow i.e input DC power and output AC power. Simulation of
PV(DC) to battery(DC), grid(AC) to battery(DC), PV and grid(AC/DC)
to battery(DC), battery(DC) to grid(AC), PV and battery(DC) to grid(AC)
can be performed in a similar manner like inverter part load curve effi-
ciency model. Input power and output power measurements are already
available. Using this, efficiency and Ploss can be estimated. Relationship
between these variables can be given as :
η = f(Pout, Vin)
η = f(Pin, Vin)
Ploss = f(Pout, Vin)
Ploss = f(Pin, Vin)
Pout = f(Pin, Vin)
3. Battery modelling
• As the general battery model is simple, systematic tests are required to
reflect the dynamic behaviour of the battery. A discharge curve should be
obtained experimentally in order to implement mathematical model such
as shepherd model to serve the purpose.
4. General remark: The scope to model and optimise individual elements in the
system is immense. Effort should also be given to simulate the PV - battery
energy storage system as a whole. Knowledge on system performance and ef-
ficiency can be used for comparison purposes with other PV - battery system
configurations. To check the economic feasibility of the project, analysis on net
present value, levelised cost of electricity and internal rate of return should also
be explored.
==PAGE:66==
56
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 8
Appendix
8.1
Fact sheet:technology neutral tender 2019
==PAGE:68==
58
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
[1]
T. M. States, “Sweden had by far the highest share, lowest share in the Nether-
lands The Netherlands and France: furthest away from their goals,” Tech. Rep.
January, 2020.
[2]
Energinet, “Environmental report 2018,” Environmental report for Danish elec-
tricity and CHP for 2017 statur year, pp. 1–5, 2018.
[3]
P. E. L. Peter Ahm, “National Survey Report of PV Power Applications in
Denmark,” Tech. Rep. August, 2018.
[4]
IEA, “Energy Policies of IEA Countries - Denmark 2019 Review,” tech. rep.,
2017.
[5]
MAZ PLECHINGER, “Better Energy plans 7GW in Danish solar capacity.”
[6]
￿. a. S. ”ΗΛΙΟΣ”, “Πανϵλλ￿νι￿￿Σ￿νδϵσµ￿￿Μϵλϵτητ￿ν - Εγκαταστατ￿ν Οικιακ￿ν
Κ Κτιριακ￿ν Φωτ￿β￿λτα￿κ￿ν ”ΗΛΙΟΣ”: Πραγµατικ￿Οικ￿ν￿µ￿α Μϵ Τ￿Net Me-
tering.”
[7]
G. Masson and I. Kaizuka, “Chapter 6 - Competitiveness of PV electricity in
2018,” tech. rep., 2019.
[8]
E. Vaarby Laursen and J. Cappelen, “DANISH METEOROLOGICAL INSTI-
TUTE ——— TECHNICAL REPORT ——— Observed Hours of Bright Sun-
shine in Denmark,” tech. rep., DANISH METEOROLOGICAL INSTITUTE,
1998.
[9]
Current Results, “Total Annual Sunshine in European Cities - Current Results,”
2017.
[10] J. Weniger, T. Tjaden, and V. Quaschning, “Sizing of residential PV battery
systems,” Energy Procedia, vol. 46, pp. 78–87, 2014.
[11] A. Poullikkas, “A comparative overview of large-scale battery systems for elec-
tricity storage,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 27, pp. 778–788,
2013.
==PAGE:70==
60
Bibliography
[12] V. Vega-Garita, A. Hanif, N. Narayan, L. Ramirez-Elizondo, and P. Bauer, “Se-
lecting a suitable battery technology for the photovoltaic battery integrated mod-
ule,” Journal of Power Sources, vol. 438, p. 227011, 2019.
[13] D. Akinyele, J. Belikov, and Y. Levron, “Battery storage technologies for electri-
cal applications: Impact in stand-alone photovoltaic systems,” Energies, vol. 10,
no. 11, pp. 1–39, 2017.
[14] E. sage, “What is the Best Battery for Solar Storage in 2019? | EnergySage,”
2020.
[15] S. Muhammad, M. U. Rafique, S. Li, Z. Shao, Q. Wang, and X. Liu, “Reconfig-
urable Battery Systems,” ACM Transactions on Design Automation of Electronic
Systems, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1–27, 2019.
[16] S. Ci, N. Lin, and D. Wu, “Reconfigurable Battery Techniques and Systems: A
Survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 1175–1189, 2016.
[17] J. Svarc, “Solar Battery System Types - AC Vs DC Coupled,” 2019.
[18] F. Chen, N. Duic, L. Manuel Alves, and M. da Graça Carvalho, “Renewislands-
Renewable energy solutions for islands,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Re-
views, vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 1888–1902, 2007.
[19] A. Helal, W. Ghoneim, and A. Halaby, “Feasibility Study for Self-Sustained
Wastewater Treatment Plants—Using Biogas CHP Fuel Cell, Micro-Turbine, PV
and Wind Turbine Systems,” Smart Grid and Renewable Energy, vol. 04, no. 02,
pp. 227–235, 2013.
[20] O. Erdinc and M. Uzunoglu, “Optimum design of hybrid renewable energy sys-
tems: Overview of different approaches,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 1412–1425, 2012.
[21] R. Luna-Rubio, M. Trejo-Perea, D. Vargas-Vázquez, and G. J. Ríos-Moreno,
“Optimal sizing of renewable hybrids energy systems: A review of methodologies,”
Solar Energy, vol. 86, no. 4, pp. 1077–1088, 2012.
[22] S. Sinha and S. S. Chandel, “Review of recent trends in optimization techniques
for solar photovoltaic-wind based hybrid energy systems,” Renewable and Sus-
tainable Energy Reviews, vol. 50, pp. 755–769, 2015.
[23] E. Koutroulis and D. Kolokotsa, “Design optimization of desalination systems
power-supplied by PV and W/G energy sources,” Desalination, vol. 258, no. 1-3,
pp. 171–181, 2010.
[24] A. Kornelakis, “Multiobjective Particle Swarm Optimization for the optimal
design of photovoltaic grid-connected systems,” Solar Energy, vol. 84, no. 12,
pp. 2022–2033, 2010.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
61
[25] O. Ekren and B. Y. Ekren, “Size optimization of a PV/wind hybrid energy con-
version system with battery storage using simulated annealing,” Applied Energy,
vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 592–598, 2010.
[26] S. Rehman, I. M. El-Amin, F. Ahmad, S. M. Shaahid, A. M. Al-Shehri, J. M.
Bakhashwain, and A. Shash, “Feasibility study of hybrid retrofits to an isolated
off-grid diesel power plant,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 11,
no. 4, pp. 635–653, 2007.
[27] E. Mazhari, J. Zhao, N. Celik, S. Lee, Y. J. Son, and L. Head, “Hybrid simu-
lation and optimization-based design and operation of integrated photovoltaic
generation, storage units, and grid,” Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory,
vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 463–481, 2011.
[28] M. Newkirk, “What is a hybrid solar system? — Clean Energy Reviews.”
[29] U. Subramaniam, S. Vavilapalli, S. Padmanaban, F. Blaabjerg, J. B. Holm-
Nielsen, and D. Almakhles, “A hybrid PV-battery system for ON-grid and
off-grid applications-controller-in-loop simulation validation,” Energies, vol. 13,
no. 3, 2020.
[30] G. Angenendt, S. Zurmühlen, H. Axelsen, and D. U. Sauer, “Comparison of differ-
ent operation strategies for PV battery home storage systems including forecast-
based operation strategies,” Applied Energy, vol. 229, no. August, pp. 884–899,
2018.
[31] A. Roth-Deblon, “Combined DC and AC integration of energy sources in hybrid
3-phase off-grid systems,” in Conference Record of the 2006 IEEE 4th World
Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, WCPEC-4, vol. 2, pp. 2431–
2433, 2006.
[32] G. Angenendt, S. Zurmühlen, R. Mir-Montazeri, D. Magnor, and D. U. Sauer,
“Enhancing Battery Lifetime in PV Battery Home Storage System Using Forecast
Based Operating Strategies,” Energy Procedia, vol. 99, no. March, pp. 80–88,
2016.
[33] N. Rasmussen, “AC vs. DC Coupling For Solar Plus Energy Storage Projects.”
[34] J. Good and J. X. Johnson, “Impact of inverter loading ratio on solar photovoltaic
system performance,” Applied Energy, vol. 177, pp. 475–486, 2016.
[35] N. DiOrio, P. Denholm, and W. B. Hobbs, “A model for evaluating the configu-
ration and dispatch of PV plus battery power plants,” Applied Energy, vol. 262,
no. January, p. 114465, 2020.
[36] M. Meinhardt, M. Rothert, M. Wollny, A. Engler, S. M. A. R. Gmbh, and
H. Strasse, “PURE AC-COUPLING – THE CONCEPT FOR SIMPLIFIED
==PAGE:72==
62
Bibliography
DESIGN OF SCALABLE PV-HYBRID SYSTEMS USING VOLTAGE / FRE-
QUENCY STATICS CONTROLLED BATTERY INVERTERS a .) Droop-mode
controlled Sunny Island 4500 Utility grid Grid failure b .) Grid and Sunny Island
present Gri,” no. 12 V, pp. 48–51.
[37] P. Strauss and A. Engler, “AC coupled PV hybrid systems and micro grids -
State of the art and future trends,” Proceedings of the 3rd World Conference on
Photovoltaic Energy Conversion, vol. C, no. June, pp. 2129–2134, 2003.
[38] G. Cramer, M. Ibrahim, and W. Kleinkauf, “PV system technologies,” Refocus,
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 38–42, 2004.
[39] J. He, Y. Yang, and D. Vinnikov, “Energy Storage for 1500 V Photovoltaic
Systems : A Comparative Reliability Analysis of DC-and AC-Coupling,” 2020.
[40] M. Sandelic, A. Sangwongwanich, and F. Blaabjerg, “Reliability evaluation of
PV systems with integrated battery energy storage systems: DC-coupled and
AC-coupled configurations,” Electronics (Switzerland), vol. 8, no. 9, 2019.
[41] N. M. A. Alrahim Shannan, N. Z. Yahaya, and B. Singh, “Single-diode model and
two-diode model of PV modules: A comparison,” Proceedings - 2013 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Control System, Computing and Engineering, ICCSCE
2013, pp. 210–214, 2013.
[42] X. H. Nguyen and M. P. Nguyen, “Mathematical modeling of photovoltaic cell/-
module/arrays with tags in Matlab/Simulink,” Environmental Systems Research,
vol. 4, no. 1, 2015.
[43] P. Suskis and I. Galkin, “Enhanced photovoltaic panel model for MATLAB-
simulink environment considering solar cell junction capacitance,” IECON Pro-
ceedings (Industrial Electronics Conference), pp. 1613–1618, 2013.
[44] B. C. Babu and S. Gurjar, “A novel simplified two-diode model of photovoltaic
(PV) module,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 1156–1161, 2014.
[45] D. L. King, W. E. Boyson, and J. A. Kratochvil, “Photovoltaic array performance
model, SANDIA Report SAND2004-3535,” Sandia Report No. 2004-3535, vol. 8,
no. December, pp. 1–19, 2004.
[46] D. Thevenard, “Review and recommendations for improving the modelling of
building integrated photovoltaic systems,” IBPSA 2005 - International Building
Performance Simulation Association 2005, pp. 1221–1228, 2005.
[47] N. J. Blair, A. P. Dobos, and P. Gilman, “Comparison of Photovoltaic Mod-
els in the System Advisor Model Preprint(http://www.nrel.gov/publications),”
Conference Paper, vol. NREL/CP-6A, no. August, 2013.
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
63
[48] S. Sellner, J. Sutterlüti, L. Schreier, and S. Ransome, “Advanced PV module
performance characterization and validation using the novel Loss Factors Model,”
Conference Record of the IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, no. March,
pp. 2938–2943, 2012.
[49] C. B. Jones, B. H. King, J. S. Stein, J. S. Fada, A. J. Curran, R. H. French,
E. Schnabel, M. Koehl, and O. Lavrova, “Quantify Photovoltaic Module Degra-
dation using the Loss Factor Model Parameters,” pp. 3488–3493, 2018.
[50] J. S. Stein, J. Sutterlueti, S. Ransome, C. W. Hansen, and B. H. King, “Outdoor
PV Performance Evaluation of Three Different Models: Single-Diode, SAPM
and Loss Factor Model,” 28th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference
and Exhibition, pp. 2865 – 2871, 2013.
[51] G. Ciulla, V. Lo Brano, V. Di Dio, and G. Cipriani, “A comparison of differ-
ent one-diode models for the representation of I-V characteristic of a PV cell,”
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 32, pp. 684–696, 2014.
[52] A. R. Jordehi, “Parameter estimation of solar photovoltaic (PV) cells: A review,”
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 61, pp. 354–371, 2016.
[53] Scholarpedia, “Artificial bee colony algorithm - Scholarpedia.”
[54] R. Wang, Y. Zhan, and H. Zhou, “Application of artificial bee colony in model
parameter identification of solar cells,” Energies, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 7563–7581,
2015.
[55] M. Ye, X. Wang, and Y. Xu, “Parameter extraction of solar cells using particle
swarm optimization,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 0–8, 2009.
[56] Z. Abdmouleh, A. Gastli, L. Ben-Brahim, M. Haouari, and N. A. Al-Emadi,
“Review of optimization techniques applied for the integration of distributed
generation from renewable energy sources,” Renewable Energy, vol. 113, no. May,
pp. 266–280, 2017.
[57] R. Galphade, “Electrical Characterization of a Photovoltaic Module Through
Artificial Neural Network: A Review,” International Journal of Electrical Com-
ponents and Energy Conversion, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 14, 2017.
[58] A. Driesse, P. Jain, and S. Harrison, “Beyond the curves: Modeling the electrical
efficiency of photovoltaic inverters,” Conference Record of the IEEE Photovoltaic
Specialists Conference, 2008.
[59] D. L. King, S. Gonzalez, G. M. Galbraith, and W. E. Boyson, “Performance
Model for Grid-Connected Photovoltaic Inverters, SAND2007-5036,” Sandia
technical report, vol. 38, no. September, pp. 655–660, 2007.
[60] PVPMC, “PV Performance Modeling Collaborative | Fixed tilt.”
==PAGE:74==
64
Bibliography
[61] M. Yilmaz, E. Kayabasi, and M. Akbaba, “Determination of the effects of operat-
ing conditions on the output power of the inverter and the power quality using an
artificial neural network,” Engineering Science and Technology, an International
Journal, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1068–1076, 2019.
[62] J. Meng, G. Luo, M. Ricco, M. Swierczynski, D. I. Stroe, and R. Teodorescu,
“Overview of Lithium-Ion battery modeling methods for state-of-charge estima-
tion in electrical vehicles,” Applied Sciences (Switzerland), vol. 8, no. 5, 2018.
[63] T. F. Fuller, “Simulation and Optimization of the Dual Lithium Ion Insertion
Cell,” Journal of The Electrochemical Society, vol. 141, no. 1, p. 1, 1994.
[64] H. He, R. Xiong, and J. Fan, “Evaluation of lithium-ion battery equivalent circuit
models for state of charge estimation by an experimental approach,” Energies,
vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 582–598, 2011.
[65] C. Zhang, K. Li, S. McLoone, and Z. Yang, “Battery modelling methods for
electric vehicles - A review,” 2014 European Control Conference, ECC 2014,
pp. 2673–2678, 2014.
[66] R. M. Spotnitz, “Battery modeling,” Electrochemical Society Interface, vol. 14,
no. 4, pp. 39–42, 2005.
[67] M. Charkhgard and M. Farrokhi, “State-of-charge estimation for lithium-ion
batteries using neural networks and EKF,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 4178–4187, 2010.
[68] LG, “This is why NCM is the preferable Cathode material for Li-ion batteries |
LG Battery Blog Europe.”
[69] A. Chouder, S. Silvestre, N. Sadaoui, and L. Rahmani, “Modeling and simulation
of a grid connected PV system based on the evaluation of main PV module
parameters,” Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 46–
58, 2012.
[70] M. Azzouzi, D. Popescu, and M. Bouchahdane, “Modeling of Electrical Charac-
teristics of Photovoltaic Cell Considering Single-Diode Model,” Journal of Clean
Energy Technologies, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 414–420, 2016.
[71] H. Ibrahim and N. Anani, “Variations of PV module parameters with irradiance
and temperature,” Energy Procedia, vol. 134, no. July, pp. 276–285, 2017.
[72] H. Ibrahim and N. Anani, “Variations of PV module parameters with irradiance
and temperature,” Energy Procedia, vol. 134, pp. 276–285, 2017.
[73] A. P. Dobos, “An improved coefficient calculator for the california energy com-
mission 6 parameter photovoltaic module model,” Journal of Solar Energy En-
gineering, Transactions of the ASME, vol. 134, no. 2, pp. 1–6, 2012.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
65
[74] F. B. S. Mekhtoub, “PV Cell Temperature / PV Power Output Relationships
Homer Methodology Calculation,” Ipco, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2014.
[75] A. Q. Jakhrani, A. K. Othman, A. R. Rigitand, and S. R. Samo, “Comparison of
solar photovoltaic module temperature models,” World Applied Sciences Journal,
vol. 14, no. SPL ISS 3, pp. 1–8, 2011.
[76] E. Skoplaki and J. A. Palyvos, “Operating temperature of photovoltaic modules:
A survey of pertinent correlations,” Renewable Energy, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 23–29,
2009.
[77] T. Khatib and W. Elmenreich, “Modeling of Photovoltaic Systems Using MAT-
LAB: Simplified Green Codes,” 2016.
[78] R. L. Yang, G. M. Tiepolo, É. A. Tonolo, J. Urbanetz, and M. B. de Souza, “Pho-
tovoltaic cell temperature estimation for a grid-connect photovoltaic systems in
Curitiba,” Brazilian Archives of Biology and Technology, vol. 62, no. specialissue,
pp. 1–9, 2019.
[79] PVeducation.org, “Shunt Resistance | PVEducation,” 2014.
[80] P. Gilman, A. Dobos, N. DiOrio, J. Freeman, S. Janzou, and D. Ryberg, “System
Advisor Model (SAM ),” no. March, 2017.
[81] E. Koutroulis and F. Blaabjerg, “A new technique for tracking the global max-
imum power point of PV arrays operating under partial-shading conditions,”
IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 184–190, 2012.
[82] Y. Du and D. D.-C. Lu, “Harmonic Distortion Caused by Single-Phase Grid-
Connected PV Inverter,” Power System Harmonics - Analysis, Effects and Mit-
igation Solutions for Power Quality Improvement, no. Dc, 2018.
[83] F. Vignola, F. Mavromatakis, and J. Krumsick, “Performance of PV inverters,”
American Solar Energy Society - SOLAR 2008, Including Proc. of 37th ASES
Annual Conf., 33rd National Passive Solar Conf., 3rd Renewable Energy Pol-
icy and Marketing Conf.: Catch the Clean Energy Wave, vol. 1, no. February,
pp. 628–650, 2008.
[84] F. Marra, G. Y. Yang, C. Traholt, E. Larsen, C. N. Rasmussen, and S. You, “De-
mand profile study of battery electric vehicle under different charging options,”
IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting, pp. 1–7, 2012.
[85] J. Liu, W. Fang, X. Zhang, and C. Yang, “An Improved Photovoltaic Power Fore-
casting Model With the Assistance of Aerosol Index Data,” IEEE Transactions
on Sustainable Energy, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 434–442, 2015.
==PAGE:76==
