==PAGE:1==
Dynamic regulation of metabolic pathways
in engineered Gram-negative bacteria using
quorum-sensing circuits
Master Thesis
August 2020
By Berta Rosich Bosch
Supervised by:
Lars Jelsbak, Professor MSO, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, DTU
Bioengineering
Pablo Ivan Nikel, Senior Researcher, Systems Environmental Microbiology, DTU Biosustain
Lorena Fernández-Cabezón, Postdoc, Systems Environmental Microbiology, DTU Biosustain
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Microbial fermentation presents an attractive alternative to petroleum-based industry for the de-
velopment of more sustainable processes. Engineering of high-productive microbial strains is re-
quired to increase the economic viability of such bioprocesses. Metabolic engineering allows the
manipulation of microbial cellular metabolism to maximize production of value-added compounds.
Traditional strategies have focused on static engineering approaches, but these may not address
challenges associated with more complex pathways and products. Dynamic pathway regulation
has proved successful in improving production of molecules by balancing metabolic ﬂux between
cell growth and product formation, according to changing conditions in the cell or fermentation
medium.
This project introduces recently developed dynamic pathway engineering methods and high-
lights quorum-sensing (QS) systems as a promising choice to dynamically regulate target genes
in an autonomous and pathway-independent manner. We developed QS genetic circuits to dy-
namically regulate the expression of target genes in the model Gram-negative bacteria Escherichia
coli and Pseudomonas putida. Initially, we presented three QS genetic circuits based on the Esa,
Las and Scb QS systems. The Esa QS-based circuit was further engineered by decoupling of the
QS components in pSensor and pResponse plasmids.
Characterization of the circuits revealed
promising combinations of pSensor and pResponse plasmids to up-regulate and down-regulate the
expression of target genes. These circuits could be potentially applied to improve production of
relevant biosynthetic pathways in Gram-negative bacterial hosts.
i
==PAGE:3==
Aknowledgements
Throughout the development of this project I have received great support and assistance. I would
like to thank Lorena Fernández-Cabezón for oﬀering me the opportunity to work in this project
and guiding me through the research part of the study. You have teached me valuable skills and
were always willing to help me. I would also like to thank my supervisors Pablo Ivan Nikel and
Lars Jelsbak for the excellent cooperation and for all the opportunities I was given to conduct my
research. I would like to acknowledge the rest of the Systems Environmental Microbiology (SEM)
group at DTU Biosustain for the great work environment. In addition, I would like to thank my
family and friends in Spain for being always there for me despite the distance. Lastly, especial
thanks to my ﬂatmates David, Gerard, Laura and Mònica and to Renaud for their support and
happy moments during the course of this project and the Covid-19 lockdown.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abbreviations
3OC12HSL 3-oxododecanoyl-homoserine lactone
3OC6HSL N-3-oxohexanoyl-homoserine lactone
AHL
Acyl homoserine lactone
AI
Auto-inducer
AIPs
auto-inducing peptides
aTC
Anhydrotetracycline
DBTL Design-build-test-learn
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
DO
Dissolved oxygen
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
FNR
Fumarate and nitrate reductase
FPP
Farnesyl pyrophosphate
GBLs γ-butyrolactones
GOI
Gene of interest
HSL
Homoserine lactone
IPTG β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside
MCS
Multiple cloning site
MI
Myo-inositol
MRTFs Metabolite-responsive transcription factors
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction
Pfk −I Phosphofructokinase-I
qRT −PCR Quantitative real-time PCR
QS
Quorum-sensing
RNA
Ribonucleic acid
SELEX Systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment
TCA
Tricarboxylic acid
TFs
Transcription factors
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Microbial metabolic engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Dynamic pathway engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Model Gram-negative bacteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Project scope
5
2.1
Aim and objectives of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Project workﬂow and DBTL cycle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Review of dynamic pathway engineering methods
7
3.1
Pathway-independent methods with external induction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Pathway-speciﬁc methods with autonomous induction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Pathway-independent methods with autonomous induction
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Review of quorum-sensing (QS) systems for dynamic pathway engineering
15
4.1
Natural Quorum-sensing systems in bacteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Selected QS systems for dynamic pathway engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Results
24
5.1
Initial design of QS-circuits based on Esa, Las and Scb QS systems . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Design and engineering of pResponse and pSensor plasmids for Esa QS-based circuits 26
5.3
Selection of the optimal reporter gene for pResponse plasmids . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
Characterization of pSensor and pResponse plasmids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4.1
Characterization of pSensor and pResponse plasmids in E. coli . . . . . . .
33
5.4.2
Characterization of pSensor and pResponse plasmids in P. putida
. . . . .
36
6
Discussion
41
7
Conclusion
44
8
Outlook
45
9
Materials and methods
46
9.1
Construction of Esa-QS based pResponse and pSensor plasmids . . . . . . . . . . .
46
iv
==PAGE:6==
9.2
Strains and growth conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
9.3
Transformation of strains
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
9.4
Fluorescence and growth curves experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
9.5
Shake ﬂask experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
9.6
Bioinformatic resources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
10 Appendix
59
A The Standard European Vector Architecture platform for plasmid construction 59
B USER cloning and Gibsons Assembly as molecular cloning techniques
59
B.1
USER cloning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
B.2
Gibsons Assembly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
C Strain, Plasmid, primers and g-blocks
61
C.1 Plasmids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
C.2 Strains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
C.3 Primers and g-block
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
C.4 Promoters and genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
D Media components
69
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
1
Workﬂow and DBTL cycle implemented in this project.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
General LuxI/R-type quorum-sensing system in Gram-negative bacteria. . . . . . .
16
3
General two-component quorum-sensing system in Gram-positive bacteria. . . . . .
17
4
Structures of bacterial autoinducer molecules. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Initial design of plasmids carrying components of Esa, Las and Scb QS systems. . .
25
6
Design of Esa QS-based circuit involving pSensor and pResponse plasmids.
. . . .
26
7
pResponse plasmids pR4, pR5 and pR6 in E. coli DH5↵and P. putida KT2440.
.
30
8
Schematic representation of constructed stains for characterization of pSensor and
pResponse plasmids in E. coli and P. putida
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
9
Characterization of E1-E16 strains for dynamic regulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
10
Characterization of P1-16 strains for dynamic regulation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
11
Characterization of P8-P13 strains in shake ﬂask cultures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
12
Map of vector pSEVA221 used in this study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
13
Map of vector pSEVA631 used in this study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
List of Tables
1
Approaches for dynamic pathway engineering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
Overview of natural quorum-sensing systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Selected QS systems for dynamic pathway engineering in this project.
. . . . . . .
23
4
Summary of pSensor and pResponse plasmid variants. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Plasmids used in this study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6
Strains used in this study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7
Primers used in this study.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
8
gBlock used in this study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
9
Sequences of the promoters and genes used in this study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
10
Components of media used in this study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Microbial metabolic engineering
Microorganisms have been used for production of foods and beverages since ancient times. Never-
theless, it was not long ago that they were recognized as a distinct class of life entity [30]. Currently,
microbial fermentation has become an attractive alternative to petroleum-based industry processes
which entail concerns such as global warming, pollution and oil depletion [37]. Increasing inter-
est in more eco-friendly and sustainable processes has emphasized the signiﬁcance of microbial
biochemical production. Microbial biochemical production oﬀers several advantages unlike most
chemical synthesis processes, as it occurs in mild conditions that provide greater safety, energy
conservation and reduced environmental foot-print. Moreover, it relies on sustainable feedstocks,
is scalable and allows production of pure compounds [30]. Therefore, the emerging of microbial
fermentation enables the development towards a more sustainable society. For this reason, mi-
crobial bioproduction has recently expanded to produce industrially-relevant compounds such as
biofuels [1, 55], pharmaceuticals [36], bioplastics [45, 33] and food-additives [43, 28, 64]. Over the
last years, signiﬁcant success has been accomplished in developing economical microbial biopro-
cesses. However, further optimization of microbial cell factories is needed to increase the economic
viability of such processes. Some challenges related to strain improvement make it diﬃcult to
compete with chemical synthesis cost-eﬀectiveness [37]. Metabolic engineering can improve the
cellular properties of microbial cells in order to overcome this challenges.
Metabolic engineering has been deﬁned as the purposeful modiﬁcation of metabolic networks
of biochemical reactions to accomplish a certain objective [57]. The ultimate goal is the construc-
tion of strains producing industrially-relevant compounds with superior yield and productivity.
Particularly, metabolic engineering seeks to manipulate cellular metabolism in order to maximize
production of valuable compounds in a more sustainable way. Generally, metabolic engineering
research has focused on understanding ﬂux distributions in core metabolic pathways and how to
redirect metabolite ﬂuxes toward the formation of a desired product. The desired ﬂux distribution
is rarely achieved by pathway engineering alone, as it typically interferes with natural regulatory
systems in the cell [11]. Thus, host engineering is often required, involving genetic manipulation of
the rest of the cell. Over the decades, a large selection of metabolic engineering strategies have been
developed and applied in diﬀerent microbial cell factories [30]. The emergence of new techniques
and strategies has lead to a signiﬁcant reduction in the turnaround time in the classic design-build-
test-learn (DBTL) cycle in metabolic engineering. Typically, the approaches have been focused
on static manipulations of metabolic pathways such as constitutive up- and down-regulation of
pathway enzymes, gene knock-out of competing pathways, deregulation from feedback inhibition
or increasing rate limiting steps [37]. Often times, this strategies are optimized separately. These
strategies have been successfully used to enhance production of naturally occurring compounds
such as lysine in Corynebacterium glutamicum [3] or to engineer pathways to produce heterologous
compounds such as biodiesel in Escherichia coli [55].
1
==PAGE:9==
Although these conventional strategies have proven to improve titers and yields, they cannot
address challenges associated with more complex pathways and products. For instance, heterol-
ogous pathways imported into host organisms may interfere with native cellular metabolism by
depleting essential metabolite pools, have branchpoints with promiscuous enzymes, or accumulate
toxic intermediates or products [23]. This metabolic imbalance results in limited product yields and
aﬀects cell growth. In such cases, it may be beneﬁcial to modify the distribution of metabolic ﬂuxes
and concentration of key metabolites throughout the course of the fermentation. As for example,
down-regulating competing essential pathways or delaying expression of engineered pathways un-
til halfway through the cultivation. Such dynamic regulation of metabolic ﬂuxes may allow to
better balance ﬂux between growth of the cell and production of the desired product. Meaning
that gene expression can be regulated to favour the accumulation of biomass or key metabolites
early, before diverting metabolic ﬂuxes towards product formation. Thus, a dynamic control of
metabolic ﬂux is required for eﬃcient microbial production in some pathways, despite involving a
more sophisticated design and implementation.
1.2
Dynamic pathway engineering
Dynamic control is inspired by naturally occurring regulatory processes that allow cells to adapt to
the changing environment and maintain metabolic homeostasis under growth conditions. Metabolic
imbalances can arise due to a large number of factors, including substrate inhibition, accumulation
of toxic metabolic intermediates, product toxicity, nutrient depletion, genetic instability, evolution
pressure or other stress factors [72]. To enable proper response and combat metabolic imbalances,
the cell must adjust pathway expression and adapt metabolic activity of the cells in real time
by sensing the environmental and intracellular signals. Furthermore, cells capable of sensing and
responding to changing conditions are advantageous at large-scale fermentation, where signiﬁcant
heterogeneity exists within culture conditions with respect to nutrient availability, medium compo-
nents, temperature, dissolved oxygen (DO) and pH [11]. In this context, robust production systems
able to maintain performance in changing culture conditions and to adapt to changes within the
host are highly convenient. This can be achieved by dynamically regulating metabolic ﬂuxes.
Moreover, another interesting application of dynamic control is the decoupling of fermentation
into two distinct phases: a growth phase and a production phase. This would be beneﬁcial for
instance, in systems where biomass formation and product formation compete for the same pre-
cursor molecules. Decoupling of growth and production allows maximum biomass accumulation
during early phases of the fermentation. Once a high microbial cell density has been reached,
expression or repression of the relevant pathway can be induced and cell resources can be diverted
towards product formation [26]. By adopting this strategy, balancing of cell resources required by
production eﬀorts with the cellular requirement for growth is no longer necessary. Therefore, it is
possible to achieve a dynamic regulation of the expression of heterologous or native pathways and
controlled removal of competitive or inhibitory metabolic pathways, increasing productivity [12].
2
==PAGE:10==
1.3
Model Gram-negative bacteria
The Gram-negative bacteria Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas putida have been used as models
for the application of metabolic engineering approaches.
Escherichia coli
E. coli is the best-characterised bacterium among all prokaryotes following more than 50 years of
intensive research. Therefore it has become an obvious ﬁrst-choice as a platform for the devel-
opment of microbial cell factories. E. coli is a rod-shaped, facultative anaerobic bacterium, that
can be found in mammalian intestines, some natural environments, and contaminated foods. The
ﬁrst biotechnological processes using E. coli were L-threonine production in the 60s and insulin
production. Some of the advantages that this microorganism presents are rapid growth rates, low
nutrient requirements which lead to reduced production costs, high density cultures through fed-
batch fermentation, a thoroughly studied versatile metabolism and a variety of available tools for
genetic manipulation and strain development. Moreover, many of the strains are non-pathogenic
and safe to use for bioproduction.
Generally, E. coli constitutes a model host for metabolic engineering and synthetic biology
approaches and an appropriate choice for testing and developing designer pathways at their initial
research stages.
However, the applications of E. coli as a cell factory are limited for complex
microbial bioprocesses in the present growing ﬁeld. For instance, some challenges are encountered
in the production of secreted proteins at high yields or the production of highly toxic compounds.
Therefore, the development of new bacterial hosts aim to overcome these challenges [13].
Pseudomonas putida
P. putida has recently gained considerable attention as a metabolic engineering platform due to its
naturally evolved properties of stress endurance, metabolic versatility, and physiological robustness
[35]. P. putida is a rod-shaped, saprophytic and non-pathogenic bacterium that can be found in
soil [13].
P. putida presents a particular biochemical network that favours high production of
NADPH rather than the generation of ATP. As a result, P. putida metabolism gives priority to
stress resistance as compared to building of biomass [35]. Therefore, this microorganism is resilient
against multiple stresses, such as oxidative stress, and is able to use a large number of compounds
as carbon sources, such as succinate, citrate, many alkenes and aromatic compounds derived
from lignin degradation. This distinct metabolism is advantegous when expressing heterologous
enzymatic pathways and maintaining a high tolerance to harsh environments.
The number of
tools and methods for genetic and genome engineering of P. putida is rapidly expanding, including
CRISPR-Cas9 technologies and expression systems such as Standard European Vector Architecture
(SEVA) vectors.
In addition, several bioinformatic tools have been developed to facilitate the
rational design of metabolically engineered strains based on P. putida KT2440 [35]. In particular,
the strain P. putida KT2440, is the best-characterised and has become a common platform for
industrial biotransformations. It presents some of the desired properties for an optimal microbial
chassis, such as rapid growth and low nutritional requirements. This strain also presents remarkable
resistance to oxidative stress and the ability to grow in a wide variety of carbon sources [41].
3
==PAGE:11==
In general, P. putida metabolic and physiological qualities makes this bacterium a promis-
ing host for diﬃcult biotransformations that impose a high level of chemical stress to the cells.
Moreover, P. putida is a suitable candidate for the use of cheap feedstocks substrates, such as
lignocellulosic residues. However, further research is required to increase growth rates and prod-
uct yields and titers in P. putida. One solution that has not been thoroughly explored so far, is
the implementation of dynamic regulation circuits to redirect metabolic ﬂuxes during fermenta-
tion conditions. Thus, developing such systems would facilitate further engineering of P. putida
metabolism and fully exploit the potential of this bacterial host.
4
==PAGE:12==
2
Project scope
2.1
Aim and objectives of the project
The aim of this research project is to design and characterize quorum-sensing (QS) circuits to
dynamically regulate the expression of target genes in the model bacteria E. coli and P. putida.
The constructed dynamic regulation circuits pretend to be applicable in diﬀerent Gram-negative
bacteria and diverse biosynthetic pathways.
The objectives of this project are:
• To review and identify dynamic pathway engineering methods for the implementation in
metabolic engineering applications.
• To characterize and validate Esa, Las and Scb QS circuits developed in the host laboratory
using P. putida strains.
• To design and develop new optimized synthetic variants of the QS circuits (i.e. construction
of a small library using diﬀerent promoters).
• To characterize the optimized genetic circuits in E. coli and P. putida strains.
Ideally, after achieving these objectives, the project will help to elucidate the potential of QS
systems in dynamic pathway engineering as well as providing new dynamic regulation tools to
increase yield and productivity in E. coli and P. putida strains producing industrially-relevant
compounds, with the purpose of improving the economic viability of such bioprocesses.
2.2
Project workﬂow and DBTL cycle
Initially, a literature review of dynamic pathway engineering methods was conducted to obtain the
required theoretical knowledge (Figure 1A). Bacterial QS systems were selected as the preferred
method to develop a genetic circuit for dynamic regulation in Gram-negative bacteria. Among
all natural QS systems in bacteria, we focused on Esa, Las and Scb systems to be implemented
for dynamic regulation in E. coli and P. putida. To begin with the experimental part, previously
constructed plasmids carrying components of the Esa, Las and Scb quorum-sensing systems were
characterized in P. putida KT2440 using gfpmut3(LVA) as a reporter gene. After this study, the
Esa QS system was selected for further engineering and a new design of QS genetic circuits was
implemented. The new approach involved the decoupling of the QS components in two diﬀerent
plasmids, pSensor and pResponse. Diﬀerent promoters were used to create several plasmid vari-
ants of pSensor and pResponse plasmids. To select the best reporter protein to characterize the
behaviour of the QS circuits, pResponse plasmids with constitutive expression of gfpmut3(LVA),
mCherry and gfpmut3 were evaluated by continuously measuring growth and ﬂuorescence signals
in E. coli and P. putida. After considering the results, GFPmut3(LVA) was selected as the optimal
reporter protein candidate for monitoring dynamic regulation since it includes a degradation tag.
5
==PAGE:13==
The following step was to obtain E. coli and P. putida strains carrying diﬀerent combinations of
pSensor and pResponse plasmid variants. A total of 16 strains were constructed for each micro-
bial host. Continuous growth and ﬂuorescence measurements of each strain were performed by
culturing them in 96-well plates. The obtained biomass and ﬂuorescence curves were analyzed
and switching ODs were determined. Finally, P. putida strains were cultured in shake ﬂasks to
characterize QS circuit behaviours in larger volumes.
During the project execution, a cyclic process of optimization of the QS-based genetic circuits
was implemented following the DBTL cycle in metabolic engineering (Figure 1B). The "Design"
refers to the conceptual creation of plasmid variants that intend to be implemented in the labora-
tory; the "Build" describes the experimental creation of the plasmid variants and transformation
of the respective plasmids to E. coli and P. putida strains; the "Test" relates to the characteriza-
tion and data collection of the strains by growth and ﬂuorescence measurements; and the "Learn"
concerns the analysis and processing of experimental data.
Figure 1: Workﬂow (A) and DBTL cycle (B) implemented in this project.
6
==PAGE:14==
3
Review of dynamic pathway engineering methods
Several dynamic regulation strategies have been successfully applied in a number of produc-
tion pathways by controlling activity of key pathway enzymes at the transcriptional or post-
transcriptional level [11]. In order to determine the most suitable metabolic pathway engineering
strategy for this project, a review of recently developed dynamic regulation tools was performed
and is presented below (Table 1). Dynamic control methods were classiﬁed based on two relevant
criteria for our research: (1) pathway-speciﬁc or pathway-independent regulation tools; and (2) au-
tonomous induction or external induction of the regulatory system. Regarding the ﬁrst criteria, we
consider pathway-speciﬁc regulation systems those systems that control the expression of pathway
enzymes in response to changes in concentration of a relevant intermediate or byproduct of the
engineered pathway. The application of such dynamic control requires a sensor capable of detect-
ing an input change such as substrate or metabolite concentration and then, induce a response
as a result of detection. In contrast, pathway-independent dynamic regulation strategies are not
dependent on pathway-speciﬁc parts and can be implemented across diﬀerent synthesis pathways.
The second criteria contemplates dynamic control methods with external induction as those that
require the addition of an exogenous inducer to the cultivation media or the manipulation of an
environmental factor at a pre-determined time to enable dynamic regulation. On the contrary, au-
tonomous induction systems refer to self-actuating systems that control the expression of pathway
enzymes without manual addition or manipulation of the induction signal.
3.1
Pathway-independent methods with external induction
The dynamic control tools presented in this section are pathway-independent strategies activated
upon the response to external stimuli. Implying that human intervention is required to activate the
induction system and the dynamic regulation is not autonomous. These approaches generally use
inducible promoters responding to external stimuli to up-regulate or down-regulate the transcrip-
tion and translation of relevant pathway genes. External induction of the dynamic regulator can be
achieved by addition of exogenous chemical inducers to the cultivation media, addition of carbon
source or regulation of environmental parameters during the fermentation (light, temperature, pH,
etc.) (Table 1).
Exogenous chemical inducers
Exogenous chemical inducers have been widely utilized in microbial host strains due to their
extensive characterization and ease of use. Generally, they are added to the cultivation media to
up-regulate or down-regulate pathway enzymes at intermediate times in the fermentaiton. These
inducible systems mostly function at the transcription level using repressor/promoter systems
such as TetR/Ptet, LacI/Plac and AraC/PBAD, which are induced by anhydrotetracycline (aTC),
isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) and L-arabinose, respectively [61].
One of the most common exogenous inducers is IPTG, which is a synthetic non-hydrolysable
structural analog of lactose used to induce expression of genes under the lac promoter [29]. Recent
applications include the construction of a metabolic toggle switch in E. coli for the production of
7
==PAGE:15==
isopropanol, where it was used to simultaneously increase ﬂux through isopropanol pathway and
decrease ﬂux into the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle upon induction with IPTG [54]. This approach
lead to a 3.7-3.1 fold improvement in isopropanol titers. A second example of extracellular chemical
inducers that can be used to regulate metabolic ﬂuxes is aTC, which regulates expression of genes
under the tetA promoter/operator. Brockman et al. constructed a dynamic knock-down system
for myo-inositol (MI) production, a glucarid acid precursor, regulated by aTC induction [10]. The
system was based on a controlled degradation of a key glycolytic enzyme, phosphofructokinase-I
(Pfk-I), to regulate metabolic ﬂux between glycolysis and MI synthesis. The degradation of the
Pfk-I enzyme was achieved by SsrA tagging and an inducible expression of SspB, an adapter protein
that tethers target protein to the ClpXP protease. This strategy allowed increases in both titer
and yield of myo-inositol.
Chemically induced promoters present advantages valuable for research and development pur-
poses, such as the ability to vary the level of gene expression by varying inducer concentration
and to control the induction timing of the biosynthetic pathway. However, they are not ideal for
large-scale production as they are extremely expensive and the addition of this molecules increases
cost in downstream processing. Moreover, some of them also present challenges such as limited
dynamic range, lack of response to cellular state, leaky expression under non-inducing conditions
and toxicity by highly overexpressing protein and supress glucose concentration [24].
Carbon source responsive promoters
Other strategies have focused on using native carbon source responsive promoters in yeast, to
induce expression or repression of genes.
For example, the glucose/galactose responsive GAL
promoters or the HXT1 promoter, which is a high-glucose-induced and low-glucose-repressed pro-
moter. These promoters have been succesfully used to increase ﬂux of farnesyl pyrophosphate for
carotenoid production [70] and to improve fatty alcohol production by increasing the intracellular
supply of acyl-CoA and free fatty acids [60]. Moreover, Williams et al. developed a dynamic
regulator based on sucrose-responsive promoters to induce an RNA interference system for gene
repression in Saccharomyces cerevisiae [68]. They screened sucrose-responsive promoters that were
repressed during growth on glucose, and activated during growth on sucrose to modulate gene ex-
pression dynamics upon diﬀerent ratios of glucose and sucrose. The resultant dynamic regulator
allowed active growth on glucose before switching to production on sucrose. It was found that
the low noise levels and high dynamic range of the SUC2 promoter presents a promising choice
for dynamic regulation in yeast. In general, these approaches circumvent the need for addition
of expensive chemical inducer compounds to the media and enable gene expression to be trig-
gered during growth on a fermentable carbon source. However, the application of such methods is
restricted by carbon source utilization.
Environmental parameters-based systems
During fermentation processes it is possible to control environmental parameters such as light,
temperature, pH and DO to dynamically regulate gene expression.
8
==PAGE:16==
Light can be used as a switch to regulate gene expression without complex media changes.
Recently, Zhao et al. constructed a light-controlled switch to shift cells from a light-induced growth
phase to a darkness-induced production phase [77]. This was achieved by a light-sensitive activator
(VP16-EL222) that, under blue light irradiation, binds to promoter Pc120 to initiate transcription
of downstream genes. This system was applied in S. cerevisiae to control the isobutanol pathway
and resulted in a titer of 8.49±0.31 g/l of isobutanol and 2.38±0.06 g/l of 2-methyl-1-butanol from
glucose. Despite succesfull applications, challenges related to limited light penetration because of
high cell densities occur in large-scale fermentations.
Temperature is also an alternative environmental parameter to use for dynamic pathway en-
gineering. Sun et al. used a temperature-sensitive system in E. coli to improve ethanol production
from lignocellulosic hydrolysates [58]. The engineered strain had regulated glucose utilization, by
placing the gene ptsG under control of the temperature-inducible λ PR and PL promoters. These
promoters are repressed in the presence of protein CI857, which binds to the promoter PR/PL at
temperatures lower than 34oC inhibiting expression of downstream genes. At temperatures higher
than 37oC, CI857 is inactive and allows expression of genes under PR/PL promoters. Using this
system the engineered strain was able to utilize xylose, galactose and arabinose but not glucose
for cell growth at 34oC and, after that its glucose catabolism pathway could be re-activated at
42oC to convert all sugars to ethanol under oxygen limited fermentation conditions. By using this
approach it was possible to obtain a higher productivity of ethanol production.
pH has as well been implemented as an environmental paramater for dynamic control of gene
expression. Yin et al. reported a low-pH-inducible promoter Pgas to produce itaconic acid in
Aspergillus niger [73]. This promoter was able to promote minimal gene expression at pH values
above 5.0 but functioned eﬃciently at low pHs, such as pH 2.0. This system resulted in a titer of
4.92 g/liter of itaconic acid.
DO has been considered as an alternative to the environmental factors mentioned above be-
cause of its relatively simple and cost-eﬀective induction mechanism and functionality in any growth
phase of cells, which are advantageous on an industrial scale. Hwang et al. used a DO-dependent
Pnar promoter in E. coli to dynamically regulate three target pathways involved in polymer syn-
thesis: the D-lactate, 2,3-butanediol and 1,3-propanediol [24]. The Pnar promoter is induced by
both anaerobic conditions and the presence of nitrate, as a result of the regulation by the two
regulation proteins fumarate and nitrate reductase (FNR) and nitrate/nitrite response regulator
(NarL). Thus, by splitting the fermentation process in a high oxygen concentration-induced growth
phase and low oxygen concentration-induced production phase they could accomplish reasonable
performance in ﬂask and bioreactor fermentations.
In summary, light, temperature, pH and DO present a convenient, pathway-independent and
reversible alternative to construct complex dynamic control regulatory strategies. However, these
environmental parameters-based systems generally need manipulation of those signals at a prede-
termined time rather than regulation of the pathway in an autonomous system. Moreover, these
approaches result in additional resources and energy consumption, for the change of the fermen-
tation conditions.
9
==PAGE:17==
3.2
Pathway-speciﬁc methods with autonomous induction
The dynamic sensor-regulator systems described here are pathway-speciﬁc strategies, that respond
to intracellular metabolites such as products or pathway intermediates and, are capable of automat-
ically regulating the metabolic ﬂux depending on the particular metabolite concentration. Such
systems can be engineered by using metabolite-responsive biosensors or identifying metabolite-
responsive promoters (Table 1).
Biosensors
Cells have native regulations systems to evaluate and respond to their internal states, including
the use of molecular biosensors. Mimicking the natural gene regulatory network, metabolic engi-
neers have exploited metabolite-responsive biosensors to probe and control the metabolic state of
a host. These biosensors consists of species that sense metabolite concentration signals through
a molecular recognition event, for instance by binding to the metabolite, and then such recog-
nition is transduced into a transcriptional output to initiate the expression of relevant genes.
Biosensors have been mainly applied for screening purposes in metabolic engineering [46]. How-
ever, metabolite-responsive biosensors can be implemented for dynamic pathway engineering. A
number of molecular mechanisms have been used for sensing intracellular metabolites, including
metabolite-responsive transcription factors (MRTFs) and riboswitches.
MRTFs are a particularly attractive approach because many organisms have evolved transcrip-
tion factors (TFs) that respond to native metabolites. These TFs can be re-purposed as biosensors
in diﬀerent hosts or by re-engineering of the TF and binding site on the promoter. MRTFs are
composed by two modules: a sensing module for the interaction with the metabolite, and a regu-
lator module that controls the expression of a target gene by interacting with speciﬁc sites on the
DNA [34]. Placing the gene of interest (GOI) under the associated promoter that the TF binds
enables metabolite dependent gene expression. Zhang et al. developed a fatty acyl-CoA biosensor
to dynamically control E. coli
production of biodiesel in the form of fatty acid ethyl ester [76].
This strategy was based on the naturally occurring fatty acid-sensing transcription factor FadR,
which has a DNA binding activity antagonized by acyl-CoAs. Upon accumulation of acyl-CoA, the
repressor FadR dissociates from its target promoters, leading to the activation of ethanol biosyn-
thesis and the expression of wax-ester synthase which converts ethanol and acyl-CoA to fatty acid
ethyl ester. The engineered biodiesel-producing E. coli strain increased the titer to 1.5 g/L. Sim-
ilarly, Xu et al. engineered the transcriptional repressor FapR into a malonyl-CoA biosensor to
improve fatty acids biosynthesis in E. coli [71]. FapR is a transcriptional repressor from Bacil-
lus subtilis that speciﬁcally senses malonyl-CoA and regulates gene expression. In this study, they
combined the transcription factor FapR and the FapR-binding site fapO (i.e. operator region) with
two diﬀerent promoters, malonyl-CoA-upregulated PT 7 and malonyl-CoA-downregulated PGAP to
construct two malonyl-CoA sensors. Then, the malonyl-CoA source pathway was under control of
the PGAP promoter and the malonyl-CoA sink pathway was under control of PT 7. In this way, the
engineered strains were able to dynamically regulate the supply and consumption of malonyl-CoA
and eﬃciently redirect carbon ﬂux towards fatty acids production. This strategy resulted in an
improvement of fatty acids titer of 15.7- and 2.1-fold compared with the wild-type strain and the
strain carrying the uncontrolled metabolic pathway.
David et al.
also applied the FapR-fapO
10
==PAGE:18==
system to dynamically control the heterologous 3-hydroxypropionic acid biosynthetic pathway in
S. cerevisiae [16]. This study demonstrates one of the ﬁrst applications of a bacterial metabolite
sensor in yeast. They designed a two-level dynamic control system: one level of the control system
regulates pathway leading from malonyl-CoA to 3-hydroxypropionic acid by using a malonyl-CoA
biosensor based on the FapR transcription factor and, the other level regulates fatty acid biosyn-
thesis which is a competing pathway for malonyl-CoA, by extracellular glucose concentration.
Introduction of the dual pathway control increased the production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid by
10-fold.
An excellent alternative to protein-based strategies would be the use of riboswitches as biosen-
sors, which have greater transferability within species and exhibit precise dose-dependent control
over gene expression. Riboswitches are natural ribonucleic acid (RNA)-based regulatory elements
that selectively bind small molecules. In response to small metabolite binding, riboswitches func-
tion as molecular switches and are able to induce (ON) or repress (OFF) genes at transcriptional
and translational levels [25]. This RNA-based regulators are composed of a ligand-sensing aptamer
domain and an expression domain. The aptamer domain directly binds intracellular metabolites
resulting in a structural change, and the expression domain modulates gene expression by tran-
scription termination, inhibition of translation initation or mRNA degradation. Artiﬁcial RNA
aptamers were used as gene regulatory tools before natural riboswitches were discovered in bacte-
ria [42]. Thus, riboswitches can be re-engineered using artiﬁcial aptamers to expand the library of
possible ligands with in vitro systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment (SELEX)
technology or using natural aptamers. Zhou et al. used natural lysine-OFF riboswitches of E. coli
and B. subtilis to dynamically control lysine biosynthesis in a recombinant strain of C. glutamicum
[79]. Intracellular L-lysine was used as a signal to control citrate synthase (gtlA), and thus the
metabolic ﬂux in the TCA cycle which is an essential but competing pathway in C.glutamicum.
The lysine production increased a 63% in the C.glutamicum strain with the E.coli lysine riboswitch
and a 38% in the strain containing the B.subtilis lysine riboswitch. The highest lysine-producing
C.glutamicum strain containing the E.coli lysine-OFF riboswitch was later re-engineered in an-
other study. Zhou et al. engineered the natural lysine-OFF riboswitch from E. coli to a synthetic
lysine-ON riboswitch [78]. This was applied in the previous recombinant strain of C.glutamicum
to achieve dynamic control of lysine transport by regulating the expression of a lysine secretion-
related gene (lysE). The following engineered strain exhibited a 21% increase in the yield of lysine
compared to the previous strain without lysine-ON riboswitch. This work demonstrates a syner-
gic eﬀect of combined lysine-ON and lysine-OFF riboswitches dynamic control to improve lysine
production.
The application of metabolite-responsive biosensors has mainly restricted to natural sensor-
regulators.
The challenge in constructing such biosensor systems is ﬁnding a sensor that can
measure key intermediates and regulators that can control gene expression to improve production
of the desired product. The naturally evolved metabolite-responsive biosensors are limited, and
the pool of metabolites targets that one would like to measure and potentially utilize for dynamic
control is much larger [74]. This makes it particularly diﬃcult to regulate heterologous metabolic
pathways where no natural biosensor is available. Moreover, it is laborious to engineer and identify
metabolite-based biosensors with the desired speciﬁcity and response curve, which limits their
broad application.
11
==PAGE:19==
Metabolite-responsive promoters
An alternative to using a well-characterized TF or riboswitch for the construction of a metabolite-
responsive biosensor would be to identify metabolite-responsive promoters. Metabolite-responsive
promoters are generally derived from native promoters that can be identiﬁed by screening with a
speciﬁc metabolite, followed by optimization for dynamic range by manipulating promoter strength
[59]. By using transcriptome analysis, such as microarrays or RNA-seq, it is possible to identify
genes whose expression is altered upon accumulation of a certain metabolite.
Exploiting this
metabolite-responsive promoters for constructing synthetic circuits to dynamically regulate path-
way expression in response to intermediates, creates a link between the cell’s metabolic state and
the expression of the metabolic pathway.
Dahl et al. applied whole-genome transcript arrays to identify promoters to improve produc-
tion of amorphadiene via the mevalonate-based isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway in E. coli [15].
This pathway has an intermediate farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP) that is toxic when it accumu-
lates in E. coli. Thus, they identiﬁed promoters that responded to FPP toxicity and coupled the
expression of genes encoding both FPP production and consumption pathways to the respective
FPP-responsive promoters PgadE and PrstA. This strategy increased production of amorphadi-
ene by 2-fold compared to commonly used inducible or constitutive promoters. In yeast, Yuan
et al.
identiﬁed ergosterol-responsive promoters using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR)
to produce non-native isoprenoid products in S. cerevisiae [75]. These promoters were used to
down-regulate the expression of ERG9 gene encoding squalene synthase, diverting metabolic ﬂux
from ergosterol synthesis to amorphadiene production. The ergosterol-responsive promoter PERG1
improved amorphadiene production by 5-fold.
This approach is useful to identify metabolite-responsive promoters without requiring to en-
gineer speciﬁc biosensors (i.e. TF or aptamers) or characterizing the speciﬁc cause of the toxicity.
The identiﬁed promoters can be easily implemented by promoter replacement of the GOI. Never-
theless, it is diﬃcult to estimate the dynamic behaviour of the particular transcriptional response,
as transcriptome analysis oﬀers a slight overview of the cellular response to metabolite accumula-
tion. Therefore, it is challenging to apply to more complex regulatory mechanisms.
3.3
Pathway-independent methods with autonomous induction
In this section, a pathway-independent dynamic control method with autonomous induction based
on bacterial QS systems is presented. This approach oﬀers the ability to regulate expression of
pathway genes based on cell density, an important parameter for many metabolic engineering
applications (Table 1).
Quorum sensing systems
QS is a process that allows bacteria to communicate with one another and regulate gene expression
based on ﬂuctuations in cell-population density. This process involves producing, releasing, detect-
ing and responding to small chemical signal molecules, called auto-inducers (AI) [65]. Natural QS
systems can be exploited for dynamic pathway engineering by placing the GOI under a promoter
12
==PAGE:20==
responsive for the AI molecules. Thus, enabling cell density-dependent regulation of the target
gene expression.
One of the most well-studied QS system is the LuxI/R system from the marine bacteria
Vibrio ﬁscheri [20]. The LuxI/R system regulates luciferase-mediated bioluminiscence encoded by
ﬁve luciferase structural genes (luxCDABE) and two regulatory genes (luxI and luxR). LuxI is a
synthase that produces the AI molecule N-3-oxohexanoyl-homoserine lactone (3OC6HSL), which
is a type of acyl homoserine lactone (AHL) and LuxR is a transcriptional activator. At a threshold
AHL concentration, LuxR binds to auto-inducer molecules and the LuxR-autoinducer complex
activates the expression of downstream genes under control of the PluxI promoter. Kim et al.
engineered the LuxI/R system for the production of the biofuel compound bisabolene in E. coli
[27]. In this study, they constructed seven variants of sensor plasmids carrying the luxI-luxR genes
and four variants of response plasmids carrying the bisabolene pathway genes under the PluxI
promoter. Then, the best combination was selected and integrated in the chromosome of an E.
coli strain. The resulting QS engineered strain was able to produce 1.1 g/L of bisabolene. Soma
et al. also engineered a LuxI/R system to develop a toggle switch for redirecting metabolic ﬂux
from TCA cycle to isopropanol biosynthesis in E. coli [53].
In yeast, Williams et al. developed a QS-linked RNA interference system for dynamic path-
way control to produce p-hydroxybenzoic acid (PHBA) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae [67]. This
was achieved by engineering a circuit based on the native pheromone quorum sensing system in
S.cerevisiae. The circuit autonomously triggered gene expression at a high population density,
and was linked with an RNA interference module to enable target silencing of competing pathway
genes. The circuit was used to control metabolic ﬂux through the shikimate pathway and decouple
growth and production phases. As a result, the titer of PHBA was succesfully improved to 1.1
mM.
The previously described dynamic control methods - including exogenous chemical induc-
ers, carbon source responsive promoters, environmental patameter-based systems, biosensors, and
metabolite-responsive promoters - have demonstrated to be successfully implemented in several
cases. However, many of these require human supervision, are not economically feasible or are
limited due to the lack of appropriate metabolite-responsive sensors. Most of the auto-inducible
methods require time-consuming screening for pathway-speciﬁc biosensors and/or laborious pro-
moter engineering to balance gene expression. QS systems overcome the aforementioned limitations
and present a promising choice to dynamically regulate cell metabolism in a pathway-independent
and process-independent manner and without requiring human intervention. Thus, to create a ge-
netic circuit for dynamic regulation applicable in diﬀerent Gram-negative bacteria and extensible
to diverse biosynthetic pathways without imposing a metabolic burden to the cell, we decided to
rely on a QS-based circuit. In this section, some examples of the application of QS systems for
dynamic control of metabolic pathways were introduced. Nevertheless, this topic will be covered
in further detail in Section 4.
13
==PAGE:21==
Table 1: Approaches for dynamic pathway engineering.
Type of
dynamic
control
Method
Responsive
factor
Regulator
References
Advantages
Disadvantages
Pathway-
independent
method with
external
induction
Exogenous chemical
inducers
IPTG
aTC
LacI/Plac
TetR/Ptet
[54]
[10]
Well-established and
characterized
Easy to use
Controlled induction
timing
External addition of inducer
Highly expensive induction
Not suitable for large-scale
Limited dynamic range
Leaky expression
Can cause toxicity due to
overexpression of genes
Carbon source
responsive
promoters
Glucose/Galactose
Glucose
Sucrose
PGAL
PHXT 1
PSUC2
[70]
[60]
[68]
Relatively inexpensive
induction
Induction by fermentable
carbon source
Application restricted by carbon
source utilization
External addition of carbon source
Environmental
parameteres-based
systems
Light
Temperature
pH
DO
VP16-EL222/Pc120
CI857/PR and PL
Pgas
FNR
and
NarL
/Pnar
[77]
[58]
[73]
[24]
Simple induction
mechanism
Reversible
No complex media
changes
External manipulation of
environmental parameters
High energy consumption
Pathway-
speciﬁc method
with
autonomous
induction
Biosensors:
Auto-inducible
Evolved natural-sensor
regulators
Limited natural sensors
Time-consuming screening for
pathway-speciﬁc biosensors
Laborious promoter engineering
for desired gene expression
(a) MRTFs
Acyl-CoA
Malonyl-CoA
FadR
FapR
[76]
[71] [16]
(b) Riboswitches
L-lysine
lysine-OFF
lysine-OFF
and
lysine-ON
[79]
[78]
Metabolite
responsive
promoters
FPP
Ergosterol
PgadE and PrstA
PERG1
[15]
[75]
Relatively less
time-consuming
Easy engineering by
promoter replacement
without expression of
speciﬁc TFs/aptamers
Not transferable to other
pathways
Diﬃcult to estimate dynamic
behaviour of the transcriptional
response
Not applicable to complex
pathways
Pathway-
independent
method with
autonomous
induction
Quorum-sensing
systems
AHL
↵-pheromone
LuxI/R system
Pheromone QS
[27] [53]
[67]
Pathway-independent and
process-independent
regulation based on
cell-density
No human intervention
required
Possible cross-talk problems
14
==PAGE:22==
4
Review of quorum-sensing (QS) systems for dynamic path-
way engineering
4.1
Natural Quorum-sensing systems in bacteria
QS is a cell-to-cell communication process in bacteria that enables them to modify collective be-
haviour in response to changes in cell population density and species composition of the surrounding
community [44]. QS allows bacteria to switch between low-cell-density and high-cell-density gene
expression programs to coordinate diﬀerent behaviours, such as bioﬁlm formation, virulence, bio-
luminiscence, antibiotic production, and sporulation [40]. Through QS-molecules species-speciﬁc
cell-to-cell communication is achieved. All natural quorum-sensing systems share common princi-
ples. First, they involve production of AI signalling molecules that are synthesized intracellularly.
Second, these AI molecules are released outside of the cells. As cell population increases, the ex-
tracellular concentration of AI molecules increases. Third, when AIs accumulate above a minimal
threshold level, AIs are detected by cognate receptors located in the bacterial cytoplasm or on
the membrane. Fourth, detection of AIs triggers signal transduction cascades that alter patterns
of gene expression in the population. Thus, QS allows cells to function and carry out behaviours
as a collective. Moreover, in a process called autoinduction, activation of QS by detection of AI
molecules often stimulates the synthesis of the AI, creating a feed-forward loop.
Quorum-sensing systems are used by both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria. How-
ever, the components and mechanism of the quorum-sensing systems are diﬀerent.
Typically,
Gram-negative bacteria use LuxI/R-type systems and Gram-positive bacteria use two-component
systems and -butyrolactones (GBL) based systems (Table 4).
Quorum-sensing in Gram-negative bacteria
As mentioned before in Section 3, the LuxI/R system from V. ﬁscheri has been extensively studied
as it was the ﬁrst described QS system [20]. Based on this, the LuxI/R system has been considered
as a model QS system for most Gram-negative bacteria.
After that, a large number of other
Gram-negative bacteria QS systems have been described. Homologs of luxI and luxR have been
identiﬁed in a large number of bacterial genomes, with other LuxI/R-type QS systems (Figure 2).
Some include the LasI/R and Rh1I/R systems of Pseudomonas aureginosa that control virulence
and bioﬁlm formation, the TraI/R system of Agrobacterium tumefaciens that regulates transfer
of the oncogenic Ti plasmid to the plant host, and the EsaI/R system in Pantoea stewartii that
controls exopolysaccharide production, adhesion, and plant colonization [40]. In Gram-negative
bacteria AHLs are the most common class of AI molecules. They have a core N-acylated HSL
ring and a 4–18 carbon acyl chain that can contain modiﬁcations (Figure 4A) [44]. These AHLs
are able to diﬀuse through the bacterial membrane. A large number of Gram-negative bacteria
contain LuxI-type synthases that produce diﬀerent AHLs from S-adenosylmethionine.
Speciﬁc
LuxR-type receptors, which are generally citoplasmatic TFs, bind their cognate AHLs molecules
synthesized by LuxI-type synthases. Typically, in the absence of AHLs, LuxR-type receptors are
degraded. On the contrary, when AHLs are present, LuxR-type/AHL complexes are stable and
bind to promoters containing a Lux-type-box to regulate transcription of downstream genes.
15
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2: General LuxI/R-type quorum-sensing system in Gram-negative bacteria.
LuxI-type synthases produce AHLs and speciﬁc LuxR-type receptors bind their cognate AHLs
molecules. When AHLs accumulate upon a threshold level, LuxR-type/AHLs compleces bind to
QS-responsive promoters to regulate transcription of target genes. Figure extracted from [40].
Quorum-sensing in Gram-positive bacteria
Gram-positive QS systems generally use small oligopeptides as autoinducers, called auto-inducing
peptides (AIPs) [4].
AIPs have variable sequences and are often modiﬁed post-translationally
(Figure 4B). These oligopeptides are impermeable and need to be secreted outside the cell by
specialized transporters. Thus, most of the Gram-positive QS systems are two-component sys-
tems, which consist of a membrane-bound sensor kinase receptor and cytoplasmic transcription
factors (Figure 3) [40]. When AIPs concentration reaches a certain threshold, they are recog-
nized by speciﬁc membrane-bound kinase receptors. The activation of the kinase receptor upon
detection of AIPs, triggers a phosphorylation cascade that subsequently activates a cytoplasmatic
transcription factor by phosphorylation. The activated transcriptional regulator eventually regu-
lates transcription of target genes under promoters controlled by QS system and the AIP secretion
pathway itself. Unlike direct binding of AIs to transcription factors in Gram-negative bacteria,
the two-component pathway involves an indirect regulation of gene expression mediated via phos-
phorilation [4]. Examples of AIPs-based Gram-positive quorum-sensing systems include ComD/E
system of Streptococcus pneumoniae that control competence development, the AgrC/A system
of Straphylococcus aureus that controls pathogenesis and the ComP/A of Bacillus subtilis that
controls competence sporulation.
16
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3: General two-component quorum-sensing system in Gram-positive bacteria.
Speciﬁc membrane-bound kinase receptors recognize AIPs when their concentration reach a certain
threshold. The receptor activates a transcriptional regulator by phosphorylation, that subsequently
regulates transcription of target genes. Figure extracted from [40].
The Streptomyces species are a diverse family of Gram-positive soil-dwelling bacteria that
present abundant sources of antibiotics and other secondary metabolites with medical interest.
Quorum-sensing systems of Streptomyces species use γ-butyrolactones as AI molecules to coor-
dinate antibiotic production and morphological diﬀerentiation. GBLs are species-speciﬁc small
diﬀusible molecules produced by GBLs synthases from the condensation between dihydroxyace-
tone phosphate and a β-ketoacid. The GBL system operates diﬀerently than AIPs-type quorum-
sensing systems. In fact, GBLs are structurally related to AHLs and analogous to AHL-based
quorum sensing. To date, at least ﬁfteen diﬀerent GBLs have been identiﬁed in diﬀerent Strep-
tomyces species. They share a common lactone ring of 3R-hydroxymethyl-1,4-butyrolactone and
a C2 n-alkane residue, which is speciﬁc for each species (Figure 4C) [5]. In Streptomyces, GBLs
promote a growth phase-dependent switch-like transition to antibiotic production by binding their
cognate receptor protein, a homodimer from the TetR family of repressors. These receptors are
master regulators of biosynthetic gene clusters and in some cases they also regulate their own
transcription and that of a GBLs synthase protein [6]. An example of a GBL system is the Scb
system in Streptomyces coelicolor.
17
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4: Structures of bacterial autoinducer molecules.
(A) Acyl-homoserine lactones
(AHLs) produced by several Gram-negative bacteria. (B) Aminoacid sequence of some autoinduc-
ing peptides (AIPs) in Gram-positive bacteria. (C) Strucuture of γ-butyrolactones (GBL) SCB1-3
from S. coelicolor. Figure adapted from [65].
Cross-talk between diﬀerent bacterial species
Quorum-sensing allows bacteria to communicate within and between species. The discovery of
autoinducer-2 (AI-2), ﬁrst identiﬁed in Vibrio harveyi, originated this inter-species QS concept. In
particular, luxS encoding AI-2 synthase is present in more than 60 species of bacteria, and AI-2
production has been veriﬁed in a large number of species and can control gene expression in a
variety of bacteria [21] [65]. This has lead to the hypothesis that bacteria use AI-2 to communicate
between species.
Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria use diﬀerent autoinducer molecules, AHLs and
AIPs, respectively. Gram-positive AIPs molecules are genetically encoded, and thus each species
of bacteria is capable of producing a peptide signal with a unique sequence [40].
In contrast,
AHLs from Gram-negative bacteria are variations on a single core molecule. To date, just a few
18
==PAGE:26==
naturally produced AHLs have been identiﬁed among hundreds of quorum-sensing systems. Thus,
systems from diﬀerent Gram-negative bacteria produce and respond to the same AHL molecule.
For instance, LuxI/R and EsaI/R systems respond to 3OC6HSL. Although LuxR-type receptors
are thought to be speciﬁc for their cognate AHLs molecules ensuring only intra-species communica-
tion, it has been demonstrated that multiple AHLs-type molecules can activate a single LuxR-type
receptor [17]. This results in cross-activation of regulators from diﬀerent quorum-sensing systems
resulting in inter-species communication. Because bacteria are generally members of polymicriobal
communities, these can beneﬁt both inter-species competition and cooperation. In in vivo settings,
inter-species cross-talk has shown to modulate bacterial virulence in plant host and human infec-
tions [66]. In addition, cross-talk can also occur at target level inducing expression of undesired
genes, similarities between promoter sequences and the DNA-binding domains within regulator
proteins contribute to cross-talk between quorum-sensing pathways [17]. In GBL systems from
Steptomyces species, no evidence has shown signal cross-talk between diﬀerent GBL regulators. In
addition, minimal cross-talk with the AHL-based QS systems LuxI/R and LasI/R was reported
by Biarnes-Carrera et al. [6].
Table 2: Overview of natural quorum-sensing systems
Type
QS system
Bacteria
Autoinducer
Synthase
Regulator
Reference
Gram-
negative
AHLs-based
LuxI/R system
V.ﬁscherii
N-3-oxohexanoyl-HSL
LuxI
LuxR
[20]
LasI/R system
P.aureginosa
N-oxododecanoyl-HSL
LasI
LasR
[56]
Rh1I/R system
P.aureginosa
N-butyryl-HSL
Rh1I
Rh1R
TraI/R system
A.tumefaciens
N-3-oxooctanoyl-HSL
TraI
TraR
[40]
EsaI/R system
P.stewartii
N-3-oxohexanoyl-HSL
EsaI
EsaR
[38]
Gram-
positive
AIPs-based
ComD/E system
S.pneumoniae
CSP
ComC/AB
ComD/E
[65]
AgrC/A system
S.aureus
AIP I-IV
AgrD/B
AgrC/A
ComP/A system
B.subtilis
ComX
ComQ
ComP/A
GBLs-based
Scb system
S.coelicolor
SCB1, SCB2, SCB3
ScbA,
ScbB and
ScbC
ScbR
[5]
4.2
Selected QS systems for dynamic pathway engineering
As discussed in Section 3, most dynamic regulatory mechanisms require external induction methods
or pathway-speciﬁc elements limiting their broad application. Ideally, cells would sense cell pop-
ulation densities and automatically adapt the response regulating expression of particular genes
at the appropriate time in a process-independent and pathway-independent manner. Coupling
gene expression to QS-dependent circuits allow metabolic engineers to dynamically redirect car-
bon ﬂux and optimize cell metabolism based on cell population density. Therefore, construction
of QS-circuits oﬀers a promising strategy to develop robust and intelligent microbial cell factories
[21].
To construct QS-dependent genetic circuits for dynamic regulation of target genes in P. putida
and E. coli, we focused our research on three QS systems: EsaI/R system from P. stewartii, LasI/R
19
==PAGE:27==
system from P. aeruginosa, and Scb system from S. coelicolor. A description of each system as
well as a discussion of the advantages and recent implementations for dynamic pathway regulation
is performed below (Summarized in Table 3).
EsaI/R system from P. stewartii
The EsaI/R system from P. stewartii is an AHL-based Gram-negative quorum-sensing system.
This system is used to control plant pathogenesis of Stewart’s wild disease in maize. EsaI is a
classic AHL synthase that produces the AI molecule 3OC6HSL. The EsaR regulator is a LuxR
homolog, but it has an unexpected behaviour compared to the majority of LuxR-type regulators,
which are typically AHLs-responsive activators. EsaR binds to a speciﬁc 20 base pair (bp) DNA
sequence known as esa box [51]. Depending on the position of the esa box in the promoter, EsaR
can act as a transcriptional repressor [38] or activator [48]. For instance, EsaR acts as a repressor in
the esaR promoter, PesaR. At low cell densities, when AHLs are absent, EsaR binds to the PesaR
promoter repressing expression of downstream genes. At high cell densities, AHLs accumulate
to a threshold level and bind to EsaR causing the dissociation from the PesaR promoter. This
eventually leads to the derepression of downstream genes. At the same time, EsaR acts as an
activator in the esaS promoter, PesaS. In the absence of AHLs, EsaR binds to PesaS and activates
expression of downstream genes. Upon binding to AHLs, EsaR dissociates from the promoter,
leading to deactivation of gene expression.
Metabolic engineers have exploited the potential of this system and demonstrated the success-
ful application for dynamic regulation of metabolic pathways. For instance, Shong et al. engineered
a set of EsaR-modulated promoters that enabled tunable QS-dependent gene expression for both
transcriptional activation and repression by manipulating EsaR binding sites on the promoter [51].
Moreover, Gupta et al. constructed genetic circuit variants based on the EsaI/R QS system
to dynamically control the down-regulation of target genes [23]. This was achieved by using the
transcriptional regulator EsaRI70V and placing target genes downstream of the PesaS promoter.
By varying the expression level of EsaI they were able to create a library of circuit variants to
switch oﬀgene expression at diﬀerent times and cell densities.
Thus, they demonstrated that
it is possible to tune and switch dynamics of these circuit by changing AHL accumulation rate.
The genetic control module was subsequently applied to dynamically regulate endogenous essential
genes in glycolysis to improve glucaric acid and myo-inositol production, by down-regulating the
Pfk-1 enzyme.
As a result, myo-inositol production increased up to 5.5-fold and glucaric acid
achieved a titer of >0.8 g/L. Later, the Esa QS-device was also implemented to down-regulate
the AroK kinase in E. coli, involved in the aromatic amino acid biosynthesis pathway.
This
strategy improved the production of shikimic acid to >100 mg/L. Thus, this study successfully
demonstrated the implementation of a QS-based circuit to divert metabolic ﬂux into the desired
product formation. In a later study, Doong et al. combined the previously described pathway-
independent Esa QS-based switch, down-regulating Pfk-1, with a pathway-speciﬁc strategy that
uses a myo-inositol biosensor to induce expression of myo-inositol oxygenase upon suﬃcient build
up of myo-inositol [19]. This approach aimed to dynamically regulate glucaric acid production
using two orthogonal, autonomous, and tunable regulators in E. coli. The resulting engineered
strain was able to produce 2 g/L of glucaric acid, the highest titer reported to date in E. coli K-12
20
==PAGE:28==
strains.
Recently, Dinh et al.
developed a dynamic regulation tool that combined components of
the two QS systems LuxI/R and EsaI/R to control multiple sets of genes in E. coli [18]. The
system contained the two regulator proteins, LuxR and EsaR, expressed constitutively.
Upon
binding of AHLs, the regulators up-regulate the expression of downstream genes from the Plux and
PesaR−H promoters. The PesaR−H is a hybrid promoter that contains the EsaR binding site (esaO)
downstream of the transcription start site of the Ptrc promoter. By constitutively expressing the
AHL synthase EsaI, it was possible to dynamically regulate the transcription of downstream genes
in a cell density-dependent manner. The switching dynamics of these circuits can be tuned to
suit the desired response by varying esaI expression, as previously showed by Gupta et al. [23].
Thus, in this study Dinh et al. evaluated the switching dynamics of these circuits by varying the
expression of esaI and luxR. The regulation tool was applied in both the naringenin pathway and
salicylic acid synthesis. For the dual regulation in the naringenin pathway, TAL and 4CL genes
were up-regulated by PesaR−H and endogenous genes associated with malonyl-CoA accumulation
were down-regulated by placing dCas9 and a single guide RNA under control of Plux promoter.
The same approach was used in the salicylic acid pathway, where PesaR−H controlled the expression
of two pathway enzymes (entC and pchB) and Plux was used to silence pheA and tyrA genes. This
work resulted in production beneﬁts in both case studies and demonstrated the implementation of
two independent QS-based control tools for dynamic regulation.
Overall, the Esa QS system, like all AHL-based systems, has been extensively characterized
and presents a simple alternative that requires minor modiﬁcations to function as expected when
transferred into Gram-negative heterologous host cells. The EsaI/R system has the advantage
of behaving as both transcriptional activator and repressor, therefore it can be implemented for
dynamic up-regulation or down-regulation of target genes, upon binding of AHLs.
Moreover,
many recent studies have demonstrated that the Esa system can be succesfully used for dynamic
control of metabolic pathways in E. coli, that switching dynamics of the circuits can be tuned for
a desired response and that it can be eﬀectively combined with other QS circuits or biosensors
for independent dual regulation. These properties make the Esa QS system a suitable choice for
constructing sophisticated QS-dependent circuits.
LasI/R system from P. aeruginosa
The LasI/R system from P. aeruginosa is a LuxI/R-type of Gram-negative quorum-sensing system.
This system is involved in control of virulence factors and bioﬁlm formation, crucial for causing
severe and persistent infections in immune compromised individuals and cystic ﬁbrosis patients
[56]. LasI synthase directs the production of the autoinducer molecule 3-oxododecanoyl-homoserine
lactone (3OC12HSL). This molecule binds and activates the cognate response regulator LasR. LasR
in complex with 3OC12HSL binds to las boxes in the promoters of target genes, therby activating
expression of downstream genes. For instance, Schuster et al. identiﬁed the PP A3904 promoter
that is up-regulated by the transcriptional regulator LasR [49].
The Las system is well described and, as other AHL-based systems, it can be easily trans-
ferred into Gram-negative heterologous host cells. Although not many research has focused on
LasI/R system for dynamic pathway regulation, engineers have successfully used this system for
21
==PAGE:29==
other applications, such as for bioﬁlm formation in two engineered E. coli populations [9] and for
building a predator-prey relationship between E. coli strains [2]. In addition, the LasI/R system
has the advantage of being from a Pseudomonas sp., which we believe it is favourable for the
implementation in P. putida due to species proximity.
Scb system from S. coelicolor
The Scb system from S. coelicolor is a GBL-based system used to control antibiotic production.
S.coelicolor synthesizes three GBLs molecules as autoinducer signals, including SCB1, SCB2 and
SCB3.
Biarnes-Carrera et al.
proposed a biosynthetic pathway for production of these GBLs
molecules in S. coelicolor, involving the three GBL synthases ScbA, ScbB and ScbC [6].
The
biosynthesis of GBLs starts with the condensation of dihydroxyacetone phosphate with a β-ketoacid
by ScbA. This product is spontaneously converted to butenolide, which is subsequently reduced by
ScbC. Then the phosphate group is lost and ScbB synthesizes the ﬁnal GBLs. GBLs accumulate
in the environment and bind to their cognate receptor ScbR, which is a homodimer that acts as a
repressor. Upon GBLs binding, the ScbR-GBLs complex derepresses target genes and regulates a
switch-like transition toward antibiotic production.
Biarnes-Carrera et al. optimized and engineered the Scb system as a tool for synthetic bi-
ology in E.coli [6]. They successfully demonstrated the potential of this tool to construct gene
circuits in heterologous hosts. Moreover, they generated a plasmid for production of GBL SCB2 in
E.coli, a series of plasmids expressing an optimized version of ScbR and a library of Scb-responsive
promoters. One of the strongest ScbR-dependent promoter that was found is the promoter PScbR.
The Scb system can be potentially used to minimize cross-talk with native QS systems in the
host bacteria, in our case Gram-negative E. coli and P. putida. As discussed in Section 4.1, previous
eﬀorts on applying AHLs-based QS pathways for metabolic engineering have often faced unexpected
cross-talk, at either the promoter or signal level. This limitation can result in undesired expression
of genes in the heterologous host cells. Furthermore, some AHL systems control expression of
virulence factors, such as LasI/R system from P. aeruginosa, and consequently organisms have
evolved to target these molecules using quorum quenchers [5]. Thus, the application of Scb system
for dynamic regulation is an attractive solution.
22
==PAGE:30==
Table 3: Selected QS systems for dynamic pathway engineering in this project.
QS system
Type
AI
Synthase
Regulator
QS-
responsive
promoter
Absence/
presence
of AI
Key features
Previous
studies
Esa system
AHL-based
3OC6HSL
EsaI
EsaR
Well-characterized
Simple transferring into
Gram-negative heterologous hosts
Potential for up-regulation and
down-regulation of target genes
Succesfull for dynamic regulation
in E. coli
Used in independent dual
dynamic regulation
[51, 23, 18]
PesaR
Repression/
Derepression
PesaS
Activation/
Deactivation
Las system
AHL-based
3OC12HSL
LasI
LasR
PP A3904
Deactivation/
Activation
Well described
Easily transferred into
Gram-negative heterologous hosts
No previous studies in dynamic
regulation
Species proximity with P. putida
None
Scb system
GBL-based
SCB1-3
ScbA,
ScbB and
ScbC
ScbR
PScbR
Derepression/
Repression
Potential to minimize cross-talk
More diﬃcult to engineer and
transfer to Gram-negative
heterologous hosts
[6]
23
==PAGE:31==
5
Results
5.1
Initial design of QS-circuits based on Esa, Las and Scb QS systems
The initial step of this project consisted in a functional validation of the three QS systems to
construct genetic circuits for dynamic regulation of target genes.
Several plasmids previously
constructed by Fernández-Cabezón et al. (unpublished) carrying components of the Esa, Las and
Scb QS systems (pEsaQS, pLasQS, pScb_synt and pScbR) were used (Figure 5). These plasmids
were constructed using pSEVA221 as a vector and included genes for the autoinducer synthases and
regulator proteins, plus a multiple cloning site (MCS) downstream of the respective QS-responsive
promoters. Constitutive expression of the synthase and regulator genes was driven by PKm and
PLacIq promoters.
The Scb system was divided in two diﬀerent plasmids because it requires
expression of multiple genes, a pSEVA631 vector carrying the synthase genes and a pSEVA221
vector carrying the receptor and QS-responsive promoter. A description of the plasmids can be
seen in Appendix C.1.
Fluorescent proteins are commonly used to monitor dynamic cellular processes in a wide
variety of biological systems and can be used to study real-time gene expression in cells by de-
tecting changes in ﬂuorescence signal. A fusion of the ﬂuorescent protein gene to the promoter
under investigation leads to an increase of ﬂuorescence when the promoter is up-regulated and a
decrease of ﬂuorescence when the promoter is down-regulated. The strength of the ﬂuorescence
signal correlates with the promoter activity and thus, with the expression of GOI. Therefore, to
investigate the behaviour of the initial QS genetic circuits, the gene of a ﬂuorescent protein was
placed under control of the QS-responsive promoters. The ﬂuorescent protein that was initially
selected was GFPmut3(LVA), a GFPmut3 variant described by Bo Andersen et al. containing
the C-terminal aminoacid sequence AANDENYALVA [8]. This C-terminal oligopeptide extension
results in degradation by intracellular tail-speciﬁc proteases, leading to an unstable GFPmut3
variant with reduced half-life. A major drawback of wild-type GFP is that once formed it seems
to be very stable. This can present a limitation for studies in real-time gene expression, as GFP
accumulates and saturates ﬂuorescence signal making it diﬃcult to discern changes in ﬂuorescence
directly caused by the regulatory circuit. Hence, GFPmut3(LVA) can overcome this limitation as
it demonstrated a short half-life in E. coli and P. putida during studies performed by Bo Andersen
et al..
New plasmid variants pEsaQS::GFP(LVA), pLasQS::GFP(LVA) and pScbR::GFP(LVA) were
created with the gfpmut3(LVA) gene inserted in the MCS driven by the respective QS-controlled
promoters (see list of plasmids in Appendix C.1). This plasmids were transformed to E. coli DH5↵
and P. putida KT2440 (see list of stains in Appendix C.2). A preliminary characterization of the
QS-circuits was performed using the obtained P. putida KT2440 strains by measuring kinetics and
ﬂuorescence in a microplate reader. Data of the experiment is not shown in this report. A priori,
signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence was not observed in any of the recombinant P. putida strains. Challenges
could be related to the reporter gene GFPmut3(LVA) or to the inadequate performance of the
synthetic QS-circuits. For this reason, it was decided to follow a new approach and design new
plasmid variants to improve the engineerered QS-circuits. The new strategy focused on a single
QS system to optimize the genetic circuits. The EsaQS system from P.stewartii was selected for
24
==PAGE:32==
further engineering as previous studies demonstrated that it can be successfully applied in E.coli
and has natural described QS-responsive promoters that can be up-regulated and down-regulated
by this system in a cell density-dependent manner.
Figure 5: Initial design of plasmids carrying components of Esa, Las and Scb QS
systems. (A) pEsaQS plasmid including esaI and esaR genes under control of PKm and PLacIq
promoters, respectively and a MCS following the PEsaS promoter. (B) pLasQS plasmid including
lasI and lasR genes under control of PKm and PLacIq promoters, respectively and a MCS following
the PP A3904 promoter. (C) pScbR plasmid including scbR gene under control of PLacIq promoters
and a MCS following the PScbR promoter. (D) pScb_synt plasmid including scbA, scbB and scbC
genes under control of PKm promoter.
25
==PAGE:33==
5.2
Design and engineering of pResponse and pSensor plasmids for Esa
QS-based circuits
To optimize the intial design of the Esa QS-based circuit, the QS components were decoupled
in two diﬀerent plasmids, a "Sensor" plasmid (pSensor) and a "Response" plasmid (pResponse)
(Figure 6). The pSensor plasmid includes the EsaI synthase and EsaR regulator protein. The
EsaI protein synthesizes the autoinducer 3OC6HSL that binds the regulator protein EsaR. At a
threshold level of autoinducer, the EsaR-AHLs complex regulates the expression of a ﬂuorescent
protein encoded in the pResponse plasmid, driven by a QS-responsive promoter. Therefore, the
strength of the ﬂuorescent signal correlates with the QS-responsive promoter activity and thus,
with the overall performance of the genetic circuit.
Figure 6: Design of Esa QS-based circuit involving pSensor and pResponse plasmids.
The pSensor plasmids contain the esaI and esaR genes under control of a constitutive promoter.
The EsaI synthase produces the autoinducer 3OC6HSL, which can diﬀuse in and out of the cell
and bind the regulator protein EsaR. At a threshold concentration, the EsaR-3OC6HSL complex
binds to the QS-responsive promoter and regulates the expression of the ﬂuorescent reporter gene.
The pSensor plasmids were constructed using the low-copy vector pSEVA221 with RK2 repli-
cation origin and kanamycin resistance gene (see plasmid map in Appendix C.1). The pSensor
plasmids carry an operon with the esaI gene encoding the AHL synthase and the esaR gene en-
coding the transcriptional regulator under control of a constitutive promoter. The esaI gene was
placed ﬁrst because the synthesis of AHLs is frequently the bottleneck of QS-circuits. To address
the poor ﬂuorescence signal of the initial QS strains, possibly caused by challenges related to the
constitutive expression of the QS components, a library of pSensor plasmids was created using
three constitutive promoters with diﬀerent strengths (P14f, PEM7 and PLac). The USER cloning
technique was used to assemble DNA fragments. The resulting pSensor plasmids pS1, pS2 and
26
==PAGE:34==
pS3 included the constitutive promoters P14f, PEM7 and PLac, respectively (Table 10). The P14f
promoter is a strong promoter in both E. coli and P. putida, the PEM7 promoter is a strong
promoter in E. coli but with medium strength in P. putida, and the PLac promoter is weak in P.
putida.
The pResponse plasmids were constructed using the medium-copy vector pSEVA631 with
pBBR1 replication origin and the gentamicin resistance gene (see plasmid map in Appendix C.1).
The pResponse plasmids include a Esa QS-responsive promoter and a ﬂuorescent reporter gene.
To be able to have diﬀerent dynamic control of the target gene, a library of pResponse plasmids
was created using several QS-responsive promoters. The pResponse plasmids pR1, pR2, pR3 and
pR4 containing the PEsaR, PEsaS, Ptrc_EsaO and PLacIq promoters respectively, were constructed
by Gibson’s Assembly. The PEsaR and PEsaS promoters are native Esa QS-responsive promoters
that can be applied to respectively up-regulate and down-regulate expression of target genes upon
accumulation of AHLs.
The Ptrc_EsaO promoter is a hybrid promoter that contains an EsaR
binding site (esaO) downstream of the transcription start site of the Ptrc promoter, these promoter
was already used in previous literature by Dinh et al. [18]. In the absence of AHL, EsaR binds to
the esaO sequence, repressing transcription. Upon binding of AHL, EsaR can no longer bind to
the operator sequence, leading to derepression. Thus, Ptrc_EsaO is used to up-regulate expression
of downstream genes. The PLacIq promoter is a medium strength constitutive promoter in E. coli
and P. putida that was used as a positive control.
Table 4: Summary of pSensor and pResponse plasmid variants.
pSensor
Constitutive promoters controlling the expression of QS genes (i.e.
esaI and esaR)
pS1
P14f (strong in E. coli and P. putida)
pS2
PEM7 (strong in E. coli, medium P. putida)
pS3
PLac (weak in P. putida)
pResponse
QS-responsive promoters controlling the expression of target gene
(i.e. reporter)
pR1
PEsaR (up-regulates downstream genes upon QS-activation)
pR2
PEsaS (down-regulates downstream genes upon QS-activation)
pR3
Ptrc_EsaO (up-regulates downstream genes upon QS-activation)
pR4
PLacIq (Medium strength constitutive promoter for the positive control plas-
mid)
5.3
Selection of the optimal reporter gene for pResponse plasmids
In the initial design, the GFPmut3(LVA) protein was selected as a reporter protein because of
its short half-life in the cytoplasm, advantageous during the monitoring of real-time experiments.
To approach the poor ﬂuorescence signal of this reporter gene observed in the initial QS strains,
27
==PAGE:35==
alternative reporter proteins that had been previously used for similar applications were considered.
GFPmut3 and mCherry were evaluated as reporter protein candidates for the construction of
pResponse plasmid variants. GFPmut3 is a mutant protein 20 times more ﬂuorescent than wild-
type GFP from the jellyﬁsh Aequorea victoria and is reported to be very stable and rapidly-
maturing. Another interesting ﬂuorescent protein is mCherry, a monomeric red ﬂuorescent protein
derived from Discosoma sp. [50]. This protein is also very stable but has a slower maturation
time than GFPmut3, which could be beneﬁcial to avoid ﬂuorescence signal saturation in dynamic
real-time experiments. To asses the best reporter gene candidate to characterize up-regulation and
down-regulation by QS-circuits in real-time experiments, constitutive expression of the ﬂuorescent
reporter genes was examined in E. coli and P. putida. Thus, the constitutive promoter PLacIq was
used to build two new pResponse plasmids, pR5 and pR6, containing the genes of mCherry and
gfpmut3, respecitvely. Plasmids were constructed by Gibson’s Assembly. Strains carrying the three
separate pResponse plasmids pR4, pR5 and pR6 (Figure 7A) and producing the distinct reporter
protein candidates were characterized by continuous growth and ﬂuorescence measurements.
Fluorescence proﬁles were obtained from E. coli DH5↵strains transformed with pR4, pR5
and pR6 plasmids and a wild-type E. coli DH5↵strain used as negative control (Figure 7B).
No drastic growth defects were observed in any of the strains containing the pResponse variants.
Strain DH5↵(p4) producing GFPmut3(LVA) showed low ﬂuorescence signal, that might be as a
result of high turnover rate of the reporter protein. Reduced ﬂuorescence signal can interfere with
background ﬂuorescence from the wild-type strain. E. coli DH5↵(p5) strain producing mCherry
demonstrated stable constitutive expression of the reporter gene. Strain DH5↵(p6) producing
GFPmut3 presented an accumulative eﬀect of ﬂuorescence signal, inadequate for characterization
studies.
In P. putida KT2440, pR4, pR5 and pR6 plasmids were co-transformed with the empty vec-
tor pSEVA221 and a P. putida KT2440 strain containing the two empty vectors pSEVA221 and
pSEVA631 was used as negative control (Figure 7C). This attempt aimed to achieve similar ﬂuo-
rescence proﬁles to the ones obtained from QS strains co-transformed with pSensor and pResponse
plasmids (Figure 7C). Especially in P. putida which presents high basal autoﬂuorescence levels.
Some inconsistences were observed in growth rates of the several strains. Strain KT2440 produc-
ing GFPmut3(LVA) showed lower protein turnover than in E. coli DH5↵, thus there was a higher
diﬀerence between the ﬂuorescent proﬁle from GFPmut3 and the background ﬂuorescence from
the control strain. This is appropiate for a good reporter protein. In contrast to stable expression
showed in E. coli, an accumulative eﬀect and very long maturation time was observed in P. putida
strain producing mCherry. Finally, the P. putida strain producing GFPmut3 exhibited a saturation
of ﬂuorescence signal that was not possible to monitor by the microplate reader instrument.
Given the results observed in the ﬂuorescence proﬁles from both microbial hosts E. coli and P.
putida, GFPmut3 was discarded as a reporter gene candidate due to high stability that caused an
accumulative eﬀect in ﬂuorescence proﬁles. Reporter protein mCherry was considered optimal for
the characterization of QS-based circuits as it demonstrated an adequate stable expression in E. coli
appropriate for the characterization of up-regulatation responses driven by PEsaR and Ptrc_EsaO
promoters. Hence, the construction of a second family of pResponse plasmids containing mCherry
as a reporter protein was considered. However, due to limited experimental time and diﬃculties
with the cloning of the plasmids, it was ﬁnally decided to continue with the already constructed
28
==PAGE:36==
pResponse plasmids containig GFPmut3(LVA). In addition, GFPmut3(LVA) demonstrated to be
an optimal reporter protein candidate in P. putida with suitable turnover rate. GFPmut3(LVA)
can be degraded by proteases inside the cell specially relevant to monitor the down-regulation of
downstream genes by the PEsaS promoter. Moreover, it permits a more accurate characterization
of real-time protein expression with no accumulative eﬀect like in more stable proteins, GFPmut3
and mCherry. The degradation tag also provides an additional control mechanism for modulating
protein pools and pathway ﬂuxes in the cell. In this study, by comparing strains producing GF-
Pmut3 and GFPmut3(LVA) it was demonstrated that the degradation tag is functional and very
powerful, as the diﬀerence in ﬂuorescence signal between the two reporter proteins was very high.
29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 7: pResponse plasmids pR4, pR5 and pR6 in E. coli DH5↵and P. putida
KT2440.
(A) General structure of pR4, pR5 and pR6 plasmids encoding diﬀerent reporter
proteins: GFPmut3(LVA), mCherry and GFPmut3, respectively. (B) Fluorescence proﬁles of E.
coli DH5↵strains containing pResponse variants with diﬀerent reporter proteins. (C) Fluorescence
proﬁles of P. putida KT2440 strains containing pResponse variants with diﬀerent reporter proteins
co-transformed with pSEVA221.
30
==PAGE:38==
5.4
Characterization of pSensor and pResponse plasmids
The next step, was to transform E. coli and P. putida with diﬀerent combinations of the constructed
pSensor and pResponse plasmids (Figure 8). A control strain with empty vectors pSEVA221 and
pSEVA631 was used in the characterization studies. To test possible growth defects caused by the
high expression of recombinant proteins EsaI and EsaR, pSensor variants and empty pSEVA631
plasmid were co-transformed. To test basal expression of the QS-responsive promoters in absence
of the QS components, pResponse variants were co-transformed with empty pSEVA221. Strains
8-10 have a QS-response driven by the PEsaR promoter, which is derepressed when a certain cell
density is surpassed, resulting in an up-regulation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression and an increase
in ﬂuorescence signal. Strains 11-13 have a QS-response driven by the PEsaS promoter, that is
deactivated when AHLs accumulate to a thershold level, resulting in a down-regulation of GF-
Pmut3(LVA) expression and a decrease in ﬂuorescence signal. Strains 14-16 have a QS-response
driven by the Ptrc_EsaO promoter, which up-regulates expression of GFPmut3(LVA) leading to an
increase in ﬂuorescence. Thus, a total of 16 strains were generated for each microbial host that
were named E1-16 and P1-16 for E. coli DH5↵λ pir and P. putida KT2440, respectively (see list
of strains in Appendix C.2). To characterize circuit behaviours, strains were cultured in 96-well
plates with continuous ﬂuorescence and OD600 measurements to obtain ﬂuorescence and biomass
time curves. Three replicate experiments were performed for each bacterial species. Representative
ﬂuorescence and growth proﬁles of a single experiment are shown in this project. Switching OD
represents the number of cells that can produce enough autoinducer molecules to trigger the up-
regulation/down-regulation of the target gene. This parameter is frequently used to characterize
QS-based circuits. To determine switching ODs for strains with PEsaS-driven down-regulation of
GFPmut3(LVA) expression, the corresponding cell density at a point of peak ﬂuorescence was ob-
tained from the ﬂuorescence and biomass time curves. To ascertain switching ODs for strains with
up-regulation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression driven by PEsaR and Ptrc_EsaO promoters, switching
OD was deﬁned as the OD at which ﬂuorescence signal surpasses the maximum signal from the
control strain.
31
==PAGE:39==
Figure 8: Schematic representation of constructed stains for characterization of pSensor and pResponse plasmids in E. coli
and P. putida
32
==PAGE:40==
5.4.1
Characterization of pSensor and pResponse plasmids in E. coli
pSensor and pResponse plasmids were analyzed individually in E. coli DH5↵λ pir strains (E1-E7)
(Figure 9A). All strains demonstrated superior growth than the control strain, which presented a
ﬁnal OD600 around 0.6 in the three experimental runs. Similar behaviour had been observed in
E. coli DH5↵wild-type strain used as control during the previous characterization studies of pR4,
pR5 and pR6 pResponse plasmids. Therefore, it was not considered abnormal. Strain E7 with
constitutive expression of GFPmut3(LVA) driven by PLacIq promoter exhibited poor ﬂuorescence
signal consistent with previous results in E. coli DH5↵(pR4) during the reporter gene selection
studies. As expected, ﬂuorescent proﬁles showed lower ﬂuorescent signal than the control strain
for all the E4-E6 strains, proving that the basal expression of the QS-responsive promoters was
low. This implies that, ﬂuorescence signals obtained when combining both pSensor and pResponse
plasmid variants in the same strain would be as a result of the expression of our target gene
(GFPmut3(LVA)).
Combination of pSensor plasmids with pResponse plasmids under control of PEsaR should
result in an up-regulation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression (Figure 9B). Strain E9 with expression of
esaI and esaR driven by PEM7 showed a successful increase in ﬂuorescence. This is reasonable as
PEM7 is a strong promoter in E. coli and thus, expression of EsaI synthase and EsaR regulator
protein in the cell culture is higher. As a result, concentration of AHLs increases and EsaR binds
to AHLs triggering GFPmut3(LVA) expression. However, a slight decrease of ﬂuorescence signal
over time was observed, probably caused by the high GFPmut3(LVA) turnover rate. For strain
E8 including a strong promoter (P14f) controlling esaI and esaR expression, a similar increase
in ﬂuorescence/OD signal would be expected. However, the ﬂuorescence of E8 strain was lower
than the control strain. Moreover, E10 strain with pSensor plasmid containing PLac demonstrated
similar ﬂuorescence as the control strain.
Strains with PEsaS driven response demonstrated a total down-regulation of GFPmut3(LVA)
expression until the same ﬂuorescence level as the control strain (Figure 9C). Strain E12 with high
expression of esaI and esaR driven by PEM7 showed the strongest repression of GFPmut3(LVA)
expression, with more than 10 hours of down-regulation. The highest ﬂuorescent peak, resulting
of the activation and subsequent deactivation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression, was obtained by the
strain E11 with the pSensor plasmid including the strong promoter P14f and it also demonstrated
a medium down-regulation time 24 hours after the inoculation. The activation and deactivation
process in strain E13 containing pSensor plasmid under control of the PLac promoter was longer,
consistent with the weaker expression of esaI and esaR.
E. coli strains containing pResponse plasmids with Ptrc_EsaO promoter should lead to an up-
regulation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression (Figure9D). Strain E16 with esaI and esaR expression
under control of the PLac exhibited reduced growth compared to the control strain but presented
a high ﬂuorescence/OD signal. In contrast, strains E14 and E15 including the strong promoters
P14f and PEM7, did not show an eﬀective up-regulation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression as lower
ﬂuorescence than the control strain was observed.
To determine the up-regulation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression by PEsaR and Ptrc_EsaO, the
mean of the maximum ﬂuorescence/OD600 signal of three replicate experiments was calculated.
33
==PAGE:41==
Values of strains E8-E10 were compared to strain E4 including the individual pR1 plasmid with
PEsaR. A considerable increase in the maximum ﬂuorescence was observed in E9 strain containing
the pSensor plasmid with PEM7 promoter. Strain E9 showed an higher ﬂuorescence singal that
the control strain in the three replicate experiments. Similarly, a comparison of strains E14-E16
with strain E6 carrying the individual pR3 plasmid with Ptrc_EsaO was performed. The strain
with the highest maximum value was found to be E16 with PLac driven expression of esaI and
esaR, but the diﬀerence was not remarkable, as the strain E16 did not show a consistent increase
in ﬂuorescence during the three experimental runs.
For switching ODs, an hypothesis would be that the higher the expression of esaI and esaR
(i.e. stronger the promoter in pSensor plasmid), the lower the number of cells that are required
for the activation of the QS-response. As not all the strains were able to generate a successful QS-
driven response, it was diﬃcult to compare switching ODs between the same type of QS-response
depending on the pSensor promoter strength. Hence, only the switching ODs of E. coli strains that
demonstrated an eﬀective response are displayed in Figure 9F. In strains E11-13 with the same
type of PEsaS-driven response, when a strong promoter was used to regulate expression of esaI
and esaR (P14f and PEM7) a lower switching OD was reported than with the weaker promoter
PLac.
34
==PAGE:42==
Figure 9: Characterization of E1-E16 strains for dynamic regulation.
(A) Individual
test of pSensor and pResponse variants in E. coli DH5↵λ pir strains (E1-E7). (B) Respresenta-
tive growth and ﬂuorescence proﬁles over time for strains with PEsaR-driven response (E8-E10).
(C) Respresentative growth and ﬂuorescence proﬁles over time for strains with PEsaS-driven re-
sponse (E11-E13). (C) Respresentative growth and ﬂuorescence proﬁles over time for strains with
Ptrc_EsaO-driven response (E14-E16). (E) Maximum ﬂuorescence of strains with up-regulation of
GFPmut3(LVA) expression. (F) Respresentative switching ODs of E. coli strains.
35
==PAGE:43==
5.4.2
Characterization of pSensor and pResponse plasmids in P. putida
When individual pSensor and pResponse plasmids were tested in P. putida KT2440 strains (P1-
P7), abnormal growth proﬁles were observed in strains P5-P7 (Figure 10A). Strain P7 exhibited
growth defects and the highest ﬂuorescence/OD signal consistent with the constitutive expression
of GFPmut3(LVA) by the PLacIq promoter. Reduced growth had been previously observed in P.
putida KT2440 (pSEVA221)(pR4) during the characterization of reporter protiens with a ﬁnal
OD600 around 0.25. However, in this experiment the strain P7 shows a lower ﬁnal OD600 (lower
than 0.05). Thus, it would be appropriate to repeat the experiment as individual pSensor and
pResponse plasmids were only characterized in a single experimental run. Moreover, strains P5
and P6 showed a basal ﬂuorescence signal higher than the control strain which must be considered
when obtaining the results from pSensor and pResponse plasmids combination.
Combination of pSensor plasmids with pResponse plasmids involving a PEsaR-driven response
in P. putida strains resulted in an increase of ﬂuorescence signal following the up-regulation of
GFPmut3(LVA) expression (Figure 10B). The activity window of the QS-circuits appears to be at
early ODs of the culture. Then, a decay of ﬂuorescence until the control strain level is observed
some time after the activation of the QS-response. Culture ﬂuorescence increases rapidly early in
time, during exponential phase of the culture signal starts declining and when culture enters to
stationary phase the ﬂuorescence signal is at basal level. During stationary phase there is a growth
limitation by nutrient or oxygen depletion, thus it is more diﬃcult to produce recombinant proteins.
As the reporter protein GFPmut3(LVA) has a degradation tag, the observed ﬂuorescence decay
might be as a result of higher degradation rate than production rate of the ﬂuorescent protein.
Moreover, growth defects were observed in P8 and P9 strains including the strong promoter P14f
and the medium strength promoter PEM7, respectively that might be due to overproduction of
recombinant proteins EsaI and EsaR, which may impose metabolic burden and lead to reduced
growth. Generally, a signiﬁcance diﬀerence between ﬂuorescence signal of the control strain and the
P8 and P9 strains was observed, that might indicate activation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression. No
signiﬁcant ﬂuorescence activation was observed in strain P10 including the weak promoter PLac.
Strains P11-P13 with a PEsaS-driven response demonstrated absolute repression of the re-
porter gene from 8 hours of culture (Figure 10C). Reduced growth was also observed in strain P11
including expression of recombinant proteins EsaI and EsaR under control of the strong promoter
P14f, that might be as a result of limited resources from the cell to grow or a certain toxicity
caused by EsaI and EsaR high expression. Strains P11 and P12 containing pSensor plasmids with
strong and medium expression of EsaI and EsaR showed strong repression around 5 and 6 hours of
culture, respectively. And strain P13 carrying pSensor plasmid with weak expression of esaI and
esaR genes by PLac promoter presented a later repression around 8 hours of culture.
A longer lag phase was observed in strains P14-P16 with Ptrc_EsaO-driven response. Strain
P14 with strong expression of esaI and esaR under P14f promoter was the only one reaching
stationary phase in 30h culture and showed an increase of ﬂuorescence signal possibly caused by
the up-regulation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression. This strain also exhibited a decline in ﬂuorescence
after the activation of the reporter gene expression. Moreover, the highest ﬂuorescence signal was
observed in strain P15 with pSensor plasmid under control of the PEM7 promoter. Strain expressing
esaI and esaR by PLac did not present an increase of ﬂuorescence. However, it might require longer
36
==PAGE:44==
culture time to show ﬂuorescence signal as it presents longer lag phase.
To determine the up-regulation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression by PEsaR and Ptrc_EsaO, maxi-
mum ﬂuorescence/OD signal of three replicate experiments was obtained. Values of strains P8-P10
were compared to strain P4 including the individual pR1 plasmid with PEsaR. A considerable in-
crease in the maximum ﬂuorescence was observed in strains P8 and P9 containing the pSensor
plasmid with promoters P14f and PEM7 respectively. This increase was constant in the three ex-
perimental replicates. This might indicate activation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression. Strains P14
and P15 with Ptrc_EsaO-driven QS-response carrying pSensor plasmids with promoters P14f and
PEM7 also exhibited an increase of maximum ﬂuorescence/OD compared to strain P6 carrying the
individual pR3 plasmid with Ptrc_EsaO. However, the results in the three experiments were highly
variable and irregular. In both types of QS-response, strains including pSensor plasmid with weak
expression by PLac promoter did not show a signiﬁcant increase in ﬂuorescence signal compared
to control strains.
Representative switching ODs were obtained from P. putida strains P8-P16. The presump-
tion was that the higher the synthesis of EsaI and EsaR proteins, the lower the number of cells
required for triggering QS-response (i.e. lower switching OD). However, a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
switching ODs was not seen between diﬀerent esaI and esaR expression strengths. Only strains
with Ptrc_EsaO-driven response (P14-P16) presented lower switching OD when QS components
were under control of a strong promoter P14f. Strains P8-P10 with PEsaR-driven QS-response
exhibited similar switching ODs at lower cell density (Switching OD <0.03). Moreover, strains
P11 and P12 with strong expression of esaI and esaR showed higher switching ODs (around 0.03)
than weak expression of QS components by PLac (around 0.02).
37
==PAGE:45==
Figure 10: Characterization of P1-16 strains for dynamic regulation.
(A) Individual
test of pSensor and pResponse variants in P. putida KT2440 strains (P1-P7). (B) Respresenta-
tive growth and ﬂuorescence proﬁles over time for strains with PEsaR-driven response (P8-P10).
(C) Respresentative growth and ﬂuorescence proﬁles over time for strains with PEsaS-driven re-
sponse (P11-P13). (C) Respresentative growth and ﬂuorescence proﬁles over time for strains with
Ptrc_EsaO-driven response (P14-P16). (E) Maximum ﬂuorescence of strains with up-regulation of
GFPmut3(LVA) expression. (F) Respresentative switching ODs of P. putida KT2440 strains.
38
==PAGE:46==
Shake ﬂask cultures of P. putida P8-P13 strains
To determine QS-circuits behaviours in larger culture volumes, P. putida strains were cultured in
shake ﬂasks of 250 ml during 40 hours and growth and ﬂuorescence measurements were performed
to obtain curves over time (Figure 11). Strains with PEsaR and PEsaS driven QS-responses were
evaluated (P8-P13). Considering that strains including promoter Ptrc_EsaO (P14-P16) presented
major inconsistencies, they were not included in this study. Growth curves of P8-P13 exhibited
stable growth similar to the control strain except for strains P8 and P9 with high expression
of heterologous proteins EsaI and EsaR under P14f and PEM7 promoter (Figure 11A). This is
consistent with what was previously observed in 96-well microtiter plates cultures, implying that
high expression of QS components might cause metabolic burden or a certain toxicity to the cells.
Moreover, strains P8 and P9 with a PEsaR-driven response presented a high ﬂuorescence signal
that might be caused by up-regulation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression (Figure 11B). This results
are also coherent with prior microtiter plate studies, where P8 and P9 strains demonstrated the
strongest up-regulation. Variability in the ﬂuorescence/OD values of the two biological replicates
was also detected. However, both replicates demonstrated a signiﬁcant increase in ﬂuorescence.
As previously described in microplate studies, a decline in ﬂuorescence/OD was observed until
similar level as the control strain after approximately 20 hours of culture. Strain P10 with pSensor
plasmid including the PLac promoter exhibited similar ﬂuorescence as the control strain, consistent
with the previous results. Regarding strains with a PEsaS-driven QS-response (P11-P13), a total
down-regulation of GFPmut3(LVA) expression was demonstrated. No ﬂuorescence/OD peak was
detected, as it was in prior 96-well plate experiments. It is important to consider that ﬂuorescence
and growth measures started 10 hours after inoculation of the culture. Therefore, the ﬁrst 10 hours
of the culture were not monitored and changes in ﬂuorescence during this period were unnoticed.
39
==PAGE:47==
Figure 11: Characterization of P8-P13 strains in shake ﬂask cultures. (A) Growth time
curve obtained with 2 biological replicates of P8-P13 strains. (B) Fluorescence/OD time curve
obtained with 2 biological replicates of P8-P13 strains.
40
==PAGE:48==
6
Discussion
In this study, we reported the engineering of genetic circuits using part of the bacterial Esa QS
system in E. coli and P. putida to implement dynamic control of target genes based on cell
population density. These circuits were applied to up-regulate/down-regulate the expression of
a ﬂuorescent reporter protein in a pathway-independent manner and without requiring external
induction.
GFPmut3(LVA) as a reporter protein for characterization of QS-based circuits
In the evaluation of reporter protein candidates, GFPmut3(LVA) was constitutively expressed by
the medium strength constitutive promoter PLacIq and demonstrated to have a strong degradation
tag with high protein turnover rates. Later, when this reporter gene was applied to character-
ize strains containing diﬀerent combinations of pSensor and pResponse plasmids, it allowed an
eﬀective monitoring of strains 11-13 with down-regulation responses of the reporter gene. Since
cellular protein pools should be depleted to observe phenotypic changes in the repression of the
transcription of target genes. The same approach had been previously used by Gupta et al. to
monitor dynamic down-regulation of expression driven by the PEsaS promoter [23].
Nevertheless, it did not result eﬃcient to monitor strains with up-regulation QS responses
driven by PEsaR and Ptrc_EsaO promoters. A decay in ﬂuorescence over time was observed in
the ﬂuorescence proﬁles of these strains . As this tag is very powerful and reduces the half-life
of the reporter protein inside the cell, a very strong up-regulation response is required to detect
an increase in ﬂuorescence of the culture.
For that reason, it would be interesting to explore
other types of reporter genes without degradation tag or with a weaker degradation tag.
As
previously mentioned, mCherry should be considered as an optimal reporter alternative to monitor
up-regulation by the QS circuits. mCherry has higher stability and a decay in ﬂuorescence will
probably not be observed. Monomeric red ﬂuorescent protein has been previously used by Kim et
al. to monitor up-regulation of PLuxI promoter [27]. An other alternative would be to use other
GFPmut3 variants with a weaker degradation tag, as the ones described by Bo Andersen et al. [8].
High variability in ﬂuorescence values observed during evaluation of pSensor and
pResponse plasmids
During the characterization of pSensor and pResponse plasmids, we encountered challenges related
to a high variability of ﬂuorescence/OD values among diﬀerent experimental runs. Several exper-
iments were performed that produced substantially diﬀerent results. After several attempts to
standarize the experimental procedures and minimize the variability, three experimental replicates
for each E. coli and P. putida microbial host showed similar behaviour of the QS-circuits. However,
some ﬂuorescence values were still highly inconsistent, which complicated the statistical analysis of
the collected data. Such variability could be as a result of inadequate experimental procedures or
inadequate performance of the synthetic QS circuits, including performance of the reporter protein
GFPmut3(LVA). Moreover, alternative analysis of transcription levels of the target gene instead of
traduction levels in protein form could be considered. The transcriptional analysis could be per-
formed using qRT-PCR by measuring mRNA levels of the target gene. Thus, further experimental
41
==PAGE:49==
work is required to address this problem.
Combination of pSensor and pResponse plasmids for up-regulation of target genes
Up-regulation of the reporter gene was contemplated as the the increase in ﬂuorescence signal of the
cultured strains in comparison to the control strain. Thus, the strongest up-regulation response was
reﬂected as the highest ﬂuorescence/OD values achieved. Characterization of pSensor plasmids and
pResponse plasmids in E.coli established strain E9 carrying the pS2 and pR1 plasmids as the most
powerful E.coli strain for up-regulation of target genes. Strain E16 with a QS-response driven
by the promoter Ptrc_EsaO was also considered, as it exhibited a high increase in ﬂuorescence
signal compared to the control strain. However, such increase was not consistent during the three
replicate experiments. In P.putida, growth and ﬂuorescence measurements determined P8 and P9
strains with a PEsaR-driven response and the respective P14f and PEM7 promoters as the most
eﬃcient for the activation of GFPmu3(LVA) expression. Similar results were observed when these
strains were cultured in shake ﬂasks. Moreover, strains P14 and P15 also showed variability in the
activation of the reporter gene expression. In general, a better performance of the up-regulation QS
responses was observed when the QS-responsive promoter PEsaR was implemented instead of the
Ptrc_EsaO. In particular, both model bacteria presented a signiﬁcant increase in GFPmut3(LVA)
expression when pS2 and pR1 plasmids were combined, establishing this combination as the most
promising for dynamic up-regulation of target genes in a cell-density dependent manner.
Combination of pSensor and pResponse plasmids for down-regulation of target genes
For the down-regulation of target genes, repression of GFPmut3(LVA) was considered when the
ﬂuorescence signal of the strains was equal to the ﬂuorescence signal of the control strain. Dur-
ing characterization studies, all strains with a PEsaS-driven response reached similar ﬂuorescence
levels as the control strain at a certain point in time, presumably as a result of down-regulation
of GFPmut3(LVA) expression. Hence, the strongest repression was the earliest to achieve con-
trol ﬂuorescence levels. In E. coli, strain E12 demonstrated the most powerful down-regulation of
gfpmut3(LVA) expression, followed by stain E11 including the P14f promoter. Strain E13 showed
the latest repression. In P. putida characterization studies, strains P11 and P12 exhibited similar
eﬀective repression and strain P13 was the slowest.
In general, the higher the observed ﬂuo-
rescence/OD peak in the ﬂuorescence proﬁles of the bacterial strains, the latest the repression
occurred. This was true for all strains except for strain E13. Overall, similar behaviour of the
QS-circuits were detected in both E.coli and P.putida strains with promising pSensor and pRe-
sponse plasmids combinations for dynamic down-regulation of target genes based on cell population
density.
Switching dynamics of the QS-circuits
Unexpectedly, switching ODs obtained from the representative growth and ﬂuorescence curves did
not decrease with the strongest expression of esaI and esaR. In E. coli strains E11-E13 it was
observed that the strongest promoters had lower switching ODs than the weaker promoters. And
in P. putida strains similar switching ODs were observed for strains P8-10 and for strains P11-
42
==PAGE:50==
P13 the opposite behaviour was detected. Only strains P14-P16 behaved as expected. Gupta et
al. reported that esaI expression is the limitant factor in switching ODs [23]. The stronger the
esaI expression and higher the AHL production rate, the lower switching ODs. Following this
strategy, they created a library of circuit variants to down-regulate gene expression at diﬀerent
times and cell densities by varying the expression level of esaI. Dinh et al. also characterized
relative switching dynamics from the Plux and Ptrc_EsaO promoter varying the esaI expression
levels. Increasing esaI expression levels resulted in earlier switching with both promoters [18]. In
this project, the ratio between the transcriptional regulator and the synthetase were the same, as
they were expressed under the same promoter. It would be interesting to express esaI and esaR
under diﬀerent promoters to be able to tune and switch dynamics of these QS-circuits by changing
AHL accumulation rates. This would allow to vary the schedule of dynamic regulation in search
for one that suits the desired application.
The Esa QS system as a promising dynamic regulation tool in P. putida
Previous studies had reported the implementation of Esa QS components for the construction of
dynamic regulators in E. coli [23, 19, 18]. The QS-responsive promoter PEsaS had been successfully
applied for the construction of genetic circuits to down-regulate essential genes in glycolisis and
shikimate pathway by Gupta et al.. Moreover, the Ptrc_EsaO promoter had been previously used by
Dinh et al. in the naringenin pathway and salicylic acid synthesis. Nevertheless, to our knowledge
no previous studies following this strategy had been reported in P. putida. Hence, this project
uncovers the potential of this dynamic regulation tool in P. putida.
43
==PAGE:51==
7
Conclusion
Dynamic regulation is an important strategy in metabolic engineering for improving productivity
in challenging pathways and increasing the economic viability of microbial bioprocesses.
This
project elucidated the beneﬁts of QS systems among other dynamic pathway engineering methods.
Athough further characterization and optimization is required, promising QS-circuits based on the
Esa QS system were provided to be applied for future metabolic applications of dynamic regulation.
These include the combination of pS2 and pR1 plasmids for up-regulation of target genes and the
combination of pS1, pS2 and pS3 with pR3 for the down-regulation of target genes in E. coli and P.
putida. Since similar behaviours of the engineerd QS-circuits were reported in both microbial hosts,
this study reveals a potential transferrable dynamic control tool to be implemented in diﬀerent
Gram-negative bacteria and diﬀerent biosynthetic pathways.
44
==PAGE:52==
8
Outlook
Future work includes further characterization of the most promising QS-circuits reported in this
project. Alternative reporter proteins could be explored as well as standarization of the experi-
mental procedures to minimize variability in ﬂuorescence values. Moreover, a library of QS-circuit
variants to up-regulate/down-regulate target gene expression at diﬀerent times and cell densities
would be constructed by varying expression of esaI and esaR. Once the Esa QS-based genetic
circuits are optimized in E.coli and P.putida, the next step would be to apply these circuits in an
actual metabolic pathway like the shikimate pathway. Structural precursors for aromatic amino
acids, tyrosine, tryptophan and phenylalanine are produced in bacteria through the shikimate
pathway. These amino acids are intrinsic valuable compounds, but can as well be converted into
other relevant value-added products with alimentary and pharmaceutical applications [13]. The
shikimate pathway is an essential part of metabolism which limits the production of this compound.
Previous attempts have involved the deleting of shikimate kinases, aroK and aroL, involved in this
biosynthetic pathway [23]. However, external addition of aromatic amino acids is required in the
fermentation medium, resulting in an increase of the production cost. Dynamic down-regulation
of these genes would avoid the need for supplementation and increase productivity. This strategy
would decouple growth from production phases in the fermentation, allowing the accumulation of
biomass in early phases followed by the redirection of metabolic ﬂux towards shikimate formation.
45
==PAGE:53==
9
Materials and methods
All plasmids and strains used in this study are listed in Appendix C.1 and C.2, respectively.
Sequences for primers are provided in Appendix C.3. Promoters and genes sequences are displayed
in Appendix C.4. An overview of media recipes can be found in Appendix D.
9.1
Construction of Esa-QS based pResponse and pSensor plasmids
In this study, the two pSEVA plasmids pSEVA221 and pSEVA631 developed by de Lorenzo’s lab
are used to construct the QS-dependent circuits [52]. The pSEVA221 contains a kanamycin (Km)
resistance marker, the origin of replication RK2 and a default multiple cloning site (MCS). The
pSEVA631 includes a gentamicin (Gm) resistance marker, the origin of replication pBBR1 and a
default MCS. The structure of these plasmids can be seen in Appendix C.1 and supplementary
information on the Standard European Vector Architecture (SEVA) platform can be consulted in
Appendix A. This strategy aims to facilitate the transfer of the resulting circuits into diﬀerent
microbial hosts due to the modularity and standarization oﬀered by the SEVA platform. pSensor
plasmids were constructed by USER cloning technique and pResponse plasmids were constructed
by Gibson’s Assembly. Supplementary information on these methods can be found in Appendix
B.
Construction of pSensor plasmids by USER cloning
To construct pS1, pS2 and pS3 DNA fragments were ampliﬁed using Phusion R⃝U Hot Start DNA
Polymerase (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc) following the manufacturer speciﬁcations [62].
The P14f
promoter sequence was ampliﬁed from pBG25 (Zobel S, Benedetti I, Eisenbach L, de Lorenzo V,
Wierckx N, Blank LM.) using primers B19 and B20. The PEM7 promoter sequence was ampliﬁed
from pSEVA4413 ([52]) using primers B11 and B12. The PLac promoter sequence was ampliﬁed
from previously puriﬁed E.coli DH5↵genomic DNA using primers B21 and B22. The esaI and esaR
genes were ampliﬁed from plasmid pUCIDT-EsaQS (Fernández-Cabezón et al.
(unpublished))
using primers pairs B13/B14 and B15/B16, respectively. The vector pSEVA221 was previously
puriﬁed from overnight cultures using Macherey-NagelTM NucleoSpinTM Plasmid EasyPure kit
following the manufacturer protocol [31], and it was subsequently ampliﬁed using primers B17 and
B18. A sample (5 µL) of the PCR products was mixed with 1 µL of TriTrack DNA Loading Dye
(6x) and loaded with GeneRuler 1 kb DNA Ladder into a 1% agarose electrophoresis gel, that was
run at 100 V for 20 min. The expected size of the fragments was 0.1 kb, 0.1 kb, 0.1 kb, 0.7 kb,
0.8 kb and 3.8 kb for P14f, PEM7, PLac, EsaI, EsaR and pSEVA221, respectively. After obtaining
the correct bands, PCR products were treated with DpnI (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc) to remove
cell-derived plasmid templates. This enzyme only cleaves when its recognition site is methylated.
0.5 µL of DpnI was added to ﬁnished 50 µL PCR reactions and the mix was incubated at 37
oC for 30 min. Then, PCR products were puriﬁed using the Macherey-NagelTM NucleoSpinTM
Gel and PCR clean-up kit following the manufacturer protocol [32]. The DNA concentration of
every sample was measured using NanoDropTM 2000/2000c Spectrophotometers (ThermoFisher
Scientiﬁc).
46
==PAGE:54==
To assemble the plasmid fragments USER reactions were performed by mixing the pSEVA221
backbone (150 ng) with EsaI and EsaR fragments in a molar ratio of 1:5, the corresponding
promoter fragments (P14f/ PEM7/ PLac) in a molar ratio of 1:7, 1.2 µL of T4 ligase buﬀer, 1 µL
of USER Enzyme, and water to a ﬁnal volume of 12 µL. The reaction mix was incubated at 37
oC for 25 min, followed by another 25 min at 25 oC in a thermocycler. After that, 0.5 µL of
T4 DNA ligase was added to each reaction tube and incubated for 10 min at room temperature.
Then, samples were transformed into E.coli chemically competent cells following transformation
protocol described below in Section 9.3. Single colonies were checked with primers PS1 and PS2
using OneTaq R⃝DNA Polymerase (New England BioLabs) following the manufacturer protocol
[39]. Finally, positive candidates were sequenced and strains containing correct plasmid sequences
were stored in glycerol stocks at -80oC.
Construction of pResponse plasmids by Gibson’s Assembly
For the construction of pResponse plasmids the pSEVA631 vector was previously digested by the
FastDigest restriction enzyme SmaI (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc). The digestion was performed by
mixing the 2 µL of FastDigest Green Buﬀer 10x, 1 µL of SmaI enzyme, 1 µg of pSEVA631 and
water to a ﬁnal volume of 20 µL. The resulting mix was then incubated at 37 oC for 30 min.
After that, the reaction mixture and GeneRuler 1 kb DNA Ladder were loaded into a 1% agarose
electrophoresis gel. The gel was run at 90 V for 30 min. Expected fragment size of the correctly
digested pSEVA631 is 3001 bp. The respective bands were cut from the gel and were puriﬁed
using the Macherey-NagelTM NucleoSpinTM Gel and PCR clean-up kit following the manufacturer
protocol [32].
To construct pR1, pR2, pR3 and pR4 DNA fragments were ampliﬁed using Phusion R⃝Hot
Start II High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc) following the manufacturer spec-
iﬁcations [63]. The PEsaS promoter sequence was ampliﬁed from the pEsaQS plasmid constructed
by Fernández-Cabezón et al. (unpublished) using primers B05 and B06. The PEsaR and Ptrc_EsaO
were ampliﬁed from gBlock-B01 using primers pairs B07/B08 and B09/B10, respectively. The
PLacIq promoter was ampliﬁed from pSEVA224 ([52]) using primers B03 and B04. The reporter
gene mut3GFP(LVA) was ampliﬁed from plasmid pSEVA441-Rsv5 (host laboratory) using primers
B01 and B02. A sample (5 µL) of the PCR products was mixed with 1 µL of TriTrack DNA Load-
ing Dye (6x) and loaded with GeneRuler 1 kb DNA Ladder into a 1% agarose electrophoresis
gel, that was run at 100 V for 20 min. The expected size of the fragments was 0.2 kb, 0.3 kb,
0.1 kb, 0.08 kb and 0.756 kb for PEsaS, PEsaR, Ptrc_EsaO, PLacIq and mut3GFP(LVA), respec-
tively. After obtaining the correct bands, the remaining PCR products were puriﬁed using the
Macherey-NagelTM NucleoSpinTM Gel and PCR clean-up kit following the manufacturer proto-
col [32]. The DNA concentration of every sample was measured using NanoDropTM 2000/2000c
Spectrophotometers (ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc).
To assemble the plasmid fragments Gibson Assembly reactions were performed by mixing
pSEVA631 backbone digested by SmaI (100 ng) with the mut3GFP(LVA) DNA fragment in a
molar ratio of 1:5 mut3GFP(LVA), the DNA fragments of the corresponding promoters (PEsaS/
PEsaR/ Ptrc_EsaO/ PLacIq) in a molar ratio of 1:7, 10 µL of Gibson Assembly Master Mix (New
England BioLabs) and water to a ﬁnal volume of 20 µL. The reaction mixture was incubated
47
==PAGE:55==
at 50oC for 1 hour.
Then, the ﬁnal constructs were transformed into E.coli competent cells
following transformation protocols described below in Section 9.3. Single colonies were checked
with primers PS1 and PS2 using OneTaq R⃝DNA Polymerase (New England BioLabs) following the
manufacturer protocol [neb]. Finally, positive candidates were sequenced and strains containing
correct plasmid sequences were stored in glycerol stocks at -80oC.
Construction of pResponse plasmids containing mCherry and mut3GFP
For the construction of pR5 and pR6 plasmids, DNA fragments were ampliﬁed and puriﬁed fol-
lowing the same procedure as described for the other pResponse plasmids. The mut3GFP gene
was ampliﬁed from pSEVA441-Rsv5 plasmid (host laboratory) using primers B23 and B01. The
mCherry gene was ampliﬁed from pGNW1-mCherry plasmid ([69]) using primers B24 and B25.
And PLacIq promoter was ampliﬁed from pSEVA224 plasmid using primers B26 and B03.
To
assemble the resulting DNA fragments, Gibson’s Assembly method was used as described earlier
for other pResponse plasmids. The ﬁnal constructs were transformed in E.coli and single colonies
were checked with primers PS1 and PS2 using OneTaq R⃝DNA Polymerase (New England Bio-
Labs) following the manufacturer protocol [39]. Positive candidates were sequenced and strains
containing the right sequence were stored in glycerol stocks at -80oC.
9.2
Strains and growth conditions
P.putida KT2440 was grown at 30oC and E.coli DH5↵λ pir strains were grown at 37oC with
shaking (250 rpm). Strains were routinely cultured in Lysogeny broth (LB) medium or LB agar
plates according to standard protocols [47], unless otherwise stated (see media components in
Appendix D). Overnight precultures were grown in LB media using volumes of 10 mL for E.coli
strains and 5 mL for P.putida KT2440. For ﬂuorescence and growth measurements, strains were
cultured in M9 minimal medium (see media components in Appendix D) with the addition of 20
mM of glucose as carbon source. Antibiotics were used at the following concentrations: Km, 50
µg mL−1 and Gm, 10 µg mL−1. Cultures were supplemented with antibiotics when required. All
bacterial strains were stored at -80oC in a 2x cryopreservation solution. The 2x cryopreservation
solution consists of 50% (vol/vol) of glycerol, 0.1 M MgSO4 AND 50 mM Tris HCl (pH=8.0). To
prepare the bacterial glycerol stocks, 700 µL of the 2x cryopreservation solution and 700 µL of the
fresh bacterial culture in LB were transferred into cryotubes
9.3
Transformation of strains
Plasmid DNA was puriﬁed from overnight cultures using the Macherey-NagelTM NucleoSpinTM
Plasmid EasyPure kit following the manufacturer protocol [31].
Transformation into E.coli DH5↵λ pir by thermic shock
E.coli DH5↵or E.coli DH5↵λ pir chemically competent cells were stored at -80oC. Aliquotes (50
µL) were taken out and placed on ice. Plasmid DNA (⇠200 ng) to be transformed was then added
48
==PAGE:56==
to the competent cells aliquotes and incubated for 10 min on ice. Then, they were exposed for 45
seconds to 42 oC, using a thermal bath, and subsequently placed on ice during 2 min. Afterwards,
1 mL of LB media was added to every tube and incubated for recovery at 37 oC for 1 hour. After
recovery, 100 µL of each tube was plated in LB agar plates with the respective antibiotics. The
rest of the culture was centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 1 min, resuspended in 100 µL and plated in
LB plates containing the corresponding antibiotic. Plates were incubated overnight at 37oC.
Transformation into P.putida KT2440 by electroporation
Plasmids in P.putida KT2440 were transfromed following the protocol described by Choi et al.
for P.aeruginosa [14]. Overnight cultures of a single colony from a plate of P.putida KT2440 in
5 mL of LB were centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 3 min at room temperature. Then, cells were
washed three times with 1 mL of sucrose solution (300 mM) by resuspending and centrifuging
in the same conditions as the previous step. In the last wash, cells were resuspended in 100 µL
of sucrose solution in an eppendorf tube and mixed with 200 ng of the plasmid DNA. This mix
was incubated in ice during 10 min and then transfered into a prechilled electroporation cuvette.
Electroporation of the cells was performed by applying a pulse of 2.5 kV and after that, 1 mL of
LB was added into the electroporation cuvette. Electroporated cells were transfered into a 12 mL
falcon tube and incubated for recovery for 1h at 30oC with shaking. After recovery, 100 µL of
the culture were plated in LB agar plates with the respective antibiotics. The rest of the culture
was centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 1 min, resuspended in 100 µL and plated in LB plates with the
corresponding antibiotics. Plates were incubated overnight at 30oC.
9.4
Fluorescence and growth curves experiments
Overnight precultures in LB media of the diﬀerent strains of E.coli and P.putida were centrifuged
at 4000 rpm for 5 min. Cells (pellet) were washed by resuspending them with M9 salts 1x in
the same volume (10 mL for E.coli and 5 mL for P.putida). Then, OD600 of the cultures was
measured and they were inoculated to an OD600 of 0.05 in 96-well microtiter plates. M9 minimal
medium + 20mM glucose media containing the corresponding antibiotics was added to a ﬁnal
volume of 200 µL in each well. Kinetics of the growth and ﬂuorescence were measured using a
SynergyMX (BioTek) microplate reader. Growth measurements of the cultures were performed at
OD600. Fluorescence measurements of the reporter proteins GFPmut3 and GFPmut3(LVA) were
performed at wavelengths of excitation and emission of 485 and 516. In the case of strains using
mCherry as a reporter ﬂuorescent protein, wavelengths of excitation and emission were measured
at 577 and 610. Measures were carried every 10 min for 30 h, at 282 cpm and a temperature of 30
oC and 37oC for P.putida and E.coli, respectively. Each experimental run was performed with 6
independent measurements of each strain. For the characterization of E.coli and P.putida strains
containig pR4, pR5 and pR6 plasmids producing diﬀerent reporter proteins, a single experimental
run was performed. For the characterization of E.coli and P.putida strains containig combinations
of pSensor and pResponse plasmids, 3 replicate experimental runs were performed.
49
==PAGE:57==
9.5
Shake ﬂask experiments
Overnight precultures of the P.putida KT2440 strains in LB medium containing the respective
antibiotics were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 5 min. Cells (pellet) were washed by resuspending
them with M9 salts 1x in 5 mL. Then, OD600 of the cultures was measured and they were inoculated
to an OD600 of 0.05 in a volume of 50 mL of M9 minimal medium with 20 mM glucose and the
corresponding antibiotics in 250 mL shake ﬂasks. For each strain two shake ﬂasks were inoculated
to have two biological replicates in a single experimental run.
Shake fasks were incubated at
30 oC and 150 rpm.
To perform growth and ﬂuorescence measurements of the cultures, 500
µL of sample was taken out of every single shake ﬂask culture. From this sample, 2 replicate
measurements of a volume of 200 µL were performed in 96-well microtiter plates. Sample was
diluted to 1/10 in M9 minimal media + 20 mM glucose when OD600 was above 1. Single reads of
growth and ﬂuorescence were performed using a SynergyMX (BioTek) microplate reader. Growth
measurements of the cultures were performed at OD600. Fluorescence measurements of the reporter
protein GFPmut3(LVA) were performed at wavelengths of excitation and emission of 485 and 516.
9.6
Bioinformatic resources
Plasmids were designed and visualized using SnapGene viewer. Sequencing results were obtained
from Euroﬁns and analyzed using Clustal W for multiple sequence alignment with the original
sequence. NEBiocalculator (New England BioLabs) was used to calculate the molar ratios for
USER cloning and Gibson’s Assembly reactions. Primers and gBlocks were ordered at IDT. Primers
were previously analyzed using OligoAnalyzer from IDT to check for hairpins and self-dimerization.
For PCR reactions, Tm was measured using NEB Tm Calculator (New England BioLabs). Data
processing and graphs were performed in Microsoft Excel and JMP Statistical software.
50
==PAGE:58==
References
[1]
Dominik Antoni, Vladimir V Zverlov, and Wolfgang H Schwarz. “Biofuels from microbes”.
In: Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 77.1 (2007), pp. 23–35. issn: 1432-0614. doi:
10.1007/s00253-007-1163-x. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-007-1163-x.
[2]
Frederick K Balagaddé et al. “A synthetic <i>Escherichia coli</i> predator–prey ecosys-
tem”. In: Molecular Systems Biology 4.1 (Jan. 2008), p. 187. issn: 1744-4292. doi: 10.1038/
msb.2008.24. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1038/msb.2008.24.
[3]
Judith Becker et al. “From zero to hero—Design-based systems metabolic engineering of
Corynebacterium glutamicum for l-lysine production”. In: Metabolic Engineering 13.2 (Mar.
2011), pp. 159–168. issn: 10967176. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2011.01.003. url: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1096717611000048.
[4]
Veer S. Bhatt. “Quorum Sensing Mechanisms in Gram Positive Bacteria”. In: Implication of
Quorum Sensing System in Bioﬁlm Formation and Virulence. Singapore: Springer Singapore,
2018, pp. 297–311. isbn: 9789811324284. doi: 10.1007/978-981-13-2429-1{\_}20. url:
http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-981-13-2429-1_20.
[5]
Marc Biarnes-Carrera, Rainer Breitling, and Eriko Takano. “Butyrolactone signalling circuits
for synthetic biology”. In: Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 28 (2015), pp. 91–98. issn:
18790402. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2015.06.024. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
cbpa.2015.06.024.
[6]
Marc Biarnes-Carrera et al. “Orthogonal Regulatory Circuits for Escherichia coli Based on the
γ-Butyrolactone System of Streptomyces coelicolor”. In: ACS Synthetic Biology 7.4 (2018),
pp. 1043–1055. issn: 21615063. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.7b00425.
[7]
Jurate Bitinaite and Nicole M. Nichols. “DNA Cloning and Engineering by Uracil Excision”.
In: Current Protocols in Molecular Biology 86.1 (Apr. 2009). issn: 1934-3639. doi: 10.1002/
0471142727.mb0321s86. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/
0471142727.mb0321s86.
[8]
Jens Bo Andersen. “New unstable variants of green ﬂuorescent protein for studies of transient
gene expression in bacteria”. In: (2013). url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
2354525859.
[9]
K. Brenner et al. “Engineered bidirectional communication mediates a consensus in a micro-
bial bioﬁlm consortium”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104.44 (Oct.
2007), pp. 17300–17304. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0704256104. url: http:
//www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0704256104.
[10]
Irene M. Brockman and Kristala L.J. Prather. “Dynamic knockdown of E. coli central
metabolism for redirecting ﬂuxes of primary metabolites”. In: Metabolic Engineering 28
(Mar. 2015), pp. 104–113. issn: 10967176. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2014.12.005. url:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1096717614001645.
[11]
Irene Brockman and Kristala Prather. “Dynamic metabolic engineering: New strategies for
developing responsive cell factories”. In: Biotechnology journal 10 (2015). doi: 10.1002/
biot.201400422.
51
==PAGE:59==
[12]
Jonathan M Burg et al. “Large-scale bioprocess competitiveness: the potential of dynamic
metabolic control in two-stage fermentations”. In: Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering
14 (Nov. 2016), pp. 121–136. issn: 22113398. doi: 10.1016/j.coche.2016.09.008. url:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2211339816300703.
[13]
Patricia Calero and Pablo I. Nikel. “Chasing bacterial chassis for metabolic engineering: a
perspective review from classical to non-traditional microorganisms”. In: Microbial Biotech-
nology 12.1 (2019), pp. 98–124. issn: 17517915. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.13292.
[14]
Kyoung-Hee Choi, Ayush Kumar, and Herbert P Schweizer. “A 10-min method for prepara-
tion of highly electrocompetent Pseudomonas aeruginosa cells: Application for DNA fragment
transfer between chromosomes and plasmid transformation”. In: Journal of Microbiological
Methods 64.3 (2006), pp. 391–397. issn: 0167-7012. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mimet.2005.06.001. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0167701205001582.
[15]
Robert H Dahl et al. “Engineering dynamic pathway regulation using stress-response pro-
moters”. In: Nature Biotechnology 31.11 (Nov. 2013), pp. 1039–1046. issn: 1087-0156. doi:
10.1038/nbt.2689. url: http://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.2689.
[16]
Florian David, Jens Nielsen, and Verena Siewers. “Flux Control at the Malonyl-CoA Node
through Hierarchical Dynamic Pathway Regulation in <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>”.
In: ACS Synthetic Biology 5.3 (Mar. 2016), pp. 224–233. issn: 2161-5063. doi: 10.1021/
acssynbio.5b00161. url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00161.
[17]
René Michele Davis, Ryan Yue Muller, and Karmella Ann Haynes. “Can the natural di-
versity of quorum-sensing advance synthetic biology?” In: Frontiers in Bioengineering and
Biotechnology 3.MAR (2015), pp. 1–10. issn: 22964185. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2015.00030.
[18]
Christina V. Dinh and Kristala L. J. Prather. “Development of an autonomous and bifunc-
tional quorum-sensing circuit for metabolic ﬂux control in engineered Escherichia coli”. In:
????? (2019), pp. 1–7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1911144116.
[19]
Stephanie J. Doong, Apoorv Gupta, and Kristala L.J. Prather. “Layered dynamic regulation
for improving metabolic pathway productivity in Escherichia coli”. In: Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 115.12 (2018), pp. 2964–2969.
issn: 10916490. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1716920115.
[20]
Joanne Engebrecht, Kenneth Nealson, and Michael Silverman. “Bacterial bioluminescence:
Isolation and genetic analysis of functions from Vibrio ﬁscheri”. In: Cell 32.3 (Mar. 1983),
pp. 773–781. issn: 00928674. doi: 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674(83 ) 90063 - 6. url: https : / /
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0092867483900636.
[21]
Chang Ge et al. “Quorum Sensing System Used as a Tool in Metabolic Engineering”. In:
Biotechnology Journal 1900360 (2020), pp. 1–9. issn: 18607314. doi: 10 . 1002 / biot .
201900360.
[22]
Daniel G Gibson et al. “Enzymatic assembly of DNA molecules up to several hundred kilo-
bases”. In: Nature Methods 6.5 (May 2009), pp. 343–345. issn: 1548-7091. doi: 10.1038/
nmeth.1318. url: http://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.1318.
52
==PAGE:60==
[23]
Apoorv Gupta et al. “Dynamic regulation of metabolic ﬂux in engineered bacteria using a
pathway-independent quorum-sensing circuit”. In: Nature Biotechnology 35.3 (2017), pp. 273–
279. issn: 15461696. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3796.
[24]
Hee J. Hwang et al. “Application of an oxygen-inducible <i>nar</i> promoter system
in metabolic engineering for production of biochemicals in <i>Escherichia coli</i>”. In:
Biotechnology and Bioengineering 114.2 (Feb. 2017), pp. 468–473. issn: 00063592. doi: 10.
1002/bit.26082. url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/bit.26082.
[25]
Sungho Jang et al. “RNA-based dynamic genetic controllers: development strategies and
applications”. In: Current Opinion in Biotechnology 53 (Oct. 2018), pp. 1–11. issn: 09581669.
doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2017.10.005. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0958166917302033.
[26]
Ross Kent and Neil Dixon. “Contemporary Tools for Regulating Gene Expression in Bacte-
ria”. In: Trends in Biotechnology 38.3 (2020), pp. 316–333. issn: 18793096. doi: 10.1016/j.
tibtech.2019.09.007. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2019.09.007.
[27]
Eun Mi Kim et al. “Autonomous control of metabolic state by a quorum sensing (QS)-
mediated regulator for bisabolene production in engineered E. coli”. In: Metabolic Engineering
44 (2017), pp. 325–336. issn: 10967184. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2017.11.004. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2017.11.004.
[28]
Frédéric Leroy and Luc De Vuyst. “Lactic acid bacteria as functional starter cultures for
the food fermentation industry”. In: Trends in Food Science & Technology 15.2 (Feb. 2004),
pp. 67–78. issn: 09242244. doi: 10.1016/j.tifs.2003.09.004. url: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0924224403002085.
[29]
Mitchell Lewis and Charles E. Bell. “A closer view of the conformation of the Lac repres-
sor bound to operator”. In: Nature Structural Biology 7.3 (Mar. 2000), pp. 209–214. issn:
10728368. doi: 10.1038/73317. url: http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/73317.
[30]
Yi Liu and Jens Nielsen. “Recent trends in metabolic engineering of microbial chemical
factories”. In: Current Opinion in Biotechnology 60 (2019), pp. 188–197. issn: 18790429.
doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2019.05.010. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2019.
05.010.
[31]
MACHEREY-NAGEL. “Plasmid DNA puriﬁcation. User manual NucleoSpin R⃝Plasmid Easy-
Pure.” In: (2014).
[32]
MACHEREY-NAGEL. “PCR clean-up Gel extraction. User manual NucleoSpin R⃝Gel and
PCR Clean-up.” In: (2017).
[33]
Fady Abd El-malek et al. “The sustainability of microbial bioplastics, production and appli-
cations”. In: International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 157 (Aug. 2020), pp. 319–
328. issn: 01418130. doi: 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.04.076. url: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0141813020329317.
[34]
Ahmad A. Mannan et al. “Fundamental Design Principles for Transcription-Factor-Based
Metabolite Biosensors”. In: ACS Synthetic Biology 6.10 (Oct. 2017), pp. 1851–1859. issn:
2161-5063. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.7b00172. url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.
1021/acssynbio.7b00172.
53
==PAGE:61==
[35]
Esteban Martínez-García and Víctor de Lorenzo. “Pseudomonas putida in the quest of pro-
grammable chemistry”. In: Current Opinion in Biotechnology 59 (2019), pp. 111–121. issn:
18790429. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2019.03.012.
[36]
José L Martínez et al. “Pharmaceutical protein production by yeast: towards production
of human blood proteins by microbial fermentation”. In: Current Opinion in Biotechnology
23.6 (Dec. 2012), pp. 965–971. issn: 09581669. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2012.03.011. url:
https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0958166912000584.
[37]
Byung Eun Min et al. “Optimization of industrial microorganisms: recent advances in syn-
thetic dynamic regulators”. In: Journal of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology 44.1
(2017), pp. 89–98. issn: 14765535. doi: 10.1007/s10295-016-1867-y.
[38]
Timothy D. Minogue et al. “The autoregulatory role of EsaR, a quorum-sensing regulator in
Pantoea stewartii ssp. stewartii: Evidence for a repressor function”. In: Molecular Microbiol-
ogy 44.6 (2002), pp. 1625–1635. issn: 0950382X. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.02987.x.
[39]
New England Biolabs. “Protocol for OneTaq R⃝Quick-Load 2X Master Mix with Standard
Buﬀer (M0486)”. In: (2015). url: https://international.neb.com/protocols/2012/09/
11/protocol-for-onetaq-quick-load-2x-master-mix-with-standard-buffer-m0486.
[40]
Wai-Leung Ng and Bonnie L. Bassler. “Bacterial Quorum-Sensing Network Architectures”.
In: Annual Review of Genetics 43.1 (Dec. 2009), pp. 197–222. issn: 0066-4197. doi: 10.
1146/annurev-genet-102108-134304. url: http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.
1146/annurev-genet-102108-134304.
[41]
Pablo I. Nikel and Víctor de Lorenzo. “Pseudomonas putida as a functional chassis for indus-
trial biocatalysis: From native biochemistry to trans-metabolism”. In: Metabolic Engineering
50.May (2018), pp. 142–155. issn: 10967184. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.05.005. url:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2018.05.005.
[42]
E Nudler. “The riboswitch control of bacterial metabolism”. In: Trends in Biochemical Sci-
ences 29.1 (Jan. 2004), pp. 11–17. issn: 09680004. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2003.11.004.
url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0968000403002822.
[43]
Ramesh Prasad Pandey et al. “Microbial production of natural and non-natural ﬂavonoids:
Pathway engineering, directed evolution and systems/synthetic biology”. In: Biotechnology
Advances 34.5 (Sept. 2016), pp. 634–662. issn: 07349750. doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.
2016.02.012. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0734975016300192.
[44]
Kai Papenfort and Bonnie L. Bassler. “Quorum sensing signal–response systems in Gram-
negative bacteria”. In: Nature Reviews Microbiology 14.9 (Sept. 2016), pp. 576–588. issn:
1740-1526. doi: 10.1038/nrmicro.2016.89. url: http://www.nature.com/articles/
nrmicro.2016.89.
[45]
C. Peña et al. “Biotechnological strategies to improve production of microbial poly-(3-
hydroxybutyrate): a review of recent research work”. In: Microbial Biotechnology 7.4 (July
2014), pp. 278–293. issn: 17517915. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.12129. url: http://doi.
wiley.com/10.1111/1751-7915.12129.
54
==PAGE:62==
[46]
Jameson K. Rogers et al. “Synthetic biosensors for precise gene control and real-time mon-
itoring of metabolites”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 43.15 (Sept. 2015), pp. 7648–7660. issn:
0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv616. url: https://academic.oup.com/nar/article-
lookup/doi/10.1093/nar/gkv616.
[47]
Joseph Sambrook. Molecular cloning: A laboratory manual. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press {a}, 2001. isbn: 0897695765. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/55655334.
[48]
Daniel J. Schu et al. “Structure/Function Analysis of the Pantoea stewartii Quorum-Sensing
Regulator EsaR as an Activator of Transcription”. In: Journal of Bacteriology 191.24 (Dec.
2009), pp. 7402–7409. issn: 0021-9193. doi: 10.1128/JB.00994-09. url: https://JB.asm.
org/content/191/24/7402.
[49]
M. Schuster, M. L. Urbanowski, and E. P. Greenberg. “Promoter speciﬁcity in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa quorum sensing revealed by DNA binding of puriﬁed LasR”. In: Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 101.45 (Nov. 2004), pp. 15833–15839. issn: 0027-8424.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0407229101. url: http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.
0407229101.
[50]
Nathan C Shaner et al. “Improved monomeric red, orange and yellow ﬂuorescent proteins
derived from Discosoma sp. red ﬂuorescent protein”. In: Nature Biotechnology 22.12 (Dec.
2004), pp. 1567–1572. issn: 1087-0156. doi: 10.1038/nbt1037. url: http://www.nature.
com/articles/nbt1037.
[51]
Jasmine Shong and Cynthia H. Collins. “Engineering the esaR promoter for tunable quorum
sensing-dependent gene expression”. In: ACS Synthetic Biology 2.10 (2013), pp. 568–575.
issn: 21615063. doi: 10.1021/sb4000433.
[52]
Rafael Silva-Rocha et al. “The Standard European Vector Architecture (SEVA): A coherent
platform for the analysis and deployment of complex prokaryotic phenotypes”. In: Nucleic
Acids Research 41.D1 (2013), pp. 666–675. issn: 03051048. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1119.
[53]
Yuki Soma and Taizo Hanai. “Self-induced metabolic state switching by a tunable cell density
sensor for microbial isopropanol production”. In: Metabolic Engineering 30 (July 2015), pp. 7–
15. issn: 10967176. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2015.04.005. url: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S109671761500049X.
[54]
Yuki Soma et al. “Metabolic ﬂux redirection from a central metabolic pathway toward a
synthetic pathway using a metabolic toggle switch”. In: Metabolic Engineering 23 (May
2014), pp. 175–184. issn: 10967176. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2014.02.008. url: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1096717614000305.
[55]
Eric J. Steen et al. “Microbial production of fatty-acid-derived fuels and chemicals from
plant biomass”. In: Nature 463.7280 (Jan. 2010), pp. 559–562. issn: 0028-0836. doi: 10.
1038/nature08721. url: http://www.nature.com/articles/nature08721.
[56]
Laura Steindler et al. “LasI/R and RhlI/R quorum sensing in a strain of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa beneﬁcial to plants”. In: Applied and Environmental Microbiology 75.15 (2009),
pp. 5131–5140. issn: 00992240. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02914-08.
[57]
Gregory Stephanopoulos. “Metabolic engineering”. In: Current Opinion in Biotechnology 5.2
(1994), pp. 196–200. issn: 09581669. doi: 10.1016/S0958-1669(05)80036-9.
55
==PAGE:63==
[58]
Jinfeng Sun et al. “Improved ethanol productivity from lignocellulosic hydrolysates by Es-
cherichia coli with regulated glucose utilization”. In: Microbial Cell Factories 17.1 (Dec.
2018), p. 66. issn: 1475-2859. doi: 10 . 1186 / s12934 - 018 - 0915 - x. url: https : / /
microbialcellfactories.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12934-018-0915-x.
[59]
Sue Zanne Tan and Kristala LJ Prather. “Dynamic pathway regulation: recent advances and
methods of construction”. In: Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 41 (2017), pp. 28–35.
issn: 18790402. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpa.2017.10.004. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.cbpa.2017.10.004.
[60]
Paulo Gonçalves Teixeira et al. “Dynamic regulation of fatty acid pools for improved pro-
duction of fatty alcohols in Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: Microbial Cell Factories 16.1
(Dec. 2017), p. 45. issn: 1475-2859. doi: 10 . 1186 / s12934 - 017 - 0663 - 3. url: http :
//microbialcellfactories.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12934-017-0663-
3.
[61]
Kay Terpe. “Overview of bacterial expression systems for heterologous protein production:
from molecular and biochemical fundamentals to commercial systems”. In: Applied Micro-
biology and Biotechnology 72.2 (Sept. 2006), pp. 211–222. issn: 0175-7598. doi: 10.1007/
s00253-006-0465-8. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00253-006-0465-8.
[62]
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. PRODUCT INFORMATION Thermo Scientiﬁc Phusion U Hot
Start DNA Polymerase. 2018. doi: No.MAN0012916.
[63]
Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. “Thermo Scientiﬁc Phusion Hot Start II High-Fidelity DNA Poly-
merase”. In: (2018).
[64]
Jian Wang et al. “Microbial production of value-added nutraceuticals”. In: Current Opinion
in Biotechnology 37 (Feb. 2016), pp. 97–104. issn: 09581669. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2015.
11.003. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0958166915001524.
[65]
Christopher M. Waters and Bonnie L. Bassler. “QUORUM SENSING: Cell-to-Cell Com-
munication in Bacteria”. In: Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 21.1 (2005),
pp. 319–346. issn: 1081-0706. doi: 10.1146/annurev.cellbio.21.012704.131001.
[66]
Samantha Wellington and E. Peter Greenberg. “Quorum Sensing Signal Selectivity and the
Potential for Interspecies Cross Talk”. In: mBio 10.2 (Mar. 2019). Ed. by Stephen Carlyle
Winans. issn: 2150-7511. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00146-19. url: https://mbio.asm.org/
content/10/2/e00146-19.
[67]
T.C. Williams et al. “Quorum-sensing linked RNA interference for dynamic metabolic path-
way control in Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: Metabolic Engineering 29 (May 2015), pp. 124–
134. issn: 10967176. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2015.03.008. url: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1096717615000348.
[68]
Thomas C Williams et al. “Dynamic regulation of gene expression using sucrose responsive
promoters and RNA interference in Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: Microbial Cell Factories
14.1 (Dec. 2015), p. 43. issn: 1475-2859. doi: 10.1186/s12934-015-0223-7. url: http:
//microbialcellfactories.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12934-015-0223-
7.
56
==PAGE:64==
[69]
Nicolas T. Wirth, Ekaterina Kozaeva, and Pablo I. Nikel. “Accelerated genome engineering of
<i>Pseudomonas putida</i> by I- <i>Sce</i> I—mediated recombination and CRISPR
-Cas9 counterselection”. In: Microbial Biotechnology 13.1 (Jan. 2020), pp. 233–249. issn:
1751-7915. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.13396. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1111/1751-7915.13396.
[70]
Wenping Xie et al. “Sequential control of biosynthetic pathways for balanced utilization of
metabolic intermediates in Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: Metabolic Engineering 28 (Mar.
2015), pp. 8–18. issn: 10967176. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . ymben . 2014 . 11 . 007. url: https :
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1096717614001451.
[71]
P. Xu et al. “Improving fatty acids production by engineering dynamic pathway regulation
and metabolic control”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111.31 (Aug.
2014), pp. 11299–11304. issn: 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1406401111. url: http:
//www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1406401111.
[72]
Peng Xu. “Production of chemicals using dynamic control of metabolic ﬂuxes”. In: Current
Opinion in Biotechnology 53 (2018), pp. 12–19. issn: 18790429. doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.
2017.10.009. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2017.10.009.
[73]
Xian Yin et al. “Pgas, a Low-pH-Induced Promoter, as a Tool for Dynamic Control of Gene
Expression for Metabolic Engineering of Aspergillus niger”. In: Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 83.6 (Mar. 2017). Ed. by Maia Kivisaar. issn: 0099-2240. doi: 10.1128/AEM.
03222-16. url: https://AEM.asm.org/lookup/doi/10.1128/AEM.03222-16.
[74]
Andrew K. D. Younger et al. “Engineering Modular Biosensors to Confer Metabolite-Responsive
Regulation of Transcription”. In: ACS Synthetic Biology 6.2 (Feb. 2017), pp. 311–325. issn:
2161-5063. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.6b00184. url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.
1021/acssynbio.6b00184.
[75]
Jifeng Yuan and Chi-Bun Ching. “Dynamic control of ERG9 expression for improved amorpha-
4,11-diene production in Saccharomyces cerevisiae”. In: Microbial Cell Factories 14.1 (Dec.
2015), p. 38. issn: 1475-2859. doi: 10.1186/s12934-015-0220-x. url: http://microbialcellfactories.
biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12934-015-0220-x.
[76]
Fuzhong Zhang, James M Carothers, and Jay D Keasling. “Design of a dynamic sensor-
regulator system for production of chemicals and fuels derived from fatty acids”. In: Nature
Biotechnology 30.4 (Apr. 2012), pp. 354–359. issn: 1087-0156. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2149. url:
http://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.2149.
[77]
Evan M. Zhao et al. “Optogenetic regulation of engineered cellular metabolism for microbial
chemical production”. In: Nature 555.7698 (Mar. 2018), pp. 683–687. issn: 0028-0836. doi:
10.1038/nature26141. url: http://www.nature.com/articles/nature26141.
[78]
Li-Bang Zhou and An-Ping Zeng. “Engineering a Lysine-ON Riboswitch for Metabolic Con-
trol of Lysine Production in <i>Corynebacterium glutamicum</i>”. In: ACS Synthetic Bi-
ology 4.12 (Dec. 2015), pp. 1335–1340. issn: 2161-5063. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.5b00075.
url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00075.
57
==PAGE:65==
[79]
Li-Bang Zhou and An-Ping Zeng. “Exploring Lysine Riboswitch for Metabolic Flux Control
and Improvement of l -Lysine Synthesis in <i>Corynebacterium glutamicum</i>”. In: ACS
Synthetic Biology 4.6 (June 2015), pp. 729–734. issn: 2161-5063. doi: 10.1021/sb500332c.
url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/sb500332c.
58
==PAGE:66==
10
Appendix
A
The Standard European Vector Architecture platform for
plasmid construction
All plasmid vectors constructed in this study follow the Standard European Vector Architecture
(SEVA) format. The SEVA consists of a web-based resource and material clone repository for
the implementation of a standard for the assembly of plasmid vectors. All SEVA vectors contain
three variable modules (origin of replication, antibiotic selection marker and business cargo) and
three permanent regions (oriT of RP4 plasmid, T0 rho-independent transcriptional terminator of
phage lambda and the T1 rho-independent transcriptional terminator of rrnB operon of E.coli).
Moreover, the SEVA format adopts simple design concepts, minimizes every DNA portion of the
plasmid vector to the shortest that retains functionality and eliminates some common restriction
sites. It also facilitates the exchange of the variable modules by ﬂanking them with rare restriction
sites, as well as providing a ﬁxed nomenclature for the designation of the constructs. This nomen-
clature consists of "pSEVA" followed by three positions, which indicate the three variable modules
included in the plasmid vector. The ﬁrst position indicates the antibiotic resistance marker, the
second position the origin of replication and the third position the cargo that confers function-
ality to the vector. For example, in the case of pSEVA233; 2 in the ﬁrst position indicates the
Kanamycin (Km) resistance marker; 3 in the second position indicates the origin of replication
pBBR1; and 3 in the last position indicates lacZ↵reporter gene of pUC18 [52].
B
USER cloning and Gibsons Assembly as molecular cloning
techniques
B.1
USER cloning
Uracil-Speciﬁc Excision Reagent (USER) is a molecular cloning method which allows assembly
of multiple DNA fragments, nucleotide sequence alteration and directional cloning. All of this
in a ligation-independent manner and a single reaction step. It relies on the ability to generate
long complementary overhangs in both PCR products and vector, that can hybridize with each
other.For the generation of overhangs in the PCR fragments, a sequence with 6-10 bp of homology
between adjacent fragments ending in a single deoxyuracil (dU) residue is included as an upstream
extension in each primer. Thus, PCR fragments contain a single dU residue ﬂanking the 3’ end of
the homology region and can be designed to perform nucleotide substitutions, insertions and/or
deletions. The primers are then used to amplify the target DNA. This PCR reaction needs to
be done with a DNA polymerase compatible with dU-containing primers.
The resulting PCR
products are treated with USER Enzyme to remove the dU residues. The cleavage of the dU
residues creates a single nucleotide gap at each location of dU that leads to the dissociation of
the short single-stranded fragments lying upstream from the cleavage sites. This results in PCR
fragments ﬂanked with single-stranded homologous extensions that can hybridize and assemble
59
==PAGE:67==
into a linearized vector to form the resulting USER product. Ligation of the fragments is done in
vivo in the cells transformed with the USER product to obtain the ﬁnal construct [7].
B.2
Gibsons Assembly
Gibson’s Assembly is a DNA assembly and cloning method described by Daniel G. Gibson based
on a exonuclease to assemble DNA seamlessly and in the correct order [22]. The method requires
DNA inserts with 15-20 bp overlapping ends ampliﬁed by PCR and a linearized vector. Then, a
reaction is carried out under isothermal conditions using three enzymatic activities in a single tube
reaction: a 5’ exonuclease, a DNA polymerase and a DNA ligase. The 5’ exonuclease degrades the 5’
end sequences and generates long overhangs with exposed complementary sequence for annealing.
Then, the 3’ extension activity of the DNA polymerase ﬁlls in the gaps on the annealed single
strand regions. A DNA ligase then seals the nick and covalently links DNA fragments together.
This assembly method can be used to contstruct synthetic and natural genes, genetic pathways
and entire genomes.
60
==PAGE:68==
C
Strain, Plasmid, primers and g-blocks
C.1
Plasmids
Table 5: Plasmids used in this study.
Plasmid
Description
Source
pSEVA221
oriV(RK2); KmR
[52]
pSEVA631
oriV(pBBR1); GmR
[52]
pEsaQS
pSEVA221-PLacIq-esaR-PKm-esaI -PEsaS-MCS
Fernndez-Cabezón et al.
(unpublished)
pLasQS
pSEVA221-PLacIq-lasR-PKm-lasI -PP A3904-MCS
Fernndez-Cabezón et al.
(unpublished)
pScb_synt
pSEVA631-PKm-scbA-scbB-scbC
Fernndez-Cabezón et al.
(unpublished)
pScbR
pSEVA221-PLacIq-scbR-PScbR-MCS
Fernndez-Cabezón et al.
(unpublished)
pEsaQS::GFP(LVA)
pSEVA221-PLacIq-esaR-PKm-esaI -PEsaS-
gfpmut3(LVA)
This study
pLasQS::GFP(LVA)
pSEVA221-PLacIq-lasR-PKm-lasI -PP A3904-
gfpmut3(LVA)
This study
pScbR::GFP(LVA)
pSEVA221-PLacIq-scbR-PScbR-gfpmut3(LVA)
This study
pS1
pSEVA221-P14F -esaI -esaR
This study
pS2
pSEVA221-PEM7-esaI -esaR
This study
pS3
pSEVA221-PLac-esaI -esaR
This study
pR1
pSEVA631-PesaR-gfpmut3(LVA)
This study
pR2
pSEVA631-PEsaS-gfpmut3(LVA)
This stuy
pR3
pSEVA631-Ptrc_EsaO-gfpmut3(LVA)
This stuy
pR4
pSEVA631-PLacIq-gfpmut3(LVA)
This stuy
pR5
pSEVA631-PLacIq-mCherry
This stuy
pR6
pSEVA631-PLacIq-gfpmut3
This stuy
61
==PAGE:69==
Figure 12: Map of vector pSEVA221 used in this study. [52]
62
==PAGE:70==
Figure 13: Map of vector pSEVA631 used in this study. [52]
63
==PAGE:71==
C.2
Strains
Table 6: Strains used in this study.
Strain
Genotype/Description
Source
E.coli DH5↵
Cloning host:
F- endA1 glnV44 thi-1
recA1 relA1 gyrA96 deoR nupG purB20
Φ80dlacZ∆M15
∆(lacZYA-argF)U169,
hsdR17(r˘
Km+
K), λ–
Host laboratory
(pSEVA221)
This study
(pSEVA631)
This study
(pEsaQS)
Fernández-Cabezón
et al. (unpublished)
(pLasQS)
Fernández-Cabezón
et al. (unpublished)
(pScb_synt)
Fernández-Cabezón
et al. (unpublished)
(pScbR)
Fernández-Cabezón
et al. (unpublished)
(pEsaQS::GFP(LVA))
This study
(pLasQS::GFP(LVA))
This study
(pScbR::GFP(LVA))
This study
(pS1)
This study
(pS2)
This study
(pS3)
This study
(pR1)
This study
(pR2)
This study
(pR3)
This study
(pR4)
This study
(pR5)
This study
(pR6)
This study
E.coli DH5↵λ pir
Cloning host: λpir lysogen of strain DH5↵
Host laboratory
E_control
(pSEVA221)(pSEVA631)
This study
E1
(pS1)(pSEVA631)
This study
E2
(pS2)(pSEVA631)
This study
E3
(pS3)(pSEVA631)
This study
E4
(pSEVA221)(pR1)
This study
E5
(pSEVA221)(pR2)
This study
E6
(pSEVA221)(pR3)
This study
E7
(pSEVA221)(pR4)
This study
E8
(pS1)(pR1)
This study
E9
(pS1)(pR2)
This study
E10
(pS1)(pR3)
This study
E11
(pS2)(pR1)
This study
E12
(pS2)(pR2)
This study
E13
(pS2)(pR3)
This study
E14
(pS3)(pR1)
This study
64
==PAGE:72==
Strain
Genotype/Description
Source
E15
(pS3)(pR2)
This study
E16
(pS3)(pR3)
This study
P.putida KT2440
Wild-type strain; mt-2 derivative cured of
the TOL plasmid pWW0
Host laboratory
(pSEVA221)
This study
(pSEVA631)
This study
(pEsaQS::GFP(LVA))
This study
(pLasQS::GFP(LVA))
This study
(pScb_synt)(pScbR::GFP(LVA))
This study
(pSEVA221)(pR5)
This study
(pSEVA221)(pR6)
This study
P1
(pS1)(pSEVA631)
This study
P2
(pS2)(pSEVA631)
This study
P3
(pS3)(pSEVA631)
This study
P4
(pSEVA221)(pR1)
This study
P5
(pSEVA221)(pR2)
This study
P6
(pSEVA221)(pR3)
This study
P7
(pSEVA221)(pR4)
This study
P8
(pS1)(pR1)
This study
P9
(pS1)(pR2)
This study
P10
(pS1)(pR3)
This study
P11
(pS2)(pR1)
This study
P12
(pS2)(pR2)
This study
P13
(pS2)(pR3)
This study
P14
(pS3)(pR1)
This study
P15
(pS3)(pR2)
This study
P16
(pS3)(pR3)
This study
C.3
Primers and g-block
Table 7: Primers used in this study.
Primers
Binding
strain
Sequence
PS1
Forward
agggcggcggatttgtcc
PS2
Reverse
gcggcaaccgagcgttc
B01.GFP(LVA)-GA-F
Forward
aggaggaaaaacatatgagtaaaggagaag
B02.GFP(LVA)-GA-R
Reverse
tgcaggtcgactctagaggatccccactagtttaagctactaaagcgtag
B03.PLacIq-GA-F
Forward
ccgcgcgaattcgagctcggtacccttgacaccatcgaatggtgcaaaac
B04.PLacIq-GA-R
Reverse
cctttactcatatgtttttcctcctattcaccaccctgaattgactctc
B05.PEsaS-GA-F
Forward
ccgcgcgaattcgagctcggtaccccctcacaacagtgtaagcgtaatc
B06.PEsaS-GA-R
Reverse
cctttactcatatgtttttcctcctgctaaacaactgaagccattgtaac
65
==PAGE:73==
Primers
Binding
strain
Sequence
B07.PEsaR-GA-F
Forward
ccgcgcgaattcgagctcggtacccgcagattgagtaaccgtgaatgtt
B08.PEsaR-GA-R
Reverse
cctttactcatatgtttttcctcctgctgcttcttttacttaacgtggac
B09.Ptrc_EsaO-GA-F
Forward
ccgcgcgaattcgagctcggtacccttgacaattaatcatccggctcgt
B10.Ptrc_EsaO-GA-R
Reverse
cctttactcatatgtttttcctcctacctgcactatagtacaggcccac
B11.PEM7-UC-F
Forward
aggccgtgUtgacaattaatcatcggcatagtatatc
B12.PEM7-UC-R
Reverse
aacatatgtUtttcctcctcctaggggtttagttcctcaccttgtcg
B13.EsaI-UC-F
Forward
aacatatgtUggaactgttcgacgtgtcgtatg
B14.EsaI-UC-R
Reverse
atgtttttccUcctgaattcctacaccggcaaggtcaacggccag
B15.EsaR-UC-F
Forward
aggaaaaacaUatgttttcgttcttcc
B16.EsaR-UC-R
Reverse
accgagcucctaccgcgctgcgcttgctg
B17.pS221-UC-F
Forward
agctcgguacccggggatcctc
B18.pS221-UC-R
Reverse
acacggccUcctgtgtgaaattgttatccgc
B19.P14f-UC-F
Forward
aggccgtgUgcccgttgacatgacatggttttg
B20.P14f-UC-R
Reverse
aacatatgtUtttcctcctcctaggtcgccacattataccctcaaaac
B21.PLac-UC-F
Forward
aggccgtgUttgcattaggcaccccaggctttac
B22.PLac-UC-R
Reverse
aacatatgtUtttcctcctcctaggatgatatctcctgtgtgagttaatc
B23.msGFP-GA-R
Reverse
tgcaggtcgactctagaggatccccactagtttaagcgtagttttcgtcgtttg
B24.mCherry-GA-F
Forward
aggaggaaaaacatatggtgagcaagg
B25.mCherry-GA-R
Reverse
tgcaggtcgactctagaggatccccactagtttacttgtacagctcgtcc
B26.PLacIq-GA-
mCherry-R
Reverse
caccatatgtttttcctcctattcaccaccctgaattgactctcttccgg
Table 8: gBlock used in this study.
g-block
Sequence
B01-gBlock
gtacccgcagattgagtaaccgtgaatgtttgtacaaatgtttcaaagatgttactatgagtgtc
ccggccagcatcactttatattttgtgacgtctggccggacgttttccctagtgttggctgttttag
cgacctggccgtacaggtcaggtttttttttaccgctaaacaactgaagccattgtaacctctga
atgattcattgtaagttactcttaagtatcatcttgcctgtactatagtgcaggttaagtccacgt
taagtaaaagaagcagcaggaggaaaaattgacaattaatcatccggctcgtataatgtgtgg
gcctgtactatagtgcaggttactagagaaagaggagaaatactag
66
==PAGE:74==
C.4
Promoters and genes
Table 9: Sequences of the promoters and genes used in this study.
Promoter/gene
Sequence
P14f
gcccgttgacatgacatggttttgagggtataatgtggcga
PEM7
tgttgacaattaatcatcggcatagtatatcggcatagtataatacgacaaggtgaggaactaaacc
PLac
ttgcattaggcaccccaggctttacactttatgcttccggctcgtatgttgtgtggaattgtgagcggata
acaatttcacaccttaagattaactcacacaggagatatcat
PEsaR
gcagattgagtaaccgtgaatgtttgtacaaatgtttcaaagatgttactatgagtgtcccggccagcat
cactttatattttgtgacgtctggccggacgttttccctagtgttggctgttttagcgacctggccgtacag
gtcaggtttttttttaccgctaaacaactgaagccattgtaacctctgaatgattcattgtaagttactctt
aagtatcatcttgcctgtactatagtgcaggttaagtccacgttaagtaaaagaagcagc
PEsaS
cctcacaacagtgtaagcgtaatccggactacccagcggagataactttctctgtatgtaagtctgaagc
gtatccgttattgtttgattttcaaggaaaaaagaaaacattcaggctccatgctgcttcttttacttaac
gtggacttaacctgcactatagtacaggcaagatgatacttaagagtaacttacaatgaatcattcaga
ggttacaatggcttcagttgtttagc
Ptrc_EsaO
ttgacaattaatcatccggctcgtataatgtgtgggcctgtactatagtgcaggttactagagaaagagg
agaaatactag
PLacIq
ttgacaccatcgaatggtgcaaaacctttcgcggtatggcatgatagcgcccggaagagagtcaattca
gggtggtgaat
esaI
cctaggaggaggaaaaacatatgttggaactgttcgacgtgtcgtatgaggagctgcaaacgacccgta
gcgaagaactctataaactccgcaagaagaccttttccgatcggctcggttgggaggtgatctgtagcca
aggcatggaatcggatgagttcgacggtcctgggacgcgctacatcctcgggatctgtgaggggcagtt
ggtctgctcggtgcgctttacgtcgctggatcggccaaatatgatcacgcatacgttccagcactgtttct
ccgacgtgaccttgcctgcgtatggcaccgagagcagccggttcttcgtggataaggctcgcgcccgtgc
actcttgggtgaacactacccaatctcccaggtcctctttttggcaatggtcaattgggcacagaataac
gcatatggcaacatttataccattgtctcccgtgcgatgctgaaaatcttgacccggagcgggtggcaga
tcaaagtcattaaggaggcctttctgacggagaaagagcggatctatctcctcacgctgcctgcgggcca
agacgacaagcagcagttggggggtgatgtggtgagccggacgggctgtccacctgtggcggtgacca
cctggccgttgaccttgccggtgtag
67
==PAGE:75==
Promoter/gene
Sequence
esaR
gaattcaggaggaaaaacatatgttttcgttcttcctcgaaaaccaaaccatcaccgacacgctccagac
ctacattcagcgcaagctctcgcctttgggttcccccgattacgcgtacacggtcgtctcgaagaaaaac
ccaagcaacgtcctcatcatttcctcctatcctgatgaatggattcgtttgtaccgtgcgaacaattttca
actgacggacccggtggtgttgaccgctttcaaacgcacgagcccattcgcttgggatgaaaacatcacc
ctgatgtccgatttgcgtttcacgaaaatcttttcgctctcgaaacaatataacattgtgaacggtttcac
gtatgtgctgcatgatcacatgaataacttggctttgctgtcggtgattattaaaggcaacgaccaaacg
gctctggagcagcgtttggctgccgaacagggcaccatgcagatgttgttgattgatttcaatgaacaga
tgtaccggctcgcagggaccgaaggcgagcgggccccagcgctgaatcaatcggcggacaagacgatc
ttttcgagccgcgaaaacgaggtgctgtactgggcttccatggggaagacctacgcggagatcgcggcc
attacgggtattagcgtctcgacggtcaagttccatatcaagaatgtcgtcgtcaaactcggcgtctcga
acgcccgccaggccattcgtctcggggtggagttggacctgatccgccccgcagcaagcgcagcgcggt
ag
gfpmut3(LVA)
aggaggaaaaacatatgagtaaaggagaagaacttttcactggagttgtcccaattcttgttgaattag
atggtgatgttaatgggcacaaattttctgtcagtggagagggtgaaggtgatgcaacatacggaaaac
ttacccttaaatttatttgcactactggaaaactacctgttccatggccaacacttgtcactactttcggtt
atggtgttcaatgctttgcgagatacccagatcatatgaaacagcatgactttttcaagagtgccatgcc
cgaaggttatgtacaggaaagaactatatttttcaaagatgacgggaactacaagacacgtgctgaagt
caagtttgaaggtgatacccttgttaatagaatcgagttaaaaggtattgattttaaagaagatggaaa
cattcttggacacaaattggaatacaactataactcacacaatgtatacatcatggcagacaaacaaaa
gaatggaatcaaagttaacttcaaaattagacacaacattgaagatggaagcgttcaactagcagacca
ttatcaacaaaatactccaattggcgatggccctgtccttttaccagacaaccattacctgtccacacaat
ctgccctttcgaaagatcccaacgaaaagagagaccacatggtccttcttgagtttgtaacagctgctgg
gattacacatggcatggatgaactatacaaaaggcctgcagcaaacgacgaaaactacgctttagtagc
ttaaactagt
gfpmut3
aggaggaaaaacatatgagtaaaggagaagaacttttcactggagttgtcccaattcttgttgaattag
atggtgatgttaatgggcacaaattttctgtcagtggagagggtgaaggtgatgcaacatacggaaaac
ttacccttaaatttatttgcactactggaaaactacctgttccatggccaacacttgtcactactttcggtt
atggtgttcaatgctttgcgagatacccagatcatatgaaacagcatgactttttcaagagtgccatgcc
cgaaggttatgtacaggaaagaactatatttttcaaagatgacgggaactacaagacacgtgctgaagt
caagtttgaaggtgatacccttgttaatagaatcgagttaaaaggtattgattttaaagaagatggaaa
cattcttggacacaaattggaatacaactataactcacacaatgtatacatcatggcagacaaacaaaa
gaatggaatcaaagttaacttcaaaattagacacaacattgaagatggaagcgttcaactagcagacca
ttatcaacaaaatactccaattggcgatggccctgtccttttaccagacaaccattacctgtccacacaat
ctgccctttcgaaagatcccaacgaaaagagagaccacatggtccttcttgagtttgtaacagctgctgg
gattacacatggcatggatgaactatacaaaaggcctgcagcaaacgacgaaaactacgcttaaacta
gt
68
==PAGE:76==
Promoter/gene
Sequence
mCherry
atggtgagcaagggcgaggaggataacatggccatcatcaaggagttcatgcgcttcaaggtgcacat
ggagggctccgtgaacggccacgagttcgagatcgagggcgagggcgagggccgcccctacgagggca
cccagaccgccaagctgaaggtgaccaagggtggccccctgcccttcgcctgggacatcctgtcccctca
gttcatgtacggctccaaggcctacgtgaagcaccccgccgacatccccgactacttgaagctgtccttc
cccgagggcttcaagtgggagcgcgtgatgaacttcgaggacggcggcgtggtgaccgtgacccagga
ctcctccctgcaagacggcgagttcatctacaaggtgaagctgcgcggcaccaacttcccctccgacggc
cccgtaatgcagaagaagaccatgggctgggaggcctcctccgagcggatgtaccccgaggacggcgc
cctgaagggcgagatcaagcagaggctgaagctgaaggacggcggccactacgacgctgaggtcaag
accacctacaaggccaagaagcccgtgcagctgcccggcgcctacaacgtcaacatcaagttggacatc
acctcccacaacgaggactacaccatcgtggaacagtacgaacgcgccgagggccgccactccaccggc
ggcatggacgagctgtacaagtaa
D
Media components
Table 10: Components of media used in this study.
Media
Components
Amount for 1L
M9 minimal media
M9 salts (10x)
100 mL
MgSO4 (2M)
1 mL
CaCl2 (1M)
100 µL
Trace elements
2,5 mL
Ammonium iron (III) citrate (0,1% (w/v))
2 mL
Wolfe’s vitamin supplement*
1 mL
MiliQ water
ﬁll up to 1 L
*Only for growing E.coli
LB media
Tryptone
10 g
NaCl
10 g
Yeast extract
5 g
MiliQ water
ﬁll up to 1 L
Agar*
15g
*Only for solid LB plates
69
