==PAGE:1==
Assessing mild traumatic brain injuries using
visual tracking methods
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Assessing mild traumatic brain injuries using visual tracking methods
Master Thesis
August, 2020
Cover photo: Vibeke Hempler, 2012 Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
https://www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Concussions can deeply affect the well being of a person and if not discovered in time
and treated, the sequelae can be long-term. This is valid for the usual life of people,
having consequences in their jobs and for athletes as well. Mild traumatic brain injuries
for athletes have to be carefully discovered, because a second concussion can create
larger damages and sometimes even death. For these reasons, the early and reliably
discovery of the pathology is essential.
Current testing methods usually involve self-reporting which can be biased especially
for athletes that may repeat them over and over again. Other methods testing vision
- that can be affected by the injury - are based on very complicated apparatus that
can be found in a professional’s examination room. Sometimes it may be too late when
the patient reaches the doctor’s office because the symptoms of concussions pass fast.
Therefore, this project aims at researching whether the previously researched visual
experiments can be achieved using a lower quality eye tracker in order to be able to
make the solution more portable.
Towards this goal, I have built a concussion experiment toolbox using Python. It can be
used to test how well the patients follow a target doing smooth pursuit on a circular path.
The error variability is the parameter that matters the most in discovering concussions
because it has been proven that, for the mild traumatic brain injuries patients, the error
variability is statistically higher than for normal subjects.
The toolbox has been tried in several experiments, going from medium sampling fre-
quency of the eye tracker to low sampling frequency.
Using the medium frequency
eye tracker, a interindividual experiment as well as a longitudinal study have been
performed.
==PAGE:4==
ii
We have proven that our method of evaluating healthy patients generates reliable results
which are comparable with the results of Maruta et al.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
4
2.1
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Eye tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Concussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Related work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Current ways of testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Visual tracking tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Rapid automatized naming tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
Video-oculography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Method
10
3.1
Concussion experiment toolbox . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.1
Data gathering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.2
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Pre-processing - cleaning the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Visual angle transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Eye position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Saccades removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
Gain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Gaze position error and variability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Experiment using Tobii 4C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
iv
3.2.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
Data cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Experiment using uncalibrated Obital
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Experiment using Hawkeye
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Results and discussion
29
4.1
Experiment using Tobii 4C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
Comparing results to the Visual Tracking Synchronization paper
30
4.1.2
Interindividual variability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.3
Longitudinal study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
Morning vs evening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Experiment using Obital . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Experiment using Hawkeye
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Current limitations and further work
39
5.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Lack of mTBI subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Portability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Tobii 4C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
Phase error
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6
Conclusion
43
A Plots of four of the participants
45
B Glasgow Coma Scale Aid
51
C Tobii data
53
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Concussions are mild traumatic brain injuries (mTBI) that affect the brain function.
Concussions can be caused by a direct hit to the head, neck or face, or to other parts
of the body that cause a force forwarded to the head [1]. There are three gravity levels
that brain injuries can have: mild, moderate or severe. Compared to moderate and
severe TBI where the signs are visible, concussions can be very difficult to diagnose, the
signs can be easily missed. The effects appear on a functional level of the brain, rather
than on a structural one, therefore concussions cannot be detected using neuroimaging
methods [1]. In most situations, the symptoms are temporary, but as a study made on
the Danish population shows, for 5% – 15% of the ones affected the consequences are
long-term [2].
Often, patients suffering from concussions have problems related to their visual system,
having symptoms such as blurring, double vision, difficulty in reading or following an
object.
Other symptoms of concussions are exhaustion, headaches and difficulty in
attention, concentration, nausea, dizziness, hypersensitivity to light and sounds [2].
In Denmark, there are 25.000 people diagnosed with concussions every year, and up to
15% of patients suffer from post concussive syndrome. According to a study made at
Copenhagen University, a concussion can lead to a job loss, especially for the people with
higher education that have to interact with different individuals, perform multi-tasking
and shift their focus from one task to the other, due to concentration impairment [3].
==PAGE:8==
1.1 Goal
2
According to the World Health Organisation [4] concussions are, in general, generated
by falls, traffic collisions or contact sports. Concussed athletes are 3 times more prone
to having a second concussion (referred to as second impact syndrome - [5]) in the same
athletic season due to persistent sequelae such as affected attention or balance [6], [7].
Repeated mTBIs can lead to depression, longer recovery times [8] and cerebral edema
that may result in permanent disability or death [5]. Therefore, a method for fast and
reliably discovering concussions, especially for athletes, must be studied.
Using eye tracking for concussions
Due to the fact that the trauma cannot be seen, diagnosing concussions is a problematic
process. This is why currently concussions testing is mainly based on self-reporting
accompanied by several neuropsychological examinations that test loss of consciousness,
memory, concentration, balance etc. [9], [10]. The main disadvantage of this type of
assessment is that athlete can influence the outcome by memorizing parts of the test
from the baseline testing [11] or by underperforming on purpose while doing the baseline
assessment [7], [12].
Traumatic brain injuries produce neuronal imbalances and a key symptom for both
short and long term effects of concussions is attention deterioration [7]. Vision is a
neurological function that is closely related to attention and thus has been proven to
be an important factor in detecting concussions [12], [13] (ADD MORE). The devices
currently used for this kind of analysis are clinical ones, that usually involve a computer,
chinrest and a very performant eye tracker.
1.1
Goal
The goal of this project is to propose a way of assessing concussions in an objective
way while also taking into consideration portability issues. We want to create a mobile
application that can detect mild traumatic brain injuries using eye tracking. The solu-
tion aims to be portable and easy to use even outside of a medical professional’s office.
Moreover, the biases that can be created, when used in a sports related activity by the
athletes, will be removed because there is no need for baseline testing.
In this paper, I will be focusing on recreating the experiment pipeline of other researchers
using a simpler apparatus, then trying the setup with different mobile trackers and see
if the results are in any way meaningful. I will perform the experiments in different
environment conditions in order to see if for example different stages of tiredness or eye
colors have an impact on the results. The experiments will be done on healthy subjects
and compare the results with similar experiments of other researchers.
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Goal
3
The initial plan of the project was that in the end real concussed patients would be
tested, but unfortunately the project was developed during the Covid-19 pandemic [14].
Therefore, I could not have access to patients because of safety reasons. Nevertheless,
even though the experiments were not tried on real mTBI patients, this research is
valuable because the methods were tried with eye trackers that can make the solution
portable and a dataset of normal subjects was obtained. Sometimes having a dataset
to work with is the most important thing; as an article of The Economist says: ”The
world’s most valuable resource is no longer oil, but data”. [15]
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Background
In this chapter, we are going to explain some concepts related to concussions and eye
tracking in order to understand the methodology used in the experiments. Further-
more, we will explore the related work in the field and outline their advantages and
disadvantages of the methods.
2.1
Theory
2.1.1
Eye tracking
Eye tracking is the analysis of the eye behaviour using a technological process.
It
involves gathering data about what people are looking at (the gaze), or what they are
ignoring, blinks and pupil’s reactions.
By looking at eye movements we can assess
human behaviour, interests and sometimes pathological conditions.
How does it work?
There are four general techniques which eye trackers are built on. These are electro-
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Theory
5
oculography, scleral contact lens/search coil, photo/video-oculography and pupil centre
corneal reflection. The electro-oculography tracks the eyes by measuring the skins’s
electric potential differences, which returns the position of the eyes relative to the head;
a head tracking device is needed in order to be able to understand where the person is
looking in the visual scene. The scleral contact lens/search coil is the most intrusive
technique but also the most precise; it also measures the position of the eyes relative to
the head. [16] The photo/video-oculography involves recording the eye movements of
the person and afterwords processing the data in order to find out the gaze position. The
most used type of eye tracker to this day uses a non-intrusive technique that measures
the position of the eyes in space, called pupil centre corneal reflection. These types of
eye trackers are usually devices that attach to a computer and can be either a dedicated
eye tracking device or eye tracking glasses. This method uses a source of light projected
on the eyes that creates reflections called Purkinje reflections, see figure 2.1. A camera
then captures the images of the eyes, the reflections are identified and the gaze position
is computed. [16] The gaze point is the where the person is looking at a point in time.
Figure 2.1: The first Purkinje reflection and the relative positions of the pupil
Although PC based eye trackers are very used now, portability is a big issue of those.
Mobile eye tracking has advanced notably in the last years, but compared to the eye
tracking on PCs it ”is still in its infancy”. Although the technology is quite new, the
collected data is ”now precise and reliable enough to provide meaningful insights” [17].
Thanks to the Apple TrueDepth camera and ARKit 2.0 since iOS 12, there are already a
few mobile applications [18], [19], [20] that put eye tracking in the users hands - literally.
ARKit is a framework that enables developers to create augmented reality applications
for the latest iPhones and iPads.
The way this works is that besides the selfie camera, the iPhones and iPads have the
so called TrueDepth camera which ”captures accurate face data by projecting and an-
alyzing over 30,000 invisible dots to create a depth map of your face and also captures
an infrared image of your face.” (Apple Inc. [21])
Eye movements
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Theory
6
Visual acuity decreases when we move away from the fovea (center of our visual field).
This is the reason why humans possess some eye movement abilities in order to be able
to target the eyes to the area of interest. Such movements can be positional (fixations,
saccadic, smooth pursuit, vestibular) or accommodation (lens focusing or relaxation)
movements [22, 16]. The important ones with respect to eye tracking are the positional
movements.
Fixations are eye movements that focus the retina over a stationary object of interest.
Our eyes usually scan the scene they are receiving at a moment and fixations are the
interruption of this scanning when a point of interest occurs. When this happens, the
foveal vision is held in place so that the details of the spot of interest can be processed.
Fixations can disclose useful information about people’s attention and understanding:
the long time it takes for the first fixation to occur reveals that the scene is not interesting
enough; too long fixations could mean that the scene is very captivating or can mean
that the presented image requires more effort for processing. [22] This kind of movement
is widely used in user experience design, packaging design or to determine consumer
behaviour.
Saccades are the rapid movements of the eyes between two fixations. They are used
to reposition the fovea from one point of interest to another. The quality of the image
during saccades is very poor due to the high speed of the eyes.
Smooth pursuit movement is happening when the fovea is following a moving target.
Unlike with saccades, when the eyes are doing smooth pursuit, the image from the point
of interest is clear and the details are processed.
2.1.2
Concussions
As described before, mild traumatic brain injuries occur due to the fast shake of the
brain inside the skull. Their clinical manifestations consist in loss of consciousness less
than 30 minutes, posttraumatic loss of memory less than 24 hours, a Glasgow Coma
Scale (GCS) between 13 and 15 and normal brain imaging [5, 23]. When a concussion
happens, a pathological feature that may appear is diffuse axonal injury (DAI) [24]
without focal injury [25]. This means that brain fibers (axons) are ruptured and there
may be microstructural modifications in the frontal white matter that are not visible
to the naked eye (on a scan or in a neurological examination).
Why is vision affected?
”Ocular motor function incorporates circuits widely distributed in both cortical and
subcortical structures.” [26] More than half of the pathways in the brain are used by
vision and a large part of these are located in areas susceptible to shear damage, like
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Related work
7
the frontal lobes. [26]
Smooth pursuits are controlled by neural circuitry overlapping with neural pathways
involved in attention, working memory and prediction. [27] which suggests there is a
relation between smooth pursuits and cognitive processes. [24])
Abnormal smooth pursuits of a target moving on a circular path have been reported
to be able to detect concussions [13, 28, 24, 29]. The researches show that the error
variability resulted when following the target like the pursuit gain, radial error or phase
error can identify concussed patients when compared to normal subjects.
The velocity at which the eyes can catch up with a moving target is debated by the
research community. Meyer says that the value is 100°/s [30], whereas Rashbass and
Barnes found much lower thresholds, which are 30-40°/s [31] and 20°/s [27] respec-
tively. Regardless of the actual value, above it, corrective saccades are made in order
to reposition the target in the middle of the fovea.
Therefore, since the smooth pursuit of a circular path target seems appropriate for
detecting concussions, this research will use this type of eye movement in order to
create the experiments. More details will be given in the related work section.
2.2
Related work
2.2.1
Current ways of testing
Early discovery of concussions in sports-related environment is a must, thus there are
various evaluation criteria available for this matter.
The first assessment of the state of a person that suffered a head impact is done using
the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS). This scale rates the level of consciousness of the patient
on a 3-15 point scale, using ”different aspects of behavioural response” which are motor,
verbal and eye opening responses. [32] The GCS categorises TBI severity into mild (13-
15), moderate (9-12) and acute (3-8) [33]. In order to see a printable GCS aid, retrieved
from glasgowcomascale.org, made by the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons
of Glasgow, go to Appendix B.
The most common manners of concussion evaluations involve neuropsychological testing
combined with self-reporting symptoms. [12, 34] Although these kind of methods are
quick and cost-effective, they are very subjective because rely a lot on self-reporting.
Sometimes athletes under perform for the baseline testings or learn the test sheets by
==PAGE:14==
2.2 Related work
8
heart in order to be kept in the game, not realising how impactful a second concussion
can be.
An example of such a method is The Standardized Concussion Assessment Tool
(SCAT5) [9]. SCAT5 was published after the 5th International Consensus Conference
on Concussion in Sport held in Berlin in 2016, where SCAT3 was revised.
SCAT5
is the most comprehensive concussion sideline assessment tool and it is widely used
in determining sports-related concussions, for athletes aged 13 or over and it has to
be used by medical professionals only. It has six steps where it combines immediate
assessment (identifying red flags - if found the athlete should be immediately removed
from the game -, memory assessment using the Maddocks test, the GCS score, a physical
examination), symptom evaluation, cognitive screening (the Standardised Assessment of
Concussion (SAC) for orientation, memory and concentration), neurological screening
which includes the modified Balance Error Scoring System(mBESS) testing, delayed
recall and decision.
The symptom evaluation section requires prior baseline testing
where players have to score how they are feeling on a normal daily basis. The baseline
scoring is then used for comparison when a concussion happens.
2.2.2
Visual tracking tests
Due to the fact that neuropsychological and neuroimaging tests cannot reliably detect
concussions [24], tests that assess the eye movement have been developed.
Rapid automatized naming tests
When performing rapid automatized naming tests, subjects have to read digits, letters
or other visual stimuli from the screen as fast as possible. The quantification for this
test is represented by the time it took until the subject finished the task.
One such tool is the King-Devick test that evaluates the saccadic eye movement. The
player has to read numbers uniquely spaced and arranged from three cards that increase
in difficulty.
The score of the test is represented by the time the athlete needs to
complete the test. Although there are cases in which the KD can discover participants
having a concussion that did not have any symptoms, the test does not check other
types of movements that involve a greater part of the brain and have been proven to be
damaged after mTBI [12, 13].
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Related work
9
Video-oculography
As described in subsection 2.1.2, smooth pursuits are a valuable tool in diagnosing
concussions.
Hunfalvay et al [12] have evaluated the vertical smooth pursuit between different levels
of TBI and normal subjects. Although the method can distinguish between moderate
and severe traumatic brain injuries, it is not able to detect the mild ones.
Samadani et al.[28] recently created a nonspatially calibrated, binocular, eye movement–
tracking algorithm to detect dysconjugate gaze. The patients in this experiment are
asked to look at a video and their pupils are tracked in the meantime. The movement
is then compared to a baseline database. This method is very valuable because it can
discover concussions without a prior calibration. The disadvantage is that the technique
requires high-resolution measurement (500Hz) and a chinrest. For the purpose of this
paper where I am trying to make the apparatus as simple as possible, preferably using
a mobile phone, the method is not suitable. Mobile phones can currently track at 30Hz
(with the TrueDepth camera).
Jun Maruta et al. researched in the paper Visual Tracking Synchronization as a Metric
for Concussion Screening [13] whether the smooth pursuit of a target on a circular
path can detect concussions. Using an EyeLink tracker of 500Hz sampling frequency,
they tested concussed patients following a 0.2° target on a circular path of 8.5°, at
0.4Hz, for 10 to 12 circles. The parameters they are testing are vertical and horizontal
gains, the phase error and the variability of the radial and tangential errors of the gaze
position compared to the stimulus position. The result is that the standard deviation
of the radial and tangential errors is a significant measure for separating healthy from
concussed subjects.
The research of Maruta et al. seems very interesting and although the sampling fre-
quency they are using is high, the performed analysis might be feasible also using a
lower quality eye tracker. Moreover, I could not find any research regarding a low qual-
ity eye tracking device or a mobile application used to try and detect mild traumatic
brain injuries. Therefore, it is very interesting to see if it is possible to create such a
tool for diagnosing concussions using an eye tracking with a lower sampling frequency
and maybe the mobile phone. This research aims to do exactly this, experimenting with
different set ups and qualities of eye trackers.
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 3
Method
In this chapter we are going through the phases I went through in order to reach the
wanted goal, that is verifying whether detecting concussions can be achieved using a
portable out-of-the-professional’s-office solution. I will describe the design and imple-
mentation of the concussion experiment toolbox I have developed and the different
experimental setups I tried.
The initial plan of the project was to test the different experimental setups with a
group of healthy patients as well as a group of subjects with mTBI from a hospital in
Copenhagen, Denmark. Unfortunately, due to Covid-19 the access to the patients was
not granted, for safety reasons. Nevertheless, the experiments were done using healthy
subjects and the results were compared to the results from the research of Maruta et al.
In this way, a baseline for the method using a lower sampling frequency was created.
3.1
Concussion experiment toolbox
In order to create the experiments, there was the need for a complete pipeline for data
processing. This includes data gathering, data analysis and presentation of the results.
For this purpose, I created a toolbox for experiments that can be used on any kind
==PAGE:17==
3.1 Concussion experiment toolbox
11
of eyetracker, as long as the available data contains position (x, y) and timestamp
of the eyes. In this section, we will discuss the design of this toolbox and how each
component works. Clearly, there are some parts that would be different for every setup.
The components are different for each experiment and will be described in detail in the
corresponding sections.
3.1.1
Data gathering
The first step consists in creating the datasets needed for further processing. This step
is dependent on the technology used for eye tracking. This subsection will explain the
overall idea of data gathering. The details can be found in the corresponding subsection
for each of the experiments.
In order to gather the data, eye movements of the test subjects were recorded using
a pupil centre corneal reflection device, at different sampling frequencies - 90Hz and
30Hz. During the experiments, the testers were presented a red circular visual stimulus
of 0.2° on a black background. The target was moving clockwise on a circular path at
0.4Hz, for 12 cycles.
The gaze information was stored in a tabular structure file. The gaze data consists of
the (x, y) positions of the eyes on the screen and the associated sampling time.
3.1.2
Data analysis
After the dataset is obtained, it is fed into the data analysis pipeline that was developed
using Python programming language and the pandas library. [35] This subsection will
explain what methods are used for processing the data and present the plots that were
made in order to analyse the results. The plots shown in this chapter correspond to one
of the test subjects.
Pre-processing - cleaning the data
The first step when working with a dataset is cleaning the data which involves removing
incomplete or invalid data, such as blinks or moments when the eyes could not be clearly
detected and the gaze was not valid. Moreover, data corresponding to the first circle is
removed because of the transient response the moving target generates [13] and because
in the human eye, there is a time delay between the moment the smooth pursuit of the
target starts and the moment when the eyes start to follow the target. [36] A detailed
==PAGE:18==
3.1 Concussion experiment toolbox
12
explanation on how the data was cleaned can be found in the corresponding subsection
for each of the experiments.
Visual angle transformation
The next step after data cleaning is transforming the gaze position data to visual angle
degrees. Eye movements are usually expressed and quantified in visual angle rather
than in cm because visual angle describes the perceived size of the object (where how
far the object is matters). Therefore, in order to compute the gaze positions in visual
angle, I created a function that transforms cm or mm to visual angle, using the formulas
below.
The way to compute the visual angle is using the equation 3.1 reproduced from Holmqvist
et al. book [37]. Given the visual angle θ, the viewing distance d and s the size of the
stimulus:
tanθ
2 = s
2d
(3.1)
θ = 2 arctan
( s
2d
)
.
(3.2)
H
W
d
s
θ
Screen
Figure 3.1: Geometrical representation of the visual angle
Figure 3.1 depicts the geometrical representation of the visual angle.
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Concussion experiment toolbox
13
Note: When the stimulus data is measured in pixels, 1mm of the screen corresponds to
rx/M pixels horizontally and ry/N vertically, where M ×Nmm represents the physical
dimensions of the screen and rx × ry represents the screen resolution.
Eye position
The easiest way to check a dataset is to look at the plots of the eye positions in time
(figure 3.2) and the trajectory of the gaze (figure 3.3). A smooth sinusoidal signal in
plot 3.2 infers that the subject has good visual tracking ability. Moreover, when looking
at the plot 3.3, the normal subjects are characterised by an almost constant radius.
Figure 3.2: Horizontal and vertical eye positions in time.
The grey vertical
bands are blinks or saccades.
Saccades removal
In order to identify and remove saccades the velocity and acceleration of the eyes were
calculated. The eye velocity was obtained by differentiating the eye position data on
using forward finite differences (equation 3.3), where x1 and x2 are the positions and t1
and t2 are the associated times.
x
′ = x2 −x1
t2 −t1
(3.3)
Because when differentiating using this method the noise of the signal is increased, the
velocity is smoothed using a 10-point moving average filter. The moving average filter
==PAGE:20==
3.1 Concussion experiment toolbox
14
Figure 3.3: Two dimensional trajectory of the gaze overlapped over the 11 cir-
cles shown in figure 3.2
is computed using the equation 3.4, where x[i] is the input signal, y[i] is the output
signal (filtered velocity) and M is the number of points in the average. [38]
y[i] = 1
M
M−1
∑
j=0
x[i + j]
(3.4)
Differentiating the velocity data using the same method, I have obtained the eye ac-
celeration, which is smoothed using a 5-point moving average filter, implemented with
equation 3.4 as well.
The saccades were identified and removed using 100°/s threshold for velocity and
1500°/s2 for acceleration, and the missing data is represented by grey vertical bands on
the plots.
Gain
A quantification of how well they eyes can follow a moving target is made using the
gain. The gain is the ration between the eye velocity and target velocity. Therefore, a
ratio of 1 indicates that the eyes can follow the target perfectly, whereas when the ratio
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Concussion experiment toolbox
15
is subunitary, the eyes fall behind the target. When the using sine wave stimuli, the
smooth pursuit gain is usually measured using the peak gain.
For this purpose, sine curves describing the target movement were fit to the horizontal
and vertical eye velocities. The sine curves were built using a fast Fourier transfor-
mation, that indicates the frequency, delay and amplitude of the signal. In order to
compute the gain, the ratio between the peak velocity (which is the amplitude of the
sine) and the target velocity was computed.
The target velocity in degrees of visual angle per second was computed using the equa-
tion 3.5, where vmax is the maximum velocity in visual angle on an axis (horizontal or
vertical), r is the radius of the circular path, tloop is the time it takes for the target to
complete one loop of the circle (for 0.4Hz and 8.5° radius, the time is 2.5s), and d is the
distance from the eye to the screen.
vtarget = arctan(vmax
d
) = arctan( 2πr
tloop · 1
d)
(3.5)
In order to visualize the gain, plots of the generated sine waves and target velocity
superimposed over the eye velocities in time were created for horizontal and vertical
trajectories separately (figures 3.4a and 3.4b). The sine wave could not be generated to
perfectly match the signal frequency, but the amplitude is correctly reflecting the data.
More details about the frequency problem can be found in the Limitations section.
==PAGE:22==
3.1 Concussion experiment toolbox
16
(a) Horizontal
(b) Vertical
Figure 3.4: Eye velocities in time
Gaze position error and variability
Patients with mTBI have been shown to have increased eye position error and variability
when performing a smooth pursuit task.
In order to quantify the variability of the
gaze, positional errors relative to the target were computed. Towards visualising the
variability, the target and the gaze positions were transformed in polar coordinates and
translated so that the target is fixed at 90°. This was done because it is easier to see
how the data is spread. When the variability is low, the plot shows a cluster (figure
3.5b), whereas when the error is high, the data is widely spread.
The angle of the target on the circular path was computed using the velocity (144°/s)
and the known time array. Then, the target coordinates were computed using Equations
3.6 and 3.7. In the end, the angle of the target in polar coordinates was computed using
the known radius and the x and y coordinates. The gaze position defined by (radius,
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Concussion experiment toolbox
17
angle) was also recomputed in polar coordinates using the same manner. In order to
move the gaze data to 90°, the needed phase shift for the target to arrive to 90° was
computed and then subtracted from the value of the gaze angle.
x = R · cos(angle)
(3.6)
y = R · sin(angle)
(3.7)
The definition of the gaze errors is depicted in figure 3.5a. The difference between the
target position and the gaze position is represented by the radial error, the tangential
error and the phase error. The radial and tangential errors are the components of the
vector with origin in the target position, direction to the gaze position and magnitude
equal to the distance between the two. The values for radial and tangential errors will
be transformed to visual angle to ease the comparison. The phase error is the angle
between the target vector from the center of the screen and the gaze vector from the
center of the screen.
Gaze
Tangential error
Phase error
Radial error
Target
(a) Schematic representation of the vari-
ability parameters, adapted after [13]
(b) Scattergram of gaze positions for the
reference frame in which the target is
at 90°
Figure 3.5: Variability
The radial error was computed by subtracting the gaze radius at a given point from
the known target radius, then transformed to visual angle using equation 3.2. Then
the mean and standard deviation were computed and written to the output text file.
Moreover, in order to visualise the radius variability, a histogram with the radius dis-
tribution (figure 3.6a) and a plot of the radius value in time (figure 3.6b) were created.
==PAGE:24==
3.1 Concussion experiment toolbox
18
The radial error means how far up or down is the gaze from the target trajectory. A
good tracking ability is characterised by a sharp peak in the radius distribution.
(a) Radius distribution
(b) Radius in time
Figure 3.6: Radius of gaze trajectory
The phase error was computed by subtracting the gaze angle in polar coordinates from
the target angle in polar coordinates. Afterwords, the mean and standard deviation
were computed and in order to visualise the phase variability, a histogram with the
phase distribution (figure 3.7a) and a plot with the phase in time (figure 3.7b) were
made. Again, a peak sharp peak in the histogram means the visual tracking works well.
The tangential error is proportional to the phase error. The tangential error means how
behind or ahead the gaze is from the target.
The most important values from this analysis are represented by the standard deviation
of the gaze positional errors. Therefore, the standard deviation of the radial error and
the standard deviation of the tangential error are the values with the highest interest
for the research.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Experiment using Tobii 4C
19
(a) Phase error distribution
(b) Phase error in time
Figure 3.7: Phase error of gaze trajectory
In the next sections, I will describe the experimental setups I tried in order to find out
if the smooth pursuit on a circular path can be used on a device outside the laboratory.
The gaze variability has been proven to detect concussions using a high sampling fre-
quency eye tracking device (500Hz). In order to develop a portable concussion detection
method, several experiments using lower sampling frequency have been done.
3.2
Experiment using Tobii 4C
The first tried experiment was done using a Tobii 4C eye tracker, attached to a Surface
Pro 4. The reason why I used this tracker is that from the available portable options
at the university, this was the one that had the highest sampling frequency, i.e. 90Hz.
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Experiment using Tobii 4C
20
Ten healthy subjects (3 females, 7 males) with normal or corrected-to-normal vision,
aged 25-30 years were recruited. All subjects provided informed consent before testing.
One of the female subjects was removed from the analysis because there were issues
with the calibration of the eye tracker. There were two types of experiments done. One
of them was performed with all ten participants and aimed to see the intraindividual
variability as well as to obtain a general description of the population of normal subjects.
The second one was done on two of the subjects and consisted of a longitudinal study
whose goal was to understand the variability within a person.
3.2.1
Experimental setup
d = 50cm
8.5°
Figure 3.8: Experimental setup Tobii 4C
Eye movements of the test subjects were recorded using a Tobii 4C eye tracking device,
at a sampling frequency of 90Hz (time between the samples - 0.011s). The testers were
presented a red circular stimulus of 0.2° diameter in visual angle on a black background.
The target was moving clockwise on a circular path of 8.5° radius at 0.4Hz, for 12 cycles.
The used screen was a Surface Pro tablet, and the Tobii 4C was attached to the bottom
of the device as required. The experimental setup is depicted in Figure 3.8.
The experiment was created in Python using Psychopy package [39] for the flow of the
experiment and Titta framework [40] for controlling Tobii.
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Experiment using Tobii 4C
21
Titta is a toolbox that provides a wrapper around Tobii’s software development kit
(SDK) that has integration with the Tobii 4C eye tracker. The framework gives the
opportunity to easily and correctly place the participant in the middle of the screen
and at the wanted distance, perform calibration and validation using the interface im-
plemented in Psychopy. Tobii 4C is a gaming eye tracker, therefore the access to the
data is not available by default. In order to be able to get the data from the device,
one needs to purchase an upgrading key that provides access to the Tobii Pro SDK.
The participants were asked to sit down in front of the tablet and were instructed what is
happening next. The test starts by asking the participant his/her name, which is saved
in the output filename. Afterwords, the participant setup starts. The setup screen from
Titta toolbox is shown which helps to correctly position the participant in the middle
of the screen, with the correct head tilt and at the correct distance. The screen displays
a blue circle, a yellow illustration of the head – that indicates the current position and
orientation of the participant – and the distance at which the participant is placed (see
Figure 3.9a). The head dimension changes if the subject moves closer or further from
the eye tracker. The eyes of the participant are also illustrated and if there is any issue
with recognizing any of the eyes, the drawing shows a closed eye (Figure 3.9b) After the
participant is set (the two circles overlap), he/she is asked to look at the points in the
corners of the screen in order to see if the tracker correctly identifies both eyes. When
one of the eyes is not tracked correctly, the animation indicates that the respective eye
is closed. This screen is very useful in order to correctly place the subject and to make
sure the eyes are tracked correctly.
(a) Participant positioning
(b) Closed eye or unstable eye data
Figure 3.9: A figure with two subfigures
Next, the calibration screen is shown, where the test subject has to press a space before
the first calibration point starts moving. The calibration does not start directly because
it has been found that the accuracy of the calibration increases if the participant can
start it by him/herself. [40] The calibration is done using 5 calibration points after
which, 4 validation points placed in a diamond shaped pattern.
When calibration
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Experiment using Tobii 4C
22
and validation are done, a validation result screen is shown where information about
data quality is displayed (see Figure 3.10). The calibration can be redone if it is not
satisfactory.
Figure 3.10: Validation result screen
Before the calibration is accepted, the participant is instructed to closely follow the
stimulus that will be displayed next.
When the 12 circles are completed, the data
about the gaze positions and times is saved in a tsv file, that is afterwords fed in the
data analysis pipeline. The filename contains the timestamp when the target started
moving, for synchronization purposes.
3.2.2
Data analysis
For data analysis, the Concussion experiment toolbox described in section 3.1 was used.
In this subsection, I will explain the part that is different for each experiment, namely
the data cleaning.
In order to understand how the cleaning was done, I will shortly explain what the used
data represents and Tobii reference systems.
The data that Tobii returns can be seen in Appendix C.1.
The important columns
for this project are the ones in Listing 3.1. An excerpt from one of the data files that
contains only the needed columns for the left eye is listed in Table 3.1; the data for the
right eye is similar.
1
'system_time_stamp',
2
'left_gaze_point_on_display_area_x',
3
'left_gaze_point_on_display_area_y',
4
'left_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system_x',
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Experiment using Tobii 4C
23
5
'left_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system_y',
6
'left_pupil_validity',
7
'right_gaze_point_on_display_area_x',
8
'right_gaze_point_on_display_area_y',
9
'right_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system_x',
10
'right_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system_y',
11
'right_pupil_validity',
Listing 3.1: Tobii data
The system_time_stamp represents the time when the gaze information was sampled
by the eye tracker. The reference point of the timestamp is an arbitrary point in time,
which means that the value should be interpreted as a time interval in microseconds
measured from an arbitrary point in time.
The gaze_point_on_display_area is the gaze data mapped to the screen. The coor-
dinate system is called Active Display Coordinate System (ACDS), where the active
display is the area of the display without the monitor frame. The origin of the ACDS
is the upper left corner of the screen. The point (0, 0) is in the upper left corner and
(1, 1) in the lower right corner, therefore the gaze positions have values from 0 to 1.
Figure 3.11 depicts Tobii’s Active Display Coordinate System.
The gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system is the gaze data in Tobii’s User Coordi-
nate System (UCS). The origin of the system is in the center of the user-facing surface
of the eye tracker. The gaze positions are expressed in milimeters. The UCS is depicted
in Figure 3.12
The pupil_validity is a flag that tells whether the corresponding eye data is valid.
The parameter can have the following values:
• 1 when the eye data is valid
• 0 when the eye data is not valid, meaning that there was an error detecting the
eye, an error of the eye tracker or a blink happened.
Table 3.1: Excerpt from data file
system_time_stamp
left_gaze_point
_on_display
_area_x
left_gaze_point
_on_display
_area_y
left_gaze_point_in
_user_coordinate
_system_x
left_gaze_point_in
_user_coordinate
_system_y
left_pupil_validity
0
1011946481532
0.50150615
0.21389097
0.391592294
144.9045105
1
1
1011946492635
0.500995696
0.214540198
0.258883923
144.7987518
1
2
1011946503741
0.500761986
0.213990226
0.198114008
144.8883209
1
3
1011946514850
0.49864611
0.213699877
-0.352003276
144.9356079
1
4
1011946525960
0.500907898
0.214160398
0.236064285
144.8605957
1
5
1011946537069
0.500621796
0.212682322
0.161675379
145.1013641
1
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Experiment using Tobii 4C
24
Figure 3.11: Tobii Active Display Coordinate System, taken from Tobii’s web-
site [41]
Figure 3.12: Tobii User Coordinate System, taken from Tobii’s website[41]
Data cleaning
The first step in data cleaning for this experiment, was to remove the blinks or moments
when the gaze data was not valid. This is done using the pupil_validity parameter.
The data for both eyes was checked, and where the pupil_validity = 0 for any of the
eyes, the data is removed and vertical bars are added to the graphs for the missing
points.
During the analysis, I observed that there was a significant delay between the target
and the eye positions which was due to the fact that the tracker starts recording before
the target starts moving.
Therefore, I saved the timestamp when the target starts
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Experiment using uncalibrated Obital
25
moving (the value saved in the filename). In order to synchronize the target data with
the eye data, I removed the data corresponding to the points recorded before the saved
timestamp.
Next, in order to compute the actual time that passed since the current experiment
started, the first value was subtracted from all the values in the time vector. Using
the actual time that passed, I removed the first circle due to the transient response
of the eyes (more details about the reasoning can be found in subsection 3.1.2 Pre-
processing). The way the first circle was removed is using the time that passed since
the target started moving. Taking into consideration that the movement frequency is
0.4Hz, the time needed for one full circle to be completed is 2.5s. Therefore, everything
before the first 2.5s was removed, and the time was recomputed to start from 0.
The next step was to center the gaze data in the center of the screen. The coordinates
in ADCS, were translated with 0.5 because they were centered in the top-left corner of
the screen (the data is between 0 and 1). The coordinates in UCS were translated 10
cm up on the y axis because they were centered in the middle of the tracker which is
situated at 10 cm from the center of the screen.
After the data was cleaned, the gaze positions were transformed to visual angle degrees.
Because the gaze_point_on_display_area is a percent, the way to compute the visual
angle is to multiply the values of the gaze positions on x and y with the corresponding
values of the screen in visual angle degrees. The screen in visual angle is computed using
the equation 3.8, where size is the size of the screen in cm and D is the distance of the
eyes from the screen. All the computations are done individually on the horizontal and
vertical axes.
screenangles = 2 arctan
(size
2D
)
.
(3.8)
From here on, I found out and removed the saccades, computed the gain and then the
gaze position error and variability. The process is exactly the one described in section
3.1 Concussion experiment toolbox.
3.3
Experiment using uncalibrated Obital
To go even closer to the goal of finding a portable solution for concussion detection, I
tried a mobile based eye tracker, Obital. Obital provides an accessible and affordable
solution for eye tracking. It is based on iOS technology (TrueDepth camera and Arkit
2, see subsection 2.1.1) and it seems a very interesting option to try out. The sampling
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Experiment using uncalibrated Obital
26
d = 50cm
8.5°
Switch 
control
Figure 3.13: Obital setup
frequency is even lower than the Tobii 4C has, but the biggest advantage is that the
eye tracking is done entirely using the mobile phone.
The Obital framework is available on iPhone and iPad as well, but I did not possess
any iPad with the TrueDepth camera. This impacted the fact that the circular path
could not stay the same, because it would not fit on the screen. The distance to the
screen could not be reduced because the minimum distance at which the tracking works
is 50cm. Therefore, I had two options: the first one was to recreate the experiment
using another radius for the target trajectory and see how the results are in comparison
to the ones obtained at the previous experiment; the second one was to use the same
screen as in the previous experiment (Surface Pro 4) with the same way of displaying
the stimulus, but on the side, using as tracker the uncalibrated Obital.
The option I chose is the second one because after talking to someone from the Obital
team, it seemed I can do the experiment without calibration, but the synchronization
of the target and the gaze would be challenging. To solve the synchronization issue, I
thought that I that could use the Tobii 4C in the same time and then could implement
a blink detection algorithm [42] and run it on both datasets and overlap the blinks.
Another reason why I was leaning to this option was that calibration can be an issue
for the concussed patients because in order to perform a good calibration one has to
pay attention to the calibration points, which a mTBI patient may not be able to do.
Therefore, I decided to hold on to my decision of continuing with the uncalibrated
Obital.
The experimental setup is depicted in figure 3.13.
The iPhone XS with the Obital
installed and opened was fixed behind the Surface Pro, exactly in the middle of the
screen. The Tobii 4C was still attatched to the tablet. Because the Obital could not
detect the eyes when it was placed too high up from the center of the tablet, I placed it
so that only the iPhone’s camera was visible. This has as a consequence the fact that I
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Experiment using Hawkeye
27
could not press the screen in order to start the experiment. Therefore, I connected it to
the laptop in order to be able to see the screen using the QuickTime screen mirroring.
In order to be able to control the screen and therefore start recording data, I turned on
the Switch Control on the iPhone and I used another iOS device as a controller.
This experiment was done on one person and the participant went through the same
process as for the previous experiment.
3.4
Experiment using Hawkeye
The last experimental setup that I tried was based on the Hawkeye platform [20].
Hawkeye is a user research tool based on the TrueDepth technology found in the latest
iOS devices, like Obital. What I found interesting when I came across Hawkeye is that is
web based, therefore it provides a way of creating the experiment that is not constrained
to only one device which the experiment is built on. Another reason why I looked into
Hawkeye was that it can be run on any web based application and I have prior knowledge
of web technologies. Therefore, I can easily construct the experiment using HTML and
CSS, whereas if I tried to recreate it using calibrated Obital, I would have had to build
the experiment using Swift. Considering that I have no prior knowledge of Swift it
would have take considerably more time to implement.
The experiment was created using Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), Cascadins
Style Sheets (CSS) and an iPhone XS. The target was drawn using a div with red
background and border radius of 50%, which makes it a circle.
Then, using CSS3
animations and keyframes I created the circular path, see listing 3.2. Unfortunately,
due to the small screen size I could not use a 8.5° radius of the path because for 50cm
distance from the screen it would have been outside the screen.
I have to mention
that the tracker does not recognize the eyes if the person is placed closer than 50cm.
Therefore, the radius of the path was 3.4° visual angle or 3cm. The values in cm are
4 times bigger because the screen of the iPhone XS is a retina display and has a pixel
density 4 times bigger than normal screens.
The code that draws and animates the target on the circular path can be found in
listing 3.2.
1
.dot {
2
animation: myOrbit 2.5s infinite linear;
3
height: 6.96mm;
4
width: 6.96mm;
5
position: fixed;
6
top: 50%;
7
left:50%;
8
}
==PAGE:34==
3.4 Experiment using Hawkeye
28
9
10
.dot::after {
11
content: '';
12
display: block;
13
will-change: transform;
14
width: 6.96mm;
15
height: 6.96mm;
16
border-radius: 50%;
17
background -color: red;
18
}
19
20
@keyframes myOrbit {
21
from { transform: rotate(0deg) translateX(12cm) rotate(0deg); }
22
to
{ transform: rotate(360deg) translateX(12cm) rotate(-360deg); }
23
}
Listing 3.2: Target moving in a circular path with CSS (a tutorial on how to
do this can be found in [43])
There were two healthy subjects taking this experiment. In order to make sure the
distance from the subject was correct, the mobile phone was placed on a desk and the
distance to the participant was measured. The participants first had to introduce their
names, then started the experiment. The first step was to perform calibration (5-point
calibration) after which the participant clicks start test and the target starts moving.
The data from was then downloaded from the Hawkeye research platform and fed in the
data analysis pipeline. Before cleaning the data, the x and y positions of the eyes were
plotted in order to see if the path is close to a circular one. The result was not positive,
therefore no further processing was done. The results and discussion are presented in
the next section.
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Results and discussion
In this section, we are going to discuss the experimental results. The results are pre-
sented in a separate section for each experiment. I will start with the Tobii 4C experi-
ment whose data could be processed until the end on the pipeline, then continue with
the Obital and Hawkeye experiments that look promising but are not yet to be able to
detect the concussed patients.
4.1
Experiment using Tobii 4C
The Tobii 4C setup generated good data that could be processed and compared to the
results in the reference paper [13]. In this section, I will present the interindividual
variability of the subjects for which I will show the results from a subset of the partici-
pants (it is not relevant to display everything) and compare the obtained values for the
positional errors. Then I will present the general characteristics of the group and see
if the results are comparable to the paper. In the end, I will present the longitudinal
study that helps us understand the variability within a person.
==PAGE:36==
4.1 Experiment using Tobii 4C
30
4.1.1
Comparing results to the Visual Tracking Synchro-
nization paper
SD tangential error: 0.37°
SD radial error: 0.33°
Mean phase: -10.49°
Horizontal gain: 1.00
Vertical gain: 1.00 
Figure 4.1: My results
The results obtained using the Tobii 4C setup (figure 4.1) are clearly comparable with
the results for the group of normal subjects that Maruta et al obtained, by looking at
the respective plots in 4.2. The plots were arranged in the same way as they were placed
in the paper for easier comparison. It can be seen in figure 4.1 that the two dimensional
trajectory of the gaze has a circular shape, the eye positions in time have sinusoidal
shape and the radial and phase errors histograms have a sharp peak. This is a proof
that the performance variability is low.
The gains on the horizontal and vertical axes for the current experiment are 0.97 ±
0.035 (mean ± SD) and 0.92 ± 0.036 respectively. Matura et al obtained 0.94 ± 0.055
and 0.83 ± 0.16 respectively. The variability of the radial errors is 0.57° ± 0.47° for
the current research and 0.9° ± 0.4° for the reference research. The tangential error
variability was 1.62° ± 0.59° for current paper and 1.1° ± 0.6° for the reference paper.
Therefore, I can say that the results I obtained are matching the reference results.
The only variable that does not match the reference research was the mean phase error,
which was -9.56° ± 4.93°, while in the reference paper it was 2.3° ± 1.6°. This difference
is probably generated by the refresh rate of the screen, meaning that we probably think
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Experiment using Tobii 4C
31
Figure 4.2: Reference paper results. These plots were taken from the paper [13]
using a screenshot.
that the target was displayed at a given time in a given position, but the true position
may be shifted. More details about this can be found in the Limitations section.
Table 4.1: Results compared with the reference paper
My results
Reference paper results
Horizontal gain ± SD
0.97 ± 0.035
0.94 ± 0.055
Vertical gain ± SD
0.92 ± 0.036
0.83 ± 0.16
Radial error ± SD
0.57° ± 0.47°
0.9° ± 0.4°
Tangential error ± SD
1.62° ± 0.59°
1.1° ± 0.6°
Phase error ± SD
-9.56° ± 4.93°
2.3° ± 1.6°
Overall, I can say that I could successfully reproduce the experiment using a lower
quality eye tracker, even though the phase error is not comparable.
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Experiment using Tobii 4C
32
4.1.2
Interindividual variability
In order to understand the differences that may appear between the test subjects, his-
tograms displaying the tracking performance have been done. It can be seen that there
are some variations in the results, but the overall variability is not high.
The plots from 4 of the people are listed in the Appendix A. The order of the people is
the same for each type of plot. We can see that there are differences between them, for
example the number of blinks/saccades varies a lot (1-17), the radial error is smaller for
some than for the others. But the overall trend of the results looks promising because
the two dimensional trajectory of the gaze has a circular shape, the eye positions in time
have sinusoidal shape for everyone and the radial and phase errors histograms have a
sharp peak.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Experiment using Tobii 4C
33
(a) Horizontal gain
(b) Vertical gain
(c) Phase error
(d) Radial error variability
(e) Tangential error variability
Figure 4.3: Histogram of the visual tracking performance distribution.
The
vertical axis represents the percentage of the tested subjects
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Experiment using Tobii 4C
34
4.1.3
Longitudinal study
To go deeper into the analysis, I decided to research how variable are the values within
an individual. For this purpose, two of the subjects were tested every morning and
every evening for 6 days.
(a) Daily radial error SD - subject 1
(b) Daily tangential error SD - subject 1
(c) Daily radial error SD - subject 2
(d) Daily tangential error SD - subject 2
Figure 4.4: Longitudinal study
Figure 4.4 shows the radial and tangential errors SDs for the two subjects. For subject
1, it looks like the first testing was an outlier and the rest of the days the values are
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Experiment using Tobii 4C
35
not oscillating that much. This may be because the person got used to the testing, or
that in the first day the subject was more tired. The second subject has relatively the
same values every day and the around the same value as for the first subject excluding
the first day. Therefore, we can say that there is some variability between the days in
a person, but the values do not oscillate tremendously, thus the method can be used at
any time because the obtained values are in the same range.
Morning vs evening
The research question for this part of the experiment is: is the variability different in
the morning compared to evening? The expected answer is that it is different. The
figure 4.5a that plots the mean of the radial error SD for the subjects separately, shows
that there is no correlation because for subject 1 the morning value is smaller than for
the evening, while for the subject 2, it is exactly the opposite. However when looking
at the tangential error, it looks like the values are correlated for both participants.
In order to go even deeper, barplots for both radial error SD and tangential error SD
have been created (figure 4.5c, 4.5d. Even though there is an outlier in the morning
data, we still get consistent better results for the morning experiments, see figure 4.5c.
Thus we can conclude that the subjects performed better in the morning than in the
evening. This means that the variability errors are higher when the person is tired.
Something else that I observed when performing this experiment was that the eye colors
matter. One of the subjects had brown eyes and the other one green eyes. Sometimes,
the calibration for the subject with brown eyes needed at least two tries to be successful,
especially in the evening when the light conditions were poorer.
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Experiment using Tobii 4C
36
(a) Radial error SD mean of all values for morning and
evening
(b) Tangential error mean of all values for morning and
evening
(c) Radial error SD, more granular
(d) Tangential error SD, more granular
Figure 4.5: Comparison between morning and evening for the two subjects
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Experiment using Obital
37
4.2
Experiment using Obital
After managing to successfully create and analyse the experiment using Tobii 4C, I
continued with an eye tracker that has even lower sampling frequency, the Obital tracker.
Although the initial research regarding this looked favourable, the end results are not
perfect. The first step was to see how the data looks like. I knew that the sampling
frequency is much smaller than the Tobii 4C sampling frequency and I thought that this
may affect the results. Unfortunately, this was true. The data is not granular enough
to be able to detect the blinks. In addition, as it can be seen in figure 4.6, the path the
tracked gaze follows is not a perfectly circular one, but it is not random either. The
reason for this could be the lack of calibration or too low sampling frequency. In order
to verify the calibration issue, I tried to find a solution to be able to do the calibration.
After some research, I found Hawkeye that seems to be doing the same as Obital, but
on web based applications.
0.00
0.05
0.10
Horizontal
0.00
0.05
Vertical
Figure 4.6: Two dimensional trajectory of the gaze
4.3
Experiment using Hawkeye
The Hawkeye experiment was performed on two people. While performing the calibra-
tion, there were a lot of failed rounds of calibration for both participants. The reason for
this could be inappropriate lighting conditions, but it can also be that the calibration
itself has some problems. I tried to get in contact with the Hawkeye team in order to
find out this information, but they did not answer.
==PAGE:44==
4.3 Experiment using Hawkeye
38
The first step after the data was obtained was to quickly try and see how the data looks
like. I did this for two reasons. First, similarly to the Obital tracker, the sampling
frequency is smaller than Tobii’s. Second, while performing the experiment, the gaze is
depicted with a cross on the screen and for both experiments the path it was drawing
looked very strange. For this purpose, I plotted the gaze positions (figure 4.7). It can be
seen again that the path the gaze is drawing is not the circular one that the target does.
However, it is also not totally distinct from a circular path. Therefore, this method
should not be discarded completely, but different changes should be tried. For example,
a smaller frequency of the target movement may give the tracker the possibility to better
record the gaze position. Nevertheless, if changes in the parameters of the experiments
are made, the results have to be tested with normal patients vs concussed patients in
order to see if there is still a significant difference between the two.
0
200
400
Horizontal
200
300
400
500
600
700
Vertical
(a) Participant 1
0
200
400
Horizontal
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Vertical
(b) Participant 2
Figure 4.7: Two dimensional trajectory of gaze
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Current limitations and further
work
5.1
Limitations
Lack of mTBI subjects
When I found the subject for the thesis, I was extremely enthusiastic at the thought
that I would be able to perform my experiments with real patients with mTBI. I started
drawing in mind how I would have two groups of subjects, one with normal and one with
concussed people, I would then statistically compare the two groups and see the results.
Unfortunately, due to Covid-19 the access to the patients was restricted and therefore I
had to limit myself to creating the baseline for the normal subjects. Nevertheless, this
is an important part of the research and it was very valuable to see that the results can
be reproduced using a lower quality eye tracker.
==PAGE:46==
5.1 Limitations
40
Portability
Using a tablet as a device for attaching the Tobii 4C seemed that would make the
solution more portable. When the tablet was unplugged, the quality of the calibration
and the tracking was very bad, there were a lot of invalid data points, or sometimes the
tracker stopped recording the gaze. This probably happened because the processor of
the tablet is throttled while unplugged. Consequently, the tablet had to be plugged in
all the time.
Figure 5.1: Two dimensional trajectory of the gaze for the person that could
not be properly tracked
Tobii 4C
The limitations that arose from using Tobii 4C start with the fact that it is a gaming
designated tracker. This kind of Tobii trackers work only on Windows because the Core
Software application that is needed to have a connection to the eye tracker is available
only on Windows. Another limitation is that Tobii 4C’s tracking population is 97%.
For one of the test subjects the calibration had large errors and it was probably because
the person was from the group that the device cannot track. Figure 5.1 shows the data
that the tracker was able to record. Another important limitation is that the sampling
frequency is small, therefore the signal is not granular enough for the best fit. This is
something that I chose to try out, thus it cannot be improved. The implication this
had was that the FFT could not generate the best frequency used to built the fitting
sine wave and for this reason, the sine wave is not perfectly overlapping the signal. But
this is only a visual problem, because due to the fact that the gain is computed using
the peak velocities, it is not a problem for the numerical values.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Limitations
41
Phase error
(a) Phase error distribution for the sig-
nal with corrected timing
(b) Scattergram of gaze positions for
the signal with corrected timing
(c) Phase in time for the signal with corrected timing
Figure 5.2: Phase changes when adding a 46ms delay to the target timing. The
data used for the plots is from the first subject on the plots in
subsection Interindividual variability
One of the biggest issues with the Tobii 4C experiment results was that the phase error
was very large. Looking at the other parameters of the results, the values are very good,
therefore the issue is most probably not because the experiment is not successful, but
because of the used apparatus. This leads to the idea that probably there is a delay
between when we think we show the target on the screen and when we actually show it.
This can be because the USB connection is not that fast, or that the processor is not
powerful enough or that there is a delay in the screen refresh rate. The Tobii 4C needs,
the USB and the CPU are satisfied, so the problem is not there. The Surface Pro has a
Samsung 123YL01-001 display (specifications found in [44]). The Samsung display has
a response time of 46ms (grey to grey) [45], which indicates that there is a lag until the
target is actually displayed on the screen. High response times are usually the norm on
==PAGE:48==
5.2 Future work
42
touch screen devices.
With this knowledge in hand, I tried the analysis using a 46ms delay in the target
timing. The plots regarding the phase error can be seen in figure 5.2. The value of the
phase error with the corrected delay is -2.50° ± 5.17° which looks much better than the
value of the phase error without the corrected delay which is -9.56° ± 4.93°. Although I
found out this information, I did not have a reliable method to validate the exact delay.
Therefore, I chose to present the results without the corrected delay.
5.2
Future work
In this section, we are going to explore future steps that can bring the idea closer to the
final goal of detecting concussions using a portable, user friendly system. A handful of
ideas are illustrated here:
1. One of them would be to make experiments on healthy subjects compared to
concussed subjects and see if the results are statistically different as with the
high wuality tracker or not.
2. I have used an improvised chinrest in order to make sure that the participants
are not moving, for being able to compare the results with the reference results
that Maruta et al obtained. Something to try out would be to experiment with
the z-coordinate that Tobii offers, without a chinrest and see how that influences
the results. This would quantify if the method can be used without a chinrest,
making the solution even more portable.
3. Another aspect to verify would be the speed at which the eyes can follow a moving
target. Research shows that this velocity at which the eyes can catch up with a
moving target is maximum 100°/s, see more details in 2.1.2. For the low quality
eye trackers, my hypothesis is that if the velocity of the target is decreased, the
data quality would be better. But this may influence the ability of the method
to differentiate between the two groups of control versus mTBI subjects.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
In this paper, we present the Concussion experiment toolbox, a toolbox built using
Python that provides a simple way of conducting and analysing eye tracking experiments
that aim to discover concussed patients. The toolbox consists of data gathering - where
the participants are asked to follow a red dot on a black screen for twelve circles - and
data analysis - where the data sets are cleaned, the saccades are detected and removed,
the gain and the positional error variability are computed.
The toolbox has been tested on three eye trackers, going from medium sampling fre-
quency of the eye tracker (Tobii 4C) to low sampling frequency (Obital, Hawkeye). The
first experiment was split in two: an interindividual experiment (9 subjects) - in order
to research what is the variability between people - and a longitudinal one (2 subjects)
- in order to see the variability in the same person.
The results are comparable with the results from the reference paper by Maruta et al.
For the interindividual experiment the results for the most important parameters are
that the radial and the tangential errors are 0.57° ± 0.47° and 1.62° ± 0.59° respectively,
compared to 0.9° ± 0.4 and 1.1° ± 0.6°, respectively.
The longitudinal experiment
results have shown that there is a difference between morning recordings and evening
recordings, as well as small daily variability, but the differences are not that significant
to be taken into consideration.
==PAGE:50==
44
The other two experiments done using the iPhone based eye trackers did not give qual-
itative enough data in order to be processed in depth. Nevertheless, the data looks like
if more research and optimisation would be done, a viable solution may be found.
==PAGE:51==
Appendix A
Plots of four of the
participants
==PAGE:52==
46
Figure A.1: Two dimensional trajectory of the gaze
==PAGE:53==
47
SD tangential error: 0.58°
SD radial error: 0.48°
Mean phase: -8.97°
Gain: 1.03
Gain: 0.99
Gain: 0.99
Gain: 0.99
SD tangential error: 0.53°
SD radial error: 0.50°
Mean phase: -9.40°
Figure A.2: Two dimensional trajectory of the gaze
==PAGE:54==
48
SD tangential error: 0.58°
SD radial error: 0.48°
Mean phase: -8.97°
SD tangential error: 0.49°
SD radial error: 0.49°
Mean phase: -13.73°
Gain: 0.98
Gain: 1.01
Gain: 1.00
Gain: 0.98
Figure A.3: Two dimensional trajectory of the gaze
==PAGE:55==
49
Figure A.4: Two dimensional trajectory of the gaze
==PAGE:56==
50
Figure A.5: Two dimensional trajectory of the gaze
==PAGE:57==
Appendix B
Glasgow Coma Scale Aid
==PAGE:58==
52
Open before stimulus
After spoken or shouted request
After ﬁnger tip stimulus
Closed by local factor
Abnormal Flexion
Slow Sterotyped
Arm across chest
Forearm rotates
Thumb clenched
Leg extends
Normal ﬂexion
Rapid
Arm away from body
S TI M UL ATE
CHE CK
OBSE RVE
For further information and video demonstration visit www.glasgowcomascale.org
GLASGOW COMA SCALE : Do it this way
R ATE
For factors Interfering with 
communication, 
ability to respond and other 
injuries
Eye opening , content of 
speech and movements of 
right and left sides
Sound: spoken or shouted
request 
Physical: Pressure on ﬁnger tip, 
trapezius or supraorbital notch
Assign according to highest 
response observed
Criterion
Observed
Rating
Score
Eye opening
Criterion
Observed
Rating
Score
Verbal response
Criterion
Observed
Rating
Score
Best motor response
Sites For Physical Stimulation
Finger tip pressure
Trapezius Pinch
Supraorbital notch
Features of Flexion Responses
Modiﬁed with permission from Van Der Naalt 2004
Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd
Variable
No opening at any time, no interfering factor
Spontaneous
To sound
To pressure
None
Non testable
4
3
2
1
NT
4
3
2
1
NT
5
4
3
2
1
NT
5
Correctly gives name, place and date
Not orientated but communication coherently
Intelligible single words
Only moans / groans
No audible response, no interfering factor
Factor interferring with communication
Orientated
Confused
Words
Sounds
None
Non testable
Obey 2-part request
Brings hand above clavicle to stimulus on head neck
Bends arm at elbow rapidly but features not predominantly abnormal
Bends arm at elbow, features clearly predominantly abnormal
Extends arm at elbow
No movement in arms / legs, no interfering factor
Paralysed or other limiting factor
Obeys commands
Localising
Normal ﬂexion
Abnormal ﬂexion
Extension
None
Non testable
6
Institute of Neurological Sciences NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde
Graphic design by Margaret Frej based on layout and illustrations from Medical Illustration M I • 268093
(c) Sir Graham Teasdale 2015
Figure B.1: GCS assessment aid
==PAGE:59==
Appendix C
Tobii data
1
['device_time_stamp',
2
'system_time_stamp',
3
'left_gaze_point_on_display_area_x',
4
'left_gaze_point_on_display_area_y',
5
'left_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system_x',
6
'left_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system_y',
7
'left_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system_z',
8
'left_gaze_origin_in_trackbox_coordinate_system_x',
9
'left_gaze_origin_in_trackbox_coordinate_system_y',
10
'left_gaze_origin_in_trackbox_coordinate_system_z',
11
'left_gaze_origin_in_user_coordinate_system_x',
12
'left_gaze_origin_in_user_coordinate_system_y',
13
'left_gaze_origin_in_user_coordinate_system_z',
14
'left_pupil_diameter',
15
'left_pupil_validity',
16
'left_gaze_origin_validity',
17
'left_gaze_point_validity',
18
'right_gaze_point_on_display_area_x',
19
'right_gaze_point_on_display_area_y',
20
'right_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system_x',
21
'right_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system_y',
22
'right_gaze_point_in_user_coordinate_system_z',
23
'right_gaze_origin_in_trackbox_coordinate_system_x',
24
'right_gaze_origin_in_trackbox_coordinate_system_y',
25
'right_gaze_origin_in_trackbox_coordinate_system_z',
26
'right_gaze_origin_in_user_coordinate_system_x',
==PAGE:60==
54
27
'right_gaze_origin_in_user_coordinate_system_y',
28
'right_gaze_origin_in_user_coordinate_system_z',
29
'right_pupil_diameter',
30
'right_pupil_validity',
31
'right_gaze_origin_validity',
32
'right_gaze_point_validity']
Listing C.1: Tobii data
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Paul McCrory et al. “Consensus statement on concussion in sport—the
5th international conference on concussion in sport held in Berlin, October
2016”. In: (2016). url: https://bjsm.bmj.com/content/51/11/838.
[2]
Center for Brain Injury. Hjernerystelse / post commotionelt syndrom. Trans-
lated from Danish using Google Translate. url: https://cfh.ku.dk/
(visited on 05/31/2020).
[3]
Janni Brixen and Hana Malá Rytter. A concussion can cost your job. 2019.
url: https://news.ku.dk/all_news/2019/07/a-concussion-can-
cost-your-job/.
[4]
JD Cassidy et al. “Incidence, risk factors and prevention of mild traumatic
brain injury: results of the WHO Collaborating Centre Task Force on Mild
Traumatic Brain Injury.” In: (2004). (43 Suppl), 28–60. url: https://doi.
org/10.1080/16501960410023732.
[5]
Cinthi Pillai and John W Gittinger Jr. Vision Testing in the Evaluation of
Concussion. 2017. doi: 10.1080/08820538.2016.1228412. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1080/08820538.2016.1228412.
[6]
Kevin M. Guskiewicz et al. “Epidemiology of Concussion in Collegiate
and High School Football Players”. In: The American Journal of Sports
Medicine 28.5 (2000), pp. 643–650. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1177/
03635465000280050401.
==PAGE:62==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
56
[7]
Eric S. Sussman et al. “Clinical evaluation of concussion: the evolving role
of oculomotor assessments”. In: Neurosurgical Focus FOC 40.4 (2016), E7.
url: https://thejns.org/focus/view/journals/neurosurg-focus/
40/4/article-pE7.xml.
[8]
David Cifu. Repetitive Head Injury Syndrome. 2017. url: https://www.
brainline.org/article/repetitive-head-injury-syndrome (visited
on 05/31/2020).
[9]
British Journal of Sports Medicine. Sport concussion assessment tool - 5th
edition. 2017. url: https://bjsm.bmj.com/content/51/11/851 (visited
on 05/31/2020).
[10]
KEITH A. SCORZA, MEGHAN F. RALEIGH, and FRANCIS G. O’CONNOR.
Current Concepts in Concussion: Evaluation and Management. 2012. url:
https://www.aafp.org/ (visited on 05/31/2020).
[11]
M.S. Dziemianowicz et al. “Sports-Related Concussion Testing”. In: Current
Neurology and Neuroscience Reports 12 (2012), pp. 547–559. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11910-012-0299-y.
[12]
Melissa Hunfalvay et al. “Vertical smooth pursuit as a diagnostic marker
of traumatic brain injury”. In: Concussion 5.1 (2020). PMID: 32266081,
CNC69. doi: 10.2217/cnc-2019-0013. url: https://doi.org/10.2217/
cnc-2019-0013.
[13]
Jun Maruta et al. “Visual Tracking Synchronization as a Metric for Con-
cussion Screening”. In: Head Trauma Rehabilitation 25.4 (2010). PMID:
20611047, pp. 293–305. doi: 10.1097/HTR.0b013e3181e67936. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1097/HTR.0b013e3181e67936.
[14]
The Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology Team.
“The Epidemiological Characteristics of an Outbreak of 2019 Novel Coro-
navirus Diseases (COVID-19) — China, 2020”. In: China CDC Weekly 2
(2020), p. 113. issn: 2096-7071. doi: 10 . 46234 / ccdcw2020 . 032. url:
http://weekly.chinacdc.cn//article/id/e53946e2- c6c4- 41e9-
9a9b-fea8db1a8f51.
[15]
The Economist. The world’s most valuable resource is no longer oil, but
data. 2017. url: https://www.economist.com/leaders/2017/05/06/
the-worlds-most-valuable-resource-is-no-longer-oil-but-data.
[16]
Andrew T. Duchowski. Eye Tracking Methodology: Theory and Practice.
3rd. Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2017. isbn: 3319578812.
[17]
J.R. Bergstrom and A. Schall. “Eye Tracking in User Experience Design”.
In: (2014). url: https://doi.org/10.1016/C2012-0-06867-6.
==PAGE:63==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
57
[18]
Mahdieh Abbaszadegan, Sohrab Yaghoubi, and I. Scott MacKenzie. “Track-
Maze: A Comparison of Head-Tracking, Eye-Tracking, and Tilt as Input
Methods for Mobile Games”. In: (2018). Ed. by Masaaki Kurosu, pp. 393–
405. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91250-9_31.
[19]
Obital. Obital Framework. July 13, 2020. url: https://obital.io/.
[20]
Inc. Hawkeye Labs. hawkeye. 2019. url: https://www.usehawkeye.com/.
[21]
Apple Inc. About Face ID advanced technology. Feb. 2020. url: https:
//support.apple.com/en-us/HT208108 (visited on 07/13/2020).
[22]
Tobii. Types of eye movement. url: https://www.tobiipro.com/learn-
and - support / learn / eye - tracking - essentials / types - of - eye -
movements/ (visited on 07/11/2020).
[23]
J. van der Naalt. Prediction of Outcome in Mild to Moderate Head Injury:
A Review. 2001. doi: 10.1076/jcen.23.6.837.1018. url: https://doi.
org/10.1076/jcen.23.6.837.1018.
[24]
Suh M et al. “Deficits in predictive smooth pursuit after mild traumatic
brain injury.” In: Neuroscience letters 401.1-2 (2006), pp. 108–113. doi:
10.1016/j.neulet.2006.02.074.
[25]
JENNIE PONSFORD et al. “Factors influencing outcome following mild
traumatic brain injury in adults”. In: Journal of the International Neuropsy-
chological Society 6.5 (2000), pp. 568–579. doi: 10.1017/S1355617700655066.
[26]
Rachel Ventura et al. “Ocular Motor Assessment in Concussion: Current
Status and Future Directions”. In: Journal of the Neurological Sciences 361
(Feb. 2016), pp. 79–86. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2015.12.010.
[27]
G. R. Barnes. “Cognitive processes involved in smooth pursuit eye move-
ments”. In: Brain and cognition 68.3 (2008), pp. 309–326. url: www.scopus.
com.
[28]
Uzma. Samadani. “A new tool for monitoring brain function: eye track-
ing goes beyond assessing attention to measuring central nervous system
physiology”. In: Neural Regeneration Research 10.8 (2015), pp. 1231–1233.
doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.162752. eprint: http://www.nrronline.org/
article.asp?issn=1673-5374;year=2015;volume=10;issue=8;spage=
1231;epage=1233;aulast=Samadani;t=6. url: http://www.nrronline.
org/article.asp?issn=1673-5374;year=2015;volume=10;issue=8;
spage=1231;epage=1233;aulast=Samadani;t=6.
==PAGE:64==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
58
[29]
Jun Maruta et al. “Predictive Visual Tracking: Specificity in Mild Trau-
matic Brain Injury and Sleep Deprivation”. In: Military Medicine 179.6
(June 2014), pp. 619–625. issn: 0026-4075. doi: 10 . 7205 / MILMED - D -
13 - 00420. eprint: https : / / academic . oup . com / milmed / article -
pdf/179 /6/619/ 21387144/milmed- d- 13- 00420.pdf. url: https:
//doi.org/10.7205/MILMED-D-13-00420.
[30]
Craig H.Meyer, Adrian G.Lasker, and David A.Robinson. “The upper limit
of human smooth pursuit velocity”. In: Vision Research 25.4 (1985), pp. 561–
563. doi: 10.3758/s13428-018-01193-y. url: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0042-6989(85)90160-9.
[31]
C. Rashbass. “The relationship between saccadic and smooth tracking eye
movements”. In: The Journal of physiology 159 (2 1961), pp. 326–338. url:
https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1961.sp006811.
[32]
Graham Teasdale and Bryan Jennett. “ASSESSMENT OF COMA AND
IMPAIRED CONSCIOUSNESS: A Practical Scale”. In: The Lancet 304.7872
(1974), pp. 81–84. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140- 6736(74)
91639-0.
[33]
Dewan MC et al. “Estimating the global incidence of traumatic brain in-
jury”. In: Journal of Neurosurgery 130.4 (2019), pp. 1080–1097. doi: 10.
3171/2017.10.JNS17352.
[34]
Dessy AM et al. “Review of Assessment Scales for Diagnosing and Moni-
toring Sports-related Concussion”. In: Cureus 9.12 (2017), e1922. doi: 10.
7759/cureus.1922.
[35]
The pandas development team. pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas. Version latest.
Feb. 2020. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3509134. url: https://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.3509134.
[36]
Kikuro Fukushima et al. “Cognitive processes involved in smooth pursuit
eye movements: behavioral evidence, neural substrate and clinical correla-
tion”. In: Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience 7 (2013), p. 4. issn: 1662-5137.
doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2013.00004. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/
article/10.3389/fnsys.2013.00004.
[37]
K. Holmqvist et al. Eye tracking: a comprehensive guide to methods and
measures. Oxford University Press, 2011. isbn: ISBN 978-0-19969708-3.
[38]
Steven W. Smith. The Scientist & Engineer’s Guide to Digital Signal Pro-
cessing. 3rd. California Technical Publishing, 1999. isbn: ISBN 0-9660176-
7-6.
[39]
J. W. Peirce et al. “PsychoPy2: experiments in behavior made easy.” In:
Behavior Research Methods. (2019). doi: 10.3758/s13428-018-01193-y.
==PAGE:65==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[40]
D.C. Niehorster, R. Andersson, and M. Nyström. “Titta: A toolbox for
creating PsychToolbox and Psychopy experiments with Tobii eye trackers.”
In: Behavior Research Methods (2020). url: https://doi.org/10.3758/
s13428-020-01358-8.
[41]
Tobii Coordinate systems. url: http : / / developer . tobiipro . com /
commonconcepts/coordinatesystems.html.
[42]
P. Bœkgaard, Michael Kai Petersen, and Jakob Eg Larsen. “In the twin-
kling of an eye: Synchronization of EEG and eye tracking based on blink
signatures”. In: 2014 4th International Workshop on Cognitive Information
Processing (CIP). 2014, pp. 1–6.
[43]
Animating Circular Paths Using CSS3 Animations. url: https://www.
useragentman.com/blog/2013/03/03/animating- circular- paths-
using-css3-transitions/.
[44]
Allen Ngo. Face Off: Microsoft Surface Pro 4 Core i7 vs. Surface Pro
4 Core i5 vs. Surface Pro 4 Core m3. Dec. 2015. url: https://www.
notebookcheck.net/Face-Off-Microsoft-Surface-Pro-4-Core-i7-
vs-Surface-Pro-4-Core-i5-vs-Surface-Pro-4-Core-m3.156031.0.
html.
[45]
SAMSUNG LTL123YL01-001 General Features. url: https://www.panelook.
com/LTL123YL01-001_Samsung_12.3_LCM_overview_27956.html.
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk
