==PAGE:1==
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
First Look at Multi Anode Selective Electroplating
Master Thesis
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Materials and Surface Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
First Look at Multi Anode Selective Electroplating
Master Thesis
August, 2020
By
Niels Peter Nielsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Materials and Surface Engineering, Building 425, 2800 Kgs. Lyn-
gby Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six and a half months in the Section of Materials and
Surface Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering, at the Technical University
of Denmark, DTU, in fulfillment of the degree Materials and Manufacturing Engineering,
MSc Eng.
All work, unless stated otherwise, has been carried out by the author. All data has been
documented, to the best of his ability.
I, Niels Peter Nielsen, understand that my thesis will become part of the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark’s permanent collection.
Niels Peter Nielsen - s133652
Signature
Date
ii
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The following paper will introduce the reader to the world of localized electrochemical
depositions.
While not every aspect of every system is covered.
The reader will be
introduced to the general mechanisms involved in: Brush plating, Current Screen(CS)
Plating, Anodes Shaped Controlled(ASC) Plating and High Speed Selective Jet Elec-
trodeposition(HSSJP). This introduction will help the reader understand the mechanisms
of a newly proposed method, first introduced in this paper, which is being referred to Multi
Anode Controlled(MAS) electroplating.
The term MAS-electroplating covers any system that utilizes multiple anodes, capable of
achieving micro selective depositions; i.e. ASC-plating and HSSJP. The anodes must be
able to be activated independent of each other, allowing localized deposition to take place
over a large area without the need of mechanical movement in the x or y plain.
Possible implementation in the production of print circuit boards, to reduce manufacturing
times, will be examined.
This paper will also show the building and design ideas, behind a test-platform. Built by
the author, as part of the larger thesis project. This test-platform looks at utilizing both
ASC-plating and HSSJP in an array of anodes. The test-platform is meant to show the
capability’s of MAS-electroplating. A control system is also made, that aims to automate
many of the aspects.
While the test-platform ran into many problems and ultimately nothing conclusive can be
said about MAS-electroplating. The system was able to produce localized depositions,
focused under selected anodes. It also showed that a line of thicker copper could be
plated, while the line had varying thickness, it remained connected.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
[Christian Nicolai Nielsen], [MSc Civil Engineering], [Creator of this LaTeX template.]
[Karen Pantleon], [Associate Professor], [Supervisor]
[Karen supported this new idea and agreed to supervise the project.]
[Peter Jacob Schwencke Westermann], [Technician], [Sub-Supervisor]
[Peter, supplied electrolyte solutions and helped carried out X-ray fluorescence analysis.]
[Lars Lund Jørgensen], [Oticon], [Toolmaker]
[Lars helped supply, stereolithographic, 3D printed parts.]
[Kenneth Weiss], [DTU], [technician]
[Kenneth, supplied stepper motor and lead screw and other small electronic compo-
nents.]
iv
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction to Localized Electroplating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Brush Plating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Current Screen Plating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.3
Anode Shape Controlled Electroplating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.4
High Speed Selective Jet Electrodeposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
Introducing the Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.1
Multi Anode Selective Electroplating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.2
Print Circuit Boards
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Experimental Platform
13
2.1
Set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.1.1
Anodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.1.2
Housing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.1.3
The Drive System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.1.4
Cathode Holder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.1.5
Other Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
2.2
Electrical Hardware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.2.1
Controlling the Anodes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.2.2
Other Hardware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.3
Coding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.4
Final Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3
Experiments and Results
29
3.1
Light Optical Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.2
Alicona Infinite Focus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
3.3
X-ray Fluorescence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
4
Concluding Remarks
44
Bibliography
45
Appendices
47
A General Electroplating
48
B Set-up Photos
52
C Controll System
57
D Controll Code
59
E
Sample Preparation
61
F
Sample Overview
63
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
v
==PAGE:8==
G Gold Bath
64
vi
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
E
lectrochemical deposition is by definition ”the process of depositing one metal on an-
other by electrolysis.”[1] The process is over 200 years old and its’ exact discovery
is still debated. However, Luigi Brugnatelli is credited with preforming the first electrode-
position of gold on silver in the early 19th century. He achieved this on the bases of his
colleague’s, Allessandro Volta, invention the ”Voltaic Pile”. Which was the first electric
battery. Discovered only a few years earlier.[2, 3]
Since then the process has become a pillar in the surface technology industry. Once the
dynamo was invented, by Michael Faraday in 1831,[4] the process truly entered the indus-
trial age. As it became possible to produce high currents, allowing for mass production
and plating of larger components.[5]
Now electroplating can be found in almost every production industry, from aerospace to
the design industry. Providing things like improved; corrosion resistance, wear resistance,
reflectivity, conductivity, visual appeal, etc.
The field of electroplating has also broaden over the past 200 years. This paper will
force on localized electroplating. So general electroplating should be understood by the
reader as it will not be explained in the following chapters. For a general introduction
there are many good books; [6] can be recommended. Else the author has provided a
brief introduction to the subject in appendix A. Taken from earlier, unpublished, work done
by the author.
1.1
Introduction to Localized Electroplating
When talking about localized or selective electroplating, a quick google search might lead
someone to believe that brush plating was the topic at hand. However, selective electro-
plating is so much more. Any process where electrochemical deposition is done in only
a specific area of a substrate, would fall under this category. In the industry today there
are several different methods for selective electroplating and the scientific community has
even more. In this section some of the methods will be presented, starting with the big
one.
1.1.1
Brush Plating
Brush plating can be very complicated when it has to be an exact science, since there
are many variables that need to be controlled. However, at the same time it can be very
simple, if criteria for end product are not that high.
In its simplest form brush plating relies on a structure that has a very large surface area in
order to hold electrolyte. This structure should also be somewhat flexible, so it dose not
brake or scratch the working surface. So something like a sponge, cloth or brush would
work well, hence the name. The structure should be non-conductive, as a anode will be
connected to the side opposite the working surface and the current must flow through the
electrolyte.
As the electrolyte is suspended in the porous structure, the current fields will be limited
by the shape of the structure. In this way electroplating will only take place where the
structure touches the surface. The electrolyte can be continually supplied via a pump or
the structure can be dipped in the electrolyte, allowing it to be absorbed.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
1
==PAGE:10==
Brush plating is very flexible as it can be used on very large parts, very small parts and it
can be use on work sites. This means it can be used for large machine tools, too large to
fit in a conventional bath, to cover wielding and a wide range of other tasks. However, in
order to achieve this flexibility, brush plating sacrifices on precision. It is also very labour
intensive and requires a skilled work force. The ability of the operator will for example
determine the uniformity of the thickness and how sharp the edges of the plated area are.
Of course they could just place some impervious tape on the areas they don’t want to plate,
giving a very sharp edge. This brings us to the next form on selective electroplating.
1.1.2
Current Screen Plating1
Current screen(CS) plating, also referred to as mask plating, may in it essence be the
simplest of all selective electroplating methods. As mentioned earlier the current field
in an electrolyte will determine where the plating takes place. CS-plating prevents the
current from reaching the surface in certain areas. This can be done in a number of ways,
for instance using tape. However this would take a lot of manual labour if the part is very
large or needs to be reproduced several times.
Figure 1.1: Shows the steps taken when creating an
all metal atomic force microscope probe, using CS-
plating. [7]
A more productive method, would
involve cutting a stencil into a
non-conductive panel. This way
the panel can be placed in front
of the substrate, only allowing the
current through the pattern. The
panel can be re-used indefinitely,
if it is chemically stable. This is
of course only viable if the part is
not too complex and needs to be
reproduced several times.
This
particular forming of CS-plating is
sometimes referred to as stencil
plating.
The screen could also be formed
by liquid or viscous martial that
can solidify; e.g.
thermosets,
photoresists or paints. This can
be applied in a very flexible man-
ner.
Current screen plating can be
used beyond surface treatment. It has also found its way into precision manufacturing
with the help of electroforming. Electroforming is a manufacturing process that utilizes
the precision and repeatability of electroplating, to create three dimensional(3D) parts.[7,
8] This process is only possible while implementing some form of localized electroplating.
In fig. 1.1 the electroforming fabrication process for a nickel based atomic force micro-
scope probe, is described. It gives in-site into how CS-plating can be used and the level
of precision.
CS-plating is not the only localized electroplating process that can be used to creating 3D
structures on a surface.
1This name may not be agreed upon by the eletrochemical community, so citing should be done with
care.
2
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:11==
1.1.3
Anode Shape Controlled Electroplating1
Anode shape controlled(ASC) plating is a lesser known process, that can be used to
make 3D structures. The process stands out when compared to the previous mentioned
methods. Where brush plating and CS-plating physically restrict the movement of ions to
the substrate, ASC-plating relies on the law of electrostatic attraction; i.e. Coulomb’s law
eq. (1.1).
F = κ · q1 · q2
r2
(1.1)
Where F is the electric force, κ the coulomb constant, r the distance of separation and
q1, q2 are charges.
Looking at 1.1 it becomes clear that distance is a key factor when it comes to the force
of the attraction. An increased electric force will allow the carrier ion to pass through
the electrolyte in a more direct manner, as it will have an easier time overcoming any
obstacles; i.e. other charged particles.
ASC-plating utilizes this effect to plate very locally, directly on the surface under the anode.
This is where the name is derived from. It does however require the two electrodes to be
extremely close to one another, in the ranges of tens of microns. This makes it very difficult
to implement in industry.
Another limiting aspect is the form factor. When the electrodes are in such close proximity,
the amount of electrolyte between them is minimal. Therefore large and normal electrodes
will deplete the solution of ions in a very short time2. At normal current densities ions will
be caught in the outer current fields as they diffuse between the two electrodes, leading
to a very uneven coating or the formation of dendrites. One way to counteract this is by
reducing the size of one of the electrodes. A decrease in the area of the electrode will
decrease the size of depleted volume in a cubic manner, but the surface to the volume will
only decrease quadratically. This leads to a more favourable surface to volumes ratios
for diffusion. If the electrodes becomes small enough, it will fall under a group known
as Ultramicroelectrodes(UME), which are categorised as any electrode with one or more
dominions that are smaller than 25µm.[9]
2Assuming they are not sacrificial. At which point the shape would no longer be a constant.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
3
==PAGE:12==
These UMEs have gained popularity in the field cyclic voltammetry. When the mass trans-
fer takes on a more hemispherical profile, see fig.1.2, it allows for increased current den-
sity. This can be seen in eq.1.2. The smaller the electrode radius ra the larger the current
density. In voltammertry this has allowed for testing in resistive media, increased scan
rates and of course testing of very small volumes.[10]
Figure 1.2: Diffusion layer profile of a 2mm vs 2µm anode.[10]
Ultramicroelectrodes also allow for some of the fastest deposition rates(µms−1) in elec-
troplating due to these high current density.
Ids = nFDc∞
ra
+ nFD
1
2 c∞
π
1
2 t
1
2
(1.2)
Where Ids is the current density, F is farday’s constant, D is the diffusion coefficient, r
the distance from the center of the sphere, t is the time and c is the concentration as a
function of r. This equation is dirived from Fick’s second law in spherical coordinates.
With the conditions[11];
at
t = 0 and r > ra; c = c∞
(1.3)
at
t > 0; r = ∞, c = c∞
(1.4)
at
r = ra; c = 0
(1.5)
Looking at 1.2 it is clear the equation can be broken into time dependant (right) and non-
time dependant (left). The time dependant part is referred to as the Cottrell equation.[12]
This becomes negligible as t →∞and all that remains is the left side:
Ids = nFDc∞
ra
(1.6)
i.e. Steady State.
When using a disk shaped microeletrode eq.1.7 can be modified as derived by Saito in
[13]. In this case the substitution ra = πrd4−1 can be used, meaning the steady state
becomes:
4
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:13==
Idd = 4nFDc∞
πrd
(1.7)
By looking at table.1.1 the reader can see how decreasing the diameter proportionally
decrease the time needed to reach steady state.
Table 1.1: An estimation of times were the response will be purely Cottrell or find steady
state, depended on the size of electrode.[11]
Diameter of Sphere
Cottrell Response
Steady State Response
µm
s
s
0.05
<2.5 × 10−9
>4 × 10−4
0.5
<2.5 × 10−7
>4 × 10−2
5
<2.5 × 10−5
>4
50
<2.5 × 10−3
>4 × 103
Using UMEs also produces extremely small current fields, so very fine localized deposition
can take place. This in combination with the rapid plating speeds achieved by using
UMEs, has given rise to exploration of creating 3D structures using only ASC-plating. As
mentioned earlier, the industrial applications don’t seem to be there quite yet. However,
many studies have had remarkable results, as can be see in fig1.5
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1.3:
Structures created using UMEs (a) 25µm diameter UME, scale 100µm[14]
(b) Unknown UME diameter, scale 200 µm[15] (c) 45µm diameter UME, scale 100µm[16]
On top of problems with implementation, UMEs’ potential in the production industry is
limited due to their size. Even with plating rates of 5-867µmmin−1 [14]. The fact that only
a surface area of 500µm2 is being treated at any given time, would lead to extremely long
processing times for anything bigger then a few centimeters.
Implementing several UMEs could be a possible solution, however problems arise when
placed too close to each other. When the UMEs are not ”extremely”(many times more
than their diameter) far apart, their diffusion profiles may start to over lap. This will lead to
a more linear, apposed to a hemispherical, profile. Decreasing the beneficial effects and
every losing current efficiencies, in comparison to an electrode that has the same total
surface area as the combined UMEs.[17, 18]
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
5
==PAGE:14==
1.1.4
High Speed Selective Jet Electrodeposition
Another way to increase diffusion, is by reducing the diffusion layer, also know as Nernst
Diffusion Layer; described in appendix A. This is one of the basic principles of High Speed
Selective Jet Electrodeposition (HSSJE) and was patented by NASA in 1974, under a
different name.[19] The process relies on a jet of, fresh or recycled, electrolyte being
projected onto a cathodic surface. The high speed aspect is a result of the decreased
diffusion layer, eqs. (1.8) to (1.10) show how the diffusion layer affects the current limit
within the system.
J = −D dc
dx = Dc∞−cs
δN
(1.8)
Jlimit(cs −→0) = Dc∞
δN
(1.9)
Ilimit = zFJlimit = nFDc∞
δN
(1.10)
Where J is the diffusion flux, x is the distance between two points of interest, Jlimit is the
max diffusion flux and Ilimit is the maximum amount of current for the reaction.
The diffusion layer thickness can be theoretically approximated using eqs. (1.11) and (1.12).[20]
Here it can be seen that velocity (V∞) has a reducing effect on the layer thickness.
δlam = L0.1V
1
6 D
1
3
V 0.5
∞
(1.11)
and for turbulent flow:
δturb ∝L0.1V
17
30 D
1
3
V 0.9
∞
(1.12)
The selective aspect of HSSJE can be explained by looking at fig. 1.4. Here the wall-jet
is shown. The wall-jet is the area around the impingement region where the electrolyte
forms a very thin film. The electrical resistance in this area is much higher than the im-
pingement region, as explained by eq. (1.13). Therefore, little to no plating takes place in
this region.[21, 22, 23]
6
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.4: Shows a sketch of what is taking place as the surface, when a jet reaches the
substrate.[21]
R = ρL
A
(1.13)
Similar to using UMEs, HSSJE doesn’t seem to be implemented in any industrial electro-
plating. While it doesn’t require the same level of precision as UME-electroplating, Dover
et al.[21] found that the complexity of the system grew with increased layer thickness.
They theorised that the speed of the moving jetting nozzle has an effect on the deposition
rate. The longer time an area experience a current, the more deposition will take place,
as the jetting nozzle cannot keep a continues speed, due to turns and stops. The only
solution is very fine current control, that takes this into account. Another problem arises
when plating next to a previously plating track. The track will affect the flow of the elec-
trolyte. In some cases pushing the hydraulic jump right next to the impingement region.
This could cause the plating to grow off the track instead of the surface, which will become
problematic after many layers. Dover et al. found that they could build up to 0.5mm with-
out too many problems. Above that they claimed they would need ”active current control
or a levelling system”. While this may be enough, modeling may also need to be done as
certain shapes have certain effects on fluid flow, which could affect the plated region.
The heat transfer and mass transfer, behave in a similar manner. Studies with heat trans-
fer, using at jet of air, have found that there is a correlation between the size of the nozzle
and the distance from the surface.[24] It was found that the largest mass transfer in a sub-
merged system with uniform flow was observed in the area d′ d−1 = 0.5 for H d−1 < 0.8.
With parabolic flow the largest mass transfer was in the area d′ d−1 = 0.1.[25] It was also
found that the current density limit, on average, remained the same for d′ d−1 ≤0.5 when
the jet had laminar flow. For turbulent flow, the area for the stable current density limit
increased to d′ d−1 = 1.[26]
In comparison to UME-plating, HSSJE offers much higher mass transfer3 (kg s−1), this is
due to not having the same limitation on size. While still reaching extremely high depo-
3Note the units.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
7
==PAGE:16==
sition rates of up to 150µm s−1. [25] This means that interest in creating 3D structures,
using HSSJE has also presented itself as can be seen in fig. 1.5. Here the edge effect
is also marked. This is one of the problems mentioned earlier, where current is stolen by
neighbouring high points; i.e. previously plated tracks.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.5:
Structures created using UMEs (a) 25µm diameter UME, scale 100µm[14]
(b) Unknown UME diameter, scale 200 µm[15] (c) 45µm diameter UME, scale 100µm[16]
1.2
Introducing the Project
This project will look at a potentially new form of localized electroplating. This new form
of localized plating is referred to as MAS-electroplating. The project will attempt to build
a set up that can test some of the aspects of MAS-electroplating. The project has no
funding at the moment, but aims to show enough potential to justify future funding.
1.2.1
Multi Anode Selective Electroplating
The idea is quite simple, as many of the elements involved have been studied and proven
to work, as shown in the previous sections. The idea is to use multi sources of selective
deposition; i.e. UMEs and/or Micro jets. These anodic source will each be able to supply
a current independent of each other, meaning some can be transmitting current while
others are not.
The thought is; this will allow for plating to take place only under the activated anodes.
So the plated area would be designed in a similar manner to pixels on a screen and like
pixels they would need to be extremely close to each other, while still preventing any
current from traveling between them; as this would effect the localization of the plating.
This may increase interest in selective plating by UMEs and jet plating, as it eliminates
the need for movement in the x,y plain. Greatly reducing the processing time.
Furthermore MAS-electroplating can be dived into three areas of study; a system based
on an array of UMEs (MASSC), a system based on an array of jets(MASJ) and a system
that utilise both. A system that uses both will be the focus in this project and will just be
referred to as (MASS). Using both can be done in various ways. Figure 1.6 shows some
of the ways the anodes and electrolyte can be brought together.
The idea for this system was thought of, not to solve any specific problem, but rather as
8
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.6:
Shows a sketch of some different cross sections of potential anodes for
MASS-plating.
a new tool that will allow electroplating to enter new fields or increase its’ role in existing
ones. That being said, there are some areas in particular this process could become very
useful. One of these is the manufacturing of print circuit boards (PCBs).
1.2.2
Print Circuit Boards
The print circuit board can be traced back to the beginning of the 20th century. The
methods used today has roots in patents as early as 1903, but the man credited with
creating the first PCB is often Paul Eisler; with he’s patent from 1936. [27, 28]
The PCB is an important invention when it comes to production. The introduction of PCBs
has allowed for the mass production and down sizing of the majority of electrical compo-
nents found in our digital age.
PCBs allows for the connection of a number of electrical components without the need
for wires. It does this with the help of conductive tracks that run from one hole to another.
Then electrical components can be placed in the holes and finally soldered in place. This
process is much easier to industrialise than connecting wires. It also saves a huge amount
of space.
PCBs can be manufactured in a numbers of different ways and each way has its’ own
benefits and limitations. This paper will not review all of the methods, instead it will fo-
cus on the methods where MAS-electroplating could potentially be implemented as an
alliterative.
There are two main processes that can be used for forming the conductive tracks, additive
and subtractive. For additive; the tracks are given their shapes by adding copper, the most
common metal used for PCB production, to an insulating substrate using screen printing
in a electorless copper bath. There is also conductive ink printing, where a conductive ink
is printed onto an insulating substrate. The ink is often made out of small metal particles
that are suspended in a solvent. Then sintering helps the metal particles diffuse into one
another, due to the high surface energy, giving the ink track its conductive properties.[29]
For subtractive; the tracks are formed by removing copper from the insulating substrate,
leaving only the conductive copper tracks. This requires the substrate to be covered
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
9
==PAGE:18==
completely with copper before hand. Often this is done either through electroless plating
or by attaching a thin copper foil. There are many ways to remove the excess copper.
Some of these are through machining or selective etching. Selective etching is basically
the exact opposite of localized deposition. So material is removed from a selective area.
For a PCB this can be done in a few ways. One way would be a form of screen plating,
which prevents the etching from taking place everywhere. The other way this can be
done is by covering the copper with epoxy. Then removing the epoxy from everywhere
the copper tracks aren’t meant to be, using a laser or by machining. The exposed copper
will then dissolve when dipped in an etching solution.[29]
Figure 1.7: Copper foil production. Electroplating on a passivated surface like stainless
steel or Titanium will lead to bad adhesion, allowing for the deposit to be pealed off.[29]
These copper foils can be made either by rolling, where a copper ingot is pressed flat
using rollers, or by electroplating. These electroplated foils are the most common used
when making circuit. It also allows for much thinner foils than rolling. The process can be
seen in 3.1.[29]
Implementing MAS-Electroplating
This is one area where the proposed process of MAS-electroplating could be used. In-
stead of producing a full foil, MAS-electroplating could be used to print only the tracks that
are needed. Of course the print would need to be continues. Therefore, the tracks would
need to be connected, or they could not be pealed off. The connected tracks could then
be cut out, but would need to be lined up again when being laminated onto the PCB.
What might be even better, is printing the tracks onto the reinforcements PCBs’ need.
This reinforcement is often made out of some sort of polymer or glass fiber mesh. This
way the process could be made continuous and would eliminate the need for alignments.
To plate onto the mesh, would rely on nucleation taking place on the cathode, in the mesh
voids. Then having the growth envelop the strands, allowing the poorly adhered copper
to by pulled off the passivated cathodic barrel together with the mesh. A possible set-up
has been sketched and can be seen in fig. 1.8. Here the first heating system could be
used to increase the rate of annealing, if the system used glass fiber reinforcement.
This could be set up with two lines of anodes slightly askew.This set-up could be based
10
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:19==
Figure 1.8: Copper foil production. Electroplating on a passivated surface like stainless
steel or Titanium will lead to bad adhesion, allowing for the deposit to be pealed off.
on MASSC-plating, as the jet plating aspect of the process would not be needed. The
no-slip condition from fluid dynamics is assumed to be true.[30]
This would mean that fresh electrolyte will be supplied as the drum rolls. Also as the set-
up would be rather thin, only 2 rows thick. Hopefully this could be perceived as a narrow
band allowing the UMEs to keep a more hemispherical profile, also shown by Saito in
[13].
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:21==
2
Experimental Platform
In this chapter the experimental platform will be reviewed. A close look will be taken at
the set-up. Here the reasoning behind each idea will be explained. In appendix B pictures
haven been added of many of the steps. It is recommend the reader has this open when
reading this section, or looks through its after, as a visual guide.
The set-up underwent many changes throughout the experimental process. The reason
for the changes will also be covered in this chapter.
2.1
Set-up
The experimental set-up, as is often the case, is the heart of the project. Therefore, it is
important to insure the set-up is catered to the objective at hand. The first step to any
set-up is to determine its goals, capabilities and limitations. While goals are easy to set at
the start of a set-up, capabilities and limitations often first present themselves throughout
the process.
Figure 2.1: Shows a sketch of the set-up.
The set-up designed for this project has some clear goals. The first of which is simply to
hold a number of anodes, a set distance apart. Then allow electrolyte to flow along the
anodes and create a continues stream to the cathode; while distancing the anodes from
the cathode at controllable and constant intervals. The anodes need to be able to activate
independent of each other, while still discharging similar amperes. The cathode needs
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
13
==PAGE:22==
to parallel and remain equidistant from the anodes. There also needs to be variables,
meaning things like current, flow rate and speed of retraction need to be controllable.
In order to perform localized electrochemical deposition over a given area, without any
mechanical movement in the XY-plain. The set-up will apply current threw multiple an-
odes. This is the reason the anodes can not touch. If they were connected in anyway,
there is a chance that the current will stray, decreasing the localization of the plating. Sim-
ilar to HSSJP, the electrolyte will be sprayed onto the cathode. This is purely to get some
higher plating rates. When trying to localize the deposition in this manner, the distance
from the cathode will play a large role as shown in the HSSJP section. Therefore being
able to control this is very important. This is also the reason paralleling is important. The
distance of each anode from the cathode should be the same.
2.1.1
Anodes
This set-up was meant to use 0.6mm needles, used for syringes, as anodes. Utilizing the
profile of a tube shaped anode as shown in fig. 1.6. This was mainly due to cost, at 1dkk
per needle. This turned out to be a good decision, as by the end of the project over 150
needles would be used. The top half of the needles were cut so they formed semi circles.
This allows liquid to flow through the side and out the end. The cut also allows the needle
to clamp onto a wire, which would supply the current, see fig. 2.3a. There are a total of
24 anodes evenly spaced in a 4.6mm square, meaning there is no anode in the center.
The anodes were meant to be cast in epoxy, so they could be sanded and polished. The
epoxy would also hold the anodes in place. This changed as it became clear that holding
the needles in place while pouring epoxy would be very difficult, as well as the danger that
epoxy could make its way into the needles blocking them. Instead the needles would be
held in place by a 3D part, created using stereolithography, as seen in fig. 2.2. This part
was supplied by Oticon, the authors work place, as DTU was closed at the time. Due to
the 2020 pandemic.
Figure 2.2: Shows a 3D model of the anode holder.
Before the anodes could be placed
in the holder.
They needed to
be cut, then clamped onto cop-
per wires.
Next the resistance
was measured between the an-
ode and the wire, anything <0.5Ω
was accepted. As this was about
the resistance measured when
the positive and negative clamps
from the potential meter were
connected.
The cut changed
over time as there were problems
in the design.
In fig. 2.3 the
three different cuts can be seen
with fig. 2.3a being the final de-
sign. The size of the needles also
changed, as clamping on to the
copper wire was difficult. The fi-
nal needles were 0.9mm Ø, which
allowed the copper wire to slip in without needing to cut the needle. This meant the holes
in the holder needed to be expended using a dip drill.
The needles are made of an unknown form of stainless steel.
Therefore after being
14
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:23==
clamped into the wires, they were plated with nickel, followed up with a thin layer of gold.
The nickel layer prevents the gold from diffusing into the copper-tin wires. Also the nickel
oxide that forms on the surfaces, does so much slower then the chromium oxide that
forms on the stainless steels. This allows the samples to be transported to the gold bath,
before the passivisation layer is formed. The anodes needed to be plated with gold as
this will insure dimensional stability as the gold is insoluble in the acid copper bath.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.3:
Shows three different methods of cutting the anodes. The final design (c),
made it much easier to plate with nickel and gold.
After being plated the needles needed to be insulated from each other. This was first done
with heat-shrink tubing. Later designs, fig. 2.3b, relied on nail polish and finally a metal
corrosion paint know as Hammerite was used in combination with heat-shrink tubing. The
tubing worked to strengthen the joint. The gold plated needles were dipped into the paint.
Then using a thin copper wire the wet paint was removed from the center of the needle
and left to dry. The wires were also covered with paint. As any small scratch in the wire
coating could lead to a disconcert, as the copper wire is vulnerable to the acidic copper
bath.
Finally they were placed in the holder, then pushed till the extend slightly out the other
side and glued in place using two component epoxy. When dry, the extruding tips where
sanded down using 500, 1000, 4000 grit sand paper. Then the exposed tips were plated
with gold once again.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
15
==PAGE:24==
Problems with the Anodes
Creating the anodes turned out to be the hardest part. Not only was it extremely labour
intensive, plating them turned out to be nearly impossible. Long small tubes like these
are very difficult to plate. This was shown with the fist set of anodes. After being used for
a few minutes the voltage started swinging. The resistance between some of the anodes
and ends of wire increased drastically from the <0.5Ωstander to a few kΩ. On top of this
a resistance could be measured between an anode and any other anode. Indicating that
current could flow between anodes. This lead to the first system being taken apart and
sure enough, some of the anodes had experienced a disconnect. See fig. 2.4.
Figure 2.4:
Shows the first set of anodes. Here a disconnect can be seen on the final
two anodes.
Disconnect
It became clear that the gold coating wasn’t good enough. To improve the coating, the
anode was changed to look like fig. 2.3c. This would help the current fields reach the
inside of the tube. The anode were also plated in smaller sets, first two sets of twelve
and finally fours sets of six. Originally, all twenty-four anodes were plated at the same
time, while being moved around the bath by hand. For the newer anodes they were bent
in a chandelier shape, separating them from each other. The current was also brought
down, since decreasing the current can help produce a more uniform coating. This turned
out to be the right dissection as the area of the anodes had been set too high. The area
was estimated to be 119µm2 and the gold bath had a recommended current density of
0.3Adm−1. Originally the the current was set to run at 5mA for each anode in the bath.
However, after the first bath some small black particles could be seen on the bottom of the
gold bath. At first it was thought that the black particles were carbon that was left behind
from the soot that had formed on the heat-shrink tubing. But X-ray Fluorescence(XRF)
showed that the particles were gold. This was an indication that the currents density
was too high. Most likely causing the brake down of water, which could have formed
16
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:25==
some very fine particles of either gold hydroxide (Au(OH3)), gold(III) oxide (Au2O3)[31]
or some other form of oxide. The gold bath is a technical bath, where the exact com-
position is not known. That being said, gold is very stable and doesn’t normally want
to form hydroxide or oxides. Therefore, there is also a chance that the black particles
are just pure gold particles on a nm scale.
This will appear black as shown in [32].
Figure 2.5: Here anodes can be seen before
(on top) and after gold plating.
The high current density was further con-
firmed when a following anode design was
accidentally plated with 5A and the bath
instantly, under 5 seconds, turned black.
Meaning the black particles form earlier
were definitely a result of high current den-
sity. So the current density was brought
down to 1mA per anode and they were
plated for 20mins.
The thickness is un-
known, as the current density is unknown
and as of this time, the anodes have not
yet been dissected.
A thickness can be
estimated to >3µm given the data provided
by the manufacturer. The final coating turn
out visually fine, as seen in fig. 2.5 . How-
ever, no test were done to see if they were
stable as anodes in the bath, which should
have been done.
Stray Current
Initially the stray current was thought to
be due to electrolyte being absorbed into
the wire insulation, which is believed to be
made of nylon, or the heat-shrink tubing.
Therefore, the wires were exchanged with
some wires designed for electrochemical
baths, see fig. 2.5 vs fig. 2.4. The anodes
were also coated with Hammerit paint, as mentioned earlier. However, even in the final
set-up a resistance, anywhere from 100kΩto 1MΩ, could be measured between anodes.
This is most likely because the electrolyte between them is acting as a bridge. Which
could be overcome with some design modifications that increases the distance between
the inlets in the anodes.
2.1.2
Housing
The housing holds the anode holder and makes sure the electrolyte flows out along the
anodes. The housing design needed three openings; one for the anodes, one for the wires
(supplying current) and one that allowed electrolyte into the housing. The housing also
needed to be connected to the drive system, so it could move away from the cathode. This
design would be easier than attempting to move the anodes on their own. The housing
design changed a few times along the way. The original plan was to 3D print many of
the parts. The first housing that was printed was made on an Ulitmaker 3+, a hobby 3D
printer, it can be seen in fig. 2.7
Both ends where open. One end would keep the anode holder in place and the other end
needed to be corked. To this end, holes where drilled into a rubber cork, using a 1.4mm
drill bit. The cork was to prevent electrolyte from flowing out of the system and the holes
allowed the wires to reach the anodes while still being sealed. The 1.4mm holes were
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.6: Shows the Arduino-Nano specifications and a diagram of it’s pins.
slightly smaller than the 1.5mm wires, helping to form a seal. Finally, the tube on the top
would let electrolyte flow into the system. The holes system would be mounted to the
side of a polypropylene (PP) container, which meant the electrolyte could be collected
and recycled.
The printed parts, had a few problems. The cylinder did not have a perfect circular cross
section, which meant it was difficult to contain the electrolyte with a plug. Any holds or
defeats would lead to the shell filling with electrolyte and finally the parts didn’t slide very
well on each other.
Instead a convectional 50Ø PP pipe was used. Ends could be bought for the pipe, so it
was certain there wasn’t any leaking. On the one end a 30mm hole was drilled for the
anode holder. On the other end twenty-four 1.4mm and one 8mm hole were drilled for
the anodes and a brass bushing. The brass bushing would allow the electrolyte to flow
into the tube. However, brass is not stable in the acidic copper bath. So the bushing was
dipped in hammerit. Once everything was pulled through, the inside of each end was
filled with sanitary silicone. This would provide a seal along the wires, bushing and anode
holder. Care was taken to insure the openings weren’t covered.
2.1.3
The Drive System
The lack of funding meant that it would be difficult to get a new drive system. Luckily, the
additive manufacturing department of DTU was able to supply a recycled stepper motor,
18
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:27==
which was already attached to a lead screw. However, the specks weren’t known. So
the precision would need to be measured. The measurement were carried out using a
dial indicator. The dial was placed behind the set-up, this way the contact point would
be pressed in as the housing retracted. The housing was connected to the drive system
using a 3D printed mounting part and two standard 50Ø pipe holders.
2.1.4
Cathode Holder
The cathode holder had to hold the cathode at a constant position, while allowing it to
parallel the anodes. This was achieved by mounting a 3D printed ball joint to the wall of
the container. Then holder itself was placed on the ball joint. The ball joint helps insure
paralleling with the anodes. The three parts that made up the cathode holder and ball
joint, were all created using stereolithography and were also supplied by Oticon.
Figure 2.7: Shows the cathode holder.
Two brass plates were connected to the cathode holder via stainless steel bottles. The
bottle were not tightened. Instead springs were placed between the nut and tightening
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
19
==PAGE:28==
point. This allowed the plates to be pulled away from the surface, so samples could be
placed. Once released, the springs would fasten the sample to the plate. While also
providing a current path. Copper wire was wrapped around the thread of the bolts and
lead out of the container, allowing it to be connected to the negative pole of the power
supply.
2.1.5
Other Equipment
Other important equipment was; a container that will hold the anodes, the cathode and
the electrolyte. This was first a PP container with holes cut in it, but later a 3D printed part
was made. The inside of the 3D part was coated with hammerit and acrylic glass was
glued onto two of the sides. This way the cathode could be observed. A flexible tube was
connected to the bottom allowing the recycled electrolyte to flow back into the pump. The
pump needed to be a chemically stable pump and needed a filter, as any smaller particles
could clog the anodes. The pump was supplied by DTU Galvolab.
Figure 2.8: Shows the full set-up, as sketched in chapter 2
20
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:29==
Two parts were also designed to hold the indicator dial, that measured how far the housing
had traveled. They are the blue parts seen in fig. 2.8. A box and lid were needed to hold
all the electronics. The box helped insure that cables wouldn’t loosen if the set-up was
moved. It also protected the electronics form any mishaps with the electrolyte. Both the
box and lid were 3D printed.
Finally, there are some clamps that have been made to hold the ends of the pp tube in
place. The pressure within the system was too high for the seal to hold on its own and
being made out of PP, glue didn’t work very well.
2.2
Electrical Hardware
In this section each area of the electrical hardware will be presented. The most basic
electrical components will not be explained. It is expected that the reader knows what
resistors, capacitor, stepper motors, push buttons and bread boards are. While not a
necessity to understand the mechanisms behind them, it is important to understand what
they do, as it won’t be a focus of this paper to explain them. Other components will be
explained in more detail, to understand why they are being used.
The ’brain’ of this system will be an arduinon-nano. The nano is a common control sys-
tem used by many due to it’s simplicity and affordability. The nano is controlled by a
ATmega328 micro controller and is programmed using Arduino IDE, which is based on
the programming language C/C++. The nano is able to receive and deliver digital in/output
in 14 pins and analog signals in 8 pins.The difference between analog and digital signals,
is that an analog signal sends information through electric pulses with varying amplitude.
A digital signal, sends information in binary format, which can be high or low. Each bit is
representative of two distinct amplitudes. The analog pins on an arduino mainly function
as input pins, turning the signal into values from 0-1023. Analog signals are difficult for the
arduino to produce. To this end the nano has six pins that provide pulse width modulation
(PWM), a way of recreating an imperfect analog signal by switching a digital output high
and low very quickly.
Figure 2.9: Shows the Arduino-Nano specifications and a diagram of it’s pins.1
2.2.1
Controlling the Anodes
What might be the main feature of the project is controlling the anodes. The anodes
need to be able to be controlled individually. This posed a problem as the Arduino-Nano
only has 14 digital pin-outs and many of these would be needed for other functions. To
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
21
==PAGE:30==
solve this problem three 74hc595 8-bit shift registers were used. The following subsection
explains how a shift register works. Using the shift registers only requires 3 pins from the
Nano and gave the option of powering 24 anodes. The registers are powered by their
own power supply. This power supply is the one that controls the reaction and will be the
one that changes depending on the test. From the registers the current flows through 24
individual light-emitting diode (LED). This allows the technician to insure that current is
traveling through the system. For this set-up blue LEDs have been used. The blue LEDs
have a voltage rage of 2.8-3.5V. This works well with the shift register, that operates with
a rage of 2-6V. These LEDs let the user know that current is flowing.
In most electrolyte solutions a current density range is given, so in the lab a current can
be set on the power supply. However, in this set-up the power supply will need to be set
using voltage, as the current will change depending on how many anodes are active. The
current density for a sulfuric acid copper sulphate bath is between 1-10Adm−2 [6, page
228]. So for this set-up a current of 0.64-6.4mA can be used per anode, derived by;
Amps = 1 A
dm2 ∗π ∗0.45mm
2
2
= 0.00064A
(2.1)
Using Ohm’s law an appropriate resistance can be found. Given that the voltage needs
to be between 2.8-3.5V and that the ampere need to be between 1-6mA per anode.
Resistor1 = 2.8V
1mA = 2800Ω
&
3.5V
2800Ω= 1.25mA
(2.2)
Resistor2 = 3.5V
2mA = 1750Ω
&
2.8V
1750Ω= 1.6mA
(2.3)
From equation 2.2&2.3 it is clear that the full range of ampere might be difficult using
normal resistors. One way to achieve this would be to switch resistors between each
range of ampere. The other way would be to use a variable resistor, more information
about variable resistors will come in a following section. The variable resistors in this range
are not that expensive, but as 24 of them are needed, the price exceeded the budget of
this project. So for this project two types of standard resistors were considered and only
two ranges of ampere could be studied. The resistors used would be in accordance with
equation 2.2&2.3.
While ordering new variable resistors would be too expensive, there was accesses to
some small 150Ωvariable resistors that were available from a personal project. These
could be used to help insure that the resistance from the shift registers to the anodes were
the same for all 24 of them. This is important as the setup is voltage controlled.
It turned out that the resistance through out the system was more than enough. So no
standard resistors were needed. The voltage was just set high and current limiting function
of the power supply was used instead.
Shift Registers
It is important to understand how a shift register works, as it justify the coding that follows.
As mentioned earlier, the register can turn three signal pins into 8 individual signals. It
does so, by utilizing one pin as a clock-pin. The clock-pin works like a base signal, every
time the clock-pin is high the register prepares to receive data and stores it. If the data-
pin is high at the same time as the clock-pin the register will save the data as high. If the
data-pin is low, it will be saved as low. When the clock-pin goes low again that data is
shifted into the first slot of memory. An 8-bit shift register, like the ones being used can
22
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.10:
Shows the part of the circuit diagram that controls the anodes. The 9v
battery is used to represent the power supply, it does not mean the system is getting 9v.
store 8 signals. Each time the clock-pin goes high/low, that data is shifted in one slot;
which looks like this 10000001 −→01000000. After the 8th slot that data is discarded,
unless the register is connected in series with another register, as seen in figure 2.12. In
this case the data keeps shifting as long as there are slots. The third pin, known as the
latch pin, is used to signal the shift register when it’s time to output data. So when the
latch pin is low, it is ready to receive the binary data. Once it is set high, the binary code
has decided which pins the shift register has to set high.
Variable Resistors
A variable resistor can reference a number of different things. But the over all term covers
a system which has the goal of lowering the out going current as compared to the incoming
current. This difference in current is dependent on the circumstances, which is different
for each type of system.
Figure 2.11: Here a trimmer is shown.2
In this project trimmers are used. A trim-
mers has three pins. Two of these pins are
connected to a resistor track. The resis-
tance between these two pins, is the max-
imum resistance the trimmer can achieve.
This value is how the trimmers are desig-
nated. The third pin is connected to the
track on a slider. This way, the third pin
can be connected to any point on the track.
When the positive pole is connected to the
first pin and the negative pole is on the
third pin; the resistance will be decided by
where on the track the third pin is con-
nected. This is the same process as for
a potentiometer, however the resistance
track on a trimmer will often wear down
a lot faster than on a potentiometer. The
second pin can also be connected to the negative pole. This will allow the current to be
split, depending on the amount of resistance in the rest of the system that follows the
trimmer.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
23
==PAGE:32==
2.2.2
Other Hardware
To control the set-up three buttons and a rotary encoder were implemented. The simple
push buttons are used for starting, stopping and testing the LEDs. The set-button, which
is the one used for testing, allows current to flow through one anode at a time. This way
the operator can see that the same amount of ampere are flowing through the individual
anodes by looking at the power supply. If an anode is demonstrating lower or higher
ampere than expected, for the given voltage, the trimmer for that anode can be utilized.
The start-button, starts the sequence. A sequence can be to set a single or multiple
anodes as high, while retracting the anodes at a set speed. The system could be set
up to store several sequences, but for testing only one was stored at a time. The stop-
button is directly connected to the reset pin of Nano, so activating it will restart the whole
program, causing a sequence to stop or turning off any activated anodes.
The anodes must be brought in contact with the cathode plate. Then be able to take
small controlled steps away from the plate again. This way the effect of distance from
cathode could be investigated. To move the anodes a rotary encoder was implemented.
The encoder would signal the stepper motor to mover up or down, depending one which
way it was turned.
Rotary Encoder
Figure 2.12: Shows a diagram of a rotary encoder. It shows how the signal of output A
and B over lap as the encoder is turned.3
The encoder has five pins. Two for current, ground and Vc, and three output pins. The
one output gives the encoder a push button function, while the other two can be used to
tell which way the encoder is turning and how many times it turned. Looking at fig. 2.12;
it can be seen that if output A is set high while output B is low or if A is set low while B is
high, the encoder most be turning counter clockwise and vice versa. Then through coding
the system will determine what happens when the encoder is turned.
2.3
Coding
An overview of the code can be seen in appendix D. Many changes have been made
throughout the process. However, this code does show the pins and gives the reader a
general idea of how it works. In this section some of the changes that have been made
will be shown and some examples of the sequences that have been used, will also be
shown.
Originally the encoder was meant to give varying commands, depended on weather of
not it was pushed. What is meant by this is; that pushing the encoder button would set
24
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:33==
the amount of steps to be 40. This would work like a fast movement mode. Then pushing
the button again, would enter a slow mode. Where one ”click” would equal one step. This
didn’t work too well and caused the stepper to jolt on fast mode. So the encoder was set
to run at one speed. In the original code it was set to 20 steps. This was later changed to
one step per ”click”. Using the measuring dial this was determined to equal approximately
10µm ± 5µm. The changes to the code can be seen in listing 2.1
1 // This section of code controls the rotary encoder.
aState = digitalRead(RotaryAPin);//It reads the current state of the output.
3
if (aState != aLastState){
//Then checks if the encoder has been moved.
if (digitalRead(RotaryBPin) != aState){
5
digitalWrite(DirectionPin ,LOW);
7
delay(1);
digitalWrite(StepPin ,HIGH);
9
delay(1);
digitalWrite(StepPin ,LOW);
11 }
else {
13
digitalWrite(DirectionPin ,HIGH);
15
delay(1);
digitalWrite(StepPin ,HIGH);
17
delay(1);
digitalWrite(StepPin ,LOW);
19 }}
Listing 2.1: A difficult example in C
This meant the encoder button had no function, so instead to was set to activate the 24th
anode. This allowed the set-test to run. By pushing the set button, a low signal was sent
into the shift register. This pushed the high signal threw the shift register activating the
23th anode. By clicking the set button 23 times each anode will have been activated. But
I simpler way of doing this was by having the first push of the set-button; set the 24th
anode as high and each consecutive push shift in a low signal. The changes can be seen
in listing 2.2. By the end of the project the encoder button had no function.
1
if (digitalRead(SetPin) == HIGH){
if(LEDState == LOW){
3
digitalWrite(latchPin , LOW);
digitalWrite(dataPin , HIGH);
5
digitalWrite(clockPin , HIGH);
digitalWrite(clockPin , LOW);
7
digitalWrite(latchPin , HIGH);
9
delay(500);
//Incase button is held in too long, this will prevent the
loop from running twice.
LEDState = HIGH;
11
x = 0;
}
13
else {
15
digitalWrite(latchPin , LOW);
digitalWrite(dataPin , LOW);
17
digitalWrite(clockPin , HIGH);
digitalWrite(clockPin , LOW);
19
digitalWrite(latchPin , HIGH);
x = x++;
//Changes x
to = x+1
21
if(x >= 23){
// Once set is hit 23 times LEDstate is set low again.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
25
==PAGE:34==
LEDState = LOW;
23
}
delay(500);
//Incase button is held in too long, this will prevent the
loop from running twice.
25 }}
Listing 2.2: A difficult example in C
The section that controls the pattern, or the sequence, also changed over time. The stop-
button in the original code, did not work as intended. With the code the way it was, the
delay on line 101, also affected the time it took for the stop button to work. Therefore the
more direct restart-pin was implemented. This code is built into the Nano, so no coding
was needed.
Other than a simple pattern and retraction, as shown in appendix D line 95-101, coding
was also implemented that would allow for a form of pulse plating and a another code
witch allowed varying retraction speeds. While the varying retraction code worked just
fine, the pulsing code didn’t quite work. The two LEDs blinked on and off a few times, but
then LED-24 stayed on while random LEDs started blinking. This repeated a few times
while changes were made to the code and resulted in sample B12 fig. 3.7.
1
if (digitalRead(StartPin) == HIGH){
updateShiftRegister(B00000000 , B00000000 , B00100111);
3
digitalWrite(DirectionPin ,LOW); // Enables the motor to move in a particular
direction
// Makes 200 pulses for making one full cycle rotation
5
for(int x = 0; x < 30; x++) {
digitalWrite(StepPin ,HIGH);
7
digitalWrite(StepPin ,LOW);
delay(5000);
9
}
for(int x = 0; x < 500; x++) {
11
digitalWrite(StepPin ,HIGH);
digitalWrite(StepPin ,LOW);
13
delay(50000);
}
15
}}
Listing 2.3: A difficult example in C
1
if (digitalRead(StartPin) == HIGH){
digitalWrite(DirectionPin ,LOW); // Enables the motor to move in a particular
direction
3
for(int x = 0; x < 2000; x++) {
for(int x = 0; x < 5; x++){ //totaling ~5sec delay per step
5
updateShiftRegister(B00000000 , B00000000 , B00010000); //pin 20 high
delay(501);
7
updateShiftRegister(B00000000 , B00000000 , B00100000);//pin 19 high
delay(500);
9
}
digitalWrite(StepPin ,HIGH);
11
digitalWrite(StepPin ,LOW);
}
13
}}
Listing 2.4: A difficult example in C
26
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:35==
2.4
Final Problems
Figure 2.13: Anodes 2,3,4,5,9,10 were all retracted
and unable to push them into place, they were left like
this.
As
mentioned
throughout
this
section, there have been some
problems when constructing the
set-up. Sadly the problems con-
tinued till the very end. The sys-
tem still needs to be taken apart
to see if there has been any dis-
connects, as not all anodes seem
to be plating equally.
Not only that, on the final build
the wires were accidentally pulled
a little too hard, causing some of
the anodes to retract. This prob-
lem tried to be rectified, but fear of
braking the anodes prevented the
anodes from being pushed back
into place, see fig. 2.13
Towards the end of the project
the electronics part was taking so
much time to fix, that the con-
trol system was completely by-
passed. Instead, the power sup-
ply was directly connected to the individual anodes that were too plate. The only part of
the program that was working well, was the reaction function, so luckily some tests could
be done with that function in mind. This too, would eventually stop working.
Finally, an acidic copper bath was used. This is a very difficult electrolyte to work with,
as its low pH causes it to react with a lot of building components. The brass cathode
holds snapped the last day of testing and need to be replaced. The bath can be seen in
table 2.1. This bath was used, because it does not require a rise in temperature.
Table 2.1: An example of an acidic copper bath, close to the one being used.[6, page 228]
CuSO4 · 5H2O
100-300[ g
L]
H2SO4
40-100[ g
L]
Temperature
20-45[C]
Current Density
1-10[ A
dm2 ]
Current efficiency
<100%
The electrolyte was taken from a larger communal bath. Therefore, exact numbers can’t
be provided, as the amount of evaporation will effect the concentrations.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:37==
3
Experiments and Results
While the goal was to make a set-up that could be used for testing aspects of MASS-
electroplating, testing some of these aspects was also on the agenda. Sadly due to time
limitation and the fact that the set-up was not only new, but also unstable, consecutive
testing could not be done. This time restraint also meant that analyzing was not done to
the depth, one could hope for.
That being said some test were run and looked at. In this section they will be presented
and commentary will follow. There is not enough data to make any conclusions, but rather
theories based on observations. This should be kept in mind.
The samples were broken into three groups A,B and C. (A) were 20x30mm steel samples
that were coated with nickel, the exact plating sequences can be seen in appendix E.
(B) were 30x30mm stainless steel samples, with no coating. They were tested using the
electrical system. Finally (C) were the same stainless steel samples, but plated directly
by connecting anodes to the power supply, bypassing the electrical system.
An overview of the samples can be seen in appendix F. The samples are (A) top left, (B)
top right and (C) bottom right. There are also three paper samples on the bottom left. A lot
of the samples were used for setting up the system. Most of the (A) samples did not bear
any useful results. The reason is thought to be related to distance between anode and
cathode. All but sample A2 and A22, which had hit the brass cathode holder, had set the
anodes and cathode extremely close to each other. For these two samples; it was thought
that the plating distance was (20 and 40µm) from the cathode, when in reality it much
further away. On observations, these two had better results. At close distances(<80µm)
the pump could not push electrolyte through the system, so the working theory is that a
lack of electrolyte lead the current fields to stray, as the path of least resistance was no
longer directly underneath it.
For sample group (B) higher distances were tested landing at around 400(µm) for sample
B6-B10. B7 was a paper test at the bottom left. The failed pulsing mentioned back in the
coding section can be seen on samples B11-B13.
Finally samples (C) implemented a simple form of voltage control. This was possible as
the power supply was directly connected to the anodes. The anodes would start 10µm
above the sample. When the voltage hit zero the operator would lift the anode slightly
and repeat this cycle for a set amount of time. After some time, automated lift sequences
were implemented, C5-C10. These also needed tuning.
Some general observations were;1
• When the pump was not able to flow; the plating became random when it ran for
more then a few minutes.
• The more anodes that were active; the higher the chances that plating would take
place under non-active jets.
• Some anodes plated better than others.
• The higher the current the less uniform the plating.
1There is not nearly enough data to prove or disprove these statements.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
29
==PAGE:38==
• At close ranges the process seems to be predominately ASC, while HSSJP seems
to take over at further distances.
3.1
Light Optical Microscopy
Figure 3.1: Sample B8. Plated for 30mins at 2mA at a constant distance of 400µm. Red
circle represents the approximate outter diameter of an anode. The placement is a best
guess. Scale is 200µm
When looking at figs. 3.1 and 3.2 a single dot is shown. While similar current was used,
time and distancing were not the same. Both samples plated quite locally. They also both
demonstrated a rather interesting phenomenon, where one side of the dot seemed raised.
There are two theories for why this might happen:
• The first, which is the worst case scenario, is that by implementing multiple jets
the surface experiences domes.[33] Domes are small rises in the level of electrolyte
along the surface, induced by two wall jets meeting, as seen in fig. 3.3. These domes
could be effecting the current field’s shape. This theory does have one possible
problem. The rise seems to be within the impingement region. This is not the normal
place to find a dome.
• The second; once a rise starts, the majority on plating takes place there, as shown
later. However, in fig. 3.1, there seems to be a slight bell shape in the center. There-
fore, it is thought that as the bell grows closer to the anode, ASC takes over, causing
the plating to become even more localized.
30
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:39==
Figure 3.2: Sample C3, scale 200µm. Plated for 10mins at 2mA, directing connected to
power supply. Starting at 10µm then manually retracting the anodes every time V=0.
Figure 3.3: Shows how multiple jets can interact with one another on a surface, when not
submerged.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.4: Sample A22. Where 5 anodes are plating at a time. With 10mA for 30mins.
Distance unknown do to mistake.
Sample 22A, seen in figs. 3.4 and 3.5, seems to confirm the worst case scenario, here it
almost looks like the copper is flowing. While very beautiful, this is quite problematic. It
doesn’t necessarily mean that MASJ or MASS-plating will not be possible, it does however
add new levels of difficulty. If the copper is ”flowing” like this, it may end up making
unwanted connections. A deeper study of fluid dynamics and more testing, is needed in
or to truly understand if there are possible solutions to this problem.
Figure 3.5: Sample A22, scale bar µm 200. The two red circles represents the approxi-
mate outter diameter of an anode. The placement is a best guess.
32
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:41==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.6: (a) Sample C5. Two anodes plating, with a current of 6mA for 20mins. The
distance was set to automatically retract 10µm every 10secs. (b) Sample C6. Two anodes
plating, with a current of 8mA. The distance was set to automatically retract 10µm every
50secs.
Figure 3.6 shows something interesting. In fig. 3.6a the two dots have taken on a crater
like shape, while in fig. 3.6b the dots have taken on a more bell shape. The working theory
has to do with the retraction rate. The theory is that when very close to the surface ASC
is the dominate force. In this case the anodes are rings, which could explain the craters.
Then as the distance increase HSSJP takes over, so the current is now traveling through
the jet. This will result in a my circular shape, which will lead to a more bell shape plating.
At a first glance fig. 3.6 almost seems to show the opposite. However, sample C5 retracted
so fast and the current was on the lower side. That plating was most likely only effective
<10mins. Meaning that the rings were formed and started smoothing out, but by then
plating was no longer as effective. Where sample C6 had plenty of time, even after 60mins
the distance from start was only 720µm.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
33
==PAGE:42==
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.7: Sample B12. Two anodes set to pulse plate which didn’t work, see section
”Coding” for description. The current was set to 2mA, but varied wildly. Distance from
sample 200 µm.
When first observed sample B12 was thought to show some promising results for the
implementation of pulse plating. Figure 3.7b was thought to show that pulse plating could
counteract this tendency of one side rising. Here three tips can be seen. It was thought
that this was a result of the increased nucleation sites that comes with pulse plating.
When looking at fig. 3.7a it can be seen that a single rise had formed on anode 24(bottom
right). While it had experienced less ”pulse plating” then anode 18. It had experienced
some. It is now believed the three tips are a result of multiple domes forming as the point
is surrounded by jets on all sides.
Plating on a mesh was carried out in the lab using the system. It was done as a small
proof of concept, for the idea proposed in PCB production . A peace of filter paper was
placed on a stainless steal plate. Then localized electroplating was carried out directly
above. Forming a small area of copper that could be pealed off the stainless steel plate
and still remaining on the filter paper, the results can be seen in fig. 3.8
Figure 3.8: Sample A32. Plated at 1.6mA for 10mins, with a distance of 20 µm + filter
thickness from the cathode.
34
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.9: Sample A36. One anode plating with 8mA for 40mins, with a retraction rate
of 10µm every 50secs.
Sample A36 is slightly different than the other A samples. It was plated at the same time
as the C group, so it’s process was closer to theirs. This sample really shows how current
will focus on a rise. Here a spike has formed as a result of this effect. The high current
also shows a burning effect of the copper.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.10: Sample C10. Four anodes, making the shape of an L, plating with 4mA for
60mins and a retraction rate of 10µm every 50secs.
Sample C10 helps illustrate what this technology aims to achieve. Even though there
seems to be copper everywhere, there is clearly an L that has taken shape.
3.2
Alicona Infinite Focus
An Alicona Infinite Focus microscope was used in corroboration with SPIP, for rendering
and data processing. It is not always clear what is being shown when looking in a normal
light optical microscope. Therefore, the 3D imaging can help with paint a clearer picture.
It also makes it possible to carry out some measurements. It should be mentioned that
when working with this kind of imaging technology, a problem arises when the surfaces
are very shiny. The imaging works by finding the focus and determine how much it had to
rise before the focus point was found for range of pixels, so very dark or very white areas
will not come into focus. Meaning no data can be found, leaving voids in the imaging.
By looking at both figs. 3.11 and 3.12 it can be seen that most plating took place under
the specific anodes that were activated. However, the same amount did not plate under
each anode. The range of plating thickness, between anodes is around 15µm. It is also
clear that plating has taken place around the anodes. Though it is still clear where the
dots start and end, by comparing both figures. What is also worth noting, is the fact that
the dots seem to be connected with a thickness larger than the surrounding plating.
36
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.11: Sample C10. Measured with a 800nm step rise in Z.
(a) X-axies
(b) Y-axies
Figure 3.12: Sample C10. (a) Is a measurement taken over the two dots along the x-axies.
This is the average of 350 measurement lines.(b) Is a measurement taken over the three
dots along the y-axies. This is the average of 350 measurement lines. Measurements
cover the x and y range shown in fig. 3.11.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.13: Sample C5. Here the Z step was 100nm. The measurements were made
using the average of 435 lines.
In fig. 3.13 sample C5 has undergone some measurements. By looking closely some
coloured triangles can be seen in the upper figure, their corresponding position can then
be seen on the graph. This measurement show that from one point(blue) to the substrate,
there is 55µmm. While from the valley (green) to the substrate there is 30µm. It can
also be seen that there are a few peaks, which correlates well with the crater theory. This
is even more clear when looking at fig. 3.14.
Figure 3.14: Sample C5. Here a 3D model has been generated based on the information
obtained in fig. 3.13
38
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.15:
Sample C6. Here the Z step was 45nm. The measurements were made
using the average of 583 lines.
Sample C6 in fig. 3.15, supports the idea that the dots are taking on a more apparent bell
shape than sample C5. It can also be seen that a peak (blue) is 90µm from the substrate,
where the valley (green) is 55µm. So between these two samples(C5C6), the difference
between the valley and top has decreased by 5%. Now this is just an observation, no
conclusion can be made on just two pictures.
Figure 3.16: Sample C6. Here a 3D model has been generated based on the informa-
tion obtained in fig. 3.15. The picture was very difficult to render due to the z step size.
Therefore moving the 3D model was impossible.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.17:
Sample B8. Here the Z step was 45nm. The measurements were made
using a cross-hair, therefore there is not an average. But instead the high measure under
these pixels
Sample B8 is very small, so some very nice rendering could be done, as seen in fig. 3.19.
This provides a clear image of this ”fin-like” shape that has grown upon the bell shaped
dot. This fin does look a lot like two opposing flows meeting, which shows how much the
neighbouring jets might be affect each other, even when they are not necessarily plating.
The fin measured 27µm which is only 3µm taller then the bell. This leads one to believe
that the bell formed first and the fin is a later result, which means the fin happened either
because the coating was getting closer to the anode or because the bell shape started
affecting the flow of the liquid.
Figure 3.18:
Sample B8. Here the Z step was 45nm. The measurements were made
using the average of 583 lines.
40
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:49==
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
41
==PAGE:50==
3.3
X-ray Fluorescence
While plating; many of the samples appeared very shiny, in some cases almost golden.
Then samples C1 was made. Here a green/blue color appeared on some of the dot. With
one area looking golden. If gold had been in contact with copper, it could explain the
green/blue colour as a form of copper oxide, brought on by galvanic corrosion.
So the question arose, if the system was plating gold. Not through alchemy, but rather
by the ionization or erosion of the gold plating, found on the anodes. Gold is stable in
the acidic copper bath and one would expect the decomposition of water before anything
happened to the gold. There could be small gold particles dislodging from the anode and
getting stuck on the sample. To be on the safe side X-ray Fluorescence was implemented
to insure there wasn’t any gold on the surface.
Figure 3.19: Sample C1. Here all 24 anodes were connected to a power supply, supplying
24mA. The anodes were manually retracted when v=0.
No gold was found on the surface as can be seen in fig. 3.20. There is a bit of iron
and chrome from the stainless steel on the darker dots. This indicates that the colour
change maybe happening to the chrome and not the copper. Chrome can change to a
bluish colour as an effect of heating, know as bluing. The theory is that where the anodes
touched the substrate, the current caused a significant temperature rise, causing bluing
of the chrome.
42
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:51==
(a) Total view.
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.20: (a) and (b) show that the surface/dots are comprised of copper, chrome and
iron.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
43
==PAGE:52==
4
Concluding Remarks
Localized electrochemical deposition is a larger field than one might first expect and there
have been published many papers on the subject. Many of these papers have shown that
when it comes to ASC and HSSJP; the ability to plate selectively, has been proven with out
a doubt. There has also been an abundant amount of dated that shows that 3D structures
can be produced using these technologies. With this project aimed at implementing these
well studied process, in a new way. It seemed rather straight forward.
However, the project did not go as well as hoped. There were a few external factors; i.e.
lack of funding and time pressure, that increased the difficultly. Nevertheless the main
factors were internal. The project, as a hole, covered too many aspects. Looking at a
combination of MASJ and MASSC was not the right approach. Nor was implementing a
complicated control system. Testing properly with a simpler set-up, should have been the
first step. The amount of time needed for build a set-up like this was extremely under-
estimated. That being said, some times these wide approaches can give a glimpse into
where some of the challenges down the run might appear, which might be the case here.
Testing showed that the flow of electrolyte along the surface doesn’t only affect the plating
rate, but also the morphology of the coating. This indicates that fluid dynamics and mod-
eling may become a much larger part of this project than previously thought, if the project
continues. It also showed how demanding the understanding of electronics, in this type
of system, truly is.
While the level of testing was not enough to make any conclusions, regarding MAS, it
did help paint a picture of MAS’ potential. Regardless of the flow problems, localized
electrochemical deposition was achieved with the help of multiple anodes. These anodes
were also able to interact with their neighbouring anodes to create connecting structures.
This bodes well for the implementation in an area like PCB production.
Therefore the pursuit for funding; aimed at implementing MAS-electroplating in the pro-
duction of PCBs, is the final result of this phase of the project.
44
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Richard Rennie and Jonathan Law. A Dictionary of Chemistry (7th ED). Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2016.
[2]
L.B.Hunt. The Early History of Gold Plating: A TANGLED TALE OF DISPUTED
PRIORITIES. Johnson Matthey & Co Limited, London, 1973.
[3]
Christoph Raub. “The History of Electroplating”. In: Metal Plating and Patination:
Cultural, Technical and Historical Developments. Elsevier Ltd, 1993. Chap. 23, pp. 284–
290.
[4]
Geoffrey Cantor, David Gooding, and Frank A. J. L. James. Faraday. Macmillan
Education LTD, 1991.
[5]
Werner Olberding. “An Introduction to Electrodeposition and Electroless Plating-
Processes”. In: Modern Surface Technology. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH Co. KGaA,
2006, pp. 101–118.
[6]
Per Møller & Lars Pleth Nielsen. Advanced Surface Technology:Volume 01. NASF,
2013.
[7]
Jan P. Rasmussen et al. “Fabrication of an All-Metal Atomic Force Microscope
Probe”. In: Proceedings of Transducers 97 1 (1997), pp. 463–466.
[8]
L.S. Johansen et al. “Electroforming of 3D microstructures on highly structured sur-
faces”. In: Sensors and Actuators a (physical) A83.1-3 (2000), pp. 156–160.
[9]
Laurence Danis et al. “Fabrication of Carbon, Gold, Platinum, Silver, and MercuryUl-
tramicroelectrodes with Controlled Geometry”. In: Analytical Chemistry 87 (2015),
2565−2569.
[10]
Stanton Ching, Ray Dudek, and ElieTabe. “Cyclic Voltammetry with Ultramicroelec-
trodes”. In: Journal of Chemical Education 71.7 (1994), pp. 602–605.
[11]
M. Irene Montenegro, M. Arlete Queiros, and John L. Daschbach. Microelectrodes:Theory
and Applications. NATO ASI, 1991.
[12]
Wittstock G. “Imaging Localized Reactivities of Surfaces by Scanning Electrochem-
ical Microscopy.” In: Solid—Liquid Interfaces. Topics in Applied Physics. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 335–365.
[13]
Yukio Saito. “A Theoretical Study on the Diffusion Current at the Stationary Elec-
trodes of Circular and Narrow Band Types”. In: Review of Polarography 15.6 (1968),
pp. 177–187.
[14]
E.M. El-Giar et al. “Localized Electrochemical Deposition of Copper Microstruc-
tures.” In: Journal of The Electrochemical Society 147.2 (2000), pp. 586–591.
[15]
Murali M. Sundaram, Abishek B. Kamaraj, and Varun S. Kumar. “Mask-less electro-
chemical additive manufacturing: A feasibility study.” In: Journal of Manufacturing
Science and Engineering, Transactions of the Asme 137.2 (2015), pp. 1–9.
[16]
John D. Madden and Ian W. Hunter. “Three-Dimensional Microfabrication by Local-
ized Electrochemical Deposition”. In: JOURNAL OF MICROELECTROMECHANI-
CAL SYSTEMS 5.1 (1996), pp. 24–32.
[17]
Werner E. Morf. “Theoretical treatment of the amperometric current response of
multiple microelectrode arrays.” In: Analytica Chimica Acta 330 (1996), pp. 139–
149.
[18]
Abdur Rub Abdur Rahman and Anthony Guiseppi-Elie. “Design considerations in
the development and applicationof microdisc electrode arrays (MDEAs) for implantablebiosen-
sors.” In: Biomed Microdevices 11 (2009), pp. 701–710.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
45
==PAGE:54==
[19]
James C. Fletcher. Scanning Nozzle Plating System. U.S. Patent 3810829 May 14
1974.
[20]
E.Bardal. Corrosion and Protection. 2003.
[21]
SJ Dover, AEW Rennie, and GR Bennett. “Rapid Prototyping using Electrodeposi-
tion of Copper.” In: Solid Freeform Fabrication Proceedings. (1996), pp. 191–198.
[22]
C. Karakus and D. T. Chin. “Metal Distribution in Jet Plating.” In: The Electrochem-
ical Society 141 (1994), pp. 691–697.
[23]
Mridul S. Rajput, Pulak M. Pandey, and Sunil Jha. “Micromanufacturing by selective
jet electrodeposition process.” In: International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology 76 (2013), pp. 61–67.
[24]
Robert Gardon J and Cahit Akfirat. “The role of turbulence in determining the heat-
transfer characteristics of impinging jets”. In: International Journal of Heat and Mass
Transfer 8 (1965), pp. 1261–1272.
[25]
C.E. Bocking. High speed selective jet electrodeposition of gold and gold alloys
using single circular jets. 1994.
[26]
M.T. Scholtz and O. Trass. “Mass Transfer in a Nonuniform Impinging Jet.” In: AIChE
Journal 16 (1970), pp. 82–90.
[27]
K. Gilleo. “Printed circuit boards: the hundredth anniversary, and abbreviated biog-
raphy of Paul Eisler (history of PCBs)”. In: Elektronik 52.9 (2003), pp. 56–66.
[28]
Kirstie Petherbridge, Peter Evans, and David Harrison. “The origins and evolution
of the PCB: A review”. In: Circuit World 31.1 (2005), pp. 41–45.
[29]
Charles Arthur Harper. Electronic materials and processes handbook. McGraw-Hill,
2004. Chap. 7.
[30]
Michael Day. “The no-slip condition of fluid dynamics”. In: Erkenntnis 33.3 (1990),
pp. 285–296.
[31]
Peter G. Jones et al. “Gold(III) Oxide and Oxychloride”. In: Gold Bulletin 13 (1980),
p. 56.
[32]
Rosa Isela Ruvalcaba Ontiveros et al. “A Simple Way to Produce Gold Nanoshells
for Cancer Therapy.” In: Current Topics in Biochemical Engineering. Intechopen,
2019.
[33]
A Bensmaili and F Coeuret. “OVERALL MASS-TRANSFER BETWEEN A SOLID-
SURFACE AND SUBMERGED OR UNSUBMERGED LIQUID MULTIJETS”. In:
Journal of the Electrochemical Society 137.6 (1990), pp. 1744–1750.
46
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:55==
Appendices
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
47
==PAGE:56==
A
General Electroplating
The fundamentals of electroplating starts with an understanding of electrolysis. Electrol-
ysis is the act of sending a current through a liquid solution. In order for the current to
travel through the liquid, it must contain ions. Ions are molecules or atoms that have an
electron charge. This is achieved by the removal or addition of electrons, in an attempt
to for-fill the octet rule. Ions need the polarity of a liquid to be stable. One of the most
basic examples is table salt in water. In this case the NaCl separates into Na+ Cl−, the
negative ion(Cl−) is surrounded by the polar positive side of water(Hydrogen) and the
positive ion(Na+) is surrounded by the polar negative side(Oxygen). The fact that ions
have the ability to receive and deliver electrons is what gives them there conductivity. As
transportation of electrons is the basics of a current.
For the current to flow, there needs to be a potential difference. This difference is mea-
sured in volts and is referred to as voltage. The net positive side is referred to as the the
anode and the negative side is referred to as the cathode. This net positively in the anode
is due to a lack of electrons and vice versa regarding the cathode. The general plural term
for the anode and cathode is electrodes. It is at the surface of these electrodes chemical
changes take place.
In the salt water example mentioned earlier. The reactions on the electrodes are as fol-
lows:
Anode : 4OH−−→2H2O + O2 + 4e−
Cathode : 2H2O + 2e−−→H2 + 2OH−
: NaCl + H2O + 2e −→NaClO + H2
Overall −Cell : 2H2O + NaCl −→2H2 + 1
2O2 + NaClO
As it can be seen in this example, even very simple solutions can become quite complex,
when it comes to all the reactions that are taking place. This example can also be used to
show why electrolysis is a broader term than electroplating. The sodium has a very high
affinity to water and therefore won’t form a solid in its presents. The example also shows
that oxygen is formed at at the anode. For this reason a substrate that delivers electrons is
said to be oxidizing, even if oxygen isn’t formed. The cathode is experiencing a reduction,
this is a description of an increased negative charge, due to the additional electrons. A
reaction that experience oxidation-reduction is referred to as a redox reaction.
If the metal had been a less reactive metal, something like copper, its net positive charge
would have caused it to adhere to the negatively charged cathode.The metal atom would
not return to solution but instead form a metallic bond with the metal cathode. This type
of electrolysis is what we call electroplating.
Cu2+
(aq) + 2e−⇐⇒Cu(s)
(A.1)
48
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:57==
Faraday’s Laws and Electroplating
Before learning about Mr.Faraday, Mr.Coulomb needs a short introduction.
Charles-
Augustin de Coulomb was a french physicist, among other things, who worked with elec-
trostatic forces. In honor of his work the SI unit for an electric charge was named after
him in 1908, approximately one hundred years after his death.
1 C = 1 A sec
(A.2)
In one ampere of current, 6.242 × 1018 electrons flow every second.
The next thing to understand is the electrochemical equivalent of a reaction. The electro-
chemical equivalent is dependant on the reaction taking place, as it involves the change
in valance state(z). More specifically it is the atomic weight divided by the valance state.
So for equation (1) electrochemical equivalent can be shown as 63.546[u]/2[z] = 31.775
and denoted as (Z).
Michael Faraday discovered that the weight of deposited material was proportional to the
charge sent through the electrolyte (a solution containing ions). He calculated the charge
of one mol of electrons, using Avogardro’s Constant, 6.022×1023[mol−1] and the charge of
a single electron. The charge of a single electron, in coulonds, is the inverse of the number
of electrons in an ampere. This gives the individual electron a charge of 1.602 × 10−19[C].
This constant was named after Faraday.
F = (6.022 × 1023[mol−1]) × (1.602 × 10−19[C])
= 96 485.33[C mol−1]
(A.3)
Using all this information, Faraday was about to derive an equation to show the mass
change in relation to charge. First the right units must be found, meaning the electo-
chemical equivalent must be changed from daltons[u] to grams.
atomic mass[u] = weight[g]
mole[mol]
(A.4)
So the units of Z =
[g]
[mol]×[z]. This is the same as taking the molar mass (M) of a substance
and dividing it by the valency number(z). This shows that:
m[g] = Q[C] × M[ g
mol]
z × F
C
mol
or
m[g] = I[A] × t[s] × M[ g
mol]
z × F A×s
mol
(A.5)
This is often used in electroplating to get an estimation of the coatings thickness.
δ[mm] =
I[A] × t[s] × M[ g
mol]
z × F A×s
mol × ρ[
[g]
[mm3] × A[mm2]
(A.6)
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
49
==PAGE:58==
For the copper example (1), the equation would look like the following:
δ[mm] =
I[A] × t[s] × 63.546[ g
mol]
2 × 96485.33A×s
mol × 0.00894[
[g]
[mm3] × A[mm2]
= I[A] × t[s]
A[mm2] × 0.03683[ mm3
A × s]
(A.7)
This way the thickness can be controlled by changing any or all of the three variables:
• Current (I) [A]
• Time (t) [s]
• Plating Area (A) [mm2]
Faraday’s laws are based on optimal theoretical conditions. That is the reason this equa-
tion can only be used as an estimation, if there is no supporting experimental data. In
many cases side reactions can take place, this is shown in the salt water example. This
means the current going towards plating is only a fraction of what is expected. This is
known as current efficiency. In electroplating it is usually only the cathode efficiency that
is of interest. This is found relatively easy, by measuring the gained mass of the cathode
and comparing with the theoretical mass gained. It is important to look at mass and not
thickness, as the coating can be very porous. The current efficiency for many electrolyte
baths have been found. The current efficiency of many bath are close to 100%, but only
at specific current densities.
Current density is the amount of amperes per area of the plated electrode. As this is set
for most baths; the only truly free variable, when deciding thickness, is time.
Sadly it still gets more complicated as we introduce current distribution. Current distri-
bution is a measure of the local current density. The electrode may experience that the
current is not uniformly spread across the surface. This won’t affect the final mass gained,
but it will very much affect the thickness distribution. It is often seen when looking at sharp
corners, that the thickness is greater than the rest of the substrate.
This difference at the edge can be contributed to ohm’s law. The current will flow along
the path of least resistance. This will lead to a concentration at a edge, as there is a larger
area exposed to the current fields in the bath at these points.
One way to counteract this, is by introducing over-potential. To understand over-potential,
Nernst’s equation most first be introduced. Nernst’s equation can best be under stood by
looking back to equation (1). Depending on which direction the reaction is taking place it
is either oxidizing (left to right) or reducing (right to left). In a cell where only this reaction is
taking place ,and no external potential is added, the rate of the reaction in either direction
will have to will have to be equal. Based on this principle Nernst formulated the following
equation for the measured potential equilibrium of a cell:
Eeq = E0 + R × T
z × F × ln( Ox
Red)
(A.8)
In which R is the gas constant, T is the temperature and E0 is the stander potential for the
given redox reaction, measured in volts. Here it is clear that when oxidation activity (Ox)
is equal to the reduction activity (Red) the measured and stander potential are the same.
50
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:59==
So over-potential is just the act of increasing the reaction rate on one of the electrodes so
the activity increases. This will lead to a shift away from the thermodynamic determined
potential of the reaction. This can be used in electroplate to deal with sharp corners/edges,
to an extent. By introducing over-potential, the current density is increased. This increase
leads to an overflow of electrons that are trying to converge on the edge. This leads to
increase in local resistance, as a ions can inhibit the transportation of other ions. The
resistance increases the ions find more favourable areas on the surface.
Over-potential is divided into three areas:
• Activation over-potential
• Concentration over-potential
• Crystallization over-potential
In this paper only concentration over-potential will be looked at.
Crystallization over-
potential is often much negligible and activation over-potential mainly center around chang-
ing the voltage of a cell, something can is relatively easy to do.
Concentration over-potential is on the other hand a little more difficult to control. Of course
the concentration of free ions in an electrolyte can be estimated based on the ratio of
ingredients. However this does not give any idea of how the concentration varies in the
bath. Due to van der waals forces, liquids tent to becomes stationary along solids. This
mean close to the electrodes ions rely on diffusion to move. This is know as the diffusion
zone. With potential energy for the surrounding solvents, the out most atoms can be
returned to motion. That way stirring the electrolyte will decrease the diffusion zone,
which is one of the main hurtles when trying to achieve high deposition rates
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
51
==PAGE:60==
B
Set-up Photos
(a) Cutting needles
(b) Remove metal shavings.
(c) Test resistance,
(d) Test anode holder.
52
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:61==
(a) Anodic degreasing of 24 anodes, at same
time.
(b) Anodes in chandelier shape.
(c) Black gold.
(d) Successfully plating anodes in gold.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
53
==PAGE:62==
(a) Anode holder after dip drilling.
(b) Anodes after the exposed tips were gold
plated.
(c) Testing Hammerit, 48 hours in copper bath.
(d) drying after everything has been covered in
Hammerit.
54
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:63==
(a) House tube from first set-up, being taken apart.
(b) Housing tube on final set-up.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
55
==PAGE:64==
(a) Orignal LEDs holder.
(b) First electrical set-up.
(c) Final electrical set-up.
(d) A look inside the box.
56
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:65==
C
Controll System
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:67==
D
Controll Code
1
//These pins recevie data from the buttons.
3 int StartPin = 2; // Start button.
int SetPin = 3; // Set button.
5 int StopPin = 4; // Stop button.
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
7 //These pins recevie data from the rotary encoder.
int RotaryPin = 5; // Rotary encoder built in button.
9 int RotaryAPin =6; // Rotary encoder output A.
int RotaryBPin =7; // Rotary encoder output B.
11
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
//These pins output data to the shift register&(LEDS).
13 int latchPin = 8; //
int clockPin = 12; //
15 int dataPin = 11; //
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
17 //These pins output data to the stepper motor.
int StepPin = 9; // Tells the motor to take a step.
19 int DirectionPin = 10; //Decides which diraction the motor turns.
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
21 int aLastState;
int aState;
23
void setup()
25 {
Serial.begin(9600);
27 // Here the arduino is receiving or sending data.
pinMode(StartPin , INPUT);
29
pinMode(SetPin,INPUT);
pinMode(StopPin , INPUT);
31
pinMode(RotaryPin , INPUT);
pinMode(RotaryAPin , INPUT);
33
pinMode(RotaryBPin , INPUT);
pinMode(latchPin , OUTPUT);
35
pinMode(dataPin , OUTPUT);
pinMode(clockPin , OUTPUT);
37
pinMode(StepPin , OUTPUT);
pinMode(DirectionPin , OUTPUT);
39 //Making sure the data and clock pin are low.
digitalWrite(dataPin , LOW);
41
digitalWrite(clockPin , LOW);
43 }
45 void loop()
{
47 // This section of code controls the rotary encoder.
aState = digitalRead(RotaryAPin);//It reads the current state of the output.
49
if (aState != aLastState){
//Then checks if the encoder has been moved.
//The encoder turns the motor one way if A=B and the other if they aren't.
51
if (digitalRead(RotaryBPin) != aState){
for(int x=0; x<20; x++){
53
digitalWrite(DirectionPin ,LOW);
digitalWrite(StepPin ,HIGH);
55
digitalWrite(StepPin ,LOW);
}}
57
else {
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
59
==PAGE:68==
for(int x=0; x<20; x++){
59
digitalWrite(DirectionPin ,HIGH);
digitalWrite(StepPin ,HIGH);
61
digitalWrite(StepPin ,LOW);
}}}
63
aLastState = aState;
//The new state of A is recorded.
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
65
//Here a singal LED is turned on.
if (RotaryPin == HIGH){
67
digitalWrite(latchPin , LOW);
digitalWrite(dataPin , HIGH);
69
digitalWrite(clockPin , HIGH);
digitalWrite(clockPin ,LOW);
71
digitalWrite(latchPin , HIGH);
digitalWrite(dataPin , LOW);
73
delay(500);
75 }
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
77
//A LOW signal is pushed threw the shift register one step at a time.
if (digitalRead(SetPin) == HIGH){
79
digitalWrite(latchPin , LOW);
digitalWrite(dataPin , LOW);
81
digitalWrite(clockPin , HIGH);
digitalWrite(clockPin , LOW);
83
digitalWrite(latchPin , HIGH);
85
delay(500);
}
87 //This can be used to test each anode.
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
89 //Here all LEDs are set LOW.
if (digitalRead(StopPin) == HIGH){
91
updateShiftRegister(B00000000 , B00000000 , B00000000);
}
93
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
//Here the pattern is set and the motor is told to start rotating.
95
if (digitalRead(StartPin) == HIGH){
updateShiftRegister(B00000000 , B11111111 , B00000000); // The pattern.
97
digitalWrite(DirectionPin ,HIGH);
for(int x = 0; x < 20000; x++) {
99
digitalWrite(StepPin ,HIGH);
digitalWrite(StepPin ,LOW);
101
delay(4000);
if(digitalRead(StopPin) == HIGH){
103
updateShiftRegister(B00000000 , B00000000 , B00000000);
break;
105 //If the stop button is pushed , all LEDs are set LOW and the loop is broken.
}}}}
107
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
// This void is used to control the shift registers.
109
void updateShiftRegister(int State1 , int State2 ,int State3)
{
111
digitalWrite(latchPin , LOW);
shiftOut(dataPin , clockPin , MSBFIRST , State1);
113
shiftOut(dataPin , clockPin , MSBFIRST , State2);
shiftOut(dataPin , clockPin , MSBFIRST , State3);
115
digitalWrite(latchPin , HIGH);
}
TestPlatForm.ino
60
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:69==
E
Sample Preparation
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Description continues on next page.
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
61
==PAGE:70==
Sample Preparation: Descriptions
(A) Holes are made in 37 (20x30mm) steel plates.
(B) Plates are marked A1,A2,A3,ect.
(C) Plates are sanded with 500 grit paper to remove and edges created when cut. Each
sample is sanded for 30sec on each side.
(D) Copper wire attached to each sample.
(E) Samples are cleaned with soap and water.
(F) Anodic degreasing for, with 5V for 3mins.
(G) Wood Nickel bath for 45mins, 5A dm−1.
(H) Wood Nickel didn’t work, copper was plating onto the samples with out any current,
due to the low galvanic potential of the steel. A Watt’s bath was used, to produce
thicker nickel layer. It was done at 50C, with a current density of 6A dm−1 for 30mins.
(I) Samples were tested to insure copper did electrolessly plate.
62
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:71==
F
Sample Overview
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
63
==PAGE:72==
G
Gold Bath
64
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:73==
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:75==
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
67
==PAGE:76==
68
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
==PAGE:77==
Localized Electrochemical Deposition
69
==PAGE:78==
“If you want to make God laugh, tell him about your
plans.” ― Woody Allen
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 425
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.mek.dtu.dk
