==PAGE:1==
Improving Visual SLAM for Mobile Indus-
trial Robots
Anastasia Panaretou (s182149)
Phillip Bach Mastrup (s142818)
Master of Science in Electrical Engineering
2020
==PAGE:2==
Improving Visual SLAM for Mobile Industrial Robots
Report written by:
Anastasia Panaretou (s182149)
Phillip Bach Mastrup (s142818)
Advisor(s):
Evangelos Boukas, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Niels Jul Jacobsen, Chief Strategy Officer of Mobile Industrial Robots
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
27. January- 20. August
ECTS:
35
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Anastasia Panaretou, Phillip Bach Mastrup, 2020
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Localisation and mapping are very important for mobile industrial robots. To ensure
full autonomy a robot needs to be able to create a map and at the same time use it
to localise itself in an unknown environment. This problem is known as simultaneous
localisation and mapping (SLAM). The main objective of this thesis is to incorporate
custom features, as landmarks, that exist in an industrial environment into the SLAM
algorithm to improve its quality and accuracy.
Static objects can be used as landmarks in a landmark-based SLAM. Landmarks are
detected using deep learning, specifically object detection. The landmarks are detected
with a camera equipped with an RGB sensor and a depth sensor. Combining the infor-
mation from the object detector and the depth map their relative position to the robot
is estimated. Loop closure is achieved by landmarks observations. To successfully detect
loop closures the system needs a robust data association algorithm. The data association
is mainly based on computer vision, specifically using a scene comparison method, Bag-
of-Visual-Words and image feature detection with Speeded up Robust Features (SURF)
algorithm.
Several alternative solutions are also discussed and investigated. Observations of
landmarks result in an improvement of the SLAM quality regarding localisation accuracy
and map representation. Robust loop closure detection is achieved as well.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisor Evangelos Boukas for his guidance and support
during this project.
We would also like to thank Mobile Industrial Robots A/S for the opportunity to
do this project in cooperation with them and for providing a robot we could work with.
Especially Niels Jul Jacobsen and Bartolomé Jimenez Vera for their continuous input
and help.
We should also thank Phillip’s parents for providing their workshop during the lock-
down. We thank our friends, Angelos for his laptop and Sofie for her car too.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Analysis
3
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Related work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.4
Object Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Mobile robot and hardware
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Robot Operating System framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
System description
17
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
System Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Object detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Distance estimation and point cloud . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.6
Data association
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.7
Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4
Test and results
57
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2
Object detector alternatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.3
Vision-based data association evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.4
Feature detection and frame comparison alternatives
. . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.5
Localisation accuracy evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5
Discussion
81
5.1
Limitations and potential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
6
Conclusion
83
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Fully autonomous navigation is the capability of a vehicle to determine its location
and plan a path to some goal without human intervention.
For robots to navigate
autonomously it is necessary to collect data from the environment and interpret the
data by building a map of the physical surroundings. Simultaneous localisation and
mapping (SLAM) is responsible for creating the map and aid the robot to localise using
it at the same tie. SLAM is crucial for the operation of mobile industrial robots. SLAM
is the main focus of this thesis. The hypothesis of the thesis is that the usage of custom
features that exist in an industrial environment can improve the accuracy and robustness
of the localisation and mapping estimations.
1.1
Objectives
The main objectives of this thesis is to improve localisation and mapping accuracy using
the Cartographer SLAM algorithm. Specifically the objectives are as follows:
• Implement a camera-based Visual SLAM solution for the mobile robots at MiR
• Integrate 3D landmarks and their associated uncertainties in the 3D SLAM archi-
tecture using the Cartographer system.
• Detect loop-closure through landmarks observation.
• Compare the solution to the original 2D cartographer solution already implemented
at MiR.
• Investigate a intuitive representation of the map created (including custom fea-
tures).
1.2
Thesis outline
Chapter 2: Description of the hardware and evaluation of several state-of-the-art solu-
tions.
Chapter 3: Description of the implemented system including SLAM approach, object
detection, distance estimation and data association.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Chapter 4: Demonstration and evaluation of testing results.
Chapter 5: Discussion of overall results
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
2.1
Introduction
This chapter describes the hardware necessary to achieve the main objectives. Addition-
ally, it describes, evaluates, and decides the overall alternatives for the approach to this
thesis.
2.2
Related work
A lot of work has gone into using pure vision-based sensors for localisation and mapping.
Many different approaches have been developed such as Robust Visual Inertial Odometry
(ROVIO) [5] and ORB-SLAM [26]. Both methods aim to use computer vision algorithms
to extract information from the environment.
In ORB-SLAM an extensive map of
features is continuously being build using only RGB camera data. This framework is
able to perform tracking as the robot moves in an indoor environment. Additionally, is
it able to recognise previously visited areas of the map and hereby do loop-closure. This
work has especially been inspired by the loop-closure approach in ORB-SLAM.
This project also involves object detection. This field has been impacted by the rising
popularity of deep learning that has been enabled by faster and computationally more
powerful hardware. One of the first deep learning-based object detection algorithms is
the R-CNN, introduced by Girshick et al. in 2013 [6]. Since then a lot of other newer
frameworks have been created. Some of these include SSD, Faster R-CNN, and YOLO.
These object detectors will be further explained and discussed in the report.
2.3
Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
A fully autonomous robot needs to be able to perform accurate SLAM. To attempt
SLAM, a robot needs a sensor that scans the environment, a lidar for instance. Addi-
tionally, it needs a way to estimate how much it has moved, expressed as its current
position relative to its previous one (dead reckoning). Motion sensors can be used for
this, for example, odometry encoders. Theoretically, when the aforementioned sensors
are insusceptible to errors, hence ideal, the robot knows exactly how much it has moved
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Analysis
and what its surroundings look like at all times. In this case SLAM sounds trivial (figure
2.1)].
Figure 2.1: A robot is performing SLAM using its sensors. The robot is precisely sensing
its surroundings knowing exactly how much it has moved. [17]
In practice, both the environment and the odometry sensors are prone to errors.
Consequently, the robot is not 100% confident where it is or what the environment looks
like. To demonstrate this, an example is shown in figure 2.2, where the robot has an ideal
lidar but its odometry has high uncertainty. The robot is trying to do SLAM as before,
but in this case, it thinks that it is at a different position than it actually is. Therefore,
it places the environment measurements at a false position. As it keeps moving, the
error accumulates and the resulting map looks nothing than the actual environment.
Figure 2.2: A robot is performing SLAM using its sensors with a high odometry un-
certainty. The green avatar represents the robot’s real position and the grey one the
estimated position. [17]
SLAM algorithms aim to overcome the uncertainties and construct a representative
map. A broadly used SLAM algorithm is Graph-SLAM. Graph-based SLAM exploits
the sensor measurements and places the robot’s pose and the sensed environment in a
graph. As explained before, since the sensors are not ideal, the pose graph is going to
look distorted after a while. A process called pose graph optimisation is responsible for
correcting the pose graph and hereby correcting the robot’s position. The logic behind
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
5
pose graph optimisation, lies in the fact that when the robot passes from a place that it
has already visited in the past, it will be able to recognise it again.
When the robot starts to move, it reads the sensor measurements and puts them into
a pose graph. In the pose graph, the robot’s pose is represented by a pair of Cartesian
coordinates which indicate its location and an angle that indicates its orientation. The
environment is represented by the distances between the robot and the obstacles as
scanned from its lidar. When the robot has moved to a new location and it acquires
a new pose, a constraint or edge connects the two poses.
A constraint is a vector
with adjustable length and orientation 2.3a, connecting two poses.
How much each
constraint’s length can be adjusted, depends on the quality of the sensors’ measurements.
If the measurements have a low uncertainty, the constraint appears to be more ’stiff’
as opposed to when the measurements have a high uncertainty. The purpose of this
adjustment is to align the pose graph, in order to replicate the real robot poses and
environment when possible. The points that a constraint is connecting are called nodes.
As the robot is moving around the environment more nodes and constraints are added
to the pose graph (figure 2.3b).
(a) The constraint’s length can be ad-
justed.
(b) Pose graph when several nodes and con-
straints are added
Figure 2.3: A constraint/edge is connecting two nodes in a pose graph. [17]
The pose graph is still not looking similar to the real environment. The constraints
need to be adjusted to align the measurements properly. The pose graph optimisation
is responsible for that. In figure 2.3b it is visible that the robot has reached its initial
location. The robot can see that the new observation resembles one in the past. This
event is called loop closure. A constraint is added between these two nodes, which in
reality they represent the same location. It is made then clear, that this constraint’s
length should be zero and it is adjusted as such (figure 2.4). As the robot keeps moving
and loops are closed the pose graph approximates its physical counterpart more and more
accurately. It is crucial to mention that because the final pose adjustment depends on
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Analysis
the loop closure detection, it is of great importance to declare a loop as closed only when
that fact is absolutely unquestionable.
Figure 2.4: Loop closure is achieved. The green constraint connects two nodes which
represent the same location. The pose graph is adjusted accordingly. [17]
2.4
Object Detection
One of the major tasks in this project is to identify and locate a landmark using computer
vision. Depending on the type of the chosen landmark the system should be able to detect
and create a bounding box in the image frame around the landmark. This procedure is
called object localisation. Furthermore, the system classifies and assigns a class label to
the localised objects in the image. To solve this computer vision problem, three state-of-
the-art deep learning models were considered for this project, namely the Faster Region-
Based Convolutional Neural Network (Faster R-CNN), Single Shot Detector (SSD) and
You Only Look Once (YOLO).
2.4.1
Convolutional Neural Networks
Deep neural networks and specifically convolutional neural networks (CNN) are applied
and widely used in image classification.
The main objective of a CNN in an image
classification task is to classify the object seen in the image. The CNN takes the image
in as an input and passes it through a series of convolutional, nonlinear, pooling layers
and fully connected layers. Finally, it generates an output in the form of a class label
(see fig: 2.5).
==PAGE:15==
2.4 Object Detection
7
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the structure of a convolutional neural net.
The convolution layer extracts tiles/kernels of the input feature map. In the first
layer, it would be the image/matrix of pixel values. In the next ones, it applies filters
to each tile/kernel to compute a new features map.
The pooling layers are typically used to decrease the dimensionality of the tiles and
hence decrease the amount of computational power to process the data. Furthermore,
they can be used to both extract the dominant features and work as a noise suppressant.
There are two types of pooling, namely max pooling and average pooling. Max pooling
returns the maximum value from the specific tile. Average pooling returns the average
of all the values within the tile.
The feature map matrix is flattened into a vector which is then fed into the fully
connected layer. The fully connected layer is in the final layers of the convolutional
neural network. Here the model learns the non-linear combination of the higher-level
features coming from the feature extraction layers. The final classification is typically
performed by using a softmax classification layer that outputs the class.
To perform object detection, it is needed to make a bounding box around the object of
interest in the image. The image can contain several objects, so the detection algorithm is
required to make several bounding boxes and classify the objects accordingly for each one.
This means that the output layer is variable in size. Previous object detection algorithms
used a sliding window approach. In a simple manner, one would apply a CNN on a fixed
region and then move the region through the whole image. However, in practice, this
would not be doable since the objects of interest might have different spatial locations
within the image and be of different aspect ratios. Hence the detection algorithm would
have to select a huge number of regions which would make it computationally inefficient.
This region of interest problem is what the Faster R-CNN, SSD, and YOLO algo-
rithms are trying to solve. These networks are end-to-end deep learning-based object
detectors where we input an image to the network and the network then outputs the
bounding boxes and class labels.
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Analysis
2.4.2
Faster R-CNN
Faster R-CNN is the final evolution within the R-CNN family. This was first introduced
in the paper, Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Region Proposal
Networks which was published by Girshick in collaboration with Ren and Sun in 2015.
[7]
Figure 2.6: General structure of the Faster R-CNN. [7]
The network starts with a base-network that is typically pre-trained on the ImageNet
dataset. This base-network is a CNN that has been trained for a classification task. The
pre-trained CNN is used for extracting features from the input image which means
that the fully-connected layers from the base-network are removed. This ensures that
the base-network is fully-convolutional and that the output is then fed into the Region
Proposal Network (RPN) and ROI Pooling in the Faster R-CNN architecture.
The
Region Proposal Network (RPN) aims to find the region of interest that needs to be
classified. The RPN does not label anything, but it is only used to determine where in
the image a potential object could be present. The proposed bounding boxes are then
sent to the Region of Interest Pooling module along with the extracted features that the
CNN has outputted. The ROI pooling then passes these fixed-size windows of features
into two fully-connected layers to obtain the final detection and localisation estimation.
There are two fully-connected layers, one for the class labels and one for the bounding
box coordinates. The general architecture of Faster R-CNN can be seen in fig: 2.6.
2.4.3
SSD - Single Shot Detector
The Single Shot Detector was first introduced by Liu et al. in the paper, SSD: Single Shot
MultiBox Dectector [8]. The Single Shot Detector tries to address some of the problems
with the Faster R-CNN in terms of slow inference speed, but it sacrifices some accuracy.
==PAGE:17==
2.4 Object Detection
9
As the name suggests, the localisation and detection of the objects are performed in a
single forward pass of the network during inference time. This is different from the Faster
R-CNN that needs two forward passes, one for generating region proposal and one for
detecting the object of each proposal. Just like the Faster R-CNN, the SSD starts with a
pre-trained base network. In the paper, the base network was the VGG16 and a diagram
of the architecture can be seen in figure 2.7. This base-network outputs the feature map
into additional convolutional layers. Each of these convolutional layers is connected to
the output fully connected layer. In combination with a Multibox algorithm, the SSD
can detect objects of varying sizes in a single forward pass.
Figure 2.7: Diagram of the Single Shot Detector [8]
2.4.4
YOLO - You Only Look Once
The YOLO object detector was first introduced by Redmon et al. in the paper, You Only
Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection [4]. Although, YOLO has been through
several updates, even during the time of this project. The final version by Redmon and
Farhardi was published in 2018, YOLOv3: An Incremental Improvement, and it was
the first framework of choice during the start of this project. But during the develop-
ment of the project, two newer versions have been released. YOLOv4 was published on
April 23, 2020 by Alexey Bochkovskiy,YOLOv4: Optimal Speed and Accuracy of Object
Detection [2]. Then on May 29, 2020, Glenn Jocher from the organisation Ultralytics
created a Github repository called YOLOv5 [3]. This implementation differs from the
previous versions by being implemented natively in PyTorch while the other versions
were implemented within a framework called Darknet. The naming and whether or not
it is version 5 is still debated within the computer version community, but ultimately
this framework is chosen since the inference speed and training time is noticeably better
than the previous versions.
The YOLO object detection algorithm performs localisation and detection in a single
forward pass of the network just like the SSD. Meaning the network only ”looks” at
the image once to obtain the final predictions, hence the name You Only Look Once.
YOLO consists of a convolutional network that predicts the bounding boxes and the
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Analysis
class probabilities for each bounding box. The general idea of YOLO is to split the
image into an SxS grid and then within each constructed grid box, the network predicts
whether there is an object m is present or not. Where m stands for the specified classes
the network is trained for. For each of the predictions, the network outputs a class
probability and offset values for the bounding box. Finally, all of the bounding boxes
that are above a certain class probability threshold are outputted as final detections.
(see fig: 2.8)
Figure 2.8: Information flow for the YOLO object detection pipeline. [4]
2.5
Mobile robot and hardware
For this project, a mobile robot and an RGB-D camera are utilised. The robot used is
a previous model of MiR100 mobile robot provided by Mobile Industrial Robots [25].
2.5.1
The MiR100
The MiR100 is an autonomous mobile robot that is able to navigate in indoor environ-
ments. The robot is equipped with several sensors that enable it to navigate in industrial
environments while simultaneously avoid obstacles and people. We will specifically use
the sensor information coming from the odometry encoders and the laser scanners.
==PAGE:19==
2.5 Mobile robot and hardware
11
Figure 2.9: The MiR100 used during this project
2.5.2
Astra Monocular Camera
The RGB-D camera used for the project is the Astra from Orbbec [31]. This is a monoc-
ular camera with a RBG image resolution of 640 x 480 and a depth image resolution
of 640 x 480. The camera has a refresh rate of 30 fps and an operation range between
0.6m and 8m.
Figure 2.10: Picture of Orbbec Astra camera used for the project
Astra is a triangulation active ranging sensor, which means it uses information about
how geometric properties manifest when it tries to estimate distance readings to objects.
The sensor is active since it projects a known light pattern onto the surrounding envi-
ronment. This is done by an IR source that emits sparse points while a CMOS sensor
receives the pattern. By combining the known geometric values as well as the triangula-
tion calculation a depth map is created (See figure 2.11). This is also called a structured
light sensor and has a major advantage over stereo vision sensors since it can work in
dark environments as well as environments where there are not many features e.g. edge-
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Analysis
less and uniformly coloured environments. Environments with a lot of illumination from
sunlight can cause problems for the Astra camera since the pattern emitted by the IR
source can be ruined by the reflection of the sunlight. Different object surfaces such as
glass, mirror, and other reflective material can also cause the same effect.
Figure 2.11: RGB image and depth map from the Astra RGB-D camera
2.5.3
Laser scanners
Figure 2.12: SICK S300 laser scanner [36]
The MiR100 robot has two laser scanners, one in each diagonal corner, to be able to scan
360° in 2D. The device is a time-of-flight sensor that uses light pulse to estimate distances
from objects. Short light pulses are transmitted while an electronic stopwatch runs. If
the light hits an object, the reflection is then received by the sensor. The distance is
then calculated based on the time interval between the moments of transmission and
moment of receipt.
The information coming from the laser scanners is in the form of a 2D point cloud
that can be used for localisation and mapping in the Cartographer algorithm. The device
emits laser pulse with an angular resolution of 0.5° and has an operating range between
0.5-20 m.
==PAGE:21==
2.6 Robot Operating System framework
13
2.5.4
Wheel and Motor Encorders
The final sensor information used for this project is the odometry. Odometry is the use
of data from motion sensors, typically wheel/motor encoders, to estimate the position
over time. The odometry is derived from the internal optical encoders inside the robot
that measure the angular speed and position of the motor/wheel shaft. The optical
encoder consists of two optical detectors, two illumination sources, a rotor disc with
small transparent sections that are equally spaced. The disc rotates with the shaft and
hereby continuously blocks the light source so optical detectors generate a square wave
pulse signal. The illumination and the detectors pair are placed 90°shifted with respect
to each other, such that the square signal looks as shown in the figure below.
Figure 2.13: Illustration of the incremental rotary optical encoder.
The figure shows a quadrature encoder that is widely used in mobile robots. The two
channels A and B provide not only information about the angular speed and position
of the motor/wheel shaft, but also the direction of rotation. This is because, with two
channels, one can determine which square wave produces a rising edge first, hereby
identify the direction of rotation (see figure 2.13 and 2.1). The increased number of
channels also provides improved resolution without changing the rotor disc.
State
Ch A
Ch B
s1
high
low
s2
high
high
s3
low
high
s4
low
low
Table 2.1: State table of the square signal from figure 2.13
2.6
Robot Operating System framework
The framework used to communicate with the robot is the Robot Operating System -
ROS. ROS is a robotics middleware containing a broad collection of libraries and tools
aiming to simplify the programming of robotic platforms. ROS is a powerful tool since
it establishes a straightforward communication with the robot. It allows the developer
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Analysis
to include a whole model of the robot platform and access the observations easily at all
times. The version used is Melodic Morenia, compatible with Ubuntu 18.0 LTS. The
programming language selected for the project implementation is Python 3.6.9. ROS
provides a client library implementation for Python, rospy. The SLAM system used,
Cartographer, provides a ROS integration [14] as well. Cartographer is able to create
offline either online, a 2D, or a 3D map. This project is implemented on top of the
robot’s existing software, meaning only the sensor measurements are utilised. For this
project, a 2D map representation is selected including the rendering of the landmarks
as three-dimensional objects.
2.6.1
Robot model
For one to utilise Cartographer within ROS API with their own robot it is necessary to
provide the system with some information. The robot model needs to be available for
the Cartographer. The MiR robot model is described with a Unified Robot Description
Format (urdf). Urdf is an XML format created to describe the robotic model including
the transformations between its links and joints.
The model is created taking into
consideration both the mobile robot and the RGB-D camera.
The .urdf-file for the
MiR100 is available at MiR’s Cartographer GitHub repository [13].
2.6.2
Sensor measurements
Cartographer requires the following measurements to successfully run its SLAM algo-
rithm:
• The origin of the Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) which is used as the tracking
frame of the robot.
• The origin of the odometry frame.
• The measurements from the odometry, the IMU, and any range sensors. A laser
measurement in case the map created is 2D or a point cloud if it is 3D.
• The information whether or not the landmarks feature is used.
The aforementioned information is passed to the Cartographer system as rostopics.
Cartographer uses specific names to associate each rostopic with the corresponding data.
Therefore the user must map accurately the observations published from the robot to
the related rostopics used by the Cartographer system. This is done via a roslaunch file
which spawns the Cartographer rosnode.
==PAGE:23==
2.6 Robot Operating System framework
15
2.6.2.1
Landmark observations
Cartographer provides the option of using landmarks to achieve SLAM. The developer
needs to publish a list of landmark observations. Each ROS message published contains
information about the pose of the landmark, the time of the observation, and a unique
id for each landmark. The pose of the landmark has to be calculated with respect to the
tracking frame of the robot, the IMU frame in this case. Two optional attributes can be
utilised, the rotation and translation weight which express how good is each measurement
published. The landmark observation weights are represented as a weight vector. The
ros mesage LandmarkList.msg contains a list of landmark observations at a specific
timestamp. Each landmark observation is represented by the LandmarkEntry.msg. The
Landmark List and Landmark Entry rosmsg have the following structure:
Landmark List message:
std_msgs/Header header
cartographer_ros_msgs/LandmarkEntry[] landmarks
Landmark Entry message:
string id
geometry_msgs/Pose tracking_from_landmark_transform
float64 translation_weight
float64 rotation_weight
2.6.2.2
Synchronisation
The V-SLAM algorithm is run via a laptop, so it is necessary to ensure that the machine
running the program and the robot itself are synchronised. Fortunately, the MiR100 has
an NTP server so before executing the program the machine needs to be synchronised
with the robot’s server. If not, the landmarks observations sent would have an incorrect
timestamp.
==PAGE:24==
16
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
System description
3.1
Introduction
This chapter will explain the overall system that has been developed during this project.
Specifically, the basic ideas behind the Cartographer SLAM algorithm will be explained.
Furthermore, the object detection part of the system will be described including the
general approach on how to train and evaluate a custom object detector. Then the
distance estimation and point cloud will be explained which involve the pinhole camera
model and how the camera calibration has been done.
Finally, we will go through
the various computer vision methods that have been implemented in order to do data
association. The program is implemented with Python 3.6.9. and it is available on
GitHub at the https://github.com/anastasiapan/Landmarks_vSLAM repository.
3.2
System Overview
The purpose of the developed system is to enhance SLAM by incorporating landmarks
detected visually with a convolutional neural network. Considering that the objects
are being used as landmarks, it is of great importance that they are static. The neural
network used, You Only Look Once (YOLO) [4], is trained to detect some custom objects
in the RGB frame of the RGB-D camera. Before the detections are further processed, it
is necessary to check their distance from the robot by reading the depth map returned
from the RGB-D camera. If they are out of the suitable range they are being discarded.
The objects within the acceptable range are then tracked visually within consecutive
detections and their position in the robot frame and in the global frame is calculated.
Moreover, it is necessary to achieve a successful data association, which is to associate the
object detected in the current frame with itself, in case it has been observed prior. Once
the data association is complete, a spatial filter is applied to eliminate false associations
using the objects’ global positions as a criterion. Provided that the condition is satisfied,
the objects can now be used as landmarks from the SLAM algorithm.
The SLAM
algorithm used is Cartographer system [20], which it takes as input the landmarks’ pose
in the robot frame and their unique id. The information flow is illustrated in figure 3.1.
==PAGE:26==
18
3 System description
Figure 3.1: Flow chart of the visual SLAM algorithm implemented.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
19
3.3
Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
The main objective of this project is to successfully achieve SLAM. Aiming to enhance
the quality of the SLAM, landmark-based visual SLAM is implemented. For this project,
the approach used to solve the core SLAM problem is a Graph-SLAM based system,
Cartographer. It provides real-time SLAM in 2D and 3D across multiple platforms and
sensor configurations [20].
3.3.1
Cartographer
Towards achieving SLAM the cartographer first creates a local map (submap) by insert-
ing a few consecutive laser scans at the best estimated pose. The pose is represented
as ξ = (ξx, ξy, ξθ) where (ξx, ξy) correspond to the translation and ξθ to the rotation
of the observations. As expected the pose cannot be estimated with zero uncertainty,
therefore an amount of accumulative error is present. To mitigate this error, Cartogra-
pher runs a pose optimisation algorithm before embedding it into a submap. The pose
is optimised by solving a nonlinear least-squares problem which utilises an open-source
library developed for that purpose, Ceres Solver [1]. Each of the completed submaps
and scans is then considered to be a loop closure candidate. If they are close enough the
scan matcher is searching for the scan in the local submap. If it is found, it is added as
a loop closure constraint to the global optimisation problem which follows Sparse Pose
Adjustment [22]. The optimisation is required to complete prior the insertion of new
scans, otherwise, it falls behind. Cartographer is using a branch-and-bound technique
to tackle this challenge.
3.3.1.1
Local two-dimensional SLAM
The first step to achieve local SLAM is to construct the current submap by inserting
scans. This is done by aligning the coordinate frames of the scans and submaps regularly.
The submaps are depicted as probability grids with an explicit resolution. The probabil-
ity is computed applying a hit or miss strategy (3.2). Each grid point is assigned a phit
or a pmiss probability if recently observed, or an updated one if observed previously.
==PAGE:28==
20
3 System description
Figure 3.2: A scan represented in a grid with hits (shaded and crossed out) and misses
(shaded only)
As quoted previously a scan pose is required to be optimised before inserted into
a submap by the scan matcher based on Ceres-solver. The matcher finds a scan pose
which maximises the grid probabilities. For the local optimisation to be successful, good
initial estimates are necessary.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
21
3.3.1.2
Loop closure
The loop closure optimisation is once again defined as a nonlinear least-squares problem.
The scan matching is searching for the optimal match in a search window. Cartographer’s
scan matching is following the Branch-and-Bound approach [15]. The central logic is
to describe nodes in a tree where the root node denotes all potential solutions and the
children nodes represent subsets of possibilities. Each leaf node stands for a unique and
feasible solution. The nodes are selected with a depth-first search approach. Additionally,
a score threshold is introduced since poor matches can not be evaluated as optimal. After
the nodes are selected a branching rule needs to be applied. The root node is branching
into a group of initial nodes at a fixed height covering the entire search window. Finally,
the upper bounds for the inner nodes are computed in an efficient manner. The algorithm
is presented below [20]:
best_score ←score_threshold
Compute and memorise a score for each element in the initial nodes C0.
Initialise a stack C with C0 sorted by score in descending order.
while C is not empty do
Pop c from stack C
if score(c) > best_score then
if c is a leaf node then
match ←ξc
▷ξc is a possible solution
best_score ←score(c)
else
Branch: Split c into nodes C
Compute and memorise a score for each element in Cc
Push Cc into stack C arranged in descending order
end
end
end
return best_score, match
Algorithm 1: Depth-first search branch-and-bound scan matcher
3.3.1.3
Landmarks component
Apart from the laser scans, Cartographer provides an additional component, landmarks.
Landmarks in SLAM are distinct and static elements in the environment which can
be observed several times.
The robot should be capable of identifying and locating
them. In this way, additional nodes and constraints are added to the graph resulting
in an improvement in the robot’s localisation. Landmarks need to be detectable from
different poses of the robot. Furthermore, they need to be clearly distinguished from
one another.
Cartographer requires the relative to the robot pose of each landmark and their
identity. Pose graph collects and stores all sensor information, including the landmarks
==PAGE:30==
22
3 System description
observations.
When the global optimisation is run the landmarks enter sparse pose
optimisation as additional independent variables.
There are numerous ways to observe and identify landmarks. For this project, static
objects that are present in the environment are selected. They are detected visually using
an object detection algorithm and located using the camera’s depth sensor. Moreover,
they are distinguished from each other with the help of computer vision methods.
3.4
Object detection
The object detector is trained for custom objects. The selected objects are traffic cones
and fire extinguishers.
The objects are to be used as landmarks for SLAM and as
explained previously they need to be static. The fire extinguishers are static and available
in every environment. The traffic cones are not static but they are selected because it
is possible to alternate their locations before every new test. This allows to explore the
most possible cases.
3.4.1
Transfer learning
In this project, transfer learning has been made use of, in order to create a custom
network that works specifically on the objects that are being used as landmarks in the
SLAM algorithm. The general idea behind transfer learning is to use an object detection
model that is trained on one task and then re-purposed on a second related task. In this
way, the weights that are trained on millions of images like the InceptionNet, Resnet50,
or other models are used as an initial starting point for our custom network. We are
then taking advantage of the low-level image features like edges, textures, etc. learnt
by the pre-trained models and then transfer that ”knowledge” to our custom model. As
a result, only the final classifications layers are being trained to learn the higher-level
details in our data-set images. These higher-level details depend of course on the object
that the model is chosen to train to detect. In this case, one of the objects is a traffic
cone seen in fig 3.3.
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Object detection
23
Figure 3.3: Image of a landmark used to train the object detection model. On the left
side the raw image is shown while on the right side, the same image annotated with the
bounding box
3.4.2
Generating training data-set
The images that are used to train the models are taken from a video stream while
moving the robot in an environment with the desired landmarks. One frame of this
video can be seen on the left side in fig 3.3 above. This video has to be annotated by
a person before it can be used to train the model. The annotation tool that is used for
this project is called Computer Vision Annotation Tool (CVAT) and is an open-source
program developed by Intel [11]. CVAT is a browser-based application so it is possible
to have multiple people work on the same annotation task. Furthermore, the application
does support several work annotation scenarios for machine learning problems such as
object detection, image classification, and image segmentation. The program is used
to generate annotated image data for training the object detection algorithms. This is
done simply by uploading the video file captured using the internet browser interface
that is set up after the installation process. The annotation process is then done by going
through each frame of the video and making a bounding box around the landmark also
illustrated in fig 3.3. After the video has been fully annotated with bounding boxes, the
training data can be downloaded. The CVAT application supports several annotation
formats such as YOLO, PASCAL VOC, TFrecord, and more.
This means that the
application can be used for the YOLO, SSD, and Faster R-CNN framework without
further annotation work needed.
The YOLO annotation folder contains several files that are needed to properly train
the network. The folder consists of .txt-files for each .jpg-image-file which will be in
the same directory and with the same name apart from the file extension. Each .txt-file
contains the annotation information for the corresponding .jpeg-image-file with the same
name. The annotation information follows the format:
<object-class> <x_center> <y_center> <width> <height>
Where <object-class> is an integer object number from 0 to (classes-1). <x_center>
==PAGE:32==
24
3 System description
<y_center> <width> <height> is float values, between 0.0 to 1.0, relative to width
and height of image. Finally, <x_center> <y_center> is the center coordinates of the
rectangle/bounding box. If there are more objects within one image the .txt will simply
just consist of more lines following the described format above.
Besides the folder containing the images and annotation .txt-files, there are three
files: obj.data, obj.names, and train.txt. The obj.name file contains the names of the
class labels. The names are ordered in such a way that the first name corresponds to
integer 0, the second name corresponds to integer 1, etc. in the .txt file. The obj.data
file holds the information about the number of classes as well as the directory path
to train.txt and obj.names files. Additionally, are the directory path defined for the
weights. This file path is the location where the weights will be stored doing training.
The training can take several hours, so at certain checkpoints, the weights will be stored
so one can continue training if it is interrupted. This also gives some flexibility in terms
of choosing the weights one would like to use since it not only restricted to the final
weights after the training is done.
The annotation files to train the Faster R-CNN and SSD are chosen to be of format
TFRecord since the Tensorflow framework is selected for training the network. TFRecord
is Tensorflow’s own binary storage format.
3.4.3
Data augmentation
Data augmentation is often used when training deep learning models. The performance
of any model generally improves with a larger data-set, but it is not always the case one
has access to that. This is also the case for this project. The annotation work described
above is very tedious and time-consuming, but by doing some data augmentation the
data-set can be increased as well as incorporate some variation to improve the robustness
of the model. The following data-augmentation has been made:
Random Flips: Randomly flips the image horizontally with a probability of 50%.
Random Rotations: Randomly rotate the image between −5◦and 5◦with a prob-
ability of 50%.
Random Exposure: Randomly change the brightness of the image between −25%
and 25%.
The horizontal flip augmentation is only used to expand the data-set, so the model
has more images to train on.
While the two other augmentations are used both to
expand the data-set but as well improve the performance/robustness of the model. The
random rotation between −5◦and 5◦helps the model to be more resilient to camera roll.
It is assumed that the mobile robot would generally only drive on flat surface hence the
reason for such a small rotation. Through testing, it is also observed that the bounding
box around the landmark improves with the inclusion of the rotation augmentation of
the training set. The final augmentation adds variability to the image brightness to help
the model be more resilient to lighting and camera setting changes. This also makes the
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Object detection
25
model more consistent in different environments where artificial lightning and sunlight
through windows can vary greatly.
3.4.4
Training and validation
The training of all the object detection models is done using Google Colaboratory.
Google Colab is a Jupyter notebook-like environment developed by Google which en-
ables one to write, run, and share code within Google Drive. But the major difference
compared to a normal Jupyter document is that the code is hardware accelerated with
access to free GPUs with very little configuration required. This has been crucial since
the training of the object detection models would not be feasible without access to high-
end GPUs. Google Colaboratory is using one of the four GPUs: Nvidia K80s, T4s, P4s,
or P100s.
Beside the augmentation described in the above section, the annotated image data
is also split into a training and a validation set. The 80% of the data-set is used as a
training set and the rest is used as a validation set. In this way, it is ensured that the
model is not trained on the same data which it will be validated on. This is done to
limit the risk of overfitting. The model tends to overfit the training data, as the training
is carried out for more number of epochs, leading to poor performance on new test data.
To eliminate this problem, validation is computed after each epoch immediately after
the training loop. This means it is possible to stop the training or save the weights at
the right point to prevent overfitting. This is called early stopping and the concept is
illustrated in figure 3.4 below.
==PAGE:34==
26
3 System description
Figure 3.4
One of the main metrics to evaluate the performance of the different object detection
models is mean Average Precision (mAP). To understand how mAP is calculated, the
precision-recall curve has to be defined. Precision is the measure of ”when the model
makes a prediction, how often does it guess correctly?”. While Recall is the measure of
”has the model made a prediction every time that it should?”. More mathematically the
precision and recall are defined as follow:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(3.1)
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(3.2)
Where TP = True positive (correctly predicting an object). TN = True negative (cor-
rectly predicting the absence of an object). FP = False positive (falsely predicting an
object when there are none). FN = False negative (failing to predict the location of an
object).
The model can have very high precision, but low recall if the model is not detecting
all of the objects in the image and vice versa. There is a trade-off depending on the level
of confidence the model should have to make a prediction. So if one wants to avoid the
model predicting false positives and this is more important than avoiding false negatives,
they can then adjust its confidence threshold to a higher value. Thereby, making the
model more likely to only produce high precision predictions at the expense of missing
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Object detection
27
some objects (recall). The precision-recall curve is a plot of precision and recall as a
function of the model’s confidence.
The precision-recall curve can then be used to calculate other metrics such as F1,
AUC, and Average Precision.
F1 is a metric that describes the optimal confidence
threshold that will maximise both precision and recall. Area Under Curve (AUC) is as
the name suggests the integral of the Precision and Recall curve. The final metric is the
average precision (AP). It is arguable the most important metric or at least the most
widely used among developers and researchers within the computer vision community.
This metric is calculated as the weighted mean of precision’s achieved for each recall
value, where the weights are the increase in recall from the previous recall value.
Figure 3.5: Sketch of the Precision-Recall curves and how F1, AUC and AP are deter-
mined
The object detection model predicts, as described before, in terms of bounding boxes.
These bounding boxes are described by X1, X2, Y1, Y2 coordinates and will most of
==PAGE:36==
28
3 System description
the time not be the exact same as the ground truth coordinates from the annotated
images. The bounding box prediction will be incorrect if the predicted class is wrong,
but if the class prediction is correct a metric to determine how well the bounding box
is capturing the object is needed. This metric is called Intersection over Union which
is a measurement of how much the predicted bounding box overlaps with the ground
truth bounding box divided by the total area of both bounding boxes (See fig 3.6). IoU
is computed as follows:
IoU = |A ∩B|
|A ∪B| = |I|
|U|
(3.3)
Where A and B are the prediction and ground truth bounding boxes respectively. IoU
has the property of scale invariance. This means that the width, height, and location
of the objects and the corresponding bounding boxes are taken into account. In other
words, the metric is normalised so the size of the objects in the image frame has no
influence, only the area of the shapes is of importance.
It is finally possible to compute the mAP. Depending on what threshold the IoU value
is set to, the corresponding Precision Recall curve would change. For example, if one
chooses an IoU threshold of 0.90 the recall rate would be significantly lower compared
to a threshold of 0.3. This is where mAP comes in. To calculate mAP, the Precision-
Recall curves are calculated for different values of IoU. The step size is typically set to
0.05, the AP is then calculated at each step starting from 0.5 up to 0.95. If there are
several classes this calculation is then done for each class across all the IoU thresholds.
The average is then calculated to finally arrive to mAP of the model. This metric is
important when comparing different models.
Figure 3.6: Sketch of the Intersection over Union computed for various bounding boxes
[33].
To visualise the different metrics described, the popular TensorBoard is used. Ten-
sorBoard is a visualisation toolkit for machine learning experiments in general, and it is
working for all the frameworks that have been tested in this project. There is some slight
difference between the YOLOv5 training graphs compared to SSD and Faster R-CNN,
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Object detection
29
since the latter has been trained using the Tensorflow Object Detection API (TFOD
API) (need ref) while the YOLOv5 was trained using Ultralytics PyTorch framework.
One difference is the first axis for YOLOv5 graphs is in number of epochs while the
training graphs for SSD and Faster RCNN are in number of steps (number of gradient
update). An epoch is one full cycle through the training data, meaning we have several
steps for one epoch. In general if we have 3000 images with a batch size of 10 an epoch
will have 3000 images/(10 images / step) = 300 steps.
3.4.5
YOLOv5 training results
As mentioned before YOLOv5 has been trained in the framework from Ultralytics which
is based on Pytorch. Here we have several options in terms of base networks. The
framework supports a total of 4 pre-trained base networks called YOLOv5s, YOLOv5m,
YOLOv5l, and YOLOv5x. Where the first is the smallest/fastest network and the last
is the biggest/slowest network. The bigger networks have higher accuracy [3]. Since all
the networks are running fast (+40 fps) at inference on our system, the biggest network
YOLOv5x was chosen.
The model was trained for 4 hours 34 min which corresponds to a total of 300 epochs.
The loss scores can be seen in the figures below (see figure 3.7).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.7: Classification (a) and objectness (b) loss during training YOLOv5.
Finally, we have the mAP evaluation during training of the YOLOv5 (see figure 3.8).
The highest accuracy reached at final epoch with a mAP of 98% at IoU=0.5 and general
mAP of 91.21%.
==PAGE:38==
30
3 System description
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: YOLOv5: Figure (a) shows mAP at IoU=0.5 and figure (b) show the mAP
evaluated within range IoU = [0.5:0.05:0.95].
3.4.6
Non-Maximum Suppression
One of the problems with object detection models is that they may find multiple detec-
tions of the same object even though there is only a single object. So instead of the
model detecting each object in the image frame once, it detects it multiple times. Non-
Maximum suppression is an algorithm that makes sure that each object is detected only
once. The general idea behind the algorithm is to suppress all the bounding box predic-
tions with lower confidence and then output only the proposals with a high/maximum
confidence score.
Figure 3.9: The Non-Maximum Suppression algorithm prune the multiple detection’s
down to one
The algorithm takes in as input a list of proposed bounding boxes B, corresponding
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Distance estimation and point cloud
31
confidence scores S, and an overlap threshold N. D will be the outputted predictions
after non-maximum suppression. The structure of the algorithm is as follows:
1. Select the detection with the highest confidence score, and remove it from B and
place it in D.
2. Compare the selected detection with all other proposed detections by calculating
the IOU. If the IOU is greater than the overlap threshold N, discard it from B
3. Select the detection with the highest confidence from the remaining detections in
B, and remove it from B and place it in D.
4. Repeat 2, but with the newly selected detection.
5. Repeat the whole process until there are no more proposed detections left in B
After Non-Maximum Suppression, only one bounding box around each object remains
(See figure 3.9).
3.5
Distance estimation and point cloud
3.5.1
Calibration
In order to get a good depth estimation from the depth camera, it is necessary to make
sure the RGB camera is calibrated. That is because when reading the information from
the depth map, first the depth map is synchronised and aligned with the RGB frame
and the object detection located in the RGB frame is used. This is a general problem
when using a camera to capture images. There are several types of distortion that might
happen, but with proper calibration, one can mitigate these. One type is called radial
distortion which happens when light rays bend more near the edges of a lens than they
do at its optical center. Radial distortion is more prevalent in smaller lens compared to
bigger lenses since the light rays have to bend more.
Figure 3.10: Illustration of how the presence of radial distortion manifests in the form
of ”fish-eye” and ”barrel” effects. [24]
==PAGE:40==
32
3 System description
Towards calculating the undistorted pixel coordinates that come from the radial
distortion the equations below have to be solved:
xdistorted = x (1 + k1r2 + k2r4 + k3r6)
ydistorted = y (1 + k1r2 + k2r4 + k3r6)
(3.4)
Where xdistorted , ydistored is the distorted pixel location and x, y is the corrected pixel
location. r is given by r = x2 + y2. k1, k2 and k3 is the radial distortion coefficients
for the lens. The distortion coefficients explains how severe the distortion is but also
what sort of distortion is occurring (figure 3.10). For example, if the radial distortion
coefficients are negative the pincushion distortion occurs, otherwise the barrel distortion
takes place.
Another type of distortion can happen when the lens and the image plane are not
completely parallel. This is called tangential distortion though it is not present in our
camera.
By calibrating it is also possible to calculate the parameters of a lens and image
sensor of an image or video camera, namely the intrinsic parameters. These parameters
are the focal lengths (fx, fy) and the principal point (cx, cy) and together they form
the camera matrix. The camera matrix is a transformation matrix which describes the
mapping of a pinhole camera from 3D points in the world to 2D points in an image
including the calibration parameters. The transformation is given below:


u
v
1

=


fx
0
cx
0
fy
cy
0
0
1

·


x/z
y/z
1


(3.5)
where:
• (fx, fy) represent the focal lengths expressed in pixel units
• (cx, cy) represent the pixel coordinates of the principal point
• (u, v) represent the pixel coordinates of a point on the image frame
• z is the distance from the principal point to the point to be projected in real world
To solve these calibration equations the ROS camera_calibration package has been
used. This package allows an easy calibration of monocular or stereo cameras using a
checkerboard calibration target. For the calibration an A3 - 40mm squares - 8x6 vertices,
9x7 squares checkerboard was used.
3.5.2
Point cloud extraction
Towards successful localisation all of the poses consist of a position expressed in Carte-
sian coordinates (x, y, z) and an orientation expressed in quaternions (x, y, z, w). Conse-
quently, the detected landmark’s position should be expressed accordingly. The camera
==PAGE:41==
3.5 Distance estimation and point cloud
33
used is equipped with a depth sensor that acquires range distance information across
its field of view (FoV). It outputs a depth map which is a matrix that contains the
aforementioned distance readings. Therefore, it is necessary to transform the distance
readings to points expressed in Cartesian coordinates.
To implement the desired point cloud expressed in Cartesian coordinates the pin-
hole camera model is utilised. The pinhole camera model describes the mathematical
relationship between the coordinates of a point in 3D space and its projection onto the
image plane of an ideal pinhole camera. The basic assumption of the pinhole model is
that light travels along a straight line and goes through a pinhole at a fixed distance in
front of an image plane.
As a matter of fact, the cameras used for computer vision applications deviate from
the pinhole camera model approximation. As a result, several types of distortion might
occur, which are eliminated by camera calibration (see 3.5.1).
To recreate the point cloud in Cartesian coordinates with the use of the depth map
first it is necessary to establish an origin frame for the Cartesian coordinates (3.11).
Figure 3.11: Camera origin frame
Using the selected origin frame and (3.5) the following mathematical equations are
used for each point:
xi = −(ui −cx) · di
fx
yi = −(vi −cy) · di
fy
zi = di
(3.6)
where di is the depth range return from the depth sensor in millimeters.
==PAGE:42==
34
3 System description
3.6
Data association
Landmark based SLAM considerably improves localisation but only if the landmarks
are identified and distinguished clearly. Therefore it is necessary to accurately identify
each landmark detected by the object detection neural network. This problem is usually
referred to as data association.
To accomplish successful data association it is necessary to track each object frame-
by-frame and recognise it again when observed at a later time. For this project, the
data association is based primarily on image comparison. Each object is being tracked
continuously by comparing its surroundings in one frame, with the ones in the previous.
On top of that, any frame which contains a continuously tracked object is stored and
searched whenever a new detection is present. A frame containing an object like that
is called a keyframe. In case a match is found in the preciously tracked objects, the
newly detected object is considered to be already observed in the past. The algorithm
is demonstrated at figure 3.12. This event is also an indication that the loop is closed.
The frame comparison is carried out with the bag of visual words (BoVW) [37].
==PAGE:43==
3.6 Data association
35
Figure 3.12: Visual data association flowchart
==PAGE:44==
36
3 System description
3.6.1
Scene comparison with bag of visual words
The bag of visual words (BoVW) method is inspired by the bag of words (BoW) method,
used in natural language processing. A BoW model is a representation of a document
that describes the occurrence of words within it. For one to be able to count the words
and create a document’s frequency histogram, a vocabulary of known words is necessary.
The order of the appearance of the words is not taken into consideration hence it is
called a ”bag”. Two documents are declared as similar if they contain similar words.
Likewise, the BoVW model represents images as a collection of keypoints.
Each
picture is represented as a frequency histogram of features.
Images that contain a
significant amount of the same keypoints are possibly representing the same scene. As
in the BoW model, a visual vocabulary is required to create the frequency histograms,
usually referred as a codebook. A codebook contains image features extracted from a
large dataset of images. The visual words are the equivalent of the words in a linguistic
dictionary. The histogram for a picture is created by counting how many times a visual
word is present in it. An example is presented (3.13) to illustrate the method more
comprehensively.
==PAGE:45==
3.6 Data association
37
(a) Images participating in the codebook’s creation.
(b) Codebook - ”bag” of visual words. The visual words are features extracted from
the codebook’s images.
(c) Illustrative frequency histograms of each codebook picture.
Figure 3.13: Bag of visual words model [16]
3.6.1.1
Codebook creation
If one wants to use the bag of visual words method, several open-source visual vocabular-
ies are available. The available codebooks have a vast amount of visual words from very
diverse environments, indoors or outdoors. Although for this project a new codebook is
created since the scene comparison is run online and the pre-existing large visual vocab-
ularies slow it down considerably. The new codebook is created using images taken in
DTU campus. The downside of this codebook’s usage is that it might not be sufficient
if applied universally in a different environment. The method creating the codebook
though, can be followed in order to create a new one, in case it’s necessary.
To construct the codebook, first it is required to capture a large image dataset. After
acquiring the pictures, SURF features are extracted (see 3.6.2.1). The SURF descriptors
need to be clustered to form the visual vocabulary. Any clustering algorithm could be
used but for this project, the K-means clustering algorithm is exploited.
==PAGE:46==
38
3 System description
K-means clustering algorithm
K-means algorithm [19] is a method utilised to cluster a number of N-dimensional
vectors, the 64-dimensional features descriptors in this case. The number of clusters k is
selected according to one’s needs. A cluster is a group of vectors in which the distance
from one to another is smaller, relative the distance from vectors in other clusters. Each
cluster has a center µk that describes each cluster.
Each element xi belongs to the
cluster that minimises the Euclidean distance ∥xi −µk∥between itself and the cluster’s
centroid. K-means clustering method consists of the following steps:
• Each cluster center µk is initialised randomly.
• Each data-set member is assigned to the closest cluster.
• The centroid µk is recalculated to be the mean of the members of the cluster.
• Repeat the two previous steps until µk does not change anymore.
This procedure is illustrated thoroughly in figure 3.14.
==PAGE:47==
3.6 Data association
39
Figure 3.14: K-means clustering example - three iterations - k = 4 clusters [19]. The
squares represent the cluster centroids. Each plot demonstrates one step. After three
iterations convergence is reached.
For the codebook 99816 image features are extracted from the entire data-set and
eventually clustered with k-means into 100 clusters. The clusters’ centroids represent
the codebook of visual words.
3.6.1.2
Creating a histogram
Once the codebook is created, a histogram for each image can be constructed according
to the bag-of-visual-words method. The histogram’s bins represent the visual words and
each bin’s value is the occurrence of the visual word in the picture. So it is a frequency
histogram that expresses the number of times each word is present in an image. Counting
the number of visual words cannot be carried out in a straightforward way as in bag-
==PAGE:48==
40
3 System description
of-words because image features are detected instead of visual words. Therefore, each
detected feature is classified as the nearest visual word. The Euclidean distance between
each feature’s descriptor and each visual word determines this. Each feature is accounted
for the visual word that minimises this Euclidean distance.
3.6.1.3
Image comparison
The purpose of this model is to carry out a frame comparison. It is then necessary to
establish a comparison method between two frames. As a match criterion between two
images, the cosine similarity between their histograms can be used. Cosine similarity is
typically used for vectors. In this case, the histograms are represented as such, so this
method is appropriate for the comparison. The cosine similarity between two histograms
is calculated as in 3.7. Its value varies between 0 and 1, where 1 stands for identical
images and 0 for completely diverse ones.
h1 · h2
∥h1∥∥h2∥
(3.7)
3.6.2
Feature detection
As explained in the previous section, the visual codebook is represented as a collection
of clusters of image features. Feature detection is a process that selects and locates in-
teresting image information that can be deemed as features. For instance edges, corners,
blobs, and ridges are all types of image features. To process the image features it is
necessary to describe them too. A feature is described by an area which contains itself
and a region around it. An ideal feature description is invariant under alterations in
scale, translation or rotation, illumination. The description of a feature is numerically
represented by a vector called feature descriptor. The way a descriptor is constructed
depends on the feature detection algorithm used.
3.6.2.1
SURF feature detection algorithm
A variety of feature detection algorithms have been implemented. For this project Ori-
ented FAST and Rotated BRIEF (ORB) and Speeded up Robust Features (SURF) are
considered although the latter is selected. SURF is a local feature detector and descrip-
tor which is also scale and rotation invariant [10]. SURF algorithm consists of feature
extraction and feature description.
Feature extraction
The detection itself is based on the Hessian matrix (3.8), but uses a very basic box
filter approximation (figure 3.15). For one pixel the Hessian matrix is calculated as:
==PAGE:49==
3.6 Data association
41
H(x, σ) =
[
Lxx(x, σ)
Lxy(x, σ)
Lxy(x, σ)
Lyy(x, σ)
]
(3.8)
where x is a point in an image at scale σ and L is the convolution of the Gaussian
second-order derivative with the image I at that point. Locating the SURF features relies
on the determinant of the Hessian matrix. To calculate the determinant first a Gaussian
kernel convolution is applied, followed by second-order derivative. This is done with box
filters. This is illustrated in figure 3.15 which demonstrates 9x9 box filters scaled with
σ = 1.2
Figure 3.15: Laplacian of Gaussian with a box filter [10]
The resulted approximations are expressed as Dxx, Dyy and Dxy. So 3.8 implies:
det(H(x, σ)) = Dxx · Dyy −(0.9 · Dxy)2
(3.9)
The features lie where the Hessian determinant has a maximum value. OpenCV’s
SURF implementation is used [27] which allows the user to set a threshold for the
Hessian determinant. The larger the threshold is set the fewer features are detected.
The optimal threshold for the Hessian determinant should:
• Find a sufficient number of features
• Ensure that the features detected contain useful information
Feature description
==PAGE:50==
42
3 System description
After acquiring the image features it is now vital to describe them numerically. SURF
features are rotation invariant thus SURF tries to find a repeatable orientation for the
keypoints. First, the Haar-wavelet responses are calculated in x (dx) and y (dy) direction
in a circular region around the keypoint. Afterwards, the sum of both the vertical and
horizontal responses is calculated. This calculation iterates through various scanning
orientations incremented by π/3 until the maximum sum is found. The orientation with
the maximum sum is the orientation of the feature descriptor (figure 3.16).
Figure 3.16: Feature orientation: As the scanning orientation is iterated the wavelet
responses are summed (blue vector). The largest vector defines the main orientation of
the keypoint. [21]
After the keypoint orientation is determined, a square region around the keypoint is
constructed aligned with its orientation. This region is then split up into smaller 4x4
square sub-regions. For each sub-region, the wavelet responses dx and dy, and their
absolute values are summarised. The feature descriptor consists of these sums for each
sub-region:
des =
(∑
dx,
∑
dy,
∑
|dx|,
∑
|dy|
)
(3.10)
3.6.2.2
Image features selection
The extracted features are used for the scene comparison with the bag-of-visual-words
method. The purpose of this method is to be able to identify the detected objects in
multiple frames. This indicates that not all the features present in a frame provide us
with useful information but the ones around the detected object. Additionally, it is
crucial to ensure that only informative features are extracted. By adjusting the Hessian
determinant threshold it is possible to secure the extraction of useful features to a certain
extend.
Feature extraction region of interest
To visually track the detected objects, SURF features are extracted from a patch
around the bounding box of each detection. The bounding box is dilated expanding
its x and y coordinates by 50% in order to contain the object’s surroundings. Objects
==PAGE:51==
3.6 Data association
43
which belong to the same class are very similar to one another, if not identical. This
means that if an object has a significant amount of SURF features on it, when extracted
they are not distinctive enough to help distinguishing it from a different one. In case
the object appears to be featureless, this issue does not occur. On the other hand, if
a serious amount of image features are located on it, this problem highly affects the
similarity calculation. This issue is tackled by removing the bounding box itself from
the patch. For this project the object classes used are traffic cones and fire extinguishers.
The cones are rather ’feature-less’ so excluding the bounding box has little to no effect.
The fire extinguishers though, contain a rather high amount of SURF features on them.
An illustrative example for each class is shown below.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.17: SURF features extraction - Cone - Patch includes the bounding box.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.18: SURF features extraction - Cone - Patch does not include the bounding
box.
w/ object
a
b
c
a
1
0.79
0.5
b
0.79
1
0.43
c
0.5
0.43
1
w/o object
a
b
c
a
1
0.78
0.5
b
0.78
1
0.4
c
0.5
0.4
1
Table 3.1: Cost matrices - traffic cones
==PAGE:52==
44
3 System description
In figures (3.17) and (3.18), the SURF features are extracted from the image patch
with the bounding box included and excluded respectively. The objects detected are
traffic cones. Three test images are demonstrated, (a) and (b) represent the same cone
in both pictures and (c) captures a different one. The images histograms are constructed
with the bag-of-visual-words method. For each case, the cosine similarity between every
image with one another is calculated and inserted into the cost matrix. The cost matrices
for both of the cases are shown in table 3.1. It is noticed that the algorithm is able to
locate the true match and removing the features within the object’s bounding box has
insignificant effect on the result.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.19: SURF features extraction - Fire extinguisher - Patch includes the bounding
box
==PAGE:53==
3.6 Data association
45
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.20: SURF features extraction - Fire extinguisher - Patch does not include
bounding box
w/ object
a
b
c
d
a
1
0.71
0.69
0.62
b
0.71
1
0.58
0.5
c
0.69
0.58
1
0.84
d
0.62
0.5
0.84
1
w/o object
a
b
c
d
a
1
0.78
0.55
0.49
b
0.78
1
0.5
0.44
c
0.55
0.5
1
0.8
d
0.49
0.44
0.8
1
Table 3.2: Cost matrices - fire extinguishers
In figures (3.19) and (3.20), the SURF features are extracted from the image patch
with the bounding box included and excluded respectively. The objects detected are
fire extinguishers. Four test images are presented, (a) and (b) which picture the same
extinguisher while (c) and (d) picture another one. The histograms and the cost matrices
are calculated in the same manner as in the cones example before. The cost matrices are
shown in table 3.2. In opposition to the cones case, here the removal of the bounding
box features has a great impact on the matcher. For instance the extinguisher captured
==PAGE:54==
46
3 System description
in case (a) produces a very high similarity score with itself in image (b), when the
bounding box’s features are included, as well as with another extinguisher in image (c).
If the bounding box features are not taken into consideration this false match is now
corrected with a considerably lower matching score.
Hessian matrix determinant threshold
To extract SURF features, OpenCV’s function is used which allows to set a threshold
for the Hessian matrix determinant [27]. The default value is 400, although two more
values are examined, 300 and 500. The aforementioned thresholds are tested along with
the bag-of-visual-words matcher to investigate which one gives the best performance for
the specific application. Five query images are tested, as seen in figure 3.22, two pairs,
(a,b) and (d,e) which represent the same object and one that contains a unique object
(c). The histogram of each image is created for each Hessian threshold test. Once again,
the cost matrix is constructed. The expected results are shown in table 3.3.
a
b
c
d
e
a
1
high
low
low
low
b
high
1
low
low
low
c
low
low
1
low
low
d
low
low
low
1
high
e
low
low
low
high
1
Table 3.3: Expected cost matrix
The resulted cost matrix for each threshold is displayed in figure 3.21. Similar images
are matched to one another and with a high similarity score regardless the threshold’s
value. The disparate images’ similarities though, appear to decrease as the threshold
increases. Therefore, as the threshold increases to 500 the similar images score with
each other remains high, while the dissimilar ones score diverges even more. So in this
case, the algorithm is able to locate similar images and on the same time distinguish
the different ones. In conclusion, the Hessian matrix determinant threshold is set to 500
since it appears to be the most effective one.
==PAGE:55==
3.6 Data association
47
Figure 3.21: Cost matrices for each Hessian matrix determinant threshold, 300, 400 and
500 correspondingly.
==PAGE:56==
48
3 System description
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 3.22: Query images for surf’s Hessian matrix determinant threshold investigation
within the bag of visual words implementation
3.6.3
Landmark tracking
The landmark-based SLAM needs a thorough data association to achieve adequate per-
formance. Therefore, it is necessary to track each landmark within consecutive detections
==PAGE:57==
3.6 Data association
49
and be able to recognise them again when encountered in the future. The landmarks are
visually tracked. Each landmark observed in a frame is compared to the landmarks ob-
served in a previous frame using SURF features and the bag-of-visual-words method as
described in chapters 3.6.2 and 3.6.1 correspondingly. Whenever one or more landmarks
are detected in frame, the steps described below are followed, for each detection:
1. Extract SURF features from the patch created around the landmark.
2. Create their histogram according to the bag-of-visual-words model.
3. Compare the histogram to each histogram constructed from the previous detec-
tions.
4. If the matching condition is satisfied, the specific landmark is tracked within these
two frames. Otherwise, the track is new.
All of the tracked objects, need to be identified again in the forthcoming frames. This
is carried out by storing keyframes and search among them later. The idea is inspired by
the ORB-SLAM project [26]. A keyframe is the image patch which contains a tracked
detection. When a track is finished, the histograms extracted from the keyframes are
stored. Once a new observation happens, the keyframes are searched and the best match
is found. A predefined matching threshold is set and in the case it is satisfied, the match
is classified as a good one. The new observation is being tracked until completion. Once
the track is finished, the accepted matches go through sampling.
Keyframes are being stored and updated dynamically. Another attempt made needed
a pre-processing step, which required to capture the keyframes of each landmark before-
hand and create their histograms. Then, whenever the program is executed, it searches
among these pre-existing keyframes for the best match. This implementation was even-
tually not selected to eliminate the pre-processing step.
3.6.3.1
Sampling
Before an observation is sent to the cartographer, it is necessary to sort out whether it
is a new one, or it has been seen before. First it is checked if the number of samples, i.e.
number of frames within the landmark is tracked, are enough. If they surpass a selected
minimum value, the sampling process continues, in any other case the observation is
disregarded. If no matches are found, it means that the landmark observed is potentially
a new one. In case accepted matches exist within the keyframes, they are sampled before
they are further processed:
s = n0
N · 100
(3.11)
where N is the total amount of matches and n0 is the amount of matches of the
prevalent observation. If the sampler result s is bigger than the predefined loop closure
==PAGE:58==
50
3 System description
threshold, the landmark observation is considered to be a good match. Regardless if the
visual match is good or not, a spatial filter is applied as an additional safety net.
3.6.4
Spatial filter
As explained before, data association is based primarily on computer vision. This method
is quite robust, although some amount of false matches occasionally occur, meaning that
the robot falsely matches the currently observed landmark to a previously observed one
which is in a different location. Consequently, the information that the Cartographer
system receives is one single object in two locations far from each other. When an event
like this happens, the SLAM algorithm is still trying to optimise these poses and it
ends up with an inaccurate map that not only is a distorted representation of the real
environment, but it results in a deranged localisation too.
To cope with this issue, before it is decided if an object is seen before or not, its
location is taken into consideration too. The landmark’s global pose is calculated and if
it is visually matched with another one seen in the past, it is checked if their calculated
global poses are close enough. If the two global poses appear to be far from each other,
this means that the match cannot be correct, therefore it is handled differently.
3.6.4.1
Landmarks global poses calculation
While the Cartographer performs SLAM it returns all of the processed information,
including the robot’s global pose and the landmarks’ global poses when they become
available. The robot’s global pose is described by a position in 3D Cartesian coordinates
and an orientation represented in quaternions form. Quaternions are being used to cope
with some ambiguities that Euler angles might fall into, such as the Gimbal lock when
there is a motion in three dimensions. In this case, a mobile robot is being used, so the
motion is only in the two-dimensional space. For that reason, it is sufficient to represent
the robot’s global pose by two Cartesian coordinates, X and Y, and one Euler angle,
between the robot’s local X-axis and the global X-axis (figure 3.23). The robot’s global
pose is denoted as:
ξ =


xg
yg
θ


(3.12)
==PAGE:59==
3.6 Data association
51
Figure 3.23: Robot’s global pose illustration
The robot’s estimated global pose is used to calculate the observed landmark’s global
pose, every time an observation occurs. The landmark’s pose is known with respect to
the robot frame, therefore it is necessary to find the transformation between the robot’s
frame and the map. Once the transformation matrix is derived, it is multiplied with the
landmark’s position in the robot’s frame to result in the landmark’s global position. The
landmark is a three-dimensional object, although in this case only its 2D location in the
map, that is x and y coordinates, is being considered. As seen in figure 3.24 the robot’s
origin frame is translated by xg, yg and rotated by θ. First, θ needs to be calculated
by converting the robot’s orientation from quaternions in Euler angles. The conversion
is carried out using Python’s scientific library (SciPy) [35]. Then, the transformation
matrix is calculated and used to acquire the landmark’s global pose (3.13).
Trans(r, g) =



cos θ
−sin θ
xg
sin θ
cos θ
yg
0
0
1


=⇒



xl
g
yl
g
1


=



cos θ
−sin θ
xg
sin θ
cos θ
yg
0
0
1


·



xl
r
yl
r
1



(3.13)
==PAGE:60==
52
3 System description
Figure 3.24: Robot and a landmark poses illustration
Once the global pose of the recently observed landmark is calculated, it is compared
with the poses of the landmarks observed prior. The poses of the previous observations
are being updated when the pose graph optimisation is complete and Cartographer
makes their global poses available. If the optimisation has not happened yet, the poses
calculated by 3.13 are being used.
3.6.4.2
Filtering
When a landmark observation is about to be sent to the Cartographer system the spatial
filter is applied. As said before, the spatial filter operation is based on a comparison
between the global poses of the currently observed landmark and every landmark en-
countered in the past. One issue that occurs is that the landmarks’ estimated global
poses carry an amount of error. Therefore, it is not possible to carry out a comparison
==PAGE:61==
3.6 Data association
53
based on single poses, but circular areas around each landmark with a predefined radius
r are used instead. First, the distance between the two landmarks is calculated from
their global poses. If that distance is smaller than r, meaning that one landmark is in
the other’s area, the two poses are considered as equal. The equality condition for the
two poses is:
d < r =⇒d2 < r2 =⇒(x1 −x2)2 + (y1 −y2)2 < r2
(3.14)
Figure 3.25: Distance between two landmarks with uncertainty illustration
First, it is checked if a match is found visually via the bag-of-visual-words method.
If a match is not found within the previously observed landmarks two possibilities exist:
• The robot has not seen the landmark before.
• The robot has seen the landmark before but failed to recognise it again.
The spatial filter helps to determine which event has happened. If all of the previously
observed landmarks are far enough it means that this is a new landmark and it is handled
as such. If a landmark already exists in the area of the current observation, there is a
==PAGE:62==
54
3 System description
possibility that the second case might be true. There is not a clear-cut way to determine
that. Although, the observation is never being sent because it is crucial to ensure that
every loop closure forwarded to the SLAM algorithm is undoubtedly correct, even if this
means that some loop closures might be disregarded.
When a match is found in the former observations then one of these two events
happens:
• The robot has successfully recognised a landmark observed in the past.
• The robot has wrongly matched the current observation to one of the former ones.
Once again, the spatial filter plays a part. If a landmark is matched to a previous
one, its global poses are being compared. If the equality condition is satisfied, the loop
closure is indeed correct and passed to the cartographer. If not, it means this is a false
match and in case the current observation’s area is free, the landmark is identified as a
new one. If the area is occupied, the observation is once again ignored.
3.7
Mapping
Cartographer produces a map as a probability occupancy grid as described in 3.3.1. For
the visualisation of the map, it uses a graphical interface provided by ROS, RViZ. By
default, Cartographer visualises landmarks as spheres. Towards creating a more intuitive
representation of the map the spheres are replaced by 3D models representing the objects
detected as landmarks. Additionally, a 3D model is also used to visualise the robot itself
(see figure 3.26). For the robot model an .sdf-file (Spatial Data File) is utilised which is
converted to .urdf [9]. The landmarks are visualised as Markers which is a visualisation
type supported by RViZ. Except its default available shapes RViZ supports .dae-files,
that is 3D models developed by COLLADA (COLLAborative Design Activity). The
models selected for each class of landmarks are illustrated in figure 3.27.
Figure 3.26: MiR100 robot - 3D model [30]
==PAGE:63==
3.7 Mapping
55
(a) Construction cone - 3D model [28]
(b) Fire extinguisher - 3D model [29]
Figure 3.27: Visualisation of landmarks
==PAGE:64==
56
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 4
Test and results
4.1
Introduction
To conclude that the developed system performs well and produces the expected results,
several tests had to be conducted. First and foremost, each of the implemented com-
ponents needs to be evaluated. Additionally, several alternatives were considered and
examined. In this chapter, the selected methodologies are evaluated, as well as compared
with some of the available alternatives. Several tests are conducted and recorded. Two
videos demonstrating the full system can be watched: Landmarks vSLAM DTU test 01
and Landmarks vSLAM DTU test 02.
4.2
Object detector alternatives
4.2.1
Scenario
During the project, several object detection architectures were considered and evaluated.
All the object detectors have been trained on the same data-set. The data-set consists of
7543 images and as explained in section 3.4.4 the data-set was split into a training- and
validation set, so 80% of the images were used to train the model and 20% for validation.
4.2.2
Faster R-CNN training results
This section shows the training results of the R-CNN architecture. As previously men-
tioned transfer learning has been used, so a pre-trained model from the Tensorflow
Object Detection Model Zoo has been downloaded. The base network chosen here was
the faster_rcnn_inception_v2. Furthermore, the configuration file
faster_rcnn_inception_v2_pets.config is used. This file instructs the TFOD API on
how to train/fine-tune the network. Very few configurations have been made to the file
except defining the number of classes, batch size, a path to the .pbtxt file, a path to
training data, etc. The following graphs show the loss score for the Faster R-CNN during
training. The model has been trained for a total of 18 hours 23 mins. If the training
is successful the weights of the network are getting adjusted in the direction of which
makes the overall loss score lower. In this way, the loss score indicates if the network is
learning and should get lower over time until convergence. For the Faster R-CNN there
==PAGE:66==
58
4 Test and results
are four types of loss scores since the network has the Region Proposal Network and
Box Classification module. Each part has an objectness loss and a localisation loss.
Figure 4.1: Loss during training for the RPN of the Faster R-CNN architecture. x-axis
is the number of steps during training, and the y-axis is the loss value.
We can see in the above loss graphs the RPN module is successfully learning during
the 50000 steps it has been trained. By the time we reach the final step we have a
localisation and an objectness loss of 0.048 and 0.09 respectively. The loss graphs could
suggest that the model could be trained for longer since the objectness loss has not
reached full convergence.
Figure 4.2: Loss during training for box classifier module of the Faster R-CNN architec-
ture.
In the above graphs, we see the loss for the box classifier module, and the final values
for the objectness and localisation loss are 0.03 and 0.0085 respectively. These individual
losses are combined into one graph showing the total loss during training and can be
seen in figure 4.3
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Object detector alternatives
59
Figure 4.3: Total loss during training for the Faster R-CNN architecture.
The next graphs show the mAP for the Faster R-CNN architecture and we can see
how it improves over time and converge at mAP of 96.4% at IoU=0.50 and general mAP
of 78.8% (see figure 4.4). It is important to note that mAP is being calculated on the
validation set, so this is the model performance on images that it has not been trained
on.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: Faster R-CNN: Figure (a) shows the mAP at IoU=0.50 and (b) show the
mAP evaluated within range IoU = [0.5:0.05:0.95]. The x-axis is the number of training
steps.
4.2.3
SSD training results
The SSD is faster to train compared to the Faster R-CNN and for this experiment the
model has been trained for 8 hours 24 mins. This results in a total of 130000 training
steps. The base network used here is the ssd_inception_v2 with the configuration file
ssd_inception_v2_pets.config. Again, no major configuration has been made in the
pipeline file other than the same as for the Faster R-CNN. The following graphs show
==PAGE:68==
60
4 Test and results
the loss score during training for the SSD architecture. Here we have two types of loss.
The classification and localisation loss. These can be seen in figure 4.5.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: Classification (a) and localisation (b) loss during the trained of the SSD
network
The classification and localisation loss reach final values of 0.74 and 0.16 (see figure
4.5. This results in the final total loss of 1.35 (see figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Total loss during training for the SSD network.
The next graphs show the mAP during training of the SSD network.
The final
results we get are 97.9% mAP at IoU=0.5 and general mAP of 79% (see figure 4.7).
This accuracy is comparable to Faster R-CNN architecture, but the SSD model has also
been trained for a higher number of training steps.
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Object detector alternatives
61
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: SSD: Figure (a) shows the mAP at IoU=0.50 and figure (b) show the mAP
evaluated within range IoU = [0.5:0.05:0.95]. The x-axis is the number of training steps.
4.2.4
Inference speed comparison
The inference speed is also of great importance when evaluating the different object
detectors. To test the different architectures two programs were used. One for running
the SSD and Faster R-CNN on a video file while calculating the FPS and one for the
YOLOv5. It should be noted again that this program was implemented using the Ten-
sorflow 1.15.2 framework while the YOLOv5 is using PyTorch 1.5.0. Furthermore, the
inference speed is calculated while running the program on Nvidia T4 GPU for Faster
R-CNN and SSD, since these were run in the Google Colab. The laptop that was used
during the project has an Nvidia GTX 1650 which is significantly slower compared to
the Nvidia Tesla 4 GPU. So the following FPS values for the Faster R-CNN and SSD
in 4.8 would be lower if the program was running natively on the laptop that was used
during the project.
==PAGE:70==
62
4 Test and results
Figure 4.8: FPS comparison of the different object detectors tested during the project.
4.2.5
Summary
The YOLOv5 has the highest accuracy with a mAP of 91.21% compared to the Faster R-
CNN and SSD frameworks. Therefore, the YOLOv5 was the choice during this project.
Furthermore, the YOLOv5 architecture inference speed is very high which is also of
great importance since we are interested in as many position estimates as possible. This
enables the Cartographer optimiser to have more measurements. It should also be noted
that all the object detectors were tested using a video from the robot running in a ”real-
world” scenario to see the actual performance. This is done since only evaluating the
performance on a validation set can be misleading due to the limited size of annotated
data.
4.3
Vision-based data association evaluation
As described in 3.6 visual and spatial information is exploited to accomplish robust
data association. The computer vision based technique is developed combining several
methods including a vision-based object tracker, frame comparison with the bag-of-
visual-words, and a sampler.
The most important aspect is to recognise an object
when it is encountered again, in other words, to detect loop closure. The loop closure
detection with the bag-of-visual-words method is evaluated and compared with some
other considered alternatives.
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Vision-based data association evaluation
63
4.3.1
Scenario
To evaluate a method a test scenario that includes as many of the potential cases as
possible is required. In order to perform a comparison, it is necessary that the test
scenario is the same among all of the query methods. Then, the results of the algorithm
are compared to the ground truth of the scenario. The ground truth must contain all of
the available object detection classes and some loop closures. In conclusion, the robot
needs to encounter objects which belong in both of the trained classes, cones and fire
extinguishers and that also observes them more than once. A video captured in DTU’s
building 329 is used as the test scenario. It contains in total 1515 detections. The objects
are re-observed from diverse angles to evaluate loop closure detection.
4.3.2
Test result analysis
First, the selected method is evaluated. The goal is to successfully distinguish diverse
objects that may belong in the same class and recognise them when observed again from
a different perspective. This problem is a classification problem so some of the metrics
used for its evaluation are the ones used for object detection as described in 3.4.4. The
association method is based on bag-of-visual-words. As explained in 3.6.1 a similarity
score percentage is calculated between two frames. To declare a match a threshold is
selected for the score. This threshold is tweaked between 55% and 85% and for each
value, the precision and recall are calculated. The precision-recall curve is demonstrated
at figure 4.9. As expected the higher the threshold the higher the precision. Although,
when increasing the threshold, a lot of true matches are disregarded leading in a low
recall.
==PAGE:72==
64
4 Test and results
Figure 4.9: Precision-recall curve extracted from tweaking the bag of words matching
threshold. Each plotted dot represents a precision and recall curve for the threshold
specified next to it.
Several metrics can be used to evaluate a model in total. One useful metric is the
average precision - AP (see 3.4.4).
The average precision is finding the Area under
Curve in the precision-recall graph (AUPRC). Before calculating the AP it is common
practice to smooth out the precision and recall curve in order to make it less prone
to small variations. This is done graphically by replacing each precision value with the
maximum precision value to the right of each recall level (figure 4.10a). Then the integral
can be calculated to estimate the AP (figure 4.10b).
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Vision-based data association evaluation
65
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.10: Average precision calculation
Another popular metric is the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic
(AUROC). It indicates the ability of a model to rank an element correctly. Thereby,
it expresses the ability of a model to distinguish between classification cases (positive)
and non-classification cases (negative). It is calculated from the integral of the Receiver
Operating Characteristic - ROC curve (figure 4.11). The ROC curve depicts the trade-off
between the false positive rate (FPR) and the true positive rate (TPR):
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
(4.1)
FPR =
FP
FP + FN
(4.2)
==PAGE:74==
66
4 Test and results
Figure 4.11: Area under Receiver Operating Characteristic - AUROC
Looking at the results it seems that an effective bag-of-visual-words threshold would
lie somewhere between 70% and 80%. To come to a safe conclusion they are examined
more closely. A confusion matrix (see table 4.2) is calculated for three thresholds: 70%,
75% and 80%. The format of the confusion matrix is shown on table 4.1. It is evaluating
only the total number of true positives, false positives, false negatives, and true negatives
rather than for each class. That is because the number of classes is dynamic since there
is no knowledge of how many objects exist prior. Nevertheless, the number of different
classes and loop closures detected after they are sampled is also counted and analysed.
This information is useful since the results from the sampler ought to be spatially filtered
and eventually sent to the cartographer.
70%
Predicted: NO
Predicted: YES
Actual: NO
TN
FP
Actual:YES
FN
TP
Table 4.1: Format of the confusion matrix
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Vision-based data association evaluation
67
70%
Predicted: NO
Predicted: YES
Actual: NO
292
451
Actual:YES
143
629
(a)
75%
Predicted: NO
Predicted: YES
Actual: NO
468
246
Actual:YES
223
629
(b)
80%
Predicted: NO
Predicted: YES
Actual: NO
615
21
Actual:YES
460
419
(c)
Table 4.2: Confusion matrices for three different bag-of-visual-words thresholds: 70%,
75% and 80%
The precision and recall are calculated for each threshold (table 4.3).
Threshold
Precision
Recall
70%
58%
82%
75%
70%
72%
80%
95%
48%
Table 4.3: Precision and recall for three different bag-of-visual-words thresholds: 70%,
75% and 80%
Finally, it is useful to evaluate the overall results after they are sampled. In the
test video used, there are three traffic cones and four fire extinguishers. For the first
detection, the matcher is not run since there are no keyframes yet. For every new object
observed the matcher should not find a similar object in the keyframes, therefore no
match should be found for 6 observations. In total, 17 times an object is re-observed,
meaning that loop closure happens 17 times. Sometimes it might happen that an object
not encountered previously might be falsely considered as such. Likewise, a previously
observed object might be considered as a new observation in case a sufficient match is
not found. The sampled results are presented at table 4.4.
==PAGE:76==
68
4 Test and results
Threshold
True loop closures
False loop closures
True new objects
False new objects
70%
11
2
5
5
75%
12
0
6
5
80%
9
0
6
8
Table 4.4: Sampled observations - evaluation of loop closure or new observation classifi-
cation
Finally, it is worth it evaluating the frames per second. Having a sufficient amount
of FPS is rather important since the number of samples increases with FPS. The FPS
calculations are happening only when the tracker is active. As seen in table 4.5 the
average FPS is 6.5 while the lowest value is 2.7. The average FPS value is fast enough
to ensure a sufficient amount of samples and the minimum value is acceptable as well.
Average
Minimum
Maximum
FPS
7.35
3.74
26.5
Table 4.5: Evaluation of FPS
Overall, looking at the AP (4.10b) and AUROC (4.11) values it is seen that they are
sufficiently high. Selecting the most relevant threshold for the matcher produces really
good results. Examining these results more closely, it is concluded that the optimal
threshold would be around 75%. As seen in table 4.3, it produces a rather satisfying
precision and recall pair. Additionally, it does not detect any loop closures wrongfully
(see table 4.4), which would be the worst-case scenario. The only downside is the number
of revisited landmarks classified as new observations. Without any further processing,
this would generate a new landmark, but the spatial filter takes care of an event like this.
As explained in 3.6.4 whenever a landmark is already seen and failed to be recognised
again, the spatial filter would be able to tell that the space is occupied, therefore the
loop closure would be ignored.
4.3.3
Summary
In conclusion, the vision-based data association implementation produces good results.
Occasionally, a small number of false loop closures might occur and even in that case,
they are filtered out by the spatial filter. That means, even if the bag-of-visual-words
matching threshold selected is sub-optimal, the robot would still be able to detect some
of the loop closures correlated with the landmarks and at the same time filter out any
false ones. The bag-of-visual-words based data association method in combination with
the spatial filter results in a quite robust implementation.
==PAGE:77==
4.4 Feature detection and frame comparison alternatives
69
4.4
Feature detection and frame comparison
alternatives
Before selecting SURF features for the feature detection and the bag-of-visual-words
method for the frame comparison several alternatives were considered for both of the
tasks. For the frame comparison, the brute force feature matching method was examined
as well as a method of re-weighting the image histograms. The three feature detection
algorithms considered are the most popular ones, namely SURF, SIFT [23], and ORB
[34]. To conduct a fair comparison the same video mentioned in 4.3 is used for every
test.
4.4.1
Frame comparison
An alternative considered for the frame comparison, except the bag-of-visual-words
method, was the brute-force feature matcher [12]. Apart from this technique, an at-
tempt is made to re-weight the image histograms with term frequency-inverse document
frequency (TF-IDF) method [37].
4.4.1.1
Brute-Force matcher
Brute-force matcher takes the descriptor of a feature detected in the query image and
calculates the distance with each feature of the image the query is compared to. It
returns the closest one. To calculate a similarity score it is necessary to find which of
the returned matches is a good match. This is achieved with the use of Lowe’s ratio
[23]. The Lowe ratio is based on the principle that if the two best matches are too close
to the query feature it is impossible to tell which one is the actual match. The value of
Lowe’s ratio tested is the default one, equal to 0.75. Therefore, a match is considered
as a good one, only if its distance from the closest match is at least 75% smaller than
its distance from the second closest match. Then the similarity score is calculated as:
score = Ngood
Ntotal
· 100
(4.3)
where Ngood is the amount of the matches classified as good by the Lowe’s ratio
criterion and Ntotal is the amount of all of the matches found.
To evaluate the results the precision and recall for three good thresholds (see ta-
ble 4.6) is calculated as well as the sampler results (table 4.7). Additionally, the fps
performance is evaluated too (table 4.8).
==PAGE:78==
70
4 Test and results
Threshold
Precision
Recall
20%
99%
55%
30%
100%
47%
40%
100%
36%
Table 4.6: Precision and recall for three different brute-force matcher thresholds: 20%,
30% and 40%
Threshold
True loop closures
False loop closures
True new objects
False new objects
20%
12
0
6
5
30%
12
0
6
5
40%
8
0
6
9
Table 4.7: Sampled observations - evaluation of loop closure or new observation classifi-
cation
Average
Minimum
Maximum
FPS
3.2
0.24
23.47
Table 4.8: Evaluation of FPS
When looking at the results of both algorithms it seems that both of the methods pro-
vide similar results regarding the loop closure detection (see tables 4.7 and 4.4). A major
disadvantage emerges, the FPS results (tables 4.8 and 4.5). The brute-force matcher
is considerably slower. The average FPS is less than half of the bag-of-visual-words
method. Apart from the mean FPS, the minimum FPS is 0.24 which is unacceptable.
Having that low FPS would lead to a significantly small number of samples and since
the architecture is based on sampling this is inappropriate. Also, the operational match-
ing thresholds appear to be very low and the precision-recall saturates very fast at a
threshold of 40% although this is not a problem (see table 4.6 and 4.3).
4.4.1.2
Term frequency–Inverse document frequency histograms
The TF-IDF method is a numerical statistic that reflects how important a word is to a
document or a feature in an image in this case [37]. Every visual word can be re-weighted
in each keyframe’s histogram with the TF-IDF formula:
ti = nid
nd
log N
ni
(4.4)
where nid is the occurrence of the visual word in the image, nd is the total number
of words that are present in an image, ni is the total number of images that contain a
==PAGE:79==
4.4 Feature detection and frame comparison alternatives
71
specific word and N is the total number of images. The logic behind the re-weighting is
that when the keyframes histograms are calculated, it is noticed that some visual words
are present in most of the keyframes. These words do not provide any useful information
towards distinguishing between frames. In general, the more distinct a feature is, the
more value it has to frame comparison. Consequently, it is useful to quantify and take
into consideration the ”feature importance”. This can happen with re-weighting the
histograms so that the most distinct features have the biggest weight and so on.
Since the keyframes are updated constantly, the re-weighting can be applied to the
query image along with the keyframes that it is compared to. That means every time
a comparison is taking place, the histograms are re-weighted with the TF-IDF method.
Once again, the same test video is used to ensure that the results can be compared to
the implemented method.
To evaluate the results the precision and recall for three operational thresholds (see
table 4.9) is calculated as well as the sampler results (table 4.10). Additionally, the FPS
performance is evaluated too (table 4.11).
Threshold
Precision
Recall
70%
38%
56%
75%
48%
53%
80%
53%
45%
Table 4.9: Precision and recall for three different brute-force matcher thresholds: 20%,
30% and 40%
Threshold
True loop closures
False loop closures
True new objects
False new objects
70%
5
3
3
11
75%
9
3
4
6
80%
6
2
5
9
Table 4.10: Sampled observations - evaluation of loop closure or new observation classi-
fication
Average
Minimum
Maximum
FPS
7.24
3.6
25.82
Table 4.11: Evaluation of FPS
The TF-IDF re-weighting method seems to not produce desirable results. For the
three most effective thresholds it is seen that the precision does not reach a satisfactory
value (see table 4.9).
Furthermore, this method is not very reliable on loop closure
detection since it misses more than the standard method and additionally, the false loop
==PAGE:80==
72
4 Test and results
closures do not seem to be eliminated (see table 4.10). In conclusion, for this visual slam
application, the original histograms behave better than the re-weighted ones.
4.4.2
Feature detection
As stated before, the three feature detectors considered for this project are SURF, SIFT,
and ORB. Out of the three, SIFT appears to be much slower [10]. Since the implemented
system is based on a sampler which requires a sufficient amount of observations, it is
decided not to prefer SIFT over of the other two faster algorithms. The two remain-
ing detectors, SURF and ORB are closely examined. Regarding the accuracy, several
comparisons exist already between SURF and ORB. Although to come to a valid con-
clusion, ORB is used with our bag-of-visual-words architecture described in 3.6.1 since
it is different from other implementations. Therefore, behaviour and performance might
diverge.
To evaluate the results the precision and recall for three operational thresholds (see
table 4.12) is calculated as well as the sampler results (table 4.13). Additionally, the
FPS performance is evaluated too (table 4.14).
Threshold
Precision
Recall
75%
50%
74%
80%
59%
40%
85%
99%
15%
Table 4.12: Precision and recall for three different brute-force matcher thresholds: 75%,
80% and 85%
Threshold
True loop closures
False loop closures
True new objects
False new objects
75%
5
4
3
3
80%
2
2
6
5
85%
1
0
6
8
Table 4.13: Sampled observations - evaluation of loop closure or new observation classi-
fication
Average
Minimum
Maximum
FPS
18.32
13.14
30
Table 4.14: Evaluation of FPS
As seen in 4.14 the FPS gain is remarkable with ORB. Although, when modifying
the thresholds the precision increases slowly while the recall drops very fast (see table
==PAGE:81==
4.5 Localisation accuracy evaluation
73
4.12).
The most important result though is the one that evaluates the loop closure
detections. As seen in 4.13 using bag-of-visual-words with ORB features leads to false
loop closures.
By increasing the matching threshold the false matches decrease but
the system also becomes unable to detect the real loop closures, which is essential for
pose graph optimisation. In conclusion, despite the high FPS performance, the sampler
results are not satisfying enough to select ORB features.
4.4.3
Summary
To conclude, after testing several frame comparison and feature detection methods the
optimal combination seems to be the bag-of-visual-words method with non-weighted
histograms and features detected by SURF algorithm. This architecture produces results
that are both sufficiently fast and accurate.
4.5
Localisation accuracy evaluation
One of the main objectives of the thesis is to improve the robot’s localisation accuracy
by integrating visually detected landmarks. The expected outcome is to notice an im-
provement since the number of measurements of the robot’s environment is increased.
4.5.1
Scenario
To evaluate the localisation, it is needed to record the relevant data in an area that
the ground truth Cartesian coordinates are known. The robot is following a trajectory
and for some selected points the ground truth coordinates are compared with the ones
calculated by the SLAM method. Three tests are carried out, one in DTU’s building
326 and two in building 329. For one of the tests in 329 a ground truth grid is created
to quantify the results. Creating a ground truth grid needs to be as accurate as possible
which is rather challenging, especially in a large space. The grid is created in an area
of approximately 17x15 meters with the use of laser-based measurement tools. Towards
creating the origin of the coordinates system accurately, Bosch’s GLL 3-80 C laser tool
is used [18]. It produces laser rectangles perpendicular to each other. The laser has a
rather large range so it makes it possible to measure x and y distances from the axes’
start. It is also crucial to ensure that the robot’s frame origin is aligned with the map’s
origin when it starts its movement. The robot’s origin lies in the IMU frame which is
in the middle of its chassis. The MiR100 has two wheels aligned with the IMU frame.
Their distance is 44 cm so whenever the robot starts it is necessary to place these wheels
at y=22cm and y=-22cm with the robot facing the positive x-axis (see figure 4.12).
==PAGE:82==
74
4 Test and results
Figure 4.12: Setup of the global origin frame - ground truth
After creating the coordinates system, five cones are placed around the test area
which are used as landmarks, along with two fire extinguishers already existing in the
building. The robot completes a two-round drive around the area, detecting multiple
loop closures via the landmarks observations. In this way, it is possible to observe if the
landmarks indeed aid the robot to close loops and produce an appropriate pose graph
optimisation. While the robot is driving around the test area, some random poses are
selected and marked as way-points that are used for the localisation comparison. To
measure the ground truth a digital laser range finder is used, manufactured by Bosch
(PLR 50 C [32]) and a wooden board.
The wooden board is held aligned with the
laser lines indicating the coordinate system’s axes and the range finder is measuring the
distance from each axis to the way-point. The test setup is shown at figure 4.13.
==PAGE:83==
4.5 Localisation accuracy evaluation
75
(a) The laser line tool indicating the origin
of the coordinates system.
(b) The test setup with the robot placed at the
origin and some of the landmarks placed.
Figure 4.13: Localisation test setup
Setting up the test area is carried out with the maximum accuracy possible. De-
spite that, an amount of measurement error is still present since both of the setup and
measuring procedures are performed manually.
This makes it impossible to see any
difference when using landmarks or not, while the laser scanners are activated, since
Cartographer’s error is extremely small in both cases and within the measurement error.
In spite of that, the measurement error becomes insignificant compared to the errors
produced by the robot’s localisation when the laser scans are deactivated and only the
odometry data are used, which makes it possible to observe the effects of the landmark
observations on the localisation. Furthermore, since the solution with the laser scanners
activated is almost identical to the ground truth (see graph 4.17), it can be compared
to the tests conducted without it and be used as ground truth.
4.5.2
Test result analysis
For all of the localisation tests, the same data are recorded to a rosbag file and then
played by the cartographer with different configuration for each test case. The resulted
maps along with their trajectories are demonstrated in figure 4.14.
Three cases are
examined for each test:
• Optimal SLAM - using laser scans, landmark observations, and odometry
• Localisation using the odometry data only
• Localisation using the odometry and the landmarks observations
==PAGE:84==
76
4 Test and results
(a) Cartographer results from DTU’s building 326 - 3 landmarks - 3x8 area
(b) Cartographer results from DTU’s building 329A - 9 landmarks - 40x40 area
(c) Cartographer results from DTU’s building 329A - 7 landmarks - 17x15
Figure 4.14: Trajectories resulted from cartographer system compared to the SLAM
solution which includes laser scans.
Looking at figure 4.14 it is clear that the Cartographer result using odometry and
landmarks resembles the optimal one in a much better way than the odometry-only
result. Most of the outliers are handled. Specifically for the trajectory plot in 4.14c, the
odometry completely drifts away while adding landmarks approaches the optimal SLAM
==PAGE:85==
4.5 Localisation accuracy evaluation
77
better. For the setup depicted in figure 4.14c measurements are also taken to quantify
the localisation errors. A test is carried out, following the method described in 4.5.1
above, for 24 points. The robot follows a route performing a lot of turns and challenging
movements aiming to test the system’s limits. For each different SLAM configuration, a
trajectory is plotted connecting the estimated x and y coordinates and the ground truth
x and y coordinates (see figure 4.15). Moreover, the errors for each case and for each
coordinate are calculated and plotted in a bar graph (see figure 4.16) along with their
mean values (see table 4.15) to provide a more clear picture of the effect of landmarks
to localisation. The error for the optimal SLAM solution is rather small hence plotted
on a different graph with a smaller scale (4.17).
==PAGE:86==
78
4 Test and results
(a) Ground truth vs optimal SLAM
(b) Ground truth vs SLAM with odometry only and ground truth vs SLAM using odometry
and landmarks
Figure 4.15: Ground truth vs global coordinates calculated by cartographer. Trajectory
is extracted from connecting the x and y coordinates of the selected points.
==PAGE:87==
4.5 Localisation accuracy evaluation
79
(a) Error for x coordinates.
(b) Error for y coordinates.
Figure 4.16: Error bar graphs
Figure 4.17: Error in x and y for ground truth vs optimal SLAM
==PAGE:88==
80
4 Test and results
Optimal
Odometry only
Odometry and landmarks
Mean error - x [m]
0.16
6.01
2.84
Mean error - y [m]
0.06
5.56
2.95
Table 4.15: Mean error for x and y global coordinates
Finally, looking at the resulted trajectories both in the recorded trajectories (4.14)
and the plotted trajectories (4.15) the improvement is visible. These results are using
only a handful of landmark observations although they still produce decent results, espe-
cially when the robot does not move in an unpredictable manner (see 4.14a and 4.14b).
By increasing the landmarks’ density the SLAM quality can increase even more, ap-
proaching the optimal SLAM results. Looking at the error bar graphs 4.16), it is seen
that the odometry-only trajectory drifts very much and the error becomes larger and
larger with some fluctuations in between. When the landmark observations are added
the trajectory resembles the ground truth in a much better way, although not to the
same extent as in the other two results. While loops are being closed via revisiting the
landmarks, the errors are kept at relatively low levels. By looking at the mean errors
(4.15), when using landmarks and odometry the error drops at almost half in comparison
to when using only the odometry data.
4.5.3
Summary
To sum up, the landmark observations improve SLAM quality.
When the robot is
able to detect multiple landmarks and re-observe them again, loops are closed and the
localisation error drops. The resulted trajectories in 4.14 suggest that if the landmarks
are dense, it could be possible to not use laser scans at all and depend solely on odometry
and landmark observations.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
In this chapter some interesting results are discussed, as well as some of the limitations
and possibilities for future work.
During this project, the keyframe extraction was
discussed a lot and two approaches were implemented. The first one required a pre-
processing step that the keyframes were captured for each landmark. This method makes
the robot able to detect loop closures from a broad range of orientations. Nevertheless, it
requires a time consuming pre-processing step. The final method is storing and updating
the keyframes on the spot, as the robot moves and observes landmarks. This method
is selected because it has a great advantage, the pre-processing step is now eliminated
and the robot can explore every new environment without it. Although this method
might not detect a loop closure when the landmark is re-observed from a very different
view-angle, it was still preferred since having a tedious pre-processing step is not realistic
at all.
Another matter that came up is the addition of the spatial filter. The computer vision
based method appears to produce very good results, though some false loop closures
occasionally happen. Generally, when performing SLAM it is very important that the
claimed loop closures are indeed such. It is considered preferable to miss some, rather
than declare a false loop closure as true. This fact makes the spatial filter necessary,
meaning that some sense of locality is necessary apart from the visual information. The
spatial filter though is still using the depth map of the RGB-D camera and it is not
based on the laser scanners. Consequently, the proposed solution remains still solely
camera-based.
The most important test result is the localisation performance. As illustrated in
4.5 the landmarks observations do improve a lot the localisation. The results suggest
that using visually detected objects can potentially eliminate the use of laser scanners
completely. Although, by looking at the results from 4.14 the landmarks have to be dense
and frequent to produce accurate results. The static objects which can be perceived as
landmarks, have to be carefully selected and then the object detector needs to be trained
to detect them. Deciding on which object can be used as landmarks is more challenging
than it sounds. A good landmark needs to:
• Be static
• Preferably have distinct surroundings in order to be detected as loop closure
When an object is selected, it is necessary to conduct extensive tests and conclude
==PAGE:90==
82
5 Discussion
whether it adds value to SLAM accuracy. A hardware improvement would be to increase
the camera field of view by using multiple cameras or an omnidirectional camera. When
the perspective becomes broader, more observations would be available and the visual
tracking of the landmarks would be more consistent.
5.1
Limitations and potential
5.1.1
Limitations of the system
Despite the good overall performance, there are some limitations. As mentioned earlier,
the potential failure of a loop closure detection when re-observed from a much different
perspective limits the performance. Another problem is the illumination which interferes
with the depth map and a deficiency of the object detections when a reflective surface
is present. When the latter happens, the detector recognises the reflection as an object.
These problems naturally occur and they cannot be tackled in a straightforward manner.
The spatial filter induces a limitation regarding the distance between the landmarks,
since each area occupied by a landmark (see chapter 3.6.4) is considered as ’taken’ and
no new objects can be detected within it. Finally, it looks like when working with image
features and frame comparison the region of interest needs to take up a sufficient space
of the frame. This limits how far the robot can observe a landmark, since landmarks
that are far and appear small in frame, do not provide with a sufficient number of visual
information.
5.1.2
Future work
A certain amount of work could be further done to improve the performance of this
project. First and foremost, more object classes would be added to increase the amount
of landmarks observations. This would critically affect SLAM accuracy when no laser
scanners are used, since more observations would be available. While the robot moves
and detects loop closures the localisation estimation becomes better and better. That
means when the spatial filter is applied, the threshold radius could be dynamically
changed with respect to the uncertainty of the global coordinates estimation. In this
way, the robot could detect landmarks that stand close to one another after some time
has passed and the uncertainty has dropped. Finally, the camera perspective would be
increased to broaden the field of view and the visual information. This improvement
would mitigate the inability to detect loop closures from very different angles of view. In
conclusion, the future work would be focused in a direction in which SLAM can happen
accurately enough without the aid of laser scans.
==PAGE:91==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In this thesis, one of the main objectives was to implement a camera-based Visual
SLAM solution. This was indeed accomplished using the object detection and computer
vision based data association to achieve landmark-based visual SLAM. The pose graph
is created by the cartographer system in 2D, though the landmarks are represented as
3D objects.
Loop closure via landmarks observations is carried out using mainly computer vi-
sion including SURF feature extraction and the bag-of-visual-words method for frame
comparison. Each loop closure decision is made taking the observation’s associated un-
certainty into consideration. The proposed solution was successfully compared with the
pre-existing solution, conducting localisation tests. The localisation comparison verifies
the assumption that the landmarks improve SLAM quality.
The landmarks are detected and classified as objects in the environment. For that
reason, it is considered useful to visualise them, and the robot itself, as 3D objects in
the produced map. Combining them with the visualisation tools that ROS provides one
have a more intuitive experience when looking at the map the robots creates. In this
way, the user knows what kind of objects the robot sees and where.
==PAGE:92==
84
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
[1]
Sameer Agarwal, Keir Mierle, et al. Ceres Solver. http://ceres-solver.org.
[2]
Alexey Bochkovskiy et al. YOLOv4: Optimal Speed and Accuracy of Object Dec-
tection. http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.10934.
[3]
Glenn Jocher et al. YOLOv5 by Ultralytics. https://github.com/ultralytics/
yolov5.
[4]
Joseph Redmon et al. You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Dectection.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02640.
[5]
Ke Sun et al. Robust Stereo Visual Inertial Odometry for Fast Autonomous Flight.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.00036.
[6]
Ross B. Girshick et al. Rich feature hierachies for accurate object detection and
seimantic segment. https://arxiv.org/abs/1311.2524.
[7]
Shaoqing Ren et al. Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Dection with Region
Proposal Networks. http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01497.
[8]
Wei Liu et al. SSD: Single Shot Multibox Detector. http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.
02325.
[9]
andreasBihlmaier/pysdf. url: https://github.com/andreasBihlmaier/pysdf.
[10]
Herbert Bay, Tinne Tuytelaars, and Luc Van Gool. “SURF: Speeded Up Robust
Features”. In: Computer Vision – ECCV 2006. Edited by Aleš Leonardis, Horst
Bischof, and Axel Pinz. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006.
[11]
Andrey Zhavoronkov Boris Sekachev and Nikita Manovich. Computer Vision An-
notation Toolr. https://github.com/opencv/cvat.
[12]
Brute Force Descriptor Matcher. https://docs.opencv.org/4.3.0/d3/da1/
classcv_1_1BFMatcher.html.
[13]
Cartographer ROS for Mobile Industrial Robots Platforms. url: https://github.
com/cartographer-project/cartographer_mir.
[14]
Cartographer ROS Integration. https://google-cartographer-ros.readthedocs.
io/en/latest/index.html.
[15]
J. Clausen. “Branch and bound algorithms-principles and examples”. In: Depart-
ment of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen. 1999.
==PAGE:94==
86
Bibliography
[16]
Distance Metric Learning for Image and Webpage Comparison - Scientific Fig-
ure on ResearchGate. url: https : / / www . researchgate . net / figure / An -
illustration- of- the- visual- Bag- of- Words- BoW- representation- for-
three-input-images_fig1_278827397.
[17]
Brian Douglas. Autonomous Navigation, Part 3: Understanding SLAM Using Pose
Graph Optimization. Youtube - MATLAB. 2020. url: https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=saVZtgPyyJQ&t=598s.
[18]
GLL 3-80 C Professional. url: https://www.bosch-professional.com/dk/da/
products/gll-3-80-c-0601063R00.
[19]
Tu Herlau, Mikkel N. Schmidt, and Morten Mørup. Introduction to Machine learn-
ing and Data mining. Technical University of Denmark, 2018.
[20]
Wolfgang Hess et al. “Real-Time Loop Closure in 2D LIDAR SLAM”. In: 2016
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 2016, pages 1271–
1278.
[21]
Introduction to SURF (Speeded-Up Robust Features). url: https : / / medium .
com/data-breach/introduction-to-surf-speeded-up-robust-features-
c7396d6e7c4e.
[22]
K. Konolige et al. “Sparse pose adjustment for 2D mapping”. In: IROS, Taipei,
Taiwan. 2010.
[23]
David G. Lowe. “Distinctive Image Features from Scale-Invariant Keypoints”. In:
2004.
[24]
Mathworks. What Is Camera Calibration? https://se.mathworks.com/help/
vision/ug/camera-calibration.html.
[25]
MiR100robot specifications. https://www.mobile-industrial-robots.com/en/
solutions/robots/mir100/.
[26]
R. Mur-Artal and J. D. Tardós. “ORB-SLAM2: An Open-Source SLAM System
for Monocular, Stereo, and RGB-D Cameras”. In: volume 33. 5. 2017, pages 1255–
1262.
[27]
OpenCV. OpenCV SURF class. https://docs.opencv.org/master/d5/df7/
classcv_1_1xfeatures2d_1_1SURF.html.
[28]
OpenRobotics. Construction Cone. Open Robotics. January 2018. url: https://
fuel.ignitionrobotics.org/1.0/OpenRobotics/fuel/models/Construction%
20Cone.
[29]
OpenRobotics. Fire Extinguisher. Open Robotics. July 2020. url: https://fuel.
ignitionrobotics.org/1.0/OpenRobotics/fuel/models/Fire%20Extinguisher.
[30]
OpenRobotics. MiR100. Open Robotics. July 2020. url: https://fuel.ignitionrobotics.
org/1.0/OpenRobotics/fuel/models/MiR100.
[31]
Orbbec. Astra RGB-D monocular camera. http://shop.orbbec3d.com/Astra_
p_12.html.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
87
[32]
PLR 50 C. url: https://www.bosch-diy.com/dk/da/p/plr-50-c-0603672200-
v37744.
[33]
Adrian Rosebrock. Intersection over Union for object detection. https://www.
pyimagesearch . com / 2016 / 11 / 07 / intersection - over - union - iou - for -
object-detection/.
[34]
Ethan Rublee et al. “ORB: an efficient alternative to SIFT or SURF”. In: November
2011, pages 2564–2571. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2011.6126544.
[35]
Scipy - Spatial Transform - Rotation. Scipy. url: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/
scipy/reference/generated/scipy.spatial.transform.Rotation.html.
[36]
SICK. Safety laser scanners S300 Standard. https://www.sick.com/ag/en/opto-
electronic-protective-devices/safety-laser-scanners/s300-standard/
c/g187239.
[37]
Jun Yang et al. “Evaluating Bag-of-Visual-Words Representations in Scene Clas-
sification”. In: Carnegie Mellon University, City University of Hong Kong.
==PAGE:96==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
