==PAGE:1==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Evacuation of High-rise Buildings
During Fires in Denmark
Case Study of Emergency Elevators
Rasmus Ibsen
Kongens Lyngby 2020
M.Sc. Thesis
==PAGE:2==
Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Denmark is not a country with strong traditions for building tall high-rise buildings - yet
the ongoing urbanization process has recently led to the construction and planning of
taller and more high-rise buildings nationwide. During an emergency of these structures,
the traditional method of egress is to evacuate via the emergency stairwell(s). However,
as buildings spur higher than ever, and the population continue to age and become in-
creasingly obese the question becomes if this traditional approach of egress is sufficient
enough to promote adequate safety of occupants in these structures.
Around the world, the implementation of emergency elevator systems are becoming a
more widely adopted approach to aid in the evacuation of occupants in the tallest of
high-rise buildings. Recent research on the matter has allowed for a better understand-
ing of how occupants interact with these systems depending on their initial floor level
placement. Based on this observed interaction, it has been shown that a combination of
stairs and occupant evacuation elevators (OCEs) can result in faster total evacuation of
high-rise buildings. However, research gaps exist for high-rise buildings under 150 me-
ters as most of the current studies investigated hypothetical skyscrapers (>150 meters)
with office-type configurations.
This thesis has, therefore, pertained to investigating the efficiency that emergency eleva-
tor systems have on the evacuation and access times of high-rise buildings in Denmark
as these high-rise structures have a more moderate height, often under 100 meters. To
do this, more than twenty evacuation scenarios have been investigated (450+ simula-
tions) for two existing high-rise buildings utilizing the egress model Pathfinder. The two
case-buildings studied consist of an 84-meter tall commercial building (1313 occupants)
with mainly hotel, office and conference facilities and a 57-meter tall residential complex
(292 occupants).
The twenty evacuation scenarios considered have been categorized into four groups to
study how the simulated evacuation times are affected by variations in different factors
such as evacuation strategies, egress capacity, human behavioural conditions and the
counterflow between occupants and firefighters on the stairs.
The results of this thesis show that a combination of stairs and elevator evacuation com-
pared to stair evacuation alone provided slightly faster average egress times of occupants
in the two studied case-buildings if simultaneous evacuation was assumed. However, the
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary
implementation of OCEs does not seem to have a significant effect on the required safe
egress time of occupants unless more occupants on the top-floors are willing to use and
wait on elevators during fire evacuations. It was further found that the implementation
of high-speed OCEs under optimal circumstances (hypothetical distribution of occupants
to stairs and elevators) yielded evacuation times that was approximately equal to those
obtained if an additional emergency stairwell was installed in the two case-buildings.
This indicates that there could be a potential business case in employing occupant evac-
uation elevators in terms of lives saved, if more occupants could be persuaded to use the
systems during fire evacuations. One of the methods to achieve this is to employ bet-
ter information systems that will allow occupants to make timely and informed decisions.
Nonetheless, the results also showed that the combined use of stairs and elevators can
increase the required safe egress time of occupants if the OCEs have insufficient capac-
ity to evacuate the number of occupants that are willing to use the systems before they
reroute towards the stairs. This was found to be especially critical for the residential
case-building as the population is expected to consist of many elderly and mobility-
impaired occupants that have comparably slow walking profiles.
Moreover, the thesis concludes that for residential buildings, it is important to ensure
that it is occupants with slow walking profiles that are evacuated out using OCEs if such
systems are implemented. Contrary, for commercial buildings, it is more important to
ensure that a high number of occupants (regardless of their demographics) is evacuated
out using the OCEs as there is an increased likelihood that the evacuation times in these
structures are governed by the congestion of occupants in the stairs. Hence, the required
safe egress time of occupants in the simulated commercial building was not governed by
the walking speed of occupants, as was the case for the residential building.
Lastly, it was observed that the counterflow between occupants and firefighters on stairs
have the potential to increase the required safe egress time of occupants significantly
compared to none-counterflow situations.
This can largely be avoided if firefighter’s
elevators (FEs) are installed. Furthermore, firefighter’s lifts were found to improve the
access time of the fire department.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master Thesis was prepared over five and a half months at the Department of
Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in fulfilment of the
requirements for acquiring a master degree in Civil Engineering. It was supervised by
Associate Professor Lars Schiøtt Sørensen.
The thesis investigates the effect that the implementation of emergency elevators can
have on the evacuation and rescue operations of high-rise buildings in Denmark.
Readers that only are interested in the primary findings of this thesis may skip directly
to the model case study (Chapter 7)
Kongens Lyngby, July 21, 2020
Rasmus Ibsen
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
The completion of this thesis would not have been possible without the support, encour-
agement and help of so many people in my life - to whom I owe my sincere gratitude
and thanks.
First and foremost, to my supervisor Lars Schiøtt Sørensen for his help and guidance
throughout this project. Thank you. I would especially like to thank you for sowing the
first seeds of interest that eventually got me hooked to the fire-safety design of buildings.
Without your support and inspiring teaching, I would not have found myself writing this
thesis. You might not realize, but you have helped me find a great passion in life - for
which I am deeply thankful.
To my twin brother, who has guided me in the formality of this thesis. I would especially
like to thank you for your relentless comments and teasing. You inspire me greatly, and
I wish you the best of luck in writing your PhD thesis in Germany.
To the remainder of my family and my friends for their support throughout this project.
I would especially like to thank my sister for drawing the front cover illustration of
this thesis, and my parents for their relentless undying support. Furthermore, a special
thanks to Mark, Jens, Morten, HC and Sebastian for supporting me in this journey of life.
Lastly, I would like to thank Thunderhead Engineering for providing me full access to
the egress model Pathfinder.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Limitations & Delimitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Thesis Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Thesis Organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Method
9
3
Principles of Fire Evacuation in Denmark
11
3.1
Evacuation Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Vertical Egress Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Firefighter’s Access Elevator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Research Background
17
4.1
Occupant Evacuation Elevators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Firefighter’s Elevators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3
Combined use of Firefighter’s- and Evacuation Elevators
. . . . . . . . .
21
5
Evacuation Behaviour
23
5.1
Timeline of Human Response to Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Disregarded Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Behavioural Traits under Fire Evacuations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4
Behavioral Conditions Associated with Building Use . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.5
Human Behaviour & Elevator Evacuations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6
Egress Model - Selection, Description & Application
33
6.1
Computational Egress Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2
Egress Model Adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.3
Pathfinder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.4
Sensitivity Analysis of Input Parameters in Pathfinder
. . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Model Case Study
41
7.1
Aarhus City Tower (A) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2
Den Hvide Facet (H) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.3
Model Input Calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.4
Evacuation Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.5
Convergence of Simulation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
7.6
Simulation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
8
Discussion
87
8.1
General Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
8.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
8.3
Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
9
Conclusion
95
A Supporting Data Tables
99
A.1 Occupant Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
A.2 Pre-evacuation Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
B Characteristics of Fires in High-rise Buildings
103
C Fire Damage
105
D Danish Fire Safety Code - Evacuation
107
Bibliography
109
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Denmark is not a country with strong traditions for building tall high-rise1 buildings.
As a matter of fact, only forty-seven buildings higher than 50 meters from ground cur-
rently exist, thirty of which are lower than 70 meters, with the tallest being 120 meters
[Wik20]. However, with the ongoing urbanization process now experienced and numer-
ous tall buildings over 100 meters planned or currently under construction [Son19], one
can expect to experience many more high-rise buildings in the coming decades.
While high-rise buildings undoubtedly allow for more dense and compact cities, it does
not come without its challenges. Serious fire accidents in high-rise buildings, such as
the Grenfell Tower fire in London has in recent years demonstrated to us, that human
lives and properties can be lost if the fire safety of these structures is not appropriately
addressed [BBC19; Ahr16]. These accidents, along with the tendency to built higher
than ever before in Denmark, have sparked a growing concern for the fire safety of high-
rise buildings nationwide [Wil17]. Multiple industry experts, engineering firms and fire
departments have, especially since the 2017 CTBUH (Council on Tall Buildings and Ur-
ban Habitat) symposium held in Copenhagen, raised the concern that there are a lack
of official guidance for fire safety of buildings over 45 meters in Denmark [Gud17].
Historically, building egress systems in Denmark has been designed around an concept
of providing sufficient stair capacity for the largest expected occupant load with little
or no consideration of evacuation behaviour and emerging technologies. Advanced and
challenging building designs, building materials, and changing occupant demographics
have forced egress designs beyond the traditional stairwell-based approaches in recent
decades [Sch14]. Now means as firefighter’s elevators and refuge areas are often utilized
or even required to assist in the safe evacuation of occupants in high-rise structures
[Dan16]. However, the fundamental principles of simultaneous evacuation of buildings,
with the stairwell(s) functioning as the primary vertical egress component, remain the
go-to evacuation strategy in many commercial and residential buildings in Denmark
[Tra19; Sch14]. Moreover, it is common practice in Denmark that elevators are disabled
for public use during potential building fires.
1buildings with floors above the reach of the fire service equipment; thus 23 meters in Denmark
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
The great vertical distances to be travelled utilizing the stairs in high-rise buildings can
result in significant evacuation times as walking speeds of occupants are lowered due to
overdrawing of physical strength, especially for buildings containing many elderly and
disabled persons [Shi05; KK14; RN14]. As buildings spur higher than ever before in Den-
mark and the population continue to age and become increasingly obese [POL18], the
question, therefore, becomes if these somewhat traditionally utilized evacuation meth-
ods and approaches are sufficient enough to provide safety for occupants in the tallest
of high-rise buildings.
The concept of using a combination of stairs and elevators to evacuate occupants in
high-rise structures efficiently is not new [ST20; HS09] - after all elevator systems are
what practically allow for the use of high-rise buildings in everyday life. Several real-life
incidents provide examples of successful evacuation by elevators. For example, an inves-
tigation of the September 11 attacks conducted by Averill et al. [Ave+05] showed that
31 staff members were able to escape World Trade Center 2 (South Tower) in just 72
seconds using the elevators. Furthermore, in a 2009 incident, all occupants on the 28th
floor of a building in the Jing’an district of Shanghai were able to escape a fire accident
by utilizing the standard built-in elevator systems [ZJD11].
Incidents as these have provided precedents for the implementation of elevators for evac-
uation purposes in several building regulations around the world [ST20]. For example,
evacuation elevators are compulsory for buildings higher than 24 meters in Singapore
[SCD18]. At the same time, the International Building Code (IBC) allow elevators to be
installed as an equal alternative to the third stairwell that else is required for buildings
over 128 meters [BT18]. Furthermore, the Building Decree of the Netherlands permits
firefighter’s elevators to be used for occupant self-evacuation before the fire department
arrives at the fire scene [RVO12]. Despite this, many countries (including Denmark)
does not have traditions for using elevators as a mean of evacuation. Furthermore, some
building codes even prohibit the use of elevators as a mean of evacuation during fire
outbreaks, for example, Turkey’s Regulation on Fire Protection [Min07] and the Hong
Kong Code of Practice on Building Works for Elevators and Escalators [Hon11].
The decision of whether or not to allow elevators to be used as a mean of evacuation
under different circumstances can be related to several factors. From a fire safety per-
spective, it is, for example, expected that emergency elevators should be safe to use
during a fire [Buk10]. Therefore, requirements and procedures describing how emer-
gency elevator systems should be designed to ensure that they are safe to use during a
fire have existed for many years (e.g. the European Standard EN 81-72:2015) [Dan15].
Hence, the main concern for incorporating elevators for occupant evacuation does not
seem to be related to the fire safety design of emergency elevator systems.
Another essential factor to consider is to which degree evacuation elevators can influence
the evacuation times of buildings. Previous research works have shown that evacuation
elevators have the potential to be a very effective way to shorten the evacuation time
==PAGE:13==
1 Introduction
3
of high-rise buildings - even when the main human factors influencing occupants choice
of egress route were considered [ST20; Kul03; SH03; RN14]. However, these conclusions
were made by investigating evacuation scenarios for super-tall buildings with heights
between 150-300 meters, i.e., skyscrapers. Furthermore, the simulation studies on the
matter often studied fictive building configurations. Hence, the found conclusions are
not necessarily representative of the comparably lower high-rise buildings found in Den-
mark and the associated fire safety practices in terms of egress design that is embedded
into the layout of these structures.
Moreover, current studies mainly focused on studying office-type configurations; why
there is a need to understand how the potential suitability of elevators is linked to differ-
ent buildings types such as high-rise apartment complexes or even hotel-type buildings.
There is also a further need to study how the use of emergency elevators is affected by
different evacuation strategies as most of the current studies focused on simultaneous
evacuations of buildings. It can also be expected that variations in evacuation behaviour
and egress capacity in terms of both elevators and stairs can affect the evacuation time
of buildings.
Concerning firefighter’s elevators, it has long been known that the implementation of
these systems can result in significantly faster access times of firefighters [Kul03]. How-
ever, there is a further need to understand how the avoidance of counterflow in stairwells
between occupants and firefighters stemming from the use of these dedicated lifts affect
the required safe egress time of buildings, and the evacuation time curves of occupants
in general.
To study the impact that emergency elevators (occupant evacuation elevators and fire-
fighter’s elevators) can have on the evacuation time of high-rise buildings in Denmark,
two existing high-rise buildings are studied in this thesis document.
The two case-
buildings investigated consist of the 5th tallest building and the 32nd tallest building in
Denmark. Together the two case-buildings contains both residential, hotel, office and
assembly occupancy. Furthermore, the influence firefighter’s lift has on the access time
of the fire department in the two case-buildings are of interest. To study how the evac-
uation times are affected by variations in different factors such as evacuation strategies,
egress capacity and human behavioural conditions, twenty different evacuation scenarios
were simulated for both case-buildings. All evacuation scenarios were simulated using
the egress model Pathfinder (2019).
==PAGE:14==
4
1 Introduction
1.1
Problem Statement
The objective of this thesis was to provide guidance and obtain recommendation on
possible future changes that can be implemented into the Danish Fire Safety Codes or
the associated guidelines - mainly for the evacuation of buildings taller than 45 meters.
More specifically, the intent was to investigate the potential increase emergency elevators
can have on the efficiency of building evacuations and the access time of firefighters if
implemented in high-rise buildings in Denmark. Additionally, the thesis study how this
is influenced by varying conditions such as evacuation behaviour, egress strategy, the
capacity of the egress components and counterflow between firefighters and occupants
on stairs. Emphasis was given to fire imposed evacuation of buildings. The following
problem statement is addressed in this thesis document:
In the event of a fire, which effect(s) do firefighter’s- and occupant evacuation
elevators have on the evacuation and rescue operations of high-rise buildings
in Denmark? Furthermore, how is this influenced by variations in evacuation
strategy, egress capacity, human behavioural conditions and the occurrence of
counterflow on stairs between occupants and firefighters?
To scope the thesis accordingly the problem statement was answered through the follow-
ing research questions:
1. How is the evacuation times for full stair evacuation of high-rise buildings affected
by the counterflow between firefighters and occupants, and does the implementation
of firefighter’s lifts influence this?
2. How is the evacuation times of high-rise buildings affected by the implementation
of occupant evacuation elevators (OCEs) if combined with different evacuation
strategies compared to current evacuation practices?
3. What role does the capacity of vertical egress components have on the potential
suitability of OCEs for high-rise buildings in terms of the simulated evacuation
times?
4. What role do variations in human behavioural conditions have on the potential
suitability of OCEs for high-rise buildings in terms of the simulated evacuation
times?
5. What impact does the implementation of firefighter’s elevators have on the access
time of firefighters for high-rise buildings compared to evacuation events where lifts
are disabled for all users?
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Limitations & Delimitations
5
1.2
Limitations & Delimitations
This thesis document focuses on studying the efficiency emergency elevators have on the
evacuation times of occupants and the access times of firefighters in high-rise buildings
located in Denmark. Other factors not studied in this thesis can potentially influence
the suitability of emergency elevator systems such as economy, technical requirements,
design preferences in terms of building layout and the public perception of emergency
elevators. Furthermore, due to the scope of this thesis, it is assumed that the available
safe egress time of occupants is sufficient enough to allow them to evacuate the build-
ing using the elevators. However, this assumption needs to be validated further before
occupant evacuation elevators are implemented in a given high-rise building. Only the
total evacuation of buildings is considered in this thesis; hence no information is derived
about the time it takes occupants to evacuate from each individual floor.
Besides, it is recognized that the research questions proposed concerning the suitability
of emergency elevators are highly dependent on the characteristics of the buildings under
consideration. Hence, it is acknowledged that the two case-buildings under consideration
may not be representative of all the possible building configurations that exist for high-
rise buildings in Denmark. Although, it should be noted that the two case-buildings
was deliberately selected to provide a broad range of applicability to the findings of this
thesis document. Moreover, it is recognized that the evacuation scenarios elaborated do
not necessarily represent all the possible variables that can impact the evacuation and
access times of high-rise buildings. For example, the impact that fire stimuli such as
smoke, heat radiation and flames can have on the evacuation behaviour of occupants
including their choice of egress route is not covered in this thesis.
The evacuation simulations have only been carried out in one egress model (Pathfinder).
The results of this thesis are, therefore, highly dependent on the assumptions embedded
in Pathfinder. Hence, there is a need to further validate the results of this thesis either
by replicating the simulation in another egress model (e.g. STEPS) or by studying live
evacuation drills of the two case-buildings. Lastly, it should be noted that the simula-
tions are highly dependent on the input calibration of population characteristics such as
occupants walking speed, pre-evacuation time and shoulder width. Furthermore, occu-
pants choice of egress component in the case of multiple options is based on a limited
amount of data-sets which could impact the applicability of the results presented in this
thesis.
The inclusion of furniture in the egress simulations is not considered in this thesis.
==PAGE:16==
6
1 Introduction
1.3
Thesis Contribution
The result of this thesis work can be used as a point of reference for the efficiency emer-
gency elevators can have on the egress and access times of occupants and firefighters
relative to high-rise buildings located in Denmark. However, the results of this thesis
are not only representative for high-rise buildings in Denmark but also other buildings
located elsewhere with comparable configurations, especially in terms of occupant load,
building height and building use. Furthermore, the work can be used by practitioners
or legislators who are trying to address challenges relative to the evacuation operations
of high-rise buildings with heights between 45-100 meters.
The following lists the contributions made in this thesis project:
• Evacuation time curves of occupants concerning the efficiency of implementing
occupant evacuation elevators in two existing high-rise buildings with heights under
100 meters for twenty different scenarios (450+ simulations conducted in total)
• Knowledge of the impact different building configurations can have on the efficiency
of implementing occupant evacuation elevators in high-rise buildings, for example,
in terms of building use, building height and occupant load
• Data-points describing the influence counterflow between occupants and firefighters
can have on the required safe egress time of high-rise buildings
• Comparison of simultaneous and phased evacuation strategies relative to the com-
bined use of stair and elevator evacuation of occupants in high-rise buildings
• Understanding of the impact on the required safe egress time of high-rise buildings
if all elderly (age 50+) and mobility-impaired occupants are assumed to initially
be willing to use the elevators as a mean of evacuation
• The influence firefighter’s elevators have on the access time of the fire department
for high-rise buildings under 100 meters
1.4
Thesis Organisation
This thesis document is organized as follows:
• Chapter 2 describes the approach for evaluating the impact of implementing emer-
gency elevators in high-rise buildings located in Denmark
• Chapter 3 outlines the existing principle fire safety practices for the evacuation of
high-rise buildings in Denmark
• Chapter 4 outlines the basics of emergency elevators relative to building evacua-
tions and rescue operations and related work by other researchers
==PAGE:17==
1.4 Thesis Organisation
7
• Chapter 5 provides the theoretical background on human behaviour in fire im-
posed building evacuations and how the use of evacuation elevators influences the
evacuation behaviour of occupants
• Chapter 6 describes the egress model utilized in the model case study
• Chapter 7 presents the model case study which includes a presentation of the two
case-buildings, model input calibration of the egress model, description of evacua-
tion scenarios, description of convergence of modelling results and the simulation
results of the study
• Chapter 8 and 9 concludes the thesis with a discussion of the obtained results,
future work, and accomplishments
==PAGE:18==
8
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Method
The method applied in this study is the application of evacuation modelling techniques,
i.e., egress simulations of different evacuation scenarios. Before an appropriate computa-
tional egress model could be selected to simulate the evacuation of the two case-buildings,
it was first necessary to specify the requirements in terms of the detail-level needed to
simulate the evacuation scenarios of interest.
Furthermore, the evacuation scenarios
themselves needed to be roughly outlined.
The initial phase of the study was, therefore, to examine the Danish Fire Safety Codes
regarding the evacuation of high-rise buildings (>23 meters) with a particular focus on
vertical egress approaches and evacuation strategies. This allowed for an understand-
ing of current practices and strategies relative to fire imposed building evacuations that
would need to be incorporated into the base case scenarios.
The second phase of the study was to review previous research work in terms of the ap-
plication of emergency elevators in high-rise buildings during fire imposed evacuations,
and the associated evacuation behaviour of occupants. This not only allowed for the
identification of existing research gaps but also as a foundation for understanding the
complex decision-making process that the selected egress model needed to be able to
represent in the case of multiple egress components (stairs and elevators). The first and
the second phase provided a basis for roughly outlining various evacuation scenarios to
be investigated in the model case study.
Third, public databases (filarkiv.dk and weblager.dk) containing casework of building
projects was reviewed to obtain construction drawings of existing high-rise buildings in
Denmark. Out of these candidates, two case-building was selected to broadly represent
different configurations of high-rise buildings found in Denmark in terms of occupant
load, building height, egress design and building use (occupancy types).
For the selection of an appropriate egress model, a literature review concerning the suit-
ability of different egress models for testing the effectiveness of various evacuation sce-
narios in high-rise buildings was conducted. In particular, studies conducted by Ronchi
& Nilsson and Kuligowski et al. was examined [RN13], [KPH10]. After this probabilistic
sensitivity studies concerning the selected egress model were reviewed. This allowed for
a determination of the weight certain modelling parameters (input parameters) could
expect to have on the sought simulation outcomes of the model case study. Hence, it
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Method
provided aid for selecting appropriate settings for the egress simulations of the two case-
buildings.
In general, there are three levels to perform evacuation model simulations, namely; spec-
ified, blind and open calculations [Lor+05]. The difference between those calculations
is the degree of information needed to represent the scenarios to be simulated, i.e., in-
formation necessary for the input calibration of the egress model. Specified calculations
employ a detailed description of the model input. In blind calculations, only a basic
description of the scenario is needed, and the model user is free to decide the remaining
information. Open calculations are based on actual evacuation data, i.e., information
that is fully validated for the scenario under consideration [RN14]. Given the objectives
of the present study, which called for a detailed representation of evacuation behaviour,
specified calculations have been performed.
To calibrate the egress model to the detail level called for by specified calculations, ex-
perimental data-sets rather than code values have been employed.
This allowed for
the simulation of realistic evacuation scenarios where input parameters such as the pre-
evacuation delay, walking speed and shoulder width of occupants was carefully selected
to represent the buildings in question best possible. In the model input calibration, an
attempt has been given to use the weighted average value of multiple experimental data-
sets. This work represents a careful attempt to avoid what is known as the user effect
where the predictive capabilities of a egress model is overshadowed by the assumptions
taken by the modeller, rather than the model sub-algorithms [RN14].
In this study, the convergence of modelling results of each of the evacuation scenarios are
employed to ensure that the obtained results are not depended on the outcome of only
one or few runs of the same scenario, this is further described in Section 7.5. However, as
the convergence criteria had to be satisfied for ten consecutive runs of the same scenario,
this meant that a total of more than 450 simulations was needed. To aid in this process,
a script1 was obtained from Thunderhead Engineering that allowed for the automatic
simulation of multiple runs of the same scenario where occupant positions on a given
floor and their profile values within the assigned distributions was randomized for each
run. To simplify the data processing of the 450 egress simulations, a simple code was
written in Python which converts the outcomes obtained from multiple simulations of
the same scenario into an averaged evacuation time curve.
1http://www.thunderheadeng.com/downloads/13356/
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Principles of Fire Evacuation
in Denmark
This chapter will briefly discuss the primary fire safety practices for the evacuation of
high-rise buildings in Denmark. A presentation of the relevant fire safety regulations
within the Danish Building Regulations (BR18) is provided in Appendix D.
3.1
Evacuation Strategies
There are mainly four evacuation strategies that are widely accepted in Denmark, namely;
simultaneous evacuation, phased evacuation, protect-in-place and relocation [Dan16].
These evacuation strategies can be applied jointly of individually to provide occupants
with an adequate level of safety during building evacuations. The applied evacuation
strategies are often directly governed by the application categories and risk classes that
are presented in Appendix D.
Simultaneous evacuation is the most widely found strategy [Sch14]. Here a one-step
concept is utilized to evacuate the whole building simultaneously at the same time. The
primary objective of total evacuation is to move occupants to open-air, preferably on
the ground, in a rapid fashion [ST20]. It is often applied in office buildings and public
buildings such as schools where there is a need to gather all occupants at an assembly
point to get an overview of missing persons [Dan16]. The concept, however, is not pre-
ferred in buildings where many occupants demand assisted evacuation such as hospitals
(application category 6).
Phased evacuation is a concept where building occupants in the greatest danger often
are evacuated first, while persons who are immediately safe from the fire are subsequently
evacuated [ST20]. The strategy can release the stress on egress components and thus
result in a faster evacuation of occupants directly affected by the fire [Cep09]. How-
ever, the total evacuation time is often higher than what can be achieved by utilizing
a simultaneous evacuation strategy [Din+15]. In Denmark, phased evacuation is often
utilized for buildings over 45 meters as this means that the width of the stairwells can
be comparably reduced.
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Principles of Fire Evacuation in Denmark
Relocation strategies can be utilized to either vertically or horizontally move occupants
to a safe place within the building, such as a refuge floor. From here occupants either
await to be assisted out by firefighters or wait for a specific amount of time before they
evacuate the building [Dan16].
Protect-in-place is a strategy that mainly is utilized in healthcare facilities with many
small rooms or similar buildings where occupant are unable to evacuate the building
unassisted or where full evacuation may take too long time. The strategy is, for exam-
ple, often applied in renovated buildings where the application have been changed since
the construction, for example, from residential use to business use; hence the stairway
capacity is incapable of acting as a safe evacuation way [Dan16].
The concept behind the four evacuation strategies is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The four main egress strategies of high-rise buildings. Obtained from [ST20].
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Vertical Egress Approaches
13
3.2
Vertical Egress Approaches
Associated with the selected evacuation strategy is the need to utilize vertical egress
components such as stairs or elevators, these components can act on their own or be
integrated into evacuation strategies such as the combined usage of emergency elevators
and stairs [RN14]. It should be mentioned that there are other vertical egress components
than stairs and elevators such as; escape chutes, abseiling, sledge systems and helicopter
evacuation [Sun13]; however, these systems are not currently adopted in Denmark.
3.2.1
Emergency Stairs
Stairs are the primary vertical egress component for tall buildings in Denmark [Sch14;
Dan16]. Generally speaking two types of stairwells for the evacuation of tall buildings
exists, namely; traditional emergency stairs and safety emergency stairs [Sch14].
Traditional emergency stairs are vertical evacuation components that are designed
with the capacity to evacuate the required occupant load within the given time frame;
thus, they are composed with proper stair width. However, they do not accommodate
specific design characteristics that prevent smoke from notably penetrating the shafts
[Sch14].
Safety emergency stairs, on the other hand, are designed to be continuously smoke-
free [Dan19]. Examples of safety emergency stairs often utilized in Denmark includes
natural ventilated and pressurized stairwells [Sch14].
Typical for both types of stairwells is that the width of the stairs is designed to suit
the selected evacuation strategy; total evacuation call for the largest stair width, while
protect-in-place strategies call for the smallest width. More generally speaking it can
be stated that the free width of stairwells are considered acceptable, according to the
prescriptive fire code, if the width is 10 mm per person, given that the width ends
up being at least 1.0 meters so to accommodate workspace for the emergency services
[Dan18; Dan19].
3.2.2
Elevator Use
No guidelines or best practices for Occupant Evacuation Elevators (OCEs) currently
exist in Denmark. Most likely because the first building in Denmark to use this type of
system will be the 142-meter tall building called ”Lighthouse” located in Aarhus that is
scheduled to finish construction in 2022 [Kai20].
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Principles of Fire Evacuation in Denmark
3.3
Firefighter’s Access Elevator
The access time of firefighters to the fire floor is another important aspect of fire safety
design. Traditionally, stairwells have been used in Denmark to provide firefighters with
access to the fire floor of buildings. However, firefighter’s elevators (FEs) can signifi-
cantly speed op the access time of firefighters and benefit rescue operations [Sch14]; why
one today are required for building sections over 22 meters [Tra19].
If available, firefighters in Denmark often take the firefighter’s elevators to one storey
below the fire floor, so that they are not directly exposed to the risk of the fire. When
arriving one storey below the fire, they often establish a forward control point (bridge-
head) in the fire-resistant elevator lobby. From this control point, they take unplugged
hose lines and traverse up to the fire floor via the emergency stairwell where they connect
the hose to the water supply at that level before entering, see Figure 3.2 [Dan16].
Figure 3.2: An example of how firefighter’s lift often is used in Denmark to reach the
fire floor. 1): Firefighter’s lift, 2): Fire floor, 3): Bridge-head, 4): Hot gases, 5): Water
on floor, 6): Fire resistant door, 7): Safe lobby, 8): stairway (escape route). Adapted
from [Dan15].
Firefighter’s lifts in Denmark is required to be installed in accordance with the European
Standard: DS/EN 81-72, Firefighter’s lifts. This standard, for example, requires that
==PAGE:25==
3.3 Firefighter’s Access Elevator
15
the lifts must be positioned together with the emergency staircase, regardless of whether
the stairwell itself is designed with pressurization or is accessed through an airlock with
a corresponding lobby [Dan15]. This ensures that firefighters can retreat down the stairs
if the lift becomes unusable, see Figure 3.2.
The guidance manual to the Danish Fire Code [Dan18] provides some pre-approved
solutions for the placement of firefighter’s elevator, two of these are presented in Figure
3.3. The solution in Figure 3.3a assumes pressurization of the shafts while the solution
in Figure 3.3b works with an airlock to prevent smoke and fire from penetrating the
elevator and staircase.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: Pre-approved solutions for the placement of firefighter’s elevators in residen-
tial complexes. Adapted from [Dan18].
The Danish Fire Code states that for buildings above 22 meters, thoughtful considera-
tions must be given to the fire departments accessibility and their response time [Dan16].
It is, therefore, not always acceptable with only one firefighter’s lift in tall buildings. A
broadly accepted guideline (not official) for the fire safety in tall buildings proposes that
two firefighter’s lifts are to be installed for buildings between 60-100 meters, where one
is to be designated to firefighters, and the other to the transportation of equipment
and injured persons [Nor13]. The guideline is mainly based on the British 9999:2008
standard.
According to the prescriptive codes, egress ways that are designed to be utilized by the
fire department for its rescue and fire extinguish operations should have a fire-resistance
that exceeds the conditions of the buildings total evacuation time [Dan16]. This is of
potential relevance for both stairways, firefighter elevators but potentially also occupant
evacuation elevators.
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Principles of Fire Evacuation in Denmark
Summary: A phased evacuation strategy is often employed in commercial and residen-
tial high-rise buildings above 45 meters in Denmark with the stairs being the primary
vertical egress component. Currently, no occupant evacuation elevators (OCEs) are in-
stalled in any high-rise buildings in Denmark. The Danish Building Regulation requires
that a minimum of one firefighter’s lift is to be installed in buildings over 22 meters.
A guideline elaborated by a group of local fire departments states that two firefighter’s
lifts should be installed for buildings between 60-100 meters; however, this is not yet
mandatory to follow. If available, firefighters often take the firefighter’s lift to one floor
below the fire floor and then continue the remaining one flight utilizing the stair(s).
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Research Background
This chapter will provide a fundamental background concerning the use of emergency
elevators in high-rise buildings.
This will be done by discussing and presenting the
findings of past case studies and related research work.
4.1
Occupant Evacuation Elevators
An occupant evacuation elevator (OCE) is a lift that can be used by building occupants
as a mean of evacuation during a fire event [Sch14]. They are therefore installed with
proper safety systems such as emergency power, smoke ventilation, automatic stop func-
tions and protected hoistways [Ant19]. Upon fire detection, the lifts enter into Fire
Mode where pre-programmed settings and algorithms controls which sequence of floors
the lifts is sent to [Sch14].
4.1.1
Elevators as a Mean of Evacuation in High-rise
Buildings
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) have conducted much of the
early research that focused on investigating the use of elevators as a mean of occupant
self-evacuation in high-rise buildings [Kul03]. Some of this work was conducted in the
early 1990s in which the pros and cons associated with the use of elevators for evacuation
were established; these observations still exist today [Pea09]. An advantage of using ele-
vator evacuation is that occupants usually seek to exit buildings during emergencies in
the same way as they entered. Furthermore, the findings indicated that the evacuation
time often could be reduced and that elderly or impaired occupants may rely on eleva-
tors as their only option for evacuation. On the other hand, the disadvantages noted
that the traditionally posted notion cautioning the public not to utilize elevators in the
event of a fire could severely lessen the occupants’ confidence in the elevator system.
Also, occupants can easily panic and become impatient, which potentially can lead to
overcrowded elevators and as such result in disabled and stuck cars.
4.1.1.1
NIST Case Study
Another study conducted by the NIST in 1992 analysed four different high-rise buildings
in USA with the objective to determine the influence building height, elevator capabili-
ties, and architectural characteristics had on the effect of elevator evacuations [Klo+92].
==PAGE:28==
18
4 Research Background
For each building, evacuation times were calculated for three conditions: stairs only,
elevators only and for various distributions of occupants to stairs and elevators. For the
evacuation simulations a simultaneous evacuation strategy were assumed for all build-
ings. The modelling results of the study is presented in Table 4.1.
Building
Floors
Stairs/
Elevators
Total
Population
Evac.
Time by
Stairs
[min]
Evac.
Time by
Elevators
[min]
Optimal
Time by
Both
[min]
Dif. Between
Stairs and Both
[min]
Building A
13
2/ 2 groups of 5
3506
14.9
24.3
11.2
3.7
Building B
18
2/ 1 group of 4
1425
14.3
28.6
12
2.3
Building C
36
2/ 3 groups of 6
3021
23.1
16.5
12.8
10.3
Building D
7
6/ 6 groups of 2
3621
7
17
6.3
0.7
Table 4.1: Summary of the NIST case study concerning the simulated evacuation times.
Elaborated from [Klo+92].
(a) White Flint North Building (Building B)
(b) Jackson Federal Building (Building C)
Figure 4.1: Examples of two of the case buildings simulated in the NIST study. Attri-
bution: a): Public Domain. b): Photo by Joe Mabel
Overall, Table 4.1 shows that a combination of stairs and elevators can reduce the evacu-
ation time of high-rise buildings and that this effect is directly proportional with building
height. Furthermore, the study shows that only the tallest building has a lower evacu-
ation time when complete elevator evacuation is utilized compared to stair evacuation
[Klo+92]. This is backed by a later study that concluded that full elevator evacuation
only becomes faster than stairway evacuation alone in buildings having more than 2,500–
3,000 occupants [SH03]. Moreover, the NIST study concluded that the size of elevator
lobbies often determined the number of elevators that could be used for evacuation due
to the reason that incapable capacity can cause blockage of the alternative egress routes
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Occupant Evacuation Elevators
19
such as stairways [Kul03].
The above case study was conducted under ideal conditions where occupant behaviour
was neglected and where all occupants were assumed already located at the entrance to
the proper egress ways [Kul03]. Furthermore, a 2-stop evacuation approach was utilized
meaning that the elevators were assumed to travel directly from the ground lobby to a
specific floor level with no stops in-between, which can result in an overestimation of the
elevator evacuation time. The neglection of factors such as occupant overcrowding of
elevator cars due to panic, impatience due to long waits in the elevator lobby, multi-use
of stairs and elevators by the same group of occupants and different fire scenarios could
severely affect the realism of the aforementioned results. The absent of the considera-
tion to different fire scenarios is a significant limitation to note, as smoke or blockage
of egress ways can result in changes to how one can evacuate the building. Hence, the
study assumes that the fastest evacuation route is the safest.
4.1.1.2
The Effect of Human Behaviour
A more recent study conducted by the Institute of Public Safety Research at Tsinghua
University [HCY14] sought to include some of the main human factors that were ne-
glected in the NIST case study. The study simulated a 60-floor hypothetical building
with three stairwells and 36 lifts. The human factors considered were the percentage
of elevator users per floor and the time occupants were willing to wait for elevators.
The study utilized data from previous experiments by Kinsey et al., Heyes et al. and
Jönsson et al. that shows that the percentage of people on each floor willing to use the
elevators are directly proportional with increasing floor height [Kin11; HS09; JA12], this
is further described in Chapter 5. In the study it was assumed that occupants would
wait a maximum of 10 minutes before rerouting from the elevators to the stairs [HCY14].
Hence, the human factors considered resulted in a situation in which not all occupants
were willing to use elevators as a mean of evacuation, even though that this system
produced the quickest evacuation times for occupants on the top floors; thus leading
to reduced efficiency compared to ideal circumstances. The study concluded that even
with some of the main human factors considered the combination of stairs and eleva-
tors shows a tendency to provide the fastest evacuation rates for tall high-rise buildings
[HCY14]. Other research papers are in line with this conclusion (e.g. [SS11] & [SH03]).
4.1.1.3
Mobility-impaired Occupants
More recently, there has been considerable attention to the evacuation of mobility-
impaired occupants as they may experience difficulties using the stairways during fire
evacuations, which make them a vulnerable group [KK14]. This can in the context of
Denmark be seen in Table C.1 (in the Appendix). The table shows the total number of
fire deaths in Denmark from 2014-2017 along with the percentage of these persons that
had a movement disability that might have influenced their ability to bring themselves
==PAGE:30==
20
4 Research Background
to safety.
Traditionally, refuge areas are often utilized to establish safety during a fire emergency
for occupants with mobility impairment, where the occupants await to be assisted out of
the building, typically via firefighter’s elevators. However, concerns have been raised that
mobility-impaired occupants may not feel comfortable spending long periods in refuge
areas, especially in tall buildings [KK14]. Effective communication between the await-
ing occupant and the fire safety management is required for the solution to be effective,
which can be challenging given the often disorganised scenery linked with emergency
conditions [Lin02]. Furthermore, it has been shown that mobility-impaired occupants
that with or without assistance try to evacuate the building by utilizing the stairways
might influence the evacuation speed of other evacuees due to congestion [KK14].
Research has shown that a suitable alternative to the two approaches mentioned above is
to evacuate occupants with mobility impairment out of the buildings utilizing occupant
evacuation lifts [KK14]. However, as space is limited in elevators an important issue
becomes how or if to prioritize elevator evacuations for mobility-impaired occupants.
The British Standard (BS 9999:2017) addresses this problem by stating that elevators
operated under the direction and control of the fire safety management are to be used for
evacuation of mobility impaired occupants only; thus not for the general public [Bri17;
Kul03].
4.2
Firefighter’s Elevators
Firefighter’s elevators (FEs) are usually defined as protected elevators dedicated to usage
by fire service personal in the event of a fire [Sch14]. Research and experience give several
advantages to the use of these dedicated lifts. One example is increased vertical speed
of firefighters and their equipment, resulting in quicker and more effective fire response
[Gat91]. Moreover, firefighters who do not have to climb many floors of stairs in heavy
gear and equipment may be able to preserve a lot of their physical energy needed to fight
the fire. Another example is assisted rescue of disabled or injured persons that might
not be able to self-evacuate utilizing the stairways [Kul03].
4.2.1
Influence on the Access Time of Firefighters
A case study on firefighter’s lifts examined a commercial building of 40 stories (180
meters) located in the U.S [Kul03]. For the purpose of the case study, it was assumed that
the fire was placed on the 35th floor. Two groups of five firefighters were analyzed in their
travel to reach the fire. Group one was to travel using the stairs and group two to traverse
the first 33 floors using the elevators and the last two using the stairway. Counterflow
between occupants and firefighters on the stairs was not considered. Furthermore, the
walking speed of firefighters was adjusted for heavy gear and equipment (25 to 45 kg per
firefighter) and fatigue. The results of the study are summarized below:
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Combined use of Firefighter’s- and Evacuation Elevators
21
• Group 1 (stairs): Travel time of 25.5 minutes on average
• Group 2 (33 stories using elevators, two with stairs): Travel time of 3.0 minutes
on average
As can be seen from the case study, the time in which fire service personal can reach
the fire floor is increased when elevators are utilized in contrast to stairways [Sch14].
This conclusion might seem obvious, but when combined with the factors identified
previously, such as transportation of heavy equipment, transportation of injured occu-
pants and avoidance of counterflow on stairways, firefighter lifts seem quite favourable.
However, the effect of the lifts will be reduced for lower buildings as the impact is pro-
portionally increasing with building height [Kul03].
Only a few studies have investigated the influence that counterflow between firefighters
and occupants on the stairs can have on the total evacuation time of occupants and the
access time of firefighters concerning high-rise buildings.
4.3
Combined use of Firefighter’s- and
Evacuation Elevators
Experience has shown that the integration of both firefighter’s- and occupant evacuation
lifts call for coordination issues that will have to be addressed in the building design
[Kul03]. For example, elevator systems for evacuation and fire service that share the
same lobby might not be optimal as occupants that wait on the occupant evacuation
elevators might interfere with the operations of the firefighters that often need space to
prepare their suppression operations. By these reasons, it might be necessary to isolate
the two systems or establish a separated operation room on each floor that is designated
to firefighters [Pea09].
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5
Evacuation Behaviour
The prediction of human behaviour during fire outbreaks in buildings is one of the most
critical and challenging areas of fire protection engineering [SFP19; Kin11; HS09]. In the
previous chapter, the importance of lessening the uncertainties associated with evacuees’
behaviours to ensure efficient building evacuations was highlighted. This chapter will
elaborate on the central issues relative to social practices and building evacuations with
a particular focus on the influence of different building types and the distinct behaviour
related to emergency elevator evacuations. However, for us to do so, we must first briefly
discuss and review the underlying concepts describing human behaviour in fires; includ-
ing the timeline of human response and essential factors influencing the behavioural
traits of occupants.
5.1
Timeline of Human Response to Fire
Human response to fires can be divided into two main periods; the pre-evacuation period
and the movement period [SFP19], see Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Timeline of human response to fire outbreaks. Obtained from [Kul09]
.
The Pre-evacuation period covers the time it takes for occupants to take purposive
evacuation movement towards an area of safe refuge from the time of fire ignition [Sch14].
The pre-evacuation period consists of at least three sub-phases [Kul09; SFP19]:
==PAGE:34==
24
5 Evacuation Behaviour
• Pre-alarm phase: The time of fire ignition till the fire is discovered either by
physical clues such as the observation of smoke or by fire safety installations as
smoke detectors
• Evacuation decision-making phase: The phase where occupants are exposed
to or seek out cues/information from the evacuation event such as the severity
of the situation or the actions taken by other occupants. Based on the gathered
information occupants decide what steps to take, e.g., to evacuate or not
• Protective action phase: The phase where occupants engage in actions that
allow them to protect themselves or others before being evacuated
The length of these three phases making up the pre-evacuation period is dependent on
the building type; thus including the building population and the fire-safety measures.
Under certain circumstances, this period can be significantly longer than the movement
period, which is the time it takes for occupants to move towards an area of safe refuge.
Similar types of decisions and actions described for the pre-evacuation period will often
take place in the movement period of occupants, especially if occupants are exposed
directly to fire conditions [Kul09].
5.2
Disregarded Theories
Within our knowledge of human behaviour in fire exist specific claims labelled as disaster
myths. While these claims might prove right for a minority of building populations or
under extraordinary circumstances, they often govern the broad public understanding
of how people act in fire situations due to overgeneralization in, for example, the enter-
tainment industry [Kul09]. Below two of these myths are briefly presented to allow the
reader to understand what human behaviour in fire is not.
5.2.1
Panic Behavior
Panic is often a notion used by the media to explain the occurrence of a catastrophic
event in buildings which result in multiple fatalities to fires [Pro95a]. It can be defined
as a fleeing type of behavioural response that involves extreme and injudicious effort, i.e.
chaotic behaviour that encompasses a lack of consideration for other occupants [Kul09].
However, the concept of panic as a behavioural response to stimuli of fire incidents, such
as smoke, heat radiation, and flames are not supported by research [Pro95a; Kul09;
Sch14]. Instead, it has been found that occupants can develop strong emotional feelings
when exposed to fire conditions such as the experience of fear and anxiety. This can
lead occupants to choose egress routes they believe are safer over those that they deem
quicker along with affecting the speed in which they traverse the building.
Despite
these emotions, it is often expected that most occupants use their instincts and rational
thinking to plan their navigation efforts when seeking egress. Moreover, it is believed
that consideration to other occupants even in extreme situations often are practised by
individuals, i.e., the breakdown of social order is rare under fire evacuations [Kul09].
==PAGE:35==
5.3 Behavioural Traits under Fire Evacuations
25
5.2.2
Disaster Shock
Earlier it was thought that occupants could become immobilized by fear during fire
outbreaks, i.e., unable to cope with the fire conditions experienced and thus rendering
some occupants unable to escape a building on their own. This condition is known as
disaster shock. However, today it is known that disaster shock most often occurs in
sudden unexpected events with no forewarning and with extensive physical destruction,
e.g., during terrorist attacks. Moreover, disaster shock is only thought to be experi-
enced by a fraction of the total population exposed to the disastrous event and only for
a short-lived period. For fire events, it is therefore often assumed that all occupants who
are physically capable of evacuating a building, would make efforts to do so. Moreover,
the disaster response behaviour, more often than not, entails proactive actions taken by
individuals to engage in their own and others’ safety [Kul09]; which can be encompassed
in both the pre-evacuation period and the movement period.
5.3
Behavioural Traits under Fire Evacuations
If occupants do not panic during a fire evacuation or go into shock, how do they be-
have? To answer this question, one have to consider several factors that all can work
simultaneously to enhance several behavioural traits. However, only the most important
factors concerning this study will be presented below; namely, social factors, the built
environment and stimuli to fire conditions.
5.3.1
Social Factors
Personality and decision-making styles of each occupant can be influential [PK04]. Many
theories on human behaviour are in agreement on the impact social influence can have on
the decision-making process of occupants, i.e., the observed behaviour of other occupants
tend to affect the actions taken by individuals [Sch14; Kob+10a]. It is, therefore, often
argued that occupants located in the same room will have comparable pre-evacuation
times and that these occupants tend to utilize the same egress components and egress
routes. For example, a study of the World Trade Center incident reveals that occupants
who used the elevators to evacuate the building mainly did so after observing similar
actions taken by others [HS09]. Moreover, social bonds can exist between occupants
which also can influence occupants selection of egress route and egress components.
As such, occupants tend to stick together with individuals to whom they have strong
psychological ties with. A study conducted by Proulx found that 62% of all persons in
the four buildings studied travelled in groups and that these groups tended to move at
the speed of the slowest occupant [Pro95a]. Also helping behaviour is to be expected in
almost every building fire, i.e., people sometimes tend to delay their own safety in order
to assist others [Kul09].
==PAGE:36==
26
5 Evacuation Behaviour
5.3.2
Influence of the Built Environment
Other factors influencing human behaviour in fires are linked to the built environment.
Occupants that are familiar with a building and conduct regular fire drills are expected
to react and evacuate the building faster than those occupants who are not [Kul09].
Moreover, occupants tend to prefer egress routes with the most considerable familiarity
[Sch14]. Additionally, those who have experienced either a real fire incident before or
know one who has, are more likely to perceive the risk as being more significant than
those who have not [Kul09]. Also, the architectural design of a building can directly
influence, govern and even limit people movement. Finally, the occupant’s role in the
building can explain differences in behaviour [Pro95a].
As such, a restaurant owner
might be more likely to fight a fire to save his property and an employee of low-rank
might be more likely to follow the lead of others.
5.3.3
Stimuli to Fire Conditions
Above we have primarily discussed how occupants are expected to behave under situa-
tions where they are not exposed or directly influenced by fire conditions. Thus, there
is a need to understand how fire conditions such as smoke, radiating heat, and flames
can alter occupant behaviour.
Previous studies within the field of human behaviour in fires have demonstrated that
occupants often tend to evacuate through smoke if necessary, but that their behaviour
in these smoke-filled environments, especially in terms of speed and consideration to
other occupants, deviate from non-smoke settings [GB16; Tad97]. A recent study found
that the movement speed of occupants can be reduced with up to 80% if the visibility of
occupants situated in a smoke-filled environment is less than one meter [Nil+18]. The
reduction in speed alone can lead some occupants to redirect their egress route towards
a new egress path that they ideally would not choose [Thu18].
It has also been shown that exposure to fire clues such as flames, smoke and radiating
heat increases the risk perceived by individuals and can thus lead to altered egress routes
or even increased walking speeds [Kul09]. Furthermore, an increase in the perceived risk
can lead occupants to deviate from evacuation strategies and official evacuation pro-
cedures. An important point to note is that behavioural conditions of occupants will
variate between building fires, not only because of discrepancies in populations but also
variations in the building design, fire safety measures, fire load and fire development
[PK04]. Lastly, fires can in extreme circumstances cause falling objects or severe smoke
that can render some egress routes unusable, for example, if traditional emergency stairs
are used over safety emergency stairs (see Section 3.2).
As a summary of the section, it can be noted that the behaviour of occupants fluctu-
ates according to three major elements; a) the occupant characteristics, b) the built
environment and c) the fire characteristics. These three elements interplay in the whole
development of a fire evacuation.
==PAGE:37==
5.4 Behavioral Conditions Associated with Building Use
27
5.4
Behavioral Conditions Associated with
Building Use
In the preceding section, some of the main factors that affect human behaviour under
evacuation events were presented. Many of these factors variate depending on building
use and its design. The factors could, for example, be influenced by variation in building
population characteristics, egress design, fire-safety installations, evacuation procedures
and fire evacuation training. This section will, therefore, address the evacuation be-
haviour of occupants for the three building types that primarily are of interest for this
study, i.e., residential buildings, hotel buildings, and office buildings [RN13].
5.4.1
Residential Buildings
In residential buildings, the pre-evacuation time is often more significant compared to
other building uses as occupants, for example, can be asleep, not appropriately dressed or
be emotionally tied to the evacuated space and its content leading to potential re-entry
behaviours [NFP12]. Emotionally ties to the property can for the same reason make oc-
cupants more reluctant to abandon. Furthermore, fire drills are more rarely conducted
in residential complexes, and information spread is often slower due to the compart-
mentation of rooms. Social links existing between families, neighbours and friends are
usually strong resulting in grouped evacuation patterns which can slow down evacuation
and result in congestion [Pro95b; Pro01]. Moreover, groups with strong social bonds are
less likely to use elevators as a mean of evacuation if this means that they would have
to split up to do so [KK14].
Furthermore, it can be more cumbersome to appoint fire wardens1 in residential com-
plexes as occupants are out of their apartments on a non-scheduled basis. Residential
complexes also have a higher proportion of people with disabilities and broader age dis-
tribution than, for example, office buildings which can affect the total evacuation time
negatively [ABS04]. In contrast, residential occupants are known to be familiar with
egress routes which can result in more efficient and timely decision-making [Pro01].
5.4.2
Hotel Buildings
Hotel buildings present some of the same characteristics in terms of both building design,
building use and the characteristics of the population involved compared to a residential
building. Hotel guests may, for example, likewise be asleep, cooking, or taking a shower
when the evacuation process is initiated, and hotels rooms are also often compartmental-
ized. However, hotel guests will not have the same emotional ties towards the evacuated
space and other building occupants except for family and travel companions; which are
expected to decrease the pre-evacuation delay. Furthermore, hotel guests are often more
1fire warden, is an individual who is allocated, or who volunteers, to take on fire safety responsibilities
for their organisation
==PAGE:38==
28
5 Evacuation Behaviour
unfamiliar with the built environment, which can make their choice of egress route more
depended on the observed actions of others along with information provided through
signage and spoken voice instructions. By this reason, the use of fire wardens can be
employed in hotel buildings to guide the evacuation behaviours of hotel guests [Pro01].
5.4.3
Office Buildings
If looking from a design perspective, office buildings differentiate from the other two
building types by having relatively open floor plans that often incorporate the use of
atriums, which limits the possibility of containing a fire outbreak within a compartment
[RN13]. Hence, the risk of occupants to be exposed to fire stimuli that could alter their
evacuation behaviour is comparably increased. Occupants in office buildings are often
better prepared for fire events since they typically are trained through evacuation drills,
are awake, appropriately dressed, responsible for only themselves and are situated in
a more formal environment [Pro01]. This has also been found to increase their will-
ingness to use OCEs if such systems are in place [Pea09]. Additionally, modern and
maintained fire-safety systems with fire alarms and pre-recorded instructions are often
installed. Furthermore, some employees are often trained to act as fire wardens that can
help to facilitate an efficient evacuation [RN13].
A summary of the characteristics that can be expected for populations in the three
buildings types addressed in this section is provided in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Summary of occupant characteristics for residential, hotel and office occu-
pancy. Children (age<18), adults (age 18-50), elderly (age 50+)
Characteristics
Residential Buildings
Hotel Buildings
Office Buildings
Familiarity
Permanent
Transitory
Permanent
Training
No
No
Yes
Ages
Adults, elderly and children
Adults, elderly and children
Adults and elderly
Disablilities
Wide range possible
Medium range possible
Small range possible
Awake
Awake or asleep
Awake or asleep
Awake
Social groupings
Individuals, couples and families
Individuals, couples and families
Individuals, co-workers
Role
Occupier
Guest (expects assistance)
Manager/subordinate
Emotional ties to
the evacuated space
Strong ties
Weak ties; possibly
to personal items
Weak ties; possibly to
personal items
==PAGE:39==
5.5 Human Behaviour & Elevator Evacuations
29
5.5
Human Behaviour & Elevator Evacuations
Successful occupant evacuation via emergency elevators requires that occupants are
aware of where the evacuation elevators are placed in the first place. A recent study
found that 80% of the participants that engaged in the survey had little or no awareness
of occupant evacuation elevators or their placement [MB15]. This tendency can poten-
tially result in a situation where occupants wait at elevators that are not designated for
self-evacuation or end up taking the stairs instead, even if the latter results in a longer
evacuation time. For mobility-impaired occupants, awareness to egress means is espe-
cially critical as this group is known to have a long evacuation time if they either have
to be assisted out using the stairs or rescued out through the firefighter’s lift. However,
awareness alone does not guarantee a successful evacuation; occupants also have to be
willing to use the systems and be willing to wait for the lifts to be available [KK14].
5.5.1
Risk Perception
It has been shown that the decision to evacuate and the determination of which egress
route to take, is influenced by the risk perceived by the individual building occupant
[Kul09; Sch14]. Risk perception depends not only on the perceived possibility to control
a given state but also on the experienced clarity of the situation [SFP19]. Therefore, it
does not come as a surprise that occupants located on higher floor levels perceive ele-
vators as being safer than those on lower levels [HS09]. The most significant perceived
risks in an evacuation scenario by building occupants concerning OCEs are the risk of
getting stuck in queues while waiting for the elevators, the risk of smoke penetrating the
elevator lobbies and the risk of getting stuck in the elevator car [JA12].
5.5.2
Occupants Willingness to Use OCEs Depending
on Floor Level
Two studies conducted by Jönsson et al. and Heyes found that occupants willingness
to use elevators are linear increasing with floor height [HS09; JA12]. The two studies,
for example, showed that between 28-33% of the occupants on the 25th floor in the
studied buildings on average were willing to use the elevators while only around 17% of
occupants on the 10th floor were willing to use elevators. Another study conducted by
Kinsey showed that occupants willingness to use elevators were logarithmically increasing
with building height [Kin11]. The study showed that around 60% of building occupants
on the 25th floor was willing to use the lifts. The variating conclusions of the studies
could be connected to cultural differences between the countries in which the surveys
were conducted along with the different methodologies applied [RN14].
The studies
are either based on on-site behavioural intention questionnaires (Jönsson et al., 2012),
online behavioural intention surveys, or simulation questionnaires (Kinsey, 2011) and
online surveys based on actual evacuation events (Heyes, 2009). Nonetheless, all three
studies seem to be in agreement that the percentage of occupants willing to utilize the lift
==PAGE:40==
30
5 Evacuation Behaviour
on the bottom floors are governed by the percentage of people with mobility impairment.
The theoretical distribution of occupants to elevators are shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Theoretical distribution of occupants to OCEs as a function of floor level.
Borrowed from [HS09].
5.5.3
Occupants Willingness to Wait on OCEs
Concerning the time occupants are willing to wait on elevator evacuation, research papers
also conclude inconsistent results due to variating demographics and research methodolo-
gies [KK14]. One survey study conducted by Heyes, for example, found that occupants
are not willing to wait more than 10 minutes [HS09]. Another survey study conducted
on-site by Jönsson et al. showed that only 4% of the buildings total population of occu-
pants were willing to wait more than 5 minutes [JA12]. In contrast, Andrée et al. found
that occupants show tendencies to be prepared to wait for a minimum of 5 minutes and
a maximum of 20 minutes [ANE16]. An experimental study conducted as a live-fire drill
concluded a significantly lower willingness among the participants as they on average
only waited for a couple of minutes on the elevators before rerouting towards the stair-
ways. However, no information systems or other implementations designed to provide
clues to the evacuees were installed in the building used for the experimental study.
==PAGE:41==
5.5 Human Behaviour & Elevator Evacuations
31
5.5.4
The Role of Information Systems
There seems to be agreement among researches that occupants willingness to use and
wait on evacuation elevators can be affected by information systems and proper instruc-
tions [SFP19; HS09; JA12; Kin11]. A study, for example, showed that 88.8% of occu-
pants on average were willing to use elevators if instructed to by firefighters [Lia+14].
However, it is not known how long they are ready to wait on the elevators in the lobbies
even if told so by fire service personnel.
Other information systems such as spoken pre-recorded voice alarms and two-way com-
munication systems can enhance the perceived acceptance of occupants to use elevators
[SFP19]. Additionally, it has been shown that education of occupants, periodic fire drills,
and display screens which show expected evacuation time of lifts and stairs for occupants
on each floor, can enhance the perceived acceptance of occupants [JA12; HS09]. Only
38% of occupants evacuating a building will take notice of emergency signs [Moo+18],
which stretches the importance of relaying information using the systems presented
above. Furthermore, a questionnaire study found that 45% of occupants evacuating a
building stated that their choice of egress route was based on the observation of others;
why periodic drills are important [KK14].
Summary: occupants willingness to use or wait on elevators during emergencies are
influenced by a range of factors such as; 1) How threatened they feel. 2) Their perception
of the performance of the lift systems. 3) The information perceived concerning the
different egress options and the emergency situation in general. 4) Whether they are
alone or attached, either physically or emotionally, to others in the building (altruism2).
5) Their physical and emotional condition. 6) The floor they are located on. 7) Building
type 8) The authority of the information perceived. 9) How they perceive the progress
of the evacuation operation. 10) The number of people waiting in the elevator lobbies.
11) How other occupants act and behave.
2people tend to try and help each other, especially if they are familiar with each other
==PAGE:42==
32
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6
Egress Model - Selection,
Description & Application
An essential aspect of the simulation of evacuation scenarios is the selection of a rep-
resentative egress model and the calibration of its input parameters. This is a critical
process as it directly influences the obtained modelling results, the embedded limitations,
and thus the overall usability of the egress analysis [RN13; SFP19].
This chapter will, therefore, first present the three types of egress models that exist
before the selected egress model along with its associated limitations is presented. Fur-
thermore, a sensitivity analysis of parameters within the selected egress model, that are
based on a literature review, will be presented. This analysis allow us to understand
how different input parameters can affect the simulation results of the model case study
that will be presented in Chapter 7. Furthermore, it will allow us to identify parameters
that need critical selection, parameters that can either be neglected or set to its default
value, and parameters that need further examination.
6.1
Computational Egress Models
Egress models are, for example, utilized to simulate people movement during a building
evacuation, i.e. how occupants behave and interact with their environment upon egress
of a structure [SFP19; RN13]. Various models use different approaches, methods and
parameters to represent an evacuation situation, which usually includes the represen-
tation of building occupants (agents), vertical and horizontal egress components and
other physical conditions such as the position of obstacles. The methods employed to
represent the movement of occupants among egress models can be categorized into three
groups, namely coarse network models, fine network models, and continuous models. It
is essential to know the assumptions of these three groups to understand their impact
on model outputs and their usability to simulate different evacuation scenarios [RN13;
CAA15].
Coarse network models represent space as a network of nodes and arcs, each repre-
senting different parts of the building considered such as rooms, stairs, doors, et cetera.
Each node can be assigned several occupants. Hence, a detailed representation of oc-
cupants in rooms, on stairs, through doors and their interaction with other occupants
==PAGE:44==
34
6 Egress Model - Selection, Description & Application
can not be represented by these models [CAA15].
Coarse network models, however,
allow for quick modelling of very complex evacuation scenarios and equally also allow
for fast computational time. The coarse network approach is, according to Ronchi and
Kinsey abandoned by the seven biggest egress model developers due to its limitations to
represent realistic human behaviours [RK11]. Hence, these models are not suitable to
simulate evacuations of high-rise buildings where multiple egress components are avail-
able.
Fine network models represent space by a grid of invariable cells. Agents move from
one cell to the next in the model simulations, where a maximum of one agent can oc-
cupy a given cell. Obstacles as walls and pillars are often represented by blocked cells
[CAA15]. Advantages of these models include structured and smooth representation of
geometry, fast computational times of buildings with high occupant loads and accurate
simulations of counterflows. Furthermore, fine network models allow for agents to be
modelled as individual entities; which allow for the simulation of complex local and
global behavioural factors. The condition that each cell can only contain one occupant
governs the main limitations of these models. Because the size of cells is fixed through-
out a simulation, the maximum achievable density is also predefined.
Similarly, the
representation of geometry through cells also means that it can be difficult to set the
grid size to correctly model the influence occupant density has on the evacuation speed
of agents by fine network models [RN13]. Furthermore, physical conditions of occupants,
such as body size and shape, can not be represented by fine network models.
Continuous models represent the geometry by a continuous space containing all build-
ing occupants. Coordinates represent the placement of occupants within this space, along
with their body size and body shape. Hence, the movement of agents is not restricted
by cell size, and the agents can thus interact freely with their environment [RN13]. Co-
ordinates likewise represent obstacles and egress components such as stairs, doors and
elevators. In order to simulate realistic occupant movements, rules describing the ac-
ceptable distance of one agent to other agents and obstacles are implemented in these
models. Iteration time steps are used to move agents through the building based on their
assigned behaviours. Continuous models allow for the closest representation of actual
occupant movement, as occupants in the real world likewise move in a continuous space
where they actively interact with other people and obstacles [CAA15]. The disadvan-
tages of continuous models are mainly linked to the complex representation of geometry
which can result in significant computational times of large buildings [RN13]. Further-
more, the higher resolution of geometry representation in the models creates challenges
for the rules that govern the movement of agents. This can, however, be addressed by
implementing sub-models that in a more detailed manner can describe route navigation
in, for example, counterflow situations. However, this again adds to the computational
time of the model simulations [CAA15].
The different ways the three types of egress models represent building geometry is pre-
sented in Figure 6.1.
==PAGE:45==
6.2 Egress Model Adoption
35
Figure 6.1: The same geometry represented by a) a coarse network model, b) a fine
network model and c) a continuous model. Adapted from [Mas16].
6.2
Egress Model Adoption
The limitation of many egress models not to allow for the simultaneous simulation of
stairway and elevator evacuation only leave us with a handful of egress models capable
of simulating our two-case buildings. From these, a continuous model called Pathfinder
(2019) has been selected for use in the model case study.
The adoption of the Pathfinder model, among the few models capable of representing
the required egress systems of the two case buildings, has been selected following the lit-
erature reviews conducted by Ronchi & Nilsson [RN13] and Kuligowski [KPH10]. These
studies investigated the suitability of different evacuation models to simulate high-rise
building evacuations under various conditions.
Critical factors for selecting the Pathfinder model not only covers the model’s capability
to simulate both stairway and elevator evacuation simultaneously, but also its ability to
represent the main factors in the complex decision-making process associated with the
use of elevators in the case of multiple egress components (section 5.5). Behavioural
performance of occupants can in the model be represented through explicit user controls
such as defining the number of agents to use an elevator on a given floor, assigning
mathematical distributions to agent profiles and implicity represent occupants waiting
time on elevators [Thu19]. Furthermore, as Pathfinder supports Reynolds refined steering
behaviour model1 it allows for the simulation of counterflows on stairways, i.e., the
1See the next page
==PAGE:46==
36
6 Egress Model - Selection, Description & Application
interaction of emergency responders proceeding up a given stairway while occupants are
evacuating downwards [AMO06; Thu19].
6.3
Pathfinder
Pathfinder (2019) is an egress simulator developed by Thunderhead Engineering2 that
utilizes the continuous model approach. The model allows for the representation of oc-
cupant movement through two different methods [Thu19]. The first being the hydraulic
model that implements the concepts presented in the Society of Fire Protection Engineer-
ing (SFPE) Handbook [GR02], which is a flow model, where the density of occupants
determines walking speeds within a given space and flow through doors is determined by
door width. It should be noted that in SFPE mode, multiple occupants can occupy the
same space. The second method is an agent-based model, i.e., Reynolds refined steering
model, also known as inverse steering behaviour. Here agents move along their paths
using a steering system that actively allows each agent to interact with the surrounding
environment and other agents [RN13].
In the model case study (Chapter 7), the inverse steering method is applied as it allows
for the study of more complex human behaviours such as the inclusion of counterflows,
speed distributions based on occupant age groups and the influence of agents physical
size [Thu19].
In the model case study, each occupant is further assigned a behaviour through Pathfind-
ers in-built user interface. This behaviour consists of a series of goals that the occupants
must achieve, such as utilizing the elevators, wait a specific time, exit the building using
only the stairs, et cetera. In order to achieve these goals, each occupant must plan a path
for moving toward the destination. The path planning approach utilized by Pathfinder is
called the Locally Quickest. Here agents egress routes are planned hierarchically, utiliz-
ing local information of occupants location within a specific room and global knowledge
of the building. Agents are assumed to be familiar with the surroundings of the room
in which they are placed and with the distance to be travelled from each local door to
the sought destination. Given this information, each door is assigned a value (cost),
and occupants then select the door with the lowest cost. When the lowest costing door
has been chosen the path leading towards this door is calculated using the A* search
algorithm3 and the applied navigation mesh [HNR68]. These steps are repeated from
room to room until the goal destination is reached [Thu19], which in our case is an area
of safe refuge.
The Locally Quickest planning approach tries to mimic the real situation in which occu-
pants utilize local information about their current room to determine the egress route
that they believe will result in the fastest evacuation time of themselves. However, since
2https://www.thunderheadeng.com/pathfinder/
3is an informed search algorithm, or a best-first search
==PAGE:47==
6.3 Pathfinder
37
occupants are not provided with global information of the choices and preferences of
other occupants within the building, the Locally Quickest route does not necessarily
equal the fastest egress route possible for individual building occupants. Furthermore,
as occupants only are provided with local information, their choice of vertical egress
component such as which staircase to utilize might change as they proceed through the
building. To prevent agents from frequently changing targets, preference is given to
occupants current selection of egress route when calculating door costs [Thu19]. The
procedures governing agent movement in Pathfinder is presented in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Steering mode procedures and algorithms adopted by Pathfinder. Elaborated
from [Pér16].
Stairs
Occupants maximum speed on stairs, in Pathfinder, depends on the agents’ maximum
horizontal speed. The maximum horizontal speed is adjusted to a vertical travel speed
based on two geometric input values of the stairway; riser height and tread depth. More-
over, the speed is further reduced in case of high densities (if the density is bigger than
0.55 p/m2) [Thu19].
Elevators
Elevators are in Pathfinder represented by a discharge node and a number of specified
elevator levels that act as pickup locations. Elevators are first called to a given floor
when occupants are within 0.05 m of an elevator door. Occupants that enter an elevator
are transported directly to the discharge floor without any intermediate stops.
The
lift can be customized to prioritize selected levels higher when determining the pickup
floor, by default, the elevators utilizes a top-down prioritization. If occupants behaviour
specifies multiple elevators to choose from, a modified version of the Locally Quickest is
utilized to select the lift to be called by individual occupants. This is important to note,
as it can result in situations where elevators are called to a floor that just have been
cleared by another lift; thus, the evacuation time by elevators are increased compared
to ideal conditions [Thu19].
==PAGE:48==
38
6 Egress Model - Selection, Description & Application
6.3.1
Model Limitations
Direct limitations of Pathfinder include the limited number of input parameters in the
elevator kinematic sub-model [RN13]. Moreover, the model does not factor in the likeli-
hood of overcrowded lifts, nor the influence of smoke spread on the evacuation speed of
refugees as presented by Seike et al. [SKH16].
However, the main limitations of the software are primarily linked to the uncertainties
surrounding human behaviour under emergency evacuations as this behaviour is stochas-
tic in nature, as described in Chapter 5. It is, for example, expected that evacuation of
a real building population under the same conditions on consecutive days would yield
varying results [Ave11]. As discussed in the previous sections, Pathfinder deal with the
decision-making process of occupants primarily through the Locally Quickest approach.
As occupants choice of egress route therefore mainly are linked to which room they are
placed in on a given floor, consecutive runs with constant floor populations, but different
occupant distributions (randomized position of occupants on floors) will produce differ-
ent evacuation results. Furthermore, as uncertainties in agent characteristics in this
study are accounted for by mathematical distributions, one simulation will not encom-
pass all possible behaviours of the occupants within a specific scenario. This stretches
the importance of performing multiple simulations of each scenario until a predefined
acceptance criteria has been met (convergence of modelling results). The convergence
of simulation result for the model case study is presented in section 7.5.
==PAGE:49==
6.4 Sensitivity Analysis of Input Parameters in Pathfinder
39
6.4
Sensitivity Analysis of Input Parameters in
Pathfinder
Probabilistic sensitivity studies specific for Pathfinder have been reviewed to find the
weight certain modelling parameters can be expected to have on the simulation results
of the model case study (Chapter 7); see Table 6.1.
Parameter
High
Sensitivity
Medium
Sensitivity
Low
Sensitivity
Source
Walking Speed (unimpeded)
[Pér16; GG13]
Shoulder Width
[Pér16; GG13]
Acceleration time (occupants)
[Pér16]
Boundary Layer
[Pér16; GG13]
Comfort Distance
[Pér16; GG13]
Persist Time
[Pér16; GG13]
Collision Response Time
[Pér16; GG13]
Riser Height
[Pér16]
Max Edge Length
[Pér16]
Queue Time Factor
[GG13]
Occupant Distribution (In Rooms)
[Din+15]
Occupant Distribution (On Floors)
[Din+15]
Table 6.1: Results from the literature review concerning the sensitivity of Pathfinder to
specific input parameters. The categorization into high, medium and low sensitivity is
based on a qualitative assessment of the impact that variation of specific parameters in
the reviewed studies had on the total evacuation time.
As can be seen from the table, the shoulder width, unimpeded walking speed and the
distribution of occupants on specific floor levels can influence the modelling results sig-
nificantly [Pér16; GG13]. Contrary, the distribution of occupants within a given room
has negligible impact on the simulation outcomes [Din+15].
The max edge length, which controls the triangulation algorithm used to convert ge-
ometry into the navigation mesh [Thu19], was for the specific study shown to have
high sensitivity [Pér16]. However, for the version of Pathfinder utilized in the model
case study the software by default attempts to avoid extremely long and thin triangles
[Thu19]. Furthermore, each scenario considered in the model case study are simulated
in multiple runs until convergence have been reached; why it is argued that the max
edge length will not have a significant impact on the yielded conclusions of this study.
Moreover, the influence of the boundary layer coefficient can be neglected in the model
case study as Reynolds Refined Steering Model is utilized over the Hydraulic Model
(Section 6.3), why flow rate equations are not used [Thu19]. All parameters with low
sensitivity are kept at their default values in the model case study expect for riser height
==PAGE:50==
40
6 Egress Model - Selection, Description & Application
that is dependent on the actual stair geometry of the two case-buildings considered.
As an end note to this chapter, it should be noted that the geometric shape, vertical speed
and pre-evacuation time of agent in the model case study all have been modelled with
stochastic representations (mathematical distributions). This representation accounts
for the variations in evacuation behaviour that is expected between building populations
and between consecutive occurrences of the same evacuation scenario.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 7
Model Case Study
This chapter presents the model case study, which consists of multiple egress simu-
lations of twenty different evacuation scenarios that each have been analysed for two
case-buildings located in Denmark, namely; Aarhus City Tower and Den Hvide Facet.
The chapter will present each of the twenty evacuation scenarios simulated along with
the input calibration of the model case study. Lastly, the chapter will describe how
convergence of the modelling results have been performed before the data analysis, and
the simulation results of the model case study will be presented.
Given the objectives of this thesis and that both case-buildings are existing structures,
a set of assumptions and simplifications was taken regarding the geometric model rep-
resentations. These assumptions will be outlined below, together with an overall pre-
sentation of the two case-buildings. However, it should be noted that except for these
simplifications, both case-buildings have been modelled as constructed. The construc-
tion documents for Aarhus City Tower and Den Hvide Facet can be found at [Aar20] &
[Vej20], respectively.
7.1
Aarhus City Tower (A)
The first case-building is the Aarhus City Tower which is the 5th tallest tower block
in Denmark [Wik20]. The building is placed in the city of Aarhus where it stands 84
meters tall over ground and spans 25 floors, including the parking garage which consist
of two storeys placed underground. The 34,000 m2 building was constructed in 2014
and consists of conference facilities with space for 1,000 persons, a hotel with 240 rooms,
nine office floors, an engineering floor, and one residential penthouse placed at the very
top.
Making up the core of the building is four occupant elevators and one fire service lift
that all are placed adjacently in an open lobby. Two safety emergency stairs are located
diagonally across the core area from each other, each with a nominal free width of 1.3
meters. One of the emergency stairwells along with the fire service lift connects all floor
levels, while the passenger elevators and the other stairwell is connected to all but the
23rd floor, see Figure 7.3.
The structural components mainly consist of reinforced concrete columns, beams, walls
and hollow-core slabs. The facade is primarily composed of facade cladding and glazing
==PAGE:52==
42
7 Model Case Study
attached to an aluminium frame. Moreover, solar panels are attached to the facade on
the southern side of the building.
The building is fully sprinkled and installed with pre-recorded voice alarms on every
floor. Upon fire detection, an automatic alarm signal is sent to the emergency services
(ABA alarm) to allow for faster response times. One of the two emergency staircases
is pressurized while the other is installed with an airlock. The building is constructed
with multiple fire sections. Level 1 and 2 as well as each of the hotel floors, constitutes
individual sections. The office space on level 14-16 forms one fire section as they are con-
nected with open stairs. Furthermore, the office space on level 17-21 is one fire section,
while the office space on level 22 and the penthouse apartment on level 22-23 make up
individual fire sections.
Geometric Simplifications
Aarhus City Tower consists of two parts; The Low-Rise which houses the big confer-
ence hall with space for 1000 persons and The Tower which houses the remaining 1313
occupants, see Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: Aarhus City Tower divided into two parts, namely; ”The Low-Rise” (blue)
and ”The Tower” (red). Adapted from [Com14].
As the purpose of this thesis is to investigate the suitability of emergency elevators, we
are only interested in modelling the high-rise part of the building; thus, The Tower. The
geometric assumptions and their expected impact on the simulated evacuation times are
presented below.
==PAGE:53==
7.1 Aarhus City Tower (A)
43
1. The basement (level -01 and 0) has been disregarded in the study since they would
have minimal impact on the evacuation of The Tower, i.e., they are served by
different egress components which with the exception of the elevators are not
connected to the high-rise floors located above (The Tower)
2. The conference hall placed on level 1 (The Low-Rise) is neglected in the study as
it is designed with separate egress routes. Thus, the inclusion of the Low-Rise part
will only have a small impact on the egress simulations
3. Given simplification (2), it is assumed that doors and hallways connecting the
modelled area of level 1 (The Tower) to the disregarded space on level 1 (The
Low-Rise) can be modelled as equivalent emergency exit doors leading to safe
permanent refuge on the terrain
4. The freight elevator connecting level 1-2 has been disregarded in the study.
Building Information Modeling (BIM) has been utilized to represent the building geom-
etry of Aarhus City Tower in Pathfinder, a rendering of this representation is provided
in Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.2: Geometric rendering of Aarhus City Tower as modelled in Pathfinder.
Given the above simplifications, the floor area modelled versus the constructed floor area
of Aarhus City Tower is listed in Table 7.1.
==PAGE:54==
44
7 Model Case Study
Table 7.1: Floor area of each building level as constructed versus the floor area utilized
in the geometric representation of Aarhus City Tower
Level
Floor area (as constructed)
Floor area (modelled)
-01:
4467 m2
0 m2
0:
3580 m2
0 m2
1:
2558 m2
1110 m2
2-22:
1092 m2
1092 m2
23:
434 m2
434 m2
Total:
33,971 m2
24,476 m2
A section cut of the geometric representation of Aarhus City Tower, as modelled in
Pathfinder, is presented in Figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: Section cut of the Pathfinder model for Aarhus City Tower. Seen from the
North.
A floor plan of the ground floor of Aarhus City Tower as modelled is presented in
Figure 7.4. The design and placement of the open elevator lobby and the two emergency
==PAGE:55==
7.2 Den Hvide Facet (H)
45
stairwells are the same for all but the 23rd floor. Detailed floor plans of all building
levels can be found in the construction drawings (see [Aar20]).
Figure 7.4: Floor plan of the ground floor of Aarhus City Tower as modelled. OCE =
occupant evacuation elevator, FE = firefighter’s elevator
7.2
Den Hvide Facet (H)
The other case-building is called Den Hvide Facet, which is the 32nd tallest building in
Denmark [Wik20]. The building is located in Vejle where it stands 57 meters tall over
ground and spans 18 floors, including a one-storey basement. The lowest four floors
above the basement each consists of office spaces, accommodating around 30 employees.
The remaining storeys consist of owner-occupied flats ranging from two-room to three-
room apartments with a total of 57 units. The 10,500 m2 building finished construction
in 2006 and is designed to house a total of 292 occupants.
The building is installed with one passenger elevator and one fire service lift. Both el-
evators are connected to all floor levels. Moreover, the building is installed with two
stairwells that have a nominal free width of one meter. The safety emergency stairwell is
through-going while the traditional emergency stairwell only connects the four low-rise
office floors, see Figure 7.6.
All structural parts of the building are carried out as concrete structures, either as in-
situ cast concrete structures or as concrete elements. The facade cladding consists of
natural stone plates attached to the concrete backing walls along with a high amount of
glazing.
==PAGE:56==
46
7 Model Case Study
The building is installed with a traditional tone-based fire alarm on every floor. Upon
fire detection, an automatic alarm signal is sent to the emergency services (ABA alarm)
to allow for faster response times. The through-going safety emergency stairwell is in-
stalled with an adjacent airlock, and smoke ventilation is installed in all common areas
on the residential and commercial floors. Each floor constitutes separate fire sections.
The building is not equipped with a sprinkler system.
Geometric Simplifications
To scope the effort of this project accordingly simplifications of the geometric layout
of Den Hvide Facet have been adopted. The geomemtric representation of Den Hvide
Facet as modelled in Pathfinder is presented in Figure 7.5.
Figure 7.5: Geometric rendering of Den Hvide Facet as modelled in Pathfinder.
In the geometric model representation of Den Hvide Facet, the basement placed un-
derground is neglected. This simplification will have minimal impact on the yielded
evacuation results as the space merely is utilized for storage, and thus not expected
to have a significant occupant load under normal circumstances. Furthermore, small
simplifications regarding the geometric representation of the exterior corners have been
taken.
==PAGE:57==
7.2 Den Hvide Facet (H)
47
Given the above simplifications, the floor area modelled versus the constructed floor area
of Den Hvide Facet is listed in Table 7.2.
Table 7.2: Floor area of each building level as constructed versus the floor area utilized
in the geometric representation of Den Hvide Facet
Level
Floor area (as constructed)
Floor area (modelled)
Basement:
720 m2
0 m2
First floor:
600 m2
590 m2
2-15:
8,680 (620 each) m2
8,660 m2
16-17:
492 (246 each) m2
489m2
Total:
10,492 m2
9,739 m2
A section cut of the geometric representation of Den Hvide Facet as modelled in Pathfinder
is presented in Figure 7.6.
Figure 7.6: Section cut of the Pathfinder model for Den Hvide Facet. Seen from the
West.
==PAGE:58==
48
7 Model Case Study
A floor plan of the ground floor of Den Hvide Facet as modelled is presented in Figure
7.7. Detailed floor plans of all buildings levels can be found in the construction drawings
(see [Vej20]).
Figure 7.7: Floor plan of the first floor of Den Hvide Facet as modelled. OCE = occupant
evacuation elevator, FE = firefighter’s elevator.
==PAGE:59==
7.3 Model Input Calibration
49
Comparison of Case-buildings
A summary table of the main characteristics of the two case-buildings is presented in
Table 7.3.
Table 7.3: Summary table of Aarhus City Tower and Den Hvide Facet. *Only closed
stairwells are included.
Description
Aarhus City Tower
Den Hvide Facet
Building type:
Hotel, office, residential
and conference facilities
Office and residential facilities
Floor area
(modelled):
24,476 m2
9,739 m2
Number of floors
(modelled):
23 floors
17 floors
Building height
(over ground):
84 meters
57 meters
Total population:
1313 occupants
292 occupants
Number of elevators:
4 OCE & 1 FE
1 OCE & 1 FE
Number of stairs*:
2 safety emergency
stairs
1 safety emergency stair
(through-going) + 1 traditional
emergency stair (level 1-4)
Nominel width of
stairs:
1.3 meters
1.0 meters
Type of fire alarm:
Pre-recorded voice alarm
Tone-based alarm
Sprinkler system:
Fully sprinkled
-
7.3
Model Input Calibration
This section provides information about how the egress model (Pathfinder) has been
calibrated to represent the evacuation scenarios that will be presented in Section 7.4,
for both Aarhus City Tower and Den Hvide Facet. In particular, this section provides
detailed information around the input calibration of stair modelling, elevator modelling,
and agent and behavioural modelling. Input parameters that are kept to its default
values will not be presented in this section; this assessment is based on the sensitivity
analysis presented in Section 6.4.
7.3.1
Stair Modelling
The parameters used to model the stairs for the two case-buildings are presented in
Table 7.4.
==PAGE:60==
50
7 Model Case Study
Table 7.4: Summary of stair configuration for the two case-buildings. *One of the stairs
only connect floor levels 1-4.
Stair Configuration
Aarhus City Tower
Den Hvide Facet
Nominal width
1300 mm
1000 mm
Minimum tread depth
280 mm
280 mm
Maximum riser height
180 mm
180 mm
No. of stairs
2 no.
2* no
The merge ratio on the stairs, i.e., the conflict between agents traversing the stairs and
agents entering from the floors, are in Pathfinder approximately equal to 50:50 [Thu19].
This is in line with the observations made by Boyce et al. [BPS09].
7.3.2
Elevator Modelling
All occupant evacuation elevators (OCEs) are modelled with a top-down prioritization
where the ground floor is assumed to be the discharge floor. For the firefighter’s elevators
(FEs) the highest accessible building level is modelled as the discharge floor. The initial
position of all elevators is conservatively modelled to be the ground floor. Moreover, it
is assumed that OCEs only can be utilized by occupants and FEs only by firefighters.
The main characteristics of the elevators with regards to kinematics and load capacity
for both case-buildings are presented in Table 7.5.
Table 7.5: Summary of the elevator characteristics for both case-buildings. *Default
value in Pathfinder.
Type
No. of
Elevator(s)
Max speed
(m/s)
Acceleration
(m/s2)
Capacity
(kg)
Nominal Load
(no.)
Open+close
time (s)*
Aalborg City Tower
OCE
4
2.5
1
1600
20
7
FE
1
2.5
1
1350
19
7
Den Hvide Facet
OCE
1
1.6
1
1000
13
7
FE
1
1.6
1
1000
13
7
==PAGE:61==
7.3 Model Input Calibration
51
7.3.2.1
Percentage of Occupants Willing to use Elevators
There is a need to calibrate how building agents interact with elevator systems. As
previously mentioned the number of occupants willing to utilize elevator systems as a
mean of evacuation is proportionally increasing with floor height, see Section 5.5. In that
section, we also mentioned the inconsistencies that exist between the main experimental
data-sets collected by Heyes (2009), Jönsson et al. (2012), and Kinsey (2011) and how
these variations are likely to stem from differences in how the data was collected, where
it was collected and what it represents. The three equations that can be derived from
these data-sets are provided in Table 7.6.
Table 7.6: Percentage of building occupants willing to use elevators as a mean of evacu-
ation as a function of their initial floor level placement.
Willingness of occupants to use emergency elevator systems vs floor level
Heyes [HS09]
Jönsson et al [JA12]
Kinsey [Kin11]
P = 1.14 × F + 5.3*
P = 0.84 × F + 1.05**
P = (0.3207 × log(F) −0.4403) × 100***
Where:
P = Percentage of occupants willing to use the elevators on a given floor
F = Floor number considered
*5≤F≤60, **5<F<24, ***5≤F≤55
It can be noted that the correlations provided by Heyes (2009) and Jönsson et al. (2012)
both are linear while the correlation presented by Kinsey (2011) is logarithmic. The
data-set obtained by Jönsson et al. was collected through an on-site questionnaire sur-
vey performed at ten high-rise buildings located in Sweden with an average height of
around 80 meters. The location of the buildings in Sweden, the average height of the
buildings studied, and the broadness of the survey make the data-set representative for
both Aarhus City Tower and Den Hvide Facet. However, the data-set obtained by Heyes
is also interesting as the data was collected by studying real evacuation events. Contrary,
the study performed by Kinsey is of less interest for the considered case-buildings since
the data was collected through an online survey that was accessible by the broad public.
Hence, the found data-points can express the opinion of persons that never have set foot
in a high-rise building or are familiar with the concept of elevator evacuation.
By these reasons, a simple average between the correlations provided by Heyes and
Jönsson et al. are utilized in the model case study, see Figure 7.8. We note that none of
the correlations presented above provides information around the number of occupants
willing to use the elevators below floor level 5. However, Jönsson et al. stated that the
correlation in use also should consider the percentage of occupants unable to traverse
the stairs [JA12], why the percentage of occupants using the elevators on floor level 2-5
is set equal to the percentage of occupants with mobility impairments. The percentage
of occupants with mobility impairments variate depending on building use, see Section
7.3.3.3.
==PAGE:62==
52
7 Model Case Study
Figure 7.8: Percentage of occupants using elevators as a mean of evacuation for floor
levels 6-24.
For floor level 2-5 the percentage of elevator users are set equal to the
number of occupants with mobility impairments (Section 7.3.3.3). *Correlation in use
is an average of Hayes, and Jönsson et al.
7.3.2.2
Maximum Waiting Time on Elevators
The second behavioural factor that needs to be calibrated is the maximum time that
occupants are willing to wait for elevators (among the occupants willing to use the lifts)
before they re-direct their egress route towards the stairs. As presented in Section 5.5.3,
the main data-sets on this issue are provided by Heyes (2009), Jönsson et al. (2012), An-
drée et al. (2015) and Ding & Boyce (2019). The inconsistency among these data-sets
are unfortunately high; thus, there is a need to collect more behavioural data on the
matter.
However, while the information on the matter is scarce, vital information can still be
subtracted. First, it is noted that the studies show different degrees of dependency be-
tween the maximum waiting time of occupants on emergency elevators and their floor
level placement. Jönsson et al. (2012) noted that this dependency is almost negligible in
the data-set collected, while Heyes (2009) showed increased willingness among occupants
on higher floors. Here it can be argued that the observations made by Jönsson et al.
can be attributed to the fact that the studied high-rise buildings were comparably low,
considering that Heyes studied the World Trade Center incident [RN14]. Moreover, all
but one data-set show that occupants are not willing to wait on elevators for more than
10 minutes.
Based on the above and the fact that both case-buildings considered in this study are
==PAGE:63==
7.3 Model Input Calibration
53
comparable with the buildings studied by Jönsson et al. (2012), a maximum waiting
time of 5 minutes for lifts are assumed in the model case study.
To study the influence that the maximum time occupants are willing to wait on OCEs
can have on the potential suitability of elevator evacuation, this time is varied in two of
the evacuation scenarios simulated, this is further described in Section 7.4.
7.3.3
Agents and Behavioural Modelling
This section provides information around the modelling assumptions concerning the sim-
ulation of building agents including their associated evacuation behaviour. The popula-
tion characteristics presented will include unimpeded walking speeds, body dimensions
and pre-evacuation behaviour. However, the occupancy zones and occupant loads of the
two case-buildings will first be presented.
7.3.3.1
Occupancy Zones and Occupant Load
As presented in Section 5.4, the evacuation behaviour of occupants can be linked to the
building use as it, for example, is expected that residential occupants have better famil-
iarity with egress routes than hotel guests. Between the two case-buildings, there are
four occupancy types that each corresponds to one of the application categories defined
in the Danish Building Regulations (Appendix D).
• Office occupancy: Application category 1
• Assembly occupancy: Application category 3
• Residential occupancy Application category 4
• Hotel occupancy: Application category 5
Based on the architectural drawings of both case-buildings, it is possible to assign oc-
cupant load and occupancy zones to the different floor levels of the two case-buildings.
The placement of occupants on individual floors will be randomized for consecutive runs
of the same scenario (see Section 7.5). However, the size of the occupant load for each
floor level will be kept constant per the following information.
Aarhus City Tower
The occupant load and the occupancy zones of Aarhus City Tower is presented in Figure
7.9.
==PAGE:64==
54
7 Model Case Study
Figure 7.9: Schematic representation of Aarhus City Tower with occupancy zones and
occupant load
Den Hvide Facet
The occupant load and the occupancy zones of Den Hvide Facet are presented in Fig-
ure 7.10. The load in the residential apartments is put equal to the number of rooms
within the apartment. Each office floor is designed to accommodate a maximum of 30
employees.
In addition to the different characteristics that can be linked to the four occupancy
types, a fraction of the population is also expected to have impairments that will affect
their evacuation behaviour. This is further addressed in section 7.3.3.3.
.
==PAGE:65==
7.3 Model Input Calibration
55
Figure 7.10: Schematic representation of Den Hvide Facet with occupancy zones and
occupant load
7.3.3.2
Pre-evacuation Delay
A list of factors influencing the pre-evacuation behaviour of building populations have
been elaborated based on Chapter 5 along with observation made by Lovreglio et al.
[Lov+19]. These factors should be included into the process of selecting suitable data-
sets to represent the pre-evacuation behaviour of the studied populations:
1. Country and evacuee culture
2. Type of fire alarm (if any)
3. Nature of the event studied, i.e., real fire incidents or drills
4. Building design, e.g., number of floors and egress layout
5. Evacuation procedures
6. Building information systems
7. Time of incident (day or night)
8. Methodology applied, e.g., video analysis, interview or questionnaires
==PAGE:66==
56
7 Model Case Study
Based on cluster analysis, it is possible to group different data-sets together in clusters.
Data-sets within a given cluster is often characterized by a set of common factors such as
the type of information systems installed or the height of the buildings. However, due to
inconsistencies, omissions and uncertainties among data-sets, it can be hard to identify
all underlying factors segregating clusters. Therefore, Lovreglio et al. suggest that for
each occupancy type considered the cluster most representative of the studied building
is selected [Lov+19]. The mathematical distribution of the pre-evacuation delay can
then be found by taking the average of the mean and standard deviation of the most
representative buildings within the selected cluster. A Study from Purser & Bensilum
have demonstrated that log-normal distributions best represent the pre-evacuation delay
of building populations [PB01], why this type of distribution is utilized for the model
case study. An example of the progress involved in formulating the distributions for the
pre-evacuation delays utilized in this study is provided below.
Office Occupancy
From the extended pre-evacuation database conducted by Lovreglio et al. (2019), we can
find data representing the pre-evacuation delay for different office building populations,
see Table 7.7. These data-sets can be grouped into two clusters, each with similar traits,
see Figure 7.11.
Table 7.7: Pre-evacuation data for office occupancy. Elaborated from [Lov+19].
Ref.
Case
Study
Building
Type
Country
Nature
Alarm
Floors
Sample
Size
Mean
(min)
SD
(min)
Cluster
[GBP09; Gwy07]
1
Office
US
P-UD
PV
11
72
2.355
1.060
1
[GBP09; Gwy07]
2
Mixed Office
US
UD
T3
4
348
1.693
0.841
1
[GBP09; Gwy07]
3
Mixed Office
US
P-UD
PV
12
132
1.233
0.562
1
[PB10]
4
Office
Canada
UD
AL
13
458
1.398
1.436
1
[PKP96]
5
Office
Canada
UD
AL
6
92
0.573
0.385
1
[PKP96]
6
Office
Canada
UD
AL
7
161
1.196
0.827
1
[Hos+07]
7
Office
Finland
AD
AL
7
33
2.722
1.151
1
[Hos+07]
8
Office
Finland
AD
AL
4
9
2.017
0.850
1
[SFP19]
9
Office
UK
UD
AL
6
19
0.467
0.183
1
[SFP19]
10
Office
Denmark
UD
PV
12
70
0.961
0.600
1
[Bre97]
11
Office
Australia
FI
No AL
14
106
5.415
1.547
1
[FP10]
12
Office**
US
FI
No AL
110
85
11.300
58.489
2
[FP10]
13
Office**
US
FI
No AL
110
46
28.400
43.490
2
Legend:
Unannounced Drill (UD); Partial Unannounced Drill (P-UD); Announced Drills (AD); Fire Incidents (FI)
Sirens, bells, and horns (AL); T3 fire alarm systems (T3); prerecorded voice notifications (PV)
**World Trade Center
==PAGE:67==
7.3 Model Input Calibration
57
Figure 7.11: Pre-evacuation data by clusters for the data presented in Table 7.7. Both
plots from [Lov+19]: a) means and standard divisions of the case studies, b) data points
of the case studies
It can be argued that cluster one is more representative for the two case-buildings be-
cause of factors such as building height, installed alarm systems and the broad nature
in which the data has been collected. Furthermore, cluster two consist only of post-
incident studies that analyzed the World Trade Center incident; thus, these data-sets
are not representative of the two case-buildings nor other high-rise buildings located in
Denmark.
It is considered favourable to have many data-points behind the selected distribution of
the pre-evacuation delay, why the average of all data-sets in cluster one except the data
from case study no. 11 is utilized; as no fire alarm was installed for the building analyzed
in that case study. By taking the average of case study 1-10 and weighing them equal
to their respective sample size, we obtain the distribution presented in table 7.8. This
distribution is utilized to represent the pre-evacuation behaviour of agents placed in the
office occupancy zones of our two buildings (Section 7.3.3.1).
Table 7.8: Pre-evacuation delay for office occupancy used in the model case study for
both case-buildings (Log-normal distribution).
Pre-evacuation delay for office occupancy
(log-normal distribution)
Mean (s)
SD (s)
Min (s)
Max (s)
86
59
1
582
Using the same approach as presented above, we obtain the distributions representing
the pre-evacuation delay of the three remaining occupancy zones.
Tables describing
the pre-evacuation data used for formulating the distributions for the remaining three
occupancy types are presented in Appendix A.
==PAGE:68==
58
7 Model Case Study
Assembly Occupancy
From the extended pre-evacuation database conducted by Lovreglio et al. (2019), we
utilize cluster two (case study 3-12) to represent the pre-evacuation delay of agents
placed in the assembly occupancy zones of the two case-buildings.
All data-sets in
cluster two have been obtained by studying buildings located in Sweden, all of whom
was installed with prerecorded voice notification alarms; which make it representative
for the two case-buildings.
The utilized distribution of the pre-evacuation delay for
assembly occupancy is presented in Table 7.9.
Table 7.9: Log-normal distribution of pre-evacuation delay for assembly occupancy,
based on case-studies conducted by [NJ09] and [Hol13].
Pre-evacuation delay for assembly occupancy
(log-normal distribution)
Mean (s)
SD (s)
Min (s)
Max (s)
33
8
3
78
Hotel Occupancy
From the extended pre-evacuation database conducted by Lovreglio et al. (2019), we uti-
lize cluster one (case study 1-3) to represent the pre-evacuation delay of agents placed
in the hotel occupancy zones of our two case-buildings, see Table 7.10.. All data-sets
utilized were collected by conducting unannounced fire drills on a single floor of hotel
buildings located in the Netherlands where occupants were warned through a text mes-
sage on their phones. Due to only a few studies conducted on hotel buildings concerning
pre-evacuation times, we are lefts with these three data-sets to represent the hotel oc-
cupancy zones in Aarhus City Tower. However, since Aarhus City Tower is installed
with comparably more modern information systems (Table 7.3), it is expected that the
pre-evacuation delay, in reality, will be lower than the distribution used for the model
case study.
Table 7.10: Log-normal distribution of pre-evacuation delay for hotel occupancy used in
the model case study. Based on case studies conducted by [Kob+10b]
Pre-evacuation delay for hotel occupancy
(log-normal distribution)
Mean (s)
SD (s)
Min (s)
Max (s)
104
98
3
580
Residential Occupancy
From the extended pre-evacuation database conducted by Lovreglio et al. (2019) concern-
ing residential occupancy, we utilize case study 3-6 placed in cluster one to represent the
pre-evacuation delay of agents placed in the residential occupancy zones of our two case-
buildings. Case study 3-6 is representative for our case-buildings as they all analyzed
populations in traditional apartment buildings with a height greater than 20 meters in
which modern fire-alarm systems were installed. Other data-sets for high-rise residential
==PAGE:69==
7.3 Model Input Calibration
59
buildings exist; however, here researchers noted poor performances of the fire alarms.
It should be stated that the utilized data-sets all represent pre-evacuation times during
daytime, and that pre-evacuation times during nighttime can vary significantly. The
utilized distribution of the pre-evacuation delay for residential occupancy is presented
in Table 7.11.
Table 7.11: Log-normal distribution of pre-evacuation delay for residential occupancy
used in the model case study. Based on case studies conducted by [Pro10] and [Pro+95]
Pre-evacuation delay for residential occupancy
(log-normal distribution)
Mean (s)
SD (s)
Min (s)
Max (s)
137
94
2
630
7.3.3.3
Unimpeded Walking Speed
Factors influencing the unimpeded walking speed of occupants include their physical
condition, their familiarity with the building and their perceived risk, see Chapter 5.
Occupants familiarity with their environment and their perceived risk is often assumed
equal between building types and evacuation scenarios (if fire conditions are not consid-
ered). Hence, the study of walking speed is often categorized into occupant demographics
such as age and the number of people with mobility impairments [SFP19]. A study con-
ducted by Gwynne & Rosenbaum showed that a normal distribution best could represent
the walking speed of occupants [GR16]; why we use this type of distribution to model
the walking speed of agents in the model case study.
Office Occupancy
For office occupancy populations, we find that approximately 1.7% of the total popula-
tion have a degree of mobility impairment that affects their unimpeded walking speed
[PB01; BFS98]. In terms of age, we find that approximately six out of seven office work-
ers is 18-50 years old. The demographics of occupants in hotel occupancy, as identified
in the literature review, is summarized in Table 7.12; we use the simple average value
of these in the model case study.
==PAGE:70==
60
7 Model Case Study
Table 7.12: Office demographic summary. The average value is used in the model case
study.
Age of Occupants
Chance (%)
18-29 years old (%)
30-50 years old (%)
50+ years old (%)
Reference
9.09
15
66
19
[PB01]
9.09
43
44
13
[US 04]
9.09
33
44
22
[Lor+05]
9.09
31
54
15
[Lor+05]
9.09
0
50
50
[Lor+05]
9.09
24
60
16
[Lor+05]
9.09
26
64
10
[Lor+05]
9.09
11
74
16
[Lor+05]
9.09
25
75
0
[Lor+05]
9.09
46
46
9
[Lor+05]
9.09
35
65
0
[Lor+05]
Average
26
58
16
[Lor+05; US 04; PB01]
Percentage of Age Group with Mobility Impairments
18-29 years old (%)
30-50 years old (%)
50+ years old (%)
Reference
Average
0.43
0.43
0.83
[US 00; Lor+05]
It is possible to review the literature and establish an average distribution representing
each of the occupant groups presented in Table 7.12, this have already been performed
by Lord et al. (2005), see Table 7.13.
Table 7.13: Unimpeded walking speed depending on demographics (normal distribution).
Elaborated from [Lor+05].
Mean (m/s)
Std (m/s)
Min (m/s)
Max (m/s)
Children (age 18<)
0.88
0.25
0.28
1.8
Adults (age 18-50)
1.12
0.25
0.25
1.9
Elderly (age 50+)
0.86
0.26
0.25
1.5
Mobility Impaired Occupants
0.77
0.24
0.25
1.3
Residential Occupancy
For residential occupancy populations, the number of persons with mobility impairments
is around 18% [Lor+05]. The increase from office occupancy can be attributed to the
high number of elderly residing in apartment housing.
The occupancy demographic
identified in the literature concerning residential occupancy is shown in Table 7.14; we
use the simple average value of these in the model case study.
==PAGE:71==
7.3 Model Input Calibration
61
Table 7.14: Residential demographic summary. The average value is used in the model
case study.
Age of Occupants
Chance (%)
Age 18< (%)
Age 18-29 (%)
Age 30-50 (%)
Age 50+ (%)
Reference
33.3
1
6
12
81
[Sek+99]
33.3
3
8
21
68
[Pro94]
33.3
6
42
30
21
[Pro+95]
Average
3
19
21
57
Percentage of Age Group with Mobility Impairments
Age 18< (%)
Age 18-29 (%)
Age 30-50 (%)
Age 50+ (%)
Reference
Average
1.6
3.8
3.8
7.8
[US 00; Lor+05]
The unimpeded walking speed of each age group presented in Table 7.14 is provided in
Table 7.13.
Assembly and Hotel Occupancy
For assembly and hotel occupancy, there exist very few data-sets that describe the
walking speed of occupants or their demographics (as a mathematical distribution). To
represent these occupants, we, therefore, utilize speed profiles based on data from John
Fruin’s Pedestrian Planning and Design Handbook [Rub96]. This data is suitable for our
use as it represents the average speed of six occupant groups of all ages. Furthermore,
the study was conducted in public areas which provide us with a broad representation of
people movement. The speed profile presented by Fruin (1996) is normally distributed,
see Table 7.15.
Table 7.15: Distribution of walking speed utilized for assembly and hotel occupancy for
occupants with no mobility impairments. Based on data from [Rub96].
Speed profiles for assembly and hotel
occupancy (normal distribution)
Mean (m/s)
SD (m/s)
Min (m/s)
Max (m/s)
1.2
0.2
0.6
1.8
However, the data-set provided by Fruin does not account for pedestrians with mobil-
ity impairments [Rub96]. By studying ten high-rise buildings in Sweden, Jönsson et
al. found that an average of 5% of the population of these buildings was affected by
movement disabilities; why we consider this amount [JA12]. As we do not know the
age composition of people with mobility impairments for hotel and assembly occupancy,
we can not use the speed profile previously presented (Table 7.13). Instead, we assume
that occupants with mobility impairments are evenly distributed among the considered
populations in assembly and hotel occupancy. This allows us to utilize the speed profile
for occupants with physical impairments elaborated by Boyce & Shields [BSS99], see
Table 7.16,
==PAGE:72==
62
7 Model Case Study
Table 7.16: Distribution of walking speed utilized for assembly and hotel occupancy for
people with locomotion disability (5 % of population assumed). Based on data from
[BSS99].
Speed profiles of people with locomotion
disability (normal distribution)
Mean (m/s)
SD (m/s)
Min (m/s)
Max (m/s)
0.8
0.37
0.1
1.68
7.3.3.4
Body Dimensions
In the sensitivity analysis presented in Section 6.4, it was found that the shoulder width
of occupants can have a strong influence on the simulated evacuation times, as Pathfinder
is an agent-based model. Thus, the shoulder width of occupants controls how agents
interact in narrow egress paths such as on stairs. Therefore, it is favourable to have a
mathematical distribution that can represent this parameter among a given population.
It is known that the distribution of shoulder width among populations in different oc-
cupancy types differ comparably to the variating population demographics [Tao+20].
Unfortunately, no data exist that represent shoulder width of occupants based on build-
ing types. The best representing data that exist are conducted by Tao et al. [Tao+20]
and Wignall et al. [WTN17] that studied the shoulder width of Chinese men aged 18-40
and the shoulder width of male and females in an undergraduate population in Australia
respectively. It can be argued that the body-frame of undergraduates are fully developed
and that populations from Australia are more representative of this study.
We, therefore, utilize the data-set collected by Wignall et al. to model the shoulder
widths of agents. To do so, we assume that the t-distributed data-set can be modelled
as an approximately equal normal distribution. Furthermore, we assume that males and
females are evenly distributed among the considered populations; thus, we obtain an
average distribution to represent the considered building populations, see Table 7.17.
Table 7.17: Distribution of shoulder width used for all occupancy types in the model
case study (normal distribution). Based on data from [WTN17]
Average shoulder width of male and females
(normal distribution)
Mean (cm)
SD (cm)
Min (cm)
Max (cm)
46
4
39
56
==PAGE:73==
7.3 Model Input Calibration
63
7.3.3.5
Firefighters
To model the travel speed of firefighters on stairs and horizontal building components, we
use a conservative speed profile elaborated by Kuligowski [Kul03]. Kuligowski reviewed
existing data-sets and accounted for the heavy gear and equipment (25-45 kg) that each
firefighter is expected to carry. The unimpeded walking speed of firefighters was found
to be 0.8 m/s and the walking speed for firefighter travelling up the stairs to 0.35 m/s
(adjusted from 0.5 m/s for heavy gear). The speed profiles furthermore account for the
effect of fatigue and exhaustion.
The geometric size of firefighters is set equal to the values presented in Table 7.17.
==PAGE:74==
64
7 Model Case Study
7.4
Evacuation Scenarios
This section presents the twenty different evacuation scenarios that are simulated for
both Aarhus City Tower and Den Hvide Facet. The scenarios have been categorized
into four groups, namely; ”Firefighter Operations (F)”, ”Evacuation Strategies (ES)”,
”Human Behavioural Conditions (H)” and ”Egress Capacity (EC)”. The first group seek
to investigate the potential suitability of firefighter’s lifts compared to the more tra-
ditional approach where firefighters traverse a building utilizing the stairs. The three
remaining groups seek to study the potential suitability of occupant evacuation elevators
(OCEs) while accounting for the influence of variations in evacuation strategies, human
behavioural conditions and egress capacity. Each scenario comprises one or two Base
Cases (B) that the other evacuation scenarios in that group will be compared versus.
A summary of all scenarios is provided in Table 7.18 (page 71).
7.4.1
F - Firefighter Operations
The purpose of the Firefighter Operations scenarios is not only to investigate the effect
firefighter’s elevators have on the access time of the fire department, but also how this
influences the egress time of building occupants as counterflow in stairwells largely can
be avoided. For all scenarios, two groups of four firefighters with a 30-second delay are
analyzed in their attempt to reach the top floor, which is assumed to be the fire floor.
For scenarios where firefighters are to traverse the building using the stairs, the response
time of the fire department is included. Based on national average data from 2011-2018,
the response time of the fire department is conservatively modelled equal to 500 seconds
(8 minutes and 20 seconds) [Ber18], unless otherwise stated.
All building occupants are simultaneously evacuated using the stairs and are assigned
mathematical distributions for their pre-evacuation delays, speed profiles and shoulder
widths in accordance with Section 7.3. The input calibration of firefighters is based on
Section 7.3.3.5.
7.4.1.1
F-B (Firefighter’s elevator - Base Case)
Firefighters arrive on the scene after the national average response time of 500 seconds
and then take the fire service access elevator to one floor under the fire floor before
continuing to travel the remaining one flight utilizing the safety emergency stairwell(s).
The principles behind the scenario are illustrated in Figure 3.2.
7.4.1.2
F1 (Firefighters on Stair(s) - No Counterflow)
Firefighters travel to the fire floor utilizing the safety emergency stairwell(s). The re-
sponse time of the fire department is assumed so high that all occupants have evacuated
==PAGE:75==
7.4 Evacuation Scenarios
65
the building when firefighters start their suppression and rescue operations; why no
counterflow in the stairwell(s) occurs.
7.4.1.3
F2 (Firefighters on Stair(s) - No Priority)
Firefighters arrive on the scene after the national average response time of 500 seconds
and then travel to the fire floor utilizing the safety emergency stairwell(s). It is assumed
that occupants are in a hurry to evacuate the building; why occupants give no priority
to firefighters in case of counterflow situations.
7.4.1.4
F3 (Firefighters on Stair(s) - Priority)
Same conditions as in scenario ”F2” except that it here is assumed that occupants now
give priority to firefighters in counterflow situations, e.g., by providing space for them
on the stairs, see Figure 7.12.
Figure 7.12: Counterflow in the stairwells between firefighters and occupants (scenario
”F3”).
7.4.2
ES - Evacuation Strategies
This scenario group seek to investigate what influence various evacuation strategies that
utilize occupant evacuation elevators have on the egress time of occupants compared to
full stairwell evacuation. Hence, the influence of firefighter operations is not considered
here.
All occupants simulated are assigned mathematical distributions for their pre-evacuation
delays, speed profiles and shoulder widths based on the values of Section 7.3. Further-
more, the distribution of occupant to stairs and elevators along with the maximum
==PAGE:76==
66
7 Model Case Study
time occupants are willing to wait on elevators is based on section 7.3.2.1 and 7.3.2.2
respectively, unless a hypothetical scenario is considered.
7.4.2.1
ES-B (Stair(s) Only - Base Case)
The only egress component(s) available for the evacuation of the building in this scenario
are the stair(s). All floors are evacuated simultaneously.
7.4.2.2
ES1 (OCE + Stair(s))
The egress components available in this scenario are all stairs along with all passenger
elevators. All floors are evacuated simultaneously.
7.4.2.3
ES2 (ES1 + Phased - Top-Down)
The same conditions as presented for evacuation scenario ”ES1” is applied in this sce-
nario. However, instead of a simultaneous evacuation of the building, a top-down phased
evacuation is employed. Here, occupants on the highest floor are evacuated first followed
by a subsequent evacuation of the remaining floors one by one. Hence, the ground floor
is evacuated last. The static evacuation delay between floors variate and is based on a
manual calibration where optimization have been sought.
7.4.2.4
ES3 (ES1 + Phased - Grouped)
The same conditions as described for evacuation scenario ”ES1” is applied in this sce-
nario.
However, instead of a simultaneous evacuation of the building, an optimized
phased evacuation strategy is employed. Here, a number of the highest and lowest floors
are simultaneously evacuated first - followed by a subsequent grouped evacuation of the
remaining floors. The static evacuation delay between floors and the sequencing of the
phased evacuation have been determined through an iterative process that focused on
achieving the lowest evacuation time for 98% of the total building population.
An example of ”Phased - Top-Down Evacuation” and ”Phased - Grouped Evacuation”
strategies are provided in Figure 7.13.
7.4.2.5
ES4 (OCEs Only)
This strategy is a hypothetical scenario in which only the occupant evacuation elevators
(OCEs) can be used for egress. Hence, it is assumed that all occupants are willing to
wait on and use occupant evacuation elevators. All floors are evacuated simultaneously.
7.4.2.6
ES5 (OCE + Stair(s) - Optimized)
In this scenario, a hypothetical distribution of occupants to stairs and elevators is utilized.
Occupants are distributed to stairs and elevators to optimize the evacuation process most
==PAGE:77==
7.4 Evacuation Scenarios
67
possible in terms of the time it takes the 98th percentile of occupants to evacuate the
building. Hence, occupants that are distributed to use the occupant evacuation elevators
for egress is assumed to be willing to wait for as long as it takes. All floors are evacuated
simultaneously.
Figure 7.13: Example of the three first sequences of ”Phased - Top-Down Evacuation”
and ”Phased - Grouped Evacuation”. Presented without pre-evacuation delay.
==PAGE:78==
68
7 Model Case Study
7.4.3
EC - Egress Capacity
The purpose of these scenarios is to study the variations in the simulated evacuation
times of occupants if the egress capacity of elevators and stairs is increased beyond the
baseline configuration. Hence, the influence of firefighter operations is not considered
here. Simultaneous evacuation is assumed in all scenarios.
All occupants simulated are assigned mathematical distributions for their pre-evacuation
delays, speed profiles and shoulder widths based on the values of Section 7.3. Further-
more, is the distribution of occupant to stairs and elevators along with the maximum
time occupants are willing to wait on elevators based on section 7.3.2.1 and 7.3.2.2
respectively, unless a hypothetical scenario is considered.
7.4.3.1
EC-B1 (Stair(s) Only - Base Case)
This base case is identical to ”ES-B”; hence, only stairwells can be used during egress
of the building.
7.4.3.2
EC-B2 (OCE + Stair(s) - Base Case)
The second base case is identical to ”ES1”; hence, both stairwells and passenger elevators
can be used during egress of the building.
7.4.3.3
EC1 (One Additional Stair)
This scenario considers the availability of one additional stair compared to the base case
(EC-B1). The geometric features are the same as the characteristics of those installed
in the baseline configuration (Table 7.4). All occupants are evacuated using only the
stairs.
7.4.3.4
EC2 (OCE Only - 25% Cap. Increase)
This scenario adapts the conditions presented for the hypothetical scenario ”ES4”; how-
ever, here, the capacity of the elevators are increased with 25%. Thus, the only available
vertical egress means are the passenger elevators.
7.4.3.5
EC3 (OCE Only - High-Speed)
This scenario adapts the conditions presented for the hypothetical scenario ”ES4”; how-
ever, here all passenger elevators including the firefighter’s lift is assumed to be high-
speed elevators of the type KONE MonoSpace 700 DX. These elevators have a speed
of 3.0 m/s and a capacity of 33 persons [KON20]. Hence, for Aarhus City Tower all
==PAGE:79==
7.4 Evacuation Scenarios
69
occupants are evacuated using five high-speed elevators, and for Den Hvide Facet two
high-speed elevators are utilized.
7.4.3.6
EC4 (High Speed OCE + Stair(s) - Optimized)
This hypothetical scenario adapts the conditions presented for scenario ”EC-B2”; how-
ever, here all passenger elevators including the firefighter’s lift is assumed to be high-
speed elevators of the type KONE MonoSpace 700 DX. Furthermore, the distribution of
occupants to stairs and elevators is based on optimizing the evacuation process of the
case-buildings in terms of the time it takes the 98th percentile of occupants to evacu-
ate the building. Hence, occupants that are distributed to use the occupant evacuation
elevators for egress is assumed to be willing to wait for as long as it takes.
7.4.3.7
EC5 (OCE + Stair(s) - 25% Cap. Increase)
This scenario adapts the conditions presented for scenario ”EC-B2”; however, here, the
capacity of the elevators are increased with 25% beyond the base case configuration.
7.4.4
H - Human Behavioural Conditions
For all scenarios but the hypothetical scenarios presented above the evacuation behaviour
of occupants have been kept uniform in accordance with the model input calibration de-
scribed in Section 7.3. However, as human behaviour is stochastic in nature and that
research on the matter is somewhat scarce (Chapter 5), it is favourable to investigate
how the potential suitability of occupant elevators are influenced by variations in this
behaviour.
The influence of firefighter operations is not considered for this scenario
group. Simultaneous evacuation is assumed in all scenarios.
All occupants simulated are assigned mathematical distributions for their speed profiles,
pre-evacuation delay and shoulder widths based on the values of Section 7.3, unless
otherwise specified. Furthermore, is the distribution of occupant to stairs and elevators
along with the maximum time that they are willing to wait on elevators kept uniform
in accordance with Section 7.3.2.1 for all scenarios, unless otherwise specified.
7.4.4.1
H-B (OCE + Stair(s) - Base Case)
The base case is identical to ”ES1”; hence, both stairwells and passenger elevators can
be used during egress of the building.
7.4.4.2
H1 (OCE + Stair(s) - Ultd. Wait Time)
This scenario adapts the conditions presented for scenario ”H-B”; however, occupants
are assumed to wait for as long as it takes to use occupant evacuation elevators. Hence,
occupants that according to Figure 7.8 are willing to use elevators are assigned no
maximum wait time on the lifts (hypothetical assumption).
==PAGE:80==
70
7 Model Case Study
7.4.4.3
H2 (OCE + Stair(s) - 10 Min. Wait Time)
This scenario adapts the conditions presented for scenario ”H-B”; however, occupants
are assumed to be willing to wait for ten minutes on the elevators compared to the
five minutes used in the base case, this is aligned with the observations made by Heyes
(2009), see Section 5.5.3.
7.4.4.4
H3 (OCE + Stair(s) - No Pre-movement Period)
This scenario adapts the conditions presented for scenario ”H-B”; however, occupants
are assumed to have no pre-movement delay, i.e., they are assumed to evacuate as soon
as they hear the fire alarm.
7.4.4.5
H4 (OCE + Stair(s) - Group Movement)
This scenario adapts the conditions presented for scenario ”H-B”; however, here all
occupants in residential and hotel occupancy are modelled with group movement. This
means that occupants in the same hotel rooms or apartments are modelled as one group
that evacuate together and take the speed of the slowest occupant in the group.
7.4.4.6
H5 (OCE + Stair(s) - Elderly & Impaired OCE Only)
This scenario adapts the conditions presented for scenario ”H-B”; however, instead of an
even distribution of occupant demographics between egress components, all elderly (age
50+) and mobility impaired occupants are assumed to use the occupant evacuation ele-
vators to evacuate the building while the remaining occupants use the stairs. Occupants
utilizing the elevators for evacuation is still assumed to have a maximum wait time of 5
minutes before rerouting towards the stairs, in accordance with section 7.3.
A summary description of the twenty evacuation scenarios is provided in Table 7.18 on
the next page.
==PAGE:81==
7.4 Evacuation Scenarios
71
Table 7.18: Summary table of the evacuation scenarios simulated for both case-buildings.
A detailed description of each scenario is provided in the sections presented above. All
scenarios utilize simultaneous evacuation unless otherwise specified.
No.
Name
Description
F - Firefighter Operations
F-B
Firefighter’s lift -
Base Case
Firefighters utilize the FE
F1
Firefighters on Stair(s) -
No Counterflow
All firefighters use the stairwell(s), no counterflow obstruct their movement
F2
Firefighters on Stair(s) -
No Priority
All firefighters use the stairwell(s), counterflow on stairs between occupants
and firefighters is expected. No priority to firefighters is given
F3
Firefighters on Stair(s) -
Priority
Same as ”F2”; however, priority to firefighters is given
ES - Evacuation Strategies
ES-B
Stair(s) Only -
Base Case
All occupants take the stair(s)
ES1
OCE + Stair(s)
Occupants take a combination of stair(s) and elevators
ES2
ES1 + Phased -
Top-Down
Same as ”ES1”; however, a phased top-down evacuation is used
ES3
ES1 + Phased -
Grouped
Same as ”ES1”; however, an optimized phased evacuation is used
where floors are evacuated in groups to enhance the evacuation efficiency
ES4
OCE Only
Only the passenger elevators are available for egress
ES5
OCE + Stair(s) -
Optimized
Same as ”ES1”; however the distribution of occupants to stair(s) and elevators
is based on the configuration that yields the most efficient evacuation
EC - Egress Capacity
EC-B1
Stair(s) Only -
Base Case
Same as ”ES-B”
EC-B2
OCE + Stair(s) -
Base Case
Same as ”ES1”
EC1
One additional stair
One additional stair compared to ”ES-B” is installed (only stair evac.).
EC2
OCE Only -
25% cap. increase
The capacity of the elevators is increased with 25 % compared to ”ES4”
EC3
OCE Only - High-Speed
Only the elevators including the FE are available for egress. These are
assumed to be high-speed KONE elevators with a capacity of 36 occupants each
EC4
High-Speed OCE +
Stair(s) - Optimized
Same as ”ES5” but all elevators including the FE can now be used for egress.
All elevators are assumed to be high-speed KONE elevators
EC5
OCE + Stair(s) -
25% Cap. Increase
Same as ”ES1”; however, the capacity of the elevators is increased with 25 %
H - Human Behavioural Conditions
H-B
OCE + Stair(s) -
Base Case
Same as ”ES1” (5 minutes maximum wait time on elevators)
H1
OCE + Stair(s) -
Ultd. Wait Time
Same as ”H-B” but with no maximum wait time on elevators
H2
OCE + Stair(s) -
10 Min. Wait Time
Same as ”H-B” but with 10 minutes maximum wait time on elevators
H3
OCE + Stair(s) -
No Pre-movement Period
Same as ”H-B” but with no pre-evacuation delay
H4
OCE + Stair(s) -
Group Movement
Same as ”H-B” but with group movement of occupants located in the same hotel
room or in the same apartment.
H5
OCE + Stair(s) -
Elderly & Impaired
OCE Only
All elderly (50+) and mobility-impaired occupants take the OCEs while the
remaining occupants utilize the stairwell(s)
==PAGE:82==
72
7 Model Case Study
7.5
Convergence of Simulation Results
In the context of fire safety design uncertainty can be divided into the following three
groups: intrinsic uncertainty, measurement uncertainty and model input uncertainty
[Pro07; RRP14].
1. Intrinsic uncertainty is the uncertainty associated with the mathematical and phys-
ical assumptions of the modelling approach and the methods adopted, including
the underlying formulas and algorithms.
2. Measurement uncertainty is linked to the collection of empirical data and experi-
mental measurements, i.e., the data acquisition methods employed.
3. Model input uncertainty is associated with the parameters obtained from experi-
mental measurements that are employed in the egress model, i.e., the assumptions
embedded to derive model input from the experiments.
In the case of evacuation data, uncertainty can be subdivided into an additional compo-
nent, namely behavioural uncertainty [RRP14]. As mentioned previously, behavioural
uncertainty is linked to the stochastic nature of human behaviour. A single experiment
is not representative of the full range of possibilities to how occupants can act on con-
secutive days under the same evacuation conditions [Ave11; Kul13]; thus, neither is one
simulation of a particular evacuation scenario representative of all possible outcomes
[RRP14].
As presented in Section 7.3.3 a stochastic representation of occupants walking speed,
pre-evacuation delay and shoulder width is utilized in the model case study. Further-
more, are the placement of occupants on each floor randomized in accordance with the
defined occupant loads per floor level (Table A.1 and A.2). This can influence the simu-
lation results between multiple runs of the same scenario, for example, can variation in
occupant placement on floors lead to different egress route selection of individuals due
to the Locally Quickest algorithm that is embedded in Pathfinder (Section 6.3).
Therefore, to account for behavioural uncertainty in each scenario simulated, conver-
gence between modelling results of consecutive runs of the same scenario will be con-
ducted until a met threshold has been met for b number of runs [RRP14]. Convergence
will be performed concerning two variables; the total evacuation time and the standard
deviation of the completion times of all occupants, see equation 7.1 and 7.2.
TETconvj =| TETavj −TETavj−1
TETavj
× 100 |
(7.1)
SDconvj =| SDj −SDavj−1
SDj
× 100 |
(7.2)
Where:
==PAGE:83==
7.5 Convergence of Simulation Results
73
TETconvj
Convergence measure for the total evacuation time for the jth run [%]
TETavj
The arithmetic mean of the total evacuation times for j runs
TETavj−1
The arithmetic mean of the total evacuation times for j-1 runs
SDconvj
Convergence measure for the standard deviation of the completion time
of building occupants for the jth run [%]
SDj
The standard deviation for for the jth run
SDavj−1
The arithmetic mean of the standard deviation for j-1 runs
The acceptance criteria of the convergence measures for b number of consecutive runs
are defined in accordance with [RRP14], see equation 7.3 and 7.4. The study states that
thresholds below 5 % would permit the assessment of the required safe egress time with
a reasonable degree of accuracy.
TEST 1:
TETconvj ≤5% for b consecutive number of runs
(7.3)
TEST 2:
SDconvj ≤5% for b consecutive number of runs
(7.4)
Where:
b = 10 [runs], in accordance with [RRP14]
Consecutive runs of the same scenario will include randomization of the following model
inputs:
• Occupants position on floor levels; however, floor level populations remain constant
in term of the total number of occupants
• Profile data of occupants (speed, pre-evacuation time and occupant size) within
the defined mathematical distributions, see Section 7.3.3
This means that atleast eleven runs of the same scenario have been performed in the
model case study or until the convergence criteria have been met. The average value
of each scenario corresponding to the number of runs of that scenario is used for the
simulation results presented in the next section (Section 7.6).
==PAGE:84==
74
7 Model Case Study
7.6
Simulation Results
The results of the egress simulations for the two case-buildings for the twenty evacuation
scenarios considered are presented in this section. It should be noted that all results pre-
sented indicate the average value obtained through multiple runs of the same scenario.
Each scenario was run until convergence was achieved, which entailed a minimum of 11
simulations per scenario, as described in Section 7.5.
The analysis of the results is divided into two parts:
1. A relative comparison of all evacuation scenarios for two case-buildings (Aarhus
City Tower and Den Hvide Facet) individually
2. A cross-comparison of the results for two case-buildings (Aarhus City Tower and
Den Hvide Facet) concerning the potential suitability of OCEs and FEs
7.6.1
Relative Comparison
Here, we are interested in plotting the evacuation time curves of occupants for all scenar-
ios. This will enable us to analyze the impact that firefighter’s elevators and occupant
evacuation elevators have on the evacuation process of occupants under different condi-
tions and to study how this variate over time.
We recollect from Section 7.5 how occupants placement on a given floor along with their
profile values, that are assigned through stochastic variables, is randomized between
consecutive runs of the same scenario. Hence, the same agents are expected to evacuate
the building in variating order across multiple simulations of the same scenario. Thus,
to plot the averaged evacuation time curve of each scenario, we take the average value
of the time it takes each occupant to evacuate the building in ascending order.
In the following, time evacuation curves for each of the scenario groups shown in Table
7.18 will be presented for both case-buildings. A critical point that needs to be high-
lighted before reading the analyzes is that we defined the acceptance criteria for the
convergence of modelling results to a threshold value of 5 %. This means that we can
expect the obtained evacuation curves to have a percentage error of minimum ± 5% due
to behavioural uncertainty alone.
7.6.1.1
Aarhus City Tower (A)
First, we present the simulation results for Aarhus City Tower. It should be noted that
this building has the highest occupant density, most number of floor levels and most
occupancy types of the two case-buildings simulated (Table 7.3). Furthermore, most of
the building occupants are office workers, hotel guests or conference guests.
==PAGE:85==
7.6 Simulation Results
75
Results for scenario group ”F” (Firefighter Operations)
The time evacuation curve of occupants for the four ”Firefighter Operation” scenarios
for Aarhus City Tower is presented in Figure 7.14. The figure shows the number of
occupants that have evacuated the building against time; thus, data points for agents
representing firefighters are not included in the plot. Where relevant, firefighters have
been modelled to utilize the stairwell where most congestion occurs (the east stairwell)
as this yield the most critical conditions.
Figure 7.14: Evacuation time curve for Aarhus City Tower for scenario group ”F”.
We observe that the evacuation time of occupants is increased by the occurrence of coun-
terflow in the stairwells due to firefighters who enter the building after approximately
500 seconds (scenario F2 and F3) compared to the scenarios where no counterflow in the
stairwells occurs (scenario F-B and F1). Furthermore, are the evacuation times increased
when occupants give no priority to firefighters in counterflow situations (scenario F2)
compared to situations where they give priority (F3), i.e., modelling firefighters with
higher priority than occupants can yield smoother flow rates in counterflow situations.
Results for scenario group ”ES” (Evacuation Strategies)
The time evacuation curve of occupants for the six ”Evacuation Strategies” scenarios for
Aarhus City Tower is presented in Figure 7.15.
==PAGE:86==
76
7 Model Case Study
Figure 7.15: Evacuation time curve for Aarhus City Tower for scenario group ”ES”
Strategy ES4 (i.e. only elevators are available for the evacuation) yields the longest
evacuation time of all the scenarios considered. The central aspect affecting this is the
capacity of the elevators, which is not significant enough to efficiently transport occu-
pants to the ground floor if comparing to full stairwell evacuation (ES-B).
A phased top-down evacuation strategy (ES2) where occupants are subsequently evacu-
ated one floor at a time, yields the second-highest total evacuation time. As observed by
Ding et al. we likewise find that phased evacuation can be optimized if groups of floors
are simultaneously evacuated in a subsequent flow (ES3) [Din+15]. From the evacuation
simulations, it was observed that the most efficient phased evacuation for Aarhus City
Tower was yielded when the top and bottom floors were evacuated first, followed by a
subsequent evacuation of the mid-rise floors, see Figure 7.13.
Furthermore, in line with the presentation of Section 3.1, we observe that even optimized
phased evacuation strategies yield higher total evacuation times than if a simultaneous
evacuation strategy is employed (scenario ES-B).
The combined use of stairs and elevators (ES1) provides a total evacuation time approx-
imately in the same range as full stairwell evacuation (scenario ES-B). However, it can
be observed that the evacuation rate is higher for strategy ES1. This can be linked to
the more significant number of occupants willing to utilize elevators on higher floors
(Figure 7.8), along with the maximum waiting time on elevators of 5 minutes. Hence, as
the time progresses, fewer occupants are waiting to be evacuated by elevators, and more
occupants are redirecting there routes from the elevators to the stairs due to lack of
==PAGE:87==
7.6 Simulation Results
77
patience or increased risk perception; which result in a steeper curve as time progresses.
Lastly, we note that the fastest evacuation rate is obtained when a hypothetical (opti-
mized) distribution of occupants to stairs and elevators are utilized (ES5). The scenario
is hypothetical as the distribution has been optimized beyond the values identified in
studies on the matter (Section 7.3.2.1). Yet, the observation provides us with an in-
dication of the limits associated with elevators as a mean of evacuation, i.e., if more
occupants could be persuaded to use the systems during emergency evacuations.
Results for scenario group ”EC” (Egress Capacity)
The time evacuation curve of occupants for ”Egress Capacity” scenarios for Aarhus City
Tower is presented in Figure 7.16.
Figure 7.16: Evacuation time curve for Aarhus City Tower for scenario group ”EC”
From Figure 7.16 it can be noted that an increased capacity of egress components gen-
erally results in both faster evacuation rates and total evacuation times. However, for
the combined use of stairs and elevators, an increase in the capacity of the elevators of
25% (scenario EC-B2 versus EC5) does not affect the results significantly. This can be
linked to three factors; the high capacity of the elevators in the baseline configuration,
the influence of pre-evacuation delay (stochastically represented) and the number of oc-
cupants willing to use the elevators as a function of floor level. Thus, increased elevator
capacity will only result in faster evacuation times if the current capacity of the systems
is so low that occupants that initially was willing to use the elevators reroute their egress
route towards the stairs due to their modelled maximum waiting times.
==PAGE:88==
78
7 Model Case Study
If we consider the hypothetical scenario again where we used an optimized distribution
of occupants to elevators and stairs (ES5), and instead replace the elevators with high-
speed elevators (EC4), we find that the evacuation times can be further reduced. The
results are comparable to those yielded when an additional stairwell is installed centrally
between the two existing stairs (EC1); however, the curve is more linear for scenario
”EC4”. This is to be expected, as scenarios that rely more on stairwells as an egress
component are more depended on occupants individual walking speeds. Thus, more oc-
cupants placed on the top floors will have to ascend the building using the stairs, some
of which are elderly and impaired occupants that have reduced speed profiles.
Results for scenario group ”H” (Human Behavioural Conditions)
The time evacuation curve of occupants for ”Human Behavioural Conditions” scenarios
for Aarhus City Tower is presented in Figure 7.17.
Figure 7.17: Evacuation time curve for Aarhus City Tower for scenario group ”H”
From Figure 7.17 it can be observed that an increased waiting time on elevators (H1 &
H2) result in improved evacuation times of occupants as this means that more occupants
are evacuating by the OCEs.
It can further be observed that evacuating all elderly and mobility-impaired occupants by
only using the lifts (H5) result in higher evacuation times if compared with the baseline
configuration (H-B). However, this is inconsistent with the observations made Grewolls
[GG13]. The percentage of occupants distributed to stairs and elevators is lower for
scenario ”H5” compared to the base case, which could explain the inconsistency noted
above. Furthermore, as the free width of the stairs (1.3 meters) is greater than two
==PAGE:89==
7.6 Simulation Results
79
times the maximum modelled shoulder width (1.1 meters) it allows the faster-moving
occupants to pass slower walking occupants on the stairs unobstructed.
It can also be observed that the neglection of the pre-evacuation time of occupants (H3)
results in faster evacuation rates initially if compared to the other scenarios. However,
as all occupants start their movement period simultaneously, it results in increased
congestion at the entrances to the stairwells which leads to higher evacuation times of
occupants placed on the top floors; why the curve steepens as time progress.
7.6.1.2
Den Hvide Facet (H)
In this section, we present the time evacuation curves for Den Hvide Facet. This build-
ing is characterized by having a significant lower occupant load, fewer floors and a high
number of residential occupants compared to Aarhus City Tower (Table 7.3). Residen-
tial occupants are distinguished from hotel occupants by both having slower unimpeded
walking speeds and longer pre-evacuation delays (Section 7.3.3). Furthermore, the num-
ber of occupants with mobility impairments is almost ten times greater in residential
buildings compared to office buildings.
As many of the same trends can be observed between the evacuation time curves of the
two case-buildings, only the principal factors differentiating the cases will be mentioned
below.
Results for scenario group ”F” (Firefighter Operations)
The time evacuation curve of occupants for the four ”Firefighter Operation” scenarios
for Den Hvide Facet is presented in Figure 7.18.
From the figure it can be noted that the impact of firefighters in the stairwells has less
influence on the evacuation time of occupants compared to what was found for Aarhus
City Tower (Figure 7.14). The reason is that the firefighters are modelled with an initial
delay that corresponds to the average national response time of around 500 seconds.
Hence, as the average evacuation time of Den Hvide Facet is comparably low (mainly
due to lower building height and smaller occupant load) most occupants have already
evacuated the building at this time. All curves are, therefore, approximately equal when
accounting for the expected percentage error of ± 5%.
.
==PAGE:90==
80
7 Model Case Study
Figure 7.18: Evacuation time curve for Den Hvide Facet for scenario group ”F”
Results for scenario group ”ES” (Evacuation Strategies)
The time evacuation curve of occupants for the six ”Evacuation Strategies” scenarios for
Den Hvide Facet is presented in Figure 7.19.
Figure 7.19: Evacuation time curve for Den Hvide Facet for scenario group ”ES”
==PAGE:91==
7.6 Simulation Results
81
The trends observed in Figure 7.19 are similar to those that were observed for Aarhus
City Tower. However, the smaller occupant load and the lower building height makes
it less efficient to utilize a combination of stairs and elevators to evacuate occupants for
Den Hvide Facet. It should further be mentioned that the total evacuation time of oc-
cupants for full stairwell evacuation was observed to be governed by occupants walking
speed and not congestion in the stairwells, as was the case for Aarhus City Tower.
Only one OCE is installed in the base line configuration of the building which explain
the high evacuation times of scenario ”ES4”.
Results for scenario group ”EC” (Egress Capacity)
The evacuation time curve of occupants for ”Egress Capacity” scenarios for Den Hvide
Facet is presented in Figure 7.20.
Figure 7.20: Evacuation time curve for Den Hvide Facet for scenario group ”EC”
The same trends can again be observed between the two case-buildings. However, for
full stair evacuation where an additional central placed stairwell is installed (EC1), it is
observed that the curve has a steep increase in evacuation times for the last percentage
of evacuees. It is argued that this is due to the relatively slow walking profiles and the
high quantity of elderlies found in residential buildings; why scenario EC1 eventually
converges with base case one (EC-B1)
==PAGE:92==
82
7 Model Case Study
Results for scenario group ”H” (Human Behavioural Conditions)
The time evacuation curve of occupants for ”Human Behavioural Conditions” scenarios
for Den Hvide Facet is presented in Figure 7.21.
Figure 7.21: Evacuation time curve for Den Hvide Facet for scenario group ”H”
It is for this scenario group that the most significant deviation of the simulated evac-
uation times is observed between the two case-buildings. Here, it can be argued that
variations of human behavioural conditions are more impactful in evacuation events
where the influence of congestion on stairs have less influence on occupants evacuation
times compared to other factors such as walking speed. The influence of group move-
ment (H4), where all occupants in the group take the speed of the slowest occupant is,
for example, less notable in cases with high congestion in the stairwells as the evacuation
time of the group eventually will be governed by the flowrate on the stairs. Furthermore,
the smaller width of the emergency stair in Den Hvide Facet (1 meter) can increase the
impact of group movement as faster occupants can not overtake more slow-walking oc-
cupants unobstructed.
The lower congestion in the stairwell for Den Hvide Facet can also explain why the
evacuation time curve for the scenario where the pre-evacuation delay is omitted (H3)
is relatively linear, i.e., less unobstructed flow of occupants results in a more constant
evacuation rate.
It can further be observed that the evacuation time for the scenario where all elderly
and mobility impaired occupants are evacuated using the elevators (H5) is increased if
compared to the base case (H-B). As Den Hvide Facet and residential populations, in
==PAGE:93==
7.6 Simulation Results
83
general, have a high distribution of elderly and mobility impaired occupants (Section
7.3.3.3) it results in a high number of occupants that initially are modelled to utilize
the elevators to evacuate the building (for scenario H5). However, as the capacity of
the elevator systems is insufficient to transport all occupants to the ground floor before
the modelled maximum wait time on elevators have elapsed, it results in higher total
evacuation time of the building. Hence, it can be seen that the use of OCEs can increase
the evacuation times of building occupants if the capacity is insufficient. This effect
is especially critical for building populations with many elderly and mobility impaired
occupants due to their comparably slow walking speeds.
7.6.2
Cross-comparison
In this section, a more in-depth comparison between the simulation results of the two
case-buildings will be presented. The analysis will allow for a broader understanding of
the conditions that influence the potential suitability of firefighter’s lifts and occupant
evacuation lifts and how this can be linked to differences in the considered occupancy
types, building layouts and egress systems.
The section is divided into a cross-comparison of the influence emergency elevators have
on the access time of firefighters and the evacuation time of occupants, respectively.
7.6.2.1
Access Time of Firefighters
As previously mentioned, both case-buildings have been modelled with firefighters that
arrive on the fire scene after a set response time of 500 seconds (the national average
response time). Firefighters then continue to ascend the building until the middle of the
fire floor has been reached, which is assumed to be the top floor. Table 7.19 provides
information on the average time it takes the firefighters to reach the fire floor depending
on the scenario considered.
Table 7.19: Cross-comparison of the average time it takes firefighters to reach the fire
floor (highest floor level) after arriving on the fire scene. Firefighters are modelled to
enter the buildings from the main entrance after the response time has elapsed.
No.
Keyword Description
AAT
Average Access Time of
Firefighters to the Fire Floor
% AAT Lost Compared to Utilizing a
Firefighter’s Lift (scenario F-B)
Aarhus City Tower
Den Hvide Facet
Aarhus City Tower
Den Hvide Facet
F-B
Firefighter lift -
Base Case
168 s
132 s
-
-
F1
Firefighters on Stairs -
No Counterflow
501 s
433 s
198 %
228 %
F2
Firefighters on Stairs -
No Priority
940 s
493 s
460 %
274 %
F3
Firefighters on Stairs -
Priority
580 s
446 s
245 %
238 %
From the table, it can be seen that firefighter’s lifts provide access times that approx-
imately are between 200-460% and 230-270% faster than if firefighters are modelled to
==PAGE:94==
84
7 Model Case Study
ascend the building by utilizing the stairs (depending on the assumptions taken) for
Aarhus City Tower and Den Hvide Facet respectively.
It is further observed that the occurrence of counterflow between occupants and fire-
fighters in the stairwells increases the access time of firefighters for both case-buildings.
However, the influence of counterflow is found to be more significant for Aarhus City
Tower. In the time evacuation curves presented in Section 7.6.1.2 for Den Hvide Facet
it was found that most occupants have evacuated the building when firefighters arrive
on the fire scene; why lesser counterflow and congestion occurs in the stairwells for this
building. Contrary, will the increased occupant load and greater height of Aarhus City
Tower result in more congestion in the stairs, which amplifies the impact that counterflow
have on the simulated access time of firefighters.
7.6.2.2
Evacuation Times of Occupants
In this section, we compare the egress time of occupants for the two case-buildings. More
specifically, the total evacuation time of occupants, their average evacuation times and
the spread of their evacuation times, see Table 7.20.
Studies have found that the total evacuation time, where all evacuees have evacuated the
building, can be dependent on limitations inhered to a specific egress model [FNE07].
As different sub-models in Pathfinder are utilized to simulate the different scenarios
considered the evacuation times of the last percentage of evacuees can, therefore, be gov-
erned by the assumptions embedded in these sub-models. Furthermore, the evacuation
times of the last percentage of evacuees are less stable as their pre-evacuation delays
and speed profiles often are extreme due to the stochastic representation of these values.
Therefore, the evacuation time used as a reference for the total evacuation time is the
value corresponding to 98% of the evacuees.
From Table 7.20, we observe that the counterflow of firefighters in the stairwells (scenario
group F) negatively affect the average evacuation times of occupants with up to 8%. It
can further be seen that simultaneous evacuation strategies (e.g. ES1) can yield evacu-
ation rates that are 10 and 17% higher if compared to the optimized phased evacuation
strategy (ES3) for Aarhus City Tower and Den Hvide Facet, respectively.
==PAGE:95==
7.6 Simulation Results
85
Table 7.20: Cross-comparison of evacuation times for Aarhus City Tower (A) and Den
Hvide Facet (H) for the four scenario groups simulated. Data-points representing fire-
fighters are not included in this table. *Value corresponding to 98% of the evacuees.
No.
Keyword
Description
TET
Total Evacuation
Time*
APET
Average Personal
Evacuation Time
SPET
Standard Deviation
of Personal
Evacuation Times
% APET Saved
Compared to the Respective
Basecases (B)
A
H
A
H
A
H
A
H
F - Firefighter Operations
F-B
Firefighter’s lift -
Base Case
1083 s
699 s
488 s
331 s
294 s
196 s
-
-
F1
Firefighters on Stairs -
No Counterflow
1067 s
723 s
482 s
341 s
286 s
208 s
1 %
-3 %
F2
Firefighters on Stairs -
No Priority
1305 s
752 s
528 s
340 s
312 s
208 s
-8 %
-3 %
F3
Firefighters on Stairs -
Priority
1142 s
765 s
529 s
336 s
355 s
211 s
-8 %
-1.5 %
ES - Evacuation Strategies
ES-B
Stairs Only -
Base Case
1063 s
723 s
482 s
333 s
286 s
203 s
-
-
ES1
OCE + Stairs
1073 s
699 s
448 s
316 s
285 s
191 s
7 %
5 %
ES2
ES1 + Phased -
Top-down
1598 s
928 s
1005 s
676 s
360 s
175 s
-109 %
-103 %
ES3
ES1 + Phased -
Grouped
1110 s
772 s
497 s
373 s
311 s
234 s
-3 %
-12 %
ES4
OCE Only
1968 s
1903 s
1097 s
1101 s
633 s
560 s
-128 %
-230 %
ES5
OCE + Stairs -
Optimized
792 s
605 s
377 s
295 s
211 s
167 s
22 %
11 %
EC - Egress Capacity
EC-B1
EC-B2
EC-B1
EC-B2
EC-B1
Stairs Only -
Base Case
1063 s
723 s
482 s
333 s
286 s
203 s
-
-
-
-
EC-B2
OCE + Stairs -
Base Case
1073 s
699 s
448 s
316 s
285 s
191 s
-
-
-
-
EC1
One additional stair
787 s
704 s
364 s
294 s
205 s
184 s
24 %
19 %
12 %
7 %
EC2
OCE Only -
25 % cap. increase
1497 s
1352 s
832 s
824 s
463 s
416 s
-73 %
-86 %
-147 %
-160 %
EC3
OCE Only -
High-Speed
1254 s
1005 s
698 s
635 s
384 s
297 s
-45 %
-56 %
-91 %
-101 %
EC4
High-Speed OCE +
Stairs - Optimized
684 s
588 s
340 s
295 s
181 s
156 s
29 %
24 %
11 %
7 %
EC5
OCE + Stairs -
25 % Cap. Increase
1039 s
698 s
442 s
321 s
279 s
194 s
8 %
1 %
4 %
-1.5 %
H - Human Behavioural Conditions
H-B
OCE + Stairs -
Base Case
1073 s
699 s
448 s
316 s
285 s
203 s
-
-
H1
OCE + Stair -
Ultd. Wait Time
993 s
719 s
431 s
323 s
265 s
198 s
4 %
-2 %
H2
OCE + Stair -
10 Min. Wait Time
1025 s
700 s
436 s
324 s
274 s
199 s
3 %
-3 %
H3
OCE + Stair -
No Pre-movement
Period
1043 s
595 s
407 s
249 s
297 s
186 s
9 %
21 %
H4
OCE + Stair -
Group Movement
1080 s
771 s
459 s
372 s
305 s
231 s
-2 %
-18 %
H5
OCE + Stairs -
Elderly & Impaired
OCE Only
1108 s
809 s
463 s
359 s
289 s
222 s
-3 %
-13 %
In general, we note that the combined use of stairs and occupant evacuation elevators
(e.g. ES1 and EC5) can result in lower average evacuation times if compared to full
stairwell evacuation (e.g. ES-B). The increase in evacuation rates is more prominent
for Aarhus City Tower as this building both are taller and have higher occupant load
per floor area than Den Hvide Facet. Furthermore, the increase is more considerable
for both case-buildings in the hypothetical scenario where an optimized distribution is
==PAGE:96==
86
7 Model Case Study
utilized (ES5). This indicates that there could be a potential business case in employ-
ing occupant evacuation elevators in terms of lives saved - if more occupants could be
persuaded to use the systems during fire events.
It can further be noted that strategies where full elevator evacuation is utilized (e.g.
ES4) yield average evacuation times that are up to 128% and 230% slower if compared
to the base case (ES-B) for Aarhus City Tower and Den Hvide Facet respectively. As
expected, the evacuation times for full elevator evacuation can be optimized if the ca-
pacity of the systems is increased (EC2) or if high-speed elevators are adopted (EC3).
By installing an additional stairwell (EC1) compared to the base case configuration (EC-
B1), the average evacuation times can be improved with 24% and 12% for Aarhus City
Tower and Den Hvide Facet, respectively. These results are approximately equal to the
results obtained when a hypothetical distribution of occupants to elevators and stairs
is utilized (ES5). If high-speed elevators alternatively are used for the hypothetical sce-
nario (EC4) the average evacuation times can be improved to 29% and 11% if matched
to full stairwell evacuation in the baseline configuration (EC-B1) for Aarhus City Tower
and Den Hvide Facet, respectively.
Concerning modifications in human behavioural conditions (scenario group H), we find
that the influence of social bonds between occupants (H4) has a neglectable influence
on the evacuation times for Aarhus City Tower. This could be because the stairwells
already act as the bottleneck for the associated base case (H-B). Furthermore, only the
bonds existing between hotel and residential occupants are considered, the inclusion of
social bonds between office occupants could, therefore, alter the obtained results. For
Den Hvide Facet, we find that the occurrence of social bonds negatively affects the simu-
lated average evacuation time with 18%. This is mainly because of the comparably high
number of occupants with slow speed profiles. Hence, occupants in a movement group
take the speed of the slowest occupant in that group.
Lastly, it can be observed that increased waiting time on the elevators (H1 and H2)
both can have a negatively and positively impact on the simulated average evacuation
times of occupants. Hence, increased waiting times of occupants is only favourable if
the capacity of the OCEs is sufficient enough to transport occupants to the ground floor
before they reroute towards the stairs.
==PAGE:97==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
In the present study we have successfully employed the egress model Pathfinder to study
the effectiveness of emergency elevators by simulating twenty different evacuation sce-
narios for two high-rise buildings in Denmark; namely, Aarhus City Tower and Den
Hvide Facet. Subdividing the analysis into four evacuation scenario groups have allowed
for an isolated understanding of how variations among conditions in these groups can
affect both the simulated evacuation times of occupants and the access time of fire-
fighters. The cross-comparison between the two case-buildings allows for a validation of
the simulation results within our current understanding and theoretical basis, and for
an understanding of how the yielded outcomes can be linked to differences in building
height, egress design and building layout, demographics along with the distribution and
quantity of occupants.
Careful consideration to model input calibration, selection of egress model, variations of
simulation results between consecutive runs of the same scenario (convergence), selec-
tion of evacuation scenarios and adoption of relevant case-buildings have been given in
this study. However, despite these efforts is the overall usability of the yielded simula-
tion results still governed by the embedded assumptions taken concerning these factors.
Therefore, it is crucial to discuss these factors in the context of the obtained simulation
results along with the current knowledge existing within the fire safety community, in-
cluding the known unknowns. It should be noted that careful selection of parameters
and assumptions does not necessarily equal a better representation of reality due to
theoretical simplifications and the stochastic nature of human behaviour. Yet, it allows
for a thorough theoretical analysis between egress components.
Before the work of the presented study is discussed, it should furthermore be noted
that other factors than fire safety and life safety in terms of the yielded evacuation
times can influence the perceived feasibility of emergency elevators. Such factors, for
example, include economy, technical requirements, building layout, maintenance and the
public perception of emergency elevators. While these additional factors are not directly
included in the present study, they should be accounted for when comparing emergency
elevators against alternative egress components.
8.1
General Remarks
The two case-buildings simulated, broadly represent the high-rise buildings that cur-
rently exist and are under construction in Denmark except for tall healthcare facilities
==PAGE:98==
88
8 Discussion
such as hospitals as these buildings call for further attention to the evacuation of mobil-
ity disabled patients and the associated evacuation strategies [Wik20]. The analyses of
Aarhus City Tower is representative for both hotel and office buildings where congestion
in the stairwells occur under evacuation events. In contrast, is the analyses of Den Hvide
Facet more representative for apartment buildings with lighter occupant loads and where
the evacuation times mainly are governed by occupants with slow speed profiles.
The egress model applied (Pathfinder) for the simulation of the two case-buildings con-
sidered in this study directly affect the yielded simulation outcomes due to the inherent
assumptions embedded in the model. Previous studies comparing Pathfinder with the
fine network model STEPS, which is one of the few other egress models that alterna-
tively could have been applied in this study, found that the variance of evacuation times
between the models was most significant for the last percentage of evacuees. Pathfinder
was furthermore found to be the most conservative of the two models [RN14]. There-
fore, it can be expected that the adoption of another egress model would yield other
simulation results for the twenty evacuation scenarios considered. Hence, the adoption
of a different egress model could potentially affect the conclusions and observations of
this study regarding the yielded evacuation results - mainly for the last percentage of
evacuees [FNE07]. Likewise is the assumptions embedded in the different sub-models
within Pathfinder (e.g. no representation of fatigue) influencing the yielded evacuation
time curves for the considered scenarios. This influence is most substantial among sce-
narios where completely different sub-models are utilized, such as between full stairwell
evacuation and full elevator evacuation.
Another assumption affecting the yielded evacuation times is the distribution of occu-
pants on different floors. For this study, multiple runs of the same evacuation scenario
were performed until a set acceptance criterion was met. For each run, the occupant
load was kept constant on the separate floors, but the distribution of occupants on
these floors was randomized. It is recognized, that rooms or group of rooms often are
designed to hold a specific number of occupants such as a single person office or a four-
room apartment. Yet, it is argued that the distribution of occupants on floors should
not be confined to these rooms as other more critical arrangements can occur. For ex-
ample, a number of occupants could be located in the hallway, visiting the neighbour
or a family of four could be playing a game of cards in a two-person hotel room when
the fire alarm is activated.
The stochastic representation of occupant profiles likewise provides a broader represen-
tation of the human behaviour that can be expected between evacuation events and
building populations.
The Monte Carlo Simulation presented in Figure 8.1 for scenario A_ES-B show that
different occupant positions on floor levels along with variations in the modelled pre-
evacuation delays and walking speeds of occupants, within the defined distributions
(Section 7.3.3), indeed affect the yielded evacuating times between multiple runs of the
==PAGE:99==
8.1 General Remarks
89
same scenario. Hence, one simulation of each scenario is not representative of all possible
simulation outcomes; which stretches the importance of conducting convergence between
modelling results of consecutive runs. From Figure 8.2 it can be noted that the average
travel distance of occupants is approximately equal between consecutive runs of the same
scenario, which indicates that the choice of egress route (e.g. using one stairwell over
another) have a higher influence on the evacuation time of occupants than the distance
travelled.
Figure 8.1: Monte Carlo Simulation of the completion time of all occupants for full
stairwell evacuation of Aarhus City Tower (A_ES-B). y = completion time of occupants
(s), x = jth run of the evacuation scenario
Figure 8.2: Monte Carlo Simulation of the travel distances of all occupants for full
stairwell evacuation of Aarhus City Tower (A_ES-B). y = travel distance of occupants
(m), x = jth run of the evacuation scenario
==PAGE:100==
90
8 Discussion
8.2
Results
The yielded simulation results show that full elevator evacuation (scenario ES4) provides
the highest evacuation times compared to any of the other scenarios considered for both
case-buildings. However, the increase in evacuation times between full stairwell evacua-
tion and full elevator evacuation is decreased for the taller case-building (Aarhus City
Tower). The observation that full elevator evacuation becomes more feasible in terms of
increased evacuation rates for greater building heights is highlighted by previous simu-
lation studies, e.g., the case studies presented in Table 4.1.
Results concerning the installation of an additional emergency stairwell (scenario EC1)
present average evacuation times that are lower than the use of one and two stairs (e.g.
ES-B) for Den Hvide Facet and Aarhus City Tower, respectively. The combined use
of both stairs and elevators (ES1) also yields average evacuation times that are lower
if compared to full stairwell evacuation (ES-B); however, the average evacuation time
is 7-19% greater than those simulated when installing an additional staircase in the
case-buildings (EC1). Therefore, it is found that the implementation of OCEs for the
considered case-buildings not is an equal alternative compared to adding an additional
stairwell to improve the evacuation times of occupants in the two case-buildings unless
more occupants are willing to use the lifts. In fact, the hypothetical distribution of
occupants to stairs and elevators (ES5), where optimization was sought, show that the
combined use of stairs and elevators can yield approximately equal evacuation times to
those simulated by installing an additional stair - if all occupants on the top floors uti-
lize the elevator systems during evacuation events. Aligned with previous studies, it is
likewise noted that the combined usage of stairs and elevators becomes more beneficial
for taller buildings. This indicates that OCEs can be an equal alternative compared to
installing extra stairs if the height of the building is significant enough. This confirms
the exclusion included in the International Building Code (2018) that allow OCEs to be
installed as an alternative solution to the otherwise required 3rd stairwell for buildings
over 128 meters [BT18].
The present study also found that increasing the capacity of OCEs if both stair and
elevator evacuation is utilized (EC5 versus EC-B2) only have a negligible impact on the
yielded evacuation times due to the low willingness among occupants to utilize the lifts.
Hence, increasing the capacity and number of OCEs is only relevant if a higher percent-
age of a building population (preferable on the top floors) use the elevators during an
evacuation event.
Currently, the Danish Fire Safety Codes do not directly require the number of stairs to
be installed in high-rise buildings [Tra19]. There is, therefore, a need to evaluate the pos-
sible implementation of such requirements and to discuss if other egress component(s)
such as OCEs can be used as an alternative or supplement to emergency stairwells. How-
ever, this study also found that the use of OCEs can lead to increased evacuation times
==PAGE:101==
8.2 Results
91
for the last percentage of evacuees if occupants reroute from the elevators to the stairs
due to long waiting times. We know from Chapter 5, that the effectiveness of strategies
employing OCEs are directly linked to the information provided to occupants as this
can affect their willingness to use and wait for the lifts. Studies have for example found
that occupants perception of time passed is not accurate in emergency situations unless
real-time information is relayed which could lead to decreased waiting time on eleva-
tors. Furthermore, the present study indicate that an increased maximum waiting time
on lifts and an increased willingness among occupants significantly affect the potential
feasibility of elevators. Hence, the consideration to elevators as a possible egress com-
ponent should, therefore, include discussions of information systems and strategies that
can be implemented to allow occupants to make timely and informative decisions on
which egress component(s) to utilize during emergency events. This could, for example,
be boards displaying the estimated waiting time on lifts per floor level or information
boards and posters pertaining to the safety features that are employed in the design
of the emergency elevator systems. The latter could increase the perception of safety
among occupants towards the use of lifts during fire events as shown by Heyes [HS09].
This study further indicates that the suitability of occupant evacuation elevators is not
only dependent on building height but also other building-specific conditions such as
occupant load and building use (occupancy types); which also should be taken into ac-
count by legislators. The higher occupant load of hotel and office buildings compared to
residential buildings seems to result in increased congestion of occupants in the stairwells
if full stair evacuation is employed. Hence, the combined usage of stairs and elevators
could result in less congestion in the stairwells, which could lead to increased evacuation
rates. The contrary is found for residential buildings where the lighter occupant load
makes the yielded evacuation times more dependent on the walking speed of occupants
due to low congestion in the stairs. Hence, for residential buildings, it is more important
to ensure that it is occupants with slow walking speeds that are evacuated out using the
OCEs.
Furthermore, the higher pre-evacuation delay in residential buildings compared to office
buildings can result in more severe conditions for utilizing OCEs due to increased fire
development. However, this can be mitigated by placing the emergency elevators in
protected lobbies, see Figure 3.3. Experience also shows that it is simpler to conduct
regular fire drills, employ fire wardens and get occupants to follow evacuation procedures
for office buildings compared to residential buildings (Chapter 5). This can directly in-
fluence how many occupants that utilize OCEs during emergencies and thus increase
the potential feasibility of the system.
Simultaneous evacuation strategies seem more favourable than phased evacuation strate-
gies if the evacuation time curves, the average evacuation times of occupants or the to-
tal evacuation times are directly compared. A simultaneous evacuation strategy for the
combined use of stairs and elevators (ES-B), for example, yielded average evacuation
times that were 10% and 17% more favourable if compared to the optimized phased
==PAGE:102==
92
8 Discussion
evacuation strategy (ES3) for Aarhus City Tower and Den Hvide Facet, respectively.
However, the phased evacuation strategies will result in lower required safe egress time
of occupants placed on the highest floors. If consideration to fire confinement due to
compartmentation of the building is given, phased strategies could become favourable
over simultaneous evacuation strategies. Nonetheless, this calls for further analyses by
simulating the fire spread for different fire scenarios and comparing the calculated avail-
able safe egress times of individual floor levels with the simulated required safe egress
time of that floor.
Firefighters elevators were found to improve both the access time of firefighters and the
evacuation rate of occupants significantly as counterflow could be avoided. The exact
improvement is depended on the assumptions taken. Yet, it is evident that the effect is
more significant for taller buildings with greater evacuation times due to the expected
response time of the fire department. While the Danish Fire Safety Code does require
the installation of minimum one FE for high-rise buildings, this study stretches the im-
portance of ensuring that these systems are functional and the benefit of separating the
flow of occupants from firefighters. For tall high-rise buildings where the evacuation
time is extra critical, it could be beneficial to install multiple firefighters elevators to
enhance the system redundancy.
In the present study occupants with mobility impairments are included in the simulation
of all the considered evacuation scenarios. Nevertheless, the simplistic manner in which
these occupants are represented in the egress model (with a reduced speed profile) is a
significant limitation to note. Hence, no consideration is given to the geometric represen-
tation of occupants using walkers, canes or other walking assist devices. Furthermore,
other disabilities that can affect the evacuation of building populations are not consid-
ered, such as hearing disorders, visual impairments, mental disorders and alcohol abuse.
It should lastly be noted that the cross-comparison between Aarhus City Tower and
Den Hvide Facet have allowed for validation of the simulation results within a theoret-
ical understanding. However, the representation of human behaviour (walking speed,
pre-evacuation delay, et cetera) is based on a limited number of data-points that have
been obtained by studying other buildings that might not be representative of the case-
buildings considered.
8.3
Future Research
The simulation work of this study showed that an optimized hypothetical distribution
of occupants to stairs and elevators (EC4) resulted in the most effective evacuation time
curves for the two case-buildings studied. It is known that different message strategies
can increase occupants willingness to utilize and wait on elevators as a mean of evacu-
ation (Chapter 5); however, the specific effect is unknown. Hence, there is a need to
==PAGE:103==
8.3 Future Research
93
further investigate the interconnection between human behaviour, information systems,
and elevator evacuation. In this context, it is, for example, relevant to study how peri-
odic fire drills, availability of staff, display screens showing the expected waiting time on
elevators, and pre-recorded voice instructions can encourage evacuees to use and wait
on elevators. Additionally, there is a need to study how this variate among occupancy
types and demographics as well as investigating if this is influenced by stimuli to fire
conditions such as smoke, flames, and heat radiation. It would also be of interest to
study how the individual’s choice of egress route in regards to elevator evacuation is
influenced by the observed actions taken by other occupants.
Furthermore, this study highlights the lack of data-sets concerning occupants decision-
making process in the case of combined use of egress components (stairs and elevators).
The behaviour is represented in the study by proposing a calibration based on data-sets
from Heyes (2009) and Jönsson et al. (2012); however, this representation is in incon-
sistency with the data-sets provided by Kinsey (2011), see Figure 7.8. Furthermore, as
most of the existing data-sets on occupants willingness to use elevators are based on
survey studies, there is a need to further investigate this by studying both unannounced
and announced fire drills or even real fire incidents.
The study of Aarhus City Tower and Den Hvide Facet, that collectively include office,
hotel, residential and assembly occupancy, provide a broad representation of the config-
urations that exist among the few taller high-rise buildings in Denmark except for health
care facilities. The yielded results of this paper are in line with what has been found in
existing studies. It is therefore argued that additional simulation studies investigating a
broader range of building heights and configurations for buildings in Denmark regarding
the suitability of emergency elevators will not provide a better representation of real-
ity due to our lack of understanding of human behaviour concerning elevator evacuation.
Currently, there is instead a need to verify the accuracy of existing simulation studies by
comparing it to real circumstances. In the context of this study, it could be by examining
evacuation drills of Aarhus City Tower and Den Hvide facet where occupants will be
allowed to use both stairs and elevators as a mean of evacuation.
==PAGE:104==
94
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
Emergency elevators are becoming more widely adopted around the world to enhance
the safety of occupants during fire evacuation of tall high-rise buildings. Studies on the
matter have been ongoing for almost three decades, recently with a particular focus on
evacuation of mobility impaired occupants and occupants willingness to use and wait
on elevator evacuation. Most of these studies found that a combination of stairs and
elevators resulted in the fastest evacuation time of occupants for the studied buildings,
and that this effect was proportionally increasing with building height. However, re-
search gaps exist for high-rise buildings under 150 meters as most of the current case
studies that included occupants willingness to use occupant evacuation elevators inves-
tigated hypothetical skyscrapers (>150 meters). This thesis has, therefore, pertained to
investigating the efficiency of implementing emergency elevators in high-rise buildings in
Denmark, as these high-rise structures have a more moderate height. To do this, twenty
different evacuation scenarios were simulated for two existing buildings which included
an 84-meter tall commercial building with mainly hotel, office and conference facilities
and a 57-meter tall residential complex.
Five research questions were established for this thesis (see Section 1.1); these will be
answered separately in the following.
Research question 1
How is the evacuation times for full stair evacuation of high-
rise buildings affected by the counterflow between firefighters and occupants, and does the
implementation of firefighter’s lifts influence this?
The obtained results show that the occurrence of counterflow between occupants and
firefighters on the stairs can decrease the average personal evacuation time of occupants
with up to 9 % compared to none-counterflow situations. The effect was found to only
significantly affect the taller of the two-case buildings due to its comparably larger av-
erage evacuation times of occupants in combination with the national average response
time of the fire department (500 seconds). Furthermore, it was found that if occupants
do not provide space for firefighters in contraflow situations (mainly on the stairs), it
can result in a higher total evacuation time of the building. With the implementation
of firefighter’s lifts, the occurrence of counterflow in the stairs can largely be avoided.
Research question 2
How is the evacuation times of high-rise buildings affected by
the implementation of occupant evacuation elevators (OCEs) if combined with different
evacuation strategies compared to current evacuation practices?
==PAGE:106==
96
9 Conclusion
The model case study (chapter 7) shows that the average personal evacuation time can
be improved between 5-7% if occupants use a combination of stairs and elevators to
evacuate the two case-buildings compared to stair evacuation alone. The increase in
efficiency is only obtained when a simultaneous evacuation of the building is assumed.
However, it is observed from the egress simulations that a phased evacuation strategy
can result in a comparably faster evacuation of the fire floor, although the exact influence
has not been studied in detail. The combined use of stairs and OCEs does not seem to
influence the total evacuation time of the two case-buildings significantly.
It is also shown that full elevator evacuation of the two case-buildings yield average evac-
uation times that is between 128-230% higher compared to full stair evacuation; why
this is not a suitable strategy.
If a hypothetical distribution of occupants to stairs and elevators are utilized, the per-
sonal evacuation time of occupants can be improved between 11-22% compared to full
stair evacuation. The greatest increase in effeciency is observed for the taller of the
two case-buildings. This indicates that OCEs can significantly reduce the evacuation
times of occupants if more occupants could be persuaded to utilize the systems during a
fire evacuation. One of the methods to achieve this is to employ better information sys-
tems that will allow occupants to make timely and informed decisions (see Section 5.5.4).
Research question 3
What role does the capacity of vertical egress components have
on the potential suitability of OCEs for high-rise buildings in terms of the simulated
evacuation times?
Overall it can be concluded that the observed efficiency of using a combination of stairs
and elevators to evacuate a high-rise building is not notably influenced by increasing the
capacity of the passenger elevators. The capacity of the elevators is only influential if
more occupants can be persuaded to utilize elevators as a mean of evacuation.
The installation of an additional emergency stairwell in both case-buildings (compared
to the current configurations) increase the efficiency of the evacuation of occupants be-
yond what can be achieved by using a combination of stairs and elevators - unless a
hypothetical distribution of occupants to stairs and elevators are utilized.
Research question 4
What role do variations in human behavioural conditions have
on the potential suitability of OCEs for high-rise buildings in terms of the simulated
evacuation times?
It can be concluded that the efficiency of the combined use of stairs and elevators can
be enhanced if the time occupants are willing to wait on elevators is increased. How-
ever, increasing occupants maximum waiting time on lifts can also negatively affect the
efficiency of the aforementioned approach if the capacity of the occupant evacuation
==PAGE:107==
9 Conclusion
97
elevators is insufficient. It can further be concluded that it is especially critical to en-
sure that mobility-impaired and elderly (age 50+) occupants that initially are willing
to evacuate by the elevators can do so before they reroute towards the stairs. For the
residential case-building, it was found that if all elderly and mobility-impaired occupants
were modelled to be willing to utilize the OCEs initially, it would result in a decrease in
efficiency of 13% due to insufficient capacity of the OCEs.
Lastly, it can be concluded that the occurrence of group movement among occupants
evacuating can increase the evacuation time of high-rise residential buildings. This is
mainly the result of two factors; the lighter occupant load (almost no congestion in
stairs) and the high number of elderly and mobility impaired occupants. Because of
these factors, it can also be concluded that for residential buildings, it is important
to ensure that it is occupants with slow walking profiles that are evacuated out of the
building if OCEs are implemented. Contrary, for commercial buildings, it is more im-
portant to ensure that a high number of occupants (regardless of their demographics) is
evacuated out using the OCEs as the evacuation time in the commercial case-building
was observed to be governed by the congestion of occupants in the stairs.
Research question 5
What impact does the implementation of firefighter’s elevators
have on the access time of firefighters for high-rise buildings compared to evacuation
events where lifts are disabled for all users?
It can be concluded that the implementation of firefighter’s lifts provide access times
that approximately are between 200-460% and 230-270% faster than if firefighters are
modelled to ascend the building by utilizing the stairs (depending on the assumptions
taken) for the commercial case-building and the residential case-building, respectively.
Hence, the impact of firefighter’s lifts is more influential for taller buildings with higher
occupant load.
==PAGE:108==
98
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX A
Supporting Data Tables
This appendix provides supplement data that partially or wholly have been used in the
model case study to aid in the input calibration of the egress model (Section 7.3.3).
A.1
Occupant Load
The occupant load along with a description of area use for Aarhus City Tower and Den
Hvide Facet is provided in Table A.1 and Table A.2 respectively.
Table A.1: Area use of Aarhus City Tower along with the proposed occupant load of
each of the modelled building levels.
Level
Floor Description
Proposed Occupant Load
Per Floor (No.)
1
Hotel lobby, conference facilities and a bar
96
2
Conference facilities
260
3-6 & 8-13
Hotel rooms; 19 double rooms and 5 single
rooms on each storey
43
7
Engineering floor (mechanical, electrical
and plumbing)
0
14-16
Office space (company 1) connected with
open internal stairwells
40
17-20
Office space (company 2) connected with
open internal stairwells
40
21
Meeting rooms and a canteen with space
to 54 people (company 1)
94
22
Meeting rooms and a canteen with space
to 60 people (company 2). Aditionally part
of the penthouse
149
23
Residential housing (penthouse) that is
openly connected with the housing section
on level 22
4
Total
1313
==PAGE:110==
100
A Supporting Data Tables
Table A.2: Area use of Den Hvide Facet along with the proposed occupant load of each
of the modelled building levels.
Level
Floor Description
Proposed Occupant Load
Per Floor (No.)
1-4
Office Space
30
5-15
Residential apartments
14
16
Residential apartments and two roof terraces
14
17
One residential apartment (penthouse)
4
Total
292
.
A.2
Pre-evacuation Data
This section provides data tables that have been used to elaborate the pre-evacuation
distributions for assembly, hotel and residential occupancy that are presented in Sec-
tion 7.3.3.2. The tables include the following terms: Unannounced Drill (UD); Partial
Unannounced Drill (P-UD); Announced Drills (AD); Semi-Announced Drills (SAD);
Fire Incidents (FI); Sirens, bells, and horns (AL); T3 fire alarm systems (T3); Live voice
notifications (LV); and Prerecorded voice notifications (PV).
Figure A.1: Pre-evacuation data for assembly occupancy. Obtained from [Lov+19].
aData converted from graphical to digital form
.
==PAGE:111==
A.2 Pre-evacuation Data
101
Figure A.2: Pre-evacuation data for hotel occupancy. Obtained from [Lov+19].
**Experiment took place on a single floor.
Figure A.3: Pre-evacuation data for residential occupancy. Obtained from [Lov+19].
aEarly morning.
bPoor performance of the alarm system.
==PAGE:112==
102
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX B
Characteristics of Fires in
High-rise Buildings
High-rise buildings are often constructed with many vertical shafts such as stairways,
elevator shafts, pipe shafts and air passages. If appropriate fire-protection measures
such as fire separation are not thoroughly addressed, these shafts can become towering
chimneys where plumes and smoke as the result of air buoyancy are aided to spread
between building floors (stack effect) [LZZ12; Shi+14]. This is particularly the case for
buildings with significant fire loads such as libraries, office buildings but also residential
complexes. Because of the considerable fire load, once it catches fire at one level, the
combustion can spread quickly and reach untenable conditions. The horizontal speed of
smoke spread in the initial stage of the fire is around 0.3 m/s and may increase to 0.5-4
m/s as the fire grows. As a result of this phenomenon, the smoke spread can diffuse to
the top floors within minutes even for buildings hundred of meters tall [LZZ12]. In ad-
dition, fire can spread externally on the building if it breaks out of windows or blasts its
way through failed wall panels. Here the Coanda effect along with wind speed/pressure
will aid in the vertical spread of the fire [NOG20]. Lastly, the fire spread can be assisted
in its growth by internal pressure differences and airflow (ventilation effect) [LZZ12].
When a building is on fire a evacuation process is usually initiated at the time of detec-
tion. As briefly touched upon, this process can be especially tricky in high-rise structures
due to the following reasons: 1) The vertical distance to be traveled by occupants is often
significant 2) Relative few designated egress ways in high-rise buildings 3) Rapid smoke
spread can decrease visibility in the stairways (stack effect) 4) Longer response time of
fire service personnel due to equipment limitations 5) Cumbersome for the fire response
team to control the exterior fire spread [Dep14; LZZ12].
The stack-, coanda and ventilation effect mentioned above is presented in the context of
the Grenfell Tower fire in Figure B.1.
==PAGE:114==
104
B Characteristics of Fires in High-rise Buildings
Figure B.1: Stack-, coanda and ventilation effect illustrated in the context of the Grenfell
Tower fire. Obtained from [The17].
.
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX C
Fire Damage
Fire damage can often be generalized from two aspects; loss of life and loss of properties
[LZZ12]. For the purpose of focusing on evacuation means we shall consider the loss of
human life.
Loss of life during fire outbreaks can be the result of numerous factors such as failure of
fire detection, structural collapse, falling objects, radiation and exposure to toxic gases
and smoke [LZZ12]. Even though experience and incidents indicate that the risk of loss
are reduced for fires in high-rise buildings compared with one in low-rise buildings due
to more sufficient fire safety measures [Pér16], all stakeholders have common interest in
mitigating the risks.
Smoke inhalation also technically know as asphyxiation is the most frequent cause of
human loss by fire. Related to this phenomenon is the inhalation of hot gases near
the source of the fire where temperatures often are higher than 1000 degrees centigrade.
Inhalation of high concentrations of toxic gases such as CO can also cause rapid death,
while lower levels can cause lack of coordination ability. There is also the possibility that
fires can cause low oxygen concentrations, which ultimately can lead to death [Sch14].
Smoke and heat can furthermore irritate the upper respiratory tract and eyes which
can hinder or lessen occupants ability to escape. Then there is the possibility to get
caught by flames and risk significant injuries which ultimately causes death.
While
a lower probability of death and injury is directly associated with falling building ob-
jects, it can cause blockage of egress ways that can lead to entrapped occupants [LZZ12].
C.0.1
Fire Deaths in Denmark
From 2010 to 2017 there was on average around 6,400 building fires in Denmark - 5,400
of which was in residential complexes and the remaining 1,000 in commercial and public
buildings. Around 2,580 of the residential building fires occurred in single-family houses
and 1,860 in apartment houses - the remaining occurred in greenhouses, summerhouses
or colony garden houses. Many of the fires included in the above numbers were small
and could thus often be extinguished without the assistance of firefighters; however,
the yearly average loss of human life was still around 66 [Sty18]. No specific data for
high-rise building fires in Denmark currently exist.
==PAGE:116==
106
C Fire Damage
The number of fire deaths in Denmark compared to the other Nordic countries are
presented in Figure C.1.
Figure C.1: Deaths due to injuries from fires in the Nordic countries (2010-2018). Elab-
orated from [Nor18]
Table C.1 shows the number of fire death in Denmark from 2014-2017 along with the
percentage of these occupants that were affected by different factors that could have
impacted their ability to bring themselves to safety during the fire incident.
Age Group
0-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79
80-89
90+
Physical disability
5.9 %
21.7 %
16.7 %
37.9 %
55.1 %
64.4 %
71.4 %
- Mobility impaired
5.9 %
21.7 %
9.5 %
31.0 %
36.7 %
48.9 %
35.7 %
- Wheelchair User
-
-
7.1 %
6.9 %
16.3 %
13.3 %
35.7 %
- visually impaired
-
-
-
-
2.0 %
2,2 %
-
Addict (drug or alcohol)
11.8 %
52.2 %
31.0 %
20.7 %
6.1 %
-
-
Cognitive impairment
/ mentally ill
11.8 %
13.0 %
14.3 %
13.8 %
10.2 %
17.8 %
-
Number in the age group
17
23
42
58
49
45
14
Table C.1: Share of critical factors per age group of fire deaths in Denmark, 2014-2017
(N = 248). Elaborated from [Sty18]
==PAGE:117==
APPENDIX D
Danish Fire Safety Code -
Evacuation
This appendix is based on the executive order on building regulations 2018 (BR18) Chap-
ter 5 - Fire [Tra19]. Code requirements related to the evacuation of high-rise buildings,
in particular egress means, will be presented in edited format.
Regarding the evacuation of buildings, the regulations overall state that structures which
are constructed with occupiable floors must be safe for persons in case of a fire outbreak
and that this standard must be upheld in the entire useful lifespan of the building.
Furthermore, this need to be executed with due consideration to the building use such
that:
1. safe evacuation of persons in and around the building is possible
2. rescue personnel have secure options for searching for and rescuing persons and
options for carrying out the extinguishing measures which are necessary in order
to search for and rescue persons and limit the spreading of the fire
3. structures and installation have sufficient fire safety in relation to their location
and use
4. occupants ability to bring themselves into safety unassisted
To ensure a sufficient level of fire protection within buildings, the fire regulations specify
that structures should be divided into building sections with comparable fire risks. All
these building sections must be referred to an application category (category of use) and
a risk class.
For high-rise buildings, the relevant risk classes are three and four, where class three is
for buildings between 22 and 45 meters and class four for buildings above 45 meters. The
application category is determined based on factors specific to the characteristics and
functions of the occupants in the building; hence the building use. A brief description
of the application categories relevant for this study is provided below:
Application category 1 includes building sections for daily use, where the occupants
staying in the building section all have knowledge of the escape routes and are capable
==PAGE:118==
108
D Danish Fire Safety Code - Evacuation
of bringing themselves to safety
Application category 3 includes building sections for daily use for many persons,
where the occupants staying in the building section do not necessarily have knowledge
of the escape routes but are capable of bringing themselves to safety
Application category 4 includes building sections with sleeping facilities, where the
occupants staying in the building section all have knowledge of the escape routes and
are capable of bringing themselves to safety
Application category 5 includes building sections with sleeping facilities, where the
occupants staying in the building section do not necessarily have knowledge of the escape
routes but are capable of bringing themselves to safety
Specific to the design of egress routes and its components it is stated that the design,
planning and construction of egress routes must be carried out with consideration to:
1. Individuals knowledge of the egress routes in the building
2. The possibility to easy use and identify egress routes
3. The opportunity and ability of individuals to use the egress routes in the building
4. That critical temperatures, smoke concentrations, heat radiation or similar crit-
ical conditions will not occur before the time when egress routes are needed for
evacuation
If elevators, escalators or non-traditional ways of egress is included in the egress routes,
it is necessary to ensure that they do not block or otherwise impede with the evacuation
process [Dan16].
==PAGE:119==
Bibliography
[Aar20]
Aarhus Kommune. Project Documents for the Construction of Aarhus City
Tower. 2020. url: https://minejendom.aarhus.dk/ByggesagErhverv/
Vis/330315.
[ABS04]
ABS. Housing and Lifestyle: High Rise Living. Technical report. Australian
Bureau of Statistics, 2004.
[Ahr16]
Marty Ahrens. High-Rise Building Fires. Technical report. 2016. url: www.
nfpa.org/osds.
[AMO06]
Heni Ben Amor, Jan Murray, and Oliver Obst. “Fast, Neat, and Under
Control: Arbitrating Between Steering Behaviors”. In: s. In: Rabin S (ed)
Proceedings of the AI Game Programming Wisdom 3 (2006), pages 221–
232.
[ANE16]
Kristin Andrée, Daniel Nilsson, and Joakim Eriksson. “Evacuation experi-
ments in a virtual reality high-rise building: Exit choice and waiting time for
evacuation elevators”. In: Fire and Materials 40.4 (June 2016), pages 554–
567. issn: 10991018. doi: 10.1002/fam.2310.
[Ant19]
John Antona. Occupant Evacuation Elevators. 2019. url: https://www.
elevatorbooks.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/EW0715.pdf.
[Ave+05]
J. Averill et al. “Occupant Behavior, Egress, and Emergency Communica-
tion. Federal Building and Fire Safety Investigation of the World Trade
Center Disaster (NIST NCSTAR 1-7)”. In: (January 2005).
[Ave11]
J D Averill. “Five Grand Challenges in Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynam-
ics BT - Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics”. In: edited by Richard D
Peacock, Erica D Kuligowski, and Jason D Averill. Boston, MA: Springer
US, 2011, pages 1–11. isbn: 978-1-4419-9725-8.
[BBC19]
BBC Visual Journalism team. Grenfell Tower: What happened. https://
www.bbc.com/news/uk-40301289. October 2019.
[Ber18]
Beredskabsstyrelsen. Redningsberedskabets Statistikbank | Responstider. 2018.
url: https://statistikbank.brs.dk/sb#page=77fb3232-1de9-4c7b-
baa2-1907d09b972c.
==PAGE:120==
110
Bibliography
[BFS98]
KE Boyce, JN Fraser-Mitchell, and TJ Shields. “Survey Analysis and Mod-
elling of Office Evacuation using the Crisp Model”. English. In: Proceedings
First International Symposium Human Behaviour in Fire. Edited by TJ
Shields. Northern Ireland: Ulster University, September 1998, pages 691–
702. isbn: 1 85923 103 9.
[BPS09]
K.E. Boyce, David Purser, and T. Shields. “Experimental studies to Inves-
tigate merging Behaviour in A Staircase”. In: July 2009.
[Bre97]
Patricia Brennan. Timing Human Response in Real Fires. Technical report.
1997. url: http://www.iafss.org/publications/fss/5/807/view/
fss_5-807.pdf.
[Bri17]
British Standards Institution. BS 9999:2017 Fire safety in the design, man-
agement and use of buildings - code of practice (Incorporating corrigen-
dum No. 1). 2017. url: https://www.thenbs.com/PublicationIndex/
documents/details?Pub=BSI&DocID=316664.
[BSS99]
K E Boyce, T J Shields, and G W H Silcock. “Toward the Characterization
of Building Occupancies for Fire Safety Engineering: Capabilities of Dis-
abled People Moving Horizontally and on an Incline”. In: Fire Technology
35.1 (1999), pages 51–67. issn: 1572-8099. doi: 10.1023/A:1015339216366.
url: https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1015339216366.
[BT18]
David Bowman and Beth Tubbs. Changes to the International Building
Code - SFPE. 2018. url: https://www.sfpe.org/page/FPE_ET_Issue_
25/Changes-to-the-International-Building-Code.htm.
[Buk10]
Richard W. Bukowski. Applications of Elevators for Occupant Egress in
Fires. 2010. url: https://www.sfpe.org/page/FPE_ET_Issue_38/
Applications-of-Elevators-for-Occupant-Egress-in-Fires.htm.
[CAA15]
A. Cuesta, O. Abreu, and D. Alvear. Evacuation Modeling Trends. Springer
International Publishing, 2015. isbn: 9783319207087. url: https://books.
google.dk/books?id=K-HHCgAAQBAJ.
[Cep09]
Elvezia M. Cepolina. “Phased evacuation: An optimisation model which
takes into account the capacity drop phenomenon in pedestrian flows”. In:
Fire Safety Journal 44.4 (May 2009), pages 532–544. issn: 03797112. doi:
10.1016/j.firesaf.2008.11.002.
[Com14]
Comwell. Hotelkæde vil bygge New Yorker-højhus midt i Aarhus | TV2
ØSTJYLLAND. 2014. url: https://www.tv2ostjylland.dk/aarhus/
hotelkaede-vil-bygge-new-yorker-hojhus-midt-i-aarhus.
[Dan15]
Dansk Standard. “EN 81-72:2015 Safety rules for the construction and in-
stallation of lifts - Particular applications for passenger and goods passenger
lifts - Part 72: Firefighters lifts”. In: (2015).
[Dan16]
Danish Transport, Building and Housing Authority. Eksempelsamling om
brandsikring af byggeri 2012 - 2. reviderede udgave 2016. 2016, page 180.
isbn: 978-87-9176-969-6.
==PAGE:121==
Bibliography
111
[Dan18]
Danish Transport, Building and Housing Authority. “Bilag 2 til Bygningsre-
glementets vejledning til kap . 5”. In: (2018).
[Dan19]
Danish Transport, Building and Housing Authority. “Bygningsreglementets
vejledning til kap 5 - Brand. Kapitel 2: Evakuering og redning af personer”.
In: (2019), pages 1–42.
[Dep14]
Department for Communities and Local Government. Generic Risk Assess-
ment 3.2. Fighting fires - In high rise buildings. Technical report. Lon-
don: CFRA, 2014. url: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/
278168/FINAL_GRA_3_2_Fighting_fires_in_high_rise_buildings.
pdf.
[Din+15]
Yuanchun Ding et al. “Investigation of combined stairs elevators evacua-
tion strategies for high rise buildings based on simulation”. In: Simulation
Modelling Practice and Theory 53 (2015), pages 60–73. doi: 10.1016/j.
simpat.2015.01.004. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.simpat.
2015.01.004.
[FNE07]
Håkan Frantzich, Daniel Nilsson, and Oskar Eriksson. Utvärdering och
validering av utrymningsprogram. Technical report. 2007.
[FP10]
Rita Fahy and G. Proulx. “Toward creating a database on delay times to
start evacuation and walking speeds for use in evacuation modeling”. In: 2nd
International Symposium on Human Behaviour in Fire (January 2010).
[Gat91]
Albert J. Gatfield. Elevators and Fire: Designing for Safety. 1991. url:
https : / / www . nist . gov / system / files / documents / 2017 / 05 / 09 /
3Gatfield_R9100736_Elevators_and_Fire.pdf.
[GB16]
S. Gwynne and K. Boyce. “Assessment of Hazards to Occupants from
Smoke, Toxic Gases and Heat”. In: The SFPE Handbook of Fire Protec-
tion Engineering. 4th Edition. Springer, 2016.
[GBP09]
Steve Gwynne, D.L. Boswell, and G. Proulx. “Understanding the Effective-
ness of Notification Technologies in Assisting Vulnerable Populations”. In:
Journal of Fire Protection Engineering 19 (February 2009). doi: 10.1177/
1042391508095094.
[GG13]
Gerald Grewolls and Kathrin Grewolls. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF
EVACUATION SIMULATIONS. Technical report. SIMTEGO GmbH, 2013.
url: https://www.dynardo.de/fileadmin/Material_Dynardo/dokumente/
broschuere/JournalArtikel/RDOJournal_2_2014_Evacuation_P_web.
pdf.
[GR02]
SMV Gwynne and E Rosenbaum. “Emergency Movement”. In: The SFPE
Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering. 4th Edition. National Fire Pro-
tection Association, 2002, pages 3-367 - 3–380.
==PAGE:122==
112
Bibliography
[GR16]
Steven M. V. Gwynne and Eric R. Rosenbaum. “Employing the Hydraulic
Model in Assessing Emergency Movement”. In: SFPE Handbook of Fire
Protection Engineering. Edited by Morgan J. Hurley et al. New York, NY:
Springer New York, 2016, pages 2115–2151. isbn: 978-1-4939-2565-0. doi:
10.1007/978-1-4939-2565-0_59. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
1-4939-2565-0_59.
[Gud17]
Tim Gudmand-Høyer. Kronik: Danmark mangler metode til brandsikring af
højhuse. https://ing.dk/artikel/kronik-danmark-mangler-metode-
brandsikring-hoejhuse-197311. April 2017.
[Gwy07]
Steve Gwynne. “Optimizing fire alarm notification for high risk groups:
notification effectiveness for large groups”. In: Report Prepared for the Fire
Protection Research Foundation, NFPA (January 2007).
[HCY14]
Lida Huang, Tao Chen, and Hongyong Yuan. “Simulation study of evac-
uation in high-rise buildings”. In: Transportation Research Procedia. 2014.
doi: 10.1016/j.trpro.2014.09.069.
[HNR68]
P. E. Hart, N. J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael. “A Formal Basis for the Heuristic
Determination of Minimum Cost Paths”. In: IEEE Transactions on Systems
Science and Cybernetics 4.2 (1968), pages 100–107.
[Hol13]
Erik Holmström JoachimSävmark. Talat utrymningsmeddelande - optimerad
utformning utifrån fullskaleförsök. 2013. url: https://lup.lub.lu.se/
student-papers/search/publication/3683721.
[Hon11]
Hong Kong Building Authority. CODE OF PRACTICE FOR THE DE-
SIGN AND CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS AND BUILDING WORKS
FOR THE INSTALLATION AND SAFE USE OF LIFTS AND ESCALA-
TORS. Technical report. 2011. url: https : / / www . bd . gov . hk / doc /
en/resources/codes-and-references/code-and-design-manuals/
BWLE2011e.pdf.
[Hos+07]
Simo Hostikka et al. “Evacuation experiments in offices and public build-
ings”. In: 2007.
[HS09]
E Heyes and M J Spearpoint. Lifts for evacuation - Human behaviour
considerations. Technical report. 2009, pages 73–84.
[JA12]
Axel Jönsson and Johan Andersson. Public Risk Perception of Elevator
Evacuation in High-Rise Buildings. 2012. url: https://www.sfpe.org/
page / FPE _ ET _ Issue _ 87 / Public - Risk - Perception - of - Elevator -
Evacuation-in-High-Rise-Buildings-.htm.
[Kai20]
Jens Kaiser. Højhus udfordrer ingeniører. https://jyllands-posten.dk/
aarhus/ECE10647806/hoejhus-udfordrer-ingenioerer/. 2020.
[Kin11]
Michael Jon. Kinsey. “Vertical transport evacuation modelling”. In: Septem-
ber (2011). url: http://gala.gre.ac.uk/7786/.
==PAGE:123==
Bibliography
113
[KK14]
Max Kinateder and Erica Kuligowski. “The Use of Elevators for Evacuation
in Fire Emergencies in International Buildings”. In: (2014). doi: 10.6028/
NIST.TN.1825. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.TN.1825.
[Klo+92]
J.H. Klote et al. “Feasibility and Design Considerations of Emergency Evac-
uation by Elevators”. eng. In: NISTIR 4870.1 (1992).
[Kob+10a]
Margrethe Kobes et al. “Building safety and human behaviour in fire: A
literature review”. In: Fire Safety Journal 45.1 (2010), pages 1–11. issn:
0379-7112. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . firesaf . 2009 . 08 .
005. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0379711209001167.
[Kob+10b]
Margrethe Kobes et al. “Exit choice, (pre-)movement time and (pre-)evacuation
behaviour in hotel fire evacuation — Behavioural analysis and validation of
the use of serious gaming in experimental research”. In: Procedia Engineer-
ing 3 (2010). 1st Conference on Evacuation Modeling and Management,
pages 37–51. issn: 1877-7058. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.
2010.07.006. url: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1877705810004753.
[KON20]
KONE. KONE MONOSPACE DX LIFT. 2020. url: https://www.kone.
co.uk/new-buildings/lifts-elevators/kone-monospace-dx/.
[KPH10]
Erica D Kuligowski, Richard D Peacock, and Bryan L Hoskins. A Re-
view of Building Evacuation Models, 2nd Edition. Technical report. NIST,
2010. url: https://www.nist.gov/publications/review-building-
evacuation-models-2nd-edition.
[Kul03]
Erica Kuligowski. “Elevators for occupant evacuation and fire department
access”. In: NISTIR (January 2003).
[Kul09]
Erica Kuligowski. THE PROCESS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR IN FIRES.
Technical report. National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2009.
[Kul13]
Erica Kuligowski. “Predicting Human Behavior During Fires”. In: Fire Tech-
nology 49.1 (2013), pages 101–120. issn: 1572-8099. doi: 10.1007/s10694-
011-0245-6. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10694-011-0245-6.
[Lia+14]
Y J Liao et al. “A Study on People’s Attitude to the Use of Elevators for
Fire Escape”. In: Fire Technology 50.2 (2014), pages 363–378. issn: 1572-
8099. doi: 10.1007/s10694-012-0300-y. url: https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10694-012-0300-y.
[Lin02]
Lincolne Scott. Egress for People with Disabilities in high-rise office build-
ings. Technical report. 2002.
[Lor+05]
James Lord et al. “Guide for evaluating the predictive capabilities of com-
puter egress models”. In: NIST GCR (January 2005), pages 06–886.
==PAGE:124==
114
Bibliography
[Lov+19]
R. Lovreglio et al. “A pre-evacuation database for use in egress simulations”.
In: Fire Safety Journal 105 (2019), pages 107–128. issn: 0379-7112. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.firesaf.2018.12.009. url: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0379711218302212.
[LZZ12]
Xiuyu Liu, Hao Zhang, and Qingming Zhu. “Factor analysis of high-rise
building fires reasons and fire protection measures”. In: Procedia Engineer-
ing. Volume 45. Elsevier Ltd, January 2012, pages 643–648. doi: 10.1016/
j.proeng.2012.08.216.
[Mas16]
Mohammad Mashhadawi. “MassMotion Evacuation Model Validation”. In:
2016.
[MB15]
Nigel C. McConnell and Karen E. Boyce. “Refuge areas and vertical evac-
uation of multistorey buildings: The end users’ perspectives”. In: Fire and
Materials. Volume 39. 4. John Wiley and Sons Ltd, June 2015, pages 396–
406. doi: 10.1002/fam.2205.
[Min07]
Ministry of Public Works and Settlement. Turkey’s Regulation On Fire
Protection. 2007. url: https://www.resmigazete.gov.tr/eskiler/
2007/12/20071219-2.htm.
[Moo+18]
D. Moore et al. “Multi-storey residential buildings and occupant’s behaviour
during fire evacuation in the UK: factors relevant to the development of
evacuation strategies.” In: International journal of building pathology and
adaptation (2018). url: https://doi.org/10.1108/IJBPA-08-2017-
0033.
[NFP12]
NFPA. NFPA 101 - Life Safety Code. Technical report. Quincy (USA):
National Fire Protection Association, 2012.
[Nil+18]
Daniel Nilsson et al. “WALKING SPEED IN SMOKE: REPRESENTA-
TION IN LIFE SAFETY VERIFICATIONS”. In: Journal of Chemical In-
formation and Modeling (2018). issn: 1098-6596. url: https://cdn.wsp.
com/-/media/Insights/Sweden/Documents/2018/WALKING-SPEED-IN-
SMOKE-REPRESENTATION-IN-LIFE-SAFETY.pdf.
[NJ09]
Daniel Nilsson and Anders Johansson. “Social influence during the initial
phase of a fire evacuation — Analysis of evacuation experiments in a cinema
theatre”. In: Fire Safety Journal 44.1 (2009), pages 71–79. issn: 0379-7112.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.firesaf.2008.03.008. url: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0379711208000362.
[NOG20]
NOG. Hazard - Uncontrolled ventilation. 2020. url: https://www.ukfrs.
com/guidance/search/uncontrolled-ventilation.
[Nor13]
Nordjyllands Beredskab. Vejledning om brandsikring af højhusbyggeri. https:
//www.nordjyllandsberedskab.dk/sites/default/files/hoejhusvejledning-
juni-2013.pdf. 2013.
[Nor18]
NordicFireStatistics. Nordic Fire Statistics. 2018. url: https://brs.dk/
viden/statistik/Pages/statistik.aspx.
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
115
[PB01]
D.A Purser and M Bensilum. “Quantification of behaviour for engineer-
ing design standards and escape time calculations”. In: Safety Science 38.2
(2001), pages 157–182. issn: 0925-7535. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0925 - 7535(00 ) 00066 - 7. url: http : / / www . sciencedirect . com /
science/article/pii/S0925753500000667.
[PB10]
Guylène Proulx and Noureddine Bénichou. “Evacuation Movement in Pho-
toluminescent Stairwells”. In: Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics 2008.
Edited by Wolfram W. F. Klingsch et al. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2010, pages 25–42. isbn: 978-3-642-04504-2.
[Pea09]
Richard D Peacock. Summary of NIST/GSA Cooperative Research on the
Use of Elevators During Fire Emergencies. Technical report. 2009. doi:
10.6028/NIST.SP.1620.
[Pér16]
Olaf Albano Pérez. “The Importance of Input Parameters in Computational
Modelling - Evacuation Simulations - SFPE”. In: SFPE (2016). url: https:
//www.sfpe.org/page/Issue4Feature2/The-Importance-of-Input-
Parameters-in-Computational-Modelling---Evacua.htm.
[PK04]
David Purser and M.E. Kuipers. “Interactions between buildings, fires and
occupant behavior using a relational database created from incident inves-
tigations and interviews”. In: In: Human behaviour in fire: Proceedings of
the third international symposium (September 2004), pages 443–456.
[PKP96]
G Proulx, A Kaufman, and J Pineau. Evacuation Time and Movement in
Office Buildings. eng. Technical report. 1996. doi: 10.4224/20358733.
[POL18]
POLITIKEN. Overlæge: Vi bliver tykkere og tykkere, og det er ikke bare,
fordi vi mangler viljestyrke. Politikerne bør tage kampen mod fedmeepi-
demien op. 2018. url: https://politiken.dk/debat/art6408057/Vi-
bliver - tykkere - og - tykkere - og - det - er - ikke - bare - fordi - vi -
mangler-viljestyrke.-Politikerne-b%5C%C3%5C%B8r-tage-kampen-
mod-fedmeepidemien-op.
[Pro+95]
G. Proulx et al. “Housing Evacuation of Mixed Abilities Occupants in High-
rise Buildings”. In: (January 1995). doi: 10.4224/20375582.
[Pro01]
G. Proulx. High-rise evacuation: a questionable concept. Technical report.
2001, pages 221–230. url: www.nrc.ca/irc/ircpubs.
[Pro07]
Epri M Project Manager H Salley RP Kassawara. Verification & Validation
of Selected Fire Models for Nuclear Power Plant Applications. Technical
report. 2007.
[Pro10]
G. Proulx. “Housing evacuation of mixed abilities occupants: A Case study”.
In: (January 2010).
[Pro94]
Guylène Proulx. “The Time Delay to Start Evacuating upon Hearing a Fire
Alarm”. In: 1994.
==PAGE:126==
116
Bibliography
[Pro95a]
Guylène Proulx. “Evacuation time and movement in apartment buildings”.
In: Fire Safety Journal 24.3 (1995), pages 229–246. issn: 0379-7112. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0379-7112(95)00023-M. url: http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/037971129500023M.
[Pro95b]
Guylène Proulx. “Evacuation time and movement in apartment buildings”.
In: Fire Safety Journal 24.3 (January 1995), pages 229–246. issn: 03797112.
doi: 10.1016/0379-7112(95)00023-M.
[RK11]
Enrico Ronchi and Michael Kinsey. “Evacuation models of the future: in-
sights from an online survey of user’s experiences and needs”. In: October
2011.
[RN13]
Enrico Ronchi and Daniel Nilsson. Fire evacuation in high-rise buildings: a
review of human behaviour and modelling research. Technical report. 2013.
url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1186/2193-0414-2-7.
[RN14]
Enrico Ronchi and Daniel Nilsson. Assessment of Total Evacuation Systems
for Tall Buildings. SpringerBriefs in Fire. New York, NY: Springer New
York, 2014. isbn: 978-1-4939-1073-1. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1074-8.
url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4939-1074-8.
[RRP14]
Enrico Ronchi, Paul A. Reneke, and Richard D. Peacock. “A Method for
the Analysis of Behavioural Uncertainty in Evacuation Modelling”. In: Fire
Technology 50.6 (October 2014), pages 1545–1571. issn: 15728099. doi:
10.1007/s10694-013-0352-7.
[Rub96]
H.M. Rubenstein. A Guide to Site Planning and Landscape Construction.
Wiley, 1996. isbn: 9780471129325. url: https : / / books . google . dk /
books?id=0kyolMTtsb8C.
[RVO12]
RVO. Bouwbesluit, Netherland. 2012. url: https://business.gov.nl/
regulation/building-regulations/.
[SCD18]
SCDF. Code of Practice for Fire Precautions in Buildings, Singapore. Tech-
nical report. 2018. url: https://www.scdf.gov.sg/docs/default-
source/scdf- library/fssd- downloads/fire- code- 2018- edition.
pdf.
[Sch14]
Lars Schiøtt Sørensen. Fire-safety engineering and performance-based codes.
Lyngby: Polyteknisk Forlag, 2014, 668 sider, illustreret (nogle i farver).
isbn: 9788750209928 CN - 69.89.
[Sek+99]
Ai Sekizawa et al. “Occupants’ behaviour in response to the high-rise apart-
ments fire in Hiroshima City”. In: 1999.
[SFP19]
SFPE. Guide to Human Behavior in Fire. 2019. url: https://www.sfpe.
org/page/HumanBehavior.
[SH03]
Marja-Liisa Siikonen and Henri Hakonen. “Efficient evacuation methods in
tall buildings”. In: Elevator World 51 (July 2003).
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
117
[Shi+14]
Wen Xi Shi et al. “Experimental study on influence of stack effect on fire
in the compartment adjacent to stairwell of high rise building”. In: Journal
of Civil Engineering and Management 20.1 (2014), pages 121–131. issn:
18223605. doi: 10.3846/13923730.2013.802729.
[Shi05]
Jonathan Shimshoni. Evacuating High-Rise Buildings. 2005. url: https:
//www.astm.org/SNEWS/MARCH_2005/shimshoni_mar05.html.
[SKH16]
Miho Seike, Nobuyoshi Kawabata, and Masato Hasegawa. “Experiments
of evacuation speed in smoke-filled tunnel”. In: Tunnelling and Under-
ground Space Technology 53 (2016), pages 61–67. issn: 0886-7798. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tust.2016.01.003. url: http://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0886779816300086.
[Son19]
Katrine Irminger Sonne. Her er Københavns højeste boligbyggeri: Endnu et
tårn skyder op i Carlsberg Byen. 2019. url: https://www.berlingske.dk/
aok/her-er-koebenhavns-hoejeste-boligbyggeri-endnu-et-taarn-
skyder-op-i-carlsberg.
[SS11]
Marja-Liisa Siikonen and J. Sorsa. “Elevator Evacuation Algorithms”. In:
January 2011, pages 637–647. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-9725-8_57.
[ST20]
Muhsin Satır and Yagmur Toprakli. “A Review of Design Parameters for
Safe Evacuation in High-Rise Buildings”. In: 8 (April 2020), pages 553–563.
[Sty18]
Beredskabs Styrelsen. Statistikker om redningsberedskabet i Danmark. 2018.
url: https://brs.dk/viden/statistik/Pages/statistik.aspx.
[Sun13]
Yang Sun. “Egress as Part of Fire Safety in High-rise Buildings”. In: (2013).
url: https : / / repository . tudelft . nl / islandora / object / uuid :
e06f2348-1cc0-49e1-842f-62ecad6b63bb/datastream/OBJ2/download.
[Tad97]
Jin Tadahisa. Studies on Human Behavior and Tenability in Fire Smoke.
Technical report. 1997, pages 3–21.
[Tao+20]
Chen Tao et al. “A NEW COMPOSITE FIRE EVACUATION (CFE)
MODEL BASED ON HUMAN BEHAVIOR”. In: (June 2020).
[The17]
The Times. The missing three hours of the Grenfell Tower fire and the
deathtrap stairwell. 2017. url: https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/
grenfell-tower-fire-the-missing-three-hours-stairwell-danger-
council-lqh9nc55q.
[Thu18]
Thunderhead Engineering. Manually Coupling FDS and Pathfinder to Re-
spond to Smoke. 2018. url: https://www.thunderheadeng.com/2018/
11/manually-coupling-fds-and-pathfinder-to-respond-to-smoke/.
[Thu19]
Thunderhead Engineering. Technical Reference. 2019. url: https://www.
thunderheadeng.com/wp- content/uploads/dlm_uploads/2011/07/
tech_ref-6.pdf.
==PAGE:128==
118
Bibliography
[Tra19]
Trafik: Bygge og Boligstyrelsen. Bygningsreglementets vejledning til kap 5
- Brand. http://bygningsreglementet.dk/-/media/Br/Kap_5_Brand/
Vejledninger/Generel- vejledning/Evakuering- kap- 2- til- BR18-
vejledning.pdf. February 2019.
[US 00]
US Census Bureau. 2000 Census Data. 2000. url: https://www.census.
gov/main/www/cen2000.html.
[US 04]
US Department of Labor. Labor Force Statistics. 2004. url: https://www.
bls.gov/cps/home.htm#charemp.
[Vej20]
Vejle Kommune. Project Documents for the Construction of Den Hvide
Facet. 2020. url: https://weblager.dk/rest/buildingproject/download/
full/3742822#pagemode=thumbs&view=Fit.
[Wik20]
Wikipedia. Højeste bygningsværker i Danmark. 2020. url: https://da.
wikipedia.org/wiki/H%C3%B8jeste_bygningsv%C3%A6rker_i_Danmark.
[Wil17]
Søren Willumsen. Eksperter efterlyser klarere regler for brandsikring af
højhuse i Aarhus. https://stiften.dk/artikel/eksperter-efterlyser-
klarere-regler-for-brandsikring-af-højhuse-i-aarhus. June 2017.
[WTN17]
Sophie Wignall, Nicole Thomas, and Michael (Mike) Nicholls. “Fat or fic-
tion? Effects of body size, eating pathology, and sex upon the body schema
of an undergraduate population”. In: Body Image 23 (December 2017),
pages 135–145. doi: 10.1016/j.bodyim.2017.09.004.
[ZJD11]
CHEN Zu-ming, ZHANG Jin, and LI De-pin. “Smoke Control – Discussion
of Switching Elevator to Evacuation Elevator in High-rise Building”. In:
Procedia Engineering 11 (December 2011), pages 40–44. doi: 10.1016/j.
proeng.2011.04.624.
